R334 : page 1 

VOL. III. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL, 1882. 

NO. 10. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he can not and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send 
paper-money or three cent stamps to the amount of two dollars by 
mail at our risk. Larger amounts by Check, P.O. Money Order or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 



FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign subscribers will 
be 65 cents a year. Please send us no foreign money or postage 
stamps as we can make no use of them. Remittances may be made 
by Postal Money Orders. 

N.B.-This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who 
will send a card yearly requesting it. 



R334 : page 1 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Everywhere the knowledge of the love of God and the grandeur of 
his plans seems to be spreading and deepening among his truly 
consecrated children. We think we rightly express the causes of its 
spread, when we say that not only has increase of civilization been 
gradually preparing mankind for a less heathenish understanding of 
the teachings of God's Word; but, as we recently informed a 
Methodist minister-all of our people are preachers, from the least 
to the greatest of them. They make the preaching of the "glad 
tidings" the chief business of life-all other business being 
considered secondary. Women as well as men, each according to 
his or her ability, preach Christ and him crucified, and the blessed 
results accruing to every man, for whom he died. Their preaching, 
though often in a humble way, shows the inestimable value of the 
ransom from death, far better than the flowery essays of three- 
fourths of the "clergy. " We preach because we cannot keep the 
glorious news. It fires our own hearts with so much love and praise 
to our great God of love, that we must tell it. 

I love to tell the story, 
It did so much for me, 
And that is just the reason 
I tell it now to thee. 

On the other hand, those who preach the bad tidings of everlasting 
misery to the race in general, can only be induced to do it by larger 
salaries than they could otherwise make with the same outlay of 
service. 

We hope we did not overstate the matter when we said that all who 
believe "this way" make preaching the chief object of life- 
preaching by 

R335 : page 1 

word, preaching by letter, preaching by dress, and manner, and 
looks, and deeds. We know that as we were "all called in one 
hope," so we were all given the same commission: "Go ye into all 
the world and preach this glad tidings to every creature. " We were 
all anointed by the same spirit, for the same work as our Head— 
"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because he hath anointed 
me to preach the glad tidings to the meek." (Isa. 61:1.) 

The glad tidings we preach is, that Jesus hath died, and there is 
remission; that Him hath God highly exalted "to be a PRINCE and 
a SAVIOR"; and that this Prince and Savior whose kingdom and 
work are soon to be recognized over all the earth, has all power in 
heaven and earth. He will, during his reign, exalt the meek, and 
bless the world by saving it out of death and sin. It is a message so 
grand that its opponents dare never state it fairly, lest all the world 
might see that, truly, "God is love"— that God's ways are not as 
men's ways, nor his thoughts (plans) as theirs. 



Neither need you fear the influence of truth upon the worldly 
minded. Some delight to tell of God's plan to His children, but fear 
to mention it to worldly people, lest they, being freed from the fear 
of eternal torment, might be made worse. We believe that these 
things are mainly due to the saints, but have no fear of injuring any 
class with the truth. In the first place, people don't believe in such a 
place, and are seldom restrained by it. Secondly, the reason so few, 
except Sunday School children, become Christians now, is because 
they see through the shallowness of the teachings of the sects, much 
better than the unthinking members of those sects. They see that to 
claim that God possessed all WISDOM, all POWER, and all 
LOVE, and also to claim that nine-tenths of the race (or even one- 
tenth) will to all eternity wail in agony and anguish beyond all 
reach of God's WISDOM, POWER, and LOVE, is not only 
contradictory, but extremely absurd. The very thing that such need, 
is a glimpse at the real plan, and perfect harmony now unfolding 
from the Word of God. In fact, this is the only thing which can set 
at rest a reasonable and reasoning mind. God wants us to use our 
reason, and says, "Come, let us reason together." 

An illustration of what we here mention occurred in this city, which 
we will relate. A Christian mother who had been attending our 
meetings and had become interested, had a son who felt little 
interest in Christianity. The mother endeavored to conceal from her 
son one of our pamphlets, which she had been reading; to her 
surprise and alarm, she one day found him reading it. She feared 
that if he got an idea that eternal torment was not a doctrine of the 
Scriptures, it might make him yet more careless of religion. Judge 
of her surprise when he remarked that this book was the most 
sensible thing he had ever read, and if that is what the Bible 
teaches, he thought he would like to be a Christian. 

Again, remember the effect of these "glad tidings" upon your own 
heart, when first you came to KNOW the Lord in his true character 
of love; when first you tasted that the Lord was gracious. Then 
neither be ashamed of it, nor fear its effects. Truth cannot produce 
bad effects, as a good tree cannot bear bad fruit. 

As seen from the WATCH TOWER, a book setting forth our 
present positions is needed, and will be ready as soon as possible. 
See notice of "Millennial Day Dawn," in another column. The 
announcement of the "Emphatic Diaglott," in this paper, at about 
one-third the regular price, will gladden some who need and desire 
this valuable work, but have been deterred from its purchase 
heretofore by reason of its cost. 

The public laborers generally report progress. Meetings are being 
held in various localities. Bro. A. D. Jones is now giving a series of 
discourses in Newark, N.J., and is arranging for the same in New 
York City and in Brooklyn-The "Day Star" shines brightly and 
increasingly. Bro. Tackabury will travel some through western New 
York, holding meetings, commencing this month. We may also 
count among the public preachers Bro. Graves, who for many years 



has been not only a "commercial traveler," but a railroad train 
preacher and tract distributor. He is rejoicing in the shining present 
truth, and has done good in preaching it, distributing "Food" during 
the past six months. Bro. Boyer will, for the present, remain in 
Pittsburgh, where he will do some mission work among his 
numerous friends and former co- laborers in the temperance work, 
meantime giving much time to the study of the Word which is able 
to make us wise; preparing himself thus for more public work. 

Bro. Keith, after having spent a pleasant and, we trust, profitable 
time with the saints at Lynn, Newark, and Chambersburg, and 
visited us at Pittsburgh a few days, started west for Elyria and 
Norwalk, O., Argos, Ind., and sundry towns in Mich. We are 
requested to announce his coming to the following places at the 
dates specified, where he will be happy to meet and commune with 
those joint-heirs who "seek for glory, honor, and immortality." He 
will be in season, for meetings on the dates below specified. 

Buchanan, Mich., April 2d; Hartford, Mich., April 7th; Lapeer, 
Mich, April 15th; Almont, Mich, April 21st; Brockway Center, 
Mich., April 26th; Detroit, Mich., May 2d. 

Bro. K. will be in season to commemorate our Passover Lamb's 
death with the Buchanan friends on Sunday night, April 2d. May 
the Lord bless and prosper his visit among you and cause that it 
work for your nourishment in spiritual things-your growth in 
grace, knowledge, and faith. We pray similar blessings upon the 
labors of the other brethren mentioned, as well as upon others who 
publicly minister, and upon the thousands who are in a more private 
way, as "living epistles" letting their light so shine as to glorify 
their Father in heaven. 

We have many inquiries from England, relative to preaching-if 
there are among those interested in these things there, some who 
can declare them publicly, they have a great and grand field. Let us 
hear from you. Some one or two should be in London. 

We are in possession of many refreshing and encouraging letters, 
but owing to a lack of space, we are unable to publish them in this 
issue. 



R335 : page 1 

MILLENNIAL DAY DAWN. 

This is the title of a new book we are about to publish. It will 
contain some matter already published, and much that will be new. 
It will contain a statement of what we understand to be the plan of 
God, an explanation of the most prominent symbols of the book of 
Revelation, together with comments on many of the "parables and 
dark sayings" of Jesus and the Apostles, and the Scriptural time 
proofs showing our present whereabouts on the stream of time, 



written in a clear and pointed, yet as condensed a manner as 
possible. 

It will not only be such a book as you would desire to loan to 
interested ones, and would want to study yourself, but it will be 
arranged with a view to making it a 

BOOK OF REFERENCE 

on almost all theological subjects. 

It will contain matter from the pens of several brethren well known 
to the readers of the WATCH TOWER, yet the work will not 
mention the name of any writer. We have thus arranged for several 
reasons: First, we shall thus have the benefit of the ability of several 
writers, each of whom may excel in his own peculiar channel; 
Second, such a method will serve to restrain personal pride and 
egotism, so often lamentably noticeable among men who have 
"written a book"; Third, it will be advantageous to you as readers, 
teaching you 

R335 : page 2 

to lean not on the words or opinions of any man, but to test all 
things solely and only by the Word of God -"that your faith should 
not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. " Lastly 
and chiefly, we hope that by thus veiling humanity, the glory of 
truth's Divine Author may the more appear. 

The price will be fixed at such a sum as will place it within the 
reach of all— just about cost and postage, probably 50 cents for cloth 
bound. 

This work is made necessary, not only by reason of the edition of 
"Day Dawn," published in 1880, being about exhausted, but also 
from the fact that since its publication, many precious and brilliant 
jewels of truth have been found. By reason of our being in "The 
path of the just which shineth more and more unto the perfect day, " 
no book could be written which would long be a fresh and full 
expression of the ever unfolding beauties of our Father's Word and 
plan. 

And still new beauties shall we see, 
And still increasing light. 

The name which we have selected will distinguish it from the old 
"Day Dawn," and yet is sufficiently like it to identify it with the 
edition which we have advertised the world over in the "Food. " 
However, after the present edition of Day Dawn is exhausted, you 
may, for abbreviation and convenience, use the same name for the 
new work, and it will be understood by us. We have on hand about 
100 COPIES OF "DAY DAWN," cloth bound, the price of which, 
we will reduce to 50 cents each to close them out before the new 
work appears. Address, C. T. RUSSELL, 

No. 101 5th Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa. 



R336 : page 2 

THE SEVEN CHURCHES. 

"The Revelation of Jesus Christ," which God gave to him, to show 
unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass, is a book 
of pen-pictures of events and of periods of earth's history-from 
Christ's first advent onward— usually in groups of seven succeeding 
stages; several of the groups running more or less synchronous, or 
parallel in time, with each other. 

The seven messages to the seven churches, to be in harmony with 
the rest of the book, must also mark or be directed to seven 
succeeding periods in the history of the church. The remarkable 
harmony between the prophecy and that history not only leaves no 
doubt of this interpretation, but is an unanswerable proof of the 
inspiration of the book, and a pledge to our faith in what remains 
unfulfilled. 

In Rev. 1:11 we are given the names of the cities to whom the 
messages are sent. Seven cities then existing, and which remain 
(some in ruins) until the present. Whether the condition of these 
local churches in John's time was such as would be specially and 
respectively blessed by these messages, we know not; but it seems 
evident that these cities were chosen from a peculiarity in their 
names which fitted God's purpose. We will notice this in due time. 
In verse 12 and onward we have a description of the appearance of 
the glorified Saviour and his surroundings, some feature of which 
seems to be peculiarly fitted to each church; and is quoted in the 
message to it, as if saying, remember who it is that speaks. 

These churches are placed in Asia. The Roman province of Asia 
was a part of that district which we now call Asia Minor, and 
embraced only the southwest half of the peninsula. 

The word Asia means muddy or boggy. Any one doomed to a long 
journey through a wild bog would, we think, before he got through, 
have a tolerably correct idea of the pathway of the church during 
the past 1800 years; especially if the greater part was traveled in 
comparative darkness-what with pitfalls and treacherous ground, 
with will o' the wisps and fog, it would prove a hard journey. True, 
the church has always had a polar star, but the mists of the 
Babylonian mystery had nearly hidden it. 

"To the messenger of the assembly in Ephesus write." [Rev. 2:1.] 

Ephesus was the capital or chief city of the province of Asia. Being 
the first or chief city of the province, and from or through which the 
laws, proclamations, etc., would go forth, it fitly represents the first 
period of the church. The church of Christ and his apostles. We 
believe implicitly the records left and the proclamations made by 
the messengers of that first church-Matthew and his three co- 



laborers, Peter, James, John, and Paul. But why? "These things 
saith he who is holding the seven stars in his right hand, who is 
walking in the midst of the seven lampstands -the golden. " 
[Young's trans.] These, who were to be messengers to all the 
churches, were so held in the grasp of Christ that they could not 
waver or deviate. We accept the fact of their inspiration, and 
receive their writings as from the right hand of him who guided 
their pens. 

We accept another fact, that only the spirit of him who in Spirit has 
walked with his church all the way down, can make clear the 
messages given in the Word. Moreover, we believe it is only 
because he is again personally present in his church, that such an 
abundance of light is now given— such as the church never had 
during his absence. 

The Lord commends this church for its works, toil, and patience; 
and because "thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and 
are not, and hast found them liars." 

Why, in apparent opposition to the general command, "Judge not," 
are they commended at this and only this time for trying these false 
teachers? Because to the first church (and to her only) was given 
the supernatural power of discerning of spirits. The cases of 
Ananias and Sapphira, of Simon and Elymas the sorcerers, and 
others, reveal this power. 

After those gifted ones fell asleep, the enemy, without hindrance, 
came and sowed tares among the wheat; and then the command was 
not to pull them up, but to let both grow together until the harvest. 
In opposition to Christ's command, the servants have, all the way 
down, been trying to pull tares; but of course they pulled wheat, just 
as our Lord had foretold. Now, in the harvest, the tares are being 
revealed and bound in sectarian bundles preparatory to the fire. 
Verses 4 and 5 show us that the "Ephesus" period reaches down to 
where the church began to lose her first love. 

"Thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate." 
Nicolans, in Greek, has the same meaning as Balaam, in Hebrew; 
and means a conqueror or lord of the people. 

In the Ephesus, and also in the Pergamos periods, there were those 
who loved to lord it over the Lord's heritage. It was the old 
contention -who should be greatest in the kingdom? "Which thing 
I hate," emphatically says Christ. Those whom God makes leaders 
will be the last to boast of it. 

"Him that hath an ear, let him hear what the spirit saith unto the 
churches." Jesus often used these words, evidently to show us that 
there are some messages sent which are not for all, but to those 
(overcomers) who are prepared to receive them. Our Lord 
recognizes two classes in the church all the way down— the nominal 
Christian, and the overcomer. To these last, who had gladly yielded 
up the pleasures of life for the truth's sake; who, like Paul, had 



spent their lives in hardship, even unto death, spreading the good 
news, there is a blessed promise of rest, a feast of life, and unending 
joy "in the Paradise of God." 

[To be continued.] 



R336 : page 2 

BIBLE STUDENTS' HELPER. 

Many inquiries come relative to helps to Bible study, and 
doubtless many desire information on the subject who have not 
written. 

To all such we would say that the most valuable publication of the 
kind known to us is the Emphatic Diaglott. It contains the New 
Testament in the Greek by Griesbach; also a word-for-word English 
translation of the same, placed directly under the Greek text, so as 
to be of greatest service to the student; it contains also an arranged 
version based on the readings of three very old Greek MSS. 
Altogether, we can say for it, that in our estimation it is the most 
valuable translation of the N.T., extant, for both the English and 
Greek student. 

We have for some time felt that our readers would be much 
benefited by its aid, and have furnished them to you at the 
wholesale price, $2.95 (cloth bound), the retail price being $4. 

Many, especially of the poorer of our readers, will be glad to learn, 
that we have come across a lot, new and fresh in every particular, 
and but slightly damaged in the fly-leaves. To all intents and 
purposes they are the regular $4 books-in no respect do they differ, 
except in the front "fly-leaves." 

We have purchased the 83 copies of the above described, and will 
furnish them to our readers at $1.50 per copy (this includes 
postage). Those desiring should send at once as we are confident 
this number will not half supply the wants of subscribers. Orders 
will be filled in rotation. 

Let us add a word: It is important that we should each provide 
ourselves with helps in study; better deny yourselves some of the 
luxuries of food or clothing (sometimes almost considered 
necessities), and be possessed of needed assistants for direction in 
the heavenly course. 



R336 : page 2 



THE INVISIBLE LINE. 



The restraint of the Gospel is the most perfect liberty. A divine 
hand holds us from evil that we may be free to do good. 



When I was a child my nearest neighbor had occasion to repair 
some breaks in the roof of one of his barns. So he sent his "hired 
man" aloft to do the work. There was not a sign of any staging built 
nor so much as a cleat nailed on to steady himself by. But, catching 
a glimpse of the man, from our place, I saw him walking up and 
down the old fashioned roof as erect and unconcerned as if he were 
only pacing a parlor floor. So I was naturally curious to learn how 
he did it. But coming a little nearer, I saw a long, tough cord 
securely tied about his waist and extending over the ridge of the 
roof, while down in the rear of the barn stood the proprietor holding 
the cord very firmly with both hands. When the man wanted to 
walk down toward the eaves, he would sing out, "More rope, more 
rope!" Instantly the proprietor would hear him, though out of sight, 
and would begin cautiously paying out the cord, a few inches at a 
time. When the workman wished to return and ascend the steep 
roof, he again called out the proper signal, the rope would tighten, 
and he would walk up as leisurely as he would have mounted a 
broad stairway. Now this man was bound with the cord and firmly 
held by the power of another. But who can fail to see that this 
restraint was really what gave him liberty. The more carefully the 
cord was grasped and handled the 

R337 : page 2 

more complete the liberty of the workman-not to fall and to break 
his neck, but to go up and down and do the repairs in safety. The 
bond made him free. 

So God gives men liberty, through the restraints of the Gospel. He 
throws the cords of his protection around the believer, allowing him 
to go up and down at will, scaling heights, treading paths of danger, 
passing securely anywhere in response to the call of duty. His 
bonds always, draw upward, never downward. The freedom which 
sin gives, of which so many boast, is the freedom which the 
breaking or the loosening of that cord would have given to the man 
upon the roof- perfect freedom to loose his footing and to plunge 
into remediless ruin. He who is willing to submit his erring nature 
to the divine restraints of the Gospel, will forever "walk at liberty," 
unhampered by self, untouched by sin, and carry with him a witness 
of safety and of peace that armed guards and castle walls and 
munitions of rocks could not assure. — N.E. Methodist. 



R337 : page 2 

MISTAKES will occur from various causes, and some of our 
subscribers fail to receive their papers. If you have subscribed and 
paid for the paper, or if you have asked to be put on "the Lord's 
poor" list, within a year, and do not receive it, be assured that if the 
fault is ours, it is unintentional. 

All such will oblige us by sending a postal card, stating their case, 
and we will attend to it. The trouble is often caused by irregularity 



in country post-offices, and many times by incompleteness of 
address furnished us. Please be very particular, and on every letter 
or card give your full address. Write it very plainly; we have a 
number of letters, the addresses of which we cannot decipher, and 
on which much valuable time has been wasted. 

IN consequence of our decision to publish the "Millennial Day 
Dawn," the Oct., Nov., and Dec, 1881, numbers of the WATCH 
TOWER will not be re-published as once proposed. The three 
leading articles of those numbers will appear in the book. 

SUNDAY evening, April 2d, after 6 P.M., will be the anniversary 
of the "Lord's Supper"-that date corresponding to the time of its 
institution as mentioned in our last issue. We again remind you of 
it, and suggest the appropriateness of its celebration on that 
occasion. We would be glad of a card from all companies of three 
or more who meet and celebrate it. 



R337 : page 3 



WE'RE DEAR TO GOD. 



O, when Christians meet and part, 
This thought is graved on every heart- 
We're dear to God! 
The future Princes in disguise 
Each look on each with loving eyes, 
All dear to God. 

O, wonder! to the Eternal One, 
Dear as His first beloved Son; 
Dearer to Jesus than His blood, 
Dear, since the Spirits fixed abode, 
Yes, dear to God. 

Though frailties cause each other pain, 
Still does this thought our love retain- 
We're dear to God! 
When truth compels us to contend, 
What love with earnest searchings blend, 
Since filled with God. 

When any glance from pilgrim's lot, 
Back to earth's charms, forget them not, 
But win them back with love and prayer; 
And leave them not to perish there- 
Those dear to God. 

Shall we be there so near, so dear, 
And be estranged and cold whilst here 
If dear to God? 

No, though by cares and toils oppress'd 
We've found in God our perfect rest, 



Love binds our hearts and heals our woes; 
We cannot do enough for those 
So dear to God! 



R.W. 



R337 : page 3 

WEALTH OF THE SAINTS. 

While in this body of flesh accompanied with the frailties of our 
first parents, with our heritage of death ever present in mind, and a 
law in our members warring against the law of our mind, how easy 
it is for us to fall into the spirit of the world, and under value or fail 
to appreciate the riches which the "little flock" have as an 
inheritance through Christ, our head. The inestimable value of our 
riches through Him was aptly illustrated by a friend in a letter lately 
received. The illustration was something as follows: 

Not long since, having become involved in debt, our creditor 
secured a judgment against us, and we were cast into prison. A 
friend of ours understanding the situation we were in, bought the 
claim against us and set us at liberty. Not long after he informed us, 
that having become acquainted with the location of a certain rich 
gold mine, and on inquiry finding that it could be purchased for one 
hundred thousand dollars, and he having just that amount, 
purchased it, knowing that when developed it would be worth as 
many and more millions, offered to make us (there were several of 
us), equal partners with himself, except that he would manage and 
be at the head of the concern, if we would put in all we had. 

This was an offer of such uncommon, unheard of liberality, that it 
was almost bewildering in its nature, and with embarrassment we 
cast about to see if we could find anything of value to offer. 

Finally we were compelled to admit that we were actually 
penniless, and all we had, (and that was not worth mentioning) was 
a few filthy rags, and that it was because of our extreme destitution 
that we were unable to pay the debt that caused the imprisonment, 
from which he had gained our release; whereupon he informed us 
that our riches consisted in our personal worth. 

That he had paid for the mine, and now what was needed was 
willing, capable persons, who would put in their all of time and 
talent, and sacrifice every other interest to the development of the 
resources of this mine; that none would be more likely to be faithful 
and true than those who felt that they owed a debt of gratitude to 
the head of the concern, and none more capable, nor more 
acceptable. 

At first it seemed too good to be true, and it was with some 
difficulty that we could bring ourselves to believe that he was really 
in earnest. We plead that we were indeed so poor that we could not 



clothe ourselves in proper attire to associate with a person of such 
wealth and dignity as himself. 

In reply he said, that as for wealth, we should be wealthy like 
himself, and as for the apparel, he would clothe us with proper 
garments from his own wardrobe when the time came for us to be 
recognized as partners. 

But an important pre-requisite was that we were first to go through 
a systematic course of education and training in order to fit us to be 
partners in a concern of such magnitude and significance, adding 
that the training would involve an acquaintance with the various 
elements of nature, earth, air, fire, water, &c, and that becoming 
acquainted with these, great danger and suffering would be 
incurred; but after that, the whole business would be to superintend 
the work, and would be most pleasant and profitable. We agreed to 
the terms and they were signed and sealed in the presence of 
witnesses. 

In this parable, as it may be called, we can see the picture of man's 
poverty, bankrupt and in prison. Christ's love and sympathy for a 
lost race, and the price he paid for the mine, all he had, and the 
conditions of co-partnership with him; a giving up and sacrificing 
all we have. 

In the offer of partnership, though to be preceded by disciplinary 
education and trial, even so as by fire, we see the conditions of our 
high calling held out to view. 

But few will accept such conditions; but few will share in such 
glory. 

But we are persuaded that the "sufferings of this present time are 
not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in 
us, For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the 
manifestation of the sons of God." Rom. 8:18,19. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R338 : page 3 



THE WORD OF GOD. 

JOHN 1:1-17. 



The Greek word, Logos, translated word in John 1 and 14 of this 
chapter, would be properly translated by the words, intention, plan, 
purpose, or expression. Apply this definition to the following 
passages where the same word (logos) occurs: Acts 10:29. "I ask 
therefor for what intent (logos) ye have sent for me." Acts 4:29. 
"Grant unto thy servants that with all boldness they may speak thy 
word"-declare thy plan, purpose, or intention. Acts 8:4. "They that 
were scattered abroad went everywhere preaching the word," plan 
or purpose of God. Acts 18:11. "Teaching the word (intention, plan 



or purpose) of God among them." Mark 4:20. "Such as hear the 
word (intention, plan or purpose of God) and receive it. " Matt. 
24:35. "Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words (plans or 
purposes) shall not pass away. " 

With this understanding then, we may thus read John 1:1. "In the 
beginning," before anything was created, and when none existed, 
but Jehovah, "was the word"-plan, intention, or purpose of God. 
Yes, God had a well defined, and matured plan, formed in his own 
mind before it found expression in the slightest development. The 
great Architect of the universe and Author of all life, first counted 
the cost, and reckoned that all should culminate to his honor and 
glory. (Luke 14:28-31; Rev. 4:11.) 

"And the word (plan or purpose) was with God." So far, it existed 
only in his own conception; it was his own thought, intention, plan, 
purpose, not yet expressed. 

"And the word was God." The term logos, not only applied to the 
plan existing only in the mind, but also to the expression of that 
plan. We understand this text then, to mean that the word-plan or 
purpose of God found its first expression in the creation of him, 
who was "The beginning of the creation of God"- "The first born 
of every creature" (who afterward became the man, Jesus). Rev. 
3:14 and 1:5. Col. 1:15; and who is now fully exalted to the divine 
nature, and still "His name is called the "Word of God." Rev. 19:13. 

This being, in whose creation, Jehovah's plan began to find 
expression, is here called a God- "And the Word [expression of the 
plan] was God." The word God signifies mighty one; but not 
always the All-mighty One. It is the translation of each of four 
Hebrew words— el, elah, elohim, and adonai, all signifying the 
mighty, or great. It is a general name, often and properly applied to 
our Heavenly Father, as well as to Jesus, angels, and men. (Deut. 
10:17. Gen. 32:24,30; Judges 13:21,22; Jer. 16:13, 10:11; Exod. 
7:1.) In Psa. 82 the distinction of beings translated by the word God 
is very marked: "God (elohim) standeth in the congregation of the 
mighty (el); he judgeth among the Gods" (elohim). Here the first 
word, God, evidently refers to Jehovah, the All-mighty one, while 
the others evidently refer to other mighty ones-the church, the sons 
of God, of whom Jesus is the head or chief. Again vs. 6, "I have 
said ye are Gods (elohim); and all of you are children of the Most 
High (el yon, the highest God), yet ye shall all die like men." We, 
now, though sons of the Most High die and appear to men nothing 
more than the others. In us, as in our Leader and Head, God is 
manifest in our mortal flesh. (See John 10:35 and 2 Cor. 4:11.) 

The Hebrew word Jehovah, is the distinctive name of the Almighty 
Father and is never applied to any other being- "I appeared unto 
Abraham, unto Isaac and unto Jacob, as God Almighty, (el— God 
shaddai— almighty) but by my name JEHOVAH, was I not known 
to them." Exod. 6:3. In our common version (O.T.) its 
distinctiveness as a name is lost, being generally rendered the Lord. 



"And the word was God." The Son of God (afterward called Jesus,) 
is here called THE WORD, because Jehovah revealed his word- 
plan or purpose, through him. It was an eastern custom for kings to 
have an officer, called the King's Word or Voice, who stood upon 
the steps of the throne, at the side of a lattice window, where there 
was a hole covered with a curtain. Behind this curtain the king sat 
and expressed his commands to this officer, who communicated 
them to the officers, judges and attendants. It is from this custom 
we presume, that the phraseology of the text is derived. 

Primarily then, the word refers to the plan of God, and it is 
afterwards applied to the messenger of that plan -the Son of God. 

John 1:2 and 3, "The same (being) was in the beginning (of 
creation) with God. All things were made by him, (as the agent of 
Jehovah) and without him was not anything made that was made. " 
He then, as here plainly stated, being the first and chiefest of 
Jehovah's creatures, was honored by him, as the agent through 
whom all things, both animate and inanimate were afterwards 
created- "Without him was not anything made. " 

Jehovah had no beginning but is "from everlasting to everlasting;" 
(Psa. 90:2) hence that which is here called the "beginning" must 
refer to the beginning of creation. 

"In him was life. " How brief this expression, and at first sight how 
simple and seemingly absurd. If the surface meaning were taken, 
the statement of such a self-evident truth would indeed be absurd— 
that in the Son of God, who was Jehovah's agent in the works of 
creation, was life. But let us look deeper, and we will see that it is 
just like God's grand and eloquent brevity. Since the 
accomplishment of the work narrated in verse 3, the Son of God 
had laid aside the glory of his pre-existent condition, and become a 
man. As a man, he had lived 30 years— the maturity of manhood, 
and had consecrated his human being to death. Here he received the 
earnest of his after, high exaltation-the begetting of the Spirit, to 
the Divine nature, to which he was born in the resurrection, when 
the consecration of the human being to death, was actually 
accomplished. In the Son of God-the Word-Jesus, then, from 30 
years of age, was this Divine life which he never before possessed. 
(See "Narrow way to Life," page 134, of "Food for Thinking 
Christians.") "And the life (this divine life) was the light of men. 
And the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness apprehendeth it 
not." (E. Diag.) 

John 1:10 and 1 1 . He was in the world and the world was made by 
him; and the world (of mankind) knew him not. He came unto his 
own, (people-the Jewish nation) and his own received him not. 

But, though the world knew him not, neither did his own receive 
him, yet, nevertheless-vs. 9, "That was the true Light which 
lighteth every man that cometh into the world. " This Light has not 
yet enlightened every man. It now lights only those referred to in 
vs. 12— "as many as received him and believed on his name." To 



this class— believers— "gave he privilege (margin) to become sons 
of God" (John 1:13, E. Diag., begotten... of God)-on condition that 
they follow in his footsteps, sacrificing the human nature. These, 
throughout the Gospel Age, "walk in the light," and like their Head, 
Jesus, are "lights in the world." (Phil. 2:15.) But still the world fails 
to apprehend the light, and will, until Jesus and all the members of 
his body-followers in his footsteps -constituting the Heavenly 
City (Rev. 21:2) are as "a city set on a hill (which) cannot be hid." 
(Matt. 5:14.) Yes, this heavenly city "shall be established in the 
tops of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all 
nations shall flow unto it:" (Isa. 2:2.) "And the nations shall walk in 
the light of it." (Rev. 21:24.) Then this "true light (shining in its 
strength, from the exalted Divine Christ-head and body, will) 
lighten every man that cometh into the world. " 

R338 : page 4 

That this interpretation of John 1 :4 and 5 is correct, is proven by 
John 1:6,7,8, and 15. John came six months before Jesus' baptism, 
and begetting to the divine nature, bearing witness of the coming 
light, saying, "There cometh one after me, who is preferred before 
me." 

Jesus had already come as a human being, and had, as John 
declared, existed before him, not as a man, for John was six months 
older than Jesus; but in his glorious pre-human condition. In what 
sense, then, did Jesus come after John's preaching? We answer that 
at the time of his consecration and typical baptism, he came as the 
Anointed One, the Christ, the divinely begotten Son of God, and 
consequent light of the world. 

Vs. 14. "And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us." 

As in John 1 : 3, we are informed of the glory and power of the pre- 
existent Word, and in John 1 :4, ignoring the subsequent human 
nature for which he left that glory, we are informed of that divine 
life which is ultimately to enlighten every man that cometh into the 
world; so John 1:14 goes back to tell how he left the glory which he 
had with the Father, gave up his spiritual being, and became a 
human being. 

"And we beheld his glory (the glory of his perfect humanity), the 
glory as of the only begotten of a father. " His perfect human nature 
shone with such lustre in contrast with all other imperfect men, that 
he seemed not to be a son of the fallen race, but the only begotten 
of some perfect being— and such he was, a new creation of God, the 
second direct human creation of God, just as Adam was the first, 
though Jesus was born of the virgin Mary, while Adam was formed 
from the dust of the earth. 

Jesus, because a perfect man, was full of grace (favor) and truth. He 
lived in full and constant favor with God, and therefore God made 
known his truth-his plans-to him. 

R339 : page 4 



Vs. 16. "And of his fullness have all we (believers) received." Yes, 
of that same fullness of favor with God, which Jesus enjoyed 
because of his sinless perfection, have all we received because of 
our justification through faith in his blood. Thus Jesus lifts 
believers up to the plane which he occupied, into fullness of favor 
and communion with God- "justified freely from all things." 

"And grace for grace," or favor on account of favor: that is, being 
lifted from the condition of rebels and sinners to that of justification 
by faith, was one act of favor; then that favor opened the way for 
another favor- viz., the call to become partakers of the Divine 
nature, to become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus by 
suffering with him. 

Yes, with Paul, because of this grace (of justification) wherein we 
stand, we rejoice in hope of the glory of God (Rom. 5:2); reckoning 
that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. (Rom. 8:18.) 

John 1:17. "For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth 
came by Jesus Christ. " Here a contrast is drawn between the Jewish 
and Gospel Ages: In the former, only the Law (the shadow of good 
things to come in and after the Gospel Age) was given. But it could 
never give life, because none were able to measure up to its 
requirements. "But grace"-the payment of our ransom price, and 
not only so, but also the additional favor- "truth," or the knowledge 
of God's plan, and our high-calling as revealed through it- both 
these favors came by Jesus Christ. "The appearing of Jesus Christ, 
our Saviour, brought life (the 'restitution' to perfection of humanity) 
and immortality (believers' high-calling) to light." (2 Tim. 1:10.) 
This special favor ("grace"), and this wonderful knowledge 
("truth") then, are peculiar only to the Gospel Age. 

In the brief space here considered what a glorious biography we 
have presented to us, of the once glorious spiritual, subsequent 
perfect human, and now "highly exalted" Divine, Immortal WORD. 
Here it stands on the sacred page in its simple, eloquent brevity as 
dictated by the spirit of Jehovah. Behold what grace the Father 
bestowed upon him- "That all men (and all created beings) should 
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. " 

If all the world my Savior knew, 
Then all the world would love Him too. 

Thank God the happy day will soon dawn when this knowledge 
shall fill the whole earth. 

Beloved followers in his footsteps, "behold what manner of love the 
Father hath bestowed upon us that we, (as partakers with him, and 
joint-heirs of the same things) should (also) be called the sons of 
God." 



R339 : page 4 



TRUTH SPREADING. 

At a meeting of the local Evangelical Association held in the First 
Presbyterian Church of this city, March 6th, Dr. Bittinger, of 
Sewickly, read an able essay on the "Eschatology of St. Paul," or 
the Apostle's teachings relative to death and judgment. The paper 
required more than an hour for its delivery. The last paragraph, 
which we quote below, gives the gist of the argument, and in our 
opinion shows a marked step toward truth, by an able and 
seemingly fearless man. 

We would be glad to see more men of nerve, and of intelligent, 
untrammeled interest in the teachings of Paul and all the Scriptures. 
But so surely as they step upon the Word of God as a basis of faith, 
they will find, as did this essayist, that the traditions of men are 
sadly out of joint under the present rule of anti -Christ. Mark and 
ponder well the force of the argument of this brother just 
awakening to a realization of the shortness of the "bed" (creed) in 
which he has been resting. (Isa. 28:20.) 

"In conclusion, accept a few remarks and reflections. I have been 
struck with the prominence which Paul gives to the coming of 
Christ, in his epistles, speeches, and sermons; the many direct 
statements of the dogma, and the still more numerous allusions and 
references to it. I am struck and startled by the practical value of 
this doctrine for exhortation, encouragement, comfort, warning, and 
vigilance. It is the farthest goal set for this life, and to appear 
blameless at Christ's coming is the highest aim of Christian living. 
It is evident that with Paul and the primitive Christians, Christ's 
coming took the place of our popular conception of heaven. We are 
refugees fleeing from a pursuing wrath; they were pursuers of hope, 
looking for a deliverer. We think, speak, and sing of going to 
heaven; the Apostles wrote and spoke of Christ's coming from 
heaven, and to this expectant King all David's psalms were set. We 
think of the judgment, with fear, trembling, and horror; they 
thought of it with solemn joy. I might mention other things, but 
these are enough to show that the modern Church does not conceive 
of Christ's second coming as the Apostolic Church did. As a 
practical doctrine, it has no place in our theology, no influence in 
our lives. Has the virtue all gone out of it, or have we fallen away 
from the faith once delivered to the saints?" 

Truly a wonderful awakening of the people, relative to what is 
taught in the Bible is in progress. Thousands of letters from all parts 
of this country and Great Britain, give abundant evidence that 
people will no longer "stop thinking," or "burn the book" at the 
behest of self-satisfied sectarians, interested only in the upbuilding 
of their party and its views, and not in the elucidation of Bible truth. 

Oh, how sad it is, that the so-called pastors care only to have their 
flocks asleep and dreaming, and will not lead them to the beautiful, 
fresh fields of living truth, and streams of living water. On the 
contrary, they seek by every means to prevent the sheep from eating 



Food by raising the cry of POISON. Their flocks may drink deeply 
into pleasure of the world, or satiate themselves with worldly 
business, and it is all "very natural"; but let them seek to acquaint 
themselves with the teachings of their Father's Word, and they are 
the subjects of prayers, entreaties, expostulations, and threatenings. 
They are told that they are on the road to infidelity and hell, and 
that the only cure is to "stop thinking, and get at church work." If it 
is true that to be a Christian to-day means that we must "stop 
thinking," and be mere MACHINES, controlled by the theological 
schools, then is that Scripture out of place in which God says: 
"Come, let us reason together"-and again, "Search the Scriptures"- 
and again, the Scriptures "are able to make thee wise." 

Yes, it seems to be one of the snares which Satan sets for the saints' 
feet: He gets them to work at holding fairs, festivals, and church 
lotteries, in the belief that that is working for Jesus. Perhaps it is to 
cancel a church debt which Satan prompted them to incur, to 
minister to religious pride. And we might add, much of the other 
church work seems to us conducive to evil results, and hence 
attributable to evil. For instance, it has become fashionable for 
nearly all churches to have three meetings on Sunday, and four or 
five during the week. This absorbs all the spare time of many, and 
leaves them weary of religious things, and without any time for 
Bible study, or thought on the "deep things of God." 

The meetings do not give spiritual nourishment and strength, but 
merely soothe the minds of some who think that thus, they please 
God, work for Jesus and bear the cross, while instead, much of it is 
the merest nonsense, conducive to self satisfaction. 

True Christians see through the hollowness, and endeavor to have 
their hearts fed by secret worship and communion, and conclude 
that because all Christians and ministers do and sanction this 
system, it must be right. Thus, this which is called work for Jesus, 
is in reality an arrangement with Satan to make people "stop 
thinking"-He puts them to work; since he cannot get them to do 
evil, he does get them to work so hard and so much that they can 
get little good and no truth. 

We were struck with the operation of this plan as practiced by a 
minister of Allegheny city, recently. An elder of the church came 
twice to our afternoon meetings to get some "Food. " He was 
spotted as a sheep likely to jump from the fold, and being a sheep 
of some means and influence, he must be penned again. 
Accordingly the minister was informed, and he visited the elder, 
who candidly said that he had gone to our meetings to hear for 
himself, and so far he had heard nothing which he thought was 
unchristian or unscriptural. He excused himself by saying, that he 
had gone because they happened to have no afternoon meetings in 
their church. Before the next Sunday a meeting was appointed for 
the afternoon hour and this poor sheep was made its leader. 



If we are correct in judging, that much of the work, is arranged by 
and in the interest of Satan, and he has able helpers in many of the 
under-shepherds. 

How does the chief shepherd regard such tenders of the flock, think 
you? As there are kinds of work owned and accepted of God, so 
there are exceptions among the ministers. 

To any who doubt our conclusions we say, "Come, let us reason 
together," test your preacher and see whether he is able to show you 
how and where our Bible based teachings are wrong. But if he says 
"stop thinking," "burn the book," or any 

R340 : page 4 

other unChristlike or unreasonable thing, conclude that he cannot 
meet it fairly. If they offer theory, or if they speak disparagingly of 
those "of this way," remember that ours is only a repetition of the 
experience of Jesus, the Apostles, and of the reformers— Knox, 
Wesley, Luther and all who ever proclaimed advanced truth. 
Answer all opponents with a "Thus saith the Lord," or a "Thus it is 
written," and ask them for Scriptural proofs for their utterances. To 
this end, study to show yourselves workmen approved unto God, 
that you may be able to give to every man that asketh you, a reason 
for the hope that is in you with meekness and fear. (2 Tim. 2:15, 
and 1 Pet. 3:15.) 

You will be sure to find that their titles and knowledge of their own 
line of theology, is the extent of their stock; and of Bible 
knowledge, they have very little— next to none. (Isa. 29:10-14.) 
Then, too, if ever so well posted in the Scriptures, there is very little 
which can be applied in harmony with their creeds. 

Then, with charity for them, and love for all the sheep, go to the 
storehouse of the chief shepherd; there drink in the truth and give to 
others, fearless of infringement upon any theological patent, and 
God will bless you with refreshing draughts. 

"Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, (right 
and truth) they shall be filled," if they know the voice of the 
shepherd and follow him. 



R340 : page 4 

LET THE SAME MIND BE IN YOU WHICH 
WAS ALSO IN CHRIST JESUS. 

Guard against impatience when any deny this doctrine, or call in 
question your experience of its blessings. There are very good men 
who do not understand this doctrine as we understand it. They have 
been led by education and training to look at it from a different 
standpoint, and consequently have arrived at different and opposite 
conclusions. To 



R340 : page 5 

betray impatience when conversing with them, will help to confirm 
them in their unscriptural views and their opposition. Let this grace 
dwell in you so richly that nothing shall move you. Let the opposers 
of the doctrine see in your spirit a manifestation of its fruit. 

Holiness and truth will not long exist without opposition; and the 
most perfect holiness, purest truth, will provoke the greatest 
opposition. Birds, when they can, generally peck at the choicest and 
ripest fruit; so the beak of slander generally strikes the holiest and 
ripest Christians. No matter how closely we may walk with God, or 
how blamelessly we may walk before men, some will charge us 
with imperfection, or perhaps with sin. To the blinded Jews and 
Pharisees, Christ himself was guilty of great imperfection and even 
blasphemy. And strange as it may seem, this opposition will come 
chiefly from professors of religion. "Those who love God with all 
their hearts," says Wesley, "must expect most opposition from 
professors who have gone on for twenty years in an old beaten 
track, and fancy they are wiser than all the world; these always 
oppose sanctification most. " But opposition to the doctrine of entire 
sanctification, if the friends of it take care to exhibit it in their lives, 
will tend to spread it. Opposition should not be courted, but it 
should never be feared, and it should always be borne in a meek, 
sweet spirit. If we retaliate when an injury is done us, it shows that 
self is not dead. 

Beware of disputes and quarrels with fellow-Christians. If any use 
sharpness of speech with you, and try to breed a quarrel, it is even 
better to answer nothing and suffer wrong than to become angry. 
There is an excellent antidote for this evil disposition in keeping 
fully employed in the Lord's work. "Work, full work for God," says 
Collins, "would leave us little time for quarrelling; and devotion, 
full devotion, would leave us no inclination. " It is a great mistake, 
when evil is spoken of you, to be anxious to vindicate yourselves, 
"As they, who for every slight infirmity take physic to repair their 
health," says one writer, "do rather impair it; so they, who for every 
trifle are eager to vindicate their character, do rather weaken it. " 
"Take care of your spirit and conduct," says another, "and your 
reputation will take care of itself. " 

We often need charity exercised toward ourselves; let us not be 
slow in exercising it toward others. We do not think it just or fair 
towards us when our fellow-Christians overlook our general 
character, and pick out some imperfection and hold it up, and 
perhaps magnify it to our disadvantage; let us not do so in respect 
to them. Let us get completely under the sweet influence of the love 
of Jesus. With a heavenly unction constantly dwelling in the soul, 
we shall shrink from a censorious spirit, and shall have other work 
than to be constantly hunting after failings in our brethren. Those 
who find or profess to find, the most faults in others have generally 
the greatest number in themselves; and those who are loudest in 



trumpeting their own praise have usually the least in them 
deserving of praise. 

Do not let your mind run much on opposers of the doctrine except it 
be to pray for them, or to consider how you may best present to 
them the truth. To think too much of their opposition may foster 
unkind feeling. To converse too much with others about it may 
beget evil speaking. You may thus loose your sweetness of spirit 
and your mind may become sour. Remember you were once 
standing on the same ground that others are standing on now. The 
light that now illumines your mind did not always shine upon you. 
The opposition you now meet with from others you once 
manifested yourself. You were as slow in coming to the truth as 
many around you are. These things should teach you charity, 
forbearance, clemency, and mildness. 

Watch against any omission of the privilege and comfort of prayer 
and fellowship with the Father of spirits. The life of faith and 
holiness cannot be maintained without much prayer. Regular habits 
of secret devotion are indispensable. Each day should be begun 
with a season of close communion with God, that the heart may 
obtain new strength for new conflicts. The business of the day 
should not be entered upon without the clear sunshine of the Divine 
presence. There should be a deep consciousness that Jehovah is 
with us, and that He will abide with us through the day to sustain 
and protect us. 

The purified believer, in his seasons of closet prayer, has not daily 
to begin such seasons with confession of sin, and intercession for 
pardon, but living in constant acceptance with God, the intercourse 
between him and God is always open. Dwelling in Christ, and 
Christ abiding in him, he realizes no condemnation. United to 
Christ, there will flow into his soul heavenly life-currents, and his 
life will be a Christ-life; it will be a life of health and strength, a life 
of fruit-bearing to the glory of the Father, a life of constant victory 
over the tempter, a life of calm and peace, and joy and hope. To 
pray, therefore, will be as natural as to breathe, and through the one 
Mediator he will be able to draw near to God at once. 

-R. W. 



R340 : page 5 



THIS SAME JESUS. 



Probably no passage of Scripture has been the subject of more 
discussion and less understood, than Acts 1:11. "Men of Galilee, 
why do you stand looking towards the heavens? This Jesus, who is 
taken up from among you into the heavens, shall so come in the 
manner in which you saw him go into the heavens." (Emphatic 
Diaglott.) 



It will not be necessary, for the benefit of those who are in the light, 
in regard to the "Tabernacle and Its Teachings," to say very much 
upon this subject. Those who understand the sacrifices, will 
certainly not be looking up into the heavens, expecting to see, with 
their fleshly eyes, Jesus coming in the flesh. They have learned that 
the eyes, with which we see in this age are the eyes of the 
understanding -Eph. 1:18; which are certainly the very best kind of 
eyes. And they have learned, also, that even though we have known 
Christ after the flesh, yet now we know him so no more. 2 Cor. 
5:16. rev. ver. So we see that what is true of the members of his 
body, is true of him, as the head. Having given his (animal) body as 
a sacrifice for us, it must be dissolved, and to him was given a new 
body, a house not made with hands, etc.— 2 Cor. 5:1. 

Having sacrificed his human nature, there was given to him a new 
nature-the Divine. 

Paul says: But some will say, how are the dead raised up? And with 
what body do they come? Oh, senseless man, that which thou 
sowest is not quickened— made alive— except it die; and that which 
thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that shall be, etc., but God 
giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed its own 
body. 

The world at large have been sown with the natural seed— human 
nature -and will be raised with the natural bodies; while the new- 
divine— nature, becomes a new seed, and requires a new body; and 
God giveth to every seed its own body, etc., 1 Cor. 15:35,38. 
Before his crucifixion, Jesus had that treasure-the divine nature in 
an earthen vessel— body— 2 Cor. 4:7; in him dwelt all the fullness of 
the divine nature, in a body 

R341 : page 5 

-Col. 2:9 (Rotherham); so that new seed was sown in a natural 
body (earthen vessel); and raised in a spiritual body. 

It should be noticed that the word same is left out of the passage 
under consideration, by the Em. Diaglott- it not being in the Greek. 

The blinding phrase is, in like manner. Let us examine the Greek 
term, hon tropon, rendered like manner, in Acts 1:11; giving all the 
passages where it occurs, and putting the English translation in 
italics; then let those who are so tenacious about the exact manner, 
be just as tenacious in all the passages where it occurs. Now as (hon 
tropon) James and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these resist the 
truth. 2 Tim. 3:8. Read Exodus, 7th and 8th chapters in regard to 
those magicians— Satan's mediums. Wilt thou kill me, as (hon 
tropon) thou didst the Egyptian yesterday? Acts 7:28. 

Oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem... how often would I have gathered thy 
children together, even as (hon tropon —like manner) a hen 
gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Matt. 
23:37 and Luke 13:34. 



Will anybody claim the exact manner in any of the references 
given, especially the last? Is not the true idea that just as certainly 
as one thing has been done, another will be done? 

As certainly as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, so Jesus 
would have gathered Jerusalem's children; but we think no one 
would insist upon the exact way. Jesus said, If I go and prepare a 
place- official position, by preparing us for it-for you, I will come 
again, and receive you unto myself, etc.-John 14:3. All the Angels 
could mean in Acts 1:11 (the only remaining passage where hon 
tropon occurs), is: ye men of Galilee why do you stand looking up 
into heaven? This Jesus has gone away as he said he would, and he 
will as surely come again, as he said he would. 

Really there is nothing in the passage as to the manner of coming, 
but a positive declaration that he would come. 

Other Scriptures teach the manner and time. We have taken heed in 
our hearts, to the sure word of prophecy; and the eyes of our 
understanding have been enlightened; because, as we see the "day 
star" -(phosphorus-light-bringer-E.D.) has arisen. 2 Pet. 1:19. It 
is contrary to the teachings of the types of the old and the positive 
statements of the new Testament, to expect that Jesus will come 
again in the flesh. 

The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for 
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because 
they are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2:14. 

B. W. KEITH. 



R341 : page 5 

A VIEW FROM THE OTHER SIDE 
OF THE WATCH TOWER. 

A few years ago the watchmen who were in the light, proclaimed 
that the "Day of the Lord" had come; that the King of kings and 
Ruler of rulers had arrived and is present; that he had taken unto 
him his great power, and had begun his reign. At that time there 
was little or no outward signs of any such stupendous event; and 
very naturally, as clearly foretold, there arose scoffers, walking 
after their own desires, who sneeringly asked, "Where is the 
promise of his presence? (See margin of New Revision)... all things 
continue as they were," etc. Walking by faith, and not by sight; 
trusting the infallible Word of God, the watchmen proclaimed 
further as to what means would be used by the Stone Kingdom in 
striking the kingdoms of earth; that oppressed peoples would rise 
against the governments and throw them down. It was announced 
that the "Times of Restitution" had begun; and the faithless asked, 
Where? It was also clearly taught that the time had come when 
God's ancient people, the Jews, (beloved for the Father's sake) 



would be stirred up to begin to return to their own land. Lastly, the 
proclamation went forth, "Babylon has fallen," "Come out of her, 
my people, that ye partake not of her sins, that ye receive not of her 
plagues." 

As we said when these announcements began to be made, there 
were but few outward signs. It required implicit faith in the Word to 
believe that these things were to be fulfilled in "our day." Any 
believer almost was willing to assent to their being due two or three 
generations in the future. 

While the world and a worldly church still lie in darkness, to those 
in the watch tower there has been increasing light. Already to any 
who have eyes to see, the outward signs are multiplying. Day by 
day we see all about us increased proof of our position. Compare 2 
Tim. 3:1-7 with the days we live in, and see if the picture is not a 
faithful one. But such things have always been, says some one. 
True, to a certain extent, in accordance with verse 13; but are we 
not reaching a climax in wickedness? Judges, grand juries, and 
others who have opportunity to see and to know these things are 
alarmed at the prospect. The land is flooded with the vilest 
literature. The artist and the writer vie with each other in dishing up 
the horrid feast to the hungry army. And who compose this insatiate 
and ever-increasing multitude? Old and young, rich and poor-we 
had almost said saints [?] and sinners— we will simply say, church 
members. It is not in novels, story papers, etc., alone that the poison 
is found. If it were, we could easily keep it out of our homes. The 
reporters of the daily press have caught the infection, and news 
items that the briefest note of would be quite enough, are spiced 
and seasoned and served up steaming hot. If the facts are few, the 
reporter draws, without stint, on his morbid imagination for the 
balance. What kind of men and women will the rising generation 
make, fed on such slops? It is not difficult to see the result; it is 
already showing itself. Boys not yet in their teens are getting quite 
familiar with the revolver; a spirit of independence and lawlessness 
is revealing itself everywhere. 

R341 : page 6 

Enough of this picture; let us look at something else. It has been 
announced that the times of restitution have begun; and that Christ's 
kingdom now established, is about to overthrow the beastly 
kingdoms of earth. Be patient, it will take time. The forces are at 
work; see all over the earth the people are waking up and clamoring 
for their rights as never before. 

Ireland is not alone. The Irish are only a little more demonstrative 
than some others: the feeling is universal. 

The Czar of Russia has obtained the title of the Emperor Recluse, 
because he is afraid to go out amongst his beloved [?] subjects. He 
has not yet been crowned (it is a year since he became emperor). 
Plots have been discovered to blow up both him and his guests at 
the coronation, and it has been postponed. Failing to kill him, the 



Russians have been amusing themselves robbing and slaughtering 
the Jews. 

The stories that come to us of these atrocities read like Indian 
massacres, or something worse. We clip the following: "In 
Southern Russia alone LI 6,000,000 ($80,000,000) in property have 
been lost, 100,000 Jews rendered homeless, and in 45 places where 
reliable statistics could be collected there have been 40 murders and 
225 women subjected to torture." We hope, and rather think that the 
reports are, as usual, exaggerated, yet there may have been much 
that we have not heard of. Many are fleeing to America, but many 
more are destitute, and piteous ly appeal for help to come. 

What does this mean in the light of prophecy? It means that we 
have reached the period spoken of in Jer. 30:7. "It is even the time 
of Jacob's trouble; but he shall be saved out of it [read the context]. 
Their coming to America is, of course, not returning to their own 
land; neither will they go there in any such multitude at the first 
gathering. The prophecy says, "Ye shall be gathered one by one, O, 
ye children of Israel." Isa. 27:12. It is well to remember that there 
are over 30 years yet to accomplish this work. The recent 
developments and proposed improvements in Palestine, and all this 
trouble shows plainly that the present Lord has begun this work 
also. 

What of Babylon? Are there any outward signs of her fall? Very 
many. People are waking up to investigate as never before. 
Reverence for old creeds is rapidly passing away. Among some this 
causes a searching to know the truth. (Blessed are those seekers.) 
Among others it brings nothing but skepticism, carelessness, and 
hypocrisy. Among the masses it produces infidelity —an utter 
disregard for many of God's laws, and contempt for all who profess 
his name. The trial of Guiteau has evidently been an instrument 
used to bring odium upon the Christian profession. The church is 
losing its power and falling into disrespect. The stars are falling: 
some one way, some another. Soon the lights will be all out— not 
even a candle left. Rev. 18:23. Already the merchants (priests) 
complain that "no man buyeth their merchandise any more. " Read 
the clip from the New York Herald, in this paper, which shows that 
some of the denominations did not average one new member per 
church during the past year. The membership completely fails to 
keep pace with the growth of the population. One hopeful mission 
statistician is so pleased with the success amongst the heathen 
[where a chief commands and all his people are numbered in at 
once], that he asserts that if Christianity can only hold its own at 
home the world will in a few years be converted. What an 

R342 : page 6 

idea ! It sounds like the derision of an enemy. It looks like an 
acknowledgment that what is now preached, though easily foisted 
upon and suited to the ignorant savage, is repudiated by the 
intelligent and civilized. And is there not much truth in this 



thought? Is it not a fact that the most intelligent and best of the 
people have outgrown the creeds? Some, unfortunately, failing to 
see the whole truth, have drifted off to sea; others are boldly 
attacking error with all the light they have. [See article "Liberty of 
Protestantism," in Zion's Day Star for Jan.] 

One recent event should demonstrate to all that the house has been 
left desolate. Where in all the records of the past did a whole 
nation, almost as with one voice, cry to God in prayer without being 
answered? Did God ever do so with his chosen people? And did not 
all the orthodox churches in the United States pray that President 
Garfield's life might be spared? Even the infallible [?] Pope 
mingled his prayers with those of Ingersoll and the Protestant 
churches; and one proved as potent as the other. 

If God has proved unfaithful it is the first time. Something is 
wrong. It evidently never happened before. One of two has become 
unfaithful. Is it the Unchangeable One? or rather, has not the hand 
appeared and written on the walls of Babylon, NUMBERED! 
NUMBERED! WEIGHED! DIVIDED! and above all in letters of 
fire, ICHABOD! 

W. I. MANN. 



R342 : page 6 



"THIS GENERATION. 



"Verily I say unto you this generation shall not pass till all these 
things be fulfilled. " Matt. 24:34. 

This passage has puzzled us many times, and our experience may 
be the same as some others with regard to it, but we think we have 
the solution of it now. It may not be new to some, but it is to us. 
However, it is not because it is new, but because it is true (as we 
believe) that it satisfies us. 

The disciples had been asking Jesus (ver. 3) about the destruction of 
Jerusalem, what should be the sign of his coming, and of the end of 
the world (age), and after answering their questions with regard to 
it, he adds the words referred to above. We understand some to 
think that this prophecy was fulfilled at the transfiguration; and a 
careless reading of Mark 9:1, with 2 Peter 1:17,18, might seem to 
justify that conclusion; but when we reflect that not alone was his 
coming inquired after, but the end of the age ("what shall be the 
sign of the presence and of the end of the age" [Emphatic Diaglott]) 
and in accordance with their questions he gave the signs all along 
up to the end of the age, and then says, "Verily I say unto you this 
generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled. " This 
could not be fulfilled by any events recorded in the above 
scriptures, but Mark 9:1 was fulfilled "six days after," and is 
referred to by Peter. 



We think Jesus, as he was not talking to the multitude, used plain 
language, no figure nor symbol, but that the whole difficulty centres 
in the meaning of the word generation. We think the key to it is 
found in Matt. 19:28. "Verily I say unto you that ye who have 
followed me-in the re-generation when the son of man shall sit 
upon the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. " 

We understand that he used the word generation in distinction from 
the word regeneration; in other words, that he gave them to 
understand that he would be present before the regeneration, and 
before the people of this age should pass away ("this generation 
shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled") for (ver. 38) "as in 
those days, those before the deluge... thus will be the presence of the 
Son of man. " E. Diaglott. 

We consider this, in harmony with other scriptures, is clearly 
opposed to the post millennial view, and strongly in confirmation of 
the pre-millennial view. 

Now, then, are "all these things" fulfilled? Are they nearly all 
fulfilled? This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the 
world for a witness unto all nations." Has that been done? Yes. 

"Then shall the end (of the age- The harvest is the end of the age. 
Matt. 13:39,) come." HEKO, have come, be here; (see Young's 
Analytical Concordance.) "Therefore let us hold fast the profession 
of our faith without wavering, for he is faithful that promised, and 
let us consider one another to provoke unto love and good works, 
not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner 
of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye 
see the day approaching." Heb. 10:23,24,25. 

The end of one day (Gospel day) having come, "another day," Heb. 
4:8, is approaching. "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R342 : page 6 



THE GREAT FEAST. 



"A certain man made a great supper and invited many. And he 
sent his servant at the hour of the supper to say to those who had 
been invited, 'Come, for it is now ready.' And they all began with 
one accord to excuse themselves.... And that servant, having 
returned, related all to his Master. Then the householder, being 
angry, said to his servant, 'Go out quickly (at once) into the open 
squares and streets of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and 
crippled, and blind, and lame.' And the servant said, 'Sir, I have 
done what thou didst command, and yet there is room. " Luke 
14:16-22. Diaglott. 



Our Heavenly Father, kind, bountiful, and rich, is ever pleased to 
dispense of his bounties to those requiring and appreciating them. 
He tells us of a feast he will soon spread for all the world, when he 
will not only feast them on fat things, refined joys and pleasures, 
but he will "wipe away all tears from off all faces"— destroy death 
and remove the vail of ignorance from all nations. In the day of that 
feast it shall be said: "Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, 
and he will save us;. ..we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation" 
(Isa. 25:6-9.) A salvation from the vail of ignorance, and from 
Adamic death. That will be a delightful feast, a blessed season for 
poor, wretched humanity. But before that feast can be spread, the 
MOUNTAIN or KINGDOM of the Lord must first be established 
(see vss. 6,7), that from and through it may come this blessed feast 
"unto all people." 

The feast described by Jesus, though made by the same kind, rich 
Heavenly Father, is not the same feast above viewed. It applies, we 
believe, not to the next, but to the present age. It is not for all 
people, but for the "few selected" from among the "many invited" 
in the present age. (Matt. 22:14.) Those first invited were the 
leading representatives of the Jewish nation. "What advantage had 
the Jew? Much every way"— they being typically justified by typical 
sacrifices, were reckoned as being on a plane of friendship with 
God-having intercourse with him. To these, through the prophets, 
he had long ago intimated his intention of spreading a great feast, 
and when the time for it was come, he sent Jesus (who in turn sent 
others) "to those who had been invited," saying, it is now ready,- 
"The kingdom of God is at hand. " 

The call first reached the Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and Doctors of 
the Law who sat in Moses' seat (Matt. 23:2), and were acquainted 
with the Law of the Prophets, and who knew that such a feast was 
proposed. "And the Pharisees also who were covetous, heard all 
these things, and they derided him." (Luke 16:14.) They had a plan 
and system of their own arrangement; they were busy and could not 
heed the message; they had no desire to have their own plans 
superceded by God's plans, or, in the language of the parable, to 
taste of his supper. 

Jesus perceived that they received not the message, and gave most 
of his time and attention to the lower classes, "who knew not the 
law" (John 7:49), and had not heard the invitation. 

He said to those who were originally invited, "Verily I say unto 
you, that the Publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God 
before you." (Matt. 21:31.) "Ye shall see Abraham and Isaac and 
Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and ye 
yourselves thrust out." (Luke 13:28) -You shall not taste of the 
supper. 

"The common people (who knew not the Law, and had not 
heretofore heard the invitation) heard him gladly." (Mark 12:37.) 
But those first invited, who rejected, were grieved that he and his 



disciples taught the people (Acts 4:2), and invited them to the feast. 
Jesus therefore said, "Ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye 
them that are entering to go in." (Matt. 23:13.) 

This application of the first two calls, is in harmony with the 
parable -first the merest mention to those already invited, then 
quickly, when they refused, an invitation was given to the morally 
blind, lame, and halt, of the same CITY (or government). Thus 
Jesus came to his own, and his own people received him not; but as 
many as received him (believed his message), to them (publicans, 
harlots, etc.) gave he power (liberty) to (come 

R343 : page 6 

to the feast) become sons of God. (John 1:12.) This second feature 
of the call to the Gospel feast, continued to be the only one, for 
some years, but there were not enough of the worthy ones there in 
Jewery to complete the number of guests— yet there was room. 

Hence the servant (the body of Christ) was commissioned to go 
outside the CITY (outside Judea) to the highways and hedges— to 
the Gentiles, and constrain*-urge enough 

R343 : page 7 

to come in, to furnish this feast. "Go ye into all the world and 
preach the Gospel to every creature." (Mark 16:15.) The servant 
that calls the world is always the Christ, either head or body, while 
the servant that guides the Christ is always the Holy Spirit. 

We, then, are of those blessed under the third call. We Gentiles 
were children of wrath— strangers from the commonwealth of Israel; 
but now, by the blood of Christ, we are made nigh to God and hear 
the call, Being justified freely from all things by faith, we are 
clothed with the robes of Christ's righteousness, and invited to 
come to the feast now spread. Here is food to satisfy every longing- 
-more and better than we could ask or think. 

The feast to which we are invited is a spiritual feast of future good 
things— joys and pleasures in the presence of the Lord. It has a 
beginning just as soon as we accept the call and come to it. We at 
once begin to enjoy and feast upon God's bounteous provision; by 
hope, by faith, we have a joyful anticipation and rich feast on the 
promises of God. 

To come to this feast in any sense, either to the real feast of the 
future, or to the feast of hopes and promises of the present time, 
involves a leaving of worldly hopes, aims, and pursuits. In 
proportion as earthly things are abandoned, each may feast now. So 
the coming in and the feasting by faith and hope has continued 
during the entire age, until the door of opportunity closed Oct. 2d, 
1881, since which time we do not understand that any may enter to 
the spiritual feast (-be begotten of the Spirit, and thus enabled to 
know and understand spiritual things). But there is still time for 
those in the guest-chamber to continue their preparation for the 



marriage. We rejoice to know, however, that, though the door to the 
marriage feast is closed, there is another feast in preparation for all 
people. 

Because coming to this feast involves the leaving or sacrificing of 
earthly aims and pleasures, the world counts those who come, 
foolish, and it causes such the loss of the esteem of men. This is a 
mingling of bitter experience and sweet hope, and they are 
proportionate. As we eat his words —feast on his promises— we are 
strengthened, and will as surely have the cup of trial, death, 
presented after. Thus it was with our Head and Leader, and thus it 
must be with all his followers. After supper, he gives also the cup, 
saying: "Drink ye all of it," and again he said, "Ye shall indeed 
drink of the cup that I drink of, and with the baptism that I am 
baptized withal shall ye be baptized." (Mark 10:39.) 

To our understanding since, this third call ceased, it is no longer 
proper to invite to this feast. Those who have heard, and have 
accepted the call, came in and the door was shut— the opportunity of 
entering has ceased forever. Since all have come in, we know that 
the actual feast, the realization of the things we have long hoped 
for, is at hand. 



*The word translated compel in the old version is, in the Diaglott, 
constrain; the same word is rendered constrain in Matt. 14:22; Mark 
6:45, etc., of old ver. 



R343 : page 7 

THE MARRIAGE FEAST. 

"Jesus continuing to discourse to them in parables, said: The 
kingdom of the heavens may be compared to a royal person who 
prepared a marriage festival for his son; and he sent his servants to 
call those who had been invited to the festivities, and they refused 
to come. Again, he sent other servants, saying, 'Inform those who 
are invited-Behold I have prepared my entertainment; my oxen and 
fatlings are killed and all is ready; come to the festival. But they 
disregarding it, went away, one to his own farm and one to his 
merchandise, and the rest seizing his servants, insulted and killed 
them. And the king was indignant, and having sent his military 
forces destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.'" (Matt. 
22:1-7. Diaglott.) 

Some have questioned whether or not this parable is the same 
which Luke furnishes in very similar language, but with other 
details, previously narrated. But whether exactly the same or not, 
there seems to be no doubt that it covers the same period of time, 
viz: the Gospel Age. God has indeed prepared royal blessings for 
his Son, and has invited some to share these glorious blessings with 



him. (Eph. 1:4.) Jesus first invited Israel as a nation-as represented 
in the rulers and chief priests of his day, and in this work he 
employed his disciples but these servants were disregarded— they 
refused to come. A second message was sent them at Pentecost 
through other servants; (The disciples at first were simply justified 
men, but on and after Pentecost they were NEW creatures begotten 
of God. 1 Pet. 1:3.) but this message also they disregarded, and 
insulted and killed many of the Apostles. No wonder, then, that 
their polity (city) was subjected to (fire) wrath to the uttermost, and 
entirely overthrown-Titus' army desolating it in A.D. 70. In this 
view, as in Luke's parable, two invitations were given to the Jews; 
and here, as in that we shall find the third message to be to the 
gentiles- the Gospel call during this Gospel Age. 

The king said to his servants, the entertainment indeed is ready but 
those who have been invited were unworthy. Go therefore into the 
PUBLIC ROADS and whoever you may find invite to the 
marriage-feasts. And those servants went into the road and brought 
together all that they met, good and bad, and the feast was well 
supplied with guests." (Vss. 8-10 Diaglott.) 

Here the public roads in which the call is made, represent the 
Gentile world, in which, for over 1800 years, the invitation to come 
to the spiritual feast has been made. All who hear and accept the 
invitation, may come to the banquet. The call does not come solely 
to the good, but all who have an ear may hear and come— "good 
and bad. " Since all guests are furnished a robe (Christ's 
righteousness) it matters not how poor or ragged they were when 
they were called; at the feast all stand on an equality, so far as their 
previous condition is concerned. All are acceptable at the feast if 
clothed by faith with the righteousness of Christ. 

Just as I am without one plea. 
But that thy blood was shed for me, 
And that thou bidst me come to thee; 
O lamb of God, I come, I come. " 

As in Luke's parable, the feast is both a present one of hope and joy 
mingled with earthly bitterness, and also a future real feasting, or 
sharing of eternal joys with Jesus our Lord. In this account it is 
called a marriage feast. The King's Son-our Lord Jesus Christ is to 
be married, and the bride is found among those invited to the 
festivities. Yes, those who sacrificed much in proportion to what 
they had, in order to come to this banquet— these are the ones 
termed overcomers, who are to be united to the King's Son who was 
also an overcomer. 

The full control of the feast is given to the Bridegroom, who has 
become the "heir of all things" and at this time enters office as a 
King. Before the marriage (union) he appears as King, and inspects 
or judges of the guests, and selects the overcomers (Rev. 3:21). 
Among those assembled there as guests, he discovers three classes, 
the overcomers or bride, the guests or friends, and one who had not 



on a wedding garment— some who did not realize the necessity of 
having on Christ's righteousness, who did not recognize the 
necessity of being bought, redeemed, clothed with Christ's merit 
only, as a pre-requisite to a participation of the feast. 

When the King arrives, he makes the two selections: The one (small 
class) not having on the wedding garment, is deprived of the 
privilege of guests— bound, and cast into the outer darkness of the 
world. To the overcoming class he gives his name and a share in all 
that he hath, by uniting them to himself. They thus become heirs of 
God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ, their Lord. After the marriage, in 
joyful praise a "great company" of the bride's loved companions 
shall say, "Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to (God), for 
the marriage of the Lamb is come and his wife hath made herself 
ready." Rev. 19:7. 

These, though not of the overcomers, not of the Bride, are 
nevertheless beloved of both Bridegroom and Bride. They are the 
great company of Rev. 7:9, and in Psa. 45:14, are called, "the 
virgins, her companions which followed her," who also shall come 
into the palace of the King with gladness and rejoicing. (Vs. 15.) 
These will be the guests at the great supper, and after the marriage 
is accomplished, they shall enjoy the feast with the Royal Family, 
as it has been written to them, "Blessed are they which are called 
unto the marriage supper of the Lamb." (Rev. 19:9.) 

Matt. 25:1-10, seems to show this closing end of the age, when 
some having gone in during the entire age, the Bridegroom King 
comes, and they of the living that were ready to go to the supper 
went in 

R344 : page 7 

with him and this ended the admittance -"The door was shut." 
Since the King came in we believe that the inspection of the guests 
has been in process. Now is an important time -a testing time. Who 
will be cast "into outer darkness"-the world's condition, on account 
of denying the Lord's having bought them-taking off the wedding 
garment? "Who shall be able to stand?"-be accounted worthy, as 
his bride to "stand before the Son of Man." Take unto you the 
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand. " 

In answer to questions of those anxious to be at the Marriage 
Supper, we would say: If you heard the call, i.e., the gospel 
invitation to the feast of good things God has prepared, and having 
heard, if you accepted and commenced to feast upon the promises 
before the call ceased by the shutting of the door (Oct. 2d, 1881), 
then, we understand the Scriptures to teach that you have yet 
opportunity to make your calling and election sure— even to the 
highest position as the Bride of the Lamb. Even now in the hour of 
inspection, let us lay aside every weight, and every besetment of 
earth, and run with patience the race for the prize of our high 
calling. 



R344 : page 7 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

Ques. Please let me know by what name you people call 
yourselves? What denomination? 

Ans. We are strictly unsectarian, and consequently recognize no 
sectarian name, believing with Paul, (read 1 Cor. 3:1-4) that where 
one saith I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, or I am a Baptist, or I a 
Methodist, etc., it is an evidence of carnality, and consequently in 
opposition to the Spirit of Christ. Did Paul or Apollos die for us? If 
so, let us call ourselves theirs. Were we baptized into the Methodist, 
Presbyterian, Baptist, or other denominational churches? If so, we 
are members of it, and should be properly recognized by those 
names. But if we were baptized into the one body or church of 
which Jesus is the one and only Head, then we are members in 
particular of his body, and the only name appropriate would be his; 
Scripturally called the "Church of Christ," "Christians," "Church of 
the first born," and such like general names. Again we would 
remark that ours is the only Scriptural basis of Christian union, viz. : 
We have no creed (fence) to bind us together or to keep others out 
of our company. The Bible is our only standard, and its teachings 
our only creed, and recognizing the progressive character of the 
unfolding of Scriptural truths, we are ready and prepared to add to 
or modify our creed (faith— belief) as we get increase of light from 
our Standard. 

We are in fellowship with all Christians in whom we can recognize 
the Spirit of Christ, and especially with those who recognize the 
Bible as the only standard. We do not require, therefore, that all 
shall see, just as we do in order to be called Christians; realizing 
that growth in both grace and knowledge is a gradual process. Nor 
do we see reason to expect that any but the watchmen of Zion will 
"see eye to eye" (Isa. 52:8) until that which is perfect is come, when 
that which is in part shall be done away. (1 Cor. 13:10.) 

If all Christians were to thus free themselves of prescribed creeds, 
and study the Word of God without denominational bias, truth and 
knowledge and real Christian fellowship and unity, would result. 
The Spirit of the Head would pervade the unfettered members of 
the body, and sectarian pride would vanish. Thus we believe, thus 
we practice, and thus we teach. It becomes our duty to denounce 
sectarianism and the God-dishonoring creeds of men which, while 
contradicting each other, unite in misrepresenting God's Word and 
character. Because these are bonds which hinder God's children 
from rendering him the homage due unto his name, hinder their 
knowing him, hinder their worshiping in spirit and in truth, and also 
hinder them from enjoying that joy and peace which their Father 
designed they should have. We "cry aloud and spare not. " 



Because we believe sectarianism to be a snare of the devil, and in 
opposition both to God and his saints, therefore we labor to set 
them free, and bring them into the liberty of Christ. That this has 
been so accounted before the present day by holy men of God, we 
quote you from the words of JOHN BUNYAN, whose 

R344 : page 8 

name is a household word, and one of whose books has been more 
read than any other ever written except the Bible— "Pilgrim's 
Progress." He wrote:- 

"Since you would know by what name I would be distinguished 
from others, I tell you I would be, and hope I am, a Christian; and 
choose, if God should count me worthy, to be called a Christian, a 
believer, or other such name which is approved by the Holy Ghost. 
And as for those factious (or sect) titles of Anabaptist, Presbyterian, 
Independent, or the like, I conclude that they came neither from 
Antioch nor from Jerusalem, but from Hell and Babylon, for they 
tend to divisions: you may know them by their fruits." 

JOHN BUNYAN. 

John Bunyan was a Christian whose creed was the Bible (He was 
commonly called a "Baptist," though, then, and in a few Baptist 
churches now, the Bible is the only written confession of faith.) He 
was imprisoned in Bedford Jail by the English Church in 1660, 
because he thus believed. It was while there imprisoned that he 
wrote of "Pilgrim. " 

Ques. Was not the typical perfection of the Jews the perfecting of 
the human, to which their sacrifices pointed? 

Ans. The sacrifices and people and reconciliation, were all alike 
typical of the real sacrifices, all people, and the reconciling of the 
world. To re-concile is to harmonize again. It of course means a 
reconciling of two already existent beings— God and man. Because 
of the ransom and reconciliation, man is to be liberated from death 
and restored to perfection. This certainly involves no change of 
either God's or man's nature. Hence, we argue that the benefits of 
Christ's ransom is to men, restitution of what was once possessed- 
perfect manhood. The change of nature (to become new creatures) 
is only made during this age, and results from self-sacrifice after 
justification. 

Dear Brother R. I have not been a reader long and cannot 
understand how you harmonize, the article in the Dec. No., "The 
Blessed Dead," with "The Door Was Shut," article which appeared 
in a previous number of the Tower. Please explain. 

Ans. To our understanding, all who died previously to Oct. 2d, '81, 
passed into a "sleep" or "unclothed" condition to wait for this time, 
when the sleeping should be awakened in resurrection by their 
Lord, or the unclothed be clothed upon of their spiritual body-their 
house from heaven. It has not been a blessing to die and thus fall 



asleep; but now since we live to the time when we may step from 
the earthly tabernacle into the heavenly (spiritual) body, without a 
moment's sleep, it is a blessing. To be thus "changed in a moment"- 
-not unclothed for an instant, but translated from the natural to the 
spiritual condition instantly, is a privilege never before enjoyed. 
Since this glorious time is come, "Blessed are the dead which die in 
the Lord from henceforth," (Rev. 14:13,) because as Paul expresses 
it, they may now be "clothed upon with their house which is from 
heaven." (2 Cor. 5:1-4.) 

The human is to die— the earthly form must be laid off, as Jesus our 
pattern showed us, (2 Pet. 1:14) but the new life hid with Christ will 
not die, though it slept until now. Now we understand that the 
exaltation of the members of the Christ who were asleep has taken 
place, and the exaltation of those who are alive and remain, is due; 
and the remaining members of the body will, each in his turn soon 
experience that glorious change, from this sleep to the perfection of 
life as immortal spiritual beings like himself— by investing or 
clothing them with their house from heaven. Thus it may readily be 
seen that we the living, left over unto the presence do not precede 
the sleeping ones, but they rise first: Then we shall be changed in a 
moment to the same immortal condition— like unto Christ's glorious 
body. As did Jesus so must we all, fully lose humanity, putting off 
this "tabernacle even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed. " (2 Pet. 
1:14.) This tabernacle-the flesh. It was consecrated to death and 
must fully die, but we, the new creatures who inhabit these bodies, 
do not die and will not need even to sleep, but instantly we shall 
become more alive than ever; or as Paul says, have "mortality 
swallowed up of life. " 

We tarry only as the mouth-pieces —Priests of God, to sound the 
trumpet notes of truth until the white robed Levites (advanced 
justified believers) learn to sing the song of restitution and the 
fullness of salvation, purchased through the precious blood of 
Christ. (2 Chron. 5:12-14.) 

The door which shut was not the door into the kingdom, but the 
door into the guest-chamber— to the feast. (See article on Feasts.) 
We understand that though the marriage is not yet accomplished, it 
is just about to be. The present moments are occupied by the Bride 
in making herself ready, and no more guests are now admitted. 

Ques. If the door to the "high calling" is now closed what should 
we say to any who now say, "Lord what wouldst thou have me to 
do?" If we are mouth-pieces of the spirit, we should have a word of 
the Lord for them- what? 

Ans. If it be one who had already consecrated himself as a sacrifice 
and 

R345 : page 8 

entered covenant relationship as a new creature, we would say, 
proceed as before only more zealously to carry out your covenant 



and become dead to the world, that in the inspection by our King, 
he may be approved as one who has been faithful unto death. 

If it be one who has never before covenanted, he stands in exactly 
the position of Abraham. He has the gospel or glad tidings of 
coming earthly blessings to all who love and obey God. This is the 
"Everlasting Gospel" -that sin's penalty has been paid, and all men 
may come into harmony with their creator and live. This was the 
very Gospel which God preached unto Abraham, saying, "In thy 
seed shall all the nations of the earth be BLESSED." (Gen. 22:18; 
Acts 3:25.) In this Gospel Age— as we speak of it, there is an 
addition made to the glad tidings which did not apply before it, and 
does not apply now, since the door is shut. We now know not only 
that all nations of the earth are soon to be blessed with opportunities 
of everlasting life and happiness, but during the Gospel age we 
have been privileged or invited to become members of that spiritual 
seed of him whom Abraham typified (Jehovah), and as such to be 
the cause or instruments of the coming blessing. (See Gal. 3:29, and 
Rom. 11:31,32.) This last call properly ends, when all the members 
of that seed have been selected from the world, and then the Gospel 
message stands just as it did to Abraham— the privilege of joining 
the blessing seed being ended by accomplishment. 

We would say then to such, Live good moral lives— lives of 
communion with God, engaging in, and promoting every good 
word or work according to your ability. But you are not now called 
upon to sacrifice yourselves nor your sinless pleasures and 
comforts. It is proper that they should abstain from sins to the 
extent of their ability, and realize that their ransom price covered all 
the unavoidable weaknesses which arise from the Adamic 
transgression. Let them thus trust in the Lord and do good, and soon 
they will share in the blessings of the reign of righteousness. 

The glad tidings of justification and redemption, and the call to 
faith, repentance, and obedience, which we thus proclaim, is the 
same which the nominal church has been proclaiming all along, 
though so greatly mixed with error and superstition as not to be 
discernible to many as glad tidings. Very few have realized their 
privilege to sacrifice things, to which, as men, they have a 
legitimate right; very few have realized a begetting to a new nature. 
One prominent point of difference however, should be 
remembered: Our God is not a demon with a heart of stone, unjust, 
unmerciful, unkind; but a God of LOVE, plenteous in MERCY, 
who so loved the world, that he gave his Son that all might come to 
a knowledge of the truth, and be brought back to perfection of 
being and happiness. "And for this purpose are the ages to come," 
in which, to show the exceeding riches of his grace and his loving 
kindness. Eph 2:7. 

Ques. Please explain Matt. 25:46. 

Ans. The punishment and reward are of equal duration. We are here 
told that the reward will be life, but in this passage the nature of the 



punishment is not specified. Readers generally take for granted that 
it means everlasting misery and torment. They infer this from some 
symbolic expressions used in the book of Revelations, which they 
confess they do not understand. But God's Word nowhere says that 
the punishment of sin is torment. If we admit what is here stated 
that their punishment will be equal in duration with the reward 
promised, and will then inquire of the Word- What is the nature of 
the punishment?- we shall soon have light. We read, "The soul 
(person) that sinneth, it shall die; "-"The wages of sin is death, but 
the gift of God is eternal life. " So we find it quite harmonious. 
"These shall go away into eternal punishment death, from which 
there will be no release -no resurrection); but the righteous into life 
eternal. 

The power to live comes from God, and he promises it only to the 
righteous. God has an unquestionable right to deprive all his 
creatures of life, if they will not use it in harmony with his 
righteous will. But none but a devil of worst stamp could perpetrate 
eternal hopeless torment and agony upon any creature. Satan has, 
from the first, been a misrepresenter of God's character and word, 
and in this matter seems to have succeeded in deceiving many of 
God's dear saints. Oh, that all might learn to study God's Word in 
the light which it throws upon itself, and not allow the creeds and 
traditions of men to twist and warp their minds, destroy their peace 
and their trust in God, by turning the Word of God into a lie. 

To what extent the minds of men may be twisted, is illustrated by 
the teachings of New England's great preacher of former years- 
Jonathan Edwards. In preaching upon the eternal punishment of the 
wicked, which he said was misery and torture, he pictured it so 
frightfully, that some in the congregation sprang from their seats 
screaming, and caught hold of the pillars of the church as though 
fearful of being dropped into the yawning chasm. We quote his 
sentiments, and, as nearly as we can recall, his words. 

Addressing the Christians present, he said: Your hearts then will 
not ache for, and throb in sympathy with your friends and children; 
you will look over the battlements of heaven and see them in that 
awful everlasting torture, and turn round and praise God the louder. 

What a terrible, strong delusion possessed that child of God, that he 
could utter such blasphemy. It was a blasphemy against men as well 
as against the God of love, for if there is or ever was in all the 
universe of God, so awfully degraded a being that he could have 
everlasting joy at the expense of another's everlasting misery, that 
one is too miserable a wretch to be worthy even of the name of 
devil. If being made like our glorious and perfect Head would 
annihilate in this manner every spark of love, pity, and mercy, then 
should we earnestly pray and hope that we to his likeness should 
never attain. Take it home to your own heart, thinking Christian- 
Have you by death lost a loved and cherished son or daughter, 
brother, sister, father, or mother, or friend, whom you feel sure 
walked not "the narrow way to life"? Think, then, of what a change 



must come ere you could blend with their cries of anguish, your 
shouts of joy and pleasure. 

But no longer will such preaching frighten the people; the picture is 
so wide of the truth that the unprejudiced thinker, both in and out of 
the church, sees it to be the very opposite to the character of a God 
of love. For this reason, though the Bible has not changed, nor their 
creeds, theologians have generally abandoned the fire theory, and 
now say the punishment will be a gnawing of conscience. Yet when 
wanting to alarm some one into love for God, they will add that the 
lashings of conscience will be even more terrible than flames. 

No wonder that many sectarians, imitating their conception of a 
God, become loveless and hard, and in their families exalt the rule 
of fear, rather than the rule of love. No one knows how bad an 
effect is produced on civilized society by the monstrous ideas of 
God's character, as instilled by the traditions of men. 

All heathen nations have horrible images of their Gods. All picture 
them horrible, with malicious power; and though Christians ignore 
pictures and images, yet they draw a mental picture of their God as 
dreadful. It surely needs much help to love a being such as they are 
taught he is. The wonder is that every intelligent person has not 
been driven into infidelity by it, and we verily believe that many 
more are skeptical than openly profess it: their actions speak loudly 
ofit. 

In God's Word we see how evil was permitted for good reasons, 
and that the "little flock" now being developed, instead of rejoicing 
in the misery of ninety nine one hundredths of their fellows, will be 
praising God and manifesting the exceeding riches of his grace in 
the ages to come, by blessing all the families of the earth. 


