Floods Ravage Northwest Argentina
BY “AWAKE!” CORRESPONDENT IN ARGENTINA
“HEAVY rains lash Santiago del Estero . . . Four dead and over 1,000 evacuated.” So stated La Gaceta of Tucumán, Argentina, on February 12. By the end of February the storm had affected twelve of Argentina’s twenty-three provinces. It left in its wake a toll of nearly 170 dead, many hundreds missing, and some 100,000 evacuees.
The disaster picture included damage to property and crops, as well as ruptures in communications and transportation systems. Dr. Carlos Arturo Juárez, governor of the province of Santiago del Estero, declared: “Nothing like this has ever occurred in the history of the province!” In Salta, the floods were termed “the worst in 50 years!”
Causes of Devastation
Maps of climate zones in South America indicate that Santiago Province is part of a dry zone with desert-type vegetation. But during the drenching February rains, 463 millimeters (18 inches) of rainfall descended in just ten days. This equals the total precipitation that normally falls during an entire year. And that came on top of an unusually heavy 281-millimeter (11 inches) rainfall in January. As a result, lagoons, dams and reservoirs quickly filled up to or exceeded their capacities.
Torrential rains in Bolivia added to the chaos, aggravating rivers in the northernmost Argentine provinces of Salta and Jujuy. As these rivers flowed southward through Santiago Province, floodgates of retaining dams along the way had to be opened to avoid cracks and ruptures.
The chain reaction continued all the way south to Santa Fe Province where Río Salado empties into the Paraná River. This river, too, rose as other rain-swollen rivers emptied into it. All along the way, especially from Santiago southward, the waters gouged out new courses and channels.
Dr. Juan Rodrigo, chief of the Emergency Committee of the Social Welfare Ministry (Ministerio de Bienestar Social), commented to an Awake! correspondent: “Rivers that have not figured on physical maps for years suddenly appeared; no student of geography had ever heard of them!” He added that rainfall in Santiago was not the only concern. “We are more worried about the weather situation farther north​—that is what makes our situation grave.”
As the waters tumbled southward they swept away embankments, bridges, highways, plantations, wooded areas and livestock. In Santiago Province alone, 4,000 kilometers, or approximately 2,500 miles, of roads were destroyed or rendered impassable. Other provinces had similar experiences as mud slides and giant crevices blocked highways and rail lines.
Human error was partly responsible for the damage. People with low income usually live in flimsy structures made of mud bricks. These could not but collapse as a result of the persistent downpour, causing many deaths. Even residents in more durable housing projects were forced to evacuate. Why so? During milder weather overconfident builders erected dwellings in low-lying areas, near rivers and dry washes. City engineers, too, built drainage canals in accord with normal rainfall.
Emergency Relief Measures
A tremendous mobilization took place to aid the flood victims. Municipal, provincial and national government agencies pooled their efforts to organize the work of rescue, salvage and sanitation.
All types of transportation were summoned for the relief measures. Planes, helicopters, trucks, inflatable life rafts and private vehicles carried needed food and clothing to flood victims, or transported them to drier ground. Public schools, hospitals, dispensaries and railroad stations served as emergency housing.
Neighboring provinces, such as Tucumán, furnished a great deal of help. Solicitation of food, clothing, medicines and other necessary items went on from house to house and by radio. Businesses and private institutions lent a hand in the relief efforts. Some people even contributed a day’s wages to aid the flood victims.
Jehovah’s witnesses especially appreciated the quick response from their Christian brothers in other areas. A letter from the Watch Tower Society’s branch office in Argentina asked what kind of help was needed. Money contributions for distribution in the affected areas began to come into the Society’s branch office in Chile. Many phone calls came in from Witnesses in other areas asking what they could do to help their Christian brothers in the stricken zones.
The response of Jehovah’s witnesses to the needs of their brothers was indeed vigorous. So much so that, when Christian associates in nearby Tucumán offered material assistance, Witnesses in Santiago declined, saying that they did not need anything else. How different from the attitude of people who ask for and accept any and all help simply because it is free!
Effect on Religious Attitude
Some people are inclined to view natural disasters as a divine retribution for their sins. It was common in Tucumán, for example, to hear people say: “God is punishing the ‘Santiagueños’ because they are bad.” To this, one missionary responded: “But do you not agree that there are bad people in all provinces and countries of the earth? Do you think that God would punish just the bad people in Santiago? And besides, the bad are not the only ones suffering from the catastrophe!” The missionary went on to explain from the Bible that soon the Creator, Jehovah God, will cleanse the whole earth of wickedness.​—Ps. 37:10, 11; Rev. 11:18.
Jehovah’s witnesses have given a worldwide distribution to the special tract entitled “Is Time Running Out for Mankind?” It was distributed in Santiago in early February just before the floods struck. As soon as the water had subsided, the local Witnesses revisited the zone. They found that the flood had caused people to be more receptive to their Bible message.
The Aftermath of the Storms
While some aspects of damage can be estimated, the economic significance in terms of crop loss and soil damage cannot be accurately assessed at this time. Nor can the overall cost in labor and time needed for repairs. Fully 65 percent of the Santiago cotton crop (involving 55,000 hectares, or 135,850 acres) was lost. Comparable losses are expected in corn and sweet potatoes.
Ironically the downpour resulted in a beautiful blanket of green on the usually parched and dusty countryside. As men try to regain their balance from a powerful blow, the herds of goats in this area are enjoying a fiesta.

