R1346 : page 2 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



THIS JOURNAL TWICE A MONTH DURING 1892. 



Some of our readers, forgetting or failing to 
notice the change of the TOWER to a semi-monthly 
and the increase of the price to $1.00, 
have sent 60 cents, as last year. Such will 
please correct the matter at their earliest convenience. 
We prefer to have all subscriptions 
end with the year. 

NEW SUBSCRIBERS --TRIAL ORDERS, ETC. 



To those who feel an interest in the Truth 
and in the WATCH TOWER as an exponent of it, 
we offer the suggestion that now is a convenient 
season to invite their friends to become subscribers 
for it. We will accept of three or six 
months' subscriptions, so as to facilitate such 
new trial orders and also for the convenience 
of any whose circumstances hinder them from 
paying for the entire year in advance. 

DAWN, VOL. II., IN GERMAN, NOW READY. 



Our German readers will be glad to see this 
announcement, as some of them have long been 
wanting it for themselves and their friends who 
cannot read the English fluently. The price 
will be 35 cents per copy in paper covers, and 
50 cents in leatherette binding. (Colporteurs 
will be supplied at half price.) 

The credit for this work belongs to our dear 
Brother von Zech, who also translated the first 
volume and who is now the owner of the plates 
and the publisher of both volumes in German. 
Address all German orders, therefore, to Otto 
von Zech, Euclid Ave., Allegheny, Pa. However, 
should it ever be more convenient for you 
to enclose an order for German books with your 
letter or orders to the TOWER PUB. CO., do so, 
on a separate sheet, and we will take pleasure in 
handing it over to Brother Zech. 

By the way, we notice that the German paper 
published by Brother von Zech, The Harvest 
Sickle, will hereafter be a semi-monthly— price 
one dollar a year. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACT NO. 11. 



THE "TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF THE BETTER 
SACRIFICES" has been delayed considerably 
by a printers' strike; nor can we yet promise 
it definitely. It, like "The Wonderful Story," 
will be a special issue, and will be sent only to 
those who subscribe for it— price 10 cts. 

DAWN, VOL. I., IN LONDON. 



Colporteurs in Great Britain and Ireland will 
be pleased to learn that they can now be supplied 
with MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., in packages 
of 5, 10, 20 or multiples of these, at colporteurs' 



rates, 7d. per copy— including carriage. 

Address ELLIOT STOCK, No. 62 Paternoster Row, 

London, England. 



page 2 



Do not forget the Missionary Envelopes. We 
have a new lot and supply them now at the reduced 
price of 25 cents per hundred, and 2.00 
per thousand. This includes delivery to you 
at your Postoffice. 



ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 



Our meetings are held in Bible House Chapel, 
Arch Street, Allegheny, Pa. Readers and friends 
will be warmly welcomed. Preaching every 
Lord's-day afternoon at 3:30 o'clock. A Question 
Meeting at 7 p.m., at which all reverent 
Bible subjects are entertained, is followed by a 
Social Meeting at 7:45. 

Preaching in German by Bro. Zech, 10:30 a.m. 



R1347 : page 3 

VOL. XIII. JANUARY 1, 1892. NO. 1. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

HOME AND FOREIGN MISSIONS. 

In traveling abroad during the past Summer, 
one important object was to learn by actual observation 
something of the present condition 
and progress of Foreign Mission work, and to 
this end, had time been at our command, we 
would have liked to extend our tour a little 
further across the seas to India. However, we 
had opportunities in Turkey, Syria, Palestine 
and Egypt, which may be justly regarded as fair 
samples of foreign missionary effort and success. 
And those observations have led to a 
careful reconsideration of the entire subject of 
gospel missionary work both from the standpoint 
of Scripture testimony and from the 
standpoint of human theory and practice. Our 
findings upon the subject we submit to our 
readers. 



Foreign Missions, i.e., efforts to reform and 
proselyte barbarous peoples, have been popular 
among Christian people since the third century; 
but, strange as the statement may at first 
appear to many, we have no record of such efforts 
being made by the Apostles or under their 
direction during the first century. This, however, 
was not because the gospel is not free to all- 
barbarian or Scythian, bond or free— but because 
the apostles found plenty and more than they 
could do to spread a knowledge of the gospel 
among the civilized Jews and Gentiles, and 
found no time, therefore, for going among the 
barbarous and uncivilized, though they never 
passed by the poor, the slaves, or any class 
manifesting "an ear to hear" the truth. They 
evidently expected to find and did find more 
with "ears to hear" among those civilized peoples 
who had "their senses exercised by reason 
of use." Having right ideas concerning the 
work of the Gospel age, their efforts were always 
expended upon the most hopeful material. 
No doubt, had the time ever come when all the 
civilized peoples had been thoroughly evangelized 
and indoctrinated, they would have extended 
their efforts as far as possible— even to the 
barbarians. But that condition of things was 
not reached in their day, and some of us believe 
that it is not reached even yet. 

True, the Apostle to the Gentiles went on so-called 
"missionary journeys" for years, in the 
cities near the Mediterranean sea, but those were 
not "Foreign Missions" in the sense that this 
term is now understood. The peoples whom 
he visited, so far from being barbarians, were 
the most civilized and cultured peoples of the 
world. Nor can it be said that he did this because 
there were no barbarians; for Africa with 
its millions was just alongside his home; and 
some of the islands of the Mediterranean had 
plenty of uncivilized people or "barbarians," 
too. Yet the Apostle went past these to the 
chief cities of the world— to Athens and to 
Rome, the centers of civilization and education 
—when he went to preach the gospel. 

On the contrary, however, the book of the 
Acts of the Apostles— a history of the mission 
work of the first century— although it tells us 
of Paul's shipwreck upon the island of Melita, 

R1347 : page 4 

inhabited by "barbarians," among whom he 
was obliged to spend the three winter months, 
and of how he healed the sick among them, 
tells us not one word about any missionary effort 



made among those "barbarians," nor of any 
converts or church left there when he journeyed 
onward in the Spring. 

It is common at Foreign Missionary meetings 
in this day to represent the barbarians as 
stretching out their hands to Christians and 
saying, "Come over and help us!" as in a dream 
the Apostle Paul saw a man of Macedonia calling 
him. And this generally passes for a good 
parallel illustration, because people forget that 
Macedonia, instead of being in "darkest Africa," 
was that region lying northward of Athens 
and in every way one of the most civilized 
states of the world at that time. It was among 
these intelligent people that the Apostle labored 
so successfully, establishing the truth among the 
noble people of Thessalonica to whom he afterward 
wrote two of his noted epistles. There, 
too, he founded another congregation among 
the yet more noble Bereans, and there also another 
congregation at Philippi, to whom another 
of his noted epistles was afterward addressed. 

The fact that some of the Apostle's converts 
were "slaves" counts nothing against their intelligence, 
for the slaves of the rich were often 
hostages taken in war, and were frequently as 
well or better educated than their masters. It 
is plain, then, that the missionary efforts of the 
apostles were made among the most intelligent 
of their day, and not among the barbarians. 

It may be urged that our Lord's command 
was, "Go ye into all the world and preach the 
gospel to every creature."* But this expression 
has gradually come to have a very different 
meaning from what the apostles could have 
understood it to signify. To them it meant substantially 
this: I have heretofore confined my 
own efforts and yours to the Jews, and would 
not permit you to preach to the Gentiles; but 
now the Jewish or Law Dispensation is at an 
end; the middle wall of partition between Jews 
and Gentiles is broken down; and now, therefore, 
I instruct you to preach the good tidings 
without respect to race— to any and every creature 
who has an ear to hear it. 

That the Apostle Paul so understood our 
Lord's teaching is proved by his conduct: he 
preached the gospel to all who would hear him 
—to the Jew first and also to the Greek— and 
was "willing to preach the gospel" to the people 
of Rome also, although they were less intelligent 
than the people of Achaia and Macedonia 
(Greece). But while such fields for usefulness 
among intelligent peoples were open, he 
evidently was unwilling to go on a modern foreign 
missionary tour amongst degraded barbarians 



totally unprepared for the "high calling," 
which alone, Paul knew, was the divine call due 
to be given during the Gospel age. 

Nor would it have been right for the apostles, 
as wise master-builders, to spend their efforts 
upon the unfruitful barbaric fields while a more 
fruitful one lay open. They were bound to remember 
the other injunctions of the Word- 
that the gospel is to be preached "to the meek" 
(those ready to be taught) and to "him that 
hath an ear to hear"— a desire to know God's 
plan. They knew, too, that the present "high 
calling," so far from being a call of the world, 
is a call for the purpose of selecting from the 
world a choice "little flock" to be the bride 
of Christ and his joint-heir in a glorious kingdom, 
to be established for the blessing of the 
whole world during an age to follow— the Millennium 
or thousand years reign of Christ for which 
he taught us to pray "Thy Kingdom come, thy 
will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 
Consequently, when once they had presented 
the subject clearly, if the hearers scoffed, the 
apostles did not coax or urge and plead with 
them, but sought for others having "ears to 
hear," concluding that, for the time at least, 
such as rejected their message were unworthy 
of the knowledge and the call. See 
Acts 28:22-31. 

In the second and third centuries, when the 
gospel message became well known in the civilized 



*These words are omitted by oldest Greek MSS. 

R1348 : page 4 

parts of the world (Italy and Greece), zealous 
Christians began to branch out, carrying the 
gospel to what is now Germany, the people of 
which were gradually becoming more civilized 
and intelligent. But it was not until about the 
fifth century, when the doctrine of the eternal 
torment of all not believing in Christ had been 

R1348 : page 5 

generally accepted, that foreign missions among 
the barbaric races became popular. 

This unscriptural doctrine, that all who do 
not accept of Christ in this present life will be 
everlastingly tortured, is still the unholy, inglorious 
and God-dishonoring basis of activity 
on behalf of the heathen in the present foreign 
missionary enterprises. 



We are not sorry to see time and money 
spent upon the poor, ignorant barbarians; but 
we do sincerely regret that they should be so 
spent as to add to their superstitious fears. 
If this money and time were spent in teaching 
the uncivilized and half-civilized peoples the 
simple arts of civilized life— how to build, how 
to sew, how to cook, and how to live comfortably 
upon their meager incomes, it would be a 
good work; and if in addition they were taught 
the truth regarding the Lord's plan, or even 
given the Bible unexplained, it would be a still 
better work. But when little is done except to 
pervert the gracious promises of the Bible, it 
would be far better if the heathen were left in 
their former darkness until the true, pure sunlight 
of the Millennial Kingdom shall reach 
and bless them all. 

To imagine, however, that all the missionaries 
or all who give for the support of missions 
do so because of the belief that the barbarians 
will all go to eternal torment except such as 
learn of and accept Christ would be a mistake. 
Many have clearer heads, and the hearts 
and hopes of others are better than their heads. 
A few probably go abroad as missionaries for 
the glory and novelty of the thing, and because 
their support there is guaranteed, while here it 
would be precarious; but the majority, we are 
glad to believe, go forth with a sincere desire 
to do good in the name of the Lord. They go 
because they think it is the best way of serving 
the Lord. They see the civilized world full of 
churches and pastors, and hence look beyond 
for fields of usefulness. They do not consider 
intelligently enough the doctrines of these 
churches, and perhaps blindly give assent to the 
one proposing to send them out, not considering 
how much of error they go forth to bind 
upon the heathen, nor that a better work would 
be to get themselves right with God and his 
Word, and then to help other members of the 
body of Christ at home into the true light 
and life of entire consecration and holiness. 

Likewise with the moneys donated for this 
cause: While much of the missionary funds is 
collected in a sectarian spirit, each denomination 
striving not to be outshone by others; and 
while a few of the contributors probably give 
to missions to be seen and approved of men, 
no doubt the great majority give from noble, 
good motives— unto the Lord, to do good to 
fellow creatures— not considering, and in some 
cases not knowing, how much more necessity 
there is at home for their every talent in feeding, 
purifying and clothing the multitudes, both 



spiritually and temporally. 

Present Protestant missionary efforts may be 
said to date from A.D. 1792, although the 
Moravians and others in a small way did considerable 
before that. To say that no good is 
accomplished by these missions, their pastors 
and teachers would be an untruth. They are 
doing good, although in a different way and to 
a much less degree than is generally presumed. 
Take, for instance, Syria: were it not for these 
Protestant missions, the Roman, Greek and 
Italian Catholic Missions and the Mohammedan 
and Jewish Missions, the natives would 
be almost destitute of educational and civilizing 
advantages. As it is, they are compelled to 
swallow a certain amount of some of the religions 
offered them, in order to get a little 
schooling; and very little of any religion or 
schooling does them. They are naturally cunning 
and quick to learn first principles, and 
want no more. But so far as the real work of 
the Gospel age is concerned— the finding of the 
saints, the Lord's jewels— the foreign mission 
work seems to be a total failure. For that matter, 
however, there are few such "jewels" found 
in any field of labor: we merely point out that 
very few of these jewels are to be found among 
the "barbarians," except among the missionaries 
themselves. 

We had the opportunity of visiting the chief 
and oldest Mission Station of Syria, at Beyrout. 
It is one of the most prosperous Protestant Missions 
and will consequently afford a good illustration 
of general mission work. 

R1348 : page 6 

When we were there most of the missionaries 
had gone up to Mt. Lebanon to spend the summer, 
but we ascertained the following from those 
in charge. (1) The printing office has become 
self-supporting or better, and is now separated 
from the American Mission. (2) Beyrout represents 
twelve branches of Protestant work- 
American, English and German, including several 
denominations. (3) It has a full force 
of teachers and Doctors of Divinity. (4) Its 
schools make the principal showing. (5) During 
1890 the total number of children under 
instruction was 15,473; and of these the various 
Protestant institutions had 3,090; the remainder, 
12,383, being under Catholic, Jewish 
and Mohammedan instruction. 

Our conclusion was that the missionaries so 
engaged there are investing their time and talents 
to poor advantage, and where harvest is 



sure to be meager, if indeed under the Lord's 

scrutiny it amounts to anything in the real mission 

of the present age— the selection of the 

"little flock" of saints who, as Christ's Bride, 

will be his joint-heir in the kingdom to come, 

whose mission will then be to bless all the families 

of the earth. But although teachers in 

the secular schools of the United States are doing 

a similar mission work with even better 

prospects of success, because of the better element 

they labor with, we should and do esteem 

many of these earnest teachers of the semi-civilized 

and barbaric children very highly for 

their works' sake, for their self-denial and devotion 

to principle, even though those principles 

be founded upon human traditions and 

misinformation concerning the Lord's plans for 

the present and for the coming age. They are 

laboring in a field almost, if not altogether, barren 

of fruit such as the Lord is now seeking; 

and are trying to do before God's time, under 

great difficulties, a work which the Lord will accomplish 

thoroughly very soon. While the Lord 

no doubt accepts every sacrifice and every good 

deed done in the name of our Savior, and 

will give some reward to all such servants, we 

feel like saying, as we look at the fields of Christendom, 

white already for harvesting, and see 

that the harvest is great and the laborers few— 

Oh! dear, consecrated co-laborers and co-sacrificers, 

would that you could see the more excellent 

way of God, and engage in the harvest work 

of the Gospel age instead of laboring fruitlessly 

before the time to sow and plant for the 

work of the next age, before the improved machinery 

for so doing is ready, and while our 

Master is saying in this harvest which is to the 

end the Gospel age, as he said in the harvest or 

close of the Jewish age: "Go ye also into my 

vineyard," and "I send you forth to reap." 

He that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth 

fruit unto everlasting life. So surely as the 

harvest work is the Lord's work, that should 

be the mission and the only mission of all who 

appreciate the privilege of being co-workers 

with him. So surely as he is now saying, 

"Gather together my saints unto me, they that 

have made a covenant with me by sacrifice," 

so surely all who desire to serve and obey 

should engage heartily in that work. So surely 

as he declares that this is the time for the sealing 

of his servants in their foreheads (intellectually) 

with present truth, so surely all who get 

sealed themselves will desire thus to bless 

others and to obey their King. However, we 

must not imagine that all missionaries are saints, 



and must remember that the harvest-truth is 
only for the holy and meek, the few, while many 
who have done "many wonderful works" in 
Christ's name shall be rejected as unworthy a 
place in the kingdom.— Matt. 7:21-23. 

But, while we would discourage saints from 
going abroad on such missions, we would not 
advise the return of foreign missionaries, but, 
rather, calling to mind the Apostle's words 
(1 Cor. 7:20), would advise that, after getting 
sealed in the forehead with an intellectual 
appreciation of the truth of God's great 
plan, they stay abroad and seek the ripe 
wheat, the humble and fully consecrated saints 
among the missionaries (or among the native 
converts, if they find such), and in return seal 
them and gather them into oneness with the 
Lord and his plan. But be not discouraged if 
you find few "jewels."— Mai. 3:16-18,1-3. 

Our opinions concerning Foreign Mission 
work were by no means altered by our visit to 
the headquarters of the American Mission for 
Turkey, in Constantinople; nor yet by our visit 

R1348 : page 7 

to the English Church Mission among the Jews 
in Jerusalem; nor by our visit to the British 
Syrian Mission in Jerusalem. 

We found the Missionaries (such as we met, 
several having gone to the mountains for the 
summer) such as are ordinarily met with in the 
pulpits of the United States and Great Britain. 
And in Jerusalem we heard a very good discourse 
in good English from an Episcopal minister. 
It was delivered in a neat church building, 
fitted up in good style and with a fine pipe-organ, 
to an English congregation of about 
thirty-five persons aside from the choir-boys. 
For this congregation it required three missionaries 
to officiate, and the fourth, the bishop, was 
at Hebron for the summer. 

R1349 : page 7 

To us it seemed that those missionaries had 
missed their calling; for the three seemed to do 
less than any one of them might have done, 
had the proper spirit for such work been combined 
with a proper appreciation of the opportunities 
at their hand. 

To be adapted to work in such a field, or in 
any field, for that matter, one should first of 
all have that spirit of the Master which, seeing 
the multitude in ignorance, is "moved with compassion 
toward them." As, on our way back to 



our hotel, we saw poor Jews misled by the Talmud, 

and poor Arabs misled by the Koran, and 

poor Greek and Roman and Armenian Catholics 

misled by their priests, and then thought 

of these Protestants, more intelligent, but without 

either the truth or the spirit of it necessary 

to bless the others, we felt sad for the moment; 

but soon we were thanking God that his gracious 

plan would ere long rectify all these blind 

mistakes caused by false doctrine. 

We would have loved to learn the language 
and to have spent the remainder of our days 
among those miserable people, helping to uplift 
them, but remembered that the "harvest" work 
is much more important, in order that the already 
called-out Bride of Christ may make herself 
ready for the marriage, and then, under 
more favorable conditions than the present, 
and backed by kingdom power, she with her 
Lord and his spirit may say to those and to all 
the poor distressed ones of earth— Come to the 
water of life! -Rev. 19:7; 21:17. 

Finding that the natives generally had little 
respect for either Protestant or Catholic missionaries, 
we inquired of our guide, himself a 
Christian, why it was so. He replied, Ah! sir, 
no wonder: these priests and teachers are too 
far above the people. For instance, fancy, if 
you can, the Lord Jesus going through the 
streets of Jerusalem in patriarchal robes, and 
preceded by two men, one crying, Oh— ah! 
Oh— ah! (Clear the way!) and the other carrying 
a whip to enforce prompt obedience. Can 
you wonder that the people do not respect such 
religion? And it is the same with bishops of 
the Church of England as with the others. 

Upon inquiring at the hotel the route to the 
residence of the Rev. Ben. Oliel, whose card, 
posted in the hotel corridor, indicated that he 
was the Presbyterian Missionary, we were told 
the direction to take; but, said our director, 
he will not be known by that name among the 
people. Ask for Habish and any of the natives 
can point you to his residence. Before starting 
we inquired the meaning of Habish, and were 
told, That is Arabic for "turkey-cock:" the 
gentleman has so pompous an air that the natives 
know him as Habish. Our readers will 
not wonder that we turned our steps in another 
direction, and were pleased to find a native pastor 
preaching to a congregation of natives— 
mostly young men connected with the printing 
and other departments of the mission work. 

As we returned through England and the 
United States, where the money is furnished to 
support these missions, we said to ourselves, 



Alas! how strange that while thousands of lives 
and millions of money are given freely to civilize 
the heathen and to misinform them concerning 
the divine character and plan, so little 
is being done for the ignorant and depraved at 
home in all the large cities (into which the most 
degraded classes from all nations are being 
dumped continually); and how few lives and 
dollars, comparatively, are consecrated to the 
grand mission of proclaiming the "gospel of the 
Kingdom"— "good tidings of great joy, which 
shall be unto all people." 

Before leaving this subject of mission work 
we must notice a very emphatic statement by 
our Lord, as follows— 

R1349 : page 8 

"THIS GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM 

SHALL BE PREACHED IN ALL THE WORLD FOR A WITNESS UNTO ALL NATIONS, 

AND THEN SHALL THE END COME. "-MATT. 24:14. 



This language is so pointed and so emphatic 
that it will not do to treat it lightly, as some do 
who claim that the "gospel of the Kingdom" 
may be anything else than what its name would 
indicate. The word gospel, here, is emphatic 
in the Greek, and so is the word kingdom. It 
is not any and every good message, but a special 
one— This good message of the Kingdom— 
which must first be preached before the end of 
this age. 

We ask whether this has yet been done, and 
reply, No. That which is generally preached 
under the name gospel has little in it that is 
really good tidings, and nothing whatever in 
it about the Kingdom that our Lord promised 
should be "set up" in the end of the Gospel 
age, to bless all the families of the earth during 
the Millennial age. 

Catholics and Protestants, although they use 
our Lord's prayer, saying, "Thy kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven," do not expect such a kingdom, and 
hence are not preaching it in all or in any of 
the nations of the world. Roman Catholics 
claim that their church system is the Kingdom 
of God, and that this kingdom came or was set 
up in authority back in the sixth century. And 
on the strength of this they have for centuries 
claimed the right to govern the world politically 
and religiously. Protestants, while rejecting 
some of Rome's errors, held on to this one in 
part, and claimed that they and the so-called 



Christian governments of Europe constitute 
the Kingdom of God set up in power— they 
know not exactly when or how. Their error, 
however, is sufficient to keep them from preaching 
this gospel of the Kingdom. 

Thus this work is still open to be done and 
can be done by no others than those who know 
something of these good tidings of the 
Kingdom. 

Brethren and Sisters, the fewer there are to do 
this work the greater is the opportunity and 
privilege of those who realize the situation, 
and desire not only to be at work, but at work 
doing what our great Chief Reaper has instructed 
us to do in accordance with his plan 
and his message. 

We are not calling for missionaries to go to 
foreign fields, where they would have comparatively 
little opportunity for preaching the Kingdom 
gospel. We believe that the Lord is blessing 
and will yet more bless the printed page 
and use it in this service. Thus you can be 
at work here in the richer fields, reaping the 
ripened saints and sealing them with the truth, 
and at the same time co-operating in sending 
forth in the name of the Lord this gospel of the 
Kingdom. It is already reaching and blessing 
some in foreign lands, and they are mostly missionaries 
who in turn tell the good tidings to 
others hungry for the soul-satisfying portion of 
meat in due season. 

Let us not be discouraged by the comparative 
smallness of the number interested or the 
comparative smallness of the funds at our command, 
for "Greater is he that is for us than all 
they that be against us." Our Redeemer and 
Lord is at the helm, and the work, as he has 
planned and declared it, will be done. The 
only question for us is, How great a share in 
that work may we each have. Labor in the 
cause of this gospel of the Kingdom will not 
bring honor among men, but it will bring 
honor from above and from all the little flock 
in full sympathy with the divine arrangement. 

Let us take fresh courage for 1892, and, girding 
up the loins of our minds, run patiently the 
race, looking unto Jesus. 

PREACHING THE GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM 
DURING THE PAST SIX YEARS. 

The handful of harvest laborers and the money 
at our disposal seem insignificant in contrast 
with the hundreds of missionaries and the millions 
of dollars spent by Catholic and Protestant 
societies in their support and in publishing 



abroad the doctrinal errors handed down from 

R1349 : page 9 

the dark ages, which tend to pervert and subvert 
the teachings of the Scriptures. And yet 
such is the zeal which the "present truth" inspires 
that "A little one is able to chase a thousand, 
and two to put ten thousand to flight." 
(Deut. 32:30.) Although few, and untitled, 
and generally without great worldly learning— 
in these respects resembling those sent out by 
our Lord with the Kingdom message at the first 
advent— the faithful band of harvest workers 
is busily engaged (some giving all their time 
and others able to give only a portion of it) 
in seeking out the "wheat" class— the sickle 
of truth which they bear separating "the wheat" 
from "the tares." 

Few know these Colporteurs as the Lord's 
real representatives, or recognize that dignity 
which the Lord sees in their humility and self-sacrifice. 
Missionaries? No, say the world 
and the nominal Church, ours are the missionaries, 
who go to foreign lands. Yes, says the 
Lord, these are my missionaries, charged with 
a grand mission— to "Gather together my saints 
unto me; those that have made a covenant with 
me by sacrifice." "They shall be mine, saith 
the Lord, in the day when I come to make up 
my jewels." 

Ministers? No, say the world and the nominal 
Church, only ours who wear "clerical" 
garments and preach from our pulpits are God's 
ministers. Yes, says the Lord, My servants 
(ministers) they are because they serve me, dispensing 
present truth to my household. I have 
sent forth the message which they bear. He 
that despiseth them despiseth me, and he that 
receiveth the sealing in the forehead which I 
send by them will know the doctrine, that it 
is of me. "My sheep know my voice." 

During the past six years, annual reports of the 
work have not been made, for the reason that 
the reports would not have shown up so well as 
we would have liked, and might have been discouraging 
rather than encouraging, some years. 
But the past year has been so favorable, and the 
responses already received to the suggestion on 
last leaf of the November TOWER have been 

R1350 : page 9 

so encouraging that we have concluded to report 
each January hereafter, good or bad. We 
accordingly report now the Tower Missionary 



Work in spreading the Gospel of the Kingdom 
for the six years past. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY 

SECRETARY'S REPORT 

FROM JAN. 1, 1886, TO DEC. 1, 1891. 



EXPENDITURES: 

Paid balance, debt, owing January 1st, '86, $ 516.17 

Expended in publishing and circulating 

Tracts and sample copies of Z.W. 

TOWER and in sending TOWER to the 

Lord's poor, 8625.03 

9141.20 
RECEIPTS: 

From Old Theology Tract subscriptions,... $1113.63 
From Tract Fund Donations 8017.57 

9141.20 

It will thus be seen that we started Dec. 1st, 
'91 with an evenly balanced ledger. But since 
figures are not apt to come out so exactly, it 
may be proper to remark that we had expended 
considerably more than our receipts, which would 
have shown a debt owing, but five friends of 
the cause subscribed the balance so as to permit 
us to start the new fiscal year, beginning December 
1st, free from debt. 

The results of the above expenditures will be 
of interest and will, we believe, show a very 
economical use of the means. 

Tracts published and distributed, 841,095 

Representing— as usually stated— in pages,. 14,874,240 
Copies of Zion's Watch Tower aside from 
those sent to subscribers, 395,000 

THE DAWN COLPORTEUR WORK. 

While this branch of the service is kept separate 
from the Tract Society's Work, and is, as 
far as possible, run upon a self-supporting basis, 
it is the purpose to give during the present year 
the extra assistance necessary to enable some 
to enter this service who manifest an ability for 
it but who need a start, or whose dependent 
families make needful some extra provision to 
enable them to continue in the work. 

Of all the means in use for preaching the 
good tidings of the Kingdom, this work yields 



the most favorable results; and we praise God 
that he is sending more laborers into this harvest 
work, and that those already in it give evidence 

R1350 :page 10 

of being so filled with the spirit of the gospel 
and so consecrated to its service. The circulation 
of the MILLENNIAL DAWN in its three 
volumes during the past twelve months has reached 
nearly 85,000 copies; and these have been circulated 
almost exclusively by the Colporteurs- 
including under this name not only those who 
give their entire time to this work, but also those 
of you who are doing what you can in a humble, 
quiet way about your homes— selling, loaning 
or giving books to such as have an ear to 
hear the Truth. While congratulating you all 
and ourselves upon the results of our united efforts 
under our dear Master's blessing and guidance, 
we start upon another year hoping for 
still greater blessings in his cause and name. 
The statements on the printed slips in November 
TOWER of what you hope to be able to do 
in this cause during the year beginning have been 
very helpful and encouraging to us; and the 
kind words accompanying were no less appreciated 
—assuring us as they did that you are 
glad to be reminded of the Apostles' advice on 
the subject, and to be thus assisted in ordering 
your affairs to the Lord's praise. 



R1353 : page 10 

"THE VOICE IS NIGH THEE. 



"Where art thou, Lord?" we sometimes cry 
From hearts with pain and anguish riven, 

And wonder in our sorrow why 

No answer comes from his far Heaven. 

Filled with our grief, we do not know 

That softly, gently, through our woe, 

His voice is whispering tenderly, 

"Lo, I that speak to thee am He." 

"Where art thou, Lord?" we sometimes say, 
As clouds of unbelief and doubt 

Sweep darkly o'er our onward way 
And crowd his loving presence out. 

We shrink back as they draw more near, 

And, looking at them, do not hear 

His voice still saying lovingly, 



"Lo, I that speak to thee am He." 

"Where art thou, Lord?" we've sometimes said, 

As error, all the wide world through, 
Stalks onward with triumphant tread 

And crushes down the just and true. 
We catch the sound of strife and fear, 
But, through the discord, do not hear 
That sweet voice sounding steadily, 
"Lo, I that speak to thee am He." 

"Where art thou, Lord?" we sometimes sigh, 
From beds of weariness and pain, 

The while his husbandmen go by 
To gather in his fields of grain. 

And longing with them forth to go, 

We miss his gentle accents, low, 

That through our pain would constantly 

Say, "I that speak to thee am He." 

"Where art thou, Lord?" some glorious day 
We'll ask upon the heavenly shore, 

As 'mid the angel hosts we stray, 
Our pilgrim journey safely o'er. 

Our hearts will find no resting place 

Until before his glorious face 

The blessed words to us shall be, 

"Lo, I that speak to thee am He."— Selected. 



R1350 :page 10 

THE EVIL WHICH GOD CREATES. 



"I form the light and create darkness; I make peace 
and create evil."— Isa. 45:7. 

In view of the blasphemous explanation now 
being given by some, of this passage of Scripture, 
we are reminded that this is but a fulfilment 
of the divine forewarnings through the 
apostles and prophets. In this connection we 
notice that Paul says, "Perilous times will 
come" (2 Tim. 3:1); and then he describes 
at great length the class of men from whom we 
are to expect the perils. And that we might at 
once recognize them so as to have nothing 
whatever to do with them, he adds, those 
"Having the form of godliness, but denying 
the power thereof: from such turn away." 
(2 Tim. 3:5.) The importance of this admonition 
will be seen when it is understood that 
Jesus' death is made the power or source of 



godliness to them that believe. In harmony 
with this view Paul says, "I declare unto you 
the gospel which I preached unto you... by 
which also ye are saved... unless ye have 

R1350 :page 11 

believed in vain. ..how that Christ died for 

our sins, according to the Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:1-3.) 

For "Ye are bought with a price" 

(1 Cor. 6:20), "Redeemed... with the precious 

blood of Christ." (1 Pet. 1:18,19.) In 

this way Jesus, by the sacrifice of his life as a 

human being, obtained the right to mankind, 

having bought them from Justice with the price. 

This he did in order that God could maintain 

his Justice and at the same time receive all sinners 

who would come to him through their appointed 

substitute; for "The Lord hath laid on 

him the iniquity of us all." (Isa. 53:6.) Therefore 

those who come through Jesus are "justified 

freely by his [God's] grace [favor] through 

the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,... 

through his blood." (Rom. 3:24-26.) The 

sinner thus justified is reckoned holy or godly, 

having secured "the gift of [attributed] righteousness. 

...For as by one man's disobedience 

many were made sinners, so by the obedience 

of one shall many be made righteous." 

(Rom. 5:17,19.) Therefore Jesus' death is made 

the power or source of godliness. (1 Cor. 1:23,24.) 

Then to deny in any manner, either 

by word or implication, that Jesus gave up his 

life (died) as the price of our redemption is to 

deny the power of godliness. This, Paul said 

some would do, while they would maintain the 

outward appearance of being godly. 

It is Peter, however, who describes more particularly 
the peculiarly subtle method they would 
adopt in thus denying the ransom. He says, 
"There shall be false teachers among you, who 
shall privately bring in damnable [destructive] 
heresies, denying the Lord that bought them." 
(2 Pet. 2:1.) He thus positively asserts that 
there would be teachers of falsehood right in 
the midst of God's people. Evidently, then, 
they would be formally godly— "grievous 
wolves" in sheep's clothing. These he says 
would deny that the Lord bought them. Not 
that they would do so openly, by word of mouth, 
but that they would do so in a private manner. 
That is, while they might profess to believe in 
the ransom, they would quietly introduce some 
false theories that would be opposed to it, or, 
in other words, a virtual denial that the Lord 
bought them. 



These inspired forewarnings we now see were 
not in vain; for the false teachers are now 
here, and are doing exactly as foretold. This 
is fully exemplified, in that the words of our 
text are now being used as authority for charging 
God with being the author of sin and 
wickedness. This theory, while blasphemous 
in itself and opposed to both reason and Scripture, 
is in addition, as we shall see, a denial of 
the ransom. Now, if God be responsible for 
the introduction and continued existence of 
sin, then the commission of sin is excusable, 
and then Adam and his posterity would undoubtedly 
be irresponsible, having had no choice 
in the matter. 

Further, under such circumstances God could 
not have commanded the man to obey a given 
law. Not being in any way, then, amenable 
to law, he could not possibly be a transgressor 
of law, and therefore he could not have committed 
an offence against justice. As a sequence, 
there would be no necessity for Jesus as the 
Redeemer, and of his death as the price. For 
unoffended justice could not require satisfaction, 
i.e., a ransom or corresponding price. In this 
way, this subtle and God-dishonoring theory 
denies the Lord that bought us. In addition 
to this, by getting rid of the penalty (for where 
there could be no transgression there could be 
no penalty inflicted), it holds out a false hope 
that all must eventually be saved. 

The whole theory is decidedly unreasonable, 
and is opposed in every particular by the testimony 
of God's Word; and further, there is 
not a particle of authority for it in our text. 
That the evil here referred to by the prophet 
is not sin, but calamity, is shown by the context 
and the contrast drawn between peace and 
evil. The chapter opens with the statement 
that Cyrus is the Lord's anointed to subdue 
nations. Then, continuing, God promises him 
(verse 2) "I will go before thee" (verse 3) "I 
will give thee the treasures of darkness... 
that thou mayest know that I the Lord... 
am the God of Israel." (Verse 5) "I am the 
Lord and there is none else; there is no God 
beside me: I girded thee." (Verse 6) "That 
they may know. ..that there is none beside 
me." (Verse 7) "I form the light and create 

R1350 :page 12 

darkness; I make peace and create evil: I 
the Lord do all these things." The subject 
of the prophet is thus evidently continued, 
inclusive of the seventh verse, and here the 



word "create" is used twice, and undoubtedly 
in the same sense. For as darkness may 

R1351 :page 12 

be said to be created by the withdrawing of 
light, so also the evil referred to may be said 
to be created by the withdrawal of the restraint 
and protection that afford peace. Now, however, 
God was about to withdraw these and inflict 
chastisement. To this end Cyrus was exalted 
to power, as stated, that he might know 
that Jehovah was the God of Israel, for the 
sake of the Jewish captives then in Babylon, 
and also that the idolatrous nations might know, 
by the calamities (evils) inflicted on them, and 
the overthrow of their man-made gods (to whom 
they would vainly appeal for deliverance), that 
there was no God beside the God of Israel. 

[Rather, we would suggest, Israel had already 
experienced adversity and captivity to Babylon 
(evils) as the result of the withdrawal of the 
Lord's protecting care, because of their idolatry; 
and now that God's time had come for 
their return to his protection and favor in their 
own land, he would have Cyrus know that his 
accession to power was not accidental, but of 
divine arrangement, for the purpose of returning 
the Israelites to their own land. God would 
have Cyrus recognize him as the supervisor of 
his people's affairs.— EDITOR.] 

That this is the meaning is clear, and in this 
sense the word evil and its Hebrew equivalent, 
"ra," are repeatedly used by Moses and the 
prophets. For example, it is recorded that Lot 
said "I cannot escape to the mountain, lest 
some evil take me and I die." (Gen. 19:19.) 
Here it is evident that Lot feared that he would 
receive bodily injury or be killed; and these 
are called "evil." Again it is said, "The Lord 
will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt upon 
thee." (Deut. 7:15.) Here bodily affliction 
or diseases are called "evil." Again, the Israelites 
"Forsook the Lord and served Baal." 
"And the anger of the Lord was hot against 
Israel, and he delivered them. ..into the 
hands of their enemies." "The hand of the 
Lord was against them for evil... and they 
were greatly distressed." (Judges 2:13-15.) 
In this case Israel sinned against God, and he 
suffered their enemies to make war on them and 
spoil them; and this calamity is called "evil." 
Further, the Hebrew word ra, rendered evil, 
is also translated as follows: Adversity: "Ye 
have this day rejected your God who saved you 
out of all your [ra] adversities." (1 Sam. 10:19.) 



Afflictions: "Many are the [ra] afflictions 

of the righteous." (Psa. 34:19.) Trouble: 

"In the time of [ra] trouble he will hide 

me." (Psa. 27:5.) Hurt: "I will deliver them 

for their [ra] hurt." (Jer. 24:9.) Distress: 

"Ye see the [ra] distress we are in, how Jerusalem 

lieth waste." (Neh. 2:17.) Harm: 

"Look well to him and do him no [ra] harm." 

(Jer. 39:12.) It is also translated "misery," 

"calamities," "ill," "sorrow," and many 

other words. 

It will be seen, then, by the use of the word, 
as well as by the connection in which it is 
found in our text, and the contrast there drawn 
between peace and evil, that not sin, but calamity, 
is meant. There is, therefore, as we 
have said, not a particle of authority in our text 
for the blasphemous, God-dishonoring theory 
of these false teachers. On the contrary, 
in marked contrast with this vile charge are 
the repeated and pointed declarations of God 
through his holy apostles and prophets; for they 
all bear witness to the holiness of his character, 
and of all his works and ways. For example: 
God exhorted the people of Israel through 
Moses, saying, "Ye shall be holy, for I am 
holy." (Lev. 11:44.) And through Peter he 
exhorts the Gospel church, saying, "But as he 
which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in 
all manner of conversation." (1 Pet. 1:15,16.) 
By Isaiah (who wrote our text) God is called 
"the Holy One" thirty times, and once he 
emphasises it by adding, "Holy, holy, holy 
is the Lord." But if these theorists be right, the 
prophet was guilty of inconsistency and falsehood. 
Again, David records that "The Lord 
is righteous in all his ways (acts) and holy 
in all his works." (Psa. 145:17.) Now, it is 
clear that he could not be holy in all his 
works if he were the author of sin and 
crime. Further, Jeremiah says, "The Lord is 

R1351 :page 13 

righteous." (Lam. 1:18.) And Samuel testifies 

that, "As for God, his way is perfect." 

(2 Sam. 22:31.) And still further, "Thus saith 

the Lord:... let him that glorieth glory in 

this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, 

that I am the Lord which exerciseth lovingkindness, 

judgment and righteousness [not wickedness] 

in the earth; for in these things I delight, 

saith the Lord."-Jer. 9:22,24. 

This exhortation and this glorious expression 
of God's character should inspire unbounded 
confidence, and bring lasting comfort to those 



who honor and love him. It should likewise, 
by making the folly of those who dishonor him 
apparent, bring them shame and confusion of 
face. Not only is he thus over and over declared 
righteous and holy, but he is also proclaimed 
"A God of truth and without iniquity." 
(Deut. 32:4,5.) Also "A just Lord, and will 
not do iniquity."— Zeph. 3:5. 

Habakkuk testifies that "Thou [God] art of 
purer eyes than to behold [i.e., with approval] 
evil, and cannot look [denoting his abhorrence] 
upon iniquity." (Hab. 1:13.) James says, 
"God cannot be tempted with evil, neither 
tempteth he any man." (James 1:13.) And 
the Psalmist says, "If I regard iniquity in my 
heart, the Lord will not hear me." (Psa. 66:18.) 
Again he says, "Thou art not a God that 
hath pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil 
dwell with thee: thou hatest all workers of iniquity." 
(Psa. 5:4,5.) Then with David we 
would say, "Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, 
and give thanks at the remembrance of 
his holiness." (Psa. 97:12.) "Give thanks, 
...make known his deeds,. ..talk of his 
wondrous works, glory ye in his holy name." 
-1 Chron. 16:8-10. 

But the advocates of this God-dishonoring 
theory prefer to reverse all this; for they rejoice 
and give thanks at the remembrance of his 
unholiness (?): they make known his evil (?) 
deeds, talk of his evil (?) works, and glory in 
giving him an unholy name. But their folly 
should be manifest to all; for the evidences are 
overwhelmingly conclusive that God has not 
corrupted mankind, but that "They have deeply 
corrupted themselves."— Hosea 9:9. 
S. O. BLUNDEN. 



R1351 :page 13 

INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



LESSON I., JANUARY 3, ISA. 11:1-10. 
THE KING AND THE KINGDOM. 
Golden Text:— "He shall have dominion also from 



sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth. 
-Psa. 72:8. 

The inspiring themes of this lesson are the 
glorious Millennial Kingdom and the rightful 
King whom God hath appointed to reign in 
righteousness over all the earth. This is that 
kingdom to which our Lord referred when to 
his disciples he said, "I appoint unto you a 
kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto 
me; that ye may eat and drink at my table in 
my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging 
the twelve tribes of Israel" (Luke 22:29,30); 
that kingdom for which he taught us to pray, 
"Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on 
earth as it is done in heaven;" that kingdom 
which he commissioned his disciples to preach, 
saying, "Let the dead bury their dead, but 
go thou and preach the kingdom of God" 
(Luke 9: 1,2,60); and that to which some of 
the poor of this world, rich in faith, have been 
chosen heirs. (James 2:5.) It is that kingdom 
of which the Prophet Isaiah frequently discourses 
in glowing language, and which, indeed, 
has been the theme of all the holy prophets 
since the world began (Acts 3:19-21), as well 
as of the Lord and the apostles. 

But observe that every reference to it looks 
to its future establishment, and makes clearly 
manifest the fact that it is not yet set up in the 
earth; for the will of God is not yet done on 
earth as it is done in heaven, and the heirs of 
the kingdom are not yet reigning with Christ. 
The only way in which the kingdom of God 
yet exists is in its embryo condition, in its incipient 
stage of humiliation, in which it often 

R1351 :page 14 

"suffers violence," and "the violent take it 
by force." (Matt. 11:12.) But in due time 
these prospective heirs of the kingdom who 
now faithfully endure hardness as good soldiers, 
will be counted worthy to be exalted and to 
reign with Christ when his kingdom shall be 
established in power and great glory. (Matt. 24:30.) 
Hear the promise of our glorified Lord: 
"To him that overcometh, will I grant to sit 
with me in my throne." (Rev. 3:21.) And 
again, "They shall be priests of God and of 
Christ and shall reign with him a thousand years" 
--"on the earth. "--Rev. 20:6; 5:10. 

It seems strange indeed, in view of the clear 
testimony of the Scriptures on the subject of the 
establishment of the kingdom of God in the 
earth, and of its glorious character and work, 



that Christians generally, both Catholic and 
Protestant, entertain the idea that that kingdom 
has already come, and that it has been 
established in the earth for many centuries. 
This error is not one which originated with 
Protestants, but rather, one which they have 
never outgrown. The claim was first made by 
the Papacy when she became popular with the 
world and was exalted to power, and the "Great 

R1352:page 14 

Reformation" movement, while it touched many 
other doctrines, left this one unmolested; and 
the thoughtless indifference of Christians since 
those days has never discovered to them the 
absurdity of praying, "Thy kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven," 
while at the same time they claim that his 
kingdom did come long ago, though they freely 
admit that his will is not, and never has been, 
done on earth as it is done in heaven. 

But let us observe what the Prophet here has 
to say of the glorious character and the extent of 
this dominion and of the power and glory of 
its appointed King, and then see if there is, or 
ever yet has been, such a king or such a kingdom 
in the earth. Hear him! (Isa. 11:1.) 
"And there shall come forth a rod out of the 
stock of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of 
his roots: And the spirit of Jehovah shall rest 
upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, 
the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit 
of knowledge and of the reverence of Jehovah; 
and shall make him of quick understanding in the 
fear of the Lord: and he shall not judge after 
the sight of his eyes, neither give sentence after 
the hearing of his ears. [He will not need to 
call up the testimony of human witnesses in any 
case, since his own knowledge and understanding 
of each man's case will be perfect.] But 
with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and 
give sentence with equity for the meek of the 
earth.. ..And righteousness shall be the 
girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle 
of his reins."— Verses 1-5. 

This glorious Branch out of the stock of Jesse 
we recognize as our blessed Lord Jesus, who, 
after his resurrection, said, "All power is given 
unto me in heaven and in earth" (Matt. 28:18), 
and who at the time appointed will take 
unto him his great power and reign. (Rev. 11:17.) 
This is "the Messenger of the [new] 
covenant whom ye delight in. Behold he shall 
come, saith the Lord of hosts." (Mai. 3:1; 
Jer. 31:31-34.) Oh, let our hearts truly rejoice 



in the blessed and multiplied assurances that he 

who so loved us as to give his life for our ransom 

is coming again to reign. "Let the heavens 

rejoice, and let the earth be glad;. ..for 

he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge 

the world with righteousness and the people with 

his truth. "-Psa. 96:11-13. 

Now in observing the character of his reign, notice 
First, that it will be a terror to evil doers, and 
that because iniquity so abounds in the world, 
the first work of his reign will be the smiting 
of the earth with the rod of his mouth and the 
slaying of the wicked with the breath of his lips 
(verse 4); for somehow the truth, "the rod of 
his mouth and the breath of his lips," is either 
directly or indirectly to bring about the smiting 
of the earth— the great "time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation."— 
Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21; Jas. 5:1-6; 
Mai. 3:2-5; 4:1. 

Secondly, observe that while his reign is to 
be a terror to evil doers, exposing and uprooting 
every system and every principle of evil, 
both in society at large and in every individual, 
it will on the other hand be the consolation 
and joy of all the meek who love righteousness; 
for such shall no longer be oppressed, but 
shall be exalted and blessed.— Verse 4. 

R1352:page 15 

Thirdly, notice that the blessings of Christ's 
Millennial reign will extend, not only to the 
establishment of righteousness in the earth and 
peace and harmony among men, but to the 
lower creatures as well, so that they will be 
docile and obedient to mankind, as they were 
originally.— Verses 6-9; Psa. 8:6-8. 

And fourthly, do not overlook the blessed assurances 
of verses 9,10— "The earth shall be 
full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters 
cover the sea"— full, broad, ample and deep. 
Ah, no conflicting creeds then; for all will be 
made plain and all the vain traditions of men 
will have perished. And in that day the Root 
of Jesse shall stand for an ensign of the people; 
to him shall the nations come to inquire, and 
his resting-place shall be glorious. (Verse 10.) 
Here, he who in verse one is called the Branch 
out of the root of Jesse— the Son of Jesse— is 
now called the Root (or father) of Jesse. And 
this seeming contradiction is not an accidental 
misstatement but a veritable truth; for though 
Christ was the Son of Jesse according to the 
flesh, he is now to be "the Everlasting Father" 
or life-giver to the whole human race; so that 



Jesse, in the "Times of Restitution of all 
things," will be the son of Christ.— Isa. 9:6. 

When Christ is thus exalted in the earth and 
men begin to realize his power and goodness, 
he will indeed be for an "ensign of the people," 
and there will indeed be a great turning to 
him. Men will say, "Come ye, and let us go 
up to the mountain [kingdom] of the Lord, to 
the house of the God of Jacob; and he will 
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his 
paths. ...And all nations shall flow into it." 
(Isa. 2:3,2.) And truly "his resting-place 
shall be glorious"— so different from the miserable 
resting-places now afforded by human 
creeds, so aptly described by the Prophet (Isa. 28:20), 
saying, "For the bed is shorter than 
that a man [a developed Christian] can stretch 
himself [or grow more] on it, and the covering 
narrower than that he can wrap himself in it." 
[He knows so little of the divine plan that he 
is constantly subject to doubts and fears.] But 
the blessed resting-place which the new King 
will discover to all men, in making "the knowledge 
of the Lord fill the earth as the waters 
cover the sea," will indeed be a glorious resting-place. 
God's plan and each man's place 
in that plan will be clearly manifest and blessedly 
satisfying. 

In the blessed assurance of our Golden Text, 
that "He shall have dominion also from sea to 
sea, and from the river to the ends of the 
earth," and all the accompanying assurances of 
that precious psalm, let our hearts rejoice, remembering 
also that when he shall appear in 
his kingdom, then shall we also (if faithful unto 
death) appear with him in glory.— Col. 3:4. 

Let us not fall into that miserable delusion, 
which should be so apparent to every student 
of the Scriptures, that the kingdoms of this 
world, misnamed Christendom (Christ's kingdom) 
are in any sense the kingdom of Christ, 
or that they are in any sense accomplishing the 
work which the Scriptures under consideration 
point out as the work of that kingdom. Let 
the true saints of God, the embryo kingdom, 
the "heirs" of the kingdom soon to come in 
power and great glory, be content to be unrecognized 
of men and to suffer reproach and 
violence if need be, knowing that when it does 
come, it will far surpass the vain glory of these 
earthly kingdoms which must pass away. Such 
was Paul's faith; for when about to die, and 
looking forward to the time appointed for the 
setting up of the kingdom of God, he said, 
"Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown 
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous 



Judge, shall give me at that day, and not to me 
only, but to all them also who love his appearing 
(2 Tim. 4:8.) While, then, we wait for 
his appearing, let us confidently and joyfully 
hope for the glory to be revealed in us and 
through us. 

R1352:page 15 

A SONG OF TRIUMPH. 



LESSON II., JANUARY 10, ISA. 26:1-15. 

Golden Text— "Trust ye in the Lord forever; for in 
the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength." 

In this lesson we have two great cities brought 
to view; and the burden of the song is that the 
one has been "laid low, even to the dust"— 
i.e., utterly destroyed— while the other is established 
in peace and security. Jehovah is shown 
to be the destroyer of one, and the founder and 
strength of the other. (Verses 5,1.) In the 
symbolic language of the Scriptures a city always 
represents a government or kingdom. 
The city here represented as securely established, 
and as a place of safety for all who love 
righteousness and truth (verse 2), symbolizes 
the Millennial Kingdom of God; while the city 
which is destroyed is the opposing kingdom of 
the prince of this world. In Revelation 21:2 
the former is called "the holy city, the New 
Jerusalem," whose excellent glory is described 
as like that of "a bride adorned for her husband;" 
while the latter, in Chapters 14:8 and 
18:21, is called Babylon, whose unrighteous 
character is described, and its sudden and violent 
overthrow predicted and likened to a great 

R1352:page 16 

millstone cast into the sea to be found no more 
at all. 

The time when this song will be sung is also 
definitely pointed out. "In that day shall 
this song be sung." What day? Evidently 
the day when the singers begin to recognize the 
fact that the New Jerusalem or Kingdom of 
God is established in the earth, and that the 
great city, Babylon, has been completely 
overthrown— the dawn of the Millennial day. 
Those two events will occur simultaneously, 
and will be recognized together, as indicated 
in this song of triumph. 



This calls to mind the theme of our last lesson 
(Isa. 11:1-10), and, glancing along the 
intervening chapters, we see that the Prophet 
applies this same name, Babylon, to the great 
city whose destruction he predicts, and that he 
has much to say of its ignoble character, as 
well as of its doom. See chapters 13:1,19; 
14:4,22; 21:9; 47:1. 

The destruction of Babylon and the establishment 
of the New Jerusalem or Kingdom of 
God are ascribed to Jehovah in verses 1,4 and 5; 
and this is in harmony with Psa. 2:6. "I 
[Jehovah] have set my King [Christ] upon my 
holy hill of Zion." And the great day of 
wrath which will accomplish the destruction 
of Babylon is called "the day of Jehovah." 
"Lo, the day of Jehovah doth come, fierce with 
wrath and heat of anger."— Isa. 13:9. 

We next notice (verse 1) that this song is 
sung "in the land of Judah," thus indicating 
what is elsewhere clearly shown, that Israel will 
be the first to recognize the Kingdom established. 

R1353 :page 16 

And they will say, "Lo, this is our 
God; we have waited for him, and he will 
save us: this is the Lord; we have waited for 
him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation." 
-Isa. 25:9. 

Having thus distinguished the cities and located 
the time and the singers, let us now observe 
the burden of this song. Concerning the 
great city, Babylon, they sing (verses 5,6), 
"The lofty city [the city formerly exalted and 
powerful in the earth], he layeth it low; he layeth 
it low, even to the ground; he bringeth it 
even to the dust; for he bringeth down them 
that dwell on high. The foot shall tread it 
down, even the feet of the poor and the steps 
of the needy"— referring to the great social 
troubles which will culminate in the utter destruction 
of all the present civil and ecclesiastical 
power of "Christendom:" a culmination 
even now greatly feared by long-headed statesmen 
and ecclesiastics everywhere. 

But concerning the then established city, the 
New Jerusalem or Kingdom of God, they sing 
(verse 1), "We have a strong city; salvation 
will God appoint for walls and bulwarks." It 
will be a strong city of refuge within whose 
protecting walls all may enter who desire the 
great salvation which it assures. 

Verse 2. "Open ye the gates, that the righteous 
nation which keepeth [observeth or regardeth] 
the truth may enter in." From Rev. 21:12 



we learn that the gates or entrances of the 
city, which are twelve in number, are inscribed 
with the names of the twelve tribes of Israel. 
This is in harmony with what we have learned 
of the earthly phase of the Kingdom of God (see 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chapter XIV.), that 
the ancient worthies from the various tribes of 
Israel, selected during the Jewish age, will be the 
visible representatives of the heavenly Kingdom 
in the earth, through whose instrumentality 
the nations may enter into the blessings of 
the Kingdom. 

Verses 3,4 tell of the peace and general advantages 
of trusting in God. Verse 7 tells how 
plain he has made the path of the just— "The 
way of the just is plain: thou makest exactly 
plain the path of the just."— Leeser. 

In verses 8,9 they tell how, through the long 
night of their chastisement, when the judgments 
of the Lord were upon them, they still 
remembered the Lord and desired his favor and 
blessing; and they justify God in sending his 
chastisements upon them for their correction, 
because they were necessary. 

Verses 10,11 note the fact that the remainder 
of the world have not yet recognized and 
submitted themselves to the new Kingdom, but 
that they shall yet see and be ashamed of their 
past course, and that God will surely destroy 
any who persistently remain enemies. 

Verse 12 expresses their confidence in God, 
who has cared for them in the past and ordained 
peace for them now, since they have 
come to trust in him. 

Verses 13,14 refer to the contrast of their 
condition under the Kingdom of God with that 
under other rulers or lords of the past— the evil 
governments and systems under which they 
have suffered privation and bitter persecution. 
Henceforth they desire to make mention only 
of the Lord as their King and to forget the 
bitterness and woe of the past while cast off 
from his favor and subject to other rulers; for 
they remember that those evil governments and 
systems have perished, never again to be reorganized 
to oppress and misrule the world. 

Verse 15 again refers to the blessedness of 
Israel regathered under divine protection and 
favor— Israel, which for their sins had been 
scattered to the ends of the earth. 



page 18 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 



AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1346 : page 18 

TO TOWER SUBSCRIBERS-THANKS! 



We thank the friends for promptness this year in sending 
in their TOWER subscriptions. The many kind congratulations 
on the change of the journal to a semi-monthly 
are also much appreciated. The Master said, "Marvel 
not if the world hate you;" but he also promised compensation 
for its hatred even in this present life. (John 15:17-20; 
Mark 10:29,30.) We realize the fulfilment of the 
latter promise, as well as the former. The Lord's precious 
promises, backed by your loving letters of sympathy 
and encouragement, much more than offset the frowns and 
hostility of the world and the nominal church. 

The responses to the printed notices on the last page of 
the November TOWER have been numerous, and indicate 
a deep interest in the Truth. How much these expressions 
have been appreciated here in the TOWER office, 
we need not tell you; and how much more they are 
appreciated in heaven— we cannot tell you that. We can 



only remind you of the Scriptural promises, "The Lord 

knoweth them that are His," and "Your labor is not 

in vain in the Lord." Only a few seem to have misapprehended 

the object of the plan adopted. We well 

know that some need no suggestions from either the 

Apostle or us as to how to give to the Lord's work. 

Some, indeed, we have felt needed to be restrained from 

a liberality beyond their ability. We have felt it to be our 

duty and have at times returned money, watches, etc., to 

some whom we feared were disposed to give more than 

they should. Our object in the plan adopted was to assist 

the Church to-day by calling their attention to the 

methods advised by the Apostle to the Church of his day. 

We realize, as the Apostle did, that each one who engages 

in the Lord's work at some sacrifice to himself is proportionately 

blessed. And desiring, as the Apostle did, that 

all should be blessed, we advised and still advise his 

method of laying aside an offering to the Lord's service on 

the first day of each week (1 Cor. 16:2), as the best 

method for the majority of the Lord's people to pursue. 



Those who need to avail themselves of the terms to the 
Lord's Poor mentioned above should not hesitate to do 
so. Such should state themselves plainly and realize that 
we rejoice to send the TOWER to them. 



VOL. I.-"THE PLAN OF THE AGES. 



This work is specially designed to make plain the divine 
plan. It begins at the beginning of the subject, by establishing 
the faith of the reader in God and in the Bible as 
his revelation. It traces the glorious plan therein revealed, 
and shows which parts of that plan are accomplished 
and which will be accomplished during the Millennial 
age, also the manner of its introduction, and its 
objects and methods. 

We know of nothing to compare with this book, as a 
"Bible Key." The Two Hundredth Thousand is now 
on the press, and many who have read it carefully and 
prayerfully declare that if they could not obtain another 
they would not part with their copy, and the hopes it has 
enkindled, for millions. 

Clear type, good paper, 350 pages. Price in cloth covers, 
embossed, $1.00. (The subscribers to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER are supplied in any quantity at the wholesale 
price, 50 cents, as all are considered agents.) Price in 
paper covers, 25 cents, reduced from 50 cents. 
A GERMAN TRANSLATION OF THE ABOVE AT SAME PRICES. 

VOL. II.-"THE TIME IS AT HAND." 



This volume presents evidences that:— 
Six Thousand Years from Adam ended in A.D. 1872. 
The Date of our Lord's Birth was October, B.C. 2. 
The Date of Annunciation to Mary, Dec. 25th, B.C. 3. 
The Date of our Lord's Baptism was Oct., A.D. 29. 
The Date of our Lord's Crucifixion, April, A.D. 33. 
The "Seventy Weeks" of Israel's favor ended A.D. 36. 
The Jewish Age "Harvest" was 40 years, A.D. 30-70. 
The Christian Age "Harvest," 40 yrs., A.D. 1875-1914. 
The Jewish Jubilees were Typical of the "Times of Restitution 
of all Things."-Acts 3:19-21. 

The Typical Jubilees Mark the Date of their Antitype. 
The "Times of the Gentiles" will End with A.D. 1914. 
The Jewish Age, in Its Length, Its Ceremonies, etc., Typified 
the realities of the Christian Age and its Length. 
Elias or "Elijah the Prophet" was a Type.— How fulfilled. 
The Antichrist Has Come!— What? When? Where? 

Besides the above, it treats many other subjects of deep 
interest and great importance to "the household of faith." 
Terms the same as Vol. I.— 360 pages. 

VOL. III.-'THY KINGDOM COME." 



(This volume now ready.) 

This volume treats of the prophetic periods of Daniel 
and Revelation— The 2300 Days, The 1260 Days, The 
1290 Days, The 1335 Days. -The Work of the Harvest 
now in Progress.— The Return of God's Favor to Israel.— 
The Great Pyramid of Egypt and its wonderful corroboration 
of all the prophetic testimony. 



R1354:page 19 

VOL. XIII. JANUARY 15, 1892. NO. 2. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

THINGS TO COME-AND THE PRESENT EUROPEAN SITUATION. 

"The Spirit of truth. ..will guide you into all truth, 
...and will show you things to come."— John 16:13. 

While a part of the work of the Holy Spirit, 
or Spirit of Truth, is to guide the children of 
God into a clear apprehension of present duty 
and privilege and to give them such knowledge 
of things past as is needful, another of its 
offices is here stated to be that of showing them 



"things to come;" for the things to come, as 

well as things past and present, are of great importance 

to the Church. Such knowledge is not 

given merely to gratify curiosity, but for a definite 

and worthy purpose. It is wisely hidden 

from the merely curious and graciously revealed 

to the meek disciple who seeks to know the 

divine mind more perfectly, in order that he 

may the more fully conform to it. 

It is only such truth seekers that are ever rewarded 
with the knowledge of the things to 
come and of the relationship of things past and 
present to those which are yet future— or, in 
other words, who ever come to see the beauty 
and harmony of divine truth as a system. The 
scoffing skeptic may diligently search the divine 
oracles, but he never finds the truth until he 
comes with reverence and humility as a meek 
disciple. He reads the wonders of divine revelation 
in a disjointed way, but cannot systematize 
or comprehend them. And even if God's 
children set them forth systematically, they are 
to him foolishness: he cannot receive them. 
Nor can any man retain this divine truth after 
he has found it, unless he retain the meek spirit 
in which he first received it, which also implies 
the right and diligent use of it. 

This privilege of being shown things to come 
is granted in order, first, that we may not be 
overwhelmed with fear and discouragement at 
the seeming calamities of the future; secondly, 
that we may be co-workers together with God 
in harmony with his plan; and thirdly, in order 
that, seeing our future relationship to that plan, 
we may be fully prepared to enter into that new 
relationship and its duties and privileges. 

The Scriptures give unmistakable testimony 
to those who have full faith in its records, that 
there is a great time of trouble ahead of the 
present comparative calm in the world— a trouble 
which will embroil all nations, overthrow 
all existing institutions, civil, social and religious, 
bring about a universal reign of anarchy 
and terror, and prostrate humanity in the very 
dust of despair, thus to make them ready to appreciate 
the power that will bring order out of 
that confusion and institute the new rule of 
righteousness. All this, the Scriptures show us, 
is to come to pass before the year 1915 (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter IV.)-that 
is, within the next twenty three years. And in 
view of these calamities the Lord's consecrated 
ones are told not to be alarmed, knowing what 
the grand outcome is to be. 

All thinking men, whether they have faith in 
the Word of prophecy or not, see in the present 



attitude of mankind in general a growing 
tendency which threatens such a culmination, 

R1354 : page 20 

and they stand in fear and dread of it. As a 

consequence, the daily papers and the weeklies 

and monthlies, religious and secular, are continually 

discussing the prospects of war in Europe. 

They note the grievances and ambitions 

of the various nations and predict that war is 

inevitable at no distant day, that it may begin 

at any moment between some of the great powers, 

and that the prospects are that it will 

eventually involve them all. And they picture 

the awful calamity of such an event in view of 

the preparations made for it on the part of every 

nation. For several years past thoughtful observers 

have said, War cannot be kept off much 

longer: it must come soon— "next spring," 

"next summer," "next fall," etc. 

But, notwithstanding these predictions and 
the good reasons which many see for making 
them, we do not share them. That is, we do 
not think that the prospects of a general European 
war are so marked as is commonly supposed. 
True, all Europe is like a great powder 
magazine which a single stray match might set 
off at any moment with a tremendous explosion. 
The various nations are armed to the teeth with 
the most destructive weapons that skill and ingenuity 
can invent, and there are national 
grievances and bickerings and hatred that must 
find a vent some time; and in consideration of 
these things the war cloud is always impending 
and ever darkening: but things may continue 
just so for many years, and we think they will. 

These rumors of impending European wars, 
and the desire to judge whether observation 
would tend to confirm the divine revelation that 
the intensity of the great predicted trouble is yet 
nearly fifteen years future, formed no small part 
of our motive in visiting Europe during the past 
summer. With this object in view, and especially 
to be enabled to form some estimate of 
the social conditions of the people, which always 
have much to do with war probabilities, 
we pursued a very different course from that 
usual to European tourists. 

We paid more attention to the towns, villages, 
cities, and especially to the poorer quarters, 
than to the lakes, cathedrals and art galleries. 
That you may know that our observations were 
not confined to any one corner of Europe, we 
will state that our journey carried us over more 
than four thousand miles of those portions of 



Europe expected by so many to be the battlefield 
of the world within a year, viz., 900 miles 
in Italy, 500 miles in Austria, 900 miles in Russia, 
and 1800 miles in Germany and France. 

As for war, it is the talk of everybody in Germany, 
Austria, Russia, Italy and France. And 
all seemed agreed that if it did not break out 
this fall it would surely come by next spring. 
All seem ready for what they consider the inevitable. 
In Germany every man is a soldier; 
and wonderful soldiers they seem to be: every 
thing is done with military precision, the influence 
of the last twenty years of military methods 
extending into every department of life, 
business, etc. And, by the way, we experienced 
quite a change of view with reference to 
this matter of German military influence. We 
had heretofore considered as an almost unmixed 
evil the taking of hundreds of thousands of men 
from the tilling of the soil to spend four years 
each in the prime of life in military service; 
but now we see another side to the question. 
While the taking away of so much of the energy 
and muscle of a nation from the army of 
production into an army of consumption has 
been to the detriment of the nation financially 
for the present and to the greater bondage of 
the women of Germany who do most of the 
farming, it has been the greatest and most 
rapid educator of the men of that nation, and 
thus, under divine providence, an instrumentality 
for awakening the world and preparing for 
the great change of dispensation about to be 
inaugurated. 

It has taken sleepy, thoughtless boys from the 
farm and has waked them up and educated 
them, often to far more practical benefit than 
four years of a college course would have done. 
As a result, one seldom meets a stupid German. 
And this same rule seems to hold in other 
countries in proportion to their strictness in 
military regulations. France, Austria and Italy 
follow the lead of Germany in military education, 
although far behind her. Italy, however, 
is awaking more rapidly than other nations. 
She has adopted the German military system in 
full, and the influence of this measure is already 

R1354:page21 

seen and felt. The German military system, 
it may be as new to others as it was to us 
to learn, is not alone a system of military 
drilling and physical disciplining, but also a 
schooling in the common branches of education. 
The men do not idle and dream away their 



time, except when on dress parade, but have 
regular hours for lessons under well educated 
instructors. 

The effect of this general education may be 
imagined: the people are awake to an appreciation 
of their rights in a way and to a degree 
that no one would have suspected but a short 
time ago, when the German brain was generally 
credited with being rather slow and sluggish. 
No other nation on earth is so fully awake now. 

This general awakening of the masses to a 
knowledge of their rights and their power, it 
might be argued, is one of the chiefest reasons 
for fearing the great time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation, spoken of in the 
Scriptures as one of the results of the present 
increase of knowledge which will eventuate in 
anarchism, and prepare the way for the Kingdom 
of Heaven. 

Yes, this is true; but there are modifying circumstances, 
not generally considered, which will 
hinder this from having its full effect for some 
time to come. These modifications are as 
follows:— 

First, the various states of Germany, once independent, 
are now not only united, but that 
union is cemented by a patriotic feeling which 
would sacrifice much rather than see the present 
empire, of which they all feel proud, destroyed. 
They would therefore bear much rather than see 
it disturbed. 

Secondly, the Germans are a cautious people: 
they know that their present government is as 
good as the average, at least, and that they are 
surrounded by enemies, and they will be extremely 
slow to take chances on a change such 
as would be implied by the word Revolution. 

R1355 : page 21 

Thirdly, the present government and Emperor 
are very popular. The last ten years have 
witnessed for the masses a great social and financial 
elevation; laws have been enacted for 
the protection, and gradually for the betterment, 
of the poorer classes; and the present 
Emperor has very wisely addressed himself to 
various liberal reforms for their amelioration. 

Our judgment therefore is that, so long as 
these conditions prevail, Germany can control 
the anarchistic or lawless elements within her 
borders, and is not likely to experience a social 
revolution for some years to come. 

Germany's military preparation is so well 
known to the leading statesmen of Europe that 
no nation is likely to seek a quarrel with her; 



and her strain to keep up her present standard 
is so great that she wants no increase of it 
such as war would bring. Hence, with Austria 
and Italy in league and largely in the same 
plight and under her influence, Germany is today, 
humanly speaking, the arbiter of the 
world's peace. 

Furthermore, we found that throughout Europe 
the social conditions are much better than we 
had expected to find them. Indeed, the houses 
occupied by the poorest class, except in southern 
Russia, compare favorably with the dwellings 
of a similar class in this country; and we 
know of localities here in Pittsburgh which are 
as dilapidated in appearance as any tenements 
observed on our journey— not even excepting 
the slums of London, Liverpool, Edinburgh and 
Glasgow, which are the worst we saw in Europe, 
Russia alone excepted. 

The people are generally intelligent, industrious, 
busy and comfortably clothed and fed- 
far beyond our previous suppositions. We could 
not help wondering whence come some of 
the worst specimens of all races to this country 
as emigrants. Evidently the people of the 
United States are performing a service of inestimable 
value to the whole world in receiving their 
scum of ignorance and their dregs of degradation 
—both due more to evils of the past than to 
those of the present, and chiefly chargeable to 
priestcraft, superstition and ignorance fostered 
for centuries by that old "Mother of Harlots," 
which falsely claims to be the Church-system 
founded by our Lord and his apostles. The 
wonder often is that, with almost no assistance 
except the necessity and opportunity for industry, 
so many of these degraded members of the 
human family turn out as favorably as they do. 
What a field here at our door for mission workers, 

R1355 : page 22 

evangelists and philanthropists— better, if 

they but realized it, than any foreign mission 

field we saw. And these emigrants, let us remember, 

although generally poor, are not always 

either ignorant or vicious. Some of them 

are God's consecrated saints whom he is sending 

here to be blessed and sealed with present 

truth, which he gives us the privilege of ministering 

to them. 

True, the food of the lower classes of Europe 
would not be satisfactory to the average mechanic 
and laborer in the United States, who, 
accustomed to larger pay and unaccustomed to 
frugality, spends probably six times as much on 



his stomach, eating not only finer and more 

nutritious foods, but also much more of them, 

and wasting often through improvidence as much 

as or more than he eats. However, the European 

laborer seems to enjoy himself as much 

as or more than his artisan brother here, and on 

the whole there is more of an appearance of contentment 

on the faces of all the people there— 

the poor, the middle class and the rich— than 

on faces met in the streets here. 

Intelligence without the grace of God to back 
it up brings discontent: only when it is backed 
by godliness, does it bring contentment, peace 
and joy. For this reason it is that the greater 
general intelligence and greater liberty of the 
people of the United States bring them, not 
more contentment, but less than their less favorably 
circumstanced European brothers. And 
this leads us to expect as stirring times in the 
United States as elsewhere when the "time of 
trouble" shall reach its height. 

While the growing intelligence of Europeans is 
fast preparing them for the trouble and anarchy 
which God's Word predicts, it cannot reasonably 
be expected for some years yet. This is 
further in harmony with prophecy, though out 
of harmony with the expectations of many who 
look every day for a declaration of war in Europe, 
which they suppose will be the battle of the 
great day of God Almighty. Even should a 
war or revolution break out in Europe sooner 
than 1905, we could not consider it any portion 
of the severe trouble predicted. At most it 
could only be a forerunner to it, a mere "skirmish" 
as compared with what is to come. Indeed, 
in our judgment, based upon our observations, 
nothing could precipitate the great anarchistic 
trouble upon Europe, which the Scriptures 
predict, sooner than the date named, except 
a famine or some such unusual occurrence 
which would bring the people to feel that they 
have nothing to lose, but all to gain, by a general 
uprising. 

While it was an agreeable surprise to us (in 
view of the contrary sensational accounts so often 
published) to find the situation in Europe 
as we here describe it— in harmony with what 
the Scriptures had led us to expect— yet so 
great is our confidence in the Word of God and 
in the light of present truth shining upon it, 
that we could not have doubted its testimony 
whatever had been the appearances. The date 
of the close of that "battle" is definitely 
marked in Scripture as October, 1914. It is already 
in progress, its beginning dating from 
October, 1874. Thus far it has been chiefly a 



battle of words and a time of organizing forces 
—capital, labor, armies and secret societies. 

Never was there such a general time of banding 
together as at present. Not only are nations 
allying with each other for protection against 
other nations, but the various factions in every 
nation are organizing to protect their several 
interests. But as yet the various factions are 
merely studying the situation, testing the strength 
of their opponents, and seeking to perfect their 
plans and power for the future struggle, which 
many, without the Bible's testimony, seem to 
realize is the inevitable. Others still delude 
themselves, saying, Peace! Peace! when there 
is no possibility of peace until God's Kingdom 
comes into control, compelling the doing of his 
will on earth as it is now done in heaven. 

This feature of the battle must continue with 
varying success to all concerned; the organization 
must be very thorough; and the final 
struggle will be comparatively short, terrible 
and decisive— resulting in general anarchy. In 
many respects the convictions of the world's 
great generals coincide with the predictions of 
God's Word. Then "Woe to the man or nation 
who starts the next war in Europe; for it 
will be a war of extermination." It will be 
abetted not only by national animosities, but 

R1355 : page 23 

also by social grievances, ambitions and animosities, 
and if not brought to an end by the 
establishment of God's Kingdom in the hands 
of his elect and then glorified Church, it would 
exterminate the race.— Matt. 24:22. 

THE CHURCH'S SHARE IN THE BATTLE. 



The Scriptures show also that the battle of 
the great day will begin with the Church of 
God, and that the overthrow of the great nominal 
church systems will precede the overthrow 
of the present civil powers; for the Lord is 
about to shake, not only the earth (the civil 
organization of society), but heaven (the ecclesiastical 
powers) also (Heb. 12:26), to the end 
that great "Babylon," falsely called Christendom 
—Christ's kingdom— may be completely 
destroyed. The great counterfeit kingdom of 
Christ, with all its allied civil and ecclesiastical 
powers, must go down as a great millstone into 
the sea, preparatory to the final establishment 
of the true Kingdom of Christ. Here, as in 



the world at large, the work of preparation is 
going on. The creeds, which for years have 
been reverenced and received without questioning, 
are now called up for inspection; and their 
inconsistencies and lack of Bible foundation is 
being discovered. As a consequence, the clergy, 
whose living and honors and worldly prospects 
in general are all bound up with the systems 
held together by these creeds, are in great 
trouble, and are looking about to see what can 
be done to strengthen the stakes and lengthen 
the cords of so-called Christianity. A general 
union of the various sects is suggested, 
with a simple creed formulated from the various 
points of agreement among them all and 
the ignoring of all other points of doctrine to 
which objection might be made by some. 

This scheme meets with very general approval 
from all the sects, and the trend of their 
efforts is in this direction. This, too, is in harmony 
with prophecy, which shows, not only 
that the various sects of "Protestantism" will 
band together as one, but that there will also 
be a close affiliation with Roman Catholicism. 
These two ends of the ecclesiastical heaven will 
roll together as a scroll (Isa. 34:4), the two 
rolls, Protestantism and Romanism, coming 
closer and closer together as their power over 
the masses of the people decreases. 

This work is already progressing very rapidly: 
church congresses for the consideration of 
various schemes of union are the order of the 
day. All the various branches of Presbyterianism 
are considering the feasibility of union; so 
also of Methodism, Congregationalism, and 
others. When each of these is consolidated, 
their respective denominations will have a greater 
prestige in the world; and when all Protestant 
sects are more firmly united under some one 
name, such as "The Evangelical Alliance," the 
prestige of Protestantism as a whole will be greatly 
augmented, though we think the term Protestantism 
will probably be dropped entirely as a 
concession to the church of Rome, to secure its 
favor. Such an organization is already in existence, 

R1356 : page 23 

and corresponds to what the Revelator 

calls "the Image of the Beast" (of Papacy); but 

this Image has yet to receive life and power to 

speak with authority to the civil powers, which 

authority will be used for the oppression and 

suppression of all that is opposed to them. (Rev. 13:15.) 

All this remains to be accomplished 

before the trouble upon the world can reach its 



crisis; for when men begin to realize more fully 
the united power of ecclesiasticism to oppress 
and fetter free thought and action, and when 
under the searching light of this day they shall 
have discovered the hollowness of its pretensions, 
we can readily see what the results will be- 
viz., a sudden and terrible overthrow, as the 
Scriptures predict. And when its present power 
of superstitious reverence is broken, and its 
authority no longer binds men in subjection to 
the civil powers by the false doctrine of the divine 
right of kings, the fate of the civil powers 
will not long tremble in the balances, and the 
ever-darkening war cloud will burst in all its 
destructive fury. This culmination we do not 
expect, however, before about 1905, as the 
events predicted will require about that time, 
notwithstanding the rapid progress in these directions 
now possible. 

It is written that judgment must begin at the 
house of God (1 Pet. 4:17), and here it has 
begun. Trials for heresy of many of the most 
prominent clerics of the various denominations 

R1356 : page 24 

have raised the questions, What is heresy? and 
what is orthodoxy? and before these questions 
are settled, every creed of Christendom will be 
brought before the bar of the public judgment. 

"A THOUSAND SHALL FALL AT THY SIDE." 



But while judgment has thus begun at the 
nominal house of God and has been in progress 
for some years past, it had a still earlier beginning 
among those consecrated saints who have 
been coming out of Babylon for the last fourteen 
years, and whom the Lord has been graciously 
leading into the knowledge of the deep 
things of his wisdom and grace. It is right 
that these prospective joint-heirs of God's kingdom 
should be fully tested before its establishment, 
before being permitted to enter into their 
reward; and consequently the Lord has permitted 
and will permit our great adversary to 
severely test and try all accounted worthy of 
the light of present truth. Since 1878, the time 
when this judgment was chronologically due to 
begin, the arts and devices of the adversary to 
overthrow the faith of the saints in the very 
fundamental doctrines have been constantly 
multiplying. New theories have been constructed, 
purporting to tell us of wonderful things to 



come, yet lacking the sure foundation of the Word 

of God. What has not appeared? Theosophy, 

Christian Science, Evolution in all its various and 

deceptive forms, Koreshanism and even a modernized 

Buddhism. All these deceptions have 

one common identity; for no matter how different 

they may be in other respects, they agree 

in denying that the Lord Jesus Christ by his 

death on Calvary paid the penalty for Adam's 

transgression, the guilt and penalty of which 

his race has inherited; and they all agree that 

instead of being justified by faith in that ransom-price 

paid for our release from sin and death, 

salvation is to be on some other score. These become 

"strong delusions," because they each 

unite with their errors certain elements of present 

truth. Thus Satan clothes himself in the 

garment of "light." These have been and are 

being brought with force against the consecrated 

and awakened children of God who have 

escaped from Babylon. Their various theories 

concerning things to come are presented in most 

seductive forms, and God permits them to practice 

and prosper for a time. Nay, He even 

makes use of these, sending the strong delusions 

to lead away from the light all such as, after coming 

to a knowledge of the Truth, do not love it 

so as to be willing to die for it— 2 Thes. 2:10,11. 

Such as fall away under these delusions 
are thereby shown to be "condemned" as unworthy 
a share in the Kingdom of the elect- 
none such will escape, for the deceptions 
will be so strong that "if it were possible they 
would deceive the very elect." But the deception 
of the elect, the faithful, will not be possible: 
God knoweth them that are his— who 
meekly abide under the wedding-garment of 
Christ's imputed righteousness and who are daily 
seeking to be the more conformed to the 
image of God's dear Son. All others shall be 
deceived and led astray from the truth, being 
unworthy of it— who have pleasure in error, 
and who have not that pleasure in the truth 
which gladly endures hardness and persecution 
for its sake. If one error does not overcome 
such, the persistent adversary will be permitted 
to bring another and another. He will surely 
find some seeming messenger of light to bear 
to such a deceptive doctrine, to ensnare such as 
reject the favor of God, expressed in the sacrifice 
for sins once for all. 

And let us remember that a preparation for 
thus leaving the foundation and getting ready 
for the deception is laid beforehand, always. 
Instead of the truth leading such to humble 
service of the truth, it leads to pride or to carelessness 



and worldliness, or to that idle curiosity 
which, while willing and curious to know 
the present and the future, never leads to its 
service; or, neglecting the Word of truth, they 
fall into purely human reasoning and, getting a 
theory, start to twist the Scriptures to fit the 
theory; or imbibe some of the worldly ambitions 
to be thought well of, to be considered 
liberal-minded and very charitable to every 
thing, whether it be truth or error, and to every 
one who claims to be a teacher, whether he teach 
the true gospel or a base and deceptive counterfeit. 
All possessing such a self-seeking, compromising 
spirit are not worthy of the truth, 
and must go back into the outer darkness, 

R1356 : page 25 

whether we wish so or not. Some of the many 
deceptions and snares will overcome all such. 
Or should we become listless and indifferent 
in the service of the truth and have consecrated 
time on our hands which we are willing to occupy 
in other ways than as we covenanted to do, 
the adversary will find some convenient method 
of occupying the time and some plausible excuse 
for so doing, wherewith to silence conscience; 
and to such a covenant-breaker will 
soon be sent a strong delusion, because he is 
not a lover (server) of the Truth. 

"GREAT PEACE HAVE THEY WHO LOVE THY 
LAW, AND NOTHING SHALL STUMBLE THEM. 
-PSA. 119:165.- 



There is but one sure, safe course for the 
saints to pursue if they would gain the prize of 
our high calling, and that is a course of fidelity 
and loyalty to the truth with a full determination 
to give no heed to seducing spirits who seek 
either to present to us another gospel, or to attract 
our attention away from the true gospel 
and from the one service of preaching that gospel 
of the Kingdom to which our lives have 
been consecrated, to the study of other themes 
and interests. Our Lord has opened up before 
us the chart of his wonderful plan of the ages 
and has shown us the written specifications, so 
that the things to come might be as surely 
known to us by faith as the things past and 
present are known by history and experience. 
He has thus taken us into his confidence as beloved 
sons and heirs of the kingdom to come. 
He showed us these things because at the time 



of the showing we were justified by faith in the 
precious blood of Christ, and consecrated to 
his service, and because we were meek and had 
faith in his Word and were loyal to him and desired 
to continue faithful. So we were reckoned 
of him as worthy of the truth and eligible to 
the high calling. 

Having received all these favors of knowledge 
and grace, our use of them becomes the test of our 
loyalty and faithfulness. If we are ashamed to 
bear witness to them lest we offend those who 
advocate false doctrine, preferring their favor to 
God's favor; or if we hold the truth lightly, 
with an open ear for every doctrine opposed to 
the doctrine of Christ, and a God-speed for 
every advocate of error as well as of truth; or 
if we make no effort to withstand error, or to 
help the weak, or to spread abroad the knowledge 
of the right ways of the Lord, we are 
surely unfaithful to our trust and must lose it. 

But ye, brethren, who are still walking in the 
light, be faithful to the end. The things to 
come reveal a glorious reward for your faithfulness. 
In this our part of the battle of the great 
day, a thousand will fall at your side and ten 
thousand at your right hand (Psa. 91:7); but 
be not dismayed. Like Gideon's typical band, 
the victory is reserved to the faithful few. Glory 
not in numbers nor in worldly favor. The 
devices of error alone will prosper in that way. 
Glory only in faithfulness to the Master, and 
make haste to accomplish his appointed work 
for this time of sealing the elect, and bear the 
"good tidings of great joy unto all people," 
saint or sinner, wherever you can reach them. 

"SPEAK AS THE ORACLES OF GOD." 



And in attempting to teach others— for all 
who have the truth are commissioned to declare 
it to others— let us remember the Apostle's 
counsel: "If any man speak, let him speak as 
the oracles of God." (1 Pet. 4:11.) To teach 
what we claim to be divine truth, even in the 
humblest way, is to incur great responsibility; 
for in so doing we stand as God's representatives, 
and the Prophet Isaiah (5:20,21) says, 
"Woe unto them that call evil good, and good 
evil; that put darkness for light, and light for 
darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet 
for bitter. Woe unto them that are wise in 
their own eyes and prudent in their own sight." 

Hear again the word of the Lord by the 
Prophet Ezekiel (13:1-23) saying, "Son of 



man. ..say unto them that prophesy out of their 
own hearts, Hear ye the word of the Lord: 

R1357 : page 25 

Thus saith the Lord God, Woe unto the foolish 
prophets that follow their own spirit, and have 
seen nothing.... They have seen vanity and 
lying divination, saying, The Lord saith: and 
the Lord hath not sent them; and they have 
made others to hope that they would confirm 
the word. Have ye not seen a vain vision, and 
have ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas ye 

R1357 : page 26 

say, The Lord saith it? albeit I have not spoken." 

"Therefore, thus saith the Lord God: Because 
ye have spoken vanity and seen lies, 
therefore, behold, I am against you, saith the 
Lord God. And mine hand shall be upon the 
prophets that see vanity, and that divine lies: 
they shall not be in the assembly of the people, 
neither shall they be written in the register of 
the house of Israel; and ye shall know that I 
am the Lord Eternal." 

Let us, therefore, be zealous for the truth, 
in declaring the glorious things to come, according 
to God's revealed plan, but take heed 
that we be not of those "foolish prophets that 
follow their own spirit and have seen nothing." 
No man has any commission from God to be a 
teacher of divine truth who has not first learned 
what the truth is and become fully convinced 
of it so that he can say with confidence, Thus 
saith the Lord! and here are the chapter and 
verse, and thus and so it harmonizes with every 
other chapter and verse of the Word. Let us 
have confidence in the sure word of the Lord 
and with humble boldness declare it and with 
zeal and vigor as loyal soldiers of the cross defend 
it against every opposing device of error. 
"If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles 
of God; if any man minister, let him do 
it as of the ability which God giveth [not of his 
own], that God in all things may be glorified 
through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and 
dominion forever and ever."— 1 Pet. 4:11. 



R1360 : page 26 
THE REFORMER. 



-BY J. G. WHITTIER. 



All grim and soiled and brown with tan, 

I saw a Strong One, in his wrath, 
Smiting the godless shrines of man 
Along his path. 

The Church, beneath her trembling dome, 

Essayed in vain her ghostly charm; 
Wealth shook within his gilded home 
With strange alarm. 

Fraud from his secret chambers fled 

Before the sunlight bursting in; 
Sloth drew her pillow o'er her head 
To drown the din. 

"Spare," Art implored, "yon holy pile; 

That grand, old, time-worn turret spare;" 
Meek Reverence, kneeling in the aisle, 
Cried out, "Forbear!" 

Gray-bearded Use, who, deaf and blind, 
Groped for his old accustomed stone, 
Leaned on his staff, and wept to find 
His seat o'erthrown. 

Young Romance raised his dreamy eyes, 

O'erhung with paly locks of gold— 
"Why smite," he asked in sad surprise, 
"The fair, the old?" 

Yet louder rang the Strong One's stroke, 

Yet nearer flashed his axe's gleam. 
Shuddering and sick of heart I woke, 
As from a dream. 

I looked: aside the dust-cloud rolled— 

The Waster seemed the Builder, too; 
Up springing from the ruined Old 
I saw the New. 

'Twas but the ruin of the bad— 

The wasting of the wrong and ill; 
Whate'er of good the old time had 
Was living still. 

Calm grew the brows of him I feared; 

The frown which awed me passed away, 
And left behind a smile which cheered 
Like breaking day. 

Grown wiser for the lesson given, 



I fear no longer, for I know 
That where the share is deepest driven 
The best fruits grow. 

The outworn rite, the old abuse, 

The pious fraud transparent grown, 
The good held captive in the use 
Of wrong alone,— 

These wait their doom, from that great law 
Which makes the past time serve to-day; 
And fresher life the world shall draw 
From their decay. 

God works in all things: all obey 

His first propulsion from the night. 
Wake thou and watch!— the world is gray 
With morning light. 



R1357 : page 27 
INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. 



SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



OVERCOME WITH WINE. 



LESSON III., ISA. 28:1-13, JANUARY 17. 

Golden Text— "Judgment also will I lay to the line, 
and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall 
sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow 
the hiding place."— Verse 17. 

This portion of Isaiah's prophecy is set forth 
in the International Lesson series as the temperance 
lesson for this quarter: and it certainly 
is a very strong one. But while we carefully 
observe this, let us not forget its prophetic 
character; for a prophecy must be received as 
a prophecy, and not merely as a collection of 
moral or religious precepts to be indiscriminately 
applied. 

Our first observation in studying any prophecy 
should be as to the time when its predictions 
will be realized, and when, therefore, its warnings 
should be specially heeded. The division 



into chapters and verses, it will be remembered, 
is merely an arbitrary arrangement in modern 
times for the sake of convenience. Glancing 
back to chapters 26:21 and 27:1 we see that 
a definite time is marked— "In that day." 
What day? In the day when "the Lord cometh 
out of his place to punish the inhabitants 
of the earth for their iniquity" (26:21); the 
same day which Daniel foretold, saying, "And 
there shall be a time of trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation, even to that same 
time" (Dan. 12:1); the day of which Malachi 
said, "Behold, the day cometh that shall burn 
as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that 
do wickedly, shall be stubble" (Mai. 4:1); 
and again, "Who may abide the day of his 
[Christ's] coming? and who shall stand when 
he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire 
and like fuller's soap." (Mai. 3:2.) Ah! yes: 
it is the harvest time of the Gospel age, the 
day of reckoning, the very day in which we are 
now living— from 1874 to 1914— the latter part 
of which is to witness the great conflict foretold, 
and the preparations for which are now 
going on in the world. The wheat and tares 
of nominal Christendom are now being separated, 
and the latter bound in bundles— tied up 
tightly in great organizations— preparatory to 
the symbolic burning or trouble of the closing 
days of this age and the ushering in of the 
Millennial day. 

Among the things mentioned concerning that 
day, the Prophet (28:1) foretells woe to the 
crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim. 
As the language is symbolic, we next inquire, 
Who is referred to under the name Ephraim? 
It is the very same class mentioned in our last 
lesson (Isa. 26:5) as the "lofty city" that the 
Lord is going to bring down to the dust— that 
great city, "Babylon" (Rev. 16:19; 17:5; 
18:2), which now proudly calls itself Christendom 
(Christ's kingdom). The Prophet in succeeding 
chapters applies to it several symbolic 
names. The name Ephraim here used signifies 
fruitful, and is symbolically applied to the great 
nominal Christian system, both Papal and Protestant. 
It has a great show of fruitfulness in 
number, influence, power and wealth; but this 
is not the kind of fruitfulness for which the 
Lord is looking. This he calls "hasty fruit" 
—sour and bitter, like that forced before the 
summer.— Verse 4. 

With this introduction, let us briefly view the 
lessons of this chapter:— 

Verse 1. "Woe to the crown of pride"— the 
worldly prosperity— the boast of the great 



Nominal Church. Her glory in numbers and 
wealth and power is a fading flower. Who can 
not see it, in this day when her position is disputed 
and her doctrines and authority are boldly 
called in question? Her "beauty" crown 
the "fat valleys" of worldly-mindedness where 
many are overcome, intoxicated, with the spirit 
of the world. The trouble or "woe" on these 
systems is beginning to be experienced, and will 
be continually increasing. 

Verse 2. The "mighty and strong one" is 
the Lord, whose instrument is the Truth, which, 
"like a flood of mighty waters" (Water is a 
symbol of truth), is destined to cover the earth 
—"The knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
earth as the waters cover the sea." It will 
come as "a tempest of hail and a destroying 
storm." Hail represents truth put in a hard, 
forcible way; and "a tempest of hail" indicates 
the destructive and forceful method which the 
Lord will adopt. Thus the Truth will batter 
down the old and long-established errors upon 
which the great systems of "Christendom" 
have been built. The Lord has refrained from 
the separating of the wheat and tares until this 
time of harvest; now he will separate them, 
glorify the "wheat," and cast the "tares" into 
the fiery furnace of a time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation (Matt. 13:30). 
Thus he will do "his work, his strange work, 

R1357 : page 28 

and bring to pass his act, his strange act" 
(verse 21)— viz.: the bringing down to the 
earth and laying low of great Babylon- 
Christendom. 

Verse 3. "The crown of pride"— the 
wealth and fame and prestige of these great 
systems, together with all who have been intoxicated 
with their worldly spirit shall be 
"trodden under foot"— humbled in the dust. 
Compare Rev. 18:2,5. 

Verse 4. In rejecting the Lord's plans and 
adopting plans of their own, the various nominal 
churches have had great fruitfulness in 
numbers, etc., but the fruit is not good. It is 
"hasty," immature fruit. Thousands of such 
have been brought into the various nominal 
churches whose hearts remained unchanged, 
and hypocrites of every shade also find a home 
there, until, in the language of Inspiration, 
"Babylon has become the hold of every foul 
spirit and a cage of every unclean and hateful 
bird."-Rev. 18:2. 

Verse 5. Unto "the residue of his people" 



—those who are truly consecrated to the Lord 
and who follow his leading, who love and obey 
his truth— the Lord will be for a crown of glory 
and a diadem of beauty. They are his betrothed 
and will shortly be exalted as his bride 
and joint-heir. To all such who are still in 
Babylon as wheat in the midst of tares he says, 
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of 
her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

Verse 6. The Lord will give judgment, discretion, 
to those who endeavor to discern between 
truth and error, and who bring all things 
both new and old to the test of his Word. 
His strength will also be given to those who 
battle against the forces of error— who endeavor 
to "turn the battle at the gate." The gates 
of ancient cities were generally important places 
in the defence of the city and there courts of 
justice, public assemblies, etc., were often held. 
To turn the battle at the gate would, therefore, 
in symbolic language, signify public effort to 
withstand error with the truth, even in the 
strongholds of error. For this God will and 
now does give strength to his people, so that 
one may "chase a thousand, and two put ten 
thousand to flight." 

Verse 7. "But they also"— to whom the 
people look as leaders and teachers, viz.: the 
clergy— "have erred through wine, and through 
strong drink are out of the way: the priest and 
the prophet have erred through strong drink, 
they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of 
the way through strong drink, they err in vision, 
they stumble in judgment." Here, in 
harmony with the symbolic character of the 
prophecy, we see that the wine and strong drink 
are also symbols— symbols, too, of something 
bad, something deceptive in its character and 

R1358 : page 28 

intoxicating in its effects— hence, indirectly, a 

rebuke to the evil thing itself. But as a symbol 

what does it mean? It is a forceful symbol 

of the spirit of the world, the love of the world 

and of the world's approval and emoluments, 

with which spirit all the systems of Christendom 

are intoxicated, especially the "priests and 

the prophets"— the leaders and teachers in 

Babylon. Therefore do they "err in vision 

and stumble in judgment." It is for this 

very reason that they cannot understand this 

prophecy which we are now considering. They 

are so infatuated with the greatness of their antichristian 

systems that in their pride they cannot 



see its application to them; and in their 
blindness they set forth these verses as a lesson 
on temperance in the use of intoxicating beverages, 
taking no notice of the time of its application 
—"In that day" (verse 5)— nor to its 
symbolic and prophetic character. Truly, said 
the Prophet, "they err in vision, they stumble 
in judgment." 

Verse 8. "For all tables are full of vomit 
and filthiness, so that there is no place clean." 
"Here is a forceful statement of the condition 
of affairs of which we are all witnesses today. 
The Calvinistic tables are all so polluted 
with the rejected dogmas swallowed in the past, 
that people are now turning away in disgust 
from the tables around which they formerly 
gathered so complacently. The Arminian tables 
are almost equally polluted, so that Methodists 
are beginning to discuss the propriety of 
absolving the laity from all doctrinal tests, lest 
they lose a large proportion of their membership. 
And truly, look where we will, through 
all the sects of "Christendom," as the Prophet 
says, "There is no place clean"— no table fit 
for God's intelligent children. But God is 
providing "meat in due season" now for all 
who hunger and thirst after righteousness, outside 
of Babylon. "My table thou hast furnished 
in the presence of mine enemies," the true 
Church may still sing. 

Verse 9. Here the Prophet raises the question, 
"Whom shall he [the Lord] teach knowledge? 
and whom shall he make to understand 
doctrine?" In other words, Who among all 
this people, who are in this miserable plight, are 
worthy of the truth which is now due to the 
faithful? Will he give it to the drunken? or 
will he give it to those who are satisfied with 
their polluted tables? or to those who have no 
hungering and thirsting after truth prompting 
them to seek it? No, the Prophet says he will 
give it "to them that are weaned from the milk 

R1358 : page 29 

and drawn from the breasts"— to them who are 
reaching out after more knowledge of God and 
of his gracious plans. Blessed are the hungry 
who desire more and stronger spiritual food 
that they may grow thereby, for they shall be 
filled. (Matt. 5:6.) Milk is for babes, but 
strong meat is for those who have passed the infant 
stage and who are no longer babes in 
Christ. -Heb. 5:14. 

Verses 10-12 show that it will take a great 
many more lessons to help those in Babylon 



who are not yet ready to be helped; for he will 
not longer speak to them through the old 
tongues— the intoxicated "priests and prophets" 
to whom they still look for leading. But 
"by men of strange lips and with another 
tongue will he speak to his people." (R.V.) 
He will raise up other teachers— teachers not 
ordained of men, but of God— whom therefore 
they will not incline to recognize or heed; because 
they will not "prophesy smooth things," 
saying, Peace! peace! when there is no peace." 
And when these (verse 12) point out the true 
rest and refreshment of divine truth, they will 
not hear. 

Verse 13 is a solemn warning of the responsibility 
of such; showing that when they are 
ensnared in the traps of error, and thereby fail 
of the reward of faithfulness to the truth, it will 
have been due to their own improper condition 
of heart, and not to any lack of faithfulness on 
God's part. 

In view of this solemn averment of responsibility 
on the part of those who hear but will 
not heed the truth, and who are too much intoxicated 
with the spirit of the world to discern 
it, how solemn are the words of rebuke that 
follow. This whole prophecy is one which 
every child of God who desires to know the 
truth and to escape the snares of error would do 
well to study with reverent humility and lay its 
solemn warnings and precepts well to heart. 

But let all such first make sure that they are 
not in the least intoxicated with the wine or 
strong drink of Babylon, but that in simplicity 
of heart they desire the strong meat of truth, 
that they may grow thereby. 

R1358 : page 29 

HEZEKIAH'S PRAYER AND DELIVERANCE. 



LESSON IV., ISA. 37:14-21,33-38, JANUARY 24. 

Golden Text— "The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth 
and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:17. 

This lesson is a scrap of history incidentally 
interwoven with Isaiah's prophecy. In reading 
it we should bear in mind that Israel was 
God's peculiar people and under his special protection 
and care, as it is written, "Ye are the 
children of the Lord your God. ...Thou art 
a holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the 
Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people 



unto himself, above all the nations that are upon 
the earth." "The Lord hath chosen Jacob 
unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure." 
-Deut. 14:2; Psa. 135:4. 

We should remember also that God himself 
was King of Israel, and that Hezekiah and 
others were his representatives on the throne, 
as it is written, "Then Solomon sat on the 
throne of the Lord as king, instead of David his 
father." (1 Chron. 29:23.) While God thus 
ruled in Israel he permitted all the other nations 
to pursue their own course and follow their own 
inclinations except when they interfered with 
his plans for the government of Israel. When 
Israel became refractory and disobedient he often 
chastised them by permitting the other nations 
to annoy them and take them into captivity, 
but as long as they were obedient to the 
Lord they had prosperity. 

All the promises made to Israel were promises 
of temporal good; no mention was made to them 
of the heavenly hopes set before the Gospel 
Church. These are peculiar to the gospel dispensation 
which had its beginning in our Lord's 
ministry and at Pentecost, and which closes 
with the dawn of the Millennium. The promises 
made to Israel were that they should have 
the land of Canaan "for an everlasting possession" 
(Gen. 17:8), and that, if they were 
willing and obedient subjects of God, their 
King, they should "eat the good of the land."— 
Isa. 1:19. 

But they were also told that if they were disobedient 
and walked contrary to the Lord, he 
also would walk contrary to them, and bring 
upon them distress and trouble. See Lev. 26, 
and observe in their history how God dealt 
with them as he said he would do. So long as 
Israel was under the divine rulership and care 
no evil could befall them except by divine permission 
for their correction and discipline, as 
it is written, "Shall there be evil in a city [a 
city of Israel], and the Lord hath not done it 
[or brought it upon them]?" And they were 
generally forewarned of such impending evils 
or calamities and given the alternative of repentance; 
for, said the Prophet (Amos 3:7), 
"Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he revealeth 
his secret unto his servants the prophets." 

In reading Hezekiah' s prayer for the deliverance 
of Israel from the Assyrian invaders, and 
the Lord's answer to that prayer in the destruction 
of the enemy, we are not to consider that 
a precedent is thus established, whereby other 
nations may claim God's help in overcoming 
their national enemies; for none of the other 



nations has ever been recognized as God's 

R1358 : page 30 

kingdom, nor has Israel, since the rejection of 
the Messiah. Since that time, God has had no 
kingdom set up in the world, but has permitted 
the Gentile kingdoms to have full sway until 
the time appointed for the establishment of his 
own glorious kingdom in the hands of his 
Anointed— our Lord Jesus and his Church. 
And when that time arrives, which now is not 
far distant, all these Gentile kingdoms must be 
destroyed. 

The only sense in which the kingdom of God 
now is or has been in the world since the beginning 
of the Gospel age is in its embryo or 
incipient stage, and it is composed of the 
prospective heirs of that kingdom. In this 
sense all through the Gospel age the kingdom 
of heaven has suffered violence and the violent 
have taken it by force (Matt. 11:12). Suffering 
and ignominy, and often martyrdom, have 
been its lot; but the glory is to follow in due time. 

This scrap of Israel's history which the Prophet 
here narrates was given, not merely to point 
a moral lesson, but to show, in connection with 
other similar items recorded by other prophets 
and historians, how God actually did deal with 
them as a people according to his promises and 
his threatenings. However, we may take all 
the good suggestions we can draw out of the 
narrative. Thus, for instance, we may admire 
Hezekiah's sterling character, particularly in 
view of the wicked example of his father who 
reigned before him; for instead of heedlessly 
following in his unrighteous ways, as most sons 
of unrighteous parents incline to do, Hezekiah 
resolved to do differently, and became a great 
reformer in his day; and the narrative of this 
lesson shows his reliance upon God's promises 
in time of trouble, and how God honored his 
prayer and fulfilled those promises in the deliverance 
of Israel from a great impending 
calamity. 

The golden text— "The righteous cry, and 
the Lord heareth and delivereth them," is applicable 
to all who fulfill its conditions. 

R1358 : page 30 

WHO HATH BELIEVED OUR REPORT. 



LESSON V., JANUARY 31, ISAIAH 53:1-12. 



Golden Text— "The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity 
of us all."— Isa. 53:6. 

R1359 : page 30 

In the midst of his vivid and striking prophecies 
of the Millennial glory of Christ's Kingdom 
in the earth, and of the overthrow and 
destruction of Great Babylon preparatory thereto, 
the Prophet here predicts, and particularly 
describes, that one great event which was to be 
the foundation upon which the whole superstructure 
of the plan of salvation and the hope 
of future glory should rest. 

That one central or pivotal truth, is briefly 
expressed in our golden text— "The Lord hath 
laid on him the iniquity of us all." The one 
referred to we readily recognize by the prophetic 
description to be the Christ of the New 
Testament history. The prophecy and the 
fulfilment both stand out prominently on the 
pages of divinely-attested truth. But notwithstanding 
the importance of this great truth 
to the whole human race, the Prophet, speaking 
from a then future standpoint when the fulfilment 
of his prophecy had been accomplished, 
inquires, "Who hath believed our report? and 
to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?"— 
thus calling attention to that which we now 
realize, viz. that only a very few understand 
or appreciate the good tidings. And when we 
remember that faith in this message is necessary 
to the receiving of its benefits, it is disheartening, 
unless we know some of the further 
steps of the divine plan, to realize how few 
believe it. Daily there are thousands and tens 
of thousands, in both civilized and uncivilized 
lands, going down into the grave without faith, 
and without the least ray of hope from this 
precious truth. In view of these things, many 
seem to think that God's arm is shortened that 
it cannot save— except the very few who now 
believe. 

But let such observe the second inquiry of 
the Prophet— "And to whom is the arm of 
Jehovah revealed?"— intimating that his arm, 
his power, has not yet been revealed to many 
that they might believe. But his arm, his 
power, will be fully revealed to all in due time 
in the final accomplishment of his plan. But that 
plan is one which requires ages for its complete 
accomplishment; hence the "arm of Jehovah" 
is revealed now, to those only who can receive 
the revelation of it by faith. The household of 
faith may therefore comfort themselves with 



this blessed assurance, that "God our Savior 
will have all men to be saved [out of the 
Adamic death], and to come to the knowledge 
of the truth; for there is one God, and one 
mediator between God and men, the man 
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. 2:3-6.) 
To this end, a resurrection, "both of 
the just and the unjust," is promised: "The 
hour is coming when all that are in the graves 
shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and 
shall come forth." (Acts 24:15; John 5:28,29.) 
They will come forth in due time to have 
the truth fully testified to them, and to profit 
by it; and if they are obedient to it, they may 
go on unto perfection and live forever. 

Verses 2 and 3 describe "the man Christ 
Jesus," saying, "For he shall grow up before 

R1359 : page 31 

him [Jehovah] as a tender plant, and as a root 
out of a dry ground." All humanity under 
the condemnation of death was reckoned dead; 
and this one alone, like a new, fresh, living 
root out of the barren soil, grew up from infancy 
to manhood. But, in the estimation of 
men, he had no desirable form nor comeliness, 
nor beauty. His glorious perfection made manifest 
their deformity; and when he declared 
himself the Messiah and the King of the Jews, 
they had no desire for such a king. They were 
looking for a king like Alexander the Great, 
or like the Caesars; one who, with military 
skill and carnal weapons, should deliver them 
from the Roman yoke. They had no faith 
therefore in the meek Nazarene and his claims: 
they saw no beauty such as they were looking 
for in him. Consequently, he was despised and 
rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted 
with grief. He was despised, and 
men esteemed him not. And because men 
lightly esteemed and even despised him, "he 
hid as it were his face from them." [See 
margin. Because of their unbelief and hardness 
of heart, they therefore lost the benefit of 
his wisdom and teaching and many of his mighty 
works.-Rom. 1 1:20; Matt. 13:58.] 

Verse 4. "Surely he hath borne our griefs 
and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem 
him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted." 
As a perfect man, apart from the condemned 
race, and having no sin nor any cause of death 
in him, he voluntarily bore our griefs and carried 
our sorrows. Though he was rich before 
he became a man, and though as a man he had 



all the talent necessary to secure earthly riches, 
he voluntarily became poor and remained poor 
—so poor that often he had not where to lay 
his head. Thus he was able to sympathize 
with the poor of this world. And though as a 
perfect man, without sin, and consequently 
without the consequences of sin, he had perfect 
health, yet during the three years of his ministry 
he was continually imparting his vitality- 
vigor, strength— to the suffering ones around 
him, thus impoverishing himself and so being 
"touched with a feeling of our infirmities," 
as it is written: "And the whole multitude 
sought to touch him, for there went virtue 
[vitality, strength] out of him, and healed them 
all;" "And Jesus said, Somebody hath touched 
me, for I perceive that virtue [vitality, strength] 
is gone out of me." He felt the consequent 
weakness.-See Luke 6:17-19; 8:46-48; 
Mark 5:30-34. 

But while he thus, from exhausting labor and 
daily sacrifice for the good of others, endured 
weakness and weariness, so that at the end of 
the three and a half years of his ministry he 
was unable to bear his cross to the place of 
execution (Luke 23:26), men did not recognize 
the real cause of his physical weakness, but 
esteemed him stricken and smitten of God, as 
though he were a sinner like other men, and 
therefore, like them, subject to physical decline 
and death. But no, "In him was no sin:" he 
was generously and sympathetically bearing our 
griefs and carrying our sorrows, while we ungratefully 
"esteemed him smitten of God and 
afflicted." 

Verse 5. "But he was wounded for our 
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: 
the chastisement of our peace was upon him; 
and with his stripes we are healed." The 
dreadful tragedy of Calvary was not for his own 
sins, but for ours, as also saith the Prophet 
Daniel (9:26)-"Messiah shall be cut off, but 
not for himself." "He suffered for sins," says 
Peter, "being put to death in the flesh, the just 
for the unjust, that he might bring us to God." 
(1 Pet. 3:18.) And Isaiah continues— verses 6 and 7 
—"All we like sheep have gone astray; 
we have turned, every one, to his own way; 
and the Lord [Jehovah] hath laid on him the 
iniquity of us all." And meekly and willingly 
he bore our burden; for, though "he was oppressed 
and he was afflicted, yet he opened not 
his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is 
dumb, so he openeth not his mouth." See 
Mark 15:3-5. 



Verse 8. "Through oppression and through 
judicial punishment [by means of false accusations 
which secured a legal condemnation to 
death] was he taken away; but his generation 
—who shall declare it? for he was cut off out 
of the land of the living: for the transgression 
of my people was he stricken." 

"His generation." This expression may be 
understood in three ways truthfully, and hence 
properly. (1) Who of his day and generation 
would admit the facts?— only the very few who 
became his despised followers. (2) How few 
knew of his generation, of his divine lineage! 
how few believed or confessed that the despised, 
rejected and crucified one was the only begotten 
son of God, made flesh for the very 
purpose of thus giving himself a ransom for all! 
(3) But "his generation" is specially to be 
understood (see following verses) in the sense 
of his posterity. Who would suspect that he 
who was thus cut off childless would ever become 
"The Everlasting Father?" (Isa. 9:6.) 
Yet "he shall see his seed" (verse 10) in Jehovah's 
appointed season. At his second advent, times 
of restitution shall come (Acts 3:19-21), when, 
as the great Life-giver [father], he will give 
life and health and strength to all of Adam's 

R1359 : page 32 

race who will accept them under the conditions 

of the New Covenant. It is a gross mistake, 

however, to suppose that the Gospel 

Church is the "seed" of Christ, whether 

reckoned by the millions (including the black, 

the speckled and the ring-streaked, a worldly 

class, as Bishop Foster describes them) or merely 

the "little flock" of consecrated and faithful 

believers. The Church is never spoken of as 

the children of our Lord Jesus, either in symbol, 

or in type, or in literal statement. The 

Church "he is not ashamed to call his brethren." 

The bride, the Lamb's wife and joint-heir, 

are the honorable titles given to the little 

flock whom the Father, Jehovah, draws to 

Christ, and gives to him, as it is written, "Behold 

I and the children [of God] which God 

hath given me." (Heb. 2:11-13.) Our Lord 

Jesus enunciated this clearly when he said, "I 

ascend unto my Father and your Father, and 

to my God and your God." (John 20:17.) 

But after the "little flock" of the Gospel age 

has become the Bride and joint-heir of the 

Lamb, the glorified body of Christ, the new dispensation, 

the Millennium, will open, when the 

glorified Christ— Head and body— will become 



the Life-giver or Father to the world in general, 
restoring to them the human life and privileges 
lost in Adam but redeemed for them by the 
sacrifice of Christ's human life. That will be 
the time in which the glorified Christ in kingdom 
power will draw ALL MEN toward righteousness 
and life, even as the Father now draws 
the elect truth-hungry ones to Christ— as it is 
written, "No man can come unto me unless the 
Father which sent me draw him. And he 
[thus drawn by the truth— by the promises of 
God] that cometh unto me [Christ] I will in no 
wise reject." But as many who are now drawn 
or called to Christ by the Father fail to profit 
by the drawings of the truth, and hence to 
make their calling and election sure, so during 
the Millennial age, when Christ shall bring the 
whole world to a knowledge of the truth and 

R1360 : page 32 

thus influence or draw ALL MEN toward righteousness, 

it will still be for each to decide the 

matter for himself. Such as accept the gracious 

offer will receive everlasting life from Christ 

and his glorified Church, and will thus become 

the children of the Christ, and the Christ becomes 

to such the Everlasting Father. Thus 

He shall see his seed [his children] and shall 

prolong their days everlastingly; and thus the 

pleasure [will, plan] of Jehovah shall prosper 

in his hand.— Verse 10. 

Verse 9. "And they made his grave with 
the condemned [Heb. rasha, condemned or 
guilty— i.e., with the race of condemned sinners], 
and with the rich in his death [in the 
tomb of the rich man— Joseph of Arimathea— 
Matt. 27:57-60], although he had done no 
violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth." 

Verse 10 declares that all this violence that 
befell our blessed Lord and Redeemer was in 
exact accordance with the plan of Jehovah, 
who so loved the world that he gave his only 
begotten Son to redeem their life from destruction 
by the sacrifice of his own— "Although 
he had done no violence, neither was any 
deceit in his mouth [and therefore no cause of 
death in him], yet it pleased the Lord [Jehovah] 
to bruise him: He hath put him to grief." 

Verse 11. "He shall see [the fruits] of the 
travail of his soul [in the grand restitution of 
the redeemed race] and shall be satisfied." 
And here the Prophet interjects the statement 
that it was our Lord's knowledge of the divine 
plan or purpose to redeem and then restore the 
fallen race that enabled him to thus carry out 



that purpose in the sacrifice of himself, thus 
justifying many by bearing the penalty due for 
their iniquities— "By his knowledge shall my 
righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear 
their iniquities." 

Verse 12 points to the great personal exaltation 
of our blessed Lord Jesus, because of his 
obedience to the Father's will, even unto 
death.— "Therefore will I [Jehovah] divide 
him a portion with the Great [rab— the Lord, 
the Chief, the Master of the whole universe, 
Jehovah himself]." Because of his faithfulness 
he was highly exalted, made a partaker of the 
divine nature, and was associated with his Father 
in his throne. (See Phil. 2:9; Rev. 3:21.) And 
not only so, but he has been permitted of God to 
carry out another feature of his plan in the 
selection, training and final exaltation of a 
faithful few from among the redeemed race to 
share his great reward— to become likewise 
"partakers of the divine nature" (2 Pet. 1 :4) 
and "joint-heirs" of his kingdom and glory 
(Rom. 8:17; Luke 12:32)-Thus "he shall 
divide the spoil [the great reward] with the 
strong"— the overcomers. In accordance with 
this privilege granted him by the Father he left 
the gracious promise on record for us— "To 
him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me 
in my throne, even as I overcame and am set down 
with my Father in his throne."— Rev. 3:21. 



page 34 

SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



DO YOU DESIRE THE FURTHER SEMI-MONTHLY 
VISITS OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER? 



We send out sample copies of this issue of the 
TOWER to many who were on our Lists last 
year, but from whom we have heard no report 
as to this year. Let us know whether or not you 
desire its visits to continue. We shall, of course, 
be glad not only to have all the old names continued 
but to have large numbers added— your 
friends and neighbors— whoever you may think 
would be benefited by the "meat in due season" 
which as the Master's servants we set forth. 

If you do not wish to subscribe for your 
friends, and think that a sample copy might 
benefit them, send us their addresses at once. 

The mark on the address tag of your paper 
shows the date to which you have paid your 
subscription. If you have paid for this year it 
should read Dec. 92. The price is not high: 
one dollar a year, or less than two cents a week. 
To those who through accident or misfortune 
cannot pay, yet desire it enough to say so, it 
will be sent free. It is not, therefore, a question 
of whether you can afford it, but rather 
whether you can afford to do without it. 

R1361 : page 34 

WHAT THE "GOOD HOPES" CAN DO. 



We use this name, "Good Hopes," in referring 
to the conditional promises suggested in the 
November '91 TOWER. 

We have reckoned up the number of these 
"Hopes" and are surprised at two things: first 
at their fewness and second that the general 
average runs so high as it does. We do not 
mention this matter by way of chiding those 
who have not responded, but by way of telling 
those who did send them what their "Hopes" 
are doing in the work of spreading the Truths 
we all love to serve. While we know and teach 
that there is no law but Love for the new creatures 
in Christ, yet we believe that the great 
Apostle's instruction is as sound upon this subject 



(1 Cor. 12:2) as upon others; and while 

we believe that every one who has the spirit 

thus to serve the Master, even if it be but with a 

"poor widow's two mites," will be blessed according 

to the Master's promise, yet it is not 

for us to insist or to urge the subject upon 

any. Let each act according to his own judgment 

of the Lord's mind and the willingness 

of his own heart upon this as upon every other 

subject. We have mentioned the subject merely 

by way of reminding you and indicating 

how such a course might be used to the Master's 

glory. Each is steward of his own time, money 

and influence consecrated to him who bought 

us with his own precious blood. 

But as to what the "Hopes" are doing: We 
received in all ninety-eight, which promised, if 
possible, a total of $1,946.08— the amounts 
ranging all the way from five cents to five dollars 
per week. 

We have concluded that on the strength of this 
we can safely arrange to send out one hundred 
thousand sample copies of the WATCH TOWER; 
for if some shall find themselves unable to do all 
that their "Good Hopes" suggested, others will 
probably be able to do more, and have declared 
that they will do more if possible. 

It occurs to us that the present issue and the 
previous issue are specially suitable for new 
readers; so instead of waiting for the payments 
all to come in, we will begin at once. Who 
knows how many out of this one hundred thousand 
may find honest, truth-hungry hearts, and 
bring light and joy and peace— and a newness 
of Christian life. We cannot, of course, expect 
that many will bring forth such a fruitage; but 
if only one in a thousand, it means a hundred 
of God's dear children set free from bondage 
of ignorance into the light of present truth. 

Some of us know how to sympathize with the 
"lost sheep" who, in all the different churches, 
are seeking the true Shepherd and the green 
pastures and quiet waters of refreshment to 
which he now desires to lead all who are really 
his sheep. We doubt not that every one of 
those who have sent in "Good Hopes" was 
once among those grossly blinded by human 
tradition. They feel thankful to God for the 
truth, and to their fellows who as God's servants 
put the truth— the food— before them in the 
shape of TOWERS, TRACTS and DAWNS, etc. 
Five dollars that will go into this 100,000 sample 
copies came from the sister of an attorney at 
law who was turned from Infidelity to the service 
of Christ, by the reading of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. I. The sister sent this $5.00 as a 



thank-offering to the Lord and to help forward 
a cause which had the power of truth sufficient 
to convert an unbelieving lawyer. The next 
day brought a letter and a donation of ten dollars 
for the same purposes from the lawyer himself. 
Let us thank God for the light, dearly beloved, 
and let us do all that we can in every 
way possible, that seems to us a good way, to 
obey our Master's words: "Let your light so 
shine that men, seeing your good works, may 
glorify your Father in heaven." 



page 34 

FURTHER READING MATTER FOR YOUR INTERESTED FRIENDS. 

WHILE A SAMPLE COPY OF THE WATCH TOWER OR ONE OF 
OUR FREE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS MAY START A HUNGRY 
SOUL TO INVESTIGATING, THEY CAN DO LITTLE MORE. TELL SUCH 
THAT THE HELP THEY NEED FOR UNDERSTANDING THE BIBLE IN 
THE LIGHT OF PRESENT TRUTH IS MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. 
-"THE PLAN OF THE AGES"-OVER 160,000 ALREADY PUBLISHED 
-350 PAGES. TELL THEM OF THE BENEFIT IT HAS BEEN TO 
YOUR OWN HEART AND HEAD, AND HOW YOU VALUE IT, AND THAT 
IT IS ONLY 25 CENTS POST PAID-OR LOANED TO THOSE TOO POOR 
TO BUY-AND URGE THEM TO SEND FOR IT AT ONCE. 



R1362:page35 

VOL. XIII. FEBRUARY 1, 1892. NO. 3. 

"UNTIL THE LORD COME." 



"Therefore, judge nothing before the time, until the 
Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things 
of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the 
hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God." 
-1 Cor. 4:5. 

The teaching of the Apostle here is parallel 
to that of our Lord in his parable of the wheat 
and the tares. (Matt. 13:24-30,36-43.) When 
the zealous servant in the parable inquired, 
"Wilt thou then that we go and gather them 
[the tares] up?" the Lord answered, "Nay; 
lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also 
the wheat with them. Let both grow together 
until the harvest: and in the time of 
harvest I will say to the reapers,* Gather ye together 
first the tares, and bind them in bundles 



to burn them: but gather the wheat into my 
barn." 

All through the Gospel age the wheat and 
tares have grown together, and only the Lord, 
who could read the hearts, could distinguish 
between them with unerring precision. But both 
the Lord and the Apostle, in the above Scriptures, 
indicate a difference in the time of harvest, 
and show that it will then be possible for 
the faithful saints to judge also. With this 
thought in view, they are told to "judge nothing 
before the time, until the Lord come." 

And now the day of the Lord has come: 
we are now living in the days of the parousia 
(presence) of the Son of Man— "the Lord 
of the harvest," "having on his head a golden 
crown [divine authority] and in his hand [in 
his power] a sharp sickle"— the sickle of present 
truth, the clear unfolding of the "Word 
of God [which] is quick and powerful, and 
sharper than any two-edged sword. ..and is 
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the 
heart." (Heb. 4:12; Matt. 9:38; Rev. 14:14.) 
And he is sending forth such "laborers," 
"angels" or "messengers" into this harvest as 
he sent forth into the harvest of the Jewish age, 
viz., his consecrated and faithful disciples, 
bearing the harvest message— the now fully revealed 
plan of God and its appointed times and 
seasons. 

The truth thus sent forth is doing its appointed 
work. Like a magnet, it gathers to itself all 
who have an affinity for it. Thrust it in wherever 
you will, it will invariably accomplish its 
work of finding the loyal and faithful. And we 
can readily judge, from this affinity for the magnet, 
who are at heart true and loyal and faithful 
to the Lord. "My sheep hear my voice," 
said the Master, "and I know them, and they 
follow me;. ..for they know my voice [they 
are able to recognize his voice of truth]: and 
a stranger they will not follow, but will flee 
from him; for they know not the voice of 
strangers." (John 10:27,4,5.) Again he says, 
"He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my 
words, hath one that judgeth him: the word 
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in 
the last day. "-John 12:48. 



*"The reapers are the messengers" who bear the 
truth, the indirect influence of which binds the tares. 
See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., Chap. VI. 

R1362:page36 



Thus, in this last day, the harvest of the age, 
this day of the Lord's invisible presence in the 
world, the truth concerning the divine plan, 
which he has been revealing since 1874, and 
which is now being widely testified for the sealing 
of the elect, is doing its separating work; 
and the saints, who understand the present situation 
and watch with interest the progress of 
the harvest work, can see clearly where the lines 
of judgment are drawn between the faithful and 
the unfaithful. And often with astonishment 
they mark the divisions which the truth makes 
when some prominent church-member, whom 
they had always judged to be faithful and true, 
manifests no affinity for the truth, but turns 
from it and hugs the error more tightly than 
ever; or, when some other one, touched by the 
power of the truth, awakes to earnest self-sacrifice 
in its service. 

"Judge nothing before the time." How 
could we have judged before this time as to 
whose hearts were loyal and true? But now, 
in this day of the Lord's presence, when the 
magnet of divine truth makes manifest those 
who have and those who have not an affinity 
for it— those who refuse to recognize the voice 
of the "Good Shepherd" and will not follow 
his leading, and who flee not from the voice of 
strangers, but hearken to and follow them— it 
becomes our duty, as well as our privilege, to 
judge who is on the Lord's side and who is 
against him; for, says the Master, "He that is 
not with me is against me; and he that gathereth 
not with me scattereth abroad."— 
Matt. 12:30. 

"Judge nothing before the time, until the 
Lord come;" but then let your spiritual senses 
be exercised in observing and marking the heretofore 
hidden things which the truth, in its 
effects, is bringing to light. See how it is 
bringing to light the hitherto covered deformities 
of the various creeds. Where is the intelligent 
Calvinist to-day who would not like to 
bury his creed sea deep, and forever hush this 
wrangle that has been exposing its deformity 
for a few years past? And where is the intelligent 
Armenian that is not trembling lest his 
turn may come next? Everything is being 
dragged to the light, whether men are willing 
or not; for every hidden thing must be revealed. 
And not only the hidden things of creeds and 
systems of error and iniquity, but also the hidden 
things of individual character; "for there 
is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, 
neither hid that shall not be known. Therefore, 



whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness 
shall be heard in the light; and that which ye 
have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed 
upon the housetops." (Luke 12:2,3.) 
Ah! it is the day of reckoning with the Church, 
and "the Lord hath a controversy with his 
people." And this controversy, this reckoning, 
is not merely with the Church-nominal in 
its great sectarian branches; but in a special 
sense it is with those who have escaped from 
the bondage of error and sectarianism, and who, 
because faithful to their consciences and the 
truths brought to their attention, have been 
served by the Master with present truth as 
"meat in due season" (Luke 12:37), and who 
have been permitted to enter into some of the 
"deep things" of God's plan. 

The world has not yet come into this judgment: 
its reckoning is yet future; but ours is 
now upon us. We, to whom the testimony of 
divine truth has been borne, before whose mental 
vision the whole plan of God with all its 
specifications has been spread out and carefully 
explained, now stand on trial, yea, under the 
final tests of that trial which is either to prove 
or disprove our worthiness to enter into the 
promised reward of the faithful. Many, as 
predicted (Psa. 91:7), are proving unworthy, 
and some still stand. And among those whom 
we fellowship and bid God-speed as faithful 
brethren in Christ, it is our duty to judge as to 
whether they are still faithful when the magnet 
of truth makes their judgment so manifest in 
this day of the Lord; for it is written (2 John 10:11) 
"If there come any unto you and bring 
not this doctrine, receive him not into your 
house, neither bid him God-speed; for he that 
biddeth him God-speed is partaker of his evil 
deeds." Here is a responsibility with reference 
to our endorsement of another which we cannot 
ignore and still be faithful; and except we 
judge of one's course by his fidelity or infidelity 
to the truth, we shall be endorsing error 

R1362:page37 

quite as often as truth. It is our privilege to 
know the truth and to hold it firmly and to be 
faithful to it to the end; and if we so abide 
and walk in the light we will quickly know 
when one has turned away from the light into 
darkness, and will be able to render wholesome 
counsel and warning to such, and to help those 
who still retain enough of the spirit of meekness 
to accept the proffered assistance. But, if 
such a one still pursue the path of darkness 



and call it light, thus deceiving himself and 
others, we cannot further endorse him and be 
guiltless. To do so is to add our influence in 
some measure, at least, to the error and in opposition 
to the truth, and thus to become partaker 
of his evil deeds. 

The necessity for this careful discrimination 
and jealous guarding of the truth in these last 
days is very manifest, both from the warnings 
of the Scriptures and from observation of 
their fulfilment. "In the last days," says the 
Apostle, "perilous times shall come." (2 Tim. 3:1.) 
Why? Because the prince of darkness 
will make every possible effort to retain his 
power and dominion; and ignorance, error and 
superstition are his strongholds. He first used 
all his power to keep men in ignorance and to 
foster superstition. But now God's due time 
has come for knowledge to be increased (Dan. 12:4), 
and the Millennial dawn is breaking; 
and not only the Church but the world is now 
waking up and beginning to think. So the 
policy of Satan now is to devise plausible 
counterfeits of the truth whereby to entrap and 
mislead those who have been making progress 
in the knowledge of the divine plan. As, in the 
beginning of our Lord's ministry at his first advent, 
Satan's efforts were concentrated upon 
the one object of causing him to stumble, thereby 
to nip the divine plan in the bud, and during 
the Gospel age the consecrated members of 
the body of Christ have been specially opposed 
and beset by him, so now his efforts are concentrated 
specially upon the last members of 
that body, "the feet of him," who are running 
the race for the prize of the high calling. It is 
for this cause that so many new and plausible 
forms of error have been brought forward within 
this harvest period. Satan is using every effort 
to thwart God's plan and to stumble the 
feet. And God even more than permits this: 

R1363 : page 37 

he encourages it by sending these strong delusions 
of Satan among his professed followers— at 
the same time assuring all who at heart are 
faithful to his Word and to their covenant of 
self-sacrifice that they need fear no evil, for he 
will be with them and uphold them though a 
thousand fall at their side. 

Ever since the plan of God has been made 
manifest to the saints, the delusions of error 
have been rapidly multiplying. This was foretold 
by the Apostle who, referring to our Lord's 
second coming, said, "And then shall that 



wicked [the Man of Sin] be revealed, whom 

the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his 

mouth, and destroy with the bright-shining of 

his presence,* whose parousia [Christ's presence] 

is with+ [or accompanied by] the working 

of Satan with all power and signs and 

lying wonders, and with all deceivableness 

of unrighteousness in them that perish, because 

they received not the love of the truth, 

that they might be saved. And for this cause 

God shall send them strong delusion, that they 

should believe a lie, that they might all be 

condemned who believed not the truth, but 

had pleasure in unrighteousness. "++ (2 Thes. 2:8-12.) 

One after another the deluded ones 

who have fallen into the various snares set for 

their feet have become active advocates of the 

several causes they have espoused since they 

departed from the truth, and are advanced by 

the adversary as teachers, angels or messengers 

of new light. They never seem to realize that 

they have gone into darkness, but imagine they 

have made great strides of progress in the light. 

This is because they have been overcome by the 

strong delusions of this evil day. They verily 

mistake the darkness for the light, the error for 



*The words, "Even him," here supplied by the translators, 
and not in the original text, as indicated by the 
italics, tend to obscure the sense of this passage. 

+The Greek word "kata," rendered "after" in the 
common version, should here be rendered "with," as the 
same word is rendered in Mark 1:27; 1 Cor. 2:1; 
Eph. 6:6. 

-H-Greek adikia should here be rendered untruth or 
error because contrasted with truth. 

R1363 : page 38 

the truth. But, though they be cast thus into 
the outer darkness of the world and of the 
nominal professor, thank God, we can now see 
that by and by the shining forth of the Sun of 
Righteousness in the Millennial morning shall 
open all the error-blinded eyes to the full and 
glorious Truth, though too late to assist any to 
win the great prize of joint-heirship in the 
Kingdom. 

However, none are ever permitted to be thus 
overcome who have not in some way been unfaithful 
to the truth and hence unworthy of it. 
Upon all such God has said he would send 
the strong delusion, so that they shall believe 
a lie. The truth being designed for those only 



who are worthy of it— the elect— all others are 
bound to lose it. But it is impossible to deceive 
the "very elect." God will keep them 
by his mighty power because of their faithfulness 
and loyalty to him. 

The Lord distinguishes between the nominally 
elect and the finally elect, and so should we. 
Not all who have accepted of the Redeemer's 
favor of justification from guilt, and have heard 
and accepted the high calling to joint-heirship 
with Christ in his kingdom and glory, will attain 
that great prize. All such have entered 
the race as now the nominally elect, and all 
such are eligible to membership in the glorified 
Church as the finally elect; but in order to 
gain that prize they must fulfil the conditions 
specified when they entered the race— when 
they in Christ's name and merit made a covenant 
with God, to sacrifice themselves in his 
service. In no other way can they make their 
calling and election sure. 

It is this nominally elect class that is being 
tried now; and God is now making manifest 
the secret counsels of the hearts of his people. 
He puts us all on guard, too, saying, "Let him 
that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he 
fall;" and telling us to take heed that no man 
take our crown. 

How great is the responsibility of our present 
position before God, the great Judge of all 
hearts. He has shown us special favor in revealing 
to us the wonders of his plan and in 
setting before us the grand prize of our high 
calling. Thus far we were counted worthy of those 
favors and eligible to the prize of joint-heirship 
with Christ. How worthy have we proved ourselves 
since receiving this knowledge? Have 
we received it with meekness and humility and 
with a gratitude which manifested itself in active 
service of the truth— in proclaiming it to 
others and in defending it and standing by it 
nobly in the midst of all the reproaches hurled 
against it? Have we refused to compromise 
the truth to any extent to avoid its otherwise 
inevitable reproach? 

If we are not thus jealous for the truth we 
are not worthy of it, and some of the deceptions 
of this "evil day" will surely number us 
among its victims; for it is in this time of 
the Lord's presence that Satan is to work so 
mightily, with great power to deceive and with 
signs of success and with lying wonders of error. 
His various schemes will have great success, 
in comparison with which the success of the 
truth will seem small; for with these, as with 
Gideon's band, it will be a time of sifting, and 



"who shall be able to stand?" But let those 
who stand girt about with divine truth fear nothing 
the Lord is permitting these delusions that 
they may serve his own wise and benevolent 
purposes in the separating of the worthy from 
the unworthy, and for the manifestation of 
those who are at heart loyal to him. 



R1360 : page 38 

PRESBYTERIAN REVISION OF FAITH. 



The secretary of the Committee for the Revision 
of Faith for the Presbyterian Church, 
which met in New York on January 12th, received 
reports from nearly two hundred Presbyteries, 
as follows:— 

Twenty-eight unreservedly approve the proposed 
amendment of the Confession. One 
hundred and twelve give assent, but ask that 
it be further amended. Fifteen request that 
the old Confession be held and that all effort 
to amend it be discontinued. Thirty-eight, are 
dissatisfied with the amended Confession and, 

R1360 : page 39 

believing that it cannot be sufficiently amended 
to please them, ask for an entirely new one, 
which shall be extremely simple and almost devoid 
of doctrine. These latter would like to be 
free if the others would let them; but are unwilling 
to lose their position in the denomination. 
Each party will doubtless sacrifice principle 
and stay in, no matter what sort of a Confession 
the others may exact from them— just 
as they have done for years past. 

The Rev. Dr. Parkhurst, of the New York 
Presbytery, who, although a Presbyterian minister 
for over eight years, under vows to believe 
and to teach its doctrines, it will be remembered, 
declared that he had never so much as 
read the Confession of Faith, is one of the 
pronounced advocates for a totally new Confession. 
He recently stated himself as follows:— 

"I don't believe that the old Confession of 
Faith should be patched up or revised, but that 
it should be stowed away among the archives 
of the Church as a relic of mediaeval theology. 
To take its place an entirely new Confession 
should be formulated. The new one should be 
divested of all the non-essentials which have 



caused so much dispute. It should be a simple, 
direct statement of fundamentals of our belief, 
so worded that the commonest people could 
understand it. Instead of being 124 pages in 
length I would like to see it two pages long. 
"After the old Westminster Confession is 
laid aside, I would not advocate its use for instruction 
in theological seminaries, but would 
lay it aside altogether." 



R1367 : page 39 

THE PRESENT AND THE FUTURE. 



Our age's sphere of light, 
Though widening still, is walled around by night; 
With slow, reluctant eye, the Church has read, 
Skeptic at heart, the lesson of its Head.— Whittier. 



Despite the light that cheers the world to-day, 
Shadows surround us, on our heavenward way, 
And Error darkens Truth's celestial ray. 

Not yet the beams, whose radiant splendors dart 
From the fair realms of Science and of Art, 
With equal glory shine from soul and heart: 

Men worship golden calves and serpents still, 
Like cringing slaves bow to their masters' will- 
Obey the letter, but the spirit kill; 

Still tremble at the Priest's uplifted rod, 
For fear that he may doom them, by a nod, 
To endless hell-fire in the name of God. 

False prophets still the wrath of Heaven provoke, 
And hypocrite, and Pharisee, and rogue, 
Sit in high places in the synagogue. 

As sheep disguised, wolves still make sheep their prey, 
The blind still lead the blind the downward way, 
And sneaking Judases their Lord betray. 

Still is assailed the free soul that aspires, 
Still persecution feeds her smoldering fires, 
And still, to murder Truth, are leagued the Liars. 

Still everywhere a selfish spirit rules- 
Men herd themselves in squabbling sects and schools, 
And deem dissenting brethren knaves or fools; 



Still hack their heads with dull, polemic swords, 
Fan the fierce flames of hate with windy words, 
And take the Devil's plaudits for the Lord's. 

The world, which God gave to his children all, 

They parcel into sections, large or small, 

And round each petty church "patch" build a wall; 

Shout their strange shibboleths and battle cries, 
Assert pre-emption title to the skies, 
And curse him as a heathen who denies. 

Thus bigotry and sect intolerance 
Sharpen the infidel's else harmless lance, 
And cause the Devil's imps for joy to dance! 

Thank God! Religion is a plant that grows: 

Its perfect flower perennially blows, 

More fragrant and more fair than Sharon's rose. 

It yet shall rise from out the sloughs and swamps, 
Shed from its shining leaves the dungeon damps, 
Break every bond that yet its free growth cramps. 

Methinks I see it rising and expand! 
Its mighty branches arching every land, 
From Zembla's snows to India's sunny strand. 

Upward, forever up, I see it rise, 
Flashing resplendent glory on our eyes, 
Until its crown is lost within the skies. 

And there, beneath this everlasting tree, 
This Tree of Life and Human Destiny, 
I see the nations gather, bond and free, 

Gentile and Jew, of every clime and race- 
God's children all— and, standing face to face, 
Own but One God, their Father, and embrace! 

Then, only then, will men indeed be free, 
Then will the Golden Age we dream of be, 
And Jesus Christ reign universally! 

—Charles W. Hubner. 



R1366 : page 40 

AN ANCIENT AND INTERESTING DOCUMENT, 

FOUND IN THE VATICAN AT ROME, WHICH PURPORTS TO BE 

THE ORIGINAL REPORT OF PILATE, ROMAN GOVERNOR OF JUDEA, 

TO THE 

EMPEROR TIBERIUS CAESAR: 

EXPLANATORY OF 



THE CAUSES WHICH LED TO THE TUMULT IN JERUSALEM, IN CONNECTION WITH 
THE DEATH OF JESUS OF NAZARETH. 



The Public is indebted to the energy of a Christian 
minister, W. D. Mahan by name, for calling 
attention to and securing an English translation 
of this interesting document. He first 
heard of it through a German student who had 
spent a large portion of several years in searching 
for curiosities in the immense library of the 
Vatican at Rome. The German Professor did 
not consider the MS. of sufficient interest to 
take a copy of it, but years afterward made 
mention of it to the minister mentioned. The 
latter felt a great interest in what he had heard, 
and finally he wrote to his friend, the German 
Professor, who meantime had returned to Westphalia, 
Germany, requesting that the latter, 
who was intimate with Father Freelinhusen— 
chief guardian of the Vatican— would undertake 
to procure a translation of the MS. into 
English. 

This was finally accomplished at a cost to Mr. 
Mahan of seventy-two dollars and forty-four 
cents. 

The parties concerned in procuring this translation 
are unknown to us, but the circumstances 
leave no room for questioning the fact. 
As to whether or not the Vatican Manuscript 
is what it purports to be, each must judge for 
himself. Certain it is that the account does 
not contradict, but fully corroborates, the accounts 
given us by the Apostles in the Bible. 
We give here 

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF THE LETTER, 
PURPORTING TO BE PILATE'S. 



To TIBERIUS CAESAR-Emperor. 
Noble Sovereign, Greeting: 

The events of the last few days in my province 
have been of such a character that I 
thought well to report the details as they have 
occurred, as I should not be surprised if in the 
course of time they may change the destiny of 
our nation; for it seems of late that the gods 
have ceased to be propitious. I am almost 
ready to say, "Cursed be the day that I succeeded 
Valerius Gratius in the government 
of Judea." 

On my arrival at Jerusalem I took possession 
of the Judgment Hall and ordered a splendid 



feast to be prepared, to which I invited the tetrarch 
of Galilee, with the high priest and his 
officers. At the appointed hour no guests appeared. 
This was an insult offered to my dignity. 
A few days after, the high priest deigned 
to pay me a visit. His deportment was grave 
and deceitful. He pretended that his religion 
forbade him and his attendants to sit down at 
the table of the Romans, and to offer up libations 
with them. I thought it expedient to accept 
of his excuse, but from that moment I was 
convinced that the conquered had declared 
themselves the enemies of the conquerors. It 
seems to me that of all conquered cities, Jerusalem 
is the most difficult to govern! 

So turbulent were the people that I lived in 
momentary dread of an insurrection. To repress 
it I had but a single centurion, and a 
handful of soldiers. I requested a reinforcement 
from the Governor of Syria, who informed 
me that he had scarcely troops sufficient to defend 
his own province. An insatiate thirst for 
conquest— to extend our empire beyond the 
means of defending it — I fear will be the means 
of overthrowing our noble government. 

Among the various rumors that came to my 
ears, there was one that attracted my attention 
in particular. A young man, it was said, had 

R1366 : page 41 

appeared in Galilee, preaching with a noble 
unction a new law, in the name of the gods 
that had sent him. At first I was apprehensive 
that his design was to stir up the people against 
the Romans, but soon were my fears dispelled. 
Jesus of Nazareth spake rather as a friend of the 
Romans than of the Jews. 

One day, in passing by the place of Siloe, 
where there was a great concourse of people, I 
observed, in the midst of the group, a young 
man who was leaning against a tree, calmly addressing 
the multitude. I was told that this was 
Jesus. This I could easily have expected; so 
great was the difference between him and those 
who were listening to him. His golden-colored 
hair and beard gave to his appearance a celestial 
aspect. He appeared to be about thirty years 
of age. Never have I seen a sweeter or more 
serene countenance. What a contrast between 
him and his hearers with their black beards and 
tawny complexion. Unwilling to interrupt him 
by my presence, I continued my walk; but signified 
to my secretary to join the group and 
listen. My secretary's name is Manlius. He 
is the grandson of the chief of the conspirators 



who encamped in Etruria, waiting Catiline. 
Manlius was anciently an inhabitant of Judea 
and well acquainted with the Hebrew language. 
He is devoted to me and worthy of my confidence. 
On entering the Judgment Hall, I 
found Manlius, who related to me the words 
Jesus had pronounced at Siloe. Never have I 
heard in the Pettico, nor in the works of the 
philosophers, anything that can compare to the 
maxims of Jesus. 

One of the rebellious Jews, so numerous in 
Jerusalem, having asked him if it was lawful to 
give tribute to Caesar, Jesus replied, "Render unto 
Caesar the things which belong to Caesar, and 
unto God the things that are God's." It was 
on account of the wisdom of his sayings that I 
granted so much liberty to the Nazarene, for 
it was in my power to have had him arrested 
and exiled to Pontus; but this would have been 
contrary to the justice which has always characterized 
the Romans. This man was neither 
seditious nor rebellious, and I extended to him 
my protection unknown, perhaps, to himself. 
He was at liberty to act, to speak, to assemble 
and address the people, to choose disciples unrestrained 
by any Pretorian mandate. Should 
it ever happen— may the gods ever avert the 
omen— should it ever happen, I say, that the 
religion of our forefathers be supplanted by the 
religion of Jesus, it will be to this noble toleration 
that Rome shall owe her premature obsequies, 
while I, miserable wretch, shall have been 
the instrument of what Christians call providence, 
and we, destiny. 

But this unlimited freedom granted Jesus 
provoked the Jews; not the poor, but the rich 
and powerful. It is true that Jesus was severe 
on the latter, and this was a political reason, 
in my opinion, not to control the liberty of 
the Nazarene. "Scribes and Pharisees," he 
would say to them, "you are a race of vipers; 
you resemble painted sepulchers." At other 
times, he would sneer at the proud alms of the 
publican, telling him that the mite of the 
widow was more precious in the sight of God. 

New complaints were daily made at the Judgment 
Hall against the insolence of the Jews. 
I was even informed that some misfortune would 
befall him— that it would not be the first time 
that Jerusalem had stoned those who called 
themselves prophets— and if the Pretorium refused 
justice, an appeal would be made to 
Caesar. 

However, my conduct was approved by the 
Senate, and I was promised a reinforcement 
after the termination of the Parthian war. Being 



too weak to suppress a sedition, I resolved 

upon adopting a measure that promised to establish 

the tranquility of the city, without subjecting 

the Pretorium to humiliating 

concessions. 

I wrote to Jesus requesting an interview with 
him at the Judgment Hall, and he came. You 
know that in my veins flows the Spanish, mixed 
with Roman blood, as incapable of fear as it 
is of puerile emotion. When the Nazarene 
made his appearance I was walking in my court, 
and my feet seemed fastened with an iron 
hand to the marble pavement, and I trembled 
in every limb as a guilty culprit, though he was 
calm— the Nazarene— calm as innocence. 
When he came up to me, he stopped, and by 
a signal seemed to say to me, "I am here." 

R1366 : page 42 

For some time I contemplated with admiration 
and awe this extraordinary type of man— a 
type of man unknown to our numerous painters, 
who have given form and figure to all the 
gods and heroes. 

"Jesus," said I to him at last— and my 
tongue faltered— "Jesus of Nazareth, I have 
granted you for the last three years ample freedom 
of speech, nor do I regret it. Your words 
are those of a sage. I know not whether you 
have read Socrates, or Plato, but this I know, 
that there is in your discourses a majestic simplicity 
that elevates you far above those philosophers. 
The Emperor is informed of it, and 
I, his humble representative in this community, 
am glad of having allowed you that liberty, of 
which you are so worthy. 

"However, I must not conceal from you the 
fact that your discourses have raised up against 
you powerful and inveterate enemies. Neither 
is this surprising. Socrates had his enemies, 
and he fell a victim to their hatred. Yours 
are doubly incensed against you on account of 
your sayings, and against me on account of 
the liberty extended towards you. They even 
accuse me of being indirectly leagued with you, 
for the purpose of depriving the Hebrews of 
the little civil power which Rome has left 
them. My request— I do not say my order- 
is, that you be more circumspect in the future, 
and more tender in arousing the pride of your 
enemies, lest they raise against you the stupid 
populace, and compel me to employ the instruments 
of justice." 

The Nazarene calmly replied: 

"Prince of the earth, your words proceed 



not from true wisdom. Say to the torrent, 
Stop in the midst of the mountain home! because 
it will uproot the trees of the valley. 
The torrent will answer you, that it must obey 
the laws of the Creator. God alone knows 
whither flows the torrent. Verily, I say unto 
you, before the Rose of Sharon blossoms, the 
blood of the Just shall be spilt." "Your blood 
shall not be spilt," replied I with emotion, 

R1367 : page 42 

"You are more precious, in my estimation, on 
account of your wisdom, than all the turbulent 
and proud Pharisees, who abuse the freedom 
granted them by the Romans, conspire against 
Caesar, and construe our bounty into fear. Insolent 
wretches, they are not aware that the 
wolf of the timber sometimes clothes himself 
with the skin of the sheep. I will protect you 
against them. My Palace of Justice is open to 
you as an asylum." 

Jesus carelessly shook his head, and said, with 
a grace and a divine smile, "When the day 
shall have come, there will be no asylum for 
the Son of Man, neither in the earth, nor under 
the earth. The asylum of the Just is there," 
pointing to the heavens. "That which is written 
in the books of the prophets must be 
accomplished." 

"Young man," answered I, mildly, "you 
oblige me to convert my request into an order. 
The safety of the province, which has been 
confided to my care, requires it. You must 
observe more moderation in your discourses. 
Do not infringe. My orders you know. May 
happiness attend you. Farewell." 

"Prince of the earth," replied Jesus, "I 
came not to bring war into the world, but peace, 
love and charity. I was born the same day 
on which Augustus Caesar gave peace to the 
Roman world. Persecution proceeds not from 
me. I expect it from others, and will meet it 
in obedience to the will of my Father, who has 
shown me the way. Restrain, therefore, your 
worldly prudence. It is not in your power to 
arrest the victim at the foot of the Altar 
of expiation." 

So saying, he disappeared like a bright shadow 
behind the curtains of the palace. 

[Concluded in our next issue.] 



R1371 : page 42 



"THE RESURRECTION OF DAMNATION." 

-John 5:29.- 

A subscriber inquires for the signification of 
this expression. We reply: The difficulty to 
the English student arises from the word damnation, 
which is a mistranslation of the Greek 
word krisis. The Revised Version renders the 
expression, "The resurrection of judgment," 
which conveys the true sense much more clearly, 
although not entirely so; because the word 
judgment is so often understood to mean sentence 
merely, whereas it really signifies trial, 
including, of course, the sentence at its conclusion. 
The sense of the passage is: Some 
(the Church) will have passed their trial and 
will be resurrected to their reward; while others 
will awake to a trial for life, during the Millennial 
age, when Christ and his Church will be the 
judges.— 1 Cor. 6:2. 



R1363 : page 43 
INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. 



SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



THE GRACIOUS CALL. 



LESSON VI., FEBRUARY 7, ISAIAH 55:1-13. 

Golden Text— "Seek ye the Lord while he may be 
found; call ye upon him while he is near."— Isa. 55:6. 

In our last lesson— Isa. 53:1-12— the Prophet 
brought to view the "Lamb of God" whose 
sacrifice would take away the sin of the world, 
and thus prepare the way, legally, for the glorious 
restitution of all things spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the world 
began. -Acts 3:19-21. 

This lesson opens with the gracious invitation, 
"Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; yea, come, buy wine and milk 
without money and without price." This at 



once calls to mind the very similar invitation 
of Rev. 22: 17--" And the Spirit and the Bride 
say, Come; and let him that heareth say, 
Come; and let him that is athirst come; 
and whosoever will, let him take the water 
of life freely." It will be observed that the 
call in both cases is only to those who desire 
the water of life: "every one that thirsteth" 
and "whosoever will" may have it; but 
it will not be forced upon any. Here, as 
frequently in the Scriptures, water is mentioned 
as a symbol of truth (See also John 4:10-14; 
Rev. 7:17); consequently the invitation 
to these is to accept or partake of the 
favor of everlasting life through obedience to 
the truth.-John 17:17. 

Isaiah also compares this sanctifying and 
life-giving draught to exhilarating wine and 
nourishing milk, which the thirsty, who desire 
it and have nothing to give in exchange for 
it, may have without money and without 
price. The truth or water of life thus offered 
is the good news of redemption and consequent 
restitution to perfection and eternal life, 
through "the precious blood of Christ," "shed 
for many [for all] for the remission of sins." 
(Matt. 26:28.) Since we were all bankrupt and 
had no means wherewith to purchase so great 
a treasure, those who value it will gratefully 
appreciate its offer as a free gift, without money 
and without price. 

But though these two invitations are virtually 
the same, the student will observe that that 
of Rev. 22:17 is due in the Millennial age, 
when the now espoused virgin Church will have 
become the Bride of Christ. Then the Spirit 
and the Bride (who has no existence as the Bride 
yet) will say, Come, etc. But that the invitation 
of Isaiah 55: 1 is intended for those thirsting 
for truth during the Gospel age is manifest 
from verses 2 and 3, which show that those of this 
class have not only been desirous of the truth, but 
that they have been diligently, though hitherto 
vainly, searching for it. In hope of finding 
the truth, they have been spending their money 
for that which is not bread, and their labor for 
that which satisfieth not. In the Millennial age, 
none will thus vainly search for truth; for then 
"the earth shall be full of the knowledge of 
the Lord, as the waters cover the sea," and none 
will teach his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord, 
for all shall know him from the least of them 
to the greatest of them (Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34); 
and the way of life will be so plain 
that a wayfaring man, though unlearned, shall 
not err therein. (Isa. 35:8.) But such is not 



the case now, when hundreds of conflicting 

creeds jar and jangle with both reason and 

Scripture, each one saying to the bewildered 

inquirer, "This is the way of truth: walk ye in 

it." Such bewildered, yet earnest, thirsting 

souls the Lord here counsels to leave the unsatisfying 

portion and to hearken diligently to 

his Word, saying, "Hearken diligently unto me, 

and eat ye that which is good, and let your 

soul delight itself in fatness." The reference 

R1364 : page 43 

here is to the good plan of God, the clear unfolding 

of which, in these last days, is meat 

and drink in due season for the household of 

faith. 

The invitation is synonymous with that of 
Rev. 18:4 to the same class, to come out of 
Babylon (confusion— the confusion of sectarianism); 
for while they remain in those systems 
of error, endeavoring to support and defend 
them, they are prejudiced and blinded against 
God's truth, wherever it conflicts with their 
creeds, so that they cannot progress in knowledge 
while they thus continue to spend their 
"money"— their influence and their labor— 
for that which is not bread and which satisfieth 
not. 

But, thank God, there is a satisfying portion 
for those who earnestly crave it, and some are 
eating that goodly portion, and their souls are 
delighting themselves in fatness. Let the thirsty 
hear further the gracious invitation, "Incline 
your ear [turn your ear away from the 
clash of conflicting creeds, and incline it towards 
God's own precious word, in simple faith 

R1364 : page 44 

accepting all of its testimony, notwithstanding 
the testimony of men to the contrary], and 
come unto me: hear [my word] and your soul 
shall live." 

To those who thus heed the invitation there 
is a special promise given, over and above the 
promise of life and the satisfaction now, of receiving 
this gift by faith. It is this: "I will 
make an everlasting covenant with you, even 
the sure mercies of David." [He will make an 
agreement with such that they may share in 
those sure, holy promises which belong to his 
beloved Son— the kingdom, power and glory 
of the world to come.] The name David signifies 
beloved; and the Apostle shows (Acts 13:33,34) 
that it here refers to our Lord, the 



Beloved Son of God. And not only is the 
name David sometimes used in prophecy, as 
here, to refer to God's beloved Son, but David 
himself frequently figures as a type of our Lord, 
as in Psalm 22:1,17,18. Moreover, "the 
sure mercies" or holy promises here referred 
to as belonging to our Lord, and in which we 
of this Gospel age are invited to share with 
him, were made to King David (2 Sam. 7:8-16) 
and will evidently have a partially literal 
fulfilment, although the substance is in Christ. 

These sure mercies or holy things of David 
(Christ) are clearly set forth in Psalm 89:20-37, 
to be— 

(1) That the Lord would anoint him to be a 
great king, and that he would establish his 
throne forever— as long as the sun and moon 
endure; 

(2) That no enemy should have advantage 
over him, but that all should be made subservient 
to him; 

(3) That God's covenant to bless all the 
families of the earth should stand fast with him, 
or be fulfilled by his reign; 

(4) That his children (by redemption and 
regeneration) should have such reformatory discipline 
under his reign as would be necessary 

for their correction and establishment in 
righteousness; 

(5) And that all the willing and obedient 
who shall profit by the discipline shall endure 
forever— that thus he might see of the 
travail of his soul and be satisfied. 

Verse 5 shows how the work will progress 
among the people of the world after the Christ 
has been glorified— after all the members of 
the "body" have filled up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ and entered 
into his glory.— Col. 1:24. 

The succeeding verses picture for us the 
blessed opportunities of the Millennial age and 
the fulness of provision there for all to come 
into full harmony with God's Kingdom through 
the Christ. 

Verse 6 shows that when God does thus reveal 
his grace it must not be trifled with. God 
has graciously appointed a day [a thousand 
years— the Millennium] in which he will judge 
the world in righteousness— granting to each 
the fullest knowledge and opportunity for a return 
to his favor and to its reward, everlasting 
life; but God has determined to "make an 
end of sin and to bring in everlasting righteousness," 
and those who do not "seek the Lord 
while he may be found" will be accounted unworthy 
of further judgment [trial] and will 



perish in the second death as lovers of unrighteousness. 

(Rev. 21:8.) Or, as elsewhere stated, 

when God shall raise up to glory and dominion 

this Great Prophet, Priest and King (the Lord 

and his body or bride), it will come to pass 

that the soul that will not hear [obey] that 

Prophet shall be cut off from [life] among his 

people.— Acts 3:22,23. 

Verse 7. That will not be a time for pardoning 
wicked men, but for pardoning those who 
desire to forsake their wicked ways and thoughts. 
Nor are we to understand that the forsaking of 
the sin brings the pardon, aside from the sacrifice 
of Christ: this is merely stating the conditions 
upon which all during the Millennial 
age will share its favors. Preceding verses and 
chapters have shown how the "Beloved" first, 
by the will of God, died as the redemption 
price of Adam and his race, and in consequence 
inherited the "sure mercies"— the privilege 
of blessing the world by giving to each full 
knowledge and a righteous trial for life 
everlasting. 

Verses 9-11 take note of the present blindness 
of mankind respecting the gracious character 
of God— that they will not believe so 
gracious a message even when it is called to 
their attention. God reasons with such and 
shows them why they do not believe that he 
will be so gracious as he here promises, saying, 
My plans are not as you would plan, nor my 
ways of executing my plan such as you would 
surmise— mine are higher than yours. These 
my promises are as sure to bring blessings ultimately 
to all [whether they will hear or whether 
they will forbear; whether or not they will 
seek the Lord when he thus draws near], as my 
blessings now are extended to all— the sun 
shining upon the just and the unjust and the 
rain coming upon the evil and the good. "So 
shall my word be that goeth forth out of my 
mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it 
shall accomplish that which I please, and it 
shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." 
I have declared that in the Seed of Abraham 
(Christ and the elect Church-Gal. 3:16,29) 
all the families of the earth shall be blessed, 

R1364:page45 

and the whole earth shall be filled with my glory. 
Although men may count me slack and suppose 
that this promise and also the promise to bring 
punishment upon the wicked will never be 
fulfilled, they are mistaken: they overlook the 
fact that a thousand years with men are as one 



day with me. The day so long promised shall 
come— the day of blessing and restitution to 
all who shall prove their love of righteousness 
—the day of vengeance upon all who shall 
prove their love of iniquity.— 2 Peter 3:8. 

Verses 12,13 recount in symbolic terms the 
Millennial blessings of peace and joy for all 
who love righteousness. Instead of the thorn 
[the wicked man who wounds and injures his 
fellow creatures] shall be the fir tree [an evergreen 
tree, representative of a man possessing 
everlasting life], having inherent grace and 
fatness: "his leaf fadeth never." 

R1364:page45 

THE NEW COVENANT. 



LESSON VII., FEBRUARY 14, JER. 31:27-37. 

Golden Text— "I will forgive their iniquity and I 
will remember their sin no more."— Verse 34. 

The opening verses of this lesson (verses 27,28) 
point to the return of God's favor to Israel 
according to the flesh, and have no reference 
to spiritual Israel, as is clearly evident. Verse 10 
confirms the assurance, saying, "Hear the 
word of the Lord, O ye nations, and tell it in 
the isles afar off, and say, He that scattereth 
Israel will gather him, and keep him as a shepherd 
his flock." Verse 27 mentions Israel and 
Judah both, which might at first appear to 
teach that God has a different blessing for them 
and that the distinction which had its start after 
the death of Solomon is to be perpetuated. 
But no: we see no distinction in the blessings 
enumerated. Subsequent verses ignore all distinctions, 
thus showing that the object in mentioning 
both is to prevent any from getting the 
idea that only the ten tribes would be blessed 
in the future, and not the two tribes for a time 
known distinctively as Judah. The distinction 
really ended with the restoration from Babylon 
(Hosea 1:11); and our Lord and the Apostles 
used the name Israel as a general name. 

It is undeniable by either Jew or Gentile 
that ever since Messiah's rejection, five days 
before his crucifixion, when he said to them, 
"Your house is left desolate," Israel has been 
under divine displeasure, tempest-tossed all over 
the world. Surely God has watched over them, 
as foretold, "to pluck up and to break down 
and to throw down and to destroy and to afflict" 



them; and the faithful performance of 

the evil part of the promise is an assurance of 

the ultimate fulfilment of the promised blessings. 

Jer. 16:13-18 shows the same rejection 

and punishment of fleshly Israel, promises the 

same regathering and blessing, and indicates the 

time when it will commence. See MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, Vol. II., Chap. VII. 

But while verses 27 and 28, and verses 36 and 37, 
refer to fleshly Israel alone, we are glad 
that others as well as Israel shall have a share 
in the blessings of the New Covenant related 
in verses 24 to 34. The divine method of hiding 
truths until the due time for revealing them 
is peculiar to the Bible. As with the doctrines 
of Election and Free Grace, some affirm the 
one and deny the other, and the majority stumble 
into partial error on one side or the other, 
while in reality both are taught and both are 
true, so it is with the majority in studying 
prophecies of which Israel is the theme. Some 
will contend that it is fleshly Israel, while 
others as vehemently claim everything for spiritual 
Israel— the Gospel Church. The fact is 
that both are represented in prophecy, and it 

R1365 : page 45 

is only necessary to rightly divide the word of 
truth to see them both and their respective 
portions. 

Israel as a nation had certain inalienable 
promises yet to be inherited as a nation (Rom. 1 1:26-32), 
but it was also a typical people. 
As we have already shown, they as a people and 
their age and their ceremonies, sacrifices, etc., 
typified the Gospel Church of the present age. 
(MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., pages 201-248.) 
Moreover, they serve again in other respects as 
a type of those people of all nations who, during 
the Millennium, will accept the opportunities 
then offered, and come into covenant 
relations with God. In this latter sense they 
are before us in this prophecy of the blessings 
of the New Covenant. They represent not 
merely the faithful ones of the natural seed of 
Abraham, but all who, under those favorable 
conditions of the times of restitution, will believe 
God and seek to serve him, as did Abraham. 

As proving that Israel typified God's general 
blessing for the world, notice their three divisions, 
and what each division represented. 
(1) Priests, called out from the tribe of Levi 
and specially consecrated. These, we know, 
typified Christ our Chief Priest and his faithful, 
consecrated "little flock," the Royal Priesthood. 



(2) The Levites, who represented the 
general household of faith who serve the tabernacle 
and carry along the work financially and 
otherwise, yet never see the holy things, "the 
deep things," in any clear and definite manner. 
(Num. 4:5-15.) (3) The people of Israel, for 
whom the priesthood made sacrifices and offerings 
for sins, effecting their atonement and the 
establishment of the Covenant between them 

R1365 : page 46 

and God. These were typical, as well as the 
Priests and Levites. As the typical sacrifices 
were made for the people of Israel who desired 
harmony with God, they typified the better 
sacrifices of Christ made for the sins of the 
whole world, who might come unto God by 
him. 

It is when Israel is thus seen to be the type 
of the repentant, reconciled world that we begin 
to get a conception of the length and breadth, 
the height and depth of God's great plan as it 
embraces "whosoever will" of all the families 
of the earth. It is when we get this comprehensive 
view that we understand the Apostle's 
frequent expression— to the Jew first and also 
to the Gentile. The worthy, faithful Israelites 
after the flesh, especially those tried prophets 
and patriarchs of past dispensations, will take 
first rank in the blessings of the repentant world 
under the Millennial reign of Christ. But every 
promise and blessing to them under the New 
Covenant, will be also in as full measure to the 
numberless class whom they typify. No wonder, 
then, the Apostle reasons on this question 
that the promises of God to Israel imply life 
from the dead and general blessing. His words 
are, "If the casting away of them be the reconciling 
of the world, what shall the receiving 
of them be but life from the dead?"— 
Rom. 11:15,30-33. 

Realizing, then, that the blood of Christ 
sealed the New Covenant, not alone for Israel, 
but, as well, for all the world whom Israel typified, 
we see that whatever shall be declared true 
of Israel under that New Covenant will be 
true as well of all who, after the selection of 
the royal priesthood, shall become Israelites 
indeed, by the circumcision of the heart, when 
the full knowledge of the truth shall, in due 
time, reach the Jew first and afterward all men. 

Verses 29,30. "In those days"— days future 
at the time of the prophecy, and days still 
future, which shall be indicated by the return 
of divine favor to Israel— "In those days, they 



shall say no more, 'The fathers have eaten a 
sour grape and the children's teeth are set on 
edge.' For every one [who then dies] shall 
die for his own iniquity: every man that eateth 
the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on 
edge." The "teeth on edge" represent the 
heredity of sickness and death by the human 
family, and the "sour grape" represents 
Adam's original sin, repeated and emphasized 
in his children. We as a race die for Adam's 
sin, the effects of which we inherit, as also saith 
the Apostle. (Rom. 5:12.) As a part of the 
New Covenant sealed by the blood of Christ, 
this present state of things which has continued 
for over six thousand years is to give place 
to a new order; and none shall any longer die, 
as now, for Adam's sin; but whoever dies 
will die for his own wilful sin— the second death. 
It will be the second death because the first 
death sentence covered all. By one man's 
disobedience sin entered into the world, and 
death as the result of sin; and thus death passed 
upon all. 

The death of our Lord, "the man Christ 
Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all," was 
the full payment to justice of the penalty which 
came upon Adam, and through him by heredity 
upon all his race; so that he who paid our 
penalty thus ratified or made possible the New 
Covenant under which Israel first and then all 
the world shall be blessed, and whosoever will 
may be recovered to everlasting life. Adamic 
death or the first death, or, as people generally 
miscall it, natural death, will entirely cease as 
soon as the Great Priest, Prophet and King 
(head and body complete) shall take the control 
of earth's affairs and introduce to Israel, 
and to the world through Israel, the New Covenant. 
None, after that, shall die, unless, being 
proved unworthy of life, they come under condemnation 
to the second death, for personal, 
wilful disobedience against fullest knowledge 
and opportunity.— Acts 3:22,23. 

Verses 31 and 32 clearly point out that Israel 
must not expect these favors as a part of their 
Law Covenant made with them at Mt. Sinai, 
when they were on their way from Egypt to 
Canaan, which covenant they failed entirely to 
keep, and from which, consequently, they must 
expect no blessing. They must learn that 
this favor comes as a result of another— a new 
covenant; and in learning that, they will learn 
about him whom they pierced, whose death 
ratified or made effective this New Covenant. 
Thus they shall look upon him whom they 
pierced, and, thank God, they shall mourn as 



they come to see the actual facts.— Zech. 12:10. 

Verses 33 and 34 particularize some of the 
blessings and advantages of the Millennial age 
under the New Covenant, contrasting them 
with Israel's Law Covenant experiences. The 
Law Covenant written on tables of stone was 
easily forgotten by the typical people, and God 
was continually reminding them of their unfaithfulness, 
and chastising them by sending 
them into captivity among the nations, by 
sending blights, drouths, etc., and by sending 
his prophets to reprove their idolatries (Jer. 7:25); 
but the Israel who will enter into the 
New Covenant with God, in Christ, shall not 
be so. It shall be introduced by a greater 
prophet and mediator than Moses. The Christ 
shall be Jehovah's agent in carrying out all 
of its blessed provisions. Its law, Love, will 

R1365 : page 47 

be gradually written in the hearts of men during 
that Millennial age; and so completely 
will outward sin be kept under control, and so 
fully will temptations to forsake God be excluded, 
and so general will be the diffusion of the 
true knowledge of God (Heb. 2:14; Isa. 11:9), 
that it will no longer be necessary, as in the 
past and present, to be always preaching, 
"know the Lord;" for they shall all know him 
from the least of them to the greatest of them. 
And under this New Covenant, God (through 
Christ, the mediator of that New Covenant, who 
sealed it by the sacrifice of himself as our ransom 
price) will not only instruct all fully, and 
write his law in their hearts, but he will forgive 
their iniquities and remember no more their sins, 
i.e., of such as in that favored time of knowledge 
shall accept of the privileges offered and 
enter into the New Covenant conditions, obeying 
the law of love from the heart as it is written 
there by the finger of God— by the Great 
Prophet— the Christ. 

It will require the entire Millennial age to 
re-write in the heart of man the law of God— 
the law of love. We say re-write, for the law 
was written in man's heart, in his very constitution, 
when God created him in his own likeness. 
The law on tables of stone was given to 
Israel after two thousand years of falling had 
almost effaced the original moral-likeness. 
"When they knew God they glorified him not 
as God, neither were thankful, but became 
vain in their imaginations and their foolish 
heart was darkened. Professing themselves to 
be wise, they became fools."— Rom. 1:21,22,28. 



But God foreknew that the Law Covenant, 
made at Sinai, and the typical sacrifices for 
sin which were a part of it, could never take 
away sin nor make (Israel) the comers thereunto 
perfect; and he designed it only as a 
lesson to Israel and the world to point out the 
real remedy for sin and to foreshadow the better 
New Covenant and its superior arrangements 
for the relief of sinners at the hands of 
the Mediator like unto, but far superior to Moses. 

God gave a figure of his original law written 
in the heart of man and the renewed law as it 
will be re-written under the New Covenant. 
When Moses first went into the Mount he 
received two tables of the law, perfect, from 
the hand of God— representing the perfect man 
in the likeness of God, as he came from God's 
hand. But those tables of the law were dashed 
in pieces when Moses reached the camp, representing 
how the fall into sin has almost destroyed 
the law of God from the hearts of men, 
effacing the likeness of the Creator. God's 
method of replacing the broken tablets of the 
law was an illustration of how he purposes to 
restore his likeness and re-write his law in the 
hearts of all who desire to be in harmony with 
him under the New Covenant. He told Moses 
to hew out, polish and prepare two tables of 
stone, and promised to re-write the law thereon. 
So Christ, whom Moses typified, is to prepare 
mankind ("whosoever will") for the writing 
of the law of God. Christ does this, first of 
all by giving the ransom for all, secondly by 
bringing all who desire it back into harmony 
with God and into a full knowledge of the 
truth, which, as God's pen, will re-engrave the 
law of Love and godliness in all obedient hearts. 



page 47 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



Manitoba. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Just a word to say 
we are all well and are still rejoicing in the 
glorious Truth and endeavoring to overcome 
through the merits of our dear Lord and Redeemer, 
who has bought us and loves us. 

Our time is at present all taken up with things 
at home, and this seems to be the Master's will 
according to our judgment. 

Find enclosed a draft for $200.00 which is for 



the Master and for his work to be used as he 
may direct. We are his stewards in those 
things. He can trust some of his saints with 
this world's goods, knowing that they are in 
harmony with himself, and as he wants, they are 
perfectly willing to assist in any way they can 
in his work. So, dear Brother, just use this as 
your judgment may direct for the Master. 

With kindest love to Sister Russell and yourself, 
in which Sister Webb joins, I am yours in 
the glorious hope, W.J.WEBB. 

[Our dear Bro. W., in addition to the financial 
aid he is able to give to the Lord's work, 
has several times so arranged his affairs as to 
give some months to the Colporteur work, in 
which Sister W. also joined, taking their two 
young boys along and sending them to school 
in whatever town they chose for the work. 
The little fellows gladly helped in the distribution 
of tracts and delivery of books, being interested 
in the truth to the extent that their 
young minds can comprehend it. God bless 
the household where his name is enshrined in 
every heart— EDITOR.] 

page 48 

California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I must write to 
tell you how exceedingly interested I have been 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., which I spied 
out in a bookstore in Los Angeles. I enclose 
50 cents, for which I would like you to 
send me at once Vols. I and II of the series. 
I would also much like a sample or two of your 
paper-ZION'S WATCH TOWER -for if it is what 
I expect it to be, after DAWN Vol. III., I shall 
at once become a subscriber. Volume III., 
THY KINGDOM COME, is already circulating 
among my friends. 

Yours in the waiting for Christ's Kingdom, 
Pastor First Baptist Church. 



New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed you will 
find an order for twenty books, together with 
money order in payment for the same. I arrived 
in Buffalo on Friday evening. Cannot 
tell just how long I shall be here, but not a day 
longer than is necessary to get my clothing in 
order for winter. I had a pleasant and fairly 

profitable canvass in W . It is a small 

place, with only about 650 inhabitants, but I 
found a few precious souls, a few who, it seems to 



me, are all ready for the truth. I sold a cloth 
bound set of DAWNS to the president of the library 
association to be put in the circulating 
library there. Nearly all my sales there were of 
full sets. I did not have books enough to fill 
them all, and am to go back again. 

I called on the Presbyterian minister, a man 
of about fifty-five or sixty years, I think. I 
said, I called to show you MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
and before I got a chance to say another word, 
he said, "I am glad you came, I have always 
time to look at anything that treats on that 
subject." Then he took the books and spent 
an hour and a half looking at them. I could not 
get away. He read the preface and table of contents, 
and then extracts here and there through 
the books, asking me questions now and then, 
as to what your books taught about this or that. 
At last he said, "I believe this will prove to be 
the most valuable and reliable work I have on 
these questions, and I am going to write you a 
line with regard to it that I want you to use 

here in W , and in any place else where it 

will be of any help to you; and I hope you will 
urge every member of my congregation to buy 
the books. I wish you might leave them in 
every house in town." He then wrote a paper 
which reads as follows: 

"Having examined very carefully the books, 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, by Charles T. Russell, it 
gives me great pleasure to recommend it as a 
reliable and profitable treatment of its subject, 
and I would advise any one interested in and 
desiring to study the subject to purchase this 
work. Pastor Presbyterian Church ." 

Also the principal of the school there says 
his father, a Baptist minister, has the books, 
and values them very highly. It seems to me 
strange that any can read the books, and value 
them, and still retain their positions as pastors 
or as members of any denomination. 

I believe that I am improving a little in my 
work, and I do hope I shall learn to be a good 
worker. I do not like to do inferior work. I 
want to be able to sell as many books as other 
colporteurs do. 

I wish I could tell you half how precious the 
blessed truths are becoming to me, but I cannot. 
I read them over and over again, and they 
are like the Bible itself, in that they never grow old. 

Yours in the harvest work, MRS. M. PECK. 



Louisiana. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The package containing 



Teacher's Bible and DAWN, Vol. III., 
came duly, also your welcome letter of the 20th 
inst. Volume Third is far beyond what I could 
either ask or think. The Teacher's Bible is all 
that is claimed for it. 

As I look back now and view the way the 
Lord has led me, I can praise him with my 
whole heart for sending unworthy me this 
glorious harvest message, and also in giving me 
an ear to hear it. It is favor upon favor indeed. 
In looking back I realize how apt, yea, 
almost sure, I would have been, ere this, to 
have been caught in some of the many snares 
of deceptive errors that, according to predictions, 
abound at this time, had it not been 
that the Good Shepherd had reached out a 
helping hand in the shape of the WATCH TOWER 
publications just in time. 

My dear Brother in Christ, I must tell you, 
for your encouragement, that I am striving daily 
to put off the old man and to put on the 
new. I have nothing to boast of, though, for 
I fail so often; but my full confidence is in 
Christ and the robe that he provides, and our 
Father has promised to give power to the faint, 
and to them that have no might he increaseth 
strength. I am striving to abide in him by 
abiding in his word, that I may bear some fruit. 
Many thanks for that timely article on fruit-bearing 
in the May TOWER. 

I shall do whatever my hands find to do, 
praying earnestly that the Lord of the harvest 
may open an effectual door for the harvest message 
among my own countrymen according to 
the flesh, that they also may be sanctified by 
the Truth, and made ready for the glorious consummation 
of the hope. 

Praying God's blessing upon you and yours, 
your brother in Christ, CHARLES STRAND. 



page 50 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



R1370 : page 50 

HARVEST LABORERS. --PRAY FOR THEM! 



Brother and Sister Adamson have nearly finished 
their present field of labor in Cincinnati, 
Ohio. They have about 4000 Millennial Dawns 
circulating there now. They have done and are 
doing a good work— gathering ripe wheat and 
witnessing to others. Sunday Meetings held 
by Brother A. help to water the good word of 
present truth which he scatters during the week 
by circulating MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

Sisters Harper and Weir will soon be a year 
in Louisville, Ky., and vicinity. The Lord is 
blessing them, and through their labors quite a 
number are coming to the Light. They are 
faithful soldiers of the cross. 

Brothers Rogers and West have been in New 
York City for some months past. They already 
have over 3000 DAWNS in circulation. They 
report some very interesting meetings held 

R1371 : page 50 

lately— well attended and evidently profitable. 
God bless them. 
Brothers Leigh, Demming and VanHook have 



spent the last nine months in southern Ohio 
and northern Kentucky. They are earnest and 
faithful and are blessed and a blessing wherever 
they go. 

Sisters Erlenmyer, Clark and Peck are still 
laboring in southern New York. We have frequent 
proofs of their zeal and willingness to 
endure hardness as good soldiers of the cross- 
bearing the good tidings to those who have ears 
to hear. Their labors are not in vain in the 
Lord. 

Brother Wise is still in the harvest field, in 
Ohio, seeking the ripe wheat, and, thank the 
Lord, finding some ready to be garnered. 

Brother Smith is making a thorough canvass 
of Pittsburgh and vicinity. He is letting the 
light shine and attracting the attention of some 
of the children of the light. In the portion of 
the city already gone over, he has circulated 
over 2000 copies of DAWN, which, sooner or 
later, will bring results. 

Brothers Haynes and Thorn are in Massachusetts. 
They have recently circulated over 
1800 copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN in Lynn, and 
report considerable interest among readers. 

Sisters Vogel and Boehmer are in the work 
in eastern Pennsylvania, circulating the present 
truth— "meat in due season"— and accomplishing 
good, we trust. 

Brother and Sister Rogers in Detroit, Brother 
and Sister Utley in Minneapolis, Brother 
C. C. Wright in Iowa, Brother Hewes in Philadelphia, 
Brother and Sister Wallace in western 
Pennsylvania, Brother Brown in Michigan, 
Brother Brewer in Atlanta, Ga., Brother Herr 
in central Pennsylvania, Brother Marchant in 
Canada, and Brother Dailey in Ohio, are all 
serving the Lord and his cause earnestly and 
with success. 

Besides the above are some faithful ones who 
have been obliged to suspend operation temporarily 
from sickness and other reasons, who, we 
trust, will soon be in the work again; and who 
even now, we are sure, are not idle. 

But we have only mentioned a few of the 
noble army of the Lord who are daily battling 
for the truth— seeking to free themselves and 
others of the Lord's household from the chains 
of error and sin. We believe that more than 
one-half of the WATCH TOWER subscribers are 
true laborers in the harvest field, whose chief 
aim in life is, not money, nor pleasure, nor 
fame, nor any other selfish, earthly object, but 
who seek chiefly, and with their best endeavors, 
not only to gain for themselves a share in the 
Kingdom promised, but to help others to so run 



as to obtain the same provision of God's grace. 

Dear co-laborers, remember one another at 
the throne of the heavenly grace, and remember 
us also of the TOWER office, as we do you all. 
~2 Thes. 3:1; Heb. 13:18. 



R1367 : page 51 

VOL. XIII. FEBRUARY 15, 1892. NO. 4. 

AN ANCIENT AND INTERESTING DOCUMENT, 

FOUND IN THE VATICAN AT ROME, WHICH PURPORTS TO BE 

THE ORIGINAL REPORT OF PILATE, ROMAN GOVERNOR OF JUDEA, 

TO THE 

EMPEROR TIBERIUS CAESAR: 

EXPLANATORY OF 

THE CAUSES WHICH LED TO THE TUMULT IN JERUSALEM, IN CONNECTION WITH 

THE DEATH OF JESUS OF NAZARETH. 



(CONCLUDED FROM OUR LAST ISSUE.) 

To Herod, who then reigned in Galilee, the 
enemies of Jesus addressed themselves to wreak 
their vengeance on the Nazarene. Had Herod 
consulted his own inclination, he would have 
ordered Jesus immediately to be put to death; 
but though proud of his royal dignity, yet he 
was afraid of committing an act that might diminish 
his influence with the Senate. Herod 
called on me one day at the Pretorium, and 
on rising to take leave, after some insignificant 
conversation, he asked my opinion concerning 
the Nazarene. I replied that Jesus appeared 
to be one of those great philosophers 
that great nations sometimes produce, that his 
doctrines were by no means sacrilegious, and 
that the intention of Rome was, to leave him 
to that freedom of speech which was justified 
by his actions. Herod smiled maliciously, and 
saluting me with an ironical respect he 
departed. 

The great feast of the Jews was approaching, 
and the intention of their religious rulers was 
to avail themselves of the popular exultation 
which always manifests itself at the solemnities 
of a Passover. The city was overflowing with 
a tumultuous populace clamoring for the death 
of the Nazarene. My emissaries informed me 
that the treasure of the temple had been employed 
in bribing the people. The danger was 
pressing. A Roman centurion had been insulted. 
I wrote to the prefect of Syria for a 



hundred foot soldiers, and as many cavalry. 
He declined. I saw myself alone, with a handful 
of veterans, in the midst of a rebellious city, 
too weak to suppress a disorder, and having no 
other choice left but to tolerate it. The seditious 
rabble had seized Jesus, and although they 
felt that they had nothing to fear from the 
Pretorium, believing with their leaders that I 
winked at their sedition, continued vociferating, 
"Crucify him! crucify him!" 

Three powerful parties had combined together 
at that time against Jesus. First, the Herodians, 
and the Sadducees, whose seditious conduct 
seems to have proceeded from double 

R1368 : page 51 

motives: they hated the Nazarene, and were 
impatient of the Roman yoke. They could 
never forgive me for having entered their holy 
city with banners that bore the image of the 

R1368 : page 52 

Roman Emperor, and although in this instance 
I had ignorantly committed the fatal error, yet 
the sacrilege did not appear less heinous in their 
eyes. Another grievance also rankled in their 
bosoms: I had proposed to employ a part of 
the treasure of the Temple in erecting edifices 
of public utility, which proposal was 
scowled at. 

The Pharisees, too, were avowed enemies of 
Jesus, and they cared not for our government. 
They bore with bitterness the severe reprimands 
which the Nazarene, for three years, had been 
throwing out against them wherever he went. 
Too weak and pusillanimous to act by themselves, 
they had eagerly embraced the quarrels 
of the Herodians and the Sadducees. Besides 
these three parties, I had to contend against 
the reckless and profligate populace, always 
ready to join a sedition, and to profit by the 
disorder and confusion resulting therefrom. 

Jesus was dragged before the High Priest 
and condemned to death. It was then that 
Caiaphas, the High Priest, performed a derisory 
act of submission. He sent his prisoner 
to me to pronounce his condemnation. I answered 
him that as Jesus was a Galilean, the 
affair came under Herod's jurisdiction; and I 
ordered him to be sent thither. That wily tetrarch 
professed his humility, and protesting his 
deference to me, the Lieutenant of Caesar, recommitted 
the fate of the man to my hands. 
Soon my palace assumed the aspect of a besieged 



citadel. Every moment increased the 
number of seditionists. Jerusalem was inundated 
with crowds from the mountains of Nazareth. 
All Judea appeared to be pouring into 
the devoted city. I had taken a wife— a maiden 
from among the Gauls— who pretended to see 
into futurity; she, weeping and throwing herself 
at my feet, said to me, "Beware, and touch 
not that man, for he is holy. Last night I saw 
him in a vision. He was walking on the waters. 
He was flying on the wings of the winds. He 
spoke to the tempest and to the fishes of the 
lake— all were obedient to him. Behold! the 
torrent of Mount Kedron flows with blood! 
The statues of Caesar are filled with the filth of 
Gemonide! The columns of the Interium have 
given away, and the sun is veiled in mourning, 
like a vestal of the tomb! O Pilate! evil 
awaits thee, if thou wilt not listen to the entreaties 
of thy wife. Dread the curse of a 
Roman Senate, dread the powers of Caesar." 

By this time the marble stairs groaned under 
the weight of the multitude. The Nazarene was 
brought back to me. I proceeded to the Hall 
of Justice, followed by my guard, and asked 
the people in a severe tone what they demanded. 
"The death of the Nazarene," was their reply. 
"For what crime?" "He has blasphemed. 
He has prophesied the ruin of the temple. He 
calls himself the Son of God, the Messiah, the 
King of the Jews." "Roman justice," said I, 
"punishes not such offenses with death." "Crucify 
him, crucify him!" belched forth the relentless 
rabble. The vociferation of the infuriated 
mob shook the palace to its foundations. 
There was but one that appeared to be calm, in 
the midst of the vast multitude. It was the 
Nazarene. 

After many fruitless attempts to protect him 
from this fury of his merciless persecutors, I 
adopted a measure which, at the moment, appeared 
to me to be the only one that could save 
his life. I ordered him to be scourged; then, 
calling for an ewer, I washed my hands in the 
presence of the multitude, thereby signifying 
to them my disapproval of the deed. But in 
vain. It was his life that those wretches thirsted 
for! 

Often in our civil commotions have I witnessed 
the furious animosity of the multitude, 
but nothing could be compared to what I witnessed 
in the present instance. It might have 
been truly said that on this occasion all the 
phantoms of the infernal regions had assembled 
at Jerusalem. The crowd appeared not to walk: 
they were borne along, whirling and rolling 



like living waves, from the portals of the Pretorium, 
even unto Mount Zion, with howlings, 
screams, shrieks and vociferations, such as were 
never heard in the seditions of the Panonia, or 
in the tumult of the forum. 

By degrees the day darkened like a winter's 
twilight, such as was witnessed at the death of 
the great Julius Caesar, which was likewise toward 
the Ides of March. 

I, the continued governor of a rebellious province, 

R1368 : page 53 

was leaning against a column of my 

palace contemplating through the dreary gloom 

these fiends of torture dragging to execution 

the innocent Nazarene. All around me was 

deserted. Jerusalem had vomited forth her in-dwellers 

through the funeral gate that leads to 

the Gemonica. An air of desolation and sadness 

enveloped me. My guards had joined the 

cavalry, and the centurion, to display a shadow 

of power, was endeavoring to keep order. I 

was left alone, and my breaking heart admonished 

me that what was passing at that moment 

appertained rather to the history of the gods 

than to that of a man. A loud clamor was heard 

proceeding from Golgotha, which, borne on the 

winds, seemed to announce an agony such as 

had never been heard by mortal ears. Dark 

clouds lowered over the pinnacle of the Temple, 

and, settling over the city, covered it as with a 

veil. So dreadful were the signs that were seen, 

both in the heavens and on the earth, that 

Dionysius, the Areopagite, is reported to have 

exclaimed, "Either the author of nature is 

suffering, or the universe is falling apart." 

Towards the first hour of the night I threw 
my mantle around me and went down into the 
city towards the gates of Golgotha. The sacrifice 
was consummated. The crowd was returning 
home, still agitated, it is true, but gloomy, 
taciturn and desperate. What they had witnessed 
had stricken them with terror and remorse. 
I also saw my little Roman cohort pass 
by mournfully, the standard-bearer having veiled 
his eagle in token of grief, and I overheard 
some of the soldiers murmuring strange words 
which I did not understand. Others were recounting 
prodigies, almost similar to those 
which had so often smitten the Romans by the 
will of the gods. Sometimes groups of men 
and women would halt, then looking back toward 
Mount Calvary would remain motionless, 
in expectation of witnessing some new prodigy. 

I returned to the Pretorium, sad and pensive. 



On ascending the stairs— the steps of which 

were still stained with the blood of the Nazarene— 

I perceived an old man in a suppliant 

posture, and behind him several women in tears. 

He threw himself at my feet and wept bitterly. 

It is painful to see an old man weep. "Father," 

said I to him, mildly, "who are you, 

and what is your request?" 

"I am Joseph of Arimathea," replied he, 
"and am come to beg of you, upon my knees, 
the permission to bury Jesus of Nazareth." 

"Your prayer is granted," said I to him, and 
at the same ordered Manlius to take some soldiers 
with him to superintend the interment, 
lest it should be interfered with. 

A few days after, the sepulchre was found 
empty. His disciples published all over the 
country that Jesus had risen from the dead, as 
he had foretold. 

A last duty remained to be performed and 
that was to communicate to the Emperor these 
deplorable events. I did so on the night that 
followed the fatal catastrophe, and had just finished 
the communication when day began to 
dawn. At that moment the sound of clarions, 
playing the air of Diana, struck my ear. Casting 
my eye towards the Caesarean gate, I beheld a 
troop of soldiers and heard at a distance other 
trumpets sounding Caesar's march. It was the 
reinforcement that had been promised me— 
two thousand chosen troops who, to hasten 
their arrival, had marched all night. "It has 
been decreed by the fates," cried I, wringing 
my hands "that the great iniquity should be 
accomplished, that for the purpose of averting 
the deed of yesterday, troops should arrive today! 
Cruel destiny, how thou sportest with 
the affairs of mortals!" It was but too true, 
what the Nazarene exclaimed while writhing on 
the cross: "All is consummated." 



R1371 : page 53 

PHILANTHROPIC VERSUS HUMANITARIAN. 



When, in our issue of November last, mentioning 
the work of the Salvation Army for 
the relief of the poor and degraded classes of 
Great Britain, we called it a "humanitarian 
scheme," we had no thought of charging them 
with denying our Redeemer's character, nature, 
or work. On the contrary, we were commending 



their philanthropic work for the poor, and 
should better have used the word philanthropic, 
as a few misunderstood our expression. On the 
contrary, we believe that few Christians with the 
same degree of knowledge revere our Master more. 



R1374:page54 

"IN THE WINE-PRESS ALONE." 

"In the dusk of our sorrowful hours, 

The time of our trouble and tears, 
With frost at the heart of the flowers, 

And blight on the bloom of the years, 
Like the mother-voice tenderly hushing 

The sound of the sob and the moan, 
We hear, when the anguish is crushing, 

'He trod in the wine-press alone.' 

"And, therefore, he knows to the utmost 

The pangs that the mortal can bear: 
No mortal has pain that the Master 

Refuses to heal or to share. 
And the cries that ascend to the Loving 

Who bruised him, for us to atone, 
Are hushed at the gentle reproving, 

'He trod in the wine-press alone.' 

page 54 

"How sudden so e'er the disaster 

Or heavy the hand that may smite, 
We are yet in the grace of the Master, 

We never are out of his sight. 
Though the winnowing winds of temptation 

May forth from all quarters be blown, 
We are sure of the coming salvation— 

The Lord will remember his own. 

"From him, in the night of his trial, 

Both heaven and earth fled away; 
His boldest had only denial, 

His dearest had only dismay. 
With a cloud o'er the face of the Father, 

He entered the anguish unknown; 
But we, though our sorrows may gather, 

Shall never endure them alone." 



R1368 : page 54 
VIEWS ABROAD. 



In passing through Europe just at this time 
and in view of the sure word of prophecy as to 
what will transpire there shortly, one feels 
much as he might be expected to feel if he 
were tenting on the slopes of an active volcano, 
such as Vesuvius, where the continually 
rising smoke gives evidence that the elements 
of destruction are close at hand and may at 
any moment suddenly devastate the surrounding 
country. 

Indeed, as we looked upon that wonderful 
mountain, what a type it presented to our minds 
of the actual condition of the world, and especially 
of Europe, to-day. Upon its green and 
pleasant slopes villages are quietly nestled, and 
the inhabitants go about their daily avocations 
as if unaware of the awful threat of destruction 
that continually hovers over them; for above 
their heads at the mountain's summit is an immense 
crater, three thousand feet in diameter, 
from which proceeds a volume of smoke, while the 
ruins of the buried cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum 
at its base are constant reminders of 
its dreadful power. The traveler, in view of 
the past as well as of the present impending 
danger, almost shudders to pass that way, and 
cannot help wondering at the apparent indifference 
or unconsciousness of the residents of 
that locality, who have become accustomed to 
the sight and forgetful of the past in the bustle 

R1369 : page 54 

and confusion of the immediate present. 

Just so it is with all Europe. The people 
are insecurely slumbering on the slopes of an 
active volcano. The smoldering fires of wrath, 
of immense proportions, are pent up in the 
heart of European nations; and here and there 
an opening is found where they issue forth in 
volumes that should send the warning alarm to 
every thinking mind. And indeed they do: 
but What is to be done? is the question— a 
question, however, to which there is but one 
wise solution, a solution which the Word of God 
suggests, but which men are not yet willing to 
accept. The Scriptures say, "Be wise now 
therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges 
of the earth." (Psa. 2:10.) God's Word furnishes 
the only principles which, if put in operation, 
would avert the dread calamity now impending. 
But these principles of justice and 
love will not be accepted until the fearful, but 
much needed, chastisement shall force upon men 



of all classes and conditions their necessity as 
well as their superior value. 
At present the national animosities are intense: 

R1369 : page 55 

Russia hates Germany with a zeal akin 

to her hatred of the persecuted Jew; and Germany 

reciprocates the feeling with equal zeal. 

France has no more tender feeling toward Germany, 

and Great Britain comes in for a similar 

portion. And while the great powers confront 

and menace each other, the little powers tremble 

in the balances, fearing them all, so that 

there is no rest nor security any where. Not 

only is there bitter international animosity, but 

in every nation there is a strong under-current 

of civil strife against the civil, financial and ecclesiastical 

powers. 

It is noticeable, however, that these animosities 
exist more among the intelligent and well-to-do 
people abroad than among the very ignorant 
and miserably poor. Those of the latter 
class have not sufficient enlightenment to 
realize their degradation, while those of the 
former are ambitious to better their condition 
and scarcely know where to set the bounds of 
their ambitions. All through Europe, with the 
exceptions of Russia and Turkey, we were agreeably 
surprised to find the evidences of thrift 
and comfort in the home life of the masses of 
the people. True, the German farmers seem 
to fancy having their cattle under the same roof 
with their families, but the proverbial "pig in 
the parlor" in Ireland we did not find; nor 
was there a pig visible to the naked eye all the 
way from Cork to Dublin. Indeed, the majority 
of Irish emigrants to this country give 
rather an unfair impression to Americans of the 
Irish people in general. We were pleased to 
find there culture and refinement beyond what 
we had anticipated. Our route through Ireland 
included Queenstown, Cork, Dublin, Belfast, 
Londonderry, Armagh and the intervening 
country and smaller towns. Through all that 
part of the country— the south, north and east 
—we saw no squalor nor misery, though, of 
course, there are plenty of poor people and some 
very humble homes. From all accounts, our 
impressions of the west coast would have been 
less favorable, had we found time to go there. 
The country is very picturesque and has been 
well named the Emerald Isle, from its ever fresh 
and beautiful greenness. When, after the monotony 
of the sea voyage, we first sighted its 
shores under the glow of a glorious sunset, the 



picture was indeed beautiful, and can better be 
imagined than described; and the flocks of 
graceful seagulls that come out to meet the incoming 
vessels seemed to be bidding us welcome 
as they gaily circled round the ship's 
masts and then dived down and gracefully 
floated on the water. 

The small Irish steamer that conveyed us from 
the ocean steamer to the shore at Queenstown 
was a neat, pretty vessel, tastefully furnished, 
and landed us in Queenstown a little after 
10 P.M. Here, and all through Great Britain 
and Ireland, they have fine stone docks; 
the streets are paved with large flag stones and 
the houses here and all through Ireland, both in 
the cities and in the country districts, are of 
stone. Stone walls are also used, both in the 
cities and in the country, for fences. Those 
separating farms are low and generally covered 
with something green. The little farms all 
over the country look neat and well kept, and 
the low, one story houses with thatched roofs, 
whitewashed outside and with a bit of lace at 
the windows, looked cozy and comfortable, 
and pretty wild flowers adorned the fields. The 
country is a continual succession of low hills 
and valleys, divided into small farms, and 
presents a pleasing prospect to the eye. The 
cities of Dublin, Belfast, Cork and Queenstown 
are flourishing and enterprising. Their 
good public buildings, private residences, railway 
stations, thrifty mercantile business, etc., 
do ample credit to the energy of the Irish people. 

We were pleased also to notice the neatness 
of personal appearance and suavity of manner 
among the people in general, both in the cities 
and at every little railway station through the 
country, as well as in the hotels, railway carriages, 
etc., and at a fair in Armagh, which we 
visited specially for the purpose of coming in 
contact with the various classes of people there 
from the town and surrounding country. On 
the whole, our impressions of Ireland were very 
favorable; and the rosy-cheeked, blue-eyed, 
flaxen-haired babies of Ireland seemed the prettiest 
children in the world, until we met some 
dark eyed beauties of more southern lands, and 
then it was hard to decide which were prettiest. 

R1369 : page 56 

Passing over to Scotland and England, we 
saw similar evidences of thrift and comfort; 
though in the large cities, tucked away in the 
alleys and courts, and up rickety stairways in 
old tenement houses, are thousands of wretchedly 



poor people whom the feeble hand of benevolent 

charity finds it impossible to relieve to 

any considerable extent. The Scotch are a serious, 

thoughtful people, though not so lighthearted 

and happy, apparently, as their Irish 

neighbors. They are proud of their inheritance 

in the fame of John Knox, and like to call 

their country "the land of the Bible and of 

John Knox." But we fear this pride has stood 

much in the way of their advancement in the 

knowledge of the truth, beyond what was due 

to the household in John Knox's day. However, 

we have great hope for a good harvest yet 

from Scotland. In England and Scotland the 

manufacturing towns are closely strewn along 

the railway lines, and the hum of machinery 

and the tall smoke-stacks, as well as the cultivated 

farms with their separating green hedges 

and neat farm houses, which are of brick in 

England and of stone in Scotland, tell of an 

industrious, hard-working, energetic people; 

while their fine public buildings, private residences, 

public accomodations, etc., do them 

credit. 

Though we passed through England on our 
eastward course, we did not tarry there until 
our return. Then we halted in London and 
in Liverpool, where we were most of the time 
among subjects, not of Great Britain, but of 
the Kingdom of Heaven; and these, together 
with a few more such in other countries, we 
need not tell you were, of course, the very 
cream of Europe— expecting, too, shortly to be 
skimmed off— so that they are not to be considered 
as factors in European society, nor representatives 
of it. But aside from these dear 
ones in Christ, it was indeed truly refreshing, 
after our sojourn in the southern countries, to find 
ourselves again among the polite and cultured 
English; for no where did we meet so commonly 
that dignified grace and noble bearing which 
always characterize true manhood and womanhood. 
Of course, there are all shades of character 
in every nation, and, alas, too often outward 
grace covers some hideous inner deformity; 
but we refer now to our general impressions 
of the people as a whole, compared with 
the peoples of other nations. Nowhere are 
national characteristics more noticeable than 
on the great thoroughfares of travel. The polite 
and careful attention of busy railway officials, 
toward promiscuous strangers whom they 
never expect to meet again, is an index of a 
noble character— an index specially favorable 
on English soil, not only to the heart but also 
to the head. 



While few English people have a high appreciation 
of our late McKinley bill, yet there is 
nevertheless a very fraternal feeling among the 
masses of the people toward Americans. "Why," 
said an English friend at a hotel table one day, 
"there never could be another war between 
England and the United States: they are all 
our brothers and sisters over there." "Ah," said 
another, "America is a fine country, and your 
people are doing wonders over there." Again, 
as we passed out of a street car in London, a 
stranger who overheard some of our conversation 
with friends said inquiringly, "Ho! 
Americans?" "Yes," we replied; and he 
reached out his hand and with a hearty shake 
said, emphatically, "Good luck to you." 

Well, God bless the English people! welled 
up from our full hearts. His blessing is surer 
than luck; and we long for the glorious day 
when they and all men shall begin to realize it. 

Passing through Holland— through Rotterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Hague, and thence across 
the country to Hanover— we were charmed with 
the general appearance and friendly courtesy of 
the Dutch, and must say that the Dutchman 
stands higher in our estimation than ever before. 
In these cities we carefully looked for the 
worst quarters as well as the best and the medium, 
and we saw no evidence of squalid poverty anywhere. 
Order and cleanliness seemed to characterize 
every home, and many of the working 
people about their daily duties were models of 
neatness. At hotels, railway stations, or if inquired 
of on the streets, they were uniformly 
kind and obliging— we thought specially so to 
us, because we were foreigners. One pleasant 
faced little woman with white cap and white 

R1370 : page 57 

apron, so commonly worn by working women 

there, seeing us halt at the wrong corner for a 

street car and intuitively discerning our English 

origin, came out of her way to say in 

broken English— "Cars no stay still here"— 

and to direct us where to stop. A Professor 

and his wife from one of the colleges of Amsterdam, 

whom we met on a train, manifested a 

similar cordiality. In all Holland we failed 

to see a single miserably ragged man, woman 

or child. Yet the thrift and comfort of this 

life and the earthly prosperity, we fear, are the 

principal aim of these (in many respects) commendable 

people. 

Amsterdam is a beautiful, quiet, orderly city, 
with numerous small parks where mothers and 



children and old people of all classes enjoy the 
beauties of nature in near proximity to their 
city homes. It is well supplied with canals, too, 
which enhance the beauty of the city and at 
the same time provide a cheap way of transporting 
goods from place to place within and 
outside the city. Indeed, the whole country, 
which, it will be remembered, was reclaimed 
from the sea and ditched for the purpose of 
drainage, is beautified by these canals, which 
separate farms so that no fences are needed, 
and connect with the cities, and so are of very 
general advantage, boats being substituted for 
wagons. 

Rotterdam and the Hague are also fine and 
pleasant cities, and Zutphen is a small but very 
pretty town with the same air of comfort, etc. 
The dwellings in the cities, as well as in the 
country districts, are mainly of small, yellowish 
brick and quite tasteful, and there is a quiet and 
refined taste displayed in personal attire as well 
as in home appointments. With a few exceptions, 
where certain districts have adopted certain 
peculiar (though often pretty) costumes and 
colors, the same styles of clothing prevail there 
—and indeed, almost all over Europe— as are 
in vogue here. With a few exceptions— generally 
in country places— we did not find "loud" 
colors or uncomely costumes anywhere in 
Europe. 

As soon as we cross the border line from 
Holland to Germany, we feel at once the different 
social atmosphere, and are among a 
people of altogether different tastes, customs 
and ideas. The country homes are less tasteful. 
The farmer's family and his cattle are 
generally sheltered under the same roof, and 
the farming is very generally left in the hands 
of the women, the men and the horses being 
required for the army and for the pursuits 
of city life. Comparatively little of the farm 
work is done by machinery. On market days 
the country women may be seen by hundreds 
coming in on the trains with great loads of 
produce in immense baskets strapped on their 
backs and often another load on each arm. 

We saw one woman at a railway station with 
one of those large baskets, holding about two 
bushels, on her back, a half-bushel basket on 
her left arm and a package in her left hand, 
while with the right she supported one end of a 
trunk of which her little girl had the other 
end. And this was no uncommon thing: the 
women are literally beasts of burden. Many of 
them are old, gray-haired women of sixty or 
more, and often barefoot. It is not uncommon 



to see an old woman and a dog pulling a cart 
along the middle of the streets, loaded with 
milk or with produce and heavy enough for a 
horse. Yet, neither through the German cities 
nor through the country districts is there any 
appearance of want or squalor. The Germans 
are an industrious people and believe that thrift 
and economy will keep them out of the ditch; 
and so it does. Indeed, if it were not for the 
pluck and enterprise and hard work of the 
women of Germany, where would be her military 
glory? Yet, who ever thought of giving any 
credit to the poor, toiling wives and mothers 
who cultivate the soil and supply the markets, 
and thus save the country from famine, in addition 
to rearing the children, keeping the 
home and tending the cattle? Yet they seem 
to do it cheerfully, and no murmurings or 
strikes or socialistic sentiments come from them. 
They have bent their backs to the burden, and 
take it as a matter of course. 

In Germany and Austria, some of the principal 
cities visited were Hanover, Berlin, Wittenburg, 
Leipsic, Dresden, Prague, Vienna, Cracow, 
Strasburg, Mayence and Cologne. All of 
these cities are evidences of German thrift and 

R1370 : page 58 

prosperity. Berlin is a magnificent city and its 

palaces and public buildings are quite imposing, 

though not comparable with those of Washington, 

our capital city. Its private dwellings are 

of a substantial character and of good appearance, 

but very seldom does one family occupy 

an entire house. They are rented out in single 

rooms and suits, the cellars being rented to the 

poorest class. It is estimated that one in ten 

of the population of Berlin, or over 100,000 

people, live in these cellars. 

We were most interested here in its military 
museum, where the murderous engines of war 
of every variety, ancient and modern, are displayed. 
As we viewed this dreadful commentary 
on man's inhumanity to man, and thought 
of the near approach of the terrible conflict of 
the battle of the great day of God Almighty, 
in which we are even now living, and of the 
present threatening attitude of the angry nations, 
we rejoiced in spirit as by faith we saw 
above the darkening war cloud the white-winged 
messenger of peace, commanding that the swords 
be beaten into plow shares and the spears into 
pruning hooks. Ah! yes, we said, it must 
needs be that one more great wave of anguish, 
as foretold in the Scriptures, shall roll over the 



world, but it will be the last; for after it the 
nations shall learn war no more. 

Another museum in Berlin displays, in magnificent 
paintings and elegant statuary, the symbols 
of Germany's greatness and power. In 
the rotunda, over the doors and windows, are the 
sculptured heads of vanquished enemies, about 
four times the life size, in the agonies of dying, 
while on pedestals on all sides stood the German 
heroes larger than life size. The lofty 
ceiling was frescoed by a master hand to represent 
the old emperors of Germany as a Roman 
Senate in heaven, welcoming Emperor William, 
who was borne above the clouds by the angels, 
and extending to him a heavenly crown. The 
father of the present emperor is also shown as 
borne by the angels, and seemingly inquiring 
if he too may have a crown. Then there were 
dying soldiers on the field of battle also being 
received into glory. How strange and inconsistent 
the ideas seemed, compared with the 
truth. We fear that such hopes will be sadly 
disappointed when the heavenly crowns are actually 
awarded. The real conquerors of the 
world will never rejoice over the dying agonies 
of vanquished foes. And, thank God, a truer 
heroism will one day displace these false ideas. 

At Wittenburg we visited the former home 
of Martin Luther, entered his study and sat 
in his old chair and at his old study table, beside 
the great old fashioned stove, and handled 
some of his books. As we went through the 
various apartments, including the little chapel, 
and looked out of the old windows upon the 
same scenes, and then went down to the church 
upon which Luther defiantly nailed his thirty-nine 
theses, how vividly it brought to mind 
those stormy times when the Lord, through the 
agencies of the Reformers, began to cleanse his 
sanctuary from the pollutions of Rome. The 
old church is now undergoing extensive repairs, 
and the doors have been replaced by new ones 
of metal, in the panels of which are cast the 
thirty-nine theses once nailed there. We, dear 
friends, have great cause for rejoicing to-day 
that, although the beginners of the great reformation 
stopped short in the work and went 
about organizing other systems of error, nevertheless, 
under divine providence, the cleansing 
of the sanctuary progressed to completion, and 
the golden vessels of divine truth are now being 
replaced in order. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. III., Chap, iv.) Our joyous appreciation 
of "present truth," which these recollections 
revived, can better be imagined than described. 

In the cities of Germany there is much pleasure-seeking 



on the part of all classes. Plenty 
of music and brilliantly lighted beer gardens 
in every direction present their attractions, and 
are abundantly patronized by the multitudes. 
This pleasure-seeking (and finding, too, in their 
way) together with military zeal and ambition 
on the part of a very large class, and the continual 
drudge-life of another class, which, of 
necessity, must spend all time and thought for 
the meat that perisheth, appear to crowd the 
finer sentiments and ambitions into the background, 
except in the aristocracy, with whom 
we came little in contact. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 

(To be continued in our next issue.) 



R1371 : page 59 

TO BE PUBLISHED HEREAFTER IN ADVANCE, 
AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 

INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



JEHOIAKIM'S WICKEDNESS. 



LESSON VIII., FEBRUARY 21, Jer. 36:19-31. 

Golden Text— "To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden 
not your hearts."— Heb. 3: 15. 

The incident of this lesson seems at first 
sight a very trivial one, but when we look into 
it more closely it assumes the importance of a 
solemn warning to a special class under very 
similar circumstances. Glancing back to the 
beginning of this chapter, we read that "This 
word came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, 
'Take thee a roll of a book, and write 
therein all the words that I have spoken unto 
thee against Israel, and against Judah, and 
against all the nations, from the day I spake 
unto thee, from the days of Josiah (Chap. 1:2) 
even unto this day. It may be that the house 
of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose 



to do unto them; that they may return every 
man from his evil way; that I may forgive 
their iniquity and their sin.'" 

In obedience to this command Jeremiah employed 
Baruch the scribe to write all the words 
of this prophecy as he dictated it, and though 
that roll was burned by the defiant king Jehoiakim, 
it was re-written by Baruch from the dictation 
of Jeremiah, and thus it has come down 
to us. And that it has come down to our day 
for a purpose, and for the purpose expressed in 
verse 3, is manifest; for the prophecy is not 
only against Israel, but "against all the nations." 
And glancing back to chapter 25:29-38, 
we see that the Prophet is foretelling the 
great time of trouble spoken of by Daniel and 
by our Lord, which is due to take place in the 
end or harvest of this Gospel age— a period of 
forty years, from A.D. 1875 to 1915— in the 
very midst of which time we are now living, 
and the signs of which trouble are now manifest 
to all thinking minds. -See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. I., Chapter xv. 

The Prophet declares that the trouble is to 
be upon "all the kingdoms of the world, which 
are upon the face of the earth" (25:26); "for 
the Lord hath a controversy with the nations." 
(25:31.) No trouble that has ever yet come 
upon the world answers to the many prophetic 
descriptions of this one, and none has ever yet 
involved all nations. In chapters 50 and 5 1 
we have the significant prophecies against Babylon 
—not merely the Babylon of old, although 
it was included, but especially against Babylon 
the Great, the Mother of Harlots, which the 
literal Babylon symbolized— the Babylon of 
Revelation. And when it is remembered that 
the Book of Revelation was given as a prophecy 
of things then future (Rev. 1:1), and that 
literal Babylon was in ruins centuries before 
this prophecy concerning mystic Babylon was 
written, it requires only a little comparison of 
the two prophecies to show that the major portion 
of Jeremiah's pertains to mystic Babylon, 
and is just about to find its fulfilment upon 
"Christendom" so-called. Compare Jer. 50:15,29 
with Rev. 18:6; Jer. 50:38 with 
Rev. 16:12; Jer. 50:46 with Rev. 18:9; 
Jer. 51:6 with Rev. 18:4; Jer. 51:7,8,9 
with Rev. 14:8; 17:4; 18:2,5,9,11,19; 
Jer. 51:13 with Rev. 17:1,15; Jer. 51:33 
with Rev. 14:15,18; Jer. 51:37,45,63,64 
with Rev. 18:2,4,21. 

As we read the words of Jeremiah spoken by 
divine authority against "Great Babylon"— 
"Christendom"— and compare them with those 



of similar import by the Revelator, we call to 
mind the Lord's words to the last phase of the 
Nominal Church— Laodicea, Rev. 3:14— in the 
midst of which we are living; and while noting 
the applicability of the description— "knowest 
not that thou art poor and blind and miserable 
and naked"— we note also the warning, "I 
counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire 
[divine truth], that thou mayest be rich; and 
white raiment [that faith which justifies], that 

R1372:page59 

thou mayest be clothed and that the shame of 
thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine 
eyes with eyesalve [the eyesalve of simplicity 
and sincerity which will remove the films of 
prejudice and duplicity], that thou mayest see." 

"As many as I love [as many as are honest 
and at heart loyal to God] I rebuke and chasten: 
be zealous therefore and repent. ..To 
him that overcometh will I grant to sit with 
me in my throne." The promise here is to 
the individuals: the great nominal church systems 
will not repent and leave the traditions 
of men for the pure word of God, but the individuals 
who hearken to the Lord's voice and 
obey his word (Rev. 18:4), and thus, by overcoming 
the influence and power of error, prove 
their love of the truth and their loyalty to the 
Lord, will receive the great reward— a share 
in the kingdom which shall break the chains of 
error and superstition and sin and "bless all 
the families of the earth."— Gal. 3:16,29. 

R1372:page60 

But the great systems of error, both civil and 
religious, which in these days join hands to 
fortify and uphold each other, and which, calling 
themselves Christian nations and Christian 
churches, dishonor the Lord and his Word by 
their false teachings and evil practices, shall 
feel the righteous indignation of the Lord. It 
matters not if their great ones follow the example 
of Jehoiakim in destroying the parchment 
upon which the words of warning and counsel 
are written, and if they refuse to believe the 
testimony of the prophets and apostles against 
them; the word of the Lord is nevertheless 
sure; and both the individuals and the systems 
which despise his word and cast it from them 
shall feel his hot displeasure, while those who 
humbly hear and heed shall be blessed. 

In view of these things, how appropriate 
are the words of our golden text— "To-day 



if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts." 

R1372:page60 

JEREMIAH PERSECUTED. 



LESSON IX., FEBRUARY 28, JEREMIAH 38:1-13. 

Golden Text— "I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver 
thee."-Jer. 1:19. 

This lesson tells how the faithful Prophet, 
Jeremiah, was persecuted because he boldly 
declared the word of the Lord which foretold 
only trouble upon Israel, and how the government 
foolishly thought to avert the trouble by 
persecuting the Lord's warning messenger, instead 
of by heeding his wise counsel. 

In this the faithful Prophet typified the faithful 
of the Gospel age who will also suffer persecution 
in some shape or form, if they boldly 
declare the whole counsel of God; for, until 
the Kingdom of God is established in the earth, 
"all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall 
suffer persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12; Phil. 1:29.) 
And the Apostle Paul points those of the Gospel 
Church, who are running for the prize of our 
high calling, to the noble, self-sacrificing faithfulness 
of the ancient worthies who endured so 
much for their faithfulness to the Lord and his 
truth. -Heb. 11. 

The deliverance promised to Jeremiah in the 
words of our golden text was not to be a deliverance 
from persecution or even from death, but 
merely such protection as would prevent his enemies 
from prevailing against him to hinder the 
Lord's purposes in him. The Lord does not 
engage to deliver his children from all the ills 
of this present life. They are permitted to 
share them with the rest of mankind, and even 
to suffer injustice and abuse and often martyrdom 
for righteousness; but if faithful unto 
death— loyal and true to God and to his truth 
and to conscience— their glorious deliverance 
will come at last with an abundant entrance into 
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ— those of the Gospel age 
into the spiritual phase of that kingdom, and 
those of the Jewish age into the earthly phase 
of it. During this time in which God's people 
pray, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven," they, as its representatives, 
suffer violence as foretold (Matt. 11:12); 
and as it was with the Master, so it is 



with his followers, the violence comes more 
from worldly-spirited ones in the nominal church 
than from the open rejecters of God. 

As with the Master, so with the true followers, 
the persecutions may be more open and 
more severe at some times than at others, but 
no radical and complete change may be expected 
until the kingdom is the Lord's and he 
is the governor among the nations. (Psa. 22:28.) 
"Then shall the righteous [the wheat of 
this Gospel age] shine forth as the sun in the 
kingdom of their Father." (Matt. 13:43.) No 
longer shall they suffer the scorn, contempt and 
opprobrium of the world with Christ (2 Tim. 2:12; 
Rom. 8: 17), but they shall be glorified 
with him as joint-heirs with him in his kingdom 
which shall bless the whole world, including 
those who ignorantly persecute them now, 
and bringing all to a clear knowledge of the truth. 

R1372:page60 

THE DOWNFALL OF JUDAH. 



LESSON X., MARCH 6, JEREMIAH 39:1-10. 

Golden Text— "Behold, your house is left unto you 
desolate. "-Matt. 23:38. 

In this lesson we have an exhibition of the 
severity of God's dealings with his covenant 
people when, notwithstanding the Lord's repeated 
expostulations, warnings and chastisements, 
they wilfully pursued a course in violation 
of their national vows. Israel, unlike any 
other nation of the world, was brought into 
special relationship with God. God chose them 
to be his people, and favored them above all 
other people, by giving them his law, by raising 
up for them judges and prophets, and by 
specially guarding and directing them in so far 
as they submitted to his will, as well as by 
warning, counseling and chastising them when 
they became wilful and disobedient. 

On the other hand, Israel, as a nation, entered 
into a solemn covenant with the Lord, 
saying, "All that the Lord hath spoken we will 
do." (Exod. 19:1-8.) For the faithful keeping 
of this covenant God promised them all 
manner of earthly blessings— blessings in the 
city, blessings in the field, blessings of a numerous 
offspring and of the increase of their cattle 
and their flocks, blessings of their basket and 



R1372:page61 

store, and ample protection from all their national 
enemies. (Deut. 28:1-14; Lev. 26:1-13.) 
But if they would disregard their covenant, 
corresponding curses were pronounced against 
them. If they walked contrary to him the 
Lord declared his intention to walk contrary 
to them.-Deut. 28:15-68; Lev. 26:14-46. 

It was in fulfilment of this covenant on God's 
part that the events of this lesson came to pass. 
Judah, like backsliding Israel (the ten tribes), 
which had been previously carried away captives 
(2 Kings 17:1-24), had not profited by 
that example of the Lord's displeasure, nor by 
the warnings of his prophets, but had out-rivaled 
her sister in corruption (Jer. 3:8); and 
now her cup of iniquity was full and the Lord 
poured upon her her merited punishment, due 
alike to king and people; for "neither Zedekiah, 
nor his servants, nor the people of the 
land, did hearken unto the words of the Lord 
which he spake by the prophet Jeremiah." 

The seventy years which followed the overthrow 
here depicted are frequently referred to as 
the seventy years captivity, but the Scriptures 
designate them the seventy years desolation of the 
land— a desolation which had been predicted by 
the prophet Jeremiah (25:1 1), saying, "And this 
whole land shall be a desolation, and this nation 
shall serve the king of Babylon seventy 
years." The completeness of the desolation is 
shown in verses 8 and 9 of this lesson and also 
in 2 Chron. 36:17-21; and although the king 
of Babylon allowed certain of the poor of the 
land to remain, and gave them vineyards and 
fields, yet it was the Lord's purpose that the 
land of Israel should be desolate seventy years, 
and so it was. In the same year Gedaliah, 
whom the king of Babylon had made governor 
and under whom many of the Jewish fugitives 
were disposed to return from neighboring countries, 
was assassinated, and the entire population 
speedily removed into Egypt for fear of 
the wrath of the king of Babylon.— 2 Kings 25:21-26; 
Jer. 41:1-3; 43:5,6. 

The reason why the land must be desolate, 
and that for exactly seventy years, is a very interesting 
study, and it is clearly stated to be— 
"To fulfill the word of the Lord by the mouth 
of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her 
sabbaths; for as long as she lay desolate she 
kept sabbath to fulfill threescore and ten [70] 
years." (2 Chron. 36:21.) For a full explanation 
of this see MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., 
Chap. vi. The significance of the seventy 



years desolation is shown on page 191. 

To consider the subject of this lesson merely 
as a scrap of history and to draw a moral lesson 
therefrom is to fail, utterly, of getting its true 
significance. It should be considered in its 
relationship to the great plan of God in which 
it was a clearly marked and important step. 

(1) It marks the beginning of the great 
Jubilee cycle. 

(2) It marks the close of God's typical 
kingdom, of which Zedekiah was the last king, 
and concerning whom it was prophesied: "And 
thou, death-deserving wicked one, prince of Israel, 
whose day is come at the time of the iniquity 

of the end [or termination of the typical 
Kingdom of God]— Thus saith the Lord Eternal, 
Remove the mitre, and take off the crown: 
this shall not be so always; exalt him that is 
low, and make low him that is high. Overthrown, 
overthrown, overthrown will I render 
it also, and it shall not belong (to any one), 
until he come whose right it is, and I will give 

R1373 : page 61 

it him."— Ezek. 21:31,32.— Leeser's 
translation. 

(3) It marks the beginning of the Times of 
the Gentiles, concerning which our Lord said, 
"Jerusalem shall [continue to] be trodden down 
of the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles 
are fulfilled" [or completed].— Luke 21:24. 

Nearly twenty-five hundred years have elapsed 
since Zedekiah lost his crown; and every scattered 
Israelite throughout the world realizes 
that not another king of the house of David, 
in which centered all the promises, has ever 
since been upon the throne. Many of them are 
convinced that they will not have another until 
Messiah shall take to himself his great power 
and reign. Yet they see not that Jesus of Nazareth 
is the promised one. The eyes of their 
understanding are yet blinded by prejudice. 
They see not that the heir of the throne must 
come from the seed of David, although they are 
witnesses that since the rejection of Jesus the 
genealogies which previously were sacredly cared 
for have been lost, and none have been kept 
for centuries by which they could distinguish 
an heir to David's throne. In fact, all tribal 
and family relationships are now obliterated 
among the Jews. But, thank God, the morning 
of the restitution age is dawning, and in that 
day their blindness will be healed and they 
will recognize the fact that the one whom they 
pierced is both the son and the Lord of David, 



and the one whose right it is, to take the throne 
and to fulfil all the gracious promises of God. 
While the Jews have been thus unbelieving 
of God's Word and ignorant of the steps of his 
great plan, the other nations have erred in another 
way. Seeing Israel's kingdom cut off, 
and finding themselves for centuries uninterfered 
with in ruling the world, they conclude 
that it shall so continue always, and know not 
that their days of empire are limited to "seven 
times" or 2520 years, which will end in A.D. 

R1373 : page 62 

1915, giving place to the Kingdom of God in 
the hands of the Messiah— him whose right it 
is to rule the world, and through whose kingdom 
all the families of the earth shall be blessed. 

Even the majority of the Christian people 
who throughout the civilized world study this 
lesson, and who for years have prayed, "Thy 
Kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it 
is done in heaven," have no expectation that he 
who redeemed the world is yet to be its veritable 
ruler, taking the kingly scepter and crown 
of which those removed from Zedekiah were 
only the types, and reorganizing God's Kingdom 
"under the whole heavens" of which the 
kingdom of Israel was but a figure. 

The Golden Text has no direct reference to 
the lesson, although connected with the same 
divine plan. It marks another step in that 
plan. When the seventy years of desolation 
were ended, God opened the way for the return 
to the land of promise of all those Israelites who 
had faith in his promises; yet under such difficulties 
and trials as served to sift and test them. 
But although they tried often to re-establish 
their own government, they were not permitted 
so to do, but were continually "overturned" 
between the several successive empires of gentile 
times. Nevertheless God kept them together 
as a people until Christ came (Gen. 49:10), 
that as a people they should have the first opportunity 
to accept him and come into the 
higher favor of the New Covenant. 

It was after the Savior and his disciples had 
for three and a half years proclaimed the Kingdom 
at hand, and ready to be given them if 
they were ready to accept it properly (and when, 
rejecting it, they were crying out "Crucify 
him"), that the time came for the utter desolation 
of that nation as a people in the words of the 
golden text. There was the great turning point 
in Israel's history. The desolation of the land 
for seventy years and the removal of the crown 



and kingdom for 2520 years was a great calamity, 
but the leaving of the house utterly desolate 
as a result of their rejecting and crucifying 
the King has been far worse, themselves being 
the witnesses. 

Meantime what the nation of Israel rejected 
was accepted by a remnant of that people 
(Rom. 1 1 :7) and the foreordained number is 
being completed from among the gentiles— a 
people for his name— the Bride and joint-heir 
of the King of Glory. Soon this "little flock" 
will be complete, the union of Bridegroom and 
Bride will follow, and then the Kingdom of God 
will come in power and great glory; and fleshly 
Israel will be first of the nations to realize 
its Millennial blessings.— Rom. 11:20-33. 

These various topics are fully discussed in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chapters xiii. and 
xiv., and Vol. II., Chapters iv., v. and vi. 

R1373 : page 62 

PROMISE OF A NEW HEART. 



LESSON XL, MARCH 13, EZEK. 36:25-38. 

Golden Text— "A new heart also will I give you, and 
a new spirit will I put within you."— Ezek. 36:26. 

In our last lesson we saw Judah in distress, 
her crown removed, her holy city and temple 
in ruins, and her people given to the sword and 
to captivity. The expostulations and warnings 
of the prophet Jeremiah had not availed to turn 
them from their evil course, and consequently 
the wrath of God was visited upon them, as it 
had been previously visited upon her sister 
Samaria (the ten tribes). But although multiplied 
were their iniquities and their crimes, the 
Lord did not utterly cast away his people, but 
in great mercy remembered them, even in the 
land of their captivity, where he was represented 
in their midst by the prophet Ezekiel, 
who for twenty-two years delivered unto them 
the Word of the Lord— words of reproof and 
denunciation, and also words of promise and 
hope, of which those of this lesson are a pleasing 
sample. As we peruse these words of promise 
and call to mind the miserable idolatries, 
licentiousness and ingratitude of this hard-hearted 
and stiff-necked people, let us not fail 
to mark the loving kindness of our God, his 
mercy and faithfulness, his slowness to anger 
and his plenteous grace. And while we do so, 



let us not forget the typical character of his 

dealings with Israel— that in chastising and correcting 

and forgiving and restoring and promising 

to bless and fully re-instate them in his 

favor, he is illustrating his great love and mercy 

and his everlasting kindness toward the whole 

world whom he so loved as to give his only 

begotten Son to redeem, and whom he purposes 

in due time to bring to a knowledge of 

the truth and to a full opportunity, under the 

most favorable conditions, of securing everlasting 

life. (1 Tim. 2:4-6.) The final restoration 

and blessing of Israel here predicted is 

only the first-fruits of that abundant grace which 

is in store for all the world, to be manifested in 

due time. 

This prophecy has not yet been fulfilled, but 
clearly relates to the final restoration of Israel 
to the land of promise and to the favor of God, 
when the long period of their chastisement unmixed 
with favor (Jer. 16:13-18) is ended, 
and when he who redeemed all and "whose 
right it is" to reign over Israel and the world 
shall have come again and taken the dominion. 

The words of the Prophet previous to the 
promises of blessing in this lesson (verses 16-24) 

R1373 : page 63 

recall the numerous sins of Israel as the 

cause for their dispersion among the heathen, 

and remind them of how they had brought disgrace 

upon the name of the Lord in all the 

countries whither they went, and that they have 

no claim upon the mercy and forbearance of 

God. But, notwithstanding all this, he declares 

the Lord's purpose to gather them out from 

among the heathen, and out of all the countries, 

into their own land, and "then" to cleanse and 

bless them; and in this great exhibition of his 

forbearance and love to a notoriously stiff-necked 

and rebellious house, to exalt his great 

name among the nations— a name in which 

they, as well as Israel, may safely trust, since 

the ample provisions of his plan are for the salvation 

of all, of whatever tribe or nation, who 

trust and obey him when brought to the full 

knowledge of the truth. 

Verse 24. "For I will take you from among 
the heathen, and gather you out of all countries, 
and will bring you into your own land." 
This unquestionably refers to the literal and 
final regathering of Israel to Palestine— the 
land which God promised to Abraham, saying, 
"Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the 
place where thou art, northward, and southward, 



and eastward, and westward; for all the 

land which thou seest, to thee will I give it and 

to thy seed forever." (Gen. 13:14,15; 17:8.) 

It is the land of which Stephen said (Acts 7:5) 

Abraham never owned a foot, but in the 

confident hope of which he died. Such a promise, 

made to Abraham, as well as to his seed, and 

made by God who cannot lie, and which Abraham 

never realized before he died, manifestly 

implies the resurrection of Abraham, as well as 

of that large proportion of his seed which has 

gone down into the grave, in order to the receiving 

of the land. Nor was "the land" here 

used in a mystical sense: it was plainly— "all 

the land which thou seest," and, as stated in Gen. 17:8, 

"the land wherein thou art a stranger, 

all the land of Canaan." 

Such an interpretation of this promise is amply 
supported by the Prophet in the succeeding 
chapter (37:12-14), where he says, "Thus 
saith the Lord Jehovah: Behold, O my people 
[Israel— verse 1 1], I will open your graves, and 
cause you to come up out of your graves, and 
bring you into the land of Israel. And ye shall 
know that I am Jehovah when I have opened 
your graves, O my people, and brought you up 
out of your graves, and shall put my spirit in 
you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you in 
your own land: then shall ye know that I Jehovah 
have spoken it and performed it, saith 
Jehovah." It is also in perfect harmony with 
the words of Paul and of our Lord Jesus— 
"There shall be a resurrection of the dead, 
both of the just and unjust." "Marvel not at 

R1374:page63 

this: for the hour is coming in the which all 
that are in the graves shall hear his voice [the 
voice of the Son of Man], and shall come forth; 
they that have done good, unto the resurrection 
of life; and they that have done evil, unto 
the resurrection of judgment"*— trial.— Acts 24:15; 
John 5:28,29. 

This great regathering of all Israel to the 
land of promise, which shall by and by include 
their risen dead as well as the living, is already 
begun in the remarkable exodus thither of their 
living representatives which is attracting the 
attention of the whole civilized world. And 
God's expressed purpose of driving and gathering 
them out of all the lands whither he had 
scattered them (Jer. 16:15) is being accomplished 
in this our day. 

It is on this promise of the receiving again of 
Israel into divine favor that Paul bases an argument 



for the resurrection of the world, saying, 
"If the casting away of them be the reconciling 
of the world [the breaking down of the middle 
wall of partition between Jew and Gentile 
(which previously excluded the Gentiles from 
any share in the typical reconciliation, effected 
for Israel only under their Law Covenant), and 
the opening of the New Covenant to all— to the 
Jew first and also to the Gentile] what shall the 
receiving of them [back to divine favor] be 
[imply] but life from the dead" [—a resurrection 
of the dead ones]? (Rom. 11:15.) It will 
imply that the whole world, of which Israel is 
to be a first-fruit, is shortly to receive the 
gracious opportunity of restitution or resurrection 
which the death of Christ purchased, and 
which the exaltation and glorious reign of Christ 
and the Church shall accomplish. 

If some think they have reason still to doubt 
the restitution of wicked Israel, the first-fruits, 
and of the wicked world (whom they represented 
in type) back to divine favor and life 
and to the possession of the earth for an everlasting 
inheritance, let them turn to Ezek. 16:46-63 
and see how God promises to restore 
even the wicked Sodomites; and let them remember 
also the word of the Lord Jesus (Matt. 10:15), 
that in that day of judgment when he 
is governor over the nations "it will be more 
tolerable for Sodom" than for Israel— the chastisement 



*The Greek word krisis here rendered "damnation" 
in the Common Version is more properly "judgment" in 
the Revised Version and in the Emphatic Diaglott. The 
same Greek word is translated "judgment" in thirty-nine 
instances, and in only two others is it rendered "damnation" 
—a word to which modern theology has attached the 
unwarrantable idea of eternal torment, but which otherwise 
signifies simply judgment or trial, including, of course, 
the result or sentence, to either life or death, at its close. 

R1374:page64 

and discipline necessary to their restoration 
to righteousness will be less severe for 
them than for some who are of the natural lineage 
of Abraham. 

Verse 25. "Then will I sprinkle clean water 
[pure truth and righteous influences] upon you, 
and ye shall be clean. From all your filthiness, 
and from all your idols, will I cleanse you." 
There will be no desire, nor incentive, nor 
temptation to idolatrous worship then. Satan 
shall be bound and shall deceive the nations no 



more, and the knowledge of the Lord shall fill 
the whole earth. 

Verse 26 promises a new heart— a heart of 
flesh, subject to the blessed influences of truth 
and righteousness, and no longer callous and 
indifferent alike to the appeals of love and the 
claims of justice. The word "new" might properly 
be translated renewed or repaired as the 
same word is frequently rendered. The heart 
or disposition of man was not hard and bitter 
and selfish originally: when fresh, newly created, 
he was declared to be the image of the 
God of love. Sin, disobedience, brought the 
penalty, death, which has impaired the image 
of God, and in every way degraded man. (Rom. 5:12.) 
The creating of man was a momentary 
act, but the re-creating, the re-generation, 
the re-newing, the re-storing of his heart will 
be a gradual work and will require and have the 
Millennial age or times of restitution for its accomplishment. 
(Acts 3:19-21; Matt. 19:28.) 
The creation of Adam, and the race provided for 
in him, was without choice to the creatures; 
but while the way, the truth and the life of regeneration 
are provided for all freely, in Christ, none 
will be regenerated contrary to his own will 
and choice. God in Christ has paid the penalty 
of Adam's sin for him and all in him, and 
has provided the coming times of restitution in 
which to make known his favor to every creature, 
through the Church, selected during the 
Gospel age. But after he has made the provision 
for all, only those who accept of those 
New Covenant favors will be recognized by 
him as "my people." 

Verse 27 promises that the spirit of God and 
of Christ, the spirit of love, as distinguished 
from the spirit of selfishness, shall dwell in 
them to inform and assist them to do right. 
He will cause them to walk in his statutes— inclining 
and enabling them to be obedient. 

Verses 28-30 promise the divine protection 
and cleansing and abundant provisions of corn 
and fruit and the increase of the field, and no 
more famine while the restored Israelites dwell 
safely in the land which God gave unto their 
fathers. Let us not forget, however, the double 
application of this prophecy. As Israel signifies 
those who are blessed and favored of God and includes 
all such, with the natural seed as a first-fruit, 
so the land of Israel in its larger sense 
will be the renewed earth, Paradise restored. 

Verses 31 and 32 remind the restored ones of 
their unworthiness of all these favors— the free, 
unmerited gifts of God, and show the confusion 
and shame and repentance of all who will 



constitute the Israel referred to. 

Verses 33-35 declare that the long barren 
and desolate land of Palestine shall be cultivated, 
inhabited, its cities rebuilt, and made so 
flourishing that those who pass through it then 
shall say, "This land that was desolate is become 
like the garden of Eden"— and the entire 
earth shall blossom as the rose. 

Verse 36 shows that as these blessings progress, 
all will be witnesses of God's faithful 
goodness to his people. 

Verses 37 and 38 point out the necessity for 
co-operation on the part of any who would enjoy 
the blessings promised— prayer being a 
token of the soul's sincere desire— and promises 
the remarkable increase of the Lord's holy 
flock at that time. This reminds us of the 
words of our Lord, "Other sheep I have 
that are not of this fold; them also I must 
bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there 
shall be one flock and one shepherd." (John 10:16.) 
Every soul that longs for the truth is 
one of the Lord's lost sheep; and every such 
one will be found during the Millennial age, 
and will be brought into harmony with all 
God's sheep in heaven and on earth. All will 
be consecrated to the Lord and all will walk in 
his ways. And so changed will be the public 
sentiment of that day, that even upon the bells 
of the horses will be inscribed, "Holiness unto 
the Lord." (Zech. 14:20.) Blessed assurance! 
Glorious day! when not only Israel, the first 
fruits, but all who are feeling after righteousness 
and the true God shall be recovered from present 
blindness; and, recognizing the reign of 
Christ begun, shall say, "Blessed is he that 
cometh in the name of Jehovah." For evidence 
of its close proximity see MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. II., The Time Is At Hand. 



page 64 

FURTHER READING MATTER FOR YOUR INTERESTED FRIENDS. 

WHILE A SAMPLE COPY OF THE WATCH TOWER OR ONE 
OF OUR FREE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS MAY START A HUNGRY 
SOUL TO INVESTIGATING, THEY CAN DO LITTLE MORE. TELL SUCH 
THAT THE HELP THEY NEED FOR UNDERSTANDING THE BIBLE IN 
THE LIGHT OF PRESENT TRUTH IS MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. 
-"THE PLAN OF THE AGES"-OVER 260,000 ALREADY PUBLISHED 
-350 PAGES. TELL THEM OF THE BENEFIT IT HAS BEEN TO 
YOUR OWN HEART AND HEAD, AND HOW YOU VALUE IT, AND THAT 
IT IS ONLY 25 CENTS POST PAID-OR LOANED TO THOSE TOO POOR 
TO BUY-AND URGE THEM TO SEND FOR IT AT ONCE. 



page 66 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



OUR ANNUAL GATHERING. 



The usual, annual gathering of Believers at 
Allegheny, Pa., for the study of the Word of the 
Lord and to commemorate his death by celebrating 
the Memorial Supper on its Anniversary, 
is drawing near. 

Particulars as to Excursion rates, etc., will 
be given in our next issue. We now merely 
announce the dates. 

The Meetings for Scripture study (in connection 
with which an opportunity will be afforded 
any who desire to be immersed) will 
begin on Thursday, April 7th. On the evening 



of Sunday, April 10th, the Last Supper and 
death of our Redeemer will be commemorated. 
The session will close April 14th, although 
many will probably be unable to remain longer 
than the 1 1th. 



R1378 : page 66 

A MISAPPREHENSION. 



A Brother writes that he thinks that the 
"Good Hopes," mentioned in our issue before 
last, resemble Babylon too much. He adds 
that the publishing of the amounts promised 
and the results are a reflection upon himself and 
others who are doing all they can do for the 
spread of the Truth, in the purchase and circulation 
of O.T. Tracts, Dawns, etc. 

The Brother takes a wrong view of the matter. 
What we suggested (we did not urge it, although 
we might have done so without erring) was that 
all, so far as possible, adopt the rule which the 
Apostle Paul lays down— the setting aside of 
something, according to our prosperity (whether 
one cent or one dollar or a thousand dollars), 
on the first day of each week, as a memorial of 
the Lord's blessings during the week ended, 
and of our thankfulness. We believe that but 
few could not spare and consecrate at least one 
cent a week, and we believe that such would be 
blessed in so doing. 

We did not suggest or urge that such sums 
could only be used through the "Good Hopes," 
but merely announced that hereafter O.T. 
Tracts, Nos. 1 to 6, and 10 would be supplied 
free to all Z.W.T. subscribers, so that those 
who have greater opportunities for circulating 
tracts than for buying them, could have the 
better opportunity; and suggested that on the 
blanks furnished in the November TOWER, the 
"Good Hopes" of all who desired to help in 
this and the general work could be declared in 
a most convenient way. 

We have never blamed Babylon for her liberal 
donations to missions, tracts and charities. 
The things to be blamed are, (1) the methods 
often used to secure the money, such as fairs, 
suppers, etc., and by appealing to the motive 
of pride, by publishing names and amounts. 
(2) We have criticized the way in which these 
large sums of money have been used, in publishing 
tracts full of bad tidings of great misery, 



and by putting into civilized and heathen 
minds false doctrines, calculated to mislead and 
blind them. 

To this Brother and to all we say— the Apostle 
Paul's advice in 1 Cor. 16:2 is good; and 
it will do you all good to follow it. Then use 
the money thus set aside to God's glory, in the 
best way your reason and conscience, directed 
by God's Word, dictate. 



R1380 : page 66 

THE SITUATION IN GERMANY. 



The recent rioting in Berlin, in which some 
6000 of the very poor participated; which rifled 
baker-shops and beerhouses, and surrounded 
the Emperor's palace, shows the extremity of 
the lowest class of society there, but does not 
alter our judgment of the general situation as expressed 
in the "View" of our Jan'y 15th issue. 



R1375 : page 67 

VOL. XIII. MARCH 1, 1892. NO. 5. 

THE DOCTRINAL TEST IN METHODISM. 



The Pittsburgh Christian Advocate, a Methodist 
publication, recently contained an editorial 
which serves as a straw to show how the 
still rising wind-storm, which has caused so 
much commotion in Presbyterianism, is beginning 
to affect Methodism. 

The article was a plea for the abolition of the 
doctrinal test required of lay members, on 
the ground that it is a violation of Wesley's 
teaching on that subject, contrary to the constitution 
of the society, and mischievous in its 
effects, illustrations of which were given in men 
who were kept out of the church by it, though 
heartily in sympathy with its otherwise free, 
aggressive and progressive spirit, and in men 
driven out of it by the conviction that they 
ought not to pretend to believe what they do 
not believe. 

Commenting on this, the Pittsburgh Times 
says:— 



"The article in the Advocate repeats with 
evidence that this requirement is not consonant 
with Wesley's idea; says 'furthermore, this requirement 
is, as it seems to us, unconstitutional,' 
and gives plain reasons from the most authoritative 
source for thinking so; calls attention 
to the contradiction which has worked the mischief 
just spoken of— 'We who in our history 
have laid the least stress on mere dogma now 
stand forth as the most exacting in this particular;' 
and insists that the only thing which 
should be required of the private member is 
that he show an honest and earnest wish to lead 
a good and useful life. 

"Methodism claims to have on its rolls and in 
its congregations about one-fifth of the Protestants 
of the United States. Every preacher knows 
that there are scores of the most active and influential 
members who do not believe doctrines 
which stand out prominently in the articles of 
faith, and that the church dare not try to enforce 
a literal subscription to them. This article 
in the Advocate is a challenge to the exaction 
which does violence to the history and hampers 
the progress of the church. The article is noteworthy 
as showing that Methodism is falling 
into line with those who deny that a Christian 
life is dependent upon subscription to an interpretation 
of Christian doctrine made by men 
who were no better qualified to interpret it than 
they are themselves." 

The suggestion of the Advocate is a good one, 
so far as it goes, but if Methodists would go 
further and abolish the distinctions of clergy 
and laity and remember that they are all brethren, 
and that the Word of God is the only 
legitimate creed for Christians, they would be 
getting a little nearer the true position of the 
Church. 

Then let them not forget that the Lord himself 
is the only rightful Head of the Church, 
and consequently the only authority in it. A 
recognition of his headship or supreme authority 
in the Church, and of his Word alone as its 
doctrinal standard, with faith in him as the 
Redeemer and in the power of his truth to 
sanctify, together with a recognition of the individual 
liberty of consecrated believers, to 
grow in grace and in the knowledge of the 
truth, is the only proper attitude of the Church. 

The article, we think, is very significant of the 
fears which thinking Methodists have for Methodism 

R1375 : page 68 

in view of the rising breeze which has 



already struck and so badly damaged Presbyterianism. 

The thoughtful and solicitous begin 

to feel the necessity for observing some wise 

precautions so that the storm will not strike 

them so severely when it does come. 

It is significant also of another fact, viz., that 
Methodists— even those very anxious to support 
and perpetuate Methodism— care more for the 
name and for the numbers and prestige of the 
denomination, than for the doctrines that constitute 
Methodism and which distinguish it from 
other isms. But if the doctrinal tests be abolished 
among the lay members, why not among 
the clergy as well, leaving all free to accept 
and teach what they honestly believe? O, say 
they, that would be too radical; for then the 
world would soon discover that Methodists are 
not Methodists at all. We must still have a 
Methodist yoke and must put it on somebody's 
neck; and since the clergy are paid for wearing 
it they will submit to it, but the membership, 
having no such inducement, will not; and if we 
try to make them do so, they will just leave, 
and we want to retain them, as every one counts 
both numerically and financially. 

Very sound logic that, from the standpoint 
of worldly policy. But what requirement shall 
we make of members? is the inquiry. Now 
mark the suggestion. Is it that they should 
recognize themselves as justly condemned in 
Adam, but justified to life through faith in the 
precious blood of Christ shed for their redemption 
and the remission of sins? Is it that they 
recognize the Word of God as the only rule of 
faith and practice, and having repented of and 
forsaken sin that they desire henceforth to conform 
their lives thereto? No: the article insists 
that "the only thing which should be required 
of the lay member is that he show an 
honest and earnest wish to lead a good and useful 
life." 

Why, who could not be a Methodist under 
those conditions. Mr. Ingersoll would make 
a very good Methodist; so would Mr. Carnegie, 
though he claims to hold the principles of Buddhism. 
He is surely leading a good and useful 
life— has plenty of money and appropriates 
much of his surplus wealth to the public 
benefit. And there are scores and hundreds 
and thousands of such— very good Methodists, 
indeed. 

But all this indicates still further the trend 
of Methodism to be, in common with other 
denominations, toward open infidelity. The 
church nominal is full of infidels, and the above 
is an open confession of the fact to those who 



are sufficiently awake to read it. 

Such a precaution as this article suggests will 
not, however, be able to protect Methodism 
against the rising storm. It is coming, and 
coming, too, with tremendous force; and every 
ism in the broad domain of Christendom may 
well tremble in view of it. But let the few 
precious saints who love the Lord more than 
the isms, and the Bible more than the creeds, 
and the truth more than the speculations of 
men, cling yet closer to the Rock of ages. 
Here only is safety, and not in fellowship and 
alliance with the hosts of unbelievers, whatever 
be their name or position among men. Remember 
that the true saints whom alone God 
recognizes as his Church are a "little flock"— 
"A little flock disowned of men, 
But owned and loved of God." 



R1374:page68 

ROTHSCHILD PURCHASING LAND IN 
PALESTINE. 



In answer to queries on the subject, we reply: 
We have not yet received a reply to the 
letters to Barons Rothschild and Hirsch, proposing 
a plan for the organization of Palestine 
as a nation. It appears, however, from the 
clipping below, that one of the gentlemen is 
already acting on a part of the suggestions offered. 
It reads as follows:— 

"Jewish exiles from Russia and Poland are 
really to have a home in Palestine after all. 
Through Baron Edmond de Rothschild a tract 
of land forty miles east of Lake Tiberias, and 
said to be extremely fertile, has been bought. 
No families will be sent until some young men, 
who are to go as pioneers, have made the 
country habitable."— Milwaukee Sentinel. 



A wise man gets happiness from what he is 
rather than from what he has. What he is remains. 
What he has— who will insure that? 
"Therefore, with all thy getting, get 
understanding."— Sel. 



R1380 : page 69 



"PEACE BE UPON THEE." 



[In a recent book, by Oliver Wendell Holmes, "Over 
the Teacups," the following beautiful stanzas are found. 
The author introduces them with these words:— 

I was crowded between two children of Israel, and 
gave free inward expression to my feelings. All at once 
I happened to look more closely at one of my neighbors, 
and saw that the youth was the very ideal of the Son 
of Mary.] 

A fresh, young cheek whose olive hue 
The mantling blood shows faintly through; 
Locks dark as midnight, that divide 
And shade the neck on either side; 
Soft, gentle, loving eyes that gleam 
Clear as a starlit mountain stream; 
So looked that other child of Shem, 
The maiden's Boy of Bethlehem! 

—And thou couldst scorn the peerless blood 
That flows unmingled from the Flood,— 
Thy scutcheon spotted with the stains 
Of Norman thieves and pirate Danes! 
The New World's foundling, in thy pride 
Scowl on the Hebrew at thy side, 
And lo! the very semblance there 
The Lord of Glory deigned to wear! 

I see that radiant image rise, 
The flowing hair, the pitying eyes, 
The faintly crimsoned cheek that shows 
The blush of Sharon's opening rose,— 
Thy hands would clasp his hallowed feet 
Whose brethren soil thy Christian seat, 
Thy lips would press his garments hem 
That curl in wrathful scorn for them! 

A sudden mist, a watery screen, 
Dropped like a veil before the scene; 
The shadow floated from my soul, 
And to my lips a whisper stole:— 
"Thy prophets caught the Spirit's flame, 
From thee the Son of Mary came, 
With thee the Father deigned to dwell,— 
Peace be upon thee, Israel!" 



R1375 : page 69 
"IN DUE TIME." 



Time is one of the most important factors in 
God's plan. The days of creation were long 
periods of time; the time of man's experience 
with evil has been six days of a thousand years 
each; the day of redemption and of the development 
of the Church has been nearly two 
thousand years. Time has been necessary for 
the accomplishment of God's great work; and 
it has also been necessary in proving to man 
the righteousness of God's character. Only 
time could prove to men his invincible justice. 
Six thousand years ago his sentence of death 
passed upon mankind, and during all that time 
he has permitted generation after generation to 
go down into the grave in the midst of agony 
and blood and tears. And though he loved 
men so, even while they were yet sinners, that 
he spared not his own Son, but freely gave him 
up for us all, yet he has never for a moment 
relented to interpose his power for the relief or 
release of the groaning creation: nor will he 
do so until his "due time"— the time which 
his wisdom appointed, which will be the very 
best time for the securing of the largest possible 
results to the race, both of knowledge and 
of advantageous experience, as well as the development 
of several of the most important 
features of his plan. But as time only can develop 
God's plan, so time only can manifest 
his love, as well as his wisdom, his grace, his 
power and his justice. 

Time will fully manifest the divine wisdom 
in what seems to short-sighted humanity like 
pitiless delays. Already those who are privileged 
to view by faith the divine plan see the 
necessity of time for its full accomplishment. 
It is in view of such necessity that the children 
of God are frequently exhorted to patience. 
God has kindly brought us to his standpoint of 
view and bidden us look into the glorious future 
—to the outcome of his plan; and in proportion 
as we are able to comprehend and believe 
it, we may rest and rejoice in it. But in 
the meantime, being thus graciously refreshed 
by the cheering prospect, we must patiently 
wait for the end, however painful the waiting 
season may be. 

Patience is a virtue which our Heavenly Father 
desires to cultivate in us; and he manifests 
in himself the grandest example of it. 

R1375 : page 70 

Through all the centuries past he has patiently 



endured the reproaches of those who, failing to 

understand the course of his wisdom in executing 

justice and in working out the deep designs 

of his abounding grace, attributed evil, and only 

evil, to his truly glorious and holy character. 

He knows that "in due time" his character 

will be fully vindicated, and so he patiently 

waits and works and endures. So also our Lord 

Jesus waits and endures. He endured great humiliation 

in coming to our low estate. Then 

as a man he patiently endured the contradiction 

of sinners against himself and the ungrateful 

persecution, even unto death, from those 

he came to save. And, like his Heavenly Father, 

through it all he was cheered in consideration 

of that "due time," though then in the 

far distant future, when his character, and also 

the Father's character, would be fully vindicated 

and manifested to every creature in heaven 

and in earth. And still our blessed Lord Jesus 

and our adorable Heavenly Father await with 

patience the grand consummation. So, in 

similar attitude of mind, must we wait; for the 

servant is not above his Lord, and our rejoicing 

in view of the future will, if we have the 

mind of Christ, be not only because of our own 

prospective vindication and glory, but also in 

prospect of the vindication and glory of God 

and of our Lord Jesus, and of the prospective 

everlasting triumph of truth and righteousness. 

The waiting time is by no means a time of 
rejoicing, except in hope. This is a time when 
truth and righteousness are being humbled in 
the dust, when they that live godly must 
suffer persecution, when our eyes must look 
upon scenes of sorrow and mourning, when our 
ears must hear the wails of distress, and when 
our feeble flesh must experience the pangs of 
death. But, O! there is a glorious release to 
come "in due time." Wait for it patiently: 
"Let patience have her perfect work." Submit 
to the humbling process. The Church's pathway 
of present humiliation leads to the future glory. 

"Humble yourselves," says the Apostle, "under 
the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt 
you in due time." Do not make the great 
mistake of seeking present exaltation at the 
expense of that which is to come "in due time" 
to those who patiently endure to the end. It 
is only in proportion as any turn their eyes 
away from the glory to follow "in due time," 
and thus lose faith in it, that they begin to prize 
the trifling recompenses which the world offers 
for the sacrifice of their birthright. Let us, 
therefore, beloved, keep the eye of faith fixed 
upon the hope set before us in the gospel, and, 



forgetting those things that are behind— all 
worldly ambitions, etc.— let us press toward 
the mark for the prize of our high calling, 
which shall indeed be realized by the faithful 
—"in due time;" for "faithful is he that hath 
called you, who also will do it." His purposes 
cannot fail, nor his word return unto him void. 



R1375 : page 70 
VIEWS ABROAD. 



(CONCLUDED FROM OUR LAST ISSUE.) 

Vienna is a fine city, many of its public 
buildings rivaling those of Berlin, though it is 
not so uniformly fine. It is almost entirely 
Roman Catholic. But there is a wide difference 
here between the rich and the very poor. 
Here, and elsewhere through Austria and Russia, 
may be seen women and children carrying 
mortar and bricks, pulling carts like horses and 
carrying immense loads on their heads, or strapped 
on their shoulders. We learned that the 
wages of laboring women there is about twenty 
cents per day; of laboring men, from forty to 
fifty cents per day; and of skilled mechanics, 
from seventy-five to ninety cents per day. 
Beer with bread and cheese seems to constitute 
the regular diet of the very poor. And we 
were told that many of this class are without 
home, seeking shelter for the night often in the 
buildings on which they work during the day. 
Yet one does not observe these things in the 
general appearance of fine cities like Vienna, 
Berlin and Prague. 

In Antwerp and Brussels, cities of Belgium, 
though fine cities in many respects, in Antwerp 
especially, there was more appearance of poverty 

R1375 : page 71 

and of men out of employment, who swarm 
in hundreds about the docks waiting for work. 
We went out there early in the morning, and 
crowds of these men lounged about at almost 
every corner all through the city, but specially 
about the docks. They seemed too, to be just 
the kind for revolt when under strong leadership 
and goaded, as they may yet be, by greater 
necessity. 
Odessa and Kischenev were the only Russian 



cities we visited, and these, especially Odessa, 
presented wide differences between the well-to-do 
and the miserably poor. 

In Russia the government holds an intolerably 
tight grip on every man in the empire, 
and the stranger within their gates is always to 
them a suspicious character. His passport must 
be produced at every hotel and railway station 
before entering or leaving a city or town. The 
hotel proprietor receives your passport and 
hands it over to the Chief of Police, who retains 
it until you are ready to leave, so that any 
stranger could be readily traced as to just when 

R1376 : page 71 

he entered or left the country. Officers and 
authorities are simply civil, indicating that your 
presence is only tolerated, and any books or 
papers in your possession are carefully scrutinized 
to make sure that nothing in them is calculated 
to interfere with their ideas. 

As we passed through a part of Russia and 
witnessed the squalor and ignorance and listless 
idleness of many of the poor moujiks, we 
wondered how they managed, even in the summer 
months, to eke out an existence, and imagined 
what trouble they would be in when the 
severities of winter would overtake them. Many 
of them live in miserable hovels made of mud 
and thatched with straw, consisting of only one 
room, and that so low that they must stoop to 
enter. In many cases the thatched roof slopes 
to the ground on all sides. The soil looked 
barren and they seemed destitute of everything 
that goes to make life even tolerable. 

Leaving the Russian dominions, we next came 
under the authority of the Turks at Constantinople. 
From the Bosphorus the city looks 
most beautiful, but one has no sooner set foot 
on land than his disappointment begins. Here 
is every advantage of climate and location for 
a splendid city, but the blight of Turkish rule 
is on every thing. Passing up a narrow alleyway 
from the landing place, we were halted in 
front of a rough board shed to have our luggage 
overhauled and to produce our passport. After 
considerable delay and inconvenience we were 
permitted to proceed to our hotel, when we were 
surrounded by a miserable, ragged looking set 
of carriers wishing to take our luggage. This 
disposed of, we proceeded with our guide to a 
hotel through narrow, dirty alleys. When we 
called our guide to account for taking us through 
so many alleys, he looked surprised, and said 
these were some of the best streets in the city. 



And, sure enough, we found it even so. In the 
dirty, narrow streets sleepy, disgusting dogs are 
found by scores, and there are thousands of 
them in the city. Donkeys, carts and pedestrians 
jostle one another continually in the middle 
of the streets, the sidewalks seldom being 
more than three feet wide, and all must look 
well to their steps lest they stumble over these 
sacred dogs which the Turks so much reverence 
and will not allow to be destroyed, and which 
are too lazy even to move out of the way. Of 
course they are never muzzled and you must 
run the risks of hydrophobia in hot weather. 
Then your ears are greeted from early morning 
till late at night by the hideous voices of the 
venders of all sorts of merchandise; and when 
they stop to rest thousands of dogs make the 
night hideous with their yells, and you soon 
want to take your departure from the Turkish 
capital . 

The principal cities visited in Italy were 
Brindisi, Naples, Pompeii, Rome, Florence, 
Venice and Milan. Landing in Brindisi from 
our voyage across the Mediterranean from Alexandria, 
Egypt, we were in company with a 
Roman Catholic Patriarch from Jerusalem and 
an under priest. As we had to have our baggage 
examined here, and the Patriarch's turn 
came first, we had an opportunity to see how 
the Italian officials reverence the priesthood. 
One would naturally expect that in Italy reverence 
for the priesthood would lead them almost 
to exempt them from the ordinary searching 
to which other travelers are subjected; but, 
on the contrary, with a gruff, irreverent manner, 

R1376 : page 72 

they diligently overturned everything in the 
old man's trunk and valises, discovering finally 
several bottles of wine and an expensive 
box of snuff. The latter they confiscated, and 
the grumbling dignitary packed up the rest of 
his effects and passed on; but somehow his low, 
broad-brimmed hat and long skirts, together 
with his snuff, etc., made him seem rather unmanly, 
not to say unpriestly. The examination 
of our luggage was very slight in comparison, 
after inquiry had been made and the officials 
were assured that we had no dutiable goods on 
hand. Our guide explained this by saying that 
the officials always consider the word of Protestant 
foreigners more reliable than that of their 
Roman Catholic countrymen, especially the 
priests. Indeed, he told us beforehand that ours 
would scarcely be examined at all if we were 



not in company with the Patriarch, and that 
search of his trunk would probably prove that 
he had not correctly stated its contents. 

The same attitude toward the Papacy was also 
manifest in Rome. Our guide through the 
city, a well informed Italian, and a representative 
of a large class there, was in strong and 
outspoken opposition to such "superstition and 
nonsense," as he termed it. Nor was he satisfied 
with the present government, though, he 
said. "It is much better than the rule of the 
church, but what we want is a republic, like the 
United States of America, or like France." 
And as he pointed out the costly adornings of St. 
Peter's and the Vatican he frequently remarked, 
"All this extravagance is what is impoverishing 
the Italian people; this is not religion: it 
is all done for pride and power." On one of 
the public squares he pointed out the statue of 
Bruno, an independent philosopher of the sixteenth 
century who was arrested and executed 
by the Papal Inquisition. The statue was recently 
erected, and is regarded more as a memorial 
of Italian liberty from the Papal yoke 
than as remembrancer of the teachings of Bruno. 
It is a standing denunciation on the part of the 
people against Papal methods and doctrines, 
and a sure indication of the strong anti-papal 
feeling of the populace. Italy is too well acquainted 
with Papal tactics and Papal oppression 
to have a very cordial affection for that system. 
There is a growing spirit of independence in 
Italy, which neither civil nor ecclesiastical 
power will be able to cope with, when, by and 
by, the people begin to realize their power, and 
determine to strike for freedom. 

Rome is a place of wonderful present, as well 
as historic, interest. The ruins of a dead past 
lie all around on every side, and the indications 
of a dissatisfied present and of a future conflict 
are very manifest. The remains of its ancient 
Coliseum, the glory and the shame of old Rome, 
are a striking symbol of its present inglorious 
pose before the world. The enthusiastic pilgrims 
of the eighth century uttered a noteworthy prophecy 
when they admiringly declared, "As long 
as the Coliseum stands, Rome shall stand; when 
the Coliseum falls, Rome will fall; and when 
Rome falls, the world will fall." Enough of 
this colossal structure still stands to bear witness 
to the cruel barbarity of the period of the 
greatest "glory" of the Roman empire. It is 
a circular structure of massive masonry, around 
the interior of which are successive galleries 
with a seating capacity originally of many thousands, 
and in the center of which is a vast arena, 



where the bloody contests of men with ferocious 
wild beasts feasted the eyes of the Roman lords and 
ladies. Sometimes the victims were volunteers 
from among their best citizens; and when they 
fell in the conflict, as they generally did, their 
splendid funerals from the churches gave an 
additional holiday to the people. Sometimes 
they were prisoners of war, sometimes criminals, 
and many were Christian martyrs. With 
strange feelings we walked about these galleries 
and down into the arena and into some of the 
dungeon cells where criminals were confined 
until the fatal day of their sanguinary conflict 
should furnish amusement and entertainment to 
the cruel throng; and then we passed down into 
the great cages where hungry wild beasts 
were confined. With a shudder we turned 
away and thanked God for the ruin and desolation 
of the place. The Coliseum is now well 
nigh destroyed, and its tottering ruins aptly 
represent the decadence of Roman "glory" today. 
Pius IX., in his time, had some repairs 
made to preserve and prop the crumbling walls 
of the old Coliseum, reminding us of how he 

R1376 : page 73 

and his successors have tried to prop the falling 
structure of the similarly tottering and decaying 
church of Rome; but both symbol and substance 
are doomed to complete destruction, and 
doubtless will go down together in the last 
great conflict, when all the powers of this world 
fall, and the new world or age is ushered in. 
The old adage, "When Rome falls the world 
falls," seems not so far from truth, when one 
sees that "the new heavens and the new earth" 
refers to the new order of things under Christ's 
Millennial reign. 

Rome is full of the monuments of human folly, 
and not the least among them are St. Peter's 
Cathedral and the Vatican, the Pope's palace. 
The former is certainly the most wonderful 
building in the world, as it has been the most 
costly. Its marble floors and columns and statues 
and bas-reliefs as well as its paintings are 
exhibitions of the skill and art of the past 
eighteen centuries; for the whole civilized world 
was laid under tribute at the time of its erection 
and since. Certainly, nowhere did we find superior 
manifestations of skill and art. However, 
the faces of the popes and others there 
represented had that peculiarly treacherous, 
Jesuitical expression of countenance so repulsive 
to the open-hearted and frank. 

Noticing that one of the main entrances of 



St. Peter's was closed, we ascertained the reason 
to be as follows. It has long been the custom 
of the Popes to imitate Israel's Jubilee year 
after a fashion. (How little like the original, 
our regular readers will readily see— others can 
read in Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., Chap, vi.) 
Every fiftieth year at first, and every twenty-fifth 
year more recently, it has been the custom 
for the Pope to represent that door as leading 
into Purgatory, and approaching it he raps on 
it with a small, silver hammer, repeating certain 
Latin words. The Cardinals on the other side 
answer by attacking the wall and digging it 
open, when they march with the Pope through 
the door-way. The Pope then announces 
that so many souls have been liberated from 

R1377 : page 73 

purgatory, and ascending to a balcony extends 
his hands and gives his blessing to the Italian 
people. This door has not been opened lately 
and the people have not received the pontiff's 
blessing— the last Jubilee passing without the 
usual ceremony, because the Pope claims that 
he is deprived of his rights by the government 
which the people support, and that hence he 
cannot bless them. The Italian people, however, 
are getting over some of their superstition 
and are realizing that the Pope's blessings in 
the past have amounted to ignorance, poverty 
and oppression, and that now they are much 
more prosperous without his blessing. One of 
them laughingly related to us these facts. 

While there is poverty in Italy, and an enormous 
debt rests upon the people, we, nevertheless, 
found much less poverty than we expected, 
no abject want being outwardly noticeable. 
The people look well, have comfortable 
looking homes, are generally comfortably clad 
and seem industrious and thrifty. Nor are the 
marks of Romanism so distinguishable in Italian 
faces as in some other parts of the world- 
America, for instance— probably because the 
people there have less reverence for ecclesiastical 
dignity, having been brought into closer 
contact with it and suffered more from it. 

The buried and now partially exhumed city 
of Pompeii, near Naples, Italy, is a wonderful 
testimony of the past. We walked through its 
narrow, stone-paved streets, so narrow that two 
wagons could not pass each other; the sidewalks 
being three and sometimes four feet wide. 
At short intervals were public drinking-fountains 
of stone, worn smooth by the hands of 
those who stopped to drink. There are butcher-shops 



with meat-blocks, etc., and baker-shops 
with large bake-ovens, very like those of the 
present day, their kneading-troughs, etc., and 
some of their bread was found, just as left in 
the ovens, when the city was buried in the volcanic 
ashes of Mt. Vesuvius. We walked into 
the private dwellings, generally square with an 
open court in the center, observed the faded 
pictures frescoed on the walls, an occasional bit 
of statuary, or a "Welcome" inscribed on the 
floor at the entrance, or a small fountain in the 
centre of the court. 

We saw the various articles of furniture, etc., 
recovered from the ruins— their bedsteads, chairs, 
stoves, cooking vessels, table-ware, jewelry, 
surgical and dental instruments— the latter very 

R1377 : page 74 

similar to those of the present day. We entered 

their ancient temples, circus, theaters, courts of 

justice, etc., and saw some of the petrified 

bodies of the ancient inhabitants in various positions, 

just as they were overtaken by the calamity 

of that fatal day. Over eighteen centuries 

have passed since that time, but here is 

their record as plainly written as if they had 

perished but yesterday. 

As we ponder over these strange scenes, the 
query of Ezekiel comes forcibly to mind— 
"Can these dry bones live?"— and then the 
prophecy that, in his own good time, God will 
cause these dry bones (as well as all the rest of 
the world, typified by the "whole house of Israel") 
to hear the word of the Lord and to 
live, and to know that he is the Lord.— 
Ezek. 37. 

In Paris we were continually reminded of the 
part which the French are preparing to take in 
the coming battle of the great day. There is 
intelligence, pride, ambition, a restless spirit 
of liberty and a determination to assert and to 
contend for their ideas, which, while they continually 
lead to factions and party-strife, also 
make them enemies abroad. They are out of 
sorts with the rest of the world and almost 
equally out of sorts with each other. Paris is 
a splendid city, and speaks well for the French 
people in many respects, yet here in the capital 
all their national traits of character, both good 
and bad, are shown with greatest prominence. 

While the city looks well and prosperous, the 
poor there have a very poor showing, and enjoy 
but little of the comforts of home and family 
life. Often the best they can afford is an attic 
to lodge in while they take their meals at some 



of the cheapest restaurants. The French peasantry, 

however, seem thrifty and enterprising, 

and their little homes and farms are neatly kept. 

Everywhere throughout Europe we found preparations 
for war; but the statesmen fear socialism 
still more, and war prospects serve well as 
an excuse for armies which dare not be disbanded 
for fear of anarchy. In answer to our 
queries a merchant of Vienna replied: "It is 
a common saying that, if you turn the wheel 
of fortune three times you may have three wishes, 
but if the people of Europe could have one 
wish granted, that would be the answer to the 
question, How shall we solve the social problem? 
Another gentleman, a judge of one of 
the courts of Germany, doubtfully shook his 
head when this subject was mentioned, and 
said, "We fear great trouble and are doing all 
we can to avert it, and we hope, we hope (?) for 
better things." And so it is everywhere. 

The socialistic sentiments in Europe evidently 
do not arise as a general thing from actual 
distress among the people so much as from an 
awakening intelligence which begins to discern 
the principle of human brotherhood, and the 
common rights of all as members of that brotherhood, 
and to a rising ambition on the part of 
the middle classes to secure so far as possible 
their imagined, as well as their real, rights. 

Viewed from a religious standpoint also, the 
trend of thought in Europe is revolutionary. 
The current is very generally set in the direction 
of rank infidelity, which, when accomplished 
fully, will be a complete revolution from 
the former unquestioning faith, or rather credulity, 
in whatever a time-serving clergy chooses 
to put forth as divinely inspired truth. Those 
days are already past and the world is rapidly 
waking from its former lethargy. From the 
general awakening a few, here and there, are 
rising to a clearer apprehension of truth and 
righteousness, but the majority seem bent on 
discarding all truth as well as superstition and 
are going to the opposite extreme. 

Such, briefly stated, is the outlook of the great 
battle-field of Europe. Yet, notwithstanding 
these ominous signs of the times and the divine 
prophecies of their inevitable culmination, which 
must of necessity be only a few years in the 
distance, having confidence in the power that 
is now holding the winds until the servants of 
God are all sealed, and to control them even 
in their wildest commotion so that their destructive 
power shall only be let loose long enough 
and only go far enough to accomplish the divine 
will in the chastening and preparing of 



humanity for better conditions, we rejoice even 
in this, and hasten to accomplish our appointed 
work of sealing the elect. Let all his messengers 
make haste; for indeed "the time is 
short." --MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



page 75 

INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. 



SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1377 : page 75 
QUARTERLY REVIEW. 



LESSON XII., MARCH 20. 

Golden Text— "The wages of sin is death, but the gift 
of God is eternal life."— Rom. 6:23. 

In our judgment, the best way to review 
is to review— to re-read and carefully ponder 
the lessons of the quarter and their presentation 
in previous issues of the TOWER. 

The golden text is worthy of careful consideration. 
"The wages of sin is death," 
not life in torment, nor life in any sense, 
but total extinction of being. "The dead 
know not any thing." "There is no work, 
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in 
the grave whither thou goest." "Man dieth 
and wasteth away : yea, man giveth up 
the ghost [the breath or spirit of life] and 
where is he?. ..His sons come to honor, 
and he knoweth it not; and they are brought 
low, but he perceiveth it not of them.... 
As the waters fail from the sea, and the 
flood decayeth and drieth up, so man lieth 
down [in death] and riseth not till the heavens 
be no more; [until then] they shall not 
awake nor be raised out of their sleep." 
The present heavens or ruling powers under 
Satan, the present prince, shall give place 
to the new heavens, the Kingdom of God 
under Christ and his Church glorified (the 



Royal Priesthood), during a great time of 

trouble just at hand (Dan. 12:1), in which 

the present rule of evil shall cease and Satan 

be bound. Under the new spiritual 

power (the Kingdom), the "new heavens," 

there shall also be a new social arrangement, 

"a new earth," and then through the Kingdom-power 

not only those alive, but also "all 

that are in their graves," shall come forth— 

"awake" from the sleep of death.— Eccl. 9:5,10; 

Job 14:10,21,11,12; John 11:11-14. 

Death is an actual extinction of being. 
Mark, we do not say that death annihilates 
matter; for matter is indestructible, and 
merely passes from one form to another— 
as solid to liquid or to gas. What we do 
assert is, that being, as a condition, has an 
opposite in non-existence, and that the same 
God who gave us our being can cause that 
being or existence to terminate. "The soul 
(being) that sinneth, it shall die" (Ezek. 18:4,20), 
is God's statement on this subject. 
Nay, more; the privilege of living is dependent 
upon God, since it is "in him we live, 
and move, and have our being" (Acts 17:28), 
and our Golden Text assures us that 
God has decreed that the wages of sin shall 
be death, and that only by his gift or favor 
can any hope to live forever. In view of 
the promised resurrection from death, the 
first death, which now prevails against all, 
is likened to a sleep. (John 11:11; Dan. 12:2.) 
It would have been a sleep that would 
have known no waking, had it not been that 

R1378 : page 75 

God in his grace provided redemption from 

that death which came upon all through 

father Adam, in the death of Christ our 

Lord, who became a man and then gave himself 

our ransom-price— died, the just for the 

unjust. (Rom. 5:12,18,19,20.) Thus the 

sentence of Adam's sin is settled by Christ 

for all who accept his sacrifice and come 

into covenant relationship— which sooner or 

later all must have a chance to do. Thus 

the general resurrection of all is provided 

for; and in view of that awakening from 

death which God had fore-ordained, he and 

all who trust him call the Adamic death a 

sleep, from which all will awake in the Millennial 

morning. But the second death is 

never designated a sleep: because it will 

never end, it will be an everlasting extinction 

of being to all who go into it. The 



soul that sinneth shall die— an everlasting 
punishment for wilful sin against full light 
and opportunity, such as the world will enjoy 
during the Millennium; but which only 
consecrated believers may enjoy now. 

It was in view of the awakening, the resurrection, 
that Job, in the midst of his trouble, 
said, "Oh! that thou wouldest hide me 
in the grave, that thou wouldest keep me 
secret, until thy wrath be past [until the 
time for the curse to be removed by the establishment 
of God's Kingdom in the earth], 
that thou wouldest appoint me a set time, 
and remember me... .All the days of my 
appointed time will I wait, till my change 
come. Thou shalt call, and I [from death] 
will answer thee [by coming forth]: thou 
wilt have a desire to the work of thy hands." 
-Job 14:13-15. 

R1378 : page 76 

The doctrine of a resurrection is entirely 
incompatible with the teaching of modern 
theology, that the righteous dead are not 
really dead, but more alive than ever in 
heaven; and that the wicked dead are not 
really dead, but in a place of torment. If 
such were the case the prophecies of the 
preceding lesson, and numerous others, could 
never be fulfilled. Shall faithful Abraham, 
indeed, return from heaven to claim the 
promise of a home in the land wherein he 
was a stranger? And shall the multitudes 
of his posterity, who were corrupt and idolatrous, 
return from the sulphurous pit of 
modern theology to share it with him? 

No, but as the Prophet (Ezek. 37:12) declares, 
they will be brought up out of their 
graves, which statement is abundantly corroborated 
by the Lord and all the prophets 
and apostles. "No man hath ascended up 
to heaven, but he that came down from 
heaven, even the Son of man." (John 3:13; 
Acts 2:34.) Even the faithful Apostle Paul 
did not expect to go to heaven at death, but 
having fought the good fight and kept the 
faith and finished his course, he exclaimed, 
"Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown 
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous 
judge, shall give me at that day [the 
day of his appearing and kingdom]: and not 
to me only, but unto all them also that love 
his appearing." (2 Tim. 4:8.) True, Paul's 
portion as a member of the body or bride 
of Christ will not be an earthly, but a heavenly 



inheritance— to be entered into "at that 
day." 

While the just and certain wages of sin 
is death, the gift of God, praise his holy 
name, is eternal life to all who will accept it 
on his righteous terms, through Christ Jesus, 
our Lord and Redeemer. And it will be 
the privilege of every son and daughter of 
Adam, if they will have it. To the world 
in general it will be the restored human life 
in Edenic bliss; and to the members of the 
body or bride of Christ, being selected during 
this Gospel age, it will be a life of participation 
with him in his glory and divine 
nature. 

R1378 : page 76 

COMFORT YE MY PEOPLE. 



LESSON XIIL, MARCH 27, ISA. 40:1-10. 

Golden Text— "The glory of the Lord shall be revealed, 
and all flesh shall see it together." 

Although the seed of Abraham according 
to the flesh has always been a rebellious 
house, yet God has covenanted, as we have 
seen in preceding lessons, that he will yet 
again bless them wonderfully with his favor 
and use them as a blessing to others. The 
special blessing will come through the spiritual 
Israel (Christ and his little flock) upon 
representatives of the fleshly seed, who at 
that time will be in favor again, and more 
ready than others for the blessings and terms 
of the New Covenant, then to be thrown 
open to all mankind. These, receiving the 
favor first, will become the mouthpieces 
and channels of that New Covenant blessing 
to others. 

For centuries fleshly Israel has been desolate 
and without divine favor— ever since 
their rejection of Messiah, when he said, 
"Your house is left unto you desolate." 
Their career previously had been a period 
of favor; for though they had suffered much 
and often for sins, God cared for them and 
heard their repentant cry and brought them 
back again to the land of promise. Their 
chastisement with favor lasted from the 
death of Jacob, where their national history 
began, for 1845 years, until our Lord in A.D. 
33 pronounced their sentence. And this 



lesson (Isa. 40:1,2) with other prophecies 
tells us that when a like period of 1845 years 
chastisement without favor shall have passed, 
Israel will be restored to divine favor. 

The standpoint of Isaiah's prophecy in our 
lesson is the year 1878, just where the 1845 
years of disfavor ceased, 1845 years after A.D. 
33; and his words are- 
Verses 1 and 2, "Comfort ye, comfort ye 
my people, saith your God. Speak ye [the 
Church] comfortably to Jerusalem [the natural 
seed], and cry unto her that her appointed 
time [margin] is accomplished, that 
her iniquity is pardoned, for she hath received 
at the Lord's hand double [literally, 
the other half or second half] for all her 
sins." 

The exact turning-point of Israel's favor is 
clearly marked by Scripture (Zech. 9:9-12). 
The Prophet, after describing our Lord's 
entry into Jerusalem on the ass the very day 
he said, "Your house is left unto you desolate," 
says: "Even to-day do I declare that 
I will render double [Hebrew, mishneh, a 
second portion, a repetition] unto thee." 

The Prophet Jeremiah had also predicted 
the same thing, and described it as a season 
of unmingled disfavor, as it surely has been 
ever since their rejection of Messiah. He 
said, "Therefore will I cast you out of this 
land, into a land that ye know not, NEITHER 

R1378 : page 77 

YE NOR YOUR FATHERS [Europe-their fathers 
had been in Egypt and in Babylon, 
but never in Europe], and there shall ye serve 
other gods [rulers] day and night where I 
will not show you favor." (Jer. 16:13.) The 
next four verses show that they will not forever 
remain cast off, but that they shall be 
regathered and blessed; but he adds: "First, 

R1379 : page 77 

I will recompense their iniquity and their 
sin double."— Verse 18. 

And now the Prophet Isaiah (40:1,2), 
taking the standpoint of the end of this "appointed 
time," says, "Comfort ye, comfort 
ye my people, saith your God. Speak ye 
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her 
that her appointed time is accomplished, that 
her iniquity is pardoned; for she hath received 
of the Lord's hand double [she has 
completed the second portion of her punishment] 



for all her sins." 

Thus we find Jeremiah from the standpoint 
of the past predicting this "appointed 
time" of chastisement and promising deliverance 
at its close; Zechariah pointing 
out the very day when it began; and Isaiah 
giving the comforting message to be delivered 
at its close. For fuller treatment of 
this subject see Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., 
Chap. viii. 

But who is to deliver these comforting 
words? Verse 3 shows that it is one like 
unto John the Baptist, and like unto Elias— 
"The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness." 
That John the Baptist, who cried 
in the wilderness of Judea and introduced 
Christ at his first advent, was only a partial 
fulfilment of this prophecy is clearly shown 
by our Lord's reply to the inquiry in many 
minds whether John were the Elias that 
should come before the great and notable 
day of the Lord, or not. Jesus said, "If ye will 
receive it, this is Elias [the one who was to 
come 'in the spirit and power of Elias,' according 
to Luke 1:17] which was to come." 
(Matt. 11:14.) But Israel did not receive 
John the Baptist as the Elias, nor did they 
receive the Messiah, who then offered himself 
to them as their King, whose presence 
John heralded. And therefore their unrecognized 
and rejected King departed and 
their house was "left desolate" until he 
should come again in glory and power, when 
again his presence must be heralded by another 
who shall come in the spirit and power 
of Elias— another "Voice" crying in the wilderness, 
"Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make 
straight in the desert a highway for our God." 

That the time for this message to go forth 
has already come is clearly shown in Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. II., The Time Is At 
Hand; and a class of earnest Christians, in 
the spirit and power of Elias— an uncompromising 
and fearless spirit, and armed, 
like Elias, with the power of divine truth- 
are now crying in the wilderness (for all 
such are in the wilderness condition, separate 
from the world and the worldly minded 
nominal Christians), "Prepare ye the way 
of the Lord." And all who have this spirit 
of Elias, and who have also the power of 
present truth concerning the proximity and 
glorious character of the Kingdom of God 
and of the presence of Jehovah's Anointed 
who is even now setting up his Kingdom- 
all such constitute the Elias that was to 



come— the Voice in the wilderness, whether 
uttered audibly or through the printed page 
declaring God's wonderful plan of the ages 
and announcing Messiah's second presence. 

This voice calls upon all who hear it to 
make ready in heart and life for the new 
order of things to be established under the 
Kingdom of God, which it describes, saying- 
Verse 4. "Every valley [the meek and 
humble] shall be exalted, and every mountain 
and hill [present great ones of earth] 
shall be made low: and the crooked [the 
crooked ruts in which the present evil order 
of things are running] shall be made straight, 
and the rough places [the errors, inconsistencies, 
false doctrines and stumbling-stones 
of a perverted public sentiment, shall be 
made] plain." 

Verse 5. "And the glory of the Lord 
[the glory of his righteous character, and of 
his government and power and wisdom and 
love] shall be revealed [then], and all flesh 
shall see [appreciate] it together; for the mouth 
of the Lord hath spoken it." Glorious message! 
let all who hear it take part in sounding 
it abroad; for the time is at hand. 

But only the few are ready for this great 
change of dispensation: the majority fancy that 
all things shall continue as they are. Especially 
do the great ones in politics and theology 
and finance feel strong and confident that the 
valleys and hills of society will never come to 
a level. To this end combinations and trusts 
are being formed; but the Lord sends them 
another message, as follows— 

Verses 6-8. "A voice saith, Proclaim; and 
he saith, What shall I proclaim? [The answer 
is, Proclaim that] All flesh is grass, and all 
the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the 

R1379 : page 78 

field. The grass withereth, the flower fadeth; 
because the breath of the Lord bloweth upon 
it: surely the people is grass. The grass withereth, 
the flower fadeth: but the word of our 
God will stand firm forever." 

It will require only a breath from the Lord 
to scatter all the might and glory and power of 
earthly institutions. His word therefore will 
be fulfilled; and all who oppose his plan will 
fade in the great day of wrath which shall burn 
as an oven, and in which all the proud and 
all that do wickedly shall be as stubble.— 
Malachi4:l. 

Next, verses 9-11, the message changes to 



one of encouragement to God's people during 
that period of trouble. (Psa. 46.) They need 
not be afraid. When men's hearts are failing 
them for fear and for looking forward to those 
things coming upon the earth [society], these 
may rejoice and lift up their heads, knowing 
that their redemption at the same time is drawing 
nigh. (Luke 21:26.) In that day while 
the trouble draws on the Lord will feed his 
people with present truth. 

Verse 9. "O Zion, that bringest good tidings 
[the one Church, represented by its last 
living members, the Elias class, the only ones 
who know and can proclaim the good tidings 
of restitution, etc.], get thee up into the high 
mountain. [Let the Church be glorified as 
God's Kingdom or mountain; let the dead in 
Christ awake in his glorious likeness, and let 
those who are alive and remain be changed in 
the moment of their dying and not sleep as 
have others; and thus let the promise be fulfilled 
—'Blessed are the dead who die in the 
Lord from henceforth.'— Rev. 14:13.] O Jerusalem, 
that bringest good tidings, lift up thy 
voice with strength. [After the Church, the 
bride, has been glorified with the Lord, the 
faithful ones of the fleshly seed of Abraham will 
begin to come into prominence before the 
world by reason of the leaders whom God will 
then raise up for them]. Lift it up, be not 
afraid; say unto the cities of Judah [all who 
shall then be in covenant relationship with 
God] Behold! Your God is here!" [Thus 
the message now given by "the feet" of Christ 
—that the Millennial kingdom is already beginning 
its rule, Isa. 52:7— will be taken up 
by the earthly class when the "feet of Him" 
have passed beyond the vail.] 

Verses 10 and 1 1 go back and connect with 
verse 2, saying, "Behold, the Lord God will 
come against the strong one [Satan], and his 
arm [Christ] shall rule for him: behold, his reward 
is with him and his recompense for work, 
before him. He shall feed his flock [the 'little 
flock'— all that follow him— not Babylon] like 
a shepherd: he shall gather his lambs with his 
arm [helping even the weakest of his true sheep], 
and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently 
lead those that give suck." Those who give 
suck represent teachers and evangelists among 
the Lord's sheep. This day of the Lord is to 
be a time of special trial to such (Matt. 24:19); 
but all such who are true sheep will be 
very tenderly and carefully led along into the 
present truth by the great Shepherd. 

For a fuller statement of the matters here 



briefly mentioned see Millennial Dawn, Vol. II.. 
Chap. vii. and viii. 



page 78 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



Indianapolis. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Last Sunday I 
spent with Brothers Rogers and West. They 
met me at the Astor House Saturday evening, at 
eight o'clock, and we had a most delightful and 
refreshing meeting in my room. The next 
morning, Sunday, they came again, and after 
another little season of prayer we went over to 
Staten Island and met Brother and Sister Crane, 
dined with them, and then, our little party being 
increased by Brother Crane, we went over 
to Brooklyn to Brother Blunden's house, where 
we also met Sisters Stapleton, McPhail, and 
Sister Blunden's mother and daughter, and Sister 
Hickey and Brother Snook. 

For a subject, we started to consider what 
Christ is now doing, in his day of presence, 
and for Scripture we read Matt. 24, and before 
we were aware of it, the two hours allotted for 
study had been all occupied in considering the 
evidences of his presence, without touching on 
his work at all. Brother and Sister Blunden 
insisted that we remain to a delicious tea spread 
for us, and after an hour's conversation on the 
two subjects nearest our hearts— the Ransom 
and Restitution— Brother West and I heard Mr. 
Talmage, at the Brooklyn Tabernacle, preach 
a characteristic sermon on "Ordinary men, doing 
ordinary work, in the ordinary way and receiving 
ordinary compensation." He is a strong 
speaker, but had no "meat" for us. We found 
Brothers Rogers and Crane waiting for us at 
the hotel, and we had another season of prayer 
in my little room. What a glorious, happy 
day it was ! 

Your brother in Christ, W. M. WRIGHT. 

R1379 : page 79 

A GOOD TESTDVIONY:-"Until within a few 
years I have been a most pronounced materialist. 
The study of hypnotism drew my attention 
to the power of things unseen. Then I 
looked into Buddhism, Theosophy, Spiritualism 
and Christian Science. All these were 



found wanting; and though to a student of modern 
science the Ransom given by Christ seems 
like foolishness, I can see no other possible chance 
for the salvation of mankind. He who goes 
into the depths of philosophy finds only vanity 
and vexation of spirit. I have read MILLENNIAL 
DAWN with much interest." 

-M. T. MARTIN, M.D. 



page 79 



"I am more and more impressed with the 
necessity in these days of feeding only on 'clean 
provender' (Isa. 30:24), and letting severely 
alone all those various writings that multiply 
the danger in these perilous times (2 Tim. 3:11), 
and especially such as come under false 
pretensions as messengers of light. — 
2 Cor. 11:13-15." -W. E. PAGE. 



R1379 : page 79 

California. 

The wonderfully rapid change of vast wastes 
of the earth's surface into rich productiveness 
in fruits, grains and vineyards, now being witnessed 
on both hemispheres, is just on time- 
abundance of rain, with springs, lakes and wells 
of water bursting forth in the deserts and vast 
plains where for hundreds of years no wells, 
springs, rivers or rain have been known. 

We remember that this very work is to be 
going on, even during or "in the time of the 
slaughter" among the nations, "when the towers 
fall." (Isa. 30:25.) The falling of the 
towers (kings, potentates, etc.) must accompany 
the slaughter (disintegration, grinding to 
powder) of the nations. You have no doubt 
noticed the following prophecies now commencing 
to be fulfilled. -Isa. 30:25; 35:6,7; 41:18; 
43:19,20; 51:3. 

I have seen (last February, on my return from 
your place to my home here in California), on the 
border of both the Colorado and Mojavi deserts, 
thousands of acres made productive by wells 
"bursting forth" in the desert. I have a brother 
there who has already put down forty wells, from 
every one of which vast quantities of purest water 
bursts forth. This is taken in large stone pipes 
over hundreds of acres of the thirsty, sterile soil. 

R1380 : page 79 



Hundreds of thousands of vines and fruit trees 
are at once planted and their rapid growth is 
indeed surprising. 

Knowing as we do that the Lord is to do a 
"short work in the earth," preparatory to the 
full installment of his Son with his anointed 
body, in full ruling power, having all things 
under him; that over forty per cent of this 
work is accomplished; and that only twenty-three 
years of the allotted time remain, during 
which the remaining sixty per cent of the 
work is to be accomplished, gives these varied 
events and agencies the highest interest. 
-E. J. ROGERS. 

[While the prophecies above cited have special 
reference, we think, to Israel and the now 
barren land of Palestine, we believe that the 
same blessings of restitution are also due to the 
whole earth. --EDITOR.1 



page 79 



Manitoba. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We are glad to 
acknowledge the receipt of two letters from you 
which gave us the more pleasure since they were 
unexpected. We could form some idea of the 
amount of work awaiting you upon your arrival 
home, so we did not look for a letter so soon, 
but we intended writing to you anyway to tell 
you how thankful we are that you and Sister 
Russell are well and safe at home. We feel sure 
that your long, tiresome journey will not be in 
vain: you will have gathered much that will 
benefit the household of faith. We do appreciate, 
dear brother and sister, your labor of 
love, and for this cause we also rejoice with you. 

We are still rejoicing in the same precious 
truth. They are our courage and strength every 
morning, and our comfort and rest every night. 

Ever since we came home, last July, we have 
found many opportunities for service and sacrifice. 
We have had many seasons of sweet 
communion with the brethren in our vicinity, 
and some good letters from those "harvesters" 
gone out from among us. This is the oneness 
and unity that rejoices our hearts. Brother 
Utley has been with us since September first, 
canvassing and delivering in the different towns. 
He has put in a goodly number of DAWNS 
through this part, and delivered several lectures. 
After each lecture we had good question meetings, 
and though we know of only a few who are 



deeply interested, yet quite a number truly 
rejoice in the good tidings. People who four 
years ago would not listen at all come to us 
now to enquire, for they are beginning to see 
things are not right in the nominal church. 
This gives us an opportunity to speak a word in 
season. We know the truth will prevail, and 
we rejoice in every opportunity to speak a word 
or suffer reproach for the truth's sake, and count 
it a great privilege to do so. 

With kindest love to the Church at Allegheny, 
and much love to Sister Russell and 
yourself, in which Sister Webb joins, I am 
yours in the glorious hope, W. J. WEBB. 



R1380 : page 80 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-On the 7th of last 
June I stepped into a small hall in this city, 
and heard for the first time some of the precious 
truths I have since learned to love. I had been 
for some months engaged in evangelistic and 
missionary work. I had been for years a member 
of the Baptist sect, and you doubtless know 
how hard it was for me to give up the old ideas 
which would not let go of me, but how I praise 
God to-day. Before I had finished the second 
reading of DAWN, Vol. I., I felt that perhaps I 
might have been mistaken all these years, so I 
made up my mind to read the second volume. 
This I also read twice, and by that time felt 
that it must be true, but hardly dared believe, 
and did not dare to assert my belief, lest it 
might be error. Then I went back to the first 
volume again and read it the third time, and 
then the second volume a third time. Truly 
this third reading was a feast, and, eager 
for more, I wrote for the third volume. All 
this time I had enjoyed the precious things the 
books had brought me with scarcely even a 
thought of those through whose labors the truth 
had been so plainly and convincingly set forth, 
but when I took up the third volume and read 
the preface, an almost overwhelming sense of the 
gratitude I owed, not only to the dear heavenly 
Father, but to his agents in bringing these 
things to my attention, came over me, and I 
have found it truly hard to wait for your return 
home, to express to you as well as I can the 
deep gratitude I feel. 

Brother Russell, I loved the Lord Jesus dearly 
before. I had already not only given up for 
his sake friend and home but had known by 



a most bitter experience what it meant to be 

persecuted for his work; yet proving through all 

the bitterness the truthfulness of the promise 

that he would be a satisfying portion, I was 

happy without home or friends, because I had 

Jesus. I was continually conscious of his presence 

with me. But now it seems to me at 

times my heart will burst with love and gratitude 

and praise. I cannot do half enough for 

him; but he shall have the earnest, faithful service 

of every remaining hour of my life. 

And you, my dear brother, I know not how 
to better express my gratitude and thanks to 
you than by thus telling you how fully your precious 
work has accomplished its mission in my 
heart and life. 

I am eagerly starting out to give to others 
the glad tidings that have come to me, and yet 
I start almost fearfully. Is it not strange? I 
have been a dear lover of the Bible for years. 
I have read carefully and prayerfully, and have 
been led out of much orthodox error, and before 
I read DAWN I confidently went among 
the people, sure that I could give them food 
that would satisfy beyond any thing the popular 
preachers could give; but now that I have 
been so richly fed myself I feel timid about going, 
lest one should ask for something which I 
cannot give. 

I received to-night a precious letter from the 
office, in which the wish is expressed that I may 
be "filled with a spirit of love and humility." 
It seems to me I must be. I never felt my own 
littleness and unworthiness as I have felt it in 
the past three months, since I began to see the 
precious truth. I am amazed, as I look over 
my life and see what bungling and inefficient 
work I have done and called it work for the 
Lord, to think that he has trusted me with this 
precious truth, and is going to let me still call 
myself one of his workers. O Brother and 
Sister Russell, pray for me that I may be enabled 
to work in such a way that through my 
work, as through yours, sheaves may be garnered 
for his glorious kingdom. 

Once more thanking you for the great blessing 
and peace brought to me through your work, 
I will close. Yours in like precious faith, 
MRS. M. PECK. 



page 80 



Cincinnati. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Have received your 



letter making Chicago our next home and field. 

I enclose you a paper giving you a concise 
sketch of the recent controversy between the 
priests of Babylon and Col. Ingersoll— the 
Goliath that only David could kill, and who is 
therefore still strutting up and down before the 
Nominal Church, the supposed agent and institution 
of Jehovah. 

Ingersoll, you notice, cannot force them to 
discuss the original propositions, viz.: Christmas 
a heathen festival, and Christianity with 
its eternal torment theory a doctrinal system 
of eternal hate. 

I must call your attention to Rev. Dixon's assertion 
that God could even use an ass (Balaam's) 
for his ends and how much more a priest, and 
Ingersoll's retort, how much more and better 
the ass knew and did than the priest. 

I also enclose an offer made me of $100.00 
per month and expenses (one of many). I 
have rejected them all, believing the King who 
owns all the cattle and silver will pay better 
still, though as yet it may be evident only to 
the eye of faith. The eternal things are those 
unseen by eyes of flesh. 

We both join in warmest greetings to you 
and Sr. Russell. In Christ the Redeemer, 
J. B. ADAMSON. 



page 82 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 



By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES. 

"HELPING HANDS FOR BIBLE STUDENTS. 



VOL. I.-"THE PLAN OF THE AGES." 



This work is specially designed to make plain the divine 
plan. It begins at the beginning of the subject, by establishing 
the faith of the reader in God and in the Bible as 
his revelation. It traces the glorious plan therein revealed, 
and shows which parts of that plan are accomplished 
and which will be accomplished during the Millennial 
age, also the manner of its introduction, and its 
objects and methods. 

We know of nothing to compare with this book, as a 
"Bible Key." The Two Hundredth Thousand is now 
on the press, and many who have read it carefully and 
prayerfully declare that if they could not obtain another 
they would not part with their copy, and the hopes it has 
enkindled, for millions. 

Clear type, good paper, 350 pages. Price in cloth covers, 
embossed, $1.00. (The subscribers to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER are supplied in any quantity at the wholesale 
price, 50 cents, as all are considered agents.) Price in 
paper covers, 25 cents, reduced from 50 cents. 
A GERMAN TRANSLATION OF THE ABOVE AT SAME PRICES. 

VOL. II.-"THE TIME IS AT HAND." 



This volume presents evidences that:— 

Six Thousand Years from Adam ended in A.D. 1872. 
The Date of our Lord's Birth was October, B.C. 2. 
The Date of Annunciation to Mary, Dec. 25th, B.C. 3. 
The Date of our Lord's Baptism was Oct., A.D. 29. 
The Date of our Lord's Crucifixion, April, A.D. 33. 
The "Seventy Weeks" of Israel's favor ended A.D. 36. 
The Jewish Age "Harvest," was 40 years, A.D. 30-70. 
The Christian Age "Harvest," 40 yrs., A.D. 1875-1914. 



The Jewish Jubilees were Typical of the "Times of Restitution 
of all Things."-Acts 3:19-21. 

The Typical Jubilees Mark the Date of their Antitype. 
The "Times of the Gentiles" will End with A.D. 1914. 
The Jewish Age, in Its Length, Its Ceremonies, etc., Typified 
the realities of the Christian Age and its Length. 
Elias or "Elijah the Prophet" was a Type.— How fulfilled. 
The Antichrist Has Come!— What? When? Where? 

Besides the above, it treats many other subjects of deep 
interest and great importance to "the household of faith." 
Terms the same as Vol. I.— 360 pages. 

VOL. III.-"THY KINGDOM COME." 



(This volume now ready.) 

This volume treats of the prophetic periods of Daniel 
and Revelation— The 2300 Days, The 1260 Days, The 
1290 Days, The 1335 Days. -The Work of the Harvest 
now in Progress.— The Return of God's Favor to Israel.— 
The Great Pyramid of Egypt and its wonderful corroboration 
of all the prophetic testimony. 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 



This is a very choice collection of 150 Poems and 333 
Hymns representing the choicest thoughts of some of 
God's saints, of both the past and the present. Some 
of these have been slightly and some considerably altered, 
to fully harmonize them with the clearer light of truth as 
it is now shining. Authors' names are given so far as 
known, and any alterations are noted. Cloth bound, red 
edges, 494 pages, $1— to TOWER subscribers, 50 cents. 

Every TOWER reader should have and use this means 
of grace. Its poems are gems and will encourage and 
comfort any loyal heart. Nothing is better calculated to 
inspire true devotion. To enable all our readers to 
profit by this means of grace, those of you too poor to purchase 
at the reduced price will be supplied free, upon request, 
out of the funds of the Tower Tract Society. 

TUNES FOR HYMNS OF DAWN. 



The 333 hymns above are widely selected and no single 
book contains all the appropriate tunes for them. However, 
the tunes have been so marked that three popular 
books will supply them mostly— Winnowed Hymns, Songs 
of Pilgrimage and Gospel Hymns. Many already have 
these. Others we are prepared to supply at below the 
wholesale rate when purchased in connection with our 



own HYMNS OF DAWN, as follows:-HYMNS OF DAWN 
with Gospel Hymns, Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4, $1.20, postpaid. 
HYMNS OF DAWN with Winnowed Hymns, 75 cents, 
postpaid. HYMNS OF DAWN with Songs of Pilgrimage, 
$1.50, postpaid. Or the four books, HYMNS OF DAWN, 
Gospel Hymns Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4, Winnowed Hymns and 
Songs of Pilgrimage, all for $2.25, postage included. The 
usual price for the four, including postage, would be $3.77. 
We supply them for your convenience merely, without profit. 



Any of the above books will be loaned to the poor who 
will promise a careful reading and to pay return postage. 
All orders should be addressed, TOWER PUBLISHING CO. 
"BIBLE HOUSE," ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 



R1380 : page 83 

VOL. XIII. MARCH 15, 1892. NO. 6. 
TRAVELS IN THE HOLY LAND. 
AUGUST 1891. -EDITORIAL NOTES. 



Here we are at last in this land so sacred to 
the hearts of all who love God— the land of 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Prophets, the Lord 
and the Apostles. And although our eyes are 
busy trying to notice all the points of interest, 
and our memories busy recalling the many 
things written concerning these places in the 
remote past, and our hearts full and tender as 
we recall the scenes of our Master's sufferings 
on our behalf, and our hopes vivid for the evidences 
of coming blessings upon the natural 
seed of Abraham, we do not forget the true 
spiritual Zion whose deliverance and glorification 
must first take place before fleshly Israel, 
and then all the families of the earth, shall be 
blessed. 

We therefore invite all of the TOWER readers 
to go with us in mind over these hills and valleys, 
that together we may be refreshed and rejoiced 
in spirit. 

We land at Jaffa or Joppa, the seaport for 
Jerusalem, to which the king of Tyre sent the 
cedars of Lebanon to king Solomon for the 
building of the Temple. It is probably much 

R1381 : page 83 



the same as when Jonah visited it, fleeing from 
his duty, to take ship for Tarshish; much the 
same, too, as when Peter lodged here at the 
house of one Simon, a tanner, upon whose roof 
he saw the vision directing him no longer to 
consider God-fearing Gentiles "unclean." 

The houses are small and crowded, and as 
the town is built upon rising ground, the houses 
and streets are quite up and down. As in all 
oriental cities, the streets are very narrow- 
mere alley-ways, we should say in America. 

The conveyance which will carry us to Jerusalem 
is a rickety carriage drawn by three lean 
little horses— for the railroad, although progressing 
and already finished about one-third 
the distance, carries no passengers yet. Upon 
it, however, construction trains are running 
constantly. 

While our conveyance is getting ready we 
will see the city, and get dusted from head to 
foot by taking a walk, and climb to the house 
of Simon, the tanner. Ah! there it is. Not 
the same house, of course, but one upon its site, 
and probably much of the same size and shape, 
for here architecture and the building art have 
made little progress— retrograding, more probably. 
It is a house of one large living-room 
with a smaller reception room. Outside is a 
large stone box recently found near the spot, 
and supposed to be the one used by Simon and 
his successors in the tanning business. There 
beside the box is a water-well: quite likely, the 
same at which Peter drank while residing here. 
Outside the house against the well a flight of 
stone steps leads to the roof— similar to the one 
where Peter prayed and saw the vision.— Acts 10 
and 11. 

Our conveyance is ready and we start for 
Jerusalem on a route full of interesting memories 
—over hills and valleys trodden often by 
the feet of the Great Teacher and his apostles. 
Not the same road exactly, but the same route; 

R1381 : page 84 

for the present excellent road is of recent construction, 
the old Roman road of our Lord's 
day being here and there visible, but now 
abandoned for the better one. 

The tomb of Dorcas (Tabitha) is the first 
item of interest; it is a public fountain. This 
recalls the story of Dorcas, one of the saints of 
the early Church, a friend of the poor, whose 
awakening from the sleep of death is recorded 
in Acts 9:36-43. The tomb is in the outskirts 
of Jaffa, and leaving it we pass rapidly several 



fruit gardens hedged about by prickly-pear 
trees. At any other time, no doubt, these would 
appear beautiful, but now they are dry and dusty, 
for this is the dry season here, and no rain 
has fallen for several months. 

Outside of Jaffa we are in the "Plain of Sharon." 
It is at present very dry and barren 
looking, but our guide, a very well-informed 
and reliable man, tells us that it yields large 
crops, and that at any other season we would 
see it spangled with wild flowers of every hue. 
Our route lies across this plain for twenty miles, 
while it is nearly one hundred and fifty miles 
long. Under skilful management and with 
proper machinery this strip of land would yield 
immensely. Even at present it yields large 
quantities of grain for export, though the native 
farmers are taxed enormously for all they 
raise, besides paying heavy rentals for the use 
of the land and heavy interests for the money 
necessary to put in a crop. As much as 30, 40 
and 50 per cent interest, for a six months loan, 
is charged by the wealthy who have money to 
loan. The Jews are seldom farmers here, but 
many of them, as everywhere, are money-lenders. 
In the eyes of a European or American, 
however, none of the people appear to be 
wealthy: all look to be poor. 

Here on our left is a modern Arab village, 
built of small stones and slimed over with earth. 
The people of this and other similar villages are 
called "fellah"— they are the poor tax and 
interest burdened farmers. They are probably 
happy in their way, but others used to some of 
life's comforts would be miserable if thus situated. 
Ah! the thought comes forcibly, if such 
things pain our hearts and awaken our sympathy, 
what must it have been to our dear Master 
to witness the pain, poverty, degradation and 
general distress which sin brought into the 
world. No wonder "Jesus groaned in spirit," 
for, surrounded by such, he would not increase 
their troubles by explaining to them the extent 
of their degradation, while he could not yet, 
according to the Father's plan, apply the balm 
for all their woes (Restitution)— until he had 
paid the ransom-price for all; and until his 
Church, his Bride, being selected, the due time 
should arrive for the healing of every wound. 
(Acts 3:19-21.) We also groaned in spirit as we 
saw their poor estate and the blind and maimed 
in the way, and prayed, "Thy Kingdom come!" 
and wished it were already time to pour out the 
great blessing upon the world, typified in the 
Sabbath-day healings performed by our Lord. 
We rejoiced, however, in the "greater works" 



in which even now we are permitted to have a 
share— feeding the poor with the spiritual bread, 
anointing the eyes of the spiritually blind and 
cleansing spiritually those afflicted with the leprosy 
of sin. We concluded that we must be 
content for the present, and wait the Lord's 
time for the rising of the Sun of Righteousness 
with healing in his beams.— Mai. 4:2. 

There on our left is the traditional site of 
Hazar-Shual, where Samson caught the foxes 
and used them in burning the crops in this very 
Plain of Sharon, which at that time was held 
by the Philistines who had invaded and over-powered 
Israel. (Judges 15:4.) Samson's trick 
was not mere wantonness, but a warfare for the 
impoverishment of the captors and for the recovery 
of the land to his nation. 

Although so dry and parched looking, there 
is something growing here even now. It looks 
like our American corn or maize, but the stalk 
is only half as thick and the grain is not in 
"ears," but in a bunch or head at the top of 
the stalk. It is called "Indian Corn," and 
our guide has plucked a sample for us. The 
grains are larger than wheat, and round. 

Here we are at the Tower of Ramleh. While 
the horses rest we will climb to its top and have 
a good view of the surroundings. To the east 
is the hill-country or mountains; to the west is 
the Mediterranean sea; to the north is Mt. 
Carmel, where Elijah tested the prophets of Baal 

R1381 : page 85 

and proved that Jehovah alone is God (1 Kings 18:19); 

to the south is Gaza, the city whose 

gates Samson carried away; and this side of it 

is Gath, the home of Goliath, and Lydda, where 

one of the early Christian Churches was founded 

and where the Apostle Peter performed a 

notable miracle.— Acts 9:32. 

We have now reached the valley of Ajalon, 
and to the north-east is Mt. Gibeon. We recall 
this as the scene of the notable battle between 
Israel and the Amorites, in connection with 
which is the account of the standing still of the 
sun and the moon. Endeavoring to locate the 
battle, we are impressed with the fact that if 
the sun were standing over Mt. Gibeon there 
could be no use for moonlight in the valley of 
Ajalon, which in that event would be flooded 
with sunlight. The account given in Joshua 
does not purport to be recorded by an eye witness, 
but is rather a note and comment upon a 
record given in the "Book of Jasher," now 
lost. The facts which form the basis of the 



matter recorded would seem to us to be explainable 
in either one of two ways:— 

(1) That Joshua addressed the Lord as the 
Sun, whose strength and help had so signally 
been revealed for the relief of Israel and for 
the destruction of their enemies. With this 
the words agree well: "Then spake Joshua to 
the Lord. ..and he said in the sight of Israel, 
Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon, and 
thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon:" that is 
to say, O Lord, our Sun and strong Deliverer, 
continue thy mighty help for us in this battle 
at Mt. Gibeon, and let thy peaceful blessing 
[the Moon] be upon thy people in the valley of 
Ajalon; or 

(2) That the sun was setting in the west 
and its last beams still lighted Mount Gibeon 
while the rising moon cast her beams directly 
through the valley of Ajalon. In this 

view the desire and request of Joshua would 
be not with reference to the sun itself, but with 
reference to the sun-light: he desired that utter 
darkness might not overtake them, in order 
that the victory be a complete and lasting 
one. If this be the proper view, then it 
was the sun-light merely that continued, without 
the orb itself being visible. This would not 
have required a stoppage of the earth upon its 
axis, for clouds might have been so arranged 
as to prolong the sunset, as they sometimes 
do at the present time. 

We are now more than midway between 
Jaffa and Jerusalem, in the valley of Wady-Ali, 
and before us is the site of Kirjath-jearim, 
where the Ark of the Covenant rested for twenty 
years in the house of Aminadab (1 Sam. 7:1,2), 
whence it was taken by King David to 
Jerusalem. (2 Sam. 6:3.) Away before us, to 
the left, is Mizpah, (not the place named Mizpah 
by Jacob when he covenanted with Laban 
his father-in-law, saying, "The Lord watch between 
thee and me when we are absent one 
from another"— that was on the other side of 
Jordan, but) the place where Saul, the first 
king of Israel, was chosen and anointed, near 
which also Samuel, the prophet, reared a monument 
to the Lord, called Ebenezer, saying, 
"Hitherto the Lord hath helped us." (1 Sam. 7:5-17; 
10:17.) Yonder, not far off, is Gibeah, 
the birth-place of King Saul. 

Since getting into the hill-country the land 
has seemed very desolate, stones being almost 
the only things in sight, except that here and 
there in the valleys we have caught glimpses of 
cultivated gardens and settlements. Undoubtedly 
it would look much less barren at any other 



season of the year; and there are evidences that 
the hill and mountain sides now lying waste, 
except here and there a few olive trees and 
grape vines, were once well terraced and no 
doubt yielded grapes and olives in profusion. 

Here we pass near by Ain-Karim, which tradition 
marks as the birth-place of John the 
Baptist. Here in the hill-country of Judea 
Mary visited his mother, Elizabeth.— Luke 1:39. 

Now we have reached the brook and valley 
of Elah, the reputed site of David's battle 
with Goliath, and while we are listening to 
"the voice (sound) of the grinding of the mill," 
manipulated by women by hand, as in olden 
time, Abdullah, our thoughtful guide, has selected 
for us as mementoes five smooth sling-stones 
from the brook-bed, such as the five 
which David took, the first of which smote and 
killed Goliath, the Philistines' champion. 

Now we pass close to a town supposed to be 

R1382 : page 86 

the Emmaus to which our Lord walked with 
two disciples after his resurrection.— Luke 24:13. 

It is late when we reach Jerusalem, so we secure 
lodging, etc., at the clean, airy and comfortable 
"Hotel Jerusalem," outside the Jaffa 
Gate, in what is sometimes termed "the new 
city of Jerusalem," because here are most of the 
new buildings. Indeed, the population outside 
the wall near the Jaffa Gate bids fair to be 
greater than that within at no distant day. 
And our attention is drawn to the fact that this 
portion is precisely that so accurately described 
by the prophets. -Zech. 14:10; Jer. 31:38-40. 

(To be Continued.) 



R1382 : page 86 

BELIEVERS' CONVENTION, 

AT ALLEGHENY, PA., 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 

FOR BIBLE STUDY, 

IN CONNECTION WITH 

THE ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION OF OUR LORD'S DEATH. 

APRIL 7THTO 14TH, INCLUSIVE, 1892. 



For a number of years past it has been the 
custom for such of the WATCH TOWER readers 
as can do so to meet in Allegheny for fellowship 



and study for a few days in connection 
with the memorial of our Lord's Last Supper. 
Such meetings are purposed for the present 
year, as above announced. These meetings will 
be held in the chapel over the office of Zion's 
Watch Tower, "Bible House," No. 58 Arch 
Street, Allegheny. 

No fixed program is announced except for 
Sunday Evening, April 10th, when the Lord's 
Memorial Supper will be celebrated at 7:30 
o'clock. The meetings will commence on 
Thursday, April 7th, and continue from 10 A.M. 
to 6 P.M. (with noon adjournment for lunch) 
daily for a week. The sessions preceding the 
Memorial celebration will be specially devoted 
to Bible study, at which Bible questions of every 
kind will be entertained— among others, Baptism 
and its significance— and an opportunity 
will then be afforded for any who may so desire 
to symbolize their death with Christ by immersion. 
We have robes and every convenience. 
More than fifty persons availed themselves of 
this opportunity last year. 

WHO ARE INVITED TO ATTEND. 



(1) All who trust for justification in the 
great atoning sacrifice for sins given at Calvary 
by our Lord Jesus will be welcomed; and (2) 
especially all such who have presented themselves 
as living sacrifices in God's service; and 

R1383 : page 86 

(3) particularly all such who are regular subscribers 
to Zion's Watch Tower; and (4) all 
those engaged in the Colporteur work, or who 
contemplate entering that ministry. 

ENTERTAINMENT DURING THE MEETING. 



Friends of the Lord and the Truth, here, 
have arranged for the lodging and breakfast 
and supper of all Watch Tower subscribers and 
Colporteurs who may attend the Convention. 
And in return we have assured them that all 
who come will gladly lend a hand to carry 
what otherwise would burden them and hinder 
their attendance at the meetings. Come prepared 
to sleep on clean comfortable floor-beds 
or the best that we can supply to so large a number. 
But do not bring little ones or uninterested 



friends, unless they can be otherwise provided 
for, as every bit of space will be required 
and reserved for those who are interested. 

Come in a thoughtful and prayerful mood, 
expecting to be influenced for good and earnest 
to exercise such an influence upon all with 
whom you may come in contact. It has been 
remarked of previous meetings that from the 
waking to the sleeping moment, both in and 
out of meetings, there was but the one topic 
of conversation— the good tidings of great joy. 
One old Brother, a U.P. minister, remarked: 
"I have been at many Conventions, but never 
before at one like this, where the will and plan 

R1383 : page 87 

of God are the only and the incessant topic 
from rising until retiring; in the house, on the 
street, at meeting, at lunch and everywhere." 
Come resolved that this meeting shall be 
none behind its predecessors in spiritual fervor 
through coldness or indifference or unfavorable 
influence on your part. 

DINNERS DURING THE DAYS OF THE MEETING. 



Arrangements will be made, with boarding 
houses near, whereby all attending the meetings 
can procure good, comfortable dinners, as 
low as 15 cents each. Thus the near-by friends 
as well as those from a distance can spend the 
entire days at the meetings. And those of 
limited means, from a distance, can know that 
their entire expense for the seven days need 
not exceed twenty-five cents a day, including 
street-car fare. 

R.R. EXCURSION RATES. 



The following railroads have granted excursion 
rates to Allegheny or Pittsburg:— 

(1) The Trunk Lines, viz., P.R.R.; B.& 
O.R.R.; and N.Y.C. & H.R.R.R., and generally 
all connecting railroads of N.Y., Penn'a. 

and N.J. 

(2) The Central Passenger Association, including 
almost all the railroads west of Pittsburg 

and Buffalo, and north of the Ohio river, 
as far west as Chicago and St. Louis. 

(3) The Southern Passenger Association, 
including almost all the principal railroads of 



the South. 

The terms are uniform, as follows: Any one 
purchasing a first class, full fare ticket (limited 
or unlimited) over the above lines to the Convention 
of the Tower Tract Society, Allegheny, 
Pa., will be entitled to a printed and signed 
Certificate, stating that he has purchased such 
ticket and the route taken. On arrival here, 
said Certificate will be given to a designated 
clerk who will certify to your attendance at 
the Convention; and when ready to take your 
return journey, you will be granted a return 
ticket over the same route by which you came, 
at ONE THIRD the regular first class fare. Thus 
full fare here and one third of full fare back will 
be your railroad charges. But to secure this 
cheap return, you must have your Certificate 
properly signed over railroads belonging to the 
above associations. Make no mistake. If the 
railroads of your town are not members of any 
of these associations, the ticket agent can direct 
you to the nearest station of such roads. 
In that case go to such station and buy your 
through-ticket and get your Certificate there. If 
coming from points north of Chicago and west of 
Chicago and St. Louis, buy ordinary tickets to 
those cities and there get your Certificate, etc. 

If you think of coming to the Convention, 
at once drop us a postal card to that effect, and 
also call upon your railroad ticket agent and tell 
him that you will want such a Certificate. Do 
this in time, so that if he has no blank Certificates 
on hand, he can get them from his General 
Ticket Agent. But do not buy your ticket 
until you are ready to start. 



R1382 : page 87 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



We believe and teach that the most proper 
occasion for the celebration of our Lord's death 
is its anniversary. This was the custom of the 
early Church, and it is still observed in a fashion 
by some denominations on Good Friday— 
although, in order to have the observance come 
upon the same day of the week, the exactness 
of the date is disregarded. We, like the early 
Church, prefer to observe the memorial upon 
its exact anniversary— which we reckon as they 
and the Jews reckoned it— by lunar time— the 
day before the beginning of the Jewish Passover. 



Furthermore, we believe and teach that the 
only proper manner for the celebration of this 
memorial is that which our Lord introduced 
and which the early Church followed, and not 
as Good Friday is now celebrated by some. 

On the same night in which he was betrayed 
—after 6 o'clock P.M. of what we now would 
call the 13th day of the Hebrew month Nisan, 
but which the Jews called the beginning of the 
14th day of the month (their 24-hour day beginning 

R1382:page88 

with the evening); and therefore, in 
Jewish reckoning, in the same day in which he 
was crucified (the day before their Passover 
week began)— our Lord celebrated the Passover 
supper with his disciples. (The lamb supper, 
which always preceded the feast-week of Passover, 
was not, and is not now, termed the 
Feast of Passover by the Jews.) And after 
having thus complied with the Law (which was 
still in force over every Jew until our Lord's 
death on the cross), Jesus instituted a memorial 
of his own death, bread and "the fruit of the 
vine" being used as emblems of his flesh and 
blood. 

He instructed his followers that thus they 
should commemorate his sacrifice for sins, 
saying, 

"THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME." 



And to us it appears that the time is no less 
a part of the institution than the bread and the 
juice of the grape. We should as soon think 
of substituting another time than that of the institution 
—especially in view of the particularity 
of our Lord in the matter; for although he 
declared, "With desire have I desired to eat 
this passover with you before I suffer," yet, according 
to the Law, it could not be eaten until 
the anniversary of the killing of the typical 
lamb preceding the passing over of Israel's first-born 
in Egypt; which was to be the anniversary 
also of the killing of the true "Lamb of God 
which taketh away the sins of the world" and 
by whom the Church of the first-born is first 
to be spared or delivered. Our Lord waited, 
therefore, and "when the hour was come [the 
earliest hour possible according to the Law] he 
sat down."— Luke 22:14-20. 

The words of the Apostle "As oft as ye do 
this, ye do show forth the Lord's death until 



he come" (1 Cor. 1 1:26— particularly explained 
in March '9 1 Tower), are understood by many 
to give license to the observing of any hour, 
any day and any month; but not so to those who 
read critically; for the words "do this" have 
special weight. It would not be this if done 
at another time: just as if a command were 
given to celebrate the Independence of the 
United States on the fourth day of July, it 
would not be a fulfilment of this command, nor 
a celebration of this event, but something else, 
if another day were celebrated. 

But let no one suppose that we teach that 
God's people are under the Law on this or on 
any other subject. The only law of our new 
covenant is the law of love. We love our 
Master, we love to celebrate his great sacrifice 
for our sins, and we love to do it as he was 
pleased to show us, as nearly as we can. 

Some of the Lord's people celebrate his 
death every first day of the week, supposing 
that in so doing they have the sanction of the 
custom of the apostles and the early Church, 
as recorded in Acts 2:46; 20:7. We hold, 
however, that they err in this application of 
the words "breaking of bread," and that it 
was not the Memorial Supper, but an ordinary 
meal customary in the early Church for two 
reasons, (1) being few and scattered, when they 
gathered for a meeting they brought a luncheon; 
and (2) probably for the same reason that 
they met on the first day of the week, they ate a 
meal together, viz.: because it was on the first 
day of the week that our Lord arose from the 
dead, and because on that day he expounded 
unto them the fulfilment of the Scriptures applicable 
to himself and was known to them in 
the breaking of bread, i.e., in the eating of 
supper. No wonder that afterward they loved 
to celebrate both the day and the meal which 
brought them so much joy and blessing.— 
Luke 24:25-32. 

Those who have confounded these luncheons, 
celebrating the resurrection on the first 
day of the week, with the Memorial of our 
Lord's death have erred greatly if not seriously. 
They should notice, too, that the fruit of the 
vine is not mentioned in connection with these 
luncheons, while it is never omitted when the 
Memorial Supper is referred to, being no less 
important than the bread. The same expression, 
"breaking of bread," from the same 
Greek words, is used in Acts 27:35 where there 
can be no doubt that it refers to an ordinary 
repast for the satisfying of hunger and not as a 
memorial or symbol. 



We treat this subject but briefly here. As 
to who should celebrate the Memorial, and 

R1382:page89 

how, and many other interesting points, our 
regular readers are referred to our issue of March, 
1891. While our supply lasts, we will be pleased 
to send a copy of that issue free to new readers 
who desire to study the subject further. 

Let us urge upon all who recognize that value 
of Christ's death as their ransom-sacrifice, to 
surely "do this," as the Master enjoined, in 
remembrance of that great event which is the 
basis of our present joy in the Lord as well as 
of those which we shall enter upon as the fulfilment 
of this Memorial— when we shall partake 
of the joys of our Lord in glory, in the 
Kingdom. But those who trust to forgiveness 
aside from this sacrifice for sins, or who are 
trusting that they can crucify their own sins, 
and thus render themselves acceptable to God 
(as some claim), should not celebrate this Memorial; 
for in so doing they would be eating 
and drinking condemnation to themselves— 
not discerning the value of the Lord's broken 
body and shed blood as the one and only sin-offering 
which can take away sin and make the 
believer acceptable before God. 

The proper time for celebrating the Supper 
this year will be after 6 o'clock of Sunday, 
April 10th— that hour being the beginning of 
the 14th day of the Hebrew month Nisan. 



R1385 : page 89 

"HE CARETH FOR YOU." 



"Casting all your care upon him, for he careth for 
you."-l Pet. 5:7. 

"What can it mean? Is it aught to him 
That the nights are long and the days are dim? 
Can he be touched by the griefs I bear, 
Which sadden the heart and whiten the hair? 
Around his throne are eternal calms, 
And strong, glad music of happy psalms, 
And bliss unruffled by any strife. 
How can he care for my poor life? 

"And yet I want him to care for me, 

While I live in this world where the sorrows be; 



When the lights die down on the path I take; 
When strength is feeble, and friends forsake; 
When love and music, that once did bless, 
Have left me to silence and loneliness; 
And life-song changes to sobbing prayers- 
Then my heart cries out for a God who cares. 

"When shadows hang o'er me the whole day long 

And my spirit is bowed with shame and wrong; 

When I am not good, and the deeper shade 

Of conscious sin makes my heart afraid; 

And the busy world has too much to do 

To stay in its course to help me through, 

And I long for a Savior— can it be 

That the God of the universe cares for me? 

"O wonderful story of deathless love! 
Each child is dear to that heart above: 
He fights for me when I can not fight; 
He comforts me in the gloom of night; 
He lifts the burden, for he is strong; 
He stills the sigh, and awakens the song; 
The sorrow that bowed me down he bears, 
And loves and pardons, because he cares. 

"Let all who are sad take heart again. 

We are not alone in our hours of pain; 

Our Father stoops from his throne above 

To soothe and quiet us with his love. 

He leaves us not when the storm is high, 

And we have safety, for he is nigh. 

Can that be trouble which he doth share? 

Oh! rest in peace, for the Lord does care."— Sel. 



R1392 : page 89 

"THE DELIVERANCE." 

A MUTUAL ASSURANCE SOCIETY 

ESTABLISHED IN 

ST. JOSEPH'S CHURCH, 

WEST DE PERE, WIS., 

FOR THE RELIEF AND THE DELIVERANCE 

OF THE 

POOR SOULS IN PURGATORY. 



Thus runs the title-page of an advertising 
circular before us. The second page gives a 
picture of Christ in heaven, with Joseph and 
Mary on either hand, praying to him for those 
suffering in Purgatory; below which the sufferers 
and the flames are pictured. Subsequent 
pages explain that the admission fee is 25 cents 



and the annual dues 10 cents. Any surplus of 
merit more than is necessary for the members 
of the society will be generously donated to 
others now in Purgatory. The money goes to 
pay the priest for the sacrificing of the Mass. 
(See M. Dawn, Vol. III., p. 99.) The priest, 
"Rev. J. F. Durin," is President, Secretary, 
Treasurer and General Manager. How blind 
are those who support such an institution and 
those Protestants who sympathize with it. 



page 90 

INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS. 



SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1383 : page 90 

"THE WAY OF THE RIGHTEOUS." 



LESSON I., APRIL 3, PSALM 1:1-6. 

Golden Text— "Blessed is the man that walketh not in 
counsel of the wicked, nor standeth in the way of sinners, 
nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful."— Psa. 1:1. 

The first three verses of this lesson picture 
the perfect man, the man whose heart is perfected 
in holiness, the pure in heart. Hence 
the picture is pre-eminently that of the perfect 
man, Christ Jesus, and secondarily that of those 
imperfect men and women who, being justified 
by faith in Christ, are, as new creatures, walking 
in their Master's footsteps, and hence right 
at heart, even though sometimes imperfect 
through the weaknesses of their earthen vessels. 

The first verse shows three steps, (1) the 
ungodly— literally, the wicked, (2) sinners or 
transgressors, and (3) scorners or the conceited 
and unteachable. 

The proper course is to have no fellowship 
(sympathy and common interest) with people 
of any of these classes. This, of course, does 
not mean that we are to treat them unkindly 
or discourteously, nor that we are never to be 



seen walking, standing or sitting with such; 
but it does imply that our company should, as 
far as possible, be select, and of those who 
reverence our God, and that other fellowships 
should not be encouraged. 

A greater number, perhaps, are in danger of 
getting into fellowship with the scorners or unteachable 
than with the others: yet fellowship 
with such leads to the same spirit; and that 
leads gradually to violation of the covenant 
with God; and that leads to open wickedness 
and wilful sin. The safe way is to have no 
fellowship with darkness: it is never profitable. 

But this advice will apply also in another 
way. In all the nominal churches there are 
many who have a form of godliness, but who 
are really ungodly— far from being in harmony 
with God and his plan. In the nominal 
churches are also many sinners, living in known 
violation of their covenant with God. And 
there, too, may be found, alas! sometimes even 
in the pulpits, those who are of an unteachable, 
haughty spirit, who even scoff at God's Word 
and make it void through their traditions. 
Come out from among them; and neither sit, 
nor stand, nor walk in fellowship with such. 
(Rev. 18:4; Isa. 52:11.) Stand with God, 
even if that should seem to imply standing 
alone. The Lord knoweth them that are his, 
and he has yet more than seven thousand who 
bow not to the idol of sectarianism. 

Verse 2. Some might suppose that one thus 
isolated would have an unhappy lot; but no, 
he is truly said to have a delightful experience. 
He delights day and night in meditating upon 
God's will and plan. In this he finds a joy and 
a peace which the world and a worldly church 
can neither give nor take away. One thus consecrated 
and full of the spirit of the Lord finds 
that God's laws of righteousness are not restraints 
which he would fain be freed from; 
but, like the Master, he can say, "I delight 
to do thy will, O my God: thy law is engraven 
in my heart." 

Verse 3. Such children of God as have 
reached this degree of development do not 
wither away and become dead and barren, but, 
since the root of their new life is fed by the 
river of God's grace and truth, they are always 
fresh and joyous and fruitful— adding to faith 
virtue, brotherly kindness, love, and so are not 
unfruitful in either the knowledge or the wisdom 
which surely comes to all who have communion 
and fellowship with God. 

Whatsoever such do shall prosper. They 
have no plans of their own: they desire that 



God's will shall be done. And since God's 
plan shall prosper (Isa. 55:1 1), their plan shall 
prosper; for his is theirs. 

Verses 4 and 5 describe the reward of the 
wicked. In God's plan no provision is made 
for the wicked; and, as the chaff dust blown by 
the tornado can never again be found, so the 
wicked shall have no place after the Lord has 
thoroughly cleansed the world and swept them 
into oblivion. 

But a distinction should be made between 
wrong-doers and wicked people. The wicked 
are those who wilfully prefer sin to righteousness, 
while many violators of God's law now 
are deceived by the great enemy, Satan, (2 Cor. 4:4), 
and entrapped by depraved appetites, etc. 
Thank God that Satan soon shall be bound and 
shall deceive the nations no more; and then a 
clear knowledge of God and of righteousness 
shall be granted to all. We may reasonably 
hope that the wilfully wicked will thus ultimately 
be proved to be a much smaller number 
than at present might appear. 

But the description here given of the way of 
the wicked does not relate to their present life. 

R1383 : page 91 

In the present life they, more often than the 

righteous, flourish and prosper, as is shown by 

the same writer elsewhere.— Psa. 73:3,12; 37:10,16,35; 

145:20. 

Verse 5. The wicked, therefore, shall not 
be able to stand [shall not continue to stand- 
shall fall, pass away as the chaff] in the judgment 
[of the Millennial age]; nor shall sinners 
[those disobedient to their covenant] longer be 
found in the congregation of the just. 

The judgment which is to determine who are 
the lovers of righteousness, and who are deliberately, 
wilfully wicked, is here stated to be 
future, which accords with our Lord's words 
uttered ten centuries later— "I came not to 
judge the world, but to save the world." (John 12:47.) 
That the world has not yet been 
judged is evident; for the wicked are not yet 
overthrown and carried away as the chaff. But 
though our Lord's mission, at the first advent, 
was not to judge, but to redeem the world, the 
testimony is unmistakable that, at his second 
advent, he will judge the world, and that his 
saints now being selected from among men 
will be associate judges, kings and priests with 
him in that thousand-year-day of judgment. 
(Acts 10:42; John 5:22; Acts 17:31; 1 Cor. 6:2,3.) 
The character of these judges and 



the object of the judgment give assurance that 
it will thoroughly and righteously separate those 
for whom God in Christ has provided the gift 
of grace— everlasting life— from those who, he 
declares, will be "cut off from among his 
people," in the second death. 

Then sinners [violators of their covenant of 
consecration] will no longer have a place among 
the faithful who are completing their covenant 
of self-sacrifice. (Psa. 50:5.) This division 
of the faithful and wise servants from the unfaithful 
and foolish servants is already beginning. 
The judgment of the world will follow. 
See "The Work of Harvest" in Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. III., Chap. vi. 

page 91 

Verse 6. "The Lord knoweth [or appro veth 
of] the way of the righteous, but the way 
of the wicked leadeth to destruction." 

R1384:page91 

THE KING OF ZION. 



LESSON II., APRIL 10, PSALM 2:1-12. 

Golden Text— "Blessed are all they that put their 
trust in him."— Psa. 2:12. 

In considering this psalm it is well to remember 
that King David, its author, was a typical 
character, a type of Christ. Those of David's 
time and he himself, also, no doubt understood 
his words to refer to his own conflicts with 
surrounding nations and their kings, and although 
some of the expressions are quite too 
strong to fit the typical king and kingdom, 
and could fit only their antitypes, this no doubt 
was considered poetic license. From a higher 
standpoint, however, guided by the holy spirit 
and the words of the apostles, the Gospel 
Church can see in this psalm a prophecy of our 
Lord Christ Jesus at his first advent, and still 
further of the entire Christ (anointed) including 
the Church which is the body of Christ, 
and their final exaltation as the Millennial 
Kingdom. 

While the application of this prophecy, by 
some in the early Church, to the time of the first 
advent, and the events connected with our 
Lord's crucifixion (Acts 4:25-27), is not corroborated 
by the testimony of any of the inspired 



apostles, it is not without justification in 
the circumstances they relate. But notwithstanding 
this partial application, the fulness 
of the import belongs to the time of the second 
advent, as do almost all the prophecies which 
relate to Christ's Kingdom and glory. The object 
of his first advent was to give himself a ransom 
for all, and thus legally to prepare the way 
for the selection of some of the redeemed, his 
Church, to be his bride and joint heir, and also 
to prepare the way for restoring the race 
(whosoever wills) to all that was lost in Adam. 
The second advent, and the Kingdom of God 
then to be established, are to accomplish all 
that was made possible by the work of the first 

R1385 : page 91 

advent. The time for the fulfilment of this 
psalm in its fullest, completest sense is just at 
hand. See Millennial Dawn, Vol. II. 

Verse 1 . "Why do the nations rage and 
the peoples devise vain schemes?" This we 
understand to refer to the commotion and discontent 
already prevailing throughout the civilized 
world and daily increasing. As a result 
of the dissatisfaction, how many are the 
vain and impracticable schemes and theories being 
devised for relief— Communism, Socialism, 
Nihilism, Anarchism. But these can not bring 
the relief needed and desired. God's remedy 
is the only one that will cure present social, 
political and financial ailments and sores. 

Verse 2. "The kings of the earth entrench 
themselves, and the rulers [religious, financial 
and political] take counsel together against Jehovah 
and against his Anointed." Ah! yes; we 
can see this fulfilling on every hand. The kings 
of Europe are banded together against Socialistic 
influences; and they set or establish their 
power over the people by various combinations. 
The lesser rulers, the money-princes and religious-princes, 
are also busy; and Unions, Combinations, 
Trusts and Syndicates are the order 
of the day, not only in financial, but beginningly 
in religious matters. 

R1385 : page 92 

But little do any of these imagine that they 
are preparing to resist the establishment of the 
Kingdom of Jehovah in the hands of his 
Anointed Son. Nevertheless, this is just what 
they are doing. The time is at hand for the fall 
of present systems and for the establishment 
of God's long promised Kingdom which will enforce 



his will on earth even as it is done 

in heaven. So far from knowing that they are 

setting themselves to oppose God's will, they 

are so blinded that they call their own poor tottering 

thrones God's kingdoms. But in vain 

do they worship him in lip and form while their 

hearts are far from him. His will is not in all 

their thoughts. 

Verse 3. "Let us break their bands and cast 
away their cords from us." The translators of 
the common version got the impression that 
these words represented the sentiments of the 
kings and rulers; but not so: they are the expression 
of Jehovah and his Anointed, relative 
to the kings and rulers who have banded themselves 
together to oppose the execution of 
God's plan, because it includes the fall of their 
power. God will break all their bands— their 
combinations and trusts of every sort— and will 
cast off the cords, by which they still attempt 
to claim God's favor, protection and Word as 
upholding their kingdoms, rights, authorities, 
etc. Seelsa. 8:9-13. 

Verses 4 and 5. "He that sitteth in the 
heavens shall laugh: [i.e.] the Lord shall have 
them [as well as their wonderful banding together] 
in derision. Then shall he speak unto 
them in his wrath and trouble them in his sore 
displeasure." 

For eighteen centuries the civilized world has 
heard the words of the Great King, instructing 
that all righteousness consists in loving God 
with all the heart, mind, being and strength, 
and in loving our neighbor as ourself; and that 
he that exalteth himself shall be abased, while 
he that humbleth himself shall be exalted. 
But his instructions have been unheeded except 
by the very few: pride and love of money and 
power have ruled. Now the time has come to 
speak the same truths in a different manner— 
so loudly and so forcibly that they will never 
be forgotten. And the great time of trouble 
just approaching, such as was not since there 
was a nation, will be merely the reiteration of 
the Lord's message, once given in tender tones, 
but unheeded. 

Verse 6. "Yet [meanwhile] I [Jehovah] have 
established my King upon Zion, my holy 
mountain [kingdom]." Thus briefly does God 
announce what his work will be in connection 
with the overthrow of human systems and governments. 
He will establish Christ's Millennial 
Kingdom, and he shall take unto himself 
his great power and reign.— Rev. 11:17,18. 

Verses 7-9. Here, evidently, the speaker is 
our Lord Jesus. The words represent the lesson 



that he will first make plain to the world— 
that it is by the Father's divine decree that he 
takes possession. "I will make known the decree: 
Jehovah hath said unto me, 'Thou art 
my Son; this day have I begotten thee." The 
fulfilment of this was when our Lord Jesus, as 
the man Christ at thirty years, consecrated himself 
wholly to the will and plan of God, even 
unto death. There the sacrifice was really 
made which was "finished" three and a half 
years after at Calvary: and there, too, he was 
begotten of the spirit to the divine nature, to 
which he was fully born three and a half years 
later, when he was made a quickening spirit, 
by a resurrection to the perfection of the divine 
nature— "highly exalted."— Phil. 2:8-10. 

Next comes the enthronement of the Son in 
his Millennial Kingdom. He at his first advent 
"bought us with his own precious blood," 
and consequently he has only to "ask" for 
that which he redeemed to get it. He would 
have asked for it at once, but for another feature 
of the plan— the selection first, from among 
the purchased race, of a bride and joint-heir 
in his kingdom. This selection will be complete 
at his second advent, and then he will be 
ready to deal with the world, the nations, and 
then he will ask and receive from the Father 
all the power and authority necessary. "Ask 
of me, and I will give thee the nations for 
thine inheritance, and the earth to its uttermost 
parts for thy possession." 

While the object of the kingdom will be to 
establish peace on earth and good will toward 
men, it will not be peacefully introduced. The 
beginning of Messiah's reign will mean the 
greatest revolution the world has ever seen. 
(Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21.) Kings and princes 
will hold on to power and advantage to the 
last, and as a result all will be dashed in pieces. 

Verses 10-12. After telling of the fulness of 
the authority given to him, and that it must be 
enforced, even though such a revolution be necessary 
to introduce it, the great King of Glory 
shows his willingness to be merciful, and points 
out that, if the trouble comes thus upon men, 
it will be because of their neglect to come into 
harmony with him. But the kings and rulers 
of earth will not hear nor heed the exhortation, 
and this is clearly indicated in prophecy. They 
will not hear the voice of the antitypical Elijah 
Class— the Church in the flesh (See Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. II., Chap, viii.) — and hence the 
earth will be smitten with the great disaster so 
clearly foretold in Scripture.— Mai. 4:6. 



R1385 : page 93 

These verses 8-12 were freely quoted and applied 
by the popes to their systems during the 
dark ages of Papacy's triumph— that was the 
counterfeit Antichrist's millennium. See Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. II., Chap. ix. 

"Blessed are all they that put their trust in 
him [Christ]." These words stand as an offset 
to the promise of great trouble and overthrow 
for such as oppose the new and rightful King 
of earth. It includes the Church primarily— 
the real, the believing, the consecrated Church. 
When men's hearts begin to fail them for fear 
of those things coming upon the earth— when 
the powers of the heavens [the nominal churches] 
shall be shaken, these are instructed to 
look up and lift up their heads, because their 
redemption draweth nigh. At the same time 
that destruction comes to the one class, redemption 
and glory comes to the other. Compare 
Isa. 35:4; 63:4. 

Yea, beloved, can not all we who see the 
sign (indication) of the presence of the Son of 
Man now say, "Happy are all they that put 
their trust in him." 



R1384:page93 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



Texas. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am one of the lone 
ones— an old lady of 84 years, but I love the 
precious truths for these last days. Providentially 
I picked up the first volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN when I was away from home on a visit 
in Waco a year ago, and I thank God that he 
ever directed me to these precious truths. I 
seem to have a new Bible now and I thank God 
daily for his beautiful plan of salvation. 

I feel that I cannot wait longer for the 
TOWER. Please send it to me. I will send the 
money for it and some DAWNS to scatter. 

Yours in Christ, MRS. M. E. RUST. 



page 93 



Cincinnati. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Glad to tell you 



that I have recently found here quite a goodly 
number deeply interested from reading the 
DAWNS. 

I am drawing my canvass here to a close 
preparatory to the holding of some meetings at 
Columbus and also at New Albany, O. In the 
latter place the brethren are preparing that 
they may be mightily helped by my visit and 
preaching among them. Will you, and Sister 
Russell also, pray for us? After the meeting, 
when on my way to Chicago, I have promised 
to stop again at Columbus and Van Wert. 

Much love, in which Sr. A. joins. 

Yours in Christ, J. B. ADAMSON. 



R1384:page93 

England. 

MY VERY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have 
started several times to write to you since your 
ever-to-be-remembered visit, but have always 
been put off. Your visit here was a veritable, divine 
appointment. Its influence on others has 
been great for good, I doubt not, but to me 
especially. I cannot tell you all I have felt since 
Sept. 13th: words fail me utterly. The humiliation, 
the self-abasement, the light, the love, 
that have succeeded each other, no tongue can 
tell, but you can understand it, because you have 
known it yourself. The Scriptures have seemed 
to open out of themselves, and never before 
have I had such freedom in giving meat to the 
household of faith. 

You suggested to me the Colporteur work. 
This I felt I could not undertake without further 
consideration. I should have been so glad to 
say, Yes, to you, but something held me back. 
I could not feel that I was fitted for such work. 
This conviction has grown upon me; but with 
it I have also realized that for the present I 
must labor where I am. And I am confirmed 
in the belief that this is the Master's ordering 
by the blessing granted on the work I am doing. 
I think I told you or Sister Russell that I 
had a class of twenty to thirty men every Sunday 
morning for a Bible lesson. Somehow some 
portion of the spirit of Elijah fell upon us 
at those memorable London meetings, and the 
men have realized that their teacher has received 
a blessing and must bless others if he is 
to keep it. A fortnight ago the kindly and 
helpful testimony given as to the way these 
lessons are appreciated was most encouraging. 
To the Master be all the praise. Three of the 



men were specially anxious to testify of the good 
they had received, and these were men cradled 
and reared in Methodism. Two of them said 
the Bible was a new book to them, and that 
they had learned more of the word, plans and 
purposes of God during the last few weeks than 
in all their former life put together. I felt 
deeply humiliated and could only ask for grace 
to help in this time of need. Knowledge puffeth 
up, but I am deeply conscious that I am 
nothing and fearful that men will look too much 
at the instrument. Since then there are two 
others, who, having heard of the light God is 
giving, have come to see for themselves. One 
of them is a local preacher. He has been impressed 
with the beauty of God's plan and says 

R1384:page94 

he will not miss being present whenever he can 
get here. I have sold all the DAWNS I had and 
am glad to hear that now we can be supplied 
from London. I hope to be able to arrange 
for public meetings occasionally this winter, 
but hold myself open to anything and everything 
that the Master of the Harvest gives me 
to do. And it is astonishing how many ways 
he opens up. 

Your first discourse in London, "Come out 
of her, my people," has been a source of encouragement 
to me. I am always on the lookout 
for the sheep and lambs. O! I thank God 
that not one of his shall be lost, also for the great 
privilege of seeking them. Three weeks ago 
we had a very dear friend staying with us who 
is a Minister in the Prim. Meth. church, and 
with whom we had often exchanged views by 
letter. He and his wife left us deeply impressed 
by "our manner of life." They are 
both sincere Christians and have very much of 
the love and likeness of the Master about them. 
The Master himself ordered all our conversation. 
We invariably entered into sweet fellowship, 
and yet the doctrines of the trinity, immortality, 
future punishment, the destiny of 
mankind, and the greatest doctrine of all— the 
Atonement through Christ our Ransomer— all 
were entered into as they were suggested to us; 
and this profitably to both sides. Since then 
left us for home (London) we have received a 
good letter from them. They are fully consecrated 
to him whom we love. These means 
God has brought to me, and in so many ways— 
by letter, by speaking and by teaching— have 
I been shown God's graciousness, so that I feel 
sure that for the present, at least, my influence 



is greatest and best exerted where I am. I am 
able to sell DAWNS and get others to do so, too, 
but if the Lord will that I go out, I pray he 
may show me and give grace in needful supply. 
There are many things one would like to talk 
about. O! the time of refreshing from the 
presence of the Lord at and ever since your 
visit! But I cannot write more now, only to 
say that our (wife and self) hearts are overflowing 
with gratitude to the Master for his goodness 
in sending you to England. 

Sister Home wrote me a characteristic letter 
yesterday. She tells me she has heard from 
you. There are none on earth that occupy 
such a place in our hearts as your dear selves. 
My heart is full and I am overjoyed at having 
received such blessing. Give our loving greeting 
to all the Brethren and Sisters, and may 
your hands be strengthened and your hearts 
cheered in the great work, is the sincere prayer 
of your affectionate fellow-servants, 

AARON & P. C. RILEY. 



page 94 

Texas. 
TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, DEAR BRETHREN: 

Enclosed you will find Express Money Order 
for six dollars, the amount of my "Good 
Hopes" for this quarter. Rather early, but 
better than too late. This leaves me paid up 
until June. I delight in this opportunity for 
serving the Lord and the truth, and have a 
feeling at heart that I am doing right. With 
love to you all, I am 

Your Brother in Christ, E. WALLACE. 



R1384:page94 

Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your very kind 
and highly appreciated letter was duly received. 
After considerable study and prayer, I have 
concluded that it is best for me to have as little 
as possible to do with the nominal church, 
and nothing at all to do with their religious 
services. 

I have been singing in protracted meetings 
every night for seven successive weeks, and during 
that time I have felt very much out of place 
—as their doctrines and especially their revival 
services very much oppose the Bible and God's 



plan of the ages. "Eternal torment" and the 
"restitution of all things" do not go well 
together. 

It is my greatest desire to do the Lord's will, 
and I am confident that in the near future the 
way will be opened for me to serve him more 
effectively than I have been able to do in the 
past. 

Oh, how thankful I am to God and to you, 
Brother Russell, that the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
ever came into my hands! How thankful I am 
that God has called me out of darkness into his 
wonderful light! I cannot thank him enough 
for it. May I prove my loyalty to him by living 
the truth— by letting my light shine, and 
by putting forth every possible effort to lead 
others to the light! 

I have enjoyed studying your articles on the 
Ransom. I am sure they are thoroughly Scriptural 
and are very much needed in this evil 
day. You cannot overdo that subject. The 
S.S. lesson expositions are "meat in due 
season," and I am sure they will be highly appreciated 
by all TOWER readers. 

Enclosed you will find $5.00, which kindly 
hand to Sister Russell on account of my "Good 
Hopes." Please remember me to Sister Russell, 
Brother Henninges and all the TOWER 
workers, and pray for me that I may be as 
"wise as a serpent and harmless as a dove," 
and that I may never shrink from the consequences 
of truth. 

I remain your brother in Christ, 
M. L. McPHAIL. 



page 95 



England. 
DEAR SIR AND BRO. RUSSELL:-I see by the 

last issue of the TOWER that you desire all the 

readers to send you a few lines. And in compliance 

I beg to state I am one to whom the 

M. Dawn and the TOWER have been indeed 

and in truth meat in due season. But I have 

to state that I can no longer send in the subscription 

price, for my whole income is but 10 

pence a day; but I cannot afford to lose the 

precious food in the mean time, so I request 

that the TOWER be continued to me as one of 

the interested Lord's poor. 

I will mention the address of a friend who 
I think will be a subscriber, if you will send 
him a sample copy; his address is . 

I may describe him as a ravenous truth-seeker. 



The copies of Millennial Dawn which 
I loaned him have been to him meat in due 
season. The Parish Minister in visiting him 
saw the DAWNS, and after examining them described 
them as being a wonderful work. 
Yours with much love, in Christ, J. PLINT. 



Wisconsin. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write just a few 
lines to try to give you some idea of my high 
appreciation of the TOWER in its new dress, as 
it comes to us semi-monthly laden with the 
food now due, and which is to build up and 
strengthen the household of faith, and which, 
if properly digested, will enable them to stand, 
firmly established, by and through a knowledge 
of the Truth as found in God's Word. 

I think you have shown wisdom in taking up 
the Int. S.S. Lessons, and your manner of 
treating them will prove a blessing to all who 
will give the proper attention to their study. 
There were just three of us who met at my house 
last Lord's day. We took for study Lesson 
8th, Jer. 36:19-31, and read your remarks on 
the lesson, proving everything up as we went 
along. When we came to where you compared 
Jeremiah's prophecy with Revelation to prove 
that the Prophet referred to mystic Babylon 
we went carefully through all the references, 
comparing one with the other. When we got 
through we all felt there was no room for doubt. 

I fear many fail to get the full benefit of 
these precious truths, because they do not take 
the trouble to prove them up, and thereby put 
it beyond doubt in their own mind, and when 
they point out these truths to others, and are 
met with, "Oh! that is what Russell says," they 
are not able to reply, "It is what God's Word 
teaches." And doubtless in many instances 
doubts are created in their own minds, and all 
because they swallowed the food without proper 
mastication, and have failed to digest it and 
benefit by it, and so they are weak. 

I see I have strayed away from what I intended 
to say. Of course we get very hungry 
between meals: we have no preaching, no sermons 
except what we get from the precious 
TOWER, and that seems not half enough to 
satisfy us. And we go to the fountain of water 
(God's Word), and drink in the blessed truths, 
and look forward to the time when we may 
say to all, "Come to the waters of life and 
take freely." 

Yours in hope of the victory, S. T. BARNES. 



West Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Warmest thanks 
to you and Sister Russell, with love and gratitude 
for so much of the Lord's bounties you 
have spread and are spreading before us. It is 
simply delightful to follow you through the 
earth, into the heavens, and the ages revealing 
the "Miracles and wonders God has wrought" 
—exposing the power and signs and lying 
wonders of Satan, putting a "new song into our 
mouth, praise unto our God" (Psalm 40), and 
confirming unto us the Covenant. 

How strange to see the power of Satan exercised 
side by side with God's agencies without 
restraint— even up to and beyond the most 
thrilling crisis in the history of man. How 
Satan succeeded in preventing the arrival of 
the two thousand chosen troops in time for the 
noble Pilate's use, must have astonished higher 
intelligences than man at the time. And to-day 
he is permitted to surround the saints with 
his cunning devices, working miracles, claiming 
the sanction, if not openly the authority 
of Christ— Antichrist to the last, and deceiving 
many for a time. 

While objectors hereabouts cannot gainsay, 
yet they do express their scorn. If we had a 
name with an "ism" to it, they might tolerate 
our views.... 

Yours in Christ, H. L. GILLIS. 



BINDERS FOR THE WATCH TOWER. 

We have had some of "Emerson's Patent 
Binders" made for the present size of the Watch 
Tower. The issues can be put in from time to 
time as they come, and thus be kept straight 
and clean as a book. They are very convenient, 
have the name Zion's Watch Tower on the 
side, and will hold about three years' issues. 
By having a quantity made at once, we are able 
to supply them at fifty cents, including postage. 



THE SYRIAC NEW TESTAMENT. 

Murdoch's Translation of the Syriac-Peshito 
manuscript is sometimes inquired for. 

We can supply it in substantial half-leather 
binding, post paid for $2. 



page 98 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



R1392:page98 

MEMENTOES OF OUR JOURNEY TO PALESTINE. 



While in Jerusalem it occurred to us that 
many of our friends might like very much to 
have some little thing as a memento, both of 
our journey and of the "Holy City." We had 
no difficulty in selecting some inexpensive ones 
suited to our purpose. Some small olive-wood 
articles— paper weights, pen-holders, egg-cups 
and napkin-rings. 

Next came the difficulty— How many shall we 
purchase? How many friends have we to whom 



we would like to present a little token? We 
knew no place to draw a line, for surely all 
the TOWER readers are beloved as friends indeed. 
We could not, however, afford to purchase 
and pay transportation and customs and 
postage duty for so many— nor did we like to 
offer to sell them to our friends. We concluded, 
finally, to purchase about 1700 pieces and present 
them to the WATCH TOWER TRACT 
SOCIETY and let the society pay freight and 
customs tariff and packing and postage, and 
supply them at low prices to such as may desire 
them. Thus all will be accommodated, some 
will be pleased and the cause will be profited. 
These articles we ordered from the Baron 
Rothschild Industrial School in Jerusalem. 
They are olive-wood and stamped Jerusalem. 

We also saw some neat but inexpensive "Flower 
Cards," which we surmised would be appreciated 
by many of you. We ordered 4000 of 
these; they, too, have arrived. These will be 
sent gratis, postpaid, as love tokens and mementoes 
from Sister Russell and myself. They 
are not printed flowers, but colored wild flowers, 
grasses, etc., from the surrounding country, 
pasted on cards in tasteful designs. These 
will be sent as follows: (1) One card to each 
person purchasing one or more of the olive-wood 
articles and (2) one card each to those 
of the Lord's poor who have written since Dec. 
1, 91, requesting the Watch Tower for 1892, 
gratis. Thus all can have a little memento. 

OLIVE-WOOD MEMENTOES 



The following articles donated to the Watch 
Tower Tract Fund, as explained above, are 
offered for sale to Watch Tower readers, postage 
paid by us, at the following prices:— 
Olive-wood Pen-holders, each 20 cents. 

" " Paper-weights, " 15 " 

" " " " four 50 " 

" " Napkin Rings, each 15 " 

seven 1.00 

" " Egg cups, each 15 " 

" " " " seven 1.00 
We will be too busy to fill orders before and 
during the Memorial Meeting; but orders will 
be filed and filled in order as received. Write 
order with full address separate from other 
orders and letter. When the article ordered 
is sold out, we will send one of the 
others until all are gone. If you have a second 
choice, name it in your order. 



page 98 

THE MEMORIAL MEETINGS AT ALLEGHENY. 



The present prospects are that there will be 
quite a large attendance this year. The last 
TOWER gave very explicit directions for all intending 
to come, and it should be carefully 
re-examined to insure no mistakes. On arrival, 
come to the TOWER office, 58 Arch st. 

We have only to add further that friends 
coming from points West of Chicago and St. 
Louis can obtain excursion Certificates with 
their tickets from PEORIA, ILLINOIS, via the 
C.R.I.& P., or the C.B.& Q., or the J.S.E. 
-A.T.& S.F. Rail Roads. 

We are by no means sure that these Memorial 
Excursions will be granted another year, 
as the railroads are yearly more exacting. 

When sure that you can come, drop us a 
postal card about 24 hours before you start, advising 
us again of names and sexes, that our 
preparations may be as complete as possible. 



R1386 : page 99 

VOL. XIII. APRIL 1, 1892. NO. 7. 

"THE BRIDE, THE LAMB'S WIFE." 

(SPECIAL ATTENTION AND CAREFUL STUDY OF THIS SUBJECT IS 
REQUESTED, FOR REASONS EXPLAINED FURTHER ALONG. --EDITOR.) 



"I have espoused you as a chaste virgin unto one husband, 
even Christ."— 2 Cor. 11:2. 

The letter of the Apostle Paul in which these 
words occur was addressed to the Church of 
God at Corinth and to all the saints in all 
Achaia (2 Cor. 1:1), and together with the other 
epistles was designed by the Holy Spirit for the 
instruction of the whole Church, during the 
entire Gospel age. Therefore when the Apostle 
says, "I have espoused you as a chaste virgin 
unto one husband, even Christ," it is evident 
that the entire faithful Church is meant— all 
who as "wise virgins" will continue faithful to 
the espousal vows. Such will, in due time, be 
accepted of Christ as his glorious bride without 



spot or wrinkle or any such thing. 

This beautiful figure of the Church's relationship 
to Christ is made very prominent in the 
Scriptures. See the invitation to become the 
bride in Psa. 45:10,11, and the promised joy 
and gladness of those who accept it and prove 
themselves worthy of it. Then read Paul's 
counsel to the husbands and wives who are truly 
wedded in the Lord: they two shall be one 
flesh— as one person, having but one mind and 
one common interest, purpose and aim. And 
for this purpose, to this end, each is to forsake 
the former ties which united them to parents 
and brothers and sisters. Then says the Apostle, 
"This is a great mystery"— it is something 
rarely seen, even among Christian husbands 
and wives— "but I speak concerning 
Christ and the Church," the Bridegroom and 
Bride between whom the union will be perfect. 
-Eph. 5:22-33. 

Isaac and his wife, Rebecca, furnish a striking 
type of Christ and the Church as bridegroom 
and bride, to which we will refer later; 
and the Revelator points to the heavenly Jerusalem, 
the glorified Church, as the bride, the 
Lamb's wife. 

The teaching of this oft-repeated and beautiful 
symbol, by which the Lord would have us 
understand and appreciate his great love and 
tender care for us as his Church, is so plain 
that it seems strange that any should fail to 
comprehend it; yet through a misapplication 
of a type some few have reached erroneous conclusions 
on the subject. Two of the dear friends 
of the truth think they have found new light 
on this subject, though their views differ somewhat, 
and both cannot be right. 

One holds that the patriarchs and prophets 
of the past dispensation, mentioned in Heb. 11, 
will, in their resurrection, constitute the bride; 
and the other holds that the bride of Christ is 
to be composed of the living Israelites now regathering 
to Palestine, who, as we have seen, 
shall be the first to be blessed and restored to 
human perfection under the new Millennial dispensation. 
While dissimilar in some respects, 
these views are sufficiently alike to be examined 
together. 

We reply (1), It would be impossible in 
God's order to call the bride before the bridegroom. 
It pleased the Father that in the 

R1386 : page 100 

Anointed One all fulness should dwell— that in 
all things he should have the pre-eminence. 



(2) It would be an incongruous and impossible 

union for the bridegroom to be spiritual, and 

the bride to be human. It would be out of 

harmony, too, with our Lord's prayer, "Father 

I will that they also whom thou hast given 

me be with me where I am, that they may 

behold my glory;" and again, with his statements 

—"I go to prepare a place for you," and 

"I will come again and receive you unto myself, 

that where I am there ye may be also." 

How could Bridegroom and Bride have fellowship 

and union, joint-heirship and joint-inheritance, 

if one were of the spiritual and the 

other of the human nature? 

Both of the objecting friends recognize the 
force of the type to which we long ago called 
attention— that Abraham, Isaac and Rebecca 
represent Jehovah, Christ and the Bride. But 
both seem to have forgotten that a type must 
not be used to teach a doctrine, but merely to illustrate 
one that is already taught in plain terms. 

Both proceed to claim that Isaac represented 
the entire Gospel Church— head and body— 
and that Rebecca, his bride, must therefore represent 
some other class. They claim that as 
we have shown, or rather as the Apostle has 
shown, that Sarah, Isaac's mother, was a type of 
the Abrahamic Covenant (Gal. 4:24,31), and 
as Sarah died before Eliezer was sent to seek a 
bride for Isaac, therefore the Gospel Covenant 
must come to an end before the call of the Bride; 
and hence that the calling of the Bride will be 
deferred until this Gospel age is ended. The 
fact that the servant is instructed not to take a 
wife for Isaac from among the Canaanites, but 
to go to Abraham's own kindred for her, they 
interpret to signify that the bride must be of the 
natural seed of Abraham, claiming accordingly 
that she could not be selected from Jews 
and Gentiles as the Gospel Church has been 
selected, but must be Jewish exclusively. 

We have stated thus fully and clearly their 
position, which we believe to be erroneous, so 
that the answer may be the more conclusive to 
these friends and to all. 

Let us see to it, beloved, that we are of those 
who hold the Head (Col. 2:19), who acknowledge 
in every thought and doctrine the preeminence 
of our Redeemer. He is the antitype 
of Isaac— not we. He, alone and apart 
from us, was the heir of all things. We were 
strangers to him and afar off, like Rebecca, 
when Christ (Isaac) became Lord of all and 
was highly exalted and given a name above 
every name, and when in consequence he could 
say, "All power in heaven and in earth is 



given unto me." Ah, yes! "Of the people there 
was none with him." 

It is since he is thus Lord of all, and our 
Lord, that we or any have received an invitation 
from the Father to become his bride and 
joint-heir. To us the spirit of truth declares, 
as Eliezer declared to Rebecca and her family 
concerning Isaac— His Father is very rich, and 
all that he hath he has given to his Son— "He 
is Lord of all" the estate, and fully his Father's 
representative, and the Father now seeketh for 
him a bride and joint-heir. 

And as in the type certain gold ornaments 
were presented to Rebecca from the moment 
that she entertained the good tidings, so with 
us: from the moment that we first gave ear to 
the Father's invitation or "high-calling" we 
have been blessed. The ornaments, being of 
gold, symbolize divine blessings, gold always 
symbolizing divine things. The golden adornments 
were first, earrings, representing the blessed 
effect of hearing the call; and secondly, bracelets 
for the hands, representing the blessed effect 
of the divine call upon all our doings thereafter. 

And so these blessings came merely from the 
attentive hearing of the high call; and yet 
greater blessings followed when we accepted 
that call and said that we would leave our 
father's house (the human nature) and our own 
people (earthly friendships) and go to our Espoused 
One. (Psa. 45:9-11.) So in the type 
—when the decision was reached and Rebecca 
was "betrothed" or "espoused" to Isaac, whom 
having not seen she loved, the servant presented 
her with vessels of silver (symbolizing truths), 
and with further jewels or ornaments of gold 
(divine blessings and graces), and with new raiment, 
symbolizing her newness of life and relationship 
to the Father and the Son whose call 
she had accepted.— Gen. 24:22,53. 

R1386 :page 101 

And as Rebecca's mother and brother also 
received some valuable presents from the servant 
of Abraham when she received her greater 
blessing, this symbolizes the fact that not only 
are the fully consecrated ones blessed when they 
leave all to accept the "high-calling," but 
others of the sympathizing ones of the household 
of faith (the justified, but not fully sanctified) 
also receive spiritual blessings through the 
betrothed class, even before the union with the 
Bridegroom. 

It should be noted, then, that our friends are 
building their theories upon several misinterpretations. 



(1) Sarah's death before the Bride 
of Isaac was called would show that the promised 
"Seed" mentioned in the Abrahamic Covenant 
was fulfilled in the person of our Lord 
Jesus— the heir, and the only heir under that 
Covenant. (Heb. 1:2; Titus 3:5-7.) This the 
Apostle expresses clearly, saying— "He saith 
not, And to seeds,' as of many; but as of one, 
And to thy seed'— which is Christ." (Gal. 3:16.) 
That the Apostle here uses the name 
Christ to refer to our Lord Jesus personally, 
exclusive of his Church, is shown clearly by his 
further use of the word in the succeeding verses 
of this same chapter. See verses 22,24,26 and 27. 
In verses 28 and 29 he brings in the name 
Christ as applicable to all the Church, but in 
such a manner as to show that it is our coming 
into betrothal and union with him that gives us a 
share in that name and in the honors and glories 
future which it implies. "If ye be Christ's 
[if ye, like Rebecca, the type, have accepted 
the Father's offer to become joint-heirs with 
his Son, if ye have joyfully accepted the calling 
presented to you by the servant, the Spirit 
of Truth, and have forsaken all, and are fully 
betrothed to your Lord] then [not by being, 
like your Lord, natural heirs of those covenant 
blessings, but by your union with Christ] ye are 
Abraham's seed and heirs according to the 
promise" [children of God, whom Abraham 
typified; and if children, then heirs; heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with, by and through Jesus 
Christ, our Lord]. 

In Eph. 5:28-30, the Apostle shows that for 
Christ to love his bride is to love himself, for 
in accepting the Church as his Bride the Lord 

R1387 :page 101 

accepts her as his own body, even as in the type 
of this (Adam and Eve and the human union), 
the wife is accepted as the very flesh of her 
husband and her body as an addition to his 
members— and the husband as her head. Thus, 
now, the consecrated, espoused ones while in 
the flesh represent Christ in the flesh; and in 
their daily sacrifices they are filling up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ 
(Col. 1:24); and by and by, when glorified, 
when made spirit-beings like their glorious 
Lord, they will be his glorified spouse and joint-heir, 
and still loved as himself— as members 
of his body. 

Again, the view that the Bride must be of the 
natural seed of Abraham is a mistake. Rebecca 
was not of the seed of Abraham. If it had 



been the design to represent the Bride of Christ 
as being taken from among the Jews, the natural 
seed of Abraham, no doubt a daughter of 
Hagar, who represented the Jewish or Law Covenant, 
would have been chosen. On the contrary, 
when studying or applying a known type 
we should be sure not to mix type and antitype. 
Abraham as a part of the type represented God, 
and hence Abraham's own people represented 
God's people, as contrasted with the Canaanites, 
who represented the wilfully wicked. This 
feature of the type points out to us the fact 
that while God does call sinners to repentance, 
he does not call sinners to become joint-heirs 
with Christ, his Son and heir. To this close 
and glorious relationship he invites only those 
whom he recognizes as friends of righteousness 
and truth. In a word, this type confirms the 
teachings of the Apostles, that it is after we 
have been "justified by faith, and have peace 
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, that 
we have access into this grace [this call to joint-heirship 
with the Only Begotten Son and heir] 
wherein we stand— rejoicing in hope of [sharing] 
the glory of God." (Rom. 5:1,2.) Then 
we shall be fully united to him, and see him as 
he is, receive his name, which is above every 
name, and enter into (his mother Sarah's tent) 
the privileges and opportunities for blessing the 
world promised in the Abrahamic Covenant, 
represented by Sarah.— Gal. 4:24. 
So, then, we have shown Scripturally (1) that 

R1387 :page 102 

Isaac primarily represented our Lord, the "heir 

of all things," personally, and no others; (2) 

that the joint-heirs were represented in Rebecca, 

his bride, who was his only joint-heir; (3) that 

Rebecca typified a class selected from among 

justified believers— believers in God (Abraham) 

and in Christ (Isaac)— which is true only of the 

household of faith and surely not true of the 

Jews; (4) that the Abrahamic Covenant, represented 

by Sarah, bore only one seed, which is 

Christ Jesus, and that it died or ceased as a mother 

when he had finished his course and become 

heir of all things; (5) that if we would become 

joint-heirs of the opportunity and honor (of being 

God's seed through whom the blessing of 

the world will come) contained in that Abrahamic 

Covenant, typified by Sarah, there is no 

other way than by becoming Christ's— by giving 

ourselves to him according to the Father's 

invitation by the spirit of the truth— losing our 

own name and taking his, and forgetting our 



father's house (earthly hopes and ambitions) 
and our own people and becoming wholly his 
—his Bride, whom he loves and will cherish as 
"his own body." 

Next, let us look at the objection which 
seems to have led into the misinterpretations 
which we have here sought to correct. It is 
claimed that because the Church is sometimes 
called the body of Christ, of which Jesus is the 
head, it could not also be the Bride. Therefore, 
say the objectors, the Bride must be one 
class and the Body another class. 

This at first has a show of logic, but we must 
not trust our imperfect minds to reason straight, 
if we wander away from the Word and forget 
that "thus it is written." We must compare 
spiritual things with spiritual things, as the 
Apostle directs, and let the Word of God be 
its own interpreter. Just as unreasonably might 
we say that if Christ is the "Good Shepherd" 
and we members of his Body, we could not also 
be "his sheep," or members of the "little 
flock" to whom it is the Father's good pleasure 
to give the Kingdom, and that the little 
flock could not be the Bride, because no shepherd 
ever marries his flock. Just as unreasonably 
we might say, too, that when Christ is 
termed the Captain of our salvation, and we 
"good soldiers," the soldiers must be another 
class; because it is said that we are the body of 
Christ and members in particular. Just as unreasonably 
might we argue that those whom 
Christ is not ashamed to call his "brethren" 
must be a different class from those called 
the Bride and the Body of Christ, because 
naturally a man does not marry his brethren, 
nor are they his own body. Just as unreasonably 
might we proceed to argue that a 
captain never marries his soldiers, and that 
hence the Bride, the Body, the Good Soldiers, 
the Brethren and the little flock of Sheep must 
be different classes. The same reasoning would 
also apply to the relationship of Christ as our 
great High Priest and ourselves as the Royal 
Priesthood under him; to Christ the Pearl Merchant 
and the Church the pearl; to Christ the 
Sower of the "good seed," and "wheat" the 
children of the Kingdom; to Christ the Chief 
Corner Stone and the overcoming Church the 
living stones builded up into him unto a holy 
temple of God; to Christ the vine and his 
people the branches. 

A little reflection upon these facts will surely 
convince all that our friends were mistaken in 
concluding that because the Church in some 
places in Scripture is called "the body" she 



could not also with equal propriety be called 
"the bride" of Christ. Perhaps, indeed, their 
error may result (under the Lord's overruling 
providence) in bringing clearer views on the 
subject, not to themselves alone, but also to 
others of the Church. 

The above figures, while very different, serve, 
each better than any other, to illustrate some 
peculiar feature either of the character of the 
Lord or of the Church, or of the relationship 
between them. For instance, as sheep the 
Church must be meek, willing to be led— not 
wayward, headstrong and perverse like goats; 
they must, however, not only be meek and docile 
and peace-loving like sheep, but like soldiers 
they must "fight a good fight" and overcome 
the world and its influence, conquering 
self and overcoming obstacles put in the way 
of their service for the Lord by the world and 
the devil. Sheep are not overcomers and overcomers 
are not sheepish; two opposite truths 

R1387 :page 103 

were to be taught and two opposite illustrations 
were necessary: as "sheep" we follow our 
Shepherd and gladly obey his word, and as 
"soldiers" of the cross we fight against all opposition 
that would hinder our following and 
obeying our Captain; but we fight the good 
fight— for truth and right and love, and not 
selfishly and with carnal weapons. 

The figure of a body beautifully represents 
the intimate relationship existing between our 
Lord Jesus and his Church. He is the Head- 
he plans, directs, supervises and cares for the 
various members of his body, the Church, and 
all real members are dependent upon each other 
and upon the Head and are bound together by 
the ties of spiritual love and common interest. 
And although the Head has been actually absent 
for over eighteen hundred years, he has yet been 
present in his care and by his spirit, and representatively 
through certain members of the body 
upon whom he, in his absence, confers certain 
gifts representing his qualities and office as the 
head of the Church— the eye, the mouth, the 
ear members. (1 Cor. 12:15,21.) We should 
have missed much had the illustration of the 
Lord as the Head and the Church as his body 
been omitted. We are glad that no good thing 
or illustration helpful to those who would walk 
uprightly has been omitted. 

And when once clearly seen and fully appreciated, 
we feel sure that none will regret the 
use by the Spirit of any figures used to show 



the Church and her relationship to her Lord- 
especially that representing her as the chaste 
virgin espoused to Christ and soon to be made 
one with him in nature and likeness and glory 
and work. As the figure of head and body represented 
the care of the Lord in and over the 
Church during his actual absence in "a far 
country," the figure of the betrothed or espoused 
virgin, longing for the coming of the Bridegroom 
and the consummation of her hopes and 
his promises, represents the actual state of the 
case far better. Like Rebecca we were already 
virgins, pure ones, whose sins had been pardoned 
(by the grace of God through the atoning 
sacrifice of Christ), and therefore of the 
household of faith, before we were called of the 
Spirit to go to him to become his Bride and 
joint-heir. Like her we each (and all of the 
faithful little flock from the first) have been betrothed 
to our Lord and are following on to 
know the Lord and to see him as he is and to 
share his glory— under the lead of the Spirit. 
Already we have exceeding great and precious 
promises, gifts and graces of the spirit, but we 
are not satisfied: we prize them and treasure 
them, but we think of them only as foretastes 
of the greater blessings to come when we shall 
enter fully into the joys of our Lord. We shall 
be satisfied only when we shall see him as he is 
—when we shall awake in his likeness.— 1 John 3:2; 
Psa. 17:15. 

All along the journey, like Rebecca, the 
Church has been on the look-out for him whom, 
not having seen, she loved, and in whom, though 
she saw him not, yet she rejoiced with joy unspeakable 
and full of glory at the thought of 
the coming union. (1 Pet. 1:8.) And now, 
oh, blessed vision! our eyes of faith, like Rebecca's, 
are keen and we see one in the field 
(the world) approaching us. Like Rebecca, 
we ask our guide (the Spirit of truth) who it is 
—half surmising from the first that it is our 
Beloved, as we see his stately steppings among 
the nations and note the promised signs of his 
presence. The Spirit of the Lord through his 
Word is even now assuring us that what we see 
is "the sign [or manifestation] of the Son of 

R1388 :page 103 

Man," and that the hour of our rapture is near 
at hand. Soon we shall pass beyond the vail 
of death and be with him (See Gen. 24:64,65) 
and be accepted with him into the work and 
office of fulfilling the Covenant represented in 
Sarah. This in the type is shown by the entrance 



of Rebecca with Isaac into Sarah's tent. 

When it is remembered that the Apostle refers 
to mother Eve as a likeness of the Church and 
father Adam as a figure of our Lord Jesus; and 
when we remember that in order to the development 
of Eve a deep sleep fell upon Adam 
and she was formed from his wounded side, we 
see a beautiful harmony between this type and 
the facts. In order that we should have a being 
at all and be capable of receiving a call to 
be the Bride of Christ, it was necessary that 
our Lord should die for us— the deep sleep 
of death came upon him, his side was riven 

R1388 : page 104 

as the price of our life, our existence— and 

being thus justified by his death we were acceptable 

to him as his Bride. When all the 

chaste, wise virgins (i.e., the "overcomers," 

the "good soldiers," the faithful, fruit-bearing 

members or "branches" of the "Vine," the obedient 

"sheep," the sacrificing royal "priests") 

have been selected and prepared and made ready 

for union with the Bridegroom, the marriage or 

glorification will be accomplished; and then the 

regeneration of the world will follow. 

THE REGENERATION OF THE WORLD. 



But here again some are inclined to err: 
comparing spiritual things with natural, they 
fall into the error of expecting that the world 
will be re-generated somewhat after the manner 
of the first generation or natural birth; and consequently 
they begin to wonder and speculate as 
to how the Bride of Christ will conceive and 
bring forth children during the Millennial age, 
and point to Adam and Eve and their offspring 
as an illustration of Christ and the Church and 
the re-generation of the world. 

All this is a mistake, and comes from carrying 
a figure further than God intended, and 
further than the plain statements of his Word 
authorize. The expression regeneration does 
signify to give life again, but it in no way implies 
that it will be given in the same way as 
now. Adam was the first generator of his race: 
Christ is prepared to be the second father, the 
re-generator to such of the race as will accept 
the life he offers in his way and upon his conditions. 
The time for this offer of regeneration 
to the world will be in the Millennial age, 
as our Lord clearly shows. (Matt. 19:28.) He 



will then cause all to hear the good tidings that 

as they lost human perfection (mental, moral 

and physical) in Adam they may have their inherited 

condemnation blotted out, and may 

regain those blessings and favors lost, at the 

hands of Christ their Redeemer, by proving their 

desire to be at-one with God through him. 

As during the Gospel age the Church, the 
Bride, is regenerated and begotten to a new 
nature by faith in and obedience to certain exceeding 
great and precious promises limited to 
this age, so in the next age other precious promises 
of earthly restitution will be the begetting 
influence by obedience to which, under God's 
arrangement, they shall be re-generated and 
restored to the original likeness and harmony 
with God. 

The figure of the Bridegroom and the Bride is 
at an end when they twain are made one. To 
carry this figure further and talk about children 
of the Bride is unwarranted by the Scriptures, 
and is unjustifiable speculation. We would 
have just as much right to speculate further 
about the Lord's "sheep," and to say that sheep 
are cared for in order to get their wool and finally 
for the shepherd to sell off or to kill and 
eat, and that, therefore, after a while all the 
Church will be so dealt with by our Good 
Shepherd. 

If the type of Adam and Eve and their union, 
representing the union to be accomplished 
between Christ and his Church, did not end at 
that union, but continued and included the 
bearing of children, then the sin of Adam and 
Eve and their expulsion from Eden must also 
be parts of the type, which must be fulfilled on 
a still more awful scale than the type. But, we 
repeat, the type ended when Adam accepted of 
Eve as his wife— when they became one; for 
this final union or oneness and joint-heirship, 
between Christ and his faithful followers, is 
all that was intended to be typified. 

Just so, too, with the type of Isaac and Rebecca: 
it ends where Isaac receives his espoused 
into his mother's tent, and does not extend to 
the long-time barrenness of Rebecca; nor to the 
two kinds of twin sons (who figure in an entirely 
different type, as the Apostle shows); nor 
to the blind old age of Isaac, and his deception 
by Rebecca and Jacob. 

The majority of the figures used apply to 
and illustrate matters of the present age, and 
terminate with this age; being finished, they 
are either dropped or merged into other figures 
which better represent the changed condition 
of affairs beyond the present age. When the 



new conditions have been ushered in, there 
will no longer be use for the symbols which 
now serve so well to illustrate the true Church, 
such as "good fish," "wise virgins," "good 
soldiers," "vine-branches," "sheep," "wheat," 

R1388 : page 105 

etc. In connection with the parable of the 

harvesting of the "wheat" class the Lord clearly 

shows this change of illustration; for, instead 

of speaking further of glorified wheat, 

he changes and uses the sun as a more appropriate 

figure, saying: "Then shall the righteous 

shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of 

their father." Just so with the figure of "the 

Bride, the Lamb's wife." It is used repeatedly 

in reference to the Church during the 

period of her espousal, but ceases and is merged 

into another symbol or figure with the end of 

this age. 

Those who have but an imperfect knowledge 
of the old Jewish usage in marriage, which is 
the basis of the illustration, might suppose that 
the Church could not be appropriately or properly 
likened to the Bride or wife until the 
marriage. This would be true according to 
present custom; but the Jewish custom fits the 
facts much better, and was doubtless so arranged 
of God as a type. This old custom was 
for the father or some friend of the man to 
make a contract, arrange terms, etc., for him 
with the one to be invited to become his wife 
and joint-heir. Such a one was called "the 
friend of the Bridegroom." With them this 
contract constituted the real marriage, but the 
contracting parties lived apart usually for a 
year, after which came the wedding feast celebrating 
their union, and thereafter they lived 
together. John the Baptist at our Lord's first 
advent occupied the position of "friend of the 
Bridegroom" toward the Jewish nation— seeking 
to have them accept of Christ the Bridegroom 
and become his Bride. (John 3:29.) 
The nation as a whole rejected the offer, but a 
small remnant of them (the apostles, etc.) accepted, 
and also became in turn the friends of the 
Bridegroom, the mouthpieces of the Spirit to 
seek among God's people— believing Gentiles 
included— for the chaste, wise virgins and to espouse 
such to Christ— telling them of "the 
riches of grace in Christ Jesus." While the 
Church as a whole is sometimes spoken of as 
one virgin, because the marriage to be completed 
soon will be with one Lord, yet each 
faithful individual of the Church is recognized 



as a wise virgin, and really, each is individually 
and separately espoused to the Lord. This 
is clearly stated by the Apostle in Rom. 7:4. 
"Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become 
dead to the Law by the body [sacrifice] of 
Christ; that ye should be married to another, 
even to him who is raised from the dead." 

So then the work of espousing "wise virgins" 
to Christ as to a husband has been in 
progress throughout the entire Gospel age; and 
each espoused one is in turn permitted to serve 
in another capacity— as a "friend of the Bridegroom" 
to tell others of the great privilege 
and, co-operating with the Spirit of the truth, to 
say, "Come," to whomsoever will. (See Rev. 22:17,20.) 
And the living representatives of 
this class at any time have constituted, properly 
speaking, the Bride or Church, although the 
Church or Bride will not be actually complete 
without all the members. As in Jewish custom 
the espoused virgin was called a Bride from the 
time of her consent or contract with the Bridegroom, 
so the espoused virgin Church is called 
Christ's Bride— before the consummation of 
their union. Accordingly, the Scriptures speak 
of the marriage feast coming after the "wife 
hath made herself ready."— Rev. 19:7. 

In Rev. 18:23, when speaking of Babylon's 
fall, it is declared that the voice of the Bridegroom 
and the voice of the Bride shall no more 
be heard in her: clearly showing that previously 
they had spoken in and through Babylon, 
the confused class, and that the names Bridegroom 
and Bride were applicable before Babylon's 
fall and before the marriage feast. 

In Rev. 21:9 we are invited to "come hither" 
to the yet future standpoint and get a view 
of the Bride, the Lamb's wife, and see how 
she will then appear. "And he showed me the 
holy city Jerusalem descending out of heaven 
from God, having the glory of God." This, it 
will be noted, is given to mark the change of 
the symbol from a Bride to a City; just as elsewhere 
the figure was shown to change from 
"wheat" to "the Sun." A city is a symbol 
of a government, and the calling of it the New 
Jerusalem city would signify— The new, antitypical 
government of peace. There has been 
no occasion for the use of such a symbol during 
the Gospel age, because the Church has not 

R1388 :page 106 

been in ruling power; and when glorified with 
her Lord the figure of a virgin-bride waiting 
for full union with the Bridegroom will no 



longer be appropriate as now; hence the change 
from the one symbol to the other. 

"THY MAKER IS THY HUSBAND." 



The Old Testament makes several references 
like the above to some union or Covenant between 
Jehovah and Israel. See Isa. 54:1-6; 

R1389 : page 106 

Ezek. 16:32; Jer. 3:14; Hosea 2:2-7,14-20. 
The contracting parties are Jehovah and Israel, 
but the reference to a union is in a less particular 
sense than the New Testament references 
to Christ and the Bride, the Lamb's wife. Indeed, 
the word husband as above simply means 
caretaker. In another place Judah is represented 
as being the unfaithful husband. (Mai. 2:11-15.) 
In Isa. 62:3-5, in representing the 
future blessing of the land of Israel, the figure 
is changed, and it is said that her sons shall 
marry her, and that she shall be as a lamp and 
as a crown in the Lord's hand, and that he will 
rejoice over the restored land like as a Bridegroom 
rejoices over his bride. 

Of all the references Isaiah 54 is the most explicit; 
and upon it God has given us light 
through the Apostle Paul. (Read Gal. 4:22-31 
in the Emphatic Diaglott and in Rotherham's 
translation.) 

Here we are shown clearly that the barren 
woman who is to be blessed and to bring forth 
children and to sing, and whose Maker is her 
husband, refers neither to the people of fleshly 
Israel nor to the people of spiritual Israel. 
The Apostle declares the whole thing "an allegory," 
a figure, a type; and he explains the 
figure. Abraham was a type of God and Abraham's 
wives were types of God's Covenants. 
The covenant first declared was the Gospel 
Covenant, by which God promised to bless the 
world through the promised Seed, which is 
Christ. This covenant was typified by Sarah. 
But this promise has been barren for a long 
time— all the families of the earth have not 
been blessed, although nearly four thousand 
years have elapsed since God recognized that 
covenant and swore by himself to bring forth 
such results. Meantime (430 years after recognizing 
this covenant— Gal. 3:17) God made 
another covenant— not so great, however, nor 
by any means so good a covenant as the former 
—the Law Covenant. This covenant was typified 



in Hagar, Sarah's servant. 

For a time it appeared that the children of 
the Law Dispensation (fleshly Israel) were the 
full inheritors of the first promise or covenant, 
as Hagar bore Ishmael for Sarah and upon her 
knees as her representative. In the type, Ishmael 
passed for a time as Abraham's son and 
heir, just as Israel after the flesh for centuries 
appeared to be the promised children of God 
in whom all nations should be blessed. But 
not so was God's plan, according to which the 
offspring of Hagar the servant represented a 
servant class, while the offspring of Sarah represented 
a class of sons and heirs. 

The Hagar Covenant, the Law Covenant, 
did bring forth some noble servants of the 
Lord— "Moses verily was faithful as a servant 
over all his house" [of servants], but few in 
all— Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the holy 
prophets down to John. (Heb. 3:1-6.) There 
the Sarah Covenant began to bear: Christ our 
Lord was begotten and born of the Spirit and 
became Son and Lord and heir of all— Christ 
as a Son over his own house [also sons], whose 
house are we if we hold fast to our hope, firm 
unto the end of our trial. 

As Sarah had but one son, so the covenant 
which she represented has but one "Seed, which 
is Christ," which, however, under God's gracious 
provision, is made to include all such as 
are accepted through Christ to be his "brethren." 
But the promise includes not only the 
development and blessing of the Seed, but also 
the blessing of all the families of the earth 
through that Seed, and hence, as the Apostle 
shows, it was the whole gospel in few words. ~ 
Gal. 3:8. 

The Hagar or Law Covenant was again fitly 
represented by the rocky, barren Mt. Sinai, 
where the Law was given and where the Servant 
House was organized as a nation. It was also 
represented by the capital city of that nation, 
Jerusalem— which was continually besieged and 
in captivity. So says the Apostle: the Sarah 
Covenant is represented in "the exalted Jerusalem" 

R1389 : page 107 

—the Kingdom soon to come into power 
to bless the world— whose offspring and heirs 
through Christ we already are. This is the 
city (i.e., government) of which Christ shall be 
the head, the city of the Great King of which 
Jerusalem the literal was but an imperfect type. 

Abraham and others of the ancient worthies 
believed God, that he would establish 



righteousness in the earth, and that under his 
righteous government they would fully realize 
all that God had promised them. It is under 
this perfect city or government from God, 
through Christ, that they shall find a country 
(literally, a home) which could never have come 
under the imperfect city (government) of bondage 
which was typified by Hagar. (See Heb. 11:16.) 
Nevertheless, these all have been waiting 
for the true seed and heir (Christ) to come, 
and until his Church, his Bride, shall be selected 
and united with him; because it is by 
and through us, "the Seed," that the Kingdom 
shall come and all their good hopes be fulfilled. 
-Heb. 11:39,40. 

But much of the Sarah Covenant is still future. 
Christ has become heir of all things, but 
he has not yet used his great power and reigned; 
he has not yet entered fully into the glory of 
his high office. He has finished the sacrificial 
features of his work and all things are ready for 
the consequent work of blessing the world; but 
he waits, according to the Father's plan, until 
his "brethren," his "body," his Bride, shall be 
selected and have herself ready. And we, 
his espoused— what of us? We are coming to 
him and to the Kingdom which he and the 
Father have promised; we are running the race 
for the great prize of our high calling to joint-heirship 
in his divine nature and glory. We 
are not, filled with fearful apprehensions, approaching 
Mt. Sinai with its thunders and with 
its Law which none could keep, but we are approaching 
a very different condition of things, 
which should and does fill our hearts with rejoicing. 
We are approaching Mount Zion [the 
Kingdom of Zion], the city [government] of 
the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to 
[association with] an innumerable company of 
angels— a full assembly— and to the gathering 
together of the Church of first-born ones, having 
been enrolled in the heavens, and to a Judge 
who is God of all, and to the spirits of the 
righteous made perfect, and to the Mediator of 
the New Covenant— Jesus— and to the blood 
of sprinkling which speaketh better things than 
that of Abel [which speaks our pardon and 
peace instead of crying for just vengeance]. 
This, beloved, is what for eighteen hundred 
years and more we have been approaching, and 
which now, thank God, we are very near. But 
the world is approaching another manifestation 
of divine power, more terrible than that at 
Sinai, and of which that was but the illustration 
—a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation— no, nor ever shall be again 



—a trouble in which both the symbolic earth 
(society) and the symbolic heavens (ecclesiasticism) 
shall be shaken and utterly removed, to 
make room for our Kingdom which shall never 
be shaken, because founded by love and mercy 
upon principles of justice. 



R1389 :page 107 

TRAVELS IN THE HOLY LAND. 

AUGUST 1891. -EDITORIAL NOTES.--NO. II. 



The climate of Jerusalem surprises us. It 
is pleasantly cool at night, and, although hot 
at midday, it is decidedly cooler than we had 
expected to find it. The mountain air is very 
pure and invigorating. Jerusalem is a mountain 
city— in the tops of the mountains. The 
four mountain-tops or hills within the present 
walls evidently represented four small cities 
at one time, each with its own wall— Mt. 
Moriah, Mt. Zion, Mt. Acra, Mt. Bezetha, all 
surrounded by a general wall. The city at one 
time may have been nearly a half larger than 
at present, including more of Bezetha on the 
northwest and more of Zion on the southwest. 
The difficulty in determining arises from the 
fact that the city has been destroyed and rebuilt 
so many times. Excavations in various 
directions continually reveal old fragments of 

R1389 : page 108 

walls or cisterns or other ruins, sometimes fifty 
or even seventy feet below the present surface. 
The Tyropean valley is now almost level full 
of debris upon which houses have been built 
and inhabited these many years. 

At first the city of Jerusalem is disappointing. 
It is built after the manner of Arabian 
cities generally. The streets are mere alleyways, 
and are not depended on for ventilation, 
except for the small shops or bazars. 
The dwellings merely connect with the street 
by a door or an occasional window. The inhabitants 
seem to rely for light and ventilation 
upon inner courts from which access is had to 
the various apartments. The present buildings, 
aside from those of the various religious societies 
and government and hotel buildings, are 
generally very inferior; yet one is sometimes 



surprised at the contrast between the outside 

and the inside of some of them. Nor need 

we be surprised if, as the people become degraded, 

their ideas of architecture also depreciated. 

Certainly the very ancient ruins from 

time to time uncovered exhibit more of art 

and dignity than do the modern stone structures. 

The present population is said to be fifty 
thousand. To suppose that it ever contained 
a million people, as Josephus intimates, one 
would be obliged to conclude [1] that the 
city was larger than at present; [2] that then 
as now the people here lived more closely than 
in American or European cities (except in the 
quarters of the very poor); [3] that the siege 
was at the time of a feast which drew many 
people to Jerusalem from all parts of Palestine 
and from outside countries; [4] that the people 
from suburban villages crowded into the 

R1390 : page 108 

city for protection from the Romans; and [5] 
that Solomon's quarries and stables would, in 
such an emergency, shelter fifty thousand people. 

One is impressed from the first with the fact 
that Religion is the chief business of Jerusalem. 
Our guide informs us that there are over 
seventy convents. These, representing various 
religious factions, all seem to be imbued 
with the one error— viz.: that their duty in life 
is to pray much and often and to do nothing. 
Each sect thanks God that it is not as the 
others and especially not like the poor people 
who do a little honest work, and, according to 
divine arrangement, earn their bread by sweat 
of face. Few of them esteem very highly the 
great apostle who wrote against those "forbidding 
to marry" and those "who labor not at 
all." These very religious people all claim to 
live by faith; but the opinion of "the common 
people" is that they enjoy many of the 
substantials and even of the luxuries of the 
present life. Of course all claim that they 
trust to God for food and clothing; but from 
their craftiness many believe that their faith 
rests largely upon the credulity of their fellowmen, 
whose large and warmer hearts are moved 
by misplaced sympathy to assist them. These, 
without exception, we believe, claim to practice 
celibacy. They are supported by friends 
and religious orders in Europe and America, 
and by the liberal donations of visitors, who 
regard them as martyrs. They include Catholics 
of all shades, Greek, Roman, Armenian 
and Syrian, "the Americans," "the Germans" 



(or Society of the Temple) and Mohammedans. 
The Armenian convent on Zion 
Street is the largest. It can accommodate with 
lodgings about eight thousand pilgrims. The 
pilgrims, especially of the Greek and Armenian 
churches, come in great numbers at the 
Passover anniversary of our Lord's death. 

We enter the city at the Jaffa gate, the nearest 
to our hotel, on the way passing large numbers 
of new buildings erected by Jewish societies 
and others, and much more modern looking 
than those within the walls. The new 
outside portion is known as new Jerusalem. 
The Jaffa gate is the busiest of the city's gates: 
it is thronged with people and camels and 
donkeys and trades-folk carrying and crying 
their wares, especially eatables, and with cripples 
and blind seeking alms. Our dragoman 
leads the way to clear a path for us, and must 
repeatedly shout "O-ah!" (i.e., "Look out!" 
or "Take care!") to camel and donkey drivers, 
to prevent our being run over or jammed between 
a donkey's and a camel's burden and the 
wall; for we are not, like the natives, accustomed 
to looking out for ourselves and dodging. 

Here, near the gate we have entered, is the 
Tower of David or the stronghold of Zion. 

R1390 :page 109 

(2 Sam. 5:7.) Opposite is a large new building 
erected in 1886. It is occupied by stores 
below and a hotel above, and was the first modern 
building erected in Jerusalem for other 
than religious purposes. In excavating for its 
foundations the ruins and foundation of the 
Tower of Hananeel were discovered, and it is 
built partly upon the old wall of the Tower. 
Now read the Lord's promises— Jer. 31:27,38-40: 
Zech. 14:9-12. 

Passing along Zion Street we come to a 
building with a black dome said to be built 
over the cave where David, Solomon and many 
others of Israel's kings were buried. (1 Kings 2:10.) 
The tomb is in the possession of the 
Mohammedans, who permit no one to enter 
it. A large room above it, thirty by fifty feet, 
is accessible, however, and we enter it. This 
"upper room" is reputed to be the one where 
our Lord ate the Last Supper with his disciples, 
and where they tarried after his ascension and 
were anointed with the Holy Spirit at Pentecost. 
It is supposed that it was here that 
Peter preached the discourse in which he remarked 
that David's sepulchre was still with 
them. (Acts 2:29.) In memory of the Lord's 



washing of the disciples' feet in this "upper 
room," Roman Catholic monks now wash the 
feet of some pilgrims, yearly, on the Anniversary. 

Our guide says that a splendid view of the 
city can be had from the housetop of "the 
Americans." They welcome us to enter, and 
we thankfully avail ourselves of their kindness. 
They invite us to sit down, and our conversation 
naturally drifts into religious channels, 
the Lord's promises to the land and the people. 
They give us a poor account of the missionaries, 
and declare that they do harm rather than 
good to the natives, all of whom, they aver 
(except those in their employ), despise them. 
As to the nature of their sins, we can learn no 
particulars, except that they are haughty and 
lordly in their bearing toward the poor natives. 
The Bishop of the Church of England (imitating 
the Patriarchs of the Greek and Roman 
Catholic churches), when passing through the 
streets, is preceded by two servants, one of 
whom carries a whip to clear the way while the 
other shouts to make way for the superior. 
Among independent-minded people, such as 
the Arabs, we can readily see that such a course 
would win but few hearts, even though long 
accustomed to such treatment from Turkish 
government officials. The Americans declare 
that they are there to live before the people 
true Christian lives, and believe they are doing 
more for the cause of Christ than the missionaries. 
This seems good, and we are greatly 
interested in them and inquire concerning the 
nature of their work. To our surprise, they 
have "no work," no mission among the poor, 
ignorant people who so much need instruction 
and help. Their idea seems to be that living 
good lives consists in living as "a unity"— as 
one family, trusting in the Lord to supply their 
needs. They claim that thus they follow Christ's 
footsteps, who had not where to lay his head, 
and that the early Church had formed a unity. 
(Acts 4:32-37.) We answer that the Lord 
went about doing good and had to be about 
the Father's business; point out that the principle 
of community, tried in the early Church, 
had not been taught by Christ; that it had 
failed; and that the Apostles nowhere taught 
that such communities were to be formed. In 
proof we cite Paul's advice that men labor 
with their own hands, that they may have to 
give to those in need (Eph. 4:28), and that 
for charities each should lay by him, on the 
first day of the week, according as the Lord 
had prospered him. (1 Cor. 16:2.) We urge 
that these instructions are opposed to "community. 1 



They do not like Paul so well, so 

we refer to our Lord's dying words to John, in 

obedience to which John took Mary to "his 

own house" (John 19:27), proving that our 

Lord had neither taught nor practised communism, 

although that will be more nearly the practice 

of the future. But when they find the 

sword of the spirit too sharp for their theory, 

they say they fear that discussion is not profitable. 

We realize the shrewdness and worldly-wisdom 

of their leader in this and other matters, 

and, remembering that the Lord had said, 

He that hath an ear, let him hear, we conclude 

that it is his will that we say no more to these 

who, at present, have no ear for the truth. 

(To be Continued.) 



page 110 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1390 :page 110 

GOD'S WORKS AND WORD. 



LESSON III., APRIL 17, PSALM 19:1-14. 

Golden Text— "The law of the Lord is perfect, converting 
the soul."— Verse 7. 

It is good to meditate upon, to ponder, the 
Word of the Lord; for only in so doing can we 
receive the nourishment it is designed to give. 
A hasty reading of the Scriptures and a quick 
return of the mind to other thoughts and pursuits 
makes a spiritual dyspeptic, incapable of 
assimilating the spirit of the truth and lacking 
the strength and power of mature and developed 
Christian character. The Psalmist beautifully 
represents the proper attitude of all 
those who truly love the Lord, and who therefore 



delight in his Word and plan: "His delight 

is in the law of the Lord, and in his law 

doth he meditate day and night;" "I will 

meditate of all thy work, and talk of thy doings;" 

"I will meditate in thy precepts and 

have respect unto thy ways. I will delight myself 

in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word;" 

"Thy testimonies are my delight and my 

counsellors;" "I meditate on all thy works; I 

muse on the work of thy hands;" "O how 

love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day; 

...therefore I hate every false way. ...Thy 

testimonies have I taken as a heritage forever;" 

"My meditation of them shall be sweet: I will 

be glad in the Lord."-Psa. 1:2; 77:12; 1 19:15,16,24; 

143:5; 119:97,104,111; 104:34. 

Here, as well as in the lesson under consideration, 
the two great books of nature and of 
revelation are pointed out as special themes for 
the meditation of those who love the Lord and 
who desire to know more of him. 

Verses 1-6 refer to the silent yet eloquent 
testimony of nature to the power and skill and 
wisdom and goodness and glory of its divine 
Author. Its testimony may be read by the 
thoughtful of every land and of every language, 
by day and by night, in all the earth. "The 
heavens declare the glory of God, and the 
firmament showeth his handiwork." Job, considering 
the testimony of nature to the glory 
of God, says, "He is wise in heart and mighty 
in strength. ..which maketh Arcturus, Orion, 
and the Pleiades, and the chambers of the 
south; which doeth great things past finding 
out; yea, and wonders without number." 
(Job 9:4,9,10.) And the Lord, desiring to 
reassure Job of his superior power and grace, 
inquires of him, "Canst thou bind the sweet 
influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of 

R1391 :page 110 

Orion? Canst thou bring forth the constellations 

of the Zodiac, each in its season? or 

canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons? Knowest 

thou the ordinances of heaven? or dost 

thou appoint its rule on earth?"— Job 38:31-33. 

Thus, by their numberless multitude, their 
orderly grouping in various constellations, their 
continual yet never conflicting movements, 
their perfect harmony, their magnitude and 
their mutual benign influence, do the shining 
hosts of heaven declare the glory of God, by 
day and by night. He who meditates upon 
these things will scarcely be "the fool" who 
saith "in his heart, There is no God;" for all 



nature testifies to the Creator's glory and power. 

Verses 7-1 1 refer us to the yet superior glory 
of God's special written revelation of himself, 
given through his inspired human agents, the 
prophets and the apostles. This testimony not 
only declares the existence and power and wisdom 
of God, with a silent intimation of his 
goodness and grace, but with overwhelming 
force it bears to the thoughtful mind the convincing 
testimony of all his glorious attributes 
and of all his love and grace toward us in Christ. 

Hear the Psalmist: "The law of the Lord 
is perfect, converting the soul." Other influences 
may lead to temporary and partial 
changes of course and action, but nothing else 
equals God's revealed Truth in producing a 
change— change of being, character, soul. It 
is because other converting agencies and powers 
are so often used (instead of this one which 
God has provided) that there are so many 
merely glossed-over, nominal Christians, as 
compared with the few whose entire beings 
are turned and fully consecrated to the Lord. 
People may be converted from savagery to civilization 
by a general knowledge; or from intemperance 
to sobriety by a study of the advantages 
of the latter over the former; or from 
dishonesty to honesty by learning that "Honesty 
is the best policy." But none of these are 
soul conversions. Only God's truth can produce 
soul conversion, as also our Lord indicates in 
his prayer, "Sanctify them through thy truth— 
thy word is truth." 

"The testimony of the Lord is sure [not 
doubtful, but clear and positive], making wise 

R1391 :page 111 

[not the heady and wilful who have plans and 
theories of their own and who do not submit 
themselves to the will and plan of God, but] 
the simple" [the single hearted who have no will 
or plan of their own which they wish the Lord 
to adopt, but who seek the Lord's will only]. 

"The statutes [piqqudim— appointments: the 
appointed plans] of the Lord are right, rejoicing 
the heart." Yes, indeed, God's glorious, 
appointed plan of the ages rejoices the hearts 
of all who have come to a knowledge of it. 

"The commandments [mitsvah— precepts or 
teachings] of the Lord are clear, enlightening 
the eyes" [showing us the unmistakable course 
and end of righteousness and of unrighteousness]. 

"The fear [yirah— reverence] of the Lord 
is clean [a pure and lofty sentiment based upon 
love and gratitude, and not upon a servile recognition 



of tyranny and power], enduring forever." 

"The judgments [mishpat— ordinances or 
decrees] of the Lord are true; they are altogether 
righteous. More to be desired are they 
than gold; yea, than much fine gold: and 
they are sweeter than honey and the droppings 
of the honeycomb." Once, following the leadings 
of mistaken teachers, and catechisms, 
we thought of God's "Eternal Decrees" only 
with horror, supposing that they provided for 
the salvation of but a mere handful of our 
race and for the everlasting misery of the masses. 
But what a change since the eyes of our 
understandings are opened. God's decrees 
are sweet to our taste, we appreciate them 
greatly, we see that he has decreed a Great 
Savior and a great salvation, open to every 
creature's acceptance; and that he has provided 
that all shall be brought to a clear knowledge 
of the truth, that they may have the fullest 
opportunity for everlasting life upon the only 
condition God can make— righteousness. 

"Moreover, by them [by the judgments or 
decrees of the Lord as to the course of righteousness 
and unrighteousness and their rewards 
and penalties] is thy servant [the thoughtful 
servant, who meditates on these things] warned; 
and in keeping them [in remembering and 
harmonizing with them] there is great reward." 

Thus the Book of Nature and the Book of 
Revelation, when rightly read, harmoniously 
declare the glory of God; and blessed is the 
man whose character is ennobled and purified 
and blessed by constant meditation on these 
glorious themes. How it refreshes and strengthens 
every noble and generous aspiration, checks 
every tendency to evil and sin, purifies the 
heart, kindles hope, awakens zeal and starts 
and keeps us in the heavenly race with its 
glorious end in view. The great Emperor of 
this wonderful universe upon which we daily 
and nightly cast our wondering gaze has 
called even us to be the bride of and joint-heir 
with his only begotten Son, the heir of all 
things; and in these glorious revelations of 
himself is supplied the inspiration and instruction 
necessary to enable us to run with 
patience the race set before us, if we make 
them the centre of our meditations. 

Verse 12— "Who [in his own strength or by 
his own wisdom and foresight] can guard against 
errors?" Not one; for as the Apostle Paul 
tells us, we have our treasure, the new nature, in 
earthen vessels. Not only are we weak, mentally, 
morally and physically, but in addition 
we have a wily foe: we wrestle not merely with 



flesh and blood, but also against principalities 
and unseen spiritual powers, strongly entrenched 
in places of power and influence. (Eph. 6:12.) 
Who, indeed, is strong enough in himself to 
guard against errors of doctrine and practice 
strongly entrenched in a misguided and depraved 
public opinion, fortified by the tendencies 
of his own impaired conditions of mind 
and heart and skilfully glossed over by the 
great deceiver who, with untiring effort, seeks 
to accomplish our deception and overthrow? 
Who, indeed, is sufficient for these things? 
The inquiry of the Psalmist implies the answer 
—Not one. In our own strength we cannot 
presume to stand, and therefore how appropriate 
the prayer:— 

Verses 12-13. "From secret faults do thou 
cleanse me. Also from presumptuous sins do 
thou restrain thy servant; let them not have dominion 
over me: then shall I be upright, and I 
shall be innocent from the great transgression." 

Sins of presumption are such as result from 
undue self-confidence, ambition or pride. Many 
are guilty of them without seemingly being 
aware of the fact: They presume in prayer to 
direct the Lord how they want to have numbers 
join some sect, whose existence God never 
authorized; or they say how many they want 
to have converted at a certain meeting; or they 
instruct him how the Foreign Missions should 
be blessed and what results they shall expect. 

Others presume to decide what God intends 
to do aside from what his Word authorizes, 
and will perhaps pass lightly over such a doctrine 
as that of the Second Death if it stands 
in the way of a favorite theory which they have 
prepared for the Lord to follow. This is presumptuous 
sin. 

Others, on the other hand, tell that God will 
everlastingly preserve the wicked in torture, 
and thus they are in error from attempting to 
be wise above what is written. Is not this a 
presumptuous sin? 

Such presumptuous sins bring natural consequences: 

R1391 :page 112 

the presumptuous lose respect for 

that which they can do without, or can twist 

and turn to their own convenience. As respect 

for the exactness of the Bible is lost the presumption 

naturally increases and finds more 

pronounced expression in their self-assurance. 

Some, indeed, go so far as to interpret the language 

of Scripture the opposite of the way in 

which it reads, to favor the ideas of the presumer, 



whatever they may be. Thus one 
will read that certain wilful sinners who sin 
against full light and knowledge "shall be 
punished with everlasting destruction," and 
"in the second death," and will unblushingly 
assert that these words mean the reverse— that 
they mean everlasting preservation in life and 
in torment. Others, to support an opposite 
theory, will claim that the Second Death means 
a second blessing, and that when it is declared 
that at the end of the Millennial age of trial 
all those whose names are not found written in 
the Book of Life— the fearful, the unbelieving, 
the abominable, those who in spirit are whoremongers, 
murderers, sorcerers, and idolaters, 
and all who love lies and take pleasure in making 
them— that when these are said to be cast 
into the Second Death, it means that they will 
be blessed, sanctified and ushered into glory. 
Ah! yes, beloved, this sin of presumption is 
one into which many who have been enlightened 
by a knowledge of the plan of God are 
inclined to fall. Instead of carefully noting 
and thoughtfully considering those scriptures 
which, while they recognize their superior advantage 
and special favor from God in a knowledge 
of the truth, also warn them of the great 
danger of those thus enlightened (since the 
present is the judgment-day of all such, who 
stand on trial for life, with the alternative of 
the second death before them)— instead of 
carefully observing these (See Heb. 6:4-8; 
10:26-31; Rev. 2:11; 20:6), they ignore 
them, and, presumptuously leaning to their own 
understanding, proceed to reason in this wise: 
—They say, The Scriptures tell us that "God 
is love," so loving that he has provided salvation 
for all mankind. So far they say truly; 
but here leaving the Scriptures they begin to 
reason— as they claim, to the glory of God, 
though nothing can be to the glory of God 
which perverts or denies any portion of inspired 
truth. They say, "Yes, and we have 
faith (?) to believe that his love is so powerful 

R1392:page 112 

that not one rebellious sinner can ever get 
away from it; and if one millennium is not 
sufficient to reform him then he shall have 
another and another; for all must be saved." 
But here are the Bible warnings of a Second 
Death for wilful sinners, and coupled with the 
statement, too, that Christ dieth no more and 
that, consequently, such can never be redeemed 
again, if found worthy of the second death for 



their own wilful sins, committed with full 

knowledge and with full responsibility. The redemption 

provided in Christ is complete and 

for all, providing full salvation for every child 

of Adam from all the penalties and weaknesses 

sustained through Adam's disobedience and 

fall from divine favor. But having had such a 

salvation put fully within their reach, each is 

thereafter responsible exactly as was Adam; 

and each is subject to the same penalty— death 

—if wilfully disobedient. This is called the 

second death because it is the penalty of wilful 

sin under the second trial. 

But the presumptuous ones grow more arrogant 
and self-assertive and take the further step 
of denying the necessity of a ransom, claiming 
that the death of Christ did not redeem us 
from the first death, that we were not bought 
with a price, that they had formerly made a 
mistake in thinking so, and that their imitation 
of Christ's life is all that divine justice can demand 
of them or of any man. Thus they do 
despite to the spirit of grace manifested by 
Jehovah in the gift of his only begotten Son, 
our Redeemer, and presume to stand in the 
filthy rags of their own righteousness.— Isa. 64:6. 

They fall into this great error in their attempt 
to establish their presumptuous theory. 
For they see that if it be admitted that the 
penalty of sin was death when Adam was 
tried, and if the death of Christ was necessary 
as the payment of that penalty before any 
could be pardoned, granted liberty to become 
sons of God or be resurrected (Rom. 3:24-26; 
Col. 1:20-22; 1 Cor. 15:21,22), then, since 
God changes not, there could be no hope of 
escape from the second death except by the 
payment of a second ransom-price for each 
one so sentenced. 

Thus presumptuous sins pervert the judgment, 
make void the Scriptures and lead to "the 
great transgression" of "counting the blood 
of the covenant wherewith we were sanctified 
a common thing." (Heb. 10:29.) In view of 
such temptations and tendencies, let the consecrated 
ever bear in mind that their only 
safety is in meekness and humility, clinging 
close to the word of the Lord; and in meditating 
on its precepts and pondering over all 
their solemn and momentous import— "Then 
shall" they "be upright, and they shall be 
innocent from the great transgression." And 
let the constant prayer of all such be— 

Verse 14. "Let the words of my mouth, and 
the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in 
thy sight, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer." 



page 114 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



R1392:page 114 

The Convention for Bible Study and for 
commemorating our Lord's death, recently announced 
to be held in Allegheny from April 
7th to 14th, is just closed. It has been one of the 
most interesting of the kind ever held here 
or perhaps anywhere; for we may scarcely 
except the gatherings of the early Church in 
the days of the Apostles. 

In numbers the meeting was greater than 
any of its predecessors— about two hundred 
attending from neighboring cities, towns and 



states, in addition to about the same number 
of home residents. And all these we may 
safely count as interested ones, because others 
were invited to stay away. 

The visitors came various distances, and represented 
the following states: Pennsylvania, 
New York, New Jersey, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, 
Manitoba Canada, Minnesota, Wisconsin, 
Dakota, Colorado, Kansas, Arkansas, 
Missouri, Indiana, Illinois, Ohio, West Virginia, 
Maryland, Kentucky, Iowa and Michigan. 

R1393 :page 114 

This meeting seemed to surpass its predecessors 
in spiritual tone, if that were possible 
—but the last always seems to be the best. 

The meetings began at six o'clock on the morning 
of the 7th, in the various bedrooms where 
the friends were billeted, and continued during 
breakfast until nine o'clock, the hour of the public 
meeting— from which the time until ten o'clock 
was devoted to prayer, praise and exhortation. 
The morning session for Bible study began at ten 
o'clock and lasted until one. The afternoon session 
began at three o'clock and lasted until six. 
Then came a luncheon and chat followed by 
evening session for testimony, praise and mutual 
rejoicing. The latter we endeavored to 
close at nine o'clock, but sometimes they continued 
until after eleven. Even after retiring 
some could not restrain themselves to sleep and 
let others sleep. And at and between all of 
these meetings, the topic was the love and 
plan of God, the centre of that love and plan— 
the cross of Christ, the blessings already ours 
through it, the blessings yet to flow from it to 
the world, and the consecration of heart and 
every talent to the service of this loving God, 
this gracious plan and this mighty Savior. 

All seemed to show on their faces what they 
attested with their voices— that their hearts 
were full and overflowing with the love of God 
and Christ, resulting from the fact that the 
light of the glory of God as it shines in the 
face of Jesus Christ our Lord had shined into 
their hearts. The Bible study sessions lasted 
for five days and were followed by two days of 
conference by and with the Colporteurs relative 
to their important part in the harvest work. 
Five new workers decided to give their time 
in this blessed service which the Master has so 
signally blessed. Each pledged himself to earnest 
service to our Redeemer and King during 
the year beginning, and promised to remember 
one another continually at the throne of grace. 



page 114 

BE CAREFUL ABOUT SENDING MONEY. 



A number of letters containing money have 
recently been lost in the mails. Do not send 
us money. The postoffice clerks are not all 
honest, although many of them are so. Thieves 
can feel the money in the envelope and are 
tempted thereby to steal. Send Bank Drafts, 
Money Orders or Express Orders, if you would 
make sure of our receiving what you send. 



VOL. XIII. APRIL 15, 1892. NO. 8. 

R1393 :page 115 

WAS IT NOT NECESSARY? 



"And he said to them, "O thoughtless and slow of 
heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken. Was 
it not necessary for the Messiah to have suffered these 
things, and to enter his glory? And beginning at Moses, 
and through all the prophets, he explained to them in 
all the Scriptures the things concerning himself."— 
Luke 24:25-27. 

The occasion of this utterance will be remembered: 
our Lord thus addressed two of his disciples 
on the way from Jerusalem to Emmaus 
after his resurrection. They were discussing the 
strange and wonderful event of the few days 
previous, when a stranger suddenly drew near 
and, walking with them, said, "What manner of 
communications are these that ye have one to 
another as ye walk and are sad?" And, not 
recognizing the stranger as the Lord himself, 
one of them said, "Art thou only a stranger 
in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things 
which are come to pass there in these days?" 
And he said unto them, "What things?" And 
they said unto him, "Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, 
which was a prophet mighty in deed and 
word before God and all the people, and how 
the chief priests and our rulers delivered him 
to be condemned to death, and have crucified 
him. But we trusted that it had been he which 



should have redeemed Israel: and beside all 
this, to-day is the third day since these things 
were done. Yea, and certain women also of our 
company made us astonished, which were early 
at the sepulchre, and when they found not his 
body, they came saying that they had also seen 
a vision of angels who said that he was alive. 
And some of those with us went to the sepulchre 
and found it even as the women had said; 
but him they saw not." 

Then follow our Lord's words, "O thoughtless 
and slow of heart to believe all that the 
prophets have spoken. Was it not necessary 
for the Messiah to have suffered these things, 
and to enter his glory?" The necessity of those 
things was the great lesson which he endeavored 
to impart to these confused and bewildered, 
but earnest, disciples. 

From the standpoint of Christians to-day 
the necessity of those things is much more 
easily discerned than from the standpoint of 
the early disciples, in close proximity to those 
marvelous events. But, nevertheless, there are 
some to-day also who thoughtlessly stumble 
into very erroneous conclusions drawn from a 
reckless and heedless interpretation of the Master's 
plain teaching. They say, Yes, it was 
necessary for Christ to suffer because the path 
of suffering is the only path to glory. Christ 
had to suffer and so all must suffer; and the 
glory will follow as a natural consequence, as 
these words of the Lord teach. This is a very 
plausible argument to many who lean too much 
to their own understanding. A more reflective 
mind would say, No, that is not sound logic; 
for the glory of Jehovah was not attained 
through suffering; nor was that of the angels, 
nor was that of the Son of God in his pre-human 
existence thus attained. And a more attentive 
mind would say, No, that was not the 
ground of necessity for his sufferings to which 
the Lord referred; for he called attention to 

R1393 :page 116 

the divinely inspired prophecies which of necessity 

must be thus fulfilled. The suffering 

was necessary, because it was a feature of Jehovah's 

plan for human redemption, and was so 

expressed by the prophets; and we know that 

unless it were a feature of that plan, Jehovah 

would not have required it. The Apostle 

Paul tells why it was necessary to the plan, saying 

that it was in order to manifest Jehovah's 

righteousness in remitting the sins of the already 

condemned world, showing that he is just, and 



yet the justifier of the condemned ones who 
believe in Jesus, whom God set forth to be a 
propitiation, a satisfaction, a substitute for 
them— who also freely gave his life as a man, 
his humanity, a ransom for the many— for the 
numerous posterity of Adam who had inherited 
his sin and condemnation. 

Hear again the significant query of the Master, 
"Was it not necessary for the Messiah to 
have suffered these things?" The query is designed 
to awaken the thoughtless to a close 
observance of the justice and wisdom of Jehovah's 
course in this matter. Suppose for a 
moment that God had promised mankind salvation 
from death without this, which our 
Lord terms a "necessary" provision, what 
would have been the result? Thoughtful minds 
will at once see that such a course would have 
proved (1) That God is a changeable God, declaring 
at one time that the wages of sin is death, 
and afterwards reversing his decision and granting 
life to the condemned; (2) That either in the 
first or in the second case he was unjust— either 
that the penalty of death was too severe and therefore 
unjust, or else, if it were not unjust but a 
righteous penalty, that he was unjust in reversing 
such a righteous decision; (3) Such a variable 
course would unsettle all confidence in God. 
We would be continually led to question his 
righteousness and wisdom, and could never 
feel assured against a sudden and unaccountable 
change of his attitude and dealing toward 
us. If he promised us life and happiness today, 
we could not know that to-morrow he 
would not take back his word and consign us 
to misery or death. 

Such would have been our sad condition had 
not this necessity to which our Lord referred 
been fully met by the sufferings, even unto death, 
of "the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 
ransom for all," in compliance with the wise 
and just plan of God for human redemption. 
(1 Tim. 2:6.) By this means mankind is 
justly released from the just penalty which God 
pronounced against us; for a loving, benevolent 
Redeemer took our human nature and 
then sacrificed it in our behalf— thus bearing, in 
our room and stead, the exact penalty due to 
Adam and inherited from him by all his posterity. 
Thus our debt was paid, and all who 
have faith to believe in the promise of life 
through Christ are now legally free from the 
condemnation under which they were born, 
though the appointed time for their actual release 
has not yet come. They hold in their 
possession a promissory note— the sure covenant 



of Jehovah— sealed with the precious blood of 
Christ, and payable at the "time appointed," 
the Millennial Age. Thus they are free men 
in Christ, they are saved by faith, though they 
still walk through the valley of the shadow 
of death. And, comforted by the rod of divine 
discipline and the staff of divine counsel and 
favor, they fear no evil, knowing that in due 
time the promise of lasting life shall be fully 
verified to them. 

But there was another feature of necessity in 
the divine plan, to which our Lord referred— 
"Was it not necessary" also "for the Messiah 
to enter his glory?" The question is to you 
and to me as well as to those early disciples; 
and the fact of its being propounded implies 
our ability to discern the necessity. Yes, it 
was necessary. Why? Because we needed, not 
only a redeemer to assume and cancel our past 
indebtedness, but also an able teacher and 
leader— a prophet and king— to break the fetters 
of sin and death and lead us out of our 
bondage. If the promise of life and liberty 
were given alone, without such help, we would 
still be in the same sad state; for the prison 
doors of death are strong and securely barred 
and bolted, and we cannot burst them open; 
and the fetters of sin and sickness, of mental, 
moral and physical imbecility, are firmly clasped 
about us, and we have not the power to shake 
them off. And so we feel the necessity of a 

R1393 :page 117 

mighty deliverer as well as of a loving redeemer. 
And, thank God, in his only begotten and 
well beloved Son we have both. He is our 
Deliverer as well as our Redeemer, our Savior, 

R1394:page 117 

our Prophet, our Priest and our King— strong to 

deliver and mighty to save; for though as a 

man he sacrificed all that he then had— his humanity 

—even unto death, God, accepting that 

sacrificed humanity as the price of our redemption, 

renewed his existence in a higher nature 

—even in his own divine likeness. And thus 

this second necessity of the divine plan is met 

in the provision of one who has "all power in 

heaven and in earth given unto him," and who 

is therefore abundantly able, not only to awaken 

the redeemed race from the silence of death, 

but also to fully establish all of them who desire 

and will accept of his favor in everlasting 

righteousness and consequent worthiness of 



eternal life. Thus, through the blessings of 
his kingly and priestly office, he will, in due 
time, present all the willing and obedient faultless 
before the presence of Jehovah's majesty, 
to receive his benediction and to enter fully 
into the eternal joys of his loving favor. In 
his presence is fulness of joy, and at his right 
hand— in his favor— there are pleasures forevermore. 
-Psa. 16:11. 

Consider then, O thoughtless ones, how 
necessary it was that the Messiah should both 
suffer death, and also enter his glory. Both 
the humiliation and the exaltation meet our 
necessities in such a marvelous way that we 
clearly recognize the fact that only divine wisdom 
and love and benevolence and grace could 
have planned the wondrous scheme. "Thanks 
be unto God who giveth us the victory, through 
our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Not only was the death and resurrection and 
exaltation of Christ thus necessary to God's 
plan of salvation as viewed from a philosophical 
standpoint, which the Lord would have us 
thoughtful enough to observe, but as viewed 
from the standpoint of prophecy the necessity 
is also clear; and we should not be slow of 
heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken. 

Beginning at Moses, the Lord traced this 
line of prophecies for the two with whom he 
conversed, showing how they had been fulfilled 
in himself; and though his words are not recorded 
we still have Moses and the prophets 
and can read them for ourselves. Moses said 
to Israel, "The Lord thy God will raise up 
unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of 
thy brethren, like unto me: unto him shall ye 
hearken." (Deut. 18:15.) And here, in the 
risen Christ, was the beginning of the fulfilment 
of that promise. Moses had also in the typical 
ceremonies of the Day of Atonement prefigured 
both the sacrificial sufferings and the 
subsequent glory of Christ. The sacrifice of 
the bullock (Lev. 16:11) prefigured the former, 
and Aaron— in his robes of typical glory and 
beauty coming out of the tabernacle after the 
sacrifice had been accomplished and the blood 
presented in the "Most Holy" as a typical 
propitiation for the sins of Israel, and lifting 
up his hands and blessing the people, till then 
lying prostrate on the ground to represent the 
whole human race in death— prefigured the 
resurrection glory of Christ and his coming 
out of the Most Holy presence of Jehovah to 
bless the whole world in the Millennial age. 
(See "Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices.") 
Was it not indeed necessary to the 



fulfilment of these divinely instituted types, 
says our Lord, for the Messiah to have suffered 
these things and to enter his glory? 

Again, Moses testifies of Christ in recording 
the incidents of the typical sacrifice of Isaac 
by his father Abraham, who received him again 
from the dead in a figure (Gen. 22:1-18; Heb. 11:19), 
thus prefiguring Jehovah's offering of 
his only begotten Son and receiving him again 
from the dead. 

Again, there were all those prophecies which 
so particularly described the circumstances of 
his death— "He is brought as a lamb to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers 
is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth;" "He 
made his grave with the wicked [the sinful human 
race] and with the rich [in the tomb of 
the rich man, Joseph of Arimathea— Matt. 27:57] 
in his death" (Isa. 53:7,9); "He keepeth 
all his bones: not one of them is broken" 
(Psa. 34:20); "Thou wilt not leave my soul 
in hell [sheol, the grave], neither wilt thou suffer 
thine Holy One to see corruption" (Psa. 16:10); 

R1394:page 118 

"They pierced my hands and my 

feet;" "They part my garments among them, 

and cast lots upon my vesture;" "They gave 

me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they 

gave me vinegar to drink." (Psa. 22:16,18; 

69:21.) How minutely all of these had been 

fulfilled. 

And Isaiah (53:5) said, "He was wounded 
[not for his own, but] for our transgressions, 
he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement 
for our peace was upon him, and with his 
stripes we are healed." And Daniel (9:26) 
said, "Messiah shall be cut off, but not for 
himself." And Zechariah (13:1) said, "There 
shall be a fountain opened to the house of 
David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for 
sin and uncleanness." Then they told of his 
glorious reign, saying— "When thou shalt 
make his soul an offering for sin,. ..the pleasure 
of the Lord shall prosper in his hand." 
"He will swallow up death in victory."— 
Isa. 53:10; 25:8. 

Yes, it was necessary to the fulfilment of all 
these prophecies that Christ should both suffer 
death and that he should also enter his glory; 
and in these blessed facts all thoughtful believers 
may rejoice. A little while and all the 
faithful, as members of his body, shall have 
filled up the measure of his sufferings and shall 
enter into his glory. Then shortly his glory 



will be revealed, and all flesh shall see it; for the 
mouth of the Lord hath spoken it— Isa. 40:5. 



R1398 :page 118 

THE METHODIST REVOLT. 



The Baltimore American says:— "Methodism 
appears to be passing through a crisis which 
threatens to extend to all conferences in the 
United States. It is a revolt against the bishops 
and the presiding elders. Professor L. T. 
Townsend, of the Boston University, is a leader 
of the movement, and the fiery cross which 
announced the war was his recent public statement 
that church politics dominated the councils 
of the Methodist Church, that its elections 
were controlled by rings, and that those 
not in the cliques were pretty much out of 
every thing else, as far as the Methodist 
Church was concerned. The professor was 
bitterly assailed by the leading divines and 
elders, and his honor and veracity questioned. 
He returned the defiant answer that, at the 
meeting of the Boston Methodists to-day, he 
would produce proofs. The result was that 
many of the leading Methodist ministers of 
New England came to Boston, and Wesleyan 
Hall was crowded. 

President Richardson presided, and opened 
the proceedings by announcing the hymn, 
"Rock of Ages," as they might feel the need of 
its influence before the meeting adjourned; and 
they did. For two hours there was an exciting 
discussion. The President and the more prominent 
clergymen were decidedly anti-Townsend, 
and lost their temper when the vast audience 
greeted the professor's appearance with a storm 
of applause. He had a manuscript of eighty-four 
type-written pages and a big stack of letters, 
which contained evidence backing up his 
statement with cited examples from Methodist 
clergymen all over the country, but he was 
not given a chance to read his documents. 

He started by saying he came not to retract, 
but to prove. Here he was interrupted by Mr. 
Rice, of Lominster, who said all the professor's 
correspondence was anonymous, and should 
not be submitted. He was upheld by the president, 
whereupon the audience yelled and hissed 
and said many unkind things. 

The president declared the meeting had been 



packed by Prof. Townsend, which the latter 

denied. The meeting was on the eve of being 

declared closed then and there, when the threatening 

attitude of the audience caused the chair 

to appeal to the clergy present to sustain the 

motion to debar the letters. The meeting did 

exactly the reverse and shouted for the letters 

to be read. Dr. Dearborn, of Roslindale, 

managed to get a hearing, and asked the professor 

if his letters and proofs were anonymous 

or not. The professor said none were, except 

some five letters of which he was not sure whether 

the writers wished their names used or not. 

He would write and ascertain. The rest he 

would name now. Mr. Dearborn suggested 

that he wait until he could produce all the evidence 

unrestricted, which he agreed to do. 

After a stormy discussion the majority, who 

wanted to hear the letters read at once, consented, 

and the president adjourned the meeting 

until this day three weeks, for the professor 

to hear from his correspondents. Then there 

promises to be a lively time. 



R2167 :page 119 
CALVARY 



Through many a lovely landscape 

My pilgrim-staff I've brought, 
From many a rocky em'nence 

My gaze the valley sought. 
But far above all mountains 

I've ever seen, give me 
The quiet, lonely hillock, 

The Mount of Calvary. 

It towers not with forehead 

Ice-crowned into the clouds. 
No sunny Alpine glacier 

Its shoulders bare enshrouds. 
But ne'er in all my wanderings 

Seemed heaven so near to me, 
And earth so lost in distance, 

As there on Calvary. 

On its bald summit never 
A crown of forest stood— 

No gently waving oak -tops, 
No precious cedar-wood. 

But all the royal cedars 

That Hermon once did see 



Their lofty heads are bowing 
Before Mount Calvary. 

Go thither, earth-worn pilgrim, 
There seek thy rest at last; 

And at the feet of Jesus 
Thy heavy burdens cast. 

Then come and praise with gladness- 
How much was done for thee! 

Know this: the road to glory 
Leads over Calvary. 

—From the German. 



R1394:page 119 

TRAVELS IN THE HOLY LAND. 

AUGUST, 1891. -EDITORIAL NOTES. -NO. II. 



We now enter the orphanage kept by the 
Sisters of Zion (Roman Catholic). It is a 
new and commodious building, but seems to 
have but few orphans. It interests us because 
there seems no room to doubt that it is built 
upon the site of Pilate's Judgment Hall. In 
the new building they have preserved quite a 
large area of the old Roman pavement, which 
had long been buried under rubbish, some 
seven feet below the present street level. How 
interesting to look at the very stones upon 
which our Master stood and walked! "Pilate 
therefore brought Jesus forth and sat down in 
the judgment seat, in a place that is called the 
Pavement." (John 19:13.) Here, too, remains 
a portion of the arch upon which it is 
said that Pilate exhibited Jesus to the people, 
saying, in his final effort to have them relent— 
"Behold the man!"— as though he meant, 
would you crucify such a man, like to whom 
there is not another in your nation? Here, 
too, Pilate washed his hands as indicating his 
innocence of the death of Christ— John 19:5; 
Matt. 27:24. 

Now let us enter the "Church of the Holy 
Sepulchre." The building is under the control 
of the (Mohammedan) Turkish government, 
which holds it to preserve the peace and 
to secure liberty of entrance and freedom of 
worship to the Christian sects represented— 
Roman, Greek, Armenian and Coptic Catholics 
—each of which has its own chapel for 
services under the one roof. Here are pointed 



out the place of the crucifixion, the sepulchre 
where our Lord was laid, also the place where 
the crosses of Christ and the two thieves, and 
the crown of thorns and the nails, etc., are 
said to have been found by Queen Helena's 
workmen. But we take but little interest in 
these things since, from the location in the city, 
it seems as improbable that this is the real site 
of the crucifixion and the tomb of our Lord 
as that his cross and crown of thorns were 
found there centuries after. 

Let us go outside the gates: let us seek the 
real Mt. Calvary. Ah! This is more like it. 
We see no holes such as the crosses were set 
into, nor should we expect to find them after 
so many centuries; yet here we see the face of 
the hill with hollows which in the distance 
resemble a skull, and which probably gave rise 
to the name, Golgotha— the place of a skull. 
(Matt. 27:33.) We linger for a moment on 
the spot made so sacred by him who died for 

R1394 : page 120 

our sins, and mentally behold the bleeding 
Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of 
the world. Gladly we accept of a share in 
his sacrifice once for all, and rejoice in spirit 
as we reflect that the hour is not far distant 
when, his Church having been selected, the 
Redeemer shall begin his great Millennial work 
of blessing all the families of the earth— for all 
of whom he had poured out his soul into death 
—a sin offering. 

Here we see a crevice in the rock— perhaps 
a result of the earthquake which occurred 
when our Lord died. (Matt. 27:51.) Below 
the top of the hill is a garden, and near the 
garden a tomb hewn in the rock. The place 
where our Lord was laid was somewhat like it, 
though the description of the door does not 
correspond with this. Doubtless, however, 
the tomb was near Calvary, as it was about 
sunset when the body was taken from the 
cross, and but little time remained for burial, 
as the next day was a Sabbath (holy day) and 
began at six o'clock the same evening. The 
garden, too, corresponds; for we remember 
that the Marys came to the garden and at first 
mistook the Lord for the gardener. What 
blessed memories cluster around that garden 
and that morning of the resurrection; for if 
Christ be not risen, all our hopes are vain! 
(1 Cor. 15:17.) (1) His resurrection is the 

R1395 :page 120 



evidence to us that in him was no sin, and 
therefore the Father raised him from death a 
new creature, with power to bless and restore 
those whom he redeemed by his death. (2) 
We can see how this one who sacrificed his 
life in the service of God and his plan for 
human salvation had a merit in God's sight, by 
reason of that sacrifice, which merit the Scriptures 
assure us he presented on our behalf when 
he ascended up on high (Heb. 9:24), a full 
equivalent and offset, in God's sight, for the 
penalty which came upon Adam and all his 
race because of his disobedience. (Rom. 5:19.) 
(3) Our Lord's resurrection becomes the 
pledge or assurance that in due time God will 
accomplish through him all the gracious promises 
of restitution, spoken by the mouth of all 
the holy prophets since the world began.— 
Compare Acts 17:31 and Acts 3:19-21. 

Next let us visit the Mount of Olives. Its 
olive trees are fewer and doubtless less cared 
for than in our Lord's day; yet no other place, 
probably, remains so much the same as then; and 
no other place, perhaps, was more frequented by 
his sacred feet. On the way, as we ascend the 
slope, is the Garden of Gethsemane. It is no 
longer an open garden: a Roman Catholic 
society controls it and preserves it by an enclosure. 
Visitors are welcome, however, and 
we enter and meditate. A gardener is watering 
the plants, to whom we thankfully give a 
small coin for a few flowers and a sprig from 
the oldest olive tree in the garden— centuries 
old, at least. 

Standing upon the Mount of Olives, we do 
not wonder that our Master oft resorted thither 
for meditation and prayer and to give instruction 
to his disciples. We recall that here our 
Lord sat when he uttered the great prophecy 
of Matt. 24:3-5 1 and the parables of Matt. 25, 
just two days before his crucifixion.— 
Matt. 26:1,2. 

Although two thousand six hundred and 
eighty-two feet above the sea, Olivet is but one 
hundred and fifty feet higher than the hills 
upon which Jerusalem is built, and four hundred 
feet above the intervening valley of Kedron. 
It affords a splendid panoramic view of 
the surrounding country for many miles, and 
from a tower erected upon its summit, to memorialize 
the spot of the Lord's ascension, 
one can see, far to the east, the Jordan valley 
and the Dead sea, and beyond these the mountains 
of Moab as well as the intervening village 
of Bethany, and to the south, Bethlehem and 



Hebron. 

Riding upon donkeys, we descend the farther 
slope of Olivet, passing over the old road— 
quite probably the same that our Lord and the 
disciples often took— going to the home of 
Martha and Mary and Lazarus. We recall 
that this is the way the Master journeyed on 
the ass just five days before his crucifixion, 
and yonder is the site of the village of Bethphage, 
where Jesus sent the disciples for the ass 
upon which he rode into Jerusalem as King. 
(Matt. 21:1.) We are upon the very ground 
where the multitude cried, "Hosanna to the 

R1395 :page 121 

son of David!" while they strewed his way 
with palm-branches and with their clothing. 

Here is Bethany, and near us, to the right, is 
the site of the house of that Simon whom 
Jesus healed of leprosy. Here they made the 
feast for our Lord at which Martha served and 
Mary anointed him with the precious ointment. 
(Matt. 26:6,7; John 11:1,2; 12:3.) 
Yonder is the traditional site of the home of 
Lazarus and his sisters. The town in Arabic 
is called El' Azireyeh, or the town of Lazarus. 
What thoughts these scenes and associations 
awaken ! 

Within the city of Jerusalem are several 
items of interest which we have not yet visited. 
We will go now to the Jew's "wailing place." 
Through by-ways littered with rubbish and 
garbage we pass, holding our breath to avoid 
the heavy odors and commenting that only the 
pure mountain air prevents pestilence from 
breaking out in a place so inviting it. We 
reach finally the "wailing place." It is what 
is supposed to be a fragment of the Temple 
wall, and near it is what is known as Robinson's 
Arch, a remnant of the arch or bridge which 
once connected the Temple (on Mt. Moriah) 
with the city (Mt. Zion). Here are some immense 
stones, one of them measuring 38 feet 
4 inches in length, 7 feet in height, and 3-1/2 
feet in width. Here Jews, both rich and poor 
(especially the latter), and speaking various 
languages, are coming and going. Some kiss 
the stones while praying; others touch the 
stones with their fingers and then kiss their 
fingers; they chant in a plaintive tone some 
prayer or prophecy which we could not understand, 
and occasionally a group gathers around 
one who leads in a sort of litany. We give below 
what purport to be translations of two of these— 
Leader. For the place that lies desolate, 



Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For the place that is destroyed, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For the walls that are overthrown, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For our majesty that is departed, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For our great men that lie dead, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For the precious stones that are buried, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For the priests who have stumbled, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 
Leader. For our Kings who have despised Him, 

Response. We sit in solitude. 

Another form runs as follows:— 

Leader. We pray Thee have mercy on Zion. 

Response. Gather the children of Jerusalem. 
Leader. Haste, haste, Redeemer of Zion. 

Response. Speak to the heart of Jerusalem. 
Leader. May beauty and majesty surround Zion. 

Response. Ah! turn thyself mercifully to 
Jerusalem. 
Leader. May the Kingdom soon return to Zion. 

Response. Comfort those who mourn over 
Jerusalem. 
Leader. May peace and joy abide with Zion. 

Response. And the branch (of Jesse) spring 
up at Jerusalem. 

Our hearts are touched, especially for the 
poorer classes of Jews, who seem to be very 
sincere. We visit several of their synagogues 
on their Sabbath, and wish that we had the 
knowledge of their language, which would 
enable us to tell them the good tidings of 
great joy. Beginning with Israel's double and 
showing when and why it began and that already 
the due time has come to "Cry unto 
her that her appointed time is accomplished 
and her iniquity is pardoned, because she hath 
received of the Lord's hands double for all her 
sin" (Isa. 40:2), we feel sure we should have 
close attention. As we pass into the synagogue 
many of the faces of the poorer ones seem 
to ask inquiringly, Have you no message for us ! 

Ah! were it not that the Lord has favored 
us with a share in the work of gathering out 
the Bride and helping to make her ready for 
the marriage of the Lamb, we would be here 
in Jerusalem and, by the grace of God, would 
do a part in the great work now due of turning 
away blindness from Jacob. (Rom. 11:25.) 
We must surely write to John and Peter, the 



sons of Brother Joseph Rabinowitsch, and urge 
them to lose no time in getting into this fruitful 
field, so ripe for the true gospel of the 
Kingdom, which none here seem either able 
or willing or worthy to give to them. 

Next we will visit the site of the Temple on 
Mount Moriah. The Mosque of Omar and 
its court now cover the site. It is surrounded 
by a wall, and the space enclosed is nearly 

R1395 :page 122 

twice the size of Solomon's Temple and courts. 
The mosque is a fine one and is surmounted by 
a most graceful dome. The building has fifty-six 
elegant windows in Mosaic glass. At one time 
none but favored Mohammedans were permitted 
to enter this mosque, but now it is accessible 
to all nations, though with some formality 
and at a trifling expense for guards, etc. 

This is a remarkable spot. Here it was 
that Abraham proved his faith in God and 
showed his obedience by offering his son Isaac 
—whom he received again from the dead in 
a figure. Here it was, too, that, when the 
plague was among the Israelites, King David 
purchased of Oman the Jebusite a threshing-floor 
as a place for an altar of sacrifice. (2 Sam. 24:18-25.) 
And it is written, "Solomon began 
to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem 
in Mt. Moriah, where the Lord appeared 
unto David his father, in the place that David 
had prepared in the threshingfloor of Oman 
the Jebusite."— 2 Chron. 3:1. 

The original rock-top of Mt. Moriah is to be 
seen in the mosque, and a cave under it may 
be entered. A hole connects the top rock with 
the cave, and an aqueduct thence leads to the 
brook Kedron. Hence it is supposed that upon 
this rock the sacrifices were killed and that 
the aqueduct or sewer connected by the hole 
and the cave was used for carrying off the blood, 
and the water used in flushing and cleansing 
the altar. When we remember that the brook 
Kedron is in the valley of Jehoshaphat, "the 
valley of dry bones" (the general burying 
ground of the city), and then reflect that this 
valley was typical, as well as the blood of the 
sacrifices, we may read it thus— The blood of 
Christ the antitypical sin-offering, in a way 
unseen by the world in general, reaches unto 
all that are in their graves and secures for all 
mankind an awakening from death and an opportunity 
for life everlasting.— Rom. 5:9. 

"Solomon's Stables" were under the Temple 
courts, and were vast ones indeed. Probably 



R1396 : page 122 

one-half of the space has been appropriated to 
use as cisterns, but the remainder would still 
accommodate twelve hundred or more horses. 
Thus was the natural slope on one side of the 
mountain utilized by the wise man when he desired 
a surface on the level of the mountain top 
for the Temple and its courts. 

Passing what is termed the Golden Gate, believed 
to be the location of the "Beautiful 
Gate," where Peter and John healed the cripple, 
we gather a few wild flowers as mementoes 
and proceed to the reputed Pool of Bethesda, 
where the blind man, whose eyes were washed 
and anointed with the spittle and clay, received 
sight. Our hearts instinctively remember that 
this, like our Lord's other miracles, was to show 
forth in advance the coming glorious work of 
his Millennial Kingdom. As we think of the 
multitudes morally and spiritually blind, we rejoice 
in spirit at the remembrance of the anti-type, 
the opening of the eyes of the understanding 
foretold by the Prophet.— Isa. 35:4,5; 
42:7. 

There! see! we have a practical exemplification 
of the Lord's remark about the measure 
being pressed down, shaken together, 
heaped full, etc. (Luke 6:38.) Such an effort 
to give good measure we never before saw. 
The salesman fills the bushel, then jars or 
shakes it down solid and fills to the top, then 
puts in his hands and presses it, then spreads 
out the top so as to pile on as much as possible 
and then, running over, empties it to his customer. 

(To be Continued.) 

R1396 : page 122 

"WE HAVE NO KING BUT CAESAR." 

"There is no Jewish race,' is the somewhat 
startling declaration of 'The Jewish Tidings.' 
'We insist that in this declaration we fairly 
represent the great majority of the intelligent 
Jews of America. They do not wish to be 
separated from the rest of the citizenship of the 
countries in which they abide by such distinctions 
as 'Jewish race' or 'Hebrew nation.' 
The Jews are a religious community, having 
the same hopes and aspirations possessed by 
Christians, and differing from them only in 
their belief. The Jews of to-day believe there 
is but one God, and no other. They repudiate 
the doctrine that a Messiah has come or is 



coming, but they accord to every one freedom 
of conscience. They want to be treated upon 
equal terms with their neighbors— no better, no 
worse. The only evil which now remains to be 
fought is the popular idea that Jews are a separate 
body of people, of different manners, customs, 
minds and character from other people." 



page 123 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1396 : page 123 

THE LORD MY SHEPHERD. 



LESSON IV., APRIL 24, PSALM 23:1-6. 

Golden Text— "The Lord is my shepherd: I shall not 
want." 

In the precious and true sentiments of this 
Psalm, David doubtless took great consolation 
in the midst of his temptations and trials, and 
of the realization of his own infirmities and 
short-comings. As he looked back to his early 
shepherd life and remembered his own care for 
the dependent sheep of his flock, the thought 
of the Lord's similar care over his people came 
to mind. And, doubtless, with this realization 
of the Lord's goodness and care, came also a 
renewed determination on David's part to be 
henceforth a true sheep, that he might always 
remain under the shepherd's care. 

While such was the significance of these words 
to David, to us, the Church under the care of 
the Anointed Jesus, our Good Shepherd, they 
mean more; for, as the Lord's inspired prophet, 
David puts these words into the mouth of all of 
the Lord's "little flock" of consecrated followers 
who obediently hearken to his voice and 
who in meek humility take comfort both in 



his chastening rod and in his blessed staff of 
promise and hope. 

To those who are not in this attitude these 
words do not apply. The Lord is not a shepherd 
of wayward goats (however, he may permit 
the common blessings of sun and rain to 
come to all): the proud and the self-willed have 
no part in his tender care; and those who are 
truly his sheep and who can therefore claim 
his care and leading are, as he tells us (Luke 12:32), 
only a "little flock," to whom "it is 
the Father's good pleasure to give the kingdom." 
And it is to the kingdom— the Millennial Kingdom 
of God, to be established over all the 
earth— that the Good Shepherd is thus leading 
his consecrated flock. Such may truly say- 
Verse 1. "The Lord is my shepherd: I shall 
not want." They shall have all needful instruction, 
all needful grace and comfort and discipline 
and training and care, and such measure 
of temporal good as will be most conducive to 
their highest spiritual and everlasting blessing. 
In fact, all things shall work together for good 
to the sheep of the Lord's pasture— to the 
called according to his purpose.— Rom. 8:28. 

Verse 2 assures us that our hunger and thirst 
after truth and righteousness shall be satisfied— 
that we shall be bountifully fed and sweetly refreshed 
with the meat in due season and the 
water of life. 

Verse 3— "He restoreth my soul," etc., refers 
to our present justification through faith in the 
atoning sacrifice of Christ; for we are therefore 
now reckoned as having passed from death unto 
life, although the times of restitution have not 
yet begun. And being thus reckoned righteous, 
we are led by the Good Shepherd in the paths 
of righteousness and peace "for his name's 
sake"— because we are his, and because we 
trust in his name, in his merit, the merit of his 
sacrifice freely given for our sins. 

Verse 4— "Yea, [although I am not actually 
so restored, yet by faith in the promise, through 
Christ, I do so reckon myself, even] though 
[like all the rest of the dying world] I [still] 
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, 
[I was born in this valley and shall die in it, 
yet] I will fear no evil [no failure of thy sure 
covenant]; for thou art with me, [even here, 
and] thy [chastening] rod and thy [faithful] staff 
[of promise and hope], they comfort me." 
Verse 5 refers to the bountiful supply of 
soul-satisfying truth— the meat in due season, 
and the full cup of joy and gladness— prepared 
and spread before the household of faith even 
here in the midst of this valley of the shadow 



of death and in the presence of our enemies- 
Satan and his messengers, who vainly seek to 
stumble the feet of Christ and to subvert our 
faith. It refers also to our anointing with the 
holy spirit as members of the body of Christ. 

Verse 6. In view of such present bounty and 
blessing, well may we rest in the assurance 
that goodness and mercy shall follow us all the 
days of our life— both of this present life and 
also of that which is to come; and that if, as 
obedient sheep, we continue to follow the leading 
of the Good Shepherd we shall eventually 
dwell in the house of the Lord forever, as members 
of the royal, divine family, as the bride 
and joint-heir of Jehovah's dear Son. 

R1396 : page 123 

THE PRAYER OF THE PENITENT. 



LESSON V., MAY 1, PSALM 51:1-13. 

Golden Text— "Create in me a new heart, O God, and 
renew a right spirit within me." 

This draws our attention to the darkest stain 

R1396 : page 124 

upon the history of the Prophet David— the 
matter of the murder of Uriah and the taking 
of his wife. Skeptics are wont to point to 
that great, double sin and to sneer: "And that 
was the 'man after God's own heart,' according 
to the Bible's grand standard of morality." 
But the fact is that it was when David was a 
young shepherd just coming to manhood that 
he was after God's own heart. And yet in 
connection with this very matter of this, David's 
greatest sin, there is something which shows 
forth his better character which was "after 
God's heart:" and this is brought before us 
by this lesson. The commendable features are: 
(1) He did not attempt to justify his course by 
saying that all the kings around about did such 
things and worse, and that it was generally conceded 
by their subjects that a king had a right 
to do as he pleased; (2) he not only did not 
deny the wrong, but he did not even try 
to see what he could say in self-defense; he 
did not plead his peculiar temptation nor that 
it was above that of others, from the power he 
exercised as king; but he confessed fully and 
heartily in such a manner as convinces all that 



his heart was really better than his evil conduct 
had seemed to indicate. We have no right to 

R1397 :page 124 

condone David's crimes, but we have the privilege 
of noting those other qualities in him 
which to some extent were an offset to his 
weaknesses. 

And it is well, too, that the Bible attests 
its own truthfulness in thus faithfully preserving 
the record of the sins of its great characters 
alongside the records of their faith and service. 
Of no other book which stands as the foundation 
of a religion is this true. Others tell only 
the good and leave the evil untold; but the 
Bible tells of the weaknesses of its greatest 
heroes except our Lord Jesus: of Paul's persecutions; 
of Peter's denial and blasphemy; of 
David's sins; of Abraham's errors, etc. 

Yet this, which worldly wisdom would consider 
a serious drawback, God saw to be the 
proper thing; and many of God's people have 
been greatly blessed by these very records of 
human weakness and sin. They but corroborate 
God's testimony that all have sinned; that 
there is none righteous; that all need the grace 
of God to forgive the past and to lift them out 
of the miry pit of sin and its consequences. 
And many a sinner has thus been taught to have 
hope toward God for forgiveness and to realize 
that God who offers him his grace has had 
compassion upon others who were out of the 
way when they turned to him with true 
repentance. 

Verses 1-3. "Have mercy upon me, O God, 
according to thy loving kindness: according 
unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot 
out my transgressions. Wash me thoroughly 
from mine iniquity and cleanse me from my sin. 
For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my 
sin is continually before me." 

David thus plead for mercy; and although 
he realized finally that God's favor was restored 
to him, he knew nothing of the real philosophy 
of the matter— how God could be just and yet 
be the justifier of those whose sins merited 
wrath. Ah, yes! the standpoint of the sons of 
God, during this Gospel age, is much more 
blessed. Our Father in heaven not only tells 
us of our forgiveness and reconciliation to his 
favor, but he gives us the particulars so that we 
may see how he has done it without sanctioning 
our sins or excusing them and without violating 
his own just law on the subject. He 
shows us that Christ our Lord was the Lamb of 



God whose death as our substitute and sin offering 

taketh away the sins of the world; that 

by his stripes pardon and healing may be 

granted to whosoever accepts the grace offered 

through him. Indeed, David's sins were 

not blotted out nor forgiven; for although the 

Lord restored to him divine favor and communion, 

he punished him severely for his sin, 

as he had foretold by Nathan the Prophet 

(2 Sam. 12:11,12), Absolom's rebellion being 

the means employed. 

True, the penalty exacted was not the full 
penalty of sin, for that would have been lasting 
death. God showed mercy on David (as to all 
Jews under the Law Covenant established upon 
the basis of the typical sacrifices) in that he 
made allowance for his fallen condition and 
hence punished his sin, not with everlasting 
death, but with trouble, etc., in connection 
with Absolom's rebellion, as above stated. 

And as with David and others under the typical 
Law Covenant, so, too, it is with God's 
children under the New Covenant in Christ. 
The death of Christ as our ransom-price cancels 
the original sin of Adam, and also such portion 
or degree of our sins and shortcomings as 
are involuntary and contrary to our real sentiments. 
But whatever proportion of a sin is 
wilful, designed and agreed to by us, has a 
penalty attached to be inflicted in either the 
present or the future life. And in the case of 
all who shall be members in the Anointed body, 
God declares that such sins shall be punished 
in the present life— saying through the Apostle 
"Some men's sins go before to judgment [during 
the present life], others they follow after" 
into the next life, when some shall be beaten 
with many and some with a few stripes. And 
again it is specified that in the cases of all accounted 
worthy to be of the glorified Church, 

R1397 : page 125 

they are chastened now in order that they may 
not have part with the world in the condemnation 
(trial) of the world in the next age.— 
1 Tim. 5:24; Luke 12:48; 1 Cor. 11:32. 

Verses 4 and 5. David's confession here is 
to God— the wronged Uriah was dead. Anyway, 
in that day it was esteemed a king's privilege 
to have the bodies and lives of his people 
subject to his will; and doubtless other kings 
habitually did as bad. But David had been 
enlightened and knew better, and although his 
offenses would have been lightly passed over by 
others, David realized his guilt before God and 



besought his mercy. He confessed his sin that 
others might know, when the chastisements of 
the Lord should come, that God's judgments 
and the king's troubles were just punishments 
and not violations of God's covenant promises. 

Verses 5-12. After confessing in verse 5 his 
original sin— his impairment through the fall- 
he shows in verse 6 his clear appreciation of the 
divine plan. Although fallen and weak in the 
flesh, and therefore unable to do perfectly, God 
looks for and demands purity of heart (purity of 
motive or intention) and this David realized 
he had not manifested. Hence his prayer in 
succeeding verses is not that the Lord shall excuse 
him in sin, but that his heart may be 
cleansed and brought into harmony with God's 
character and plan. Alas! how strange that 
some living under the still clearer light of the 
Gospel dispensation fail to see what David so 
clearly expresses, and instead some even charge 
God with inspiring and causing all sin and 
crime and wickedness. But David was right, 
and these would-be wise ones have become 
darkened and foolish in their vain imaginations. 

Verse 13. What a grand principle is here 
set forth. It is eminently proper that those 
who would be used of the Lord as teachers to 
instruct transgressors, whether in this or the 
coming age, should be fully consecrated to 
God— clean— pure in heart. And the only way 
to get to this condition is to lay hold by faith 
upon the merits of the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world, and to have 
our sins blotted out by him, and then, too, to 
be renewed in spirit, sanctified through the truth. 



R1397 : page 125 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



page 125 



New Hampshire. 
DEAR BROTHER:-I herewith enclose one 
dollar in payment of ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
for this year. Was sick last year, and have 
earned no money since last June, but I wish 
the TOWER continued. I rejoice that God is 
raising up everywhere some to help in this work. 
We have entered the time of trouble, pestilence, 
famine, and, in time, war will ensue. The 
people of God are fast approaching the final 



conflict; and I think small shot, grape and 
canister, as brought to view in your S.S. Lessons, 
are very telling at this time, and will be 
in the future, when we come at short range 
with the enemy ! 

In other words, theological paragraphs, explaining 
at a glance the true significance of the 
doctrines of election and free grace, and kindred 
subjects, as we understand them, are very 
convincing to new readers. May health and 
prosperity attend you and yours. Your brother 
in Christ, L. J. HARPER. 



Iowa. 
DEAR BRETHREN:-Enclosed please find 
$3.25 subscription to the Tract Fund for the 
quarter ending April 1, 1892. From what I 
have learned of the truth, and from facts stated 
from your office, I know of no place where I 
could send this, and accomplish as much good 
as it will in your hands. The last few numbers 
of the TOWER seem to be par excellence. If 
you are sending out any food, or bread, newly 
made, I would like to scatter a few crumbs 
to my neighbors. It will be better than my 
own talk. Yours, joyful in the promises, 
C. M. RICE. 



Nebraska. 

MY DEAREST BRO. RUSSELL:-I have been 
a long way from you in distance, but always 
near in love and thought. Last April I was at 
the Memorial Meeting at Allegheny, and you, 
dear brother in Christ, immersed me; and I 
was so very happy. It symbolized my death 
to self, my burial to the world and my resurrection 
in Christ— to walk with Christ and 
Christ with me. Dear Jesus has been and is 
now with me. Oh, joy complete! it is Christ 
in me the hope of glory. 

Dear Brother Russell, I do love you and all 
so much, and will do all I can for my precious 
Saviour. I pray God that I may be so kept 
that I will meet you with the elect, to help in 
the Millennial work and now in the "harvest" 
work. I have read Vols. 1, 2 and 3 of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN through four times, and will read 
them again. I would love to be there at the 
next Passover Supper, but do not expect to 
now. My sister writes me she will attend. 

I pray God that you may all be kept by the 
power divine. Yours in Christ, A. C. BEACH. 



page 126 

West Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Enclosed 
please find postal-note for one dollar for 
the TOWER. I can not tell you how much mother 
and myself enjoy the TOWER; and we are so 
glad that its visits will be more frequent in 
future. To those in Allegheny, who are privileged 
to attend the weekly meetings, the TOWER 
may not be so much of a necessity; but to us 
who cannot meet with those of like precious 
faith, or hear the words of comfort and instruction 
the church at Allegheny feasts upon, the 
coming of the TOWER is looked forward to, and 
its contents devoured, with a pleasure you can 
scarcely imagine. 

We are so glad of your safe return from 
Europe, and of the good accomplished by your 
going, and, feeling sure you are led of the Lord, 
we believe it will prove an increasing good. 
How any one can read the different volumes of 
DAWN and not see the truth is a mystery; but 
so we find it: "their eyes are holden." We 
have enjoyed Vol. III. so much and in some 
respects think it better than either of the others. 
I can do so very little in the harvest work. 
Would gladly respond to the "Good Hope" 
invitation, but do not see that I can do so at 
present. May God's blessing be upon you 
both, and upon each one who makes an effort 
for the spread of the truth. Yours in the 
one hope, MRS. W. H. FULLER. 



R1397 : page 126 

Boston. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been thinking 
whether I could afford to attend your annual 
meeting, and also whether I could afford to 
stay away: and have concluded that (D.V.) 
I will attend. 

Last year I stayed with my aunt in Pittsburgh, 
but she will not be able to accommodate me 
this time, so that I will have to place myself at 
your disposal. I will be thankful for even a 
floor-bed. I hope and pray that the meeting 
will prove as interesting as the last one. How 
grand it will be when we shall meet to part no 
more in His glorious kingdom. 

The dear old WATCH TOWER in its semi-monthly 



visits is very refreshing indeed. I 
watch for it as eagerly as I would, when 
hungry, for a good meal. I have enjoyed 
very much "Views Abroad" from Sister Russell's 
pen, and anticipate something equally 
good in "Travels in the Holy Land" from 
yours. May the dear Lord's richest blessings 
rest upon you as you labor so earnestly in the 
Master's vineyard. With Christian love to 
yourself and Sister Russell, 

Your humble servant and brother, 
W. J. THORNE. 



page 126 



Arkansas. 
DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-Enclosed please 
find $1.55, which please appropriate to the 
spread of the glad tidings as the Lord may 
direct you. It is my savings of three Mondays. 
I am glad that you suggested this way of serving 
the Lord, for all can do something; and I 
am sure all true servants are always glad to 
have an opportunity to assist in the harvest work. 
I pray that the Lord may accept and bless this 
mite. Your brother, J. K. CONNER. 



Pennsylvania 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The brethren here 
are very much delighted to have the TOWER 
semi-monthly, and we all think that the treating 
of the S.S. Lessons is one of the strongest 
weapons against error and the nominal system 
that could be brought forth. While most of 
the readers here are out of the systems, a number 
are holding on, and these lessons will show 
them the errors so plainly that they cannot 
help seeing the importance of coming out. I 
rejoice that we are allowed to eat from a clean 
table. Yours in the Lord, C. ARNER. 



Connecticut. 
DEAR SIR:— I sent you some money sometime 
ago to pay up arrears, and now I take the 
opportunity of sending you the remainder of 
the subscription price for this year. Before 
closing, I wish to say that I am still a firm 
believer in the truth. The trials of which you 
gave warning have come to me overwhelmingly; 
and although they have taken strange and 



unexpected forms, I thank God that they did 
not find me unprepared. I know in whom I 
have put my trust. Very sincerely yours, 
MRS. H. BULLIS. 



R1397 : page 126 

Maryland. 

DEAR SISTER AND BROTHER:-I have read 
with great interest and delight your three volumes 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and think that your 
interpretations of prophecies are excellent. The 
prophecies have always been a favorite part of 
divine revelation with me; and I have been 
unable to understand why people in general 
give so little attention to them. I am fifty-four 
years old to-day, and have been in the 
ministry of the Episcopal Church nearly thirty 
years. It seems to me that Daniel's prediction 
of the "seventy weeks" is enough of itself to 
establish the faith of any reasonable man in the 
supernatural authorship of the Bible. 

I would be glad to have you send the three 
volumes of your able and instructive work to 
my sister, and also to a friend of mine in a 
former parish. I enclose the money and their 
addresses. Sincerely yours, H. VANDYNE. 



page 127 

Nebraska. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I 

know that you have not much time to read letters; 
but I must tell you that I receive more joy 
and real happiness from the Bible teachings of the 
TOWER than from all other sources combined. 
I used to be weighed down with sorrow, but I 
quite forget my troubles now, for the shepherd 
is with his fold. Yours in love through Christ, 
MRS. S. SHINKARD. 



Kansas. 
GENTLEMEN:-"The Plan of the Ages" 
came this morning. Have been reading it and 
your "Tracts" considerable of the time for 
the last forty-eight hours, and believe I have 
gotten more knowledge— that I understand— 
of the teachings of the Bible, out of them in 
that length of time, than I have learned in all 
my life put together before, and I am forty-three 



years old. I was taught to read the Bible 
as soon as I learned to read anything. When 
I was a boy I used to compete for prizes, given 
at Sunday School, by committing to memory 
whole chapters, not understanding a word I 
learned, but given to understand by my teacher 
and parents, that, if I were not good, I would 
be tormented in unquenchable fire forever 
and ever, and, knowing that I was not good, 
the thoughts of this future "torment" kept 
me in constant fear and dread, until I was 
grown and began to think for myself. Years 
ago I discarded the belief that there was such 
a thing as "Eternal Torment," but with my 
weak understanding I could not post myself 
from the Bible, so that I could explain my belief 
satisfactorily to others. 

Now your "Old Theology Tracts" have 
come to give me new light. I have given some 
of them to my friends, and want more. Please 
send one copy of "The Plan of the Ages" to 
my Sister, and to me one copy of the "Wonderful 
Story," also please send me sample copy 
"ZION'S WATCH TOWER." Yours Truly, 
A. A. POST. 



R1397 : page 127 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER:— I ship to you to-day, by express, 
a box containing some mottoes for your 
place of meeting. You are indebted to Sisters 
Erlenmyer and Clark for the materials, which 
they kindly furnished. I regret that I could 
not give sufficient time to finish them as they 
might be, but trust they may be accepted by 
the dear saints as a slight token of our love 
for the brethren and the Master, whose servants 
we are. It has indeed been a labor of love 
to do them, and I trust the good taste of the 
sisters will hang and arrange them in a better 
manner than I can suggest. 

Sister G. and I consider ourselves fortunate 
in having met Sisters Erlenmyer and Clark 

early in their canvass of O and vicinity. 

They are the first ones (in the Truth) whom 
we have met, and we have enjoyed many pleasant 
and profitable hours with them. My dear 
brother, I can not tell how much we would 
like to join you all at the Anniversary, believing 
it would be of great benefit to us; but as 
it is impossible, we have decided to hold it 
ourselves, with faith and trust that the good 
Lord will be present with us. Remember us, 



will you not, dear brother, when you approach 

R1398 : page 127 

the throne of grace? Oh, how often have I 

longed to write you, but, feeling my own unworthiness 

and knowing how very busy you 

are in the Master's cause, I have hesitated to 

trespass on your time. But we have appreciated, 

and do appreciate, how much we can not 

tell, the gratitude we owe to God and to you 

and Sister Russell, that through you we have 

been able to learn what the "Gospel of the 

Kingdom" really is. Although we have read 

the TOWER for over eight years, we feel that we 

have grown more in grace and the knowledge 

of the truth in the past year than in the seven 

preceding; and we pray that we will be led 

into all truth. I have striven for several years, 

as the Master alone knows, to lead others into 

the truth, but apparently without success until 

recently, when I found some interested ones. 

I thank the Lord for so much. 

I must say, before closing, that, while we 
have always thought each number of the TOWER 
could not be improved, each succeeding number 
is still better. With a prayer that you may 
be so filled and moved by the Holy Spirit, 
throughout the meetings, as never before, joined 
by Sister G., with much love to all the saints, I 
am your unworthy brother in the faith, 
HIRAM P. GANOUNG. 

[The mottoes were received in good order and 
are very beautiful. "I shall be satisfied when I 
awake in thy likeness," "Rejoice that your 
names are written in Heaven," and "I must work 
the works of Him that sent me while it is day." 
All appreciate them greatly. We extend to the 
donors thanks on behalf of all.— ED.] 



page 127 

Michigan. 
DEAR BROTHER IN CHRISTr-Enclosed find 
Money Order to renew my subscription for the 
WATCH TOWER. I can never express the gladness 
I feel that the TOWER and the MILLENNIAL 
DAWNS ever came to my notice. I am sixty 
years old, and have been groping since a little 
child amid the shadows of the sects, thirsting, 
but never satisfied, until I purchased of a Colporteur 
Volume I., and secured the WATCH 
TOWER. Since then I have read all the DAWNS. 



page 128 

This is the greatest blessing that I ever received; 
for a great flood of light has not only illumined 
my own soul, but my children and some of my 
friends to whom I have loaned books and papers 
have been brought to a knowledge of the 
truth. Respectfully yours, 

MRS. C. W. GARDNER. 



Texas. 
DEAR BRETHREN:-I send you herewith 80 
cents, for I don't want to miss a single number 
of the TOWER. It and the DAWNS together 
have made the Bible an intelligible book to me 
and have lifted me from the level of a rank 
skeptic to that of a firm believer in the atonement 
of our Lord and Savior. May the Lord 
bless you. Truly Yours, B. F. BANKS. 



R1398 :page 128 

Massachusetts. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your esteemed 
favor was duly received; also the DAWN and 
tracts. 

I have not had a doubt for several years 
that we are in the "harvest" of the Gospel 
age. I have been studying the Scriptures, especially 
upon this point, for some time; and 
in a quiet way have been teaching the same as 
I have had opportunity. But never until I 
commenced your publications did I see that 
the principal object of this age is to select the 
Church, and the distinction between the nominal 
and the real Church. I have also been 
led to see that my mission is chiefly to the 
Church, to emphasize the importance of entire 
consecration and holiness to the Lord; and I 
am happy to be able to say that while it has 
been positively offensive to the larger portion 
of the Church, I have found some prepared 
ground in which the seed has taken root, and 
is bringing forth fruit unto holiness. I invariably 
preach the speedy coming of the Lord, 
and that we are already in the last days, the 
transition period between the departure of the 
old and the coming of the new; the closing of 
the Gospel age, and the establishment of Christ's 
Kingdom. 

The Methodist Church here, in which I have 
preached for twenty-five years, occasionally has 



virtually been closed to me, because I have 
preached these truths so plainly and earnestly. 
But I have held a week-day service in the vestry 
and we have had some glorious meetings. 
We have a number of precious souls who have 
come out fully on the Lord's side, and are 
looking with joy to the coming of the Lord. 
Recently I have been preaching in the Advent 
church here, which has been opened to me, 
through the sickness of their pastor; but I 
found them as dead and formal as our own 
church, though, bless God, some have been 
quickened. Their pastor is a good man, but 
has been away from them for years and but 
recently returned. 

I had you send him Vol. I. of DAWN about 
two years ago, and I find it has borne fruit. He 
is converted, and I have been permitted to lead 
him out more clearly. I want you to send me, 
for him, volumes Two and Three, and I enclose 
you $5 in payment of mine and these. 

God bless you and yours. In Christ, 
W. H. FORMOSA. 



Canada. 

DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-I have been favored 
with the loan of the volumes on "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN," and the reading has been indeed profitable. 
I thank God for having seen them. They 
have made clear to my mind many difficult 
passages of Scripture. The Word of God is 
precious to me, and I can appreciate and drink 
in greedily anything that helps me to understand 
it, persuaded as I am that God has 
more light to break forth from his blessed Word. 

The Lord has been preparing me for years 
for these Millennial truths. In 1874 I left (resigned) 
the Primitive Methodist ministry in 
England, where I had been for nine years, on 
account of sympathy with the doctrines of the 
Kingdom and conditional immortality. Since 
then I have been led to the study of prophecy; 
and your volumes afford me a richness, a fulness, 
in this branch of study, beyond anything 
I have before seen. Reading them is indeed 
to me as sitting down to a banquet of "meat 
in due season"— predicted truths on becoming 
due being just this to the household of faith. 
The Lord must be invisibly present, as you say, 
being proven by the time prophecies and emphasized 
by the Master when he said, "The 
Kingdom cometh not with observation or outward 
show," and referred to the days of Noah 
before the flood as a type of the day of the 



presence of the Son of Man. 

I wish I could be of help to the watchful, 
consecrated ones; but here in the bush am 
afraid I cannot do much. I would like to know 
what the arrangements of the Tower Tract Society 
is with Colporteurs and whether they know 
of any field where there is urgent need of 
such. Yours in the love of revealed truth. 
JOHN L. LAWSON. 



page 130 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



THOSE MEMENTOES OF THE HOLY LAND. 



In our issue of April 1st we mentioned that 
Brother and Sister Russell had purchased, while 
in Jerusalem, a lot of olive-wood articles (Napkin-rings, 
Egg-cups, Pen-holders and Paperweights) 
designed to be mementoes for TOWER 
readers. They could not, of course, purchase 
sufficient to send one to each reader, and so 
concluded to let the Tract Fund have the charge 
and benefit, and donated them to you through 
it. A moderate price was put upon each article, 
and, after paying the freight and customs 
duty and postage, any profit remaining will go 



to augment the general fund for the spread of 
the Truth. Thus the articles will not only be 
mementoes of the Holy Land and of Brother 
and Sister Russell's visit to it last year, but also, 
indirectly, gifts from them. 

Not content with this, they purchased also a 
quantity of Flower Cards (cards upon which 
some of the wild flowers and grasses of Palestine 
are pasted in pretty designs), and these 
they insist shall not be sold, but given gratis, 
post-paid, to TOWER subscribers, as special mementoes 
of their love, which may go to those 
unable to afford even the small price to secure 
the olive-wood articles; although one card goes 
with each order of olive-wood articles also. 

Several have sent money for extra Flower 
Cards, saying that they would like them for 
their friends; but none will be offered for sale 
until all the Tower readers who will accept 
them as love-tokens have had full opportunity 
to secure them. After that, if any remain, 
they will be supplied at ten cents each or three 
for 25 cents; and the proceeds, after paying 
postage, etc., will go to the Tract Fund. 

Please take notice that the Pen-holders are 
all gone; of the other olive-wood articles and 
cards we still have a supply; especially of the 
Napkin-rings, of which a larger quantity came 
than of others, they being considered very 
desirable. Watch Tower Tract Society. 



THE SYRIAC NEW TESTAMENT. 



Murdoch's Translation of the Syriac-Peshito 
manuscript is sometimes inquired for. 

We can supply it in substantial half-leather 
binding, post paid for $2. 



BE CAREFUL ABOUT SENDING MONEY. 



A number of letters containing money have 
recently been lost in the mails. Do not send 
us money. The postoffice clerks are not all 
honest, although many of them are so. Thieves 
can feel the money in the envelope and are 
tempted thereby to steal. Send Bank Drafts, 
Money Orders or Express Orders, if you would 
make sure of our receiving what you send. 



R1398 :page 131 

VOL. XIII. MAY 1, 1892. NO. 9. 

ECHOES FROM THE BELIEVERS' CONVENTION. 



Many whose hearts were with us in the recent 
general meeting for Bible Study, in connection 
with the celebrating of the Memorial of our 
Lord's death, will be looking expectantly for 
some report of it— for some particulars more 

R1399 :page 131 

than were given in few words in our last issue. 

The program, as announced, was carried out, 
five days being devoted to Bible study, and 
two to the interests of the Colporteur work, with 
social meetings in the evenings, except on the 
anniversary of our dear Redeemer's death, when 
it was memorialized, as he had instructed, with 
unleavened bread and the fruit of the vine. 

Our chapel, which is an upper room on the 
third floor of the Bible House, over the office 
of the Watch Tower, had been put in good 
order, and upon the walls several motto-texts 
served to enforce both the letter and the spirit 
of the Word of God. As many will be interested, 
we will describe them: (1) The one back 
of the platform reads: "Let Him that would 
be Greatest Among You be Servant of All."— 
"One is Your Master, even Christ."— "All Ye 
are Brethren."— "God Hath Set the Various 
Members in the Body as it Hath Pleased Him." 
(2) The one to the right of the platform reads: 
"Sanctify Them Through Thy Truth: Thy 
Word is Truth."— "Whosoever Doeth the Will 
of My Father Shall Know of My Doctrine." 
—"Let Nothing be Done Through Strife or 
Vain-glory." (3) The one alongside the organ 
reads: "Praise the Lord, O my Soul."— "He 
Hath Put a New Song into my Mouth." (4) The 
next, along the side wall, reads: "Thou Shalt 
Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, 
Mind, Being and Strength; and thy Neighbor 
as Thyself." (5) The next reads: "Blessed are 
the Meek, the Merciful, the Peacemakers, the 
Pure in Heart, They that Hunger and Thirst 
after Righteousness, and Those Persecuted for 
Righteousness' Sake." (6) The next reads: 
"The Love of Christ Constraineth Us; for We 



Thus Judge that if One Died for All, then were 
All Dead, and that We Should Live the Remainder 
of our Lives unto Him Who Loved 
Us and Died for Us." (7) The last, next the 
door, reads: "One Lord— One Faith— One 
Baptism."— "One Mediator between God and 
Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself 
a Ransom for All, to be Testified in Due Time." 
Besides there are the three beautiful texts painted 
by Brother Ganoung upon celluloid cards 
furnished by Sisters Erlenmyer and Clark- 
mentioned in our last issue. 

page 131 

So far as we are aware nearly all who attended 
the Convention were greatly blessed. We 
have made selections from some of the letters 
received since, which together will convey a 
fair impression of the joyful season of communion. 
And yet cold type fails to give the impressions 
gained by personal contact with the 
dear ones, so full of love and knowledge and 
zeal, from every quarter of our land and from 
Canada. The letters below are generally extracts, 
except Brother Adamson's, which was 
handed to the compositor without even a reading, 
because such was the request of our dear 
Brother who is the senior Colporteur. 

page 132 

Dear Watch Tower Readers:— 

The Anniversary meetings just closed were 
probably in all respects the best ever held here. 
There was no waste of time. Those who came 
to the city early had an interesting meeting in 
the hall on Wednesday, before the formal opening 
on Thursday, which was set for the first day 
of the feast. Again, interesting meetings were 
held after the week of feasting appointed. Besides 
this, the testimony meetings, which heretofore 
filled almost the whole of the first day of 
the meetings, were held in the evenings at three 
houses on the hilltop, viz., Brother Zech's, 
Brother Russell's and Sister Raynor's. 

The questions came thick and fast, and Bro. 
Russell must continue to be meek and teachable, 
since his knowledge and great capacity to teach 
are still on the increase. Will the dear Lord 
grant us for many years to come the services 
of this wise and willing and holy teacher! 

On the first day of the Conference some words 
of welcome came from Bro. R. (and the Allegheny 
Church) to the two hundred visitors who had left 
their homes and interests to go in some cases 



many hundreds of miles to become more perfectly 
interested in God's Word and will and 
ways. His discourse also traced some of the 
present deceptions of the Adversary, including 
also an invulnerable argument for the Ransom. 

Questions filled in the time Thursday afternoon, 
Friday all day and Saturday morning session. 
On Saturday afternoon the clear, convincing 
sermon on Baptism was followed by 
the symbolizing of their real baptism or immersion 
into Christ on the part of about forty 
persons. 

On Sunday morning Bro. Zech preached a 
beautiful and timely sermon on the Truth-siftings 
now in progress and yet to come; 
taking for his text Peter's denial of Christ, 
his severe treatment at the hands of Satan, 
the sifter, and the meaning of the conversion 
that followed. The sermon on "Love," from 
1 Cor. 13, which was preached by Bro. R. in 
the afternoon, will not soon be forgotten by 
many who heard it. Evening brought the proper 
time to commemorate the Supper which memorializes 
the greatest event and transaction the 
world ever saw. By the Lord's death all mankind 
were redeemed from death (Rom. 5:19), 
and the same all may eat or appropriate life by 
his merits: "I am that bread which if a man 
eat he shall live forever." But before the world 
in general can be fed this bread or life, both 
Christ and his Church must be broken and suffer 
(often at the hands of the nominal church), 
which breaking is beautifully shown by the 
breaking of the unleavened bread used, "for 
ye are all one loaf." It seems impossible that 
any reasonable person present could fail to be 
convinced of the truth of our teaching on this 
subject. At least three hundred persons participated, 
and thoughtfulness and solemnity 
seemed to be over all. 

On Monday question meetings continued, 
while Tuesday and Wednesday were canvassers' 
meetings, to which many who were not Colporteurs 
remained, drawn partly by the evidences of 
God's love and providence to this class, which 
came out incidentally. From all sides came 
wonderful testimonies of God's care and keeping, 
his mercy, providence and grace, and these, 
added to the great treasure opened of things 
new and old— the words of life handled— the 
communion and fellowship so sweet between 
joint-participators in the same struggles and 
temptations, joys and sorrows, trials and blessings 
—must be invaluable to those who have now 
separated and gone forth to serve Christ's cause 
and Kingdom during the Christian year on 



which we have just entered. 

J. B. ADAMSON. 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-On my way home 
from the meeting I stopped over night with 
Brother and Sister Hewes, in Philadelphia. I 
found them well located, evidently desirous and 
preparing to do the Master's work. We had 
a good visit. I talked and prayed with them, 
asking the Lord to bless their efforts in that city. 

I arrived in New York Saturday, 2:30 P.M. 
Was quite surprised to find the floor of our little 
meeting-room nicely covered with matting, 
and supplied with a new organ. I presume it 
is safe to give Brother and Sister Fairchild 
principal credit for this kindness. 

By request of some of the brethren here, the 
time of our meeting yesterday was nearly all 
used in giving a report of the Allegheny meeting. 
I talked for about an hour, trying to give 
a fair idea of the subjects considered and truths 
brought out, as well as the spirit that prevailed 
throughout the meeting. I am sure it 
would have done your heart good to hear the 
testimonies given by all who attended from here. 
I pray that the meeting may be as great a blessing 
to all who were present as it has been to the 
company that went from here. 

During the entire meeting this year it seemed 
evident to me that the Master was present, 
guiding in all that was said and done. But 
there were times when this seemed specially 
noticeable. Sometimes during a prayer, after 
a sermon or a few words of exhortation, it 
would seem as if the dear object of all our 
thoughts was there standing in our midst, saying, 
"Peace be unto you." And there was no 
desire on the part of some to see him with the 

page 133 

natural eye, being still more blessed to recognize 
him by the eye of faith. The sweet influence 
of his love shed upon us during these 
meetings will, I trust, go with me during the 
entire year, and beyond, even unto the end, 
when we, if faithful, shall partake with him in 
the Kingdom. 
With much love in the Lord, Yours, 
S. D. ROGERS. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I arrived here 
Thursday evening; and I must say that I 
am glad that I attended the meeting. I thank 
you very much for your kindness to me while 
there. I took extracts from your discourses, 
and I am now looking them up with my Bible 
and Concordance in hand. Will just say that 
it is very profitable employment. 

I learned more about canvassing the few days 
I was there than I would in a long time by 
actual experience. But I am only selling the 
one volume at 35 cents, apparently with as 
good success as I did at 25 cents, but will not 
say yet. Please send me a few volumes of the 
leatherette as per enclosed order, and I will try 
them. I remain your brother and servant in 
Christ, C. C. WRIGHT. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Sister Vogel and 
I reached our field of labor yesterday morning. 
Sister Lizzie was very glad to see me and to 
learn that our brother had been immersed and 
would also go into the "harvest field." 

May this year prove very profitable to us all. 
I have learned many things during the past two 
weeks, which I think will enable me to serve 
the Lord with more profit than in the year past. 

Enclosed find P.O. money order for two 
hundred copies of DAWN. 

May the Lord's blessing continue with you 
and Sister Russell, is the prayer of your sister 
in the Lord's service, HELENA BOEHMER. 



R1390 : page 133 

Florida. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am very sorry 
that I could not be with you at the Memorial 
Supper of our dear Lord, but it was some comfort 
and satisfaction to think that the fruit of 
my raising should furnish a part of the entertainment 
of the saints who there represented 
the Body of Christ, and perhaps the dear Lord 
and the apostles saw and took notice of the 
fruit I gathered for him [Our dear Brother's 
orange crop was nearly a failure this year, but 
he gathered one barrel and sent them here to 
be sold for the benefit of the Tract Fund. 
Sister Fisher, to whose care they were consigned, 
paid the freight and turned over the luscious 



fruit for the benefit of the Convention. 

It was highly appreciated and the donors remembered. 

—ED.], although I had no idea of 

receiving so great an honor as you and dear Sister 

Fisher have brought upon me. Strange to tell, 

the thoughts awakened by Sister Fisher's letter 

in reference thereto make me weep, not with 

sorrow, but with a variety of emotions too deep 

for utterance. I feel so little like an "overcomer," 

and it seems to me the Lord is not 

helping me, but letting me feel my inefficiency 

as one of his messengers, and now it seems as 

though you, dear Brother, and the dear ones 

who met at Allegheny, had united in bringing 

my little offering to his notice, and perhaps he 

looked on it as he did on the widow's mite, at 

least with love and pity. Lord grant that it 

may be so ! 

Oh, if he will only strengthen and encourage 
me, and help me earn my expenses, I will 
give my time continually in circulating his gracious 
gospel of love. The spirit is willing, but 
oh, the flesh is weak, and I am a very coward, 
afraid of my shadow, and the sharp, quick ring 
of the door bells that I must ring often makes 
me tremble. I would rather face death than 
the prospect before me, and I hope the Lord 
will soon relieve or strengthen me for the work. 
Pray for me. 

Give my love to Sisters Russell and Fisher 
and accept same for yourself, from a very poor 
fellow-servant. Yours, W. A. WHITCOMB. 



page 133 

Elmira, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Knowing that you 
will be glad to learn what effect, if any, the 
Passover services have had on those who attended, 
I think it not amiss to add my report. 

I went praying and hoping that God's blessing 
would rest on me and all that would be 
present. And now for my part I can say that 
my prayers and expectations were not in vain. 
I was indeed greatly refreshed and strengthened 
in the Lord. 

I have had several opportunities of magnifying 
my Lord since, and (need I say?) I gladly 
availed myself of them. Next Sunday at 4 P.M. 
I am to address the Y.M.C.A. meeting at 
Cortland, N.Y. 

I was there about a month ago and got them 
greatly interested— so much so that one young 
man said openly: "Now I have some incentive 



to study the Bible." I was then invited 

to address them at some future time, and I have 

arranged to do so next Sunday. Pray that the 

Lord may help me to glorify his name. If you 

have any suggestions to offer they will be very 

acceptable. 

I have some of No. 5 (Bible Study) tracts, 
and I purpose giving one to every one who attends. 
I may not have enough as the secretary 

page 134 

writes me he is going to advertise the meeting. 
You might send me about a hundred more. 

With much love to you and Sister Russell, 
I am yours in the glorious hope, 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 



Ohio. 

DEAR TOWER BROTHERS:-Please accept a 
few lines from Bro. Chase and my unworthy 
self in thankfulness for your kindness while attending 
the Convention in Allegheny. O! how 
thankful we are that the Lord permitted us to 
attend those meetings. I thank the blessed 
Redeemer for light I have received, and my 
prayer is that it may increase in me daily, and 
I humbly ask an interest in the prayers of God's 
dear children that I may prove worthy of my high 
calling— that I may meet the Lord with joy. 

Brother Chase and I met at Brother McPhail's 
house last Lord's-day, and had a good 
lesson on the Ransom. In the evening we met 
at Brother Chase's home and had a lesson on 
the Resurrection. Two of Brother Chase's 
neighbors came in, and they seemed to be interested. 
Hope it may prove to be "meat in 
due season" to them. 

Brother McPhail started out yesterday to the 
"harvest work" to help gather in the sheaves. 
Brother Chase will also start in a day or so to 
spread the good news to all that have an ear to 
hear. May the Lord go with them. The Lord 
willing, I shall do what I can here at home, as 
my health is poor, but as soon as there is a way 
open I too will go forth regularly to help spread 
the good tidings of great joy. Thank God, I 
am not afraid to read my Bible now. There is 
nothing in it now to make me afraid. O! We 
have a Heavenly Father and a blessed Redeemer 
that we can love now since we know 
them better. O! I am so thankful that the 
Lord has led me into his marvelous light; and 
I thank him specially for the gift of his only 



begotten Son to be "a ransom for all." 

Dear Brother Russell, may God ever bless 
you in your labor for the Truth. Yours in 
Christian fellowship, R. S. MOORE. 



R1400 : page 134 
"WHO IS WORTHY?" 



In the visions of the Apocalypse we read of 
a wonderful scroll in the right hand of the 
great King who sits upon the throne of universal 
dominion. This scroll is a forceful representation 
of the divine plan, originally existing 
only in the mind of God, and which could 
not be made known to men until some one was 
found worthy to open the seals and display it 
to view. But "no one in heaven nor in earth 
was able to open the scroll, neither to look 
thereon," until one came whom the Revelator 
describes as "The Lion [the strong one] of 
the tribe of Judah, the root of David," of whom 
the testimony is given— "Thou art worthy to 
take the scroll and to open the seals thereof; 
for thou wast slain and hast redeemed to God 
by thy blood out of every kindred and people 
and nation; and hast made them unto our God 
a kingdom and priesthood; and they shall reign 
on the earth. "-Rev. 5:1-5,9,10. 

Excepting the bare promise (written on the 
outside of the scroll— verse 1) of salvation 
through the Seed of the woman, nothing could 
be known of the wonderful scheme for human 
restitution until the Son of God, having left 
the glory of the spiritual nature, took our nature 
and by the sacrifice of himself redeemed us 
from death. Then, having his righteousness 
imputed to us by faith, we are counted worthy 
to look upon the scroll as he opens the seals 
one after another. 

Great was the favor bestowed upon the Strong 
One of the tribe of Judah, in being permitted 
to open the seals— to carry out and make manifest 
the grand designs of infinite love— and 
great is the privilege of those who are permitted 
to look thereon as the seals are opened. 
It is not our purpose here, however, to treat of 
the peculiar symbols relating to the opening of 
the seals, but rather of what constitutes worthiness 
in us to look thereon, and what favor of 
God to us is implied in this privilege of looking. 

The knowledge of God's purposes is due only 



to those able and anxious to co-operate with 
him in their development; for God does not 
display his plans to satisfy mere idle curiosity. 
First, then, if we would comprehend what is 
revealed within the scroll we must have faith in 
what is written on the outside— the promised 
redemption through the precious blood of Christ 
—and must be sincerely desirous of knowing 
the details of God's plan in order to an earnest 

R1400 : page 135 

co-operation with it. In other words, there 

must be the earnest inquiry arising from a heart 

grateful for the promise of life through the Redeemer - 

"Lord, what wilt thou have me to 

do?" Such, and such only, are worthy to 

know, and such only ever come to see, in the 

sense of understanding and appreciating, the 

deep things of God written within the scroll. 

Such are the called according to the divine 

purpose, to be educated in and to serve the 

truth. Such are the righteous for whom the 

light (truth) is sown. Such was our Lord's attitude 

when he said, "Lo, I come to do thy 

will, O God." (Heb. 10:7.) He was meek 

and lowly of heart and ever ready to render 

implicit obedience to the will of God; and it 

is to those who are similarly meek that he was 

sent to preach the good tidings (Isa. 6:1)— to 

open the scroll. "The meek will he guide in 

judgment; the meek will he teach his way." 

(Psa. 25:9.) If any man have this evidence 

of worthiness— this acquaintance with the truth 

—let him rejoice in his privilege and by his 

works manifest his continued worthiness. 

This worthiness is inquired for not only at 
the beginning, but all along the path of light. 
If we are not found worthy by the various tests 
applied from time to time, we cannot proceed 
in the path of light; and unless the unfaithful 
ones arouse themselves to greater diligence and 
watchfulness, the light that already is in them 
will become darkness. And how great, how 
intense must be the darkness of one cast out of 
light. (Matt. 6:23.) To find the glorious hope 
that once inspired our hearts slipping away and 
the truth whereon we built that hope beginning 
to seem like an old song or an idle tale, 
or as relics of the past to be displaced at any 
time by any plausible subterfuge of error which 
our wily adversary may be pleased to palm off 
as advanced divine truth: these are indications 
that should arouse any one who discovers them 
to a realization of the fact that he is going into 
darkness— a darkness that will only become 



the more intense as he slips and slides along 
the backward track. 

All along the way, as we have said, we will 
find tests applied to prove our worthiness to 
proceed from knowledge to knowledge and 
from grace to grace. Who is worthy?— worthy 
to receive the truth, worthy to continue in the 
truth, worthy to suffer and to endure hardness 
as a good soldier for the truth, worthy to have 
part in the ministry of the truth, and finally to 
be exalted to power and great glory when truth 
and righteousness shall be exalted in the earth 
and their glorious triumph begun. 

Jesus said, "If any man will come after me, 
let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, 
and follow me." (Luke 9:23.) At the very 
beginning of our course we each found some 
cross confronting us, and had we not taken it 
up we would not have been counted worthy even 
to look with intelligent appreciation into the 
precious truths of God's plan. And as we advance 
from step to step and find the truth increasingly 
precious— sweeter than honey from 
the honey comb— we have these additional evidences 
of continued worthiness and should 
greatly rejoice in them as such. Our possession 
of these truths has thus far proved us meek 
enough to discard the popular theology of the 
nominal church and be counted as heretics, 
turncoats, fanatics, cranks, or whatever our 
former friends are, in their ignorance, now 
pleased to term us. And it has proved us meek 
enough to bear willingly this reproach for the 
great joy of thus realizing the Lord's approval 
and of seeing by faith the great blessings in 
store for us if faithful unto the end. 

But "let him that thinketh he standeth take 
heed lest he fall;" for sudden and sharp will 
be many of the tests applied to prove our continued 
faithfulness. The world, the flesh and 
the devil all conspire to allure, ensnare and 
overcome us. The world will present its allurements 
through friends or wife or husband or 
children. They will try to encroach upon the 
clearly defined line which you have drawn between 
yourself and the world. Then the flesh 
will grow weary in fighting the good fight of 
faith, weary of the reproaches of the world, 
weary of the alienation of former friends and 
weary of the self-denying, sacrificing and daily 
cross-bearing life. Then if you turn aside for 
a moment to ponder on these things the devil 
will quickly see his opportunity and will cunningly 
devise some trial specially suited to your 

R1400 : page 136 



peculiar condition of mind, and a crisis comes 
in your experience, the result of which will 
prove the exact strength of your devotion to 
God and his truth. These tests God permits 
and even desires to have come upon us, in 
order that we may be thoroughly tried and 
proved either worthy or unworthy of the great 
reward he has in keeping for those who remain 
faithful unto death. 

The Lord is seeking his precious jewels. 
Many of them are indeed diamonds in the 
rough. The real diamond is a noble, loyal, 
faithful character, devoted and uncompromising 
in its allegiance to God. Sometimes the 
circumstances of life have deprived such of education 
or culture and have left them only sufficient 
means for the barest necessities of life. 
But no matter, God's eye is on them: character 
is what he is looking for, and in due time, when 
that character is sufficiently developed, confirmed, 
tested and proved worthy of exaltation, he 
can and will add to it all the glories of knowledge 
and wisdom and grace and beauty. But 
first he will subject it to all the necessary tests. 
If it is a true diamond it will receive and it will 
also transmit to others the light of divine truth. 
Nothing so gloriously reflects the light as the 
diamond; and nothing so gloriously reflects the 
truth as the worthy character of the true and 
faithful saint. 

Another way of testing a diamond is to put 
it under pressure. If it is a real diamond it 
will stand the pressure, for the diamond is the 
hardest substance known; but if it is not a real 
diamond it will go to pieces and thus prove itself. 
So God allows us to come under the constant 
pressure of years of toil and care and self-sacrifice 
to see how we will endure; and blessed 
is that diamond-proved character that endures 
to the end.-Jas. 1:12; Matt. 10:22. 

Sometimes the tests come in the way of trials 
of faith, and we are called upon to prove ourselves 
whether we be in the faith (2 Cor. 13:5) 
when some subtle errors are presented to us 
as advanced truth. But if we know the voice of 
the "Good Shepherd" we will not be easily 
beguiled. We remember the inspired counsel, 
"To the law and the testimony: if they speak 
not according to this word it is because there 
is no light in them" (Isa. 8:20); and to the 
law and the testimony we go, and, relying implicitly 
upon this as the infallible teaching of 
the Spirit of God, we are enabled to arrive at 
definite, clear and positive doctrine. We are 
not left in doubt as to what is truth, but are 



enabled to give a solid Scriptural reason for the 
hope that is in us, on which hope we dare implicitly 
to rest our faith and with humble boldness 
to successfully withstand the assaults of error. 
But O! how dead to selfish ambition, how 
fully devoted to the will of God such must be. 

Let us, dearly beloved, as we realize that 
thus far God has counted us worthy to look upon 
the scroll of his plan which has been unsealed 
for us by our blessed Lord Jesus, the 
Lion of the tribe of Judah, prove our worthiness 
to continue to look therein and to read the 
wondrous things of his law, by faithful obedience 
and loyalty to it in all things. Let us not 
undervalue our great privilege in being counted 
worthy to suffer some reproach and some hardness 
as good soldiers for the truth's sake; and 
also in being counted worthy to have some part 
in the blessed ministry of reflecting the light 
of divine truth: let us prove ourselves jewels 
of rarest value, diamonds indeed, heartily receiving 
and beautifully transmitting to others 
the light of truth, and faithfully enduring the 
severest pressure that God may permit to come 
upon us; for, if faithful in these small things, 
we shall in due time be counted worthy also to 
reign with Christ in power and great glory. 
Let us not be like some who have only a little 
good earth on the surface of their hearts while 
the heart is really hard and stony. Let the 
good seed of divine truth sink down and take 
deep root, and then let it branch out in the life 
and bear its abundant fruitage to the Master's 
glory. So shall we be accounted worthy to see 
the King in his beauty and to live and reign 
with him as his beloved bride and joint-heir. 
And when to the "worthy Lamb that was slain" 
the voice of the multitudes ascribes blessing and 
honor and glory and power, they will also exclaim, 
"Let us be glad and rejoice and give 
honor to him: for the marriage of the Lamb 
is come, and his wife hath made herself ready." 
-Rev. 5:13; 19:7. 



R1400 : page 137 

TRAVELS IN THE HOLY LAND. 

AUGUST, 1891. -EDITORIAL NOTES. -NO. III. 



Next let us visit "Solomon's Quarries," whence 
the stones for the temple were obtained. They 



are wonderful in extent, underlying, probably, 
more than one-half of the city. With lighted 
candles and our guide we see as much of the 
quarry as we desire to see, noticing the ancient 
marks of the quarrymen, and the places from 
which immense stones had been taken and 
others are ready to be taken out— reflecting the 
while upon the quarrying of the living stones, 
which the great Master Mason, Christ our Lord, 
is now taking out, fitting and squaring for 
places in the antitypical temple in the antitypical 
Jerusalem above. 

The space left by this quarrying may yet be 
utilized for the arrangement of a general sewerage 
system for the city of Jerusalem, we suggest; 
and so, too, the taking out from the 
world of the living stones for the heavenly 
Temple, the Church, will ultimately redound to 
the benefit of the world— cleansing it from sin 
and all uncleanness. 

Sunday has come, and we will endeavor to 
improve its opportunities by becoming acquainted 
with the missionaries and their work. 
We attend service at the Protestant Episcopal 
Church and hear a good practical discourse in 
English, but find no opportunity for speaking 
to any of the three ministers present, assisting 
in the service, nor with any of the congregation. 
We are rather disappointed at the result 
of our efforts to gain an acquaintance. We 
will try another plan, and in the afternoon call 
upon some other ministers at their homes. We 
find the Bishop and one of the other ministers 
absent for the summer season, but find an 
Episcopal mission service in Arabic, and attend 
that. The congregation is an interesting one, 
of native young men chiefly. Upon inquiry, 
we learn that many of these are employees of 
the mission in one capacity or another. 

On the whole we are forced to the conclusion 
that "the Americans" had some ground 
for their charges that the missionaries here 
misrepresent the spirit of Christ by their 
rather haughty demeanor. The natives call the 
residences of the ministers palaces; and indeed 
they are the finest buildings of the city, 
aside from hotels and public buildings. 

It is a lamentable fact that although some of 
the missionaries seem to have a desire to do 
good, they have not that sympathy and consuming 
desire to do good to the poor creatures 
about them that they should have, to accomplish 
much. Here, as everywhere, it requires the 
truth to sanctify wholly and rightly direct body, 
soul and spirit in the service, which demands 
continual self-negation and sacrifice under present 



evil conditions. The truth is the one 

thing needful even for present service; but in 

no place do the "religious people" seem more 

self-satisfied. The Jews, too, are full of the 

same spirit, and surely not without some cause. 

Their synagogue services are more reasonable 

and intelligent than those of the various 

"Catholic" denominations entrenched here. 

They worship individually and singly, or in 

groups, read the Scriptures and talk concerning 

their signification. The Talmud, against which 

our Lord spoke as "the traditions of men," 

explains away or adds to the Word of the 

Lord and is their chief shackle. Nevertheless, 

we find one small congregation of Jews here 

who reject the Talmud and accept only the 

Mosaic Law and the Prophets. Their Rabbi, 

through an interpreter, tells us that there are 

many similar and larger congregations throughout 

Turkey and Russia. They call themselves 

"Caraims." The Jews here would be a most 

hopeful class for a truth-girded, working, self-sacrificing 

missionary, such as our Lord or Peter 

or Paul. As it is, a conversion of a Jew or a 

Mohammedan is a rare matter: almost the 

only converts are children cared for as infants, 

and who grow up Protestants or Catholics in 

form and name. To offset this, the Jewish 

schools and orphanages are now active and receive 

all classes. 

Let us go about the city outside the wall and 
through the valleys, and for this service the 
docile donkeys will be just the things. 

Passing out of the Damascus Gate we soon 

R1400 : page 138 

reach the "Tombs of the Kings." They are 
spacious vaults cut in the solid rock, communicating 
with a central spacious room which 
connects with the outside by a small doorway 
closed by a rolling stone, like a large grindstone, 
such as closed our Lord's sepulchre. Outside 
this small door is a spacious platform suggestive 
of a place for public gatherings, funeral 
services, etc., and from it broad steps (about 
thirty feet wide) lead up to the surface. The 
Tombs of the Judges are near our course, a 
little further along upon the side of the Mt. of 
Olives. They are large and interesting, but less 
so than the Tombs of the Kings. We will turn 
and go down the Valley of Jehoshaphat, otherwise 
known as the Valley of Kidron. Our path 
crosses and recrosses the bed of the brook Kidron 
(dry at this season), and passes near the 
Garden of Gethsemane; and we recall that the 



Master and his twelve apostles often walked 
here in going to and from Olivet and Bethany. 
(John 18:1.) Looking upward on our left, 
the slope of Olivet is thickly covered with stone 
slabs, marking graves and sepulchres centuries 
old. This Valley of Jehoshaphat is the synonym 
and reminder of God's promise of a 
resurrection. 

We pause for a drink of water from the long-celebrated 
fountain Enrogel. Farther along 
we pass the "Kings' Gardens" on our right, 
and on the opposite side of the valley is the 
village of Siloam, and a little below it a new 
Jewish colony in new, small, stone houses, 
erected, we believe, by Sir Moses Montefiore's 
benevolence; all very neat and comfortable looking. 
Just above these villages is the "Mount of 
Offence," so called because there, to please his 
heathen wives, Solomon erected temples to the 
false gods of the Ammonites and the Moabites, 
Moloch and Chemosh.—l Kings 11:1-7. 

Here we turn aside and climb the hill-side 
to visit the Pool of Siloam, opposite the village 
of the same name. See, a few of the steps 
leading down to the pool from the hill Zion 
may still be discerned. We recall the obedience 
of the blind man who here received his 
sight on the Sabbath day, and remember that 
we are already in the early dawn of the antitypical 
Sabbath— the Millennium— when the 
Satan-blinded eyes of men's understandings 
shall be anointed with the ointment from the 
Lord's mouth mixed with the clay of human 
instrumentality, and when by faith they shall 
wash in the fountains of truth then opened to 
them. How precious the promises, "Then the 
blind eyes shall be opened," and "The blind 
shall see out of obscurity." (2 Cor. 4:4; Isa. 35:5; 
29:18.) Never before did we realize so 
fully as during this journey the need of the 
whole world for the promised eye-salve; and 

R1401 :page 138 

none seem to need it more than the nominal 
Christian churches.— Rev. 3:18. 

Leaving the Kidron we pass eastward and 
then northward along the Valley of Hinnom 
or Gehenna— once used as a place for the 
destruction of offal and garbage and for the 
destruction of the dead bodies of the vilest criminals 
by means of fire and brimstone, and used 
by our Lord to symbolize the utter and hopeless 
destruction by the second death, into which 
all shall be cast who, in the judgment of the 
Millennial day of trial, shall be found unworthy 



of life. At the lower end of this valley is 
the reputed Aceldama or field of blood where 
Judas hanged himself. The valley is much 
filled up at present— the natural result of the 
stone-throwing warfare of former times and of 
the many destructions of the city and its walls. 
It is now a fertile garden of olive trees, fig 
trees, etc., at the lower part. 

Passing onward we find ourselves in the Valley 
of Kidron with its two pools or water reservoirs 
still fairly preserved. Here it was that 
Solomon was anointed King of Israel by the 
command of King David. (1 Kings 1:30-40.) 
On our left as we ascend the valley are the clean, 
neat-looking dwellings of "the Germans," or 
Society of the Temple. We regret that we will 
not have time for calling upon them. 

Now we reach the new Jerusalem, rapidly 
building up to the northwest of the walled city, 
with creditable modern structures, among which 
is our stopping place, the Hotel Jerusalem. 

We have but one day more at our disposal, 
and will visit Bethlehem and Solomon's pools. 
The carriage road is good and our contracting 
guide and friend has provided us a good 
coach and team, and we are not long in reaching 

R1400 : page 139 

Bethlehem, the town honored as our Lord's 
birth-place. On the way we pass "Rachel's 
Tomb." Near here the beloved Rachel died 
when giving birth to Benjamin, and tradition 
declares this to be her tomb. (Gen. 35:16-20.) 
Here is a cistern where tradition says the star 
appeared to the wise men the second time to 
guide them to Bethlehem and the manger. 
(Matt. 2:1-10.) This reminds us that from 
the tower upon Olivet we saw the reputed fields 
where the shepherds to whom our Lord's birth 
was announced watched their flocks by night 
(Luke 2:8), and the road we have just traversed 
in coming from Jerusalem was probably the same 
that they traveled. We render hearty thanks to 
God that in the truest sense we have found him 
that was born King of the Jews and King of 
all kings, or rather we have been found of him: 
he has revealed himself to us. "My Beloved 
is mine and I am His." 

Bethlehem is built on a hill in the shape of a 
crescent. The buildings are of white stone and 
fairly good for these parts. It has about seven 
thousand population. 

The ancient dress and customs are better preserved 
here than elsewhere, we are told and we 
believe. The Bethlehemites are clever people, 



above the average in intelligence and hospitality. 
We consider them much better samples in 
every way of our Lord's times than the people 
of Jerusalem. 

Bethlehem was the home of Boaz, and here 
it was that Naomi came with Ruth, who became 
the wife of Boaz and mother of Obed, the father 
of Jesse, the father of David the king. 
But while notable as the birthplace and home 
of these, Bethlehem's honor comes as the birthplace 
of David's Lord, the well beloved son of 
Jehovah God— "Thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, art 
not the least among the cities of Judah; for out 
of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to 
be ruler in Israel." (Micah 5:2; Matt. 2:6.) 
Here, to Bethlehem as the chief city of their 
province, came Mary with Joseph her husband, 
according to the decree of Caesar Augustus, the 
Roman Emperor, to be taxed, and here the infant 
Jesus was born.— Luke 2:1-12. 

We visit the Church of the Nativity, built upon 
the spot. It is in the joint possession of the 
Roman, Armenian and Greek Catholics, but 
the apparent harmony between these is somewhat 
enforced, as appears from the presence of 
armed Turkish (Mohammedan) soldiers, found 
necessary to be stationed here by the government 
to preserve peace between the sects. We 
descend some steps to about ten feet below the 
church floor, to the reputed birth-place of our 
Savior, which is marked by a large silver star, 
upon which is inscribed, "Hie de Virgine 
Maria Jesus Christus natus est," i.e., "Here 
Jesus was born of the Virgin Mary." Another 
spot marked by a marble slab is claimed to be 
the place where the holy manger stood. 

Connected with this, a long underground 
passage leads us to a spot where, it is said, the 
angel appeared to Joseph, directing him to flee 
with Mary and the child Jesus into Egypt. 
Farther along we come to the Altar of the Innocents, 
said to be over a cave into which the 
children, massacred by Herod, were thrown. 
Above these memorial spots are several chapels 
and convents; one, the chapel of Helena, built 
by the mother of Constantine the Great, A.D. 
327, being one hundred and twenty feet long 
and one hundred and ten feet wide. It contains 
fourty-four marble columns taken from 
Mt. Moriah, and supposed to have been pillars 
of the porches of Solomon's Temple. 

Passing along the principal street of Bethlehem 
to its farther end, we come to the celebrated 
"Well of Bethlehem," whose water was 
so highly prized by David. (2 Sam. 23:15-16.) 
From this point we get a view of the Shepherd's 



Field. The field is probably the same where 
David as a shepherd boy tended his sheep, and 
where his grandmother Ruth gleaned in the 
field of the wealthy Boaz. "And there were 
in the same country shepherds abiding in the 
field, keeping watch over their flocks by night. 
And lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them 
...and said, Fear not: for, behold, I bring 
you good tidings of great joy, which shall be 
unto all people." 

Oh! would that the shepherds of the Lord's 
flock were watching: they would now be advised 
of the second coming of the Lord's Anointed— 
not again a man, nor to suffer, to die, to redeem, 
but now in dignity, authority and power, to 

R1400 : page 140 

bless and to offer healing and restoration to all 
whom he then purchased with his own precious 
blood. Could they but hear it, the message 
of peace and blessing given eighteen centuries 
ago has now new force and beauty: it is indeed 
"good tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all 
people." But now, as then, the wise— the truly 
wise— shall find and know and worship the 
King, while others know not of his presence: 
they will see and be guided by God's star; but 
this time the guiding star will arise in their 
hearts in connection with the sure word of 
prophecy, as saith the Apostle.— 2 Pet. 1:19. 

In returning to Jerusalem, we make a detour 
to the Pools of Solomon. These are vast reservoirs 
by which the summer water supply of 
Jerusalem was gathered and stored. From these 
pools aqueducts conduct the water for miles to 
the city. These are now much out of repair, 
and consequently of little use. Indeed, the 
shortage of literal water fitly represents the 
scarcity of the truth in these parts. May the 
fountains soon be opened! 

Our return journey from Jerusalem to Jaffa is 
a very pleasant ride at night, in the full of the 
moon. We reach Jaffa early in the morning, 
and have time for a visit to a Jewish agricultural 
school on the outskirts, before taking 
steamer for the Suez Canal, and thence by rail 
to Cairo, to see the Great Pyramid. 

We conclude our visit to the Holy Land with 
the hope that ere long the earthly blessings promised 
may come to the seed of Abraham according 
to the flesh and to the land of promise, as well 
as the spiritual blessings upon the spiritual seed, 
Christ and his Bride, the heavenly Jerusalem, 
the city or Kingdom from which all of God's 
blessings will flow to the world— shortly. 



R1399 : page 140 

PREPARING FOR THE "IMAGE OF THE BEAST.' 



A Jewish Rabbi in New York— Dr. Silverman 
—in his discourse of Sunday, April 3rd, 
made a suggestion which seems likely to meet 
with a hearty response from moral and religious 
people generally. He proposes a Board of 
Morals to which, as a part of the government, 
he would favor giving a general supervision of 
the conduct and teachings of all public assemblages 
(theaters, lectures, churches, etc.), books, 
magazines, newspapers, art exhibitions, etc. 

We cannot doubt the sincerity of his motives 
in propounding such a scheme. He and others 
probably fail to see that while his scheme would 
indeed be useful in restraining vice, it would 
put an immense power into the hands of majorities 
by which the liberties of minorities on various 
subjects would soon be interfered with, 
and adjudged subversive of public peace and 
morals. For instance, any book or magazine 
opposed to sectarianism (as are Millennial Dawn 
and the Watch Tower) would come under the ban 
of the majority who consider that opposition 
to the sects is opposition to God, and hence 
contrary to public moral welfare. 

However, we fully expect from the teachings 
of the Bible that such ideas will make considerable 
progress and ultimately be carried out in 
connection with a general federation or league 
of all the principal denominations of Protestant 
Christians, which will find Roman Catholicism 
its aider and abettor in all such efforts to restrain 
all liberty of thought under the name and 
guise of moral reform. 

We subjoin an extract from the discourse in 
question:— 

"The ethical ideal underlying Judaism has 
become the basis of all modern religions, and 
to-day both Christian and Jewish churches are 
earnestly enlisted in the cause of the moral 
conversion of the masses. 

"The masses have been neglected too long. 
There is such a seething hot-bed of vice, crime, 
and all manner of corruption that we almost 
despair of a remedy. This true religion, with 
its prayer and preaching, with Bible and song, 
is peculiarly adapted for influencing the moral 
sentiment, but the moral sentiment of whom? 



Of those only who willingly go to the church, 

who are already morally trained up to the point 

at which they are susceptible of higher development. 

But what becomes of the masses 

outside of the church, who cannot be brought 

within range of the preacher's voice? How 

can they be morally influenced? There is no 

doubt that the pulpit, as regards moral reforms 

on a large scale, is helpless without the aid of 

the Government. 

R1399 :page 141 

"Dr. Parkhurst has demonstrated the fact 
that the Government does not feel obligated to 
come to the aid of the pulpit, in carrying out 
its attempts at moral reform, and that the men 
in authority will only proceed to act in a case 
of indisputable civil action. We believed that 
all along, but now it is demonstrated. 

"We have no particular grievance in this regard 
against the men in authority. It is not 
they that are entirely wrong in this instance, 
but the principle by which they are guided. 
We are brought squarely before the issue that 
many office holders, politicians and statesmen 
hold, that the Government is only a civil and 
not also a moral power. We submit that this 
view of government is extremely narrow and 
unstatesmanlike. James Bryce, in his 'American 
Commonwealth,' has taken the trouble to 
emphasize this peculiar defect of the Americans. 
'The State,' says Bryce, 'is not to 
them, as to Germans and Frenchmen and even 
to English thinkers, an ideal moral power, 
charged with the duty of forming the characters 
and guiding the lives of its subjects. It is more 
like a commercial company, or perhaps a huge 
municipality created for the management of 
certain business, in which all who reside within 
its bounds are interested, levying contributions 
and expending them in this business of 
common interest, but for the most part leaving 
the shareholders to themselves.' 

"In accordance with this view the duties of 
the government may be summed up as follows: 

"First— The protection of its borders, commerce, 
honor and property. 

"Second.— The administration of its laws and 
economy. 

"Third.— The development of its resources 
and prosperity. 

"Fourth.— The education of all its people in 
keeping with its idea as a secular institution. 

"Fifth.— The protection of personal liberty 
and life. 



"But is that all? Has the Government no 
higher object or higher duty? Is it more important 
to have a strong and rich nation than 
a moral one? I have no hesitation in maintaining, 
and I believe you will agree with me, 
that the morals of a free people are equally, if 
not more, important than their education, 
health, parks, bridges, commerce, speedway, 
etc. In a monarchy the stability of society 
and of the Government is maintained by the 
threat of a large standing army: in a republic, 
by the virtuous manhood of the people. 

"The only recourse for the pulpit thus far 
has been to resort to a number of private societies 
for the prevention of crime and cruelty 
and for the prevention of the dissemination of 
obscene literature. But all such societies, and 
even a dozen more of them, would be inefficient, 
because they do not represent a scientific, 
systematic, and absolutely authoritative treatment 
of public morals. 

"The evils which we desire to combat are so 
great that we need State institutions and State 

R1400 :page 141 

moneys for the purpose. Just as there is a 

Board for Public Works, a Board of Public Education, 

a Board of Public Health, so we need 

a Board of Public Morals, whose duties shall 

be to study the moral needs of the masses, to 

suggest proper legislation, to have the authority 

necessary for the protection of public morality, 

and for the creation of such means as will 

develop it. This board should be non-partisan, 

appointed by the Supreme Court of the State, 

and should consist of men of unquestioned integrity, 

who have made the study of practical 

morality a specialty, of men from both the 

clergy and the lay ranks. Without going into 

the details of such an institution, I submit that 

this is one of the practical ways in which the 

State could deal with public morals. 

"There are many directions in which such a 
board could at once act. The crying need of 
the hour is the regulation of vice. Let such a 
board or commission undertake to study this 
intricate and perplexing question. Another 
much mooted question is the instruction of unsectarian 
morals in the public schools. There 
can be no doubt that such instruction is desirable, 
but it must be wholly unsectarian. By 
that I mean it must be entirely disassociated 
from religious teaching or practice. The elements 
of morality are honesty, chastity, cleanliness, 
industry, frugality, unity of thought and 



speech, truthfulness, etc. The Church could privately 
supplement the public moral instruction. 

"The Board of Public Morals should also be 
empowered to exercise a sort of moral censorship 
over the press, the stage, literature, and 
advertisements. 

"I believe the time is now when the Church 
is ready to concede that it cannot alone influence 
the masses morally, and that the cause of 
religion will be advanced if the State will undertake 
non-sectarian work in the field of ethics." 



Mr. Talmage says:— "I was opposed to overhauling 
the old creed at all, but now that it has 
been lifted up, and its imperfections set up in 
the sight of the world, I say overboard with it, 
and make a new creed. There are to-day in 
our denomination five hundred men who could 
make a better one. I could make a better one 
myself." 



page 142 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1401 :page 142 

OUR HOUSE OF MANY MANSIONS. 



LESSON VI., MAY 8, PSALM 84:1-12. 

Golden Text— "Blessed are they that dwell in thy 
house."— Verse 4. 

Verses 1 and 2. "How lovely are thy dwelling-places, 
O Jehovah of hosts. My soul desireth, 
yea, it longeth for the courts of the Lord: 
my heart and my flesh cry out for the living 
God." Thus every soul that hungers and thirsts 
after righteousness longs to be separated from 



the evil of this present time and to enter that 
felicitous state where under God's promised 
kingdom all things in heaven and in earth will 
praise him and have his communion, as Adam 
enjoyed it before his disobedience and fall from 
favor. Not only so, but, under the provisions 
of the New Covenant (sealed and made operative 
by the death of our Lord and Redeemer, 
by "the blood of the New Covenant"), his people, 
accepted as sons (John 1:12), become his 
tabernacles, his dwelling-places. As it is written, 
"I will dwell in them and walk in them," 
and "Ye are the temple of the living God." 
(2 Cor. 6:16; 1 Cor. 3:16.) And all such temples 
indwelt by the spirit of the truth become 
beautiful, lovely, amiable, in the eyes of all who 
have the same spirit; and thus God's children 
may now have fellowship with him through 
each other. 

Such are not only temples or tabernacles, individually, 
but the Church of Christ as a whole 
is made up of living stones in the one great Temple 
of the future— Christ Jesus himself being 

R1402 : page 142 

the chief corner-stone— the top-stone. These 
"living stones" are now being developed, fitted, 
polished, proved and selected for positions 
in the future glorious Temple of God. These 
glorious courts or dwelling-places of God will 
be transcendently grand; and for a place among 
those "overcomers," in the immediate presence 
of God and with our Redeemer— where he is 
and like him— these are indeed the things for 
which our hearts and our flesh cry out. 

Very different are these views of the dwelling-places 
of God from those generally entertained 
by Christian people, who, as they read these 
verses, will think of the ornate temples of wood 
and brick and stone in which they worship as 
the houses of God. But the Apostle declares 
not only that the truly consecrated saints are 
the living stones of God's great future temple, 
and each a miniature temple, but also that 
"The Most High dwelleth not in temples made 
with hands. "-Acts 7:48. 

Verse 3. Our common version here gives the 
inference that sparrows and swallows built their 
nests in the altars of the Tabernacle and the 
Temple. But those familiar with the care bestowed 
by the priests upon the keeping of the 
Golden Altar will readily see that no such desecration 
of the sacred precincts of "The Holy" 
would be tolerated; while the Brazen Altar in 
the Court— surrounded continually by Levites— 



upon which sacrifices were kept burning continually, 

it can be seen would be one of the last 

places for a bird to choose for a nest in which 

to rear her young. Lesser's translation is better: 

"Even as the sparrow hath found a house 

and the swallow a nest for herself, where she 

may lay her young, [so have I found] thy altars, 

O Lord of hosts, my King, my God." We 

must remember that this is a prophecy, representing 

the experiences of the head and body of 

the Lord's anointed, and not representing the 

experiences of the prophet. The rest and peace 

which the saints find in the two altars is here 

brought to our attention. The altar in the 

Court speaks of the great sacrifice for sins on 

our behalf by our great High Priest, and the 

Golden Altar in the Holy speaks not only of 

our Lord's overcoming and acceptableness to 

God, but also of our acceptableness as joint-sacrificers 

with him— acceptable through the 

merit of his sin-offering on our behalf. 

Verse 4 declares the joy of all who now or 
ever shall enjoy a place in the Father's house. 

Verse 5 portrays the journey of the consecrated 
toward that heavenly home. 

Verse 6 represents this present time of conflict 
and disappointment and sorrow— "the valley 
of the shadow of death," in which, nevertheless, 
the holy ones may sing for joy and rejoice 
evermore. "Passing through the valley 
of weeping, they will change it to a spring: 
also the early rain covereth it with blessings." 
The most dreary place and condition is made 
cheerful and endurable by the presence of those 
in whom God dwells by his spirit of truth and 
love. Not only is it blessed to such themselves, 
but also to all who come in contact with them 
comes a blessing. The early rain represents the 
Pentecostal blessing which followed the presentation 
of the great Sin-offering on our behalf 

R1402 : page 143 

—upon the Church. The latter rain will 
be the outpouring of the Millennial blessing 
after the great time of trouble is ended, at the 
second advent. 

Verse 7. Here the progressiveness of the 
journey is shown, and the fact that it is an individual 
work and not a congregational or sectarian 
one. 

Verses 10 to 12. "For better is a day in 
thy courts than a thousand [elsewhere]: I would 
rather choose to wait at the threshold of the 
house of my God than to dwell in the tents of 
wickedness." Here the saint is represented as 



waiting during the present life for admission to 
"the Father's house," and having here no rest 
no home. Yet even here, to such, "The Lord 
God is a sun and shield." As our sun he enlightens 
us and fills us with a sense of his greatness 
and perfection, and yet through Christ he 
is also our shield. After realizing the divine 
perfection from the divine law we might indeed 
feel that in our own imperfection it would be a 
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living 
God. But whilst showing us the perfectness 
of his law he reveals to us the shield which he 
has provided because of our present weakness— 
the merit of Christ our Redeemer freely imputed 
to all who will accept it as their covering 
or shield. To such as long for his courts and 
who wait at his threshold and who trust in him 
as both their sun and shield, even now "the 
Lord will give favor and honor [as his children 
—even though mixed with tribulation, working 
patience, etc.], and no good thing [nothing 
really advantageous to such and useful to fit 
them for the Father's house] will he withhold 
from them that walk in uprightness in this way." 
Yea, verily— "O Lord of hosts, blessed the man 
[both now and forever] who trusteth in thee." 

R1402 : page 143 

PRAISE YE THE LORD. 



LESSON VII., MAY 15, PSALM 103. 

Golden Text— "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget 
not all his benefits."— Verse 2. 

Verses 1 to 5. In the beginning of a Christian's 
experience fear more than love, alas, too 
often, has the chief control of his heart and lips. 
And this because of a false theology, taught 
him from earliest infancy, even in nursery 
rhymes impressing upon the simple mind 
theories which, while denominating God the 
very essence of Love, paint his character and 
plans as the most atrocious conceivable, and 
wrest the Scripture "parables and dark sayings" 
to their support. In this early stage of 
general Christian experience, therefore, fear, 
and not a heart full of love leads to worship. 
This fact is noted by the prophet— Isa. 29:13. 

The bondage of fear in many instances fails 
to hold the penitent or to draw him near to the 
Lord, and consequently we frequently hear expressions 
similar to those of the old familiar 



hymn— "Where is the blessedness I knew 
When first I saw the Lord? 
Where is the soul-reviving view 
Of Jesus and his Word?" 

Some, however, in spite of all their false ideas, 
learn in their hearts what they are much slower 
to learn with their heads, that "God is Love." 
They drink in the spirit of the Scriptural teaching 
even when, misled by misinterpretations and 
twistings, they think that the letter of God's 
Word is in opposition. Their hearts are better 
than their theology or their heads. 

Such, and still more especially those whose 
heads as well as their hearts are illuminated by 
the grace of our God, reach as a development 
this higher state of Christian experience indicated 
by the prophet in the verses under consideration. 
They reach the place where acquaintance 
with and appreciation of the Lord 
cast out all fear, and where their whole being 
loves and praises and desires to serve the grand 
one who is so worthy. 

Such do not generalize too much God's favors: 
they particularize. And naturally and 
properly (verses 3 and 4) the first item for 
praise is the redeeming love through the sacrifice 
of his son as the propitiation (i.e., satisfaction) 
for our sins, which has forgiven our iniquities, 
healed our diseases, and redeemed our 
lives from destruction. "Hallelujah! What a 
Savior!" Not that this is all done for us yet. 
No; only by faith can we reckon it as done. 
But God has begun the good work, the sacrifice 
for our sins was paid on Calvary, and shortly 
we shall be presented before the Father blameless 
and unreprovable, without any of our present 
mental, moral and physical diseases and 
weaknesses, and in the full possession of the 
new life and the new resurrection bodies. 

Verses 6 to 10. Having expressed the sentiments 
and attitude of the saints, the prophet 
next turns to the people in general— the half-hearted 
Christians as well as the worldly— and 
declares (verse 6) that God is on the side of 
justice and makes the cause of the weak and 
oppressed ones his cause. He declares (verse 7) 
that this was fully illustrated in the laws 
which he promulgated through Moses and in 
his dealings with Israel, including their deliverance 
from the task -masters of Egypt. And all 
these show (verse 8) God's general goodness 
and sympathy and compassion. 

Verse 9. Yet none must presume upon God's 
love and mercy, and trample upon his laws; 
for although slow to anger and plenteous in 



R1402 : page 144 

mercy, "He will not always chide [contend 
with the wayward] neither will he keep [i.e., 
retain or hold back] his anger forever." 

Verse 10. What chastisements he has so far 
given are not to be esteemed as the full penalty 
for our sins. He has been holding back the 
full penalty in mercy according to his provision 
in Christ. So far "He hath not dealt 
with us according to [the just desert of] our 
sins, nor rewarded us according as our iniquities 
deserved" under his own law. But we 
must not suppose, therefore, that he will never 
execute that law which declares that death is 
the full penalty for full wilful sin. The Lord 
through the Apostle Peter declares this same 
truth, that thus far he has held back the full 
penalty, because willing that all should come 
to a full appreciation of the truth, and by acceptance 
of it be saved from the full penalty 
of wilful sin. -2 Pet. 3:7-10; Acts 3:23; 
Heb. 10:26-30. 

R1403 : page 144 

Verses 11 to 18. But the Lord, in thus threatening 
the wilfully wicked, does not wish to 
awaken dread in the hearts of those who do 
love him and seek to know and to do his will. 
Hence when these find that their lives are imperfect, 
much as they desired and endeavored 
to have them otherwise, they are not to be in 
fear of the "wrath" and "vengeance" which are 
to be let loose upon wilful sinners in due time. 
Ah, no! God considereth our frame; he knows 
our weakness, and as the Apostle declares, we 
shall be saved from wrath through Him (Christ, 
our Redeemer). Toward all such as love and 
reverence him, and who are in covenant relations 
with him, and hence under the blood of 
the new covenant, God's compassion is far beyond 
that of an earthly parent. As high as 
the heaven is above the earth, so great is his 
love for such, and as far as the east is from the 
west, he has removed their transgression— laying 
our sins upon his own spotless Lamb, our 
Redeemer, and imputing his purity to all who 
will accept it, as in due time this gift of love 
is testified to all. And not only does God's 
blessing rest upon these his "saints," but in 
some degree it follows even to their children. 

Verses 19 to 21. Here prophetically the reference 
is to that great kingdom for which we 
pray, "Thy kingdom come." In it the angels 
(messengers) and ministers (servants) of God 



will fully carry out his great plan, his goodness 
to all, showing mercy unto thousands of 
those who love and obey him, and executing 
also the judgments written (destruction— not 
everlasting torments, the judgments which some 
have imagined, but which would be in violation 
of the things written) upon those who 
treasure up unto themselves wrath against the 
day of wrath and perdition of ungodly men. 

Verse 22. Then, with a clean universe, after 
the close of the Millennial age, all God's works 
in all places of his dominion will praise and 
honor him. And all who are in full accord 
with the great divine plan can even now in advance 
hail that grand, gracious time with joy 
and exclaim, "Bless the Lord, O my soul!" 

R1403 : page 144 

QUARTERLY TEMPERANCE LESSON. 



LESSON VIII., MAY 22, DANIEL 1:8-21. 

Golden Text— "Daniel purposed in his heart that he 
would not defile himself with the portion of the king's 
meat, nor with the wine which he drank." 

The scrap of history furnished us in this lesson 
teaches a most excellent lesson in favor of 
total abstinence from intoxicants. The immense 
injury that has come to the weak, fallen 
human family through the evil of drunkenness 
cannot be stated; and indeed it is so apparent 
to conscientious people that a statement would 
be needless. All who love their fellow-creatures 
as themselves will gladly deny themselves 
liberties which to others less strong would surely 
be injurious. 



R1403 : page 144 
CONSECRATION TO A WORK. 



The following, clipped from the "National 
S.S. Teacher," well illustrates what we have 
sometimes stated, namely, that the word consecration 
is given only a limited meaning by the 
majority of Christians— that to these it means 
consecration to a self-imposed or sect-imposed 
work, rather than a full giving up of their all TO 



GOD, to seek, to learn and to do his will regardless 
of party, sect or self. The clipping reads:— 

"By consecration is meant such devotion to 
any given line of Christian work as will secure 
oneness of aim and effort. It is fundamental 
to success. No S.S. teacher can hope to be a 
winner of souls without it. Pupils can easily 
perceive the difference between the teacher who 
is consecrated to his work and one who is not. 
After all it is the key to the situation. What 
we as teachers need above all things else is 
thorough consecration to our work. But let 
us remember that God alone can consecrate. 
We can dedicate ourselves to his work and then 
await his consecration. Have we taken the 
preliminary steps. I have in mind a teacher 
who was eminently successful in winning souls 
to Christ. Some envied her, others praised 
her and wondered at the secret of her success. 
It is all summed up in one word— consecration." 



page 146 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1404 : page 146 

PROVIDING FOR COLPORTEURS' EXPENSES. 



"GO YE ALSO INTO THE VINEYARD. 



During the Colporteurs' Meetings which followed 
the regular meetings of the recent Convention, 
some of the older and more experienced 
Colporteurs made the suggestion that hereafter 
all colporteurs be authorized to sell the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series of books at Thirty-five 
cents per volume, or three volumes for One 
Dollar— explaining to any who might notice 
and inquire, that the books could be had at 
Twenty-five cents each if they chose to send to 
the Allegheny office; but that the Colporteurs 
are allowed to charge the ten cents to cover 
their additional expense connected with delivering 
the books. With the consent of the office 
several had tried the higher price plan and the 
results had been highly satisfactory: they had 
sold about as many as at Twenty-five cents. 

The object of the suggestion on the part of 
those proposing the higher price was not money-getting, 
but a desire to forward the work. 
While they are able to meet their traveling and 
living expenses and a little more at twenty-five 

R1405 : page 146 

cents, they well know that many others cannot 
do so on account of being less successful salesmen, 
or of having encumbrances in the way of 
family duties and expenses. Indeed, the plan 
proposed is that all who can do so shall return 
to the Lord's treasury all that can be spared 
from their actual expenses, that it may assist 
in the general work of spreading the Truth, to 
which all of our lives are consecrated. 

We requested all the Colporteurs present at 
the meeting to make a trial of the Thirty-five 
cent rate for one week, and then to report their 
success or failure. And the reports turned in 
confirm the view of the suggesters, that the additional 
ten cents will be no hindrance; but 
that people concede that a book of 350 pages 
on good paper is cheap at 35 cents— or over 
1100 pages for $1.00. As a consequence we 



have decided on this change. 

There are at present about forty Colporteurs, 
and we trust that the new price will soon double 
the number; for quite a number who started 
and were unable to fully meet expenses, and who 
got deeply in debt to the Tract Society at the 
twenty-five cent rate, will now be able to meet 
their expenses and perhaps a little more. Thus 
the cause of the Lord will, we trust, be prospered 
by the new arrangement. It is not the 
thought to attract worldly people into the work 
of selling Dawn. We desire only such as engage 
in the work as ministers of the gospel, 
and from the conviction that what they are 
presenting is the Truth, and in no other manner 
can they so fully and faithfully serve the 
Lord and his people. We do not know of 
one now in the colporteur work merely as a 
business: all are doing what they can as unto 
the Lord. We know of several who could earn 
nearly or quite a thousand dollars a year in 
other occupations, who gladly give their all for 
the Truth for the mere necessities of food and 
clothing; and one at present getting two thousand 
dollars a year is about to leave it and engage 
his time and talents in the Lord's service. 
He has already tried it and finds that he can 
make expenses, and seeks nothing more. 

COLPORTEURS' RATES ON MILLENNIAL DAWN 
IN PAPER COVERS. 

Single copies delivered by colporteurs, 35 cents. 
Three " " " " $1.00. 



Single copies by mail from the office, 25 cents. 

Five (or multiples of five, 10, 20, 40, 
etc.) copies of any one volume by mail, 
post-paid to one address, each, ... 15 " 

Five copies or more of any volume by 
express or freight at colporteur's charges, 12-1/2 " 

As a result of this arrangement we hope soon 
to hear of many ready and glad to give all their 
time to the work. The Master, the Chief 
Reaper, saith, "He that reapeth receiveth wages 
and gathereth fruit unto everlasting life." 



The DAWNS in the German language are now 
under the full control of Brother Zech, and all 
orders for them should be addressed to— 
Otto von Zech, Euclid Ave., Allegheny, Pa. 



R1403 : page 147 

VOL. XIII. MAY 15, 1892. NO. 10. 

"THE GLORY THAT EXCELLETH." 



"For if the ministry of condemnation be glory, much 
more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in 
glory; for that which was made glorious had no glory in 
this respect by reason of the glory that excelleth."— 
2 Cor. 3:9,10. 

The Apostle is here contrasting the two covenants 
—the law covenant, which ministered 
only condemnation to death to those under it; 
and the new covenant in Christ, which ministers 
righteousness, the imputed righteousness of 
Christ, or justification to all who by faith in 
Christ come under its gracious provisions. 
And while he points us to the superior glory of 
the new covenant, which glory is as yet only 
apprehended by faith, he reminds us of the glory 
of the old covenant, and calls attention to the 
typical character of that glory. 

In referring to the law covenant as the ministration 
of death and as less glorious than the 
new covenant, it is not the Apostle's object to 
underrate the truly glorious character of that 
covenant; nor does his language, when properly 
understood, do so. Let the reader call to 
mind his noble defense of that covenant and 
of the righteous law upon which it was based, 
when he said, "The law is holy, and the commandment 
[to obey it, and to expect its reward 
of life for such obedience, is] holy and just and 
good." (Rom. 7:12.) There was nothing wrong 
with the holy, just and good law of God: it 
was a law "ordained unto life." (Verse 10.) 
Its object was to grant life to all its obedient 
subjects. And God's first covenant or promise 
of life on condition of obedience was sure 
to all the obedient. But nevertheless, says the 
Apostle, this law, though it was "ordained unto 
life" proved "to be unto death." (Verse 10.) 
Why? how is this? It is because of our inability, 
as a fallen race, to keep that law, no 
matter how sincerely and earnestly we endeavor 
to keep it. We have inherited from our fallen 
parents mental, moral and physical infirmities 
which incapacitate us from keeping that law, 
which, to a perfect man, would be easy and 
natural. All that we imperfect men and women 



can now do is to strive against the increasingly 
downward tendencies of the fallen nature and 
to press painfully forward toward that perfect 
standard of character which the law of God 
requires. 

But even though we do thus strive against 
sin and press toward perfection, there is no 
promise of life for the striving. The covenant 
or promise of life is only for actual conformity, 
without the slightest deflection for a single 
instant, from the very dawn of existence and 
forever. This was the covenant made with 
Adam in Eden, and the very first small act of 
disobedience forfeited the covenanted blessing 
of life: and from that moment forward the dying 
man and his dying posterity were incapable 
in their dying condition of obeying that law. 
Hence that law which was "ordained unto 
life" (whose principles are not only worthy of 
life, but are absolutely necessary to life and 
happiness) proved, after the fall, to be "unto 
death," because no man was able to comply 
with its covenanted conditions of life. Then, 

R1403 : page 148 

as the result of sin, the negative side only of the 
covenant came into force: Because Adam (who 
was originally able to keep inviolate the law of 
God then inscribed in his nature) had forfeited 
the blessings affirmed on condition of obedience, 
he and the race represented in him came 
under its negative provision of death, the absence 
of life. 

Since the whole race was thus involved in sin 
and brought under the negative provision of 
the first covenant, which provision was unto 
death, if God would ever again offer them life, 
it must be under some new covenant whose 
prescribed conditions man could fulfil. Such 
a covenant Israel, not discerning the philosophy 
of God's plan, thought they had. Theirs, however, 
was not a new covenant: it was the very 
same that was made with Adam in Eden— a 
promise of eternal life on condition of perfect 
and continuous obedience to God's perfect law. 
It was given to Israel on tables of stone; but 
it was given to Adam written on the fleshly tablet 
of the heart: in other words, his was a law-inscribed 
nature. Adam could have kept that 
law, but Israel could not; and its presentation to 
Israel on tables of stone, with the promise of 
life if they should keep it, was not with any 
expectation on God's part that they could keep 
it, though he knew they would try to do so, 
and many of them made commendable progress. 



It was merely to convince them that they could 
not do it, and thus to prepare them to accept 
the favor of life upon new conditions, which 
God afterward would provide— viz., the conditions 
of a new covenant. "The law was a 
schoolmaster to bring them to Christ." 

The making of a new covenant with man was 
a legal impossibility while yet, under the negative 
provision of the first covenant, he was still 
condemned to death. He must be released 

R1404 : page 148 

from that condemnation before anything could 

be granted to him. Such a release, he in his completely 

bankrupt condition, and under the just 

sentence of death, was utterly unable to secure; 

and no man could by any means redeem his 

brother or give to God a ransom for his soul, 

because all were under the same condemnation. 

Thus we see that man's first probation ended 

when the old Edenic covenant passed away, 

leaving him under its condemnation to death. 

And since he could not be under condemnation 

and on probation at the same time, there 

must be both a legal release from the condemnation 

of the old covenant and the establishment 

of a new covenant before a new probation 

or trial could be instituted. The former was 

accomplished by the sacrificial death of Christ, 

our Redeemer; and the latter will be granted 

to the world in general in the Millennial age. 

But to a select few, the Church, it is granted 

in the present Gospel age. God devised and 

executed the wonderful plan for our deliverance: 

he sent his only begotten Son, who redeemed 

us from death by the sacrifice of himself 

—who "gave his flesh [his human existence] 

for the life of the world," and who was raised 

again— not as a man, because he had sacrificed 

his human nature for our redemption, but as a 

spirit being, of the divine nature, henceforth to 

be unto us a merciful high priest who, having 

redeemed us by his blood, might afterward by 

his life and teachings lead us back to harmony 

with God, and to the original likeness to him. 

The release from condemnation having been 
thus provided for all who desire to accept it 
(for God will not force his favors upon any 
who do not appreciate or desire them), God 
now makes a new covenant with all who still 
love his law and desire to keep it. This new 
covenant is based still upon that same inflexible 
and gloriously perfect law whose integrity 
can never be impeached nor its force abated, 
but it contains a promise which exactly meets 



the conditions of our case. Having shown us 
that we cannot, in our fallen condition, fully 
obey his law, and that we are all condemned to 
death by it, but that provision has been made 
for our release from that condemnation and for 
a return to divine favor and life through Christ, 
God now covenants with all such who are at 
heart loyal to his law, and who are therefore 
trying to the best of their ability to keep it, to 
give them life on the simple condition of faith 
in Christ and continued loyalty to truth and 
righteousness. 

Glorious covenant! how perfectly it fits our 
case. "For what the law [covenant] could not 
do, in that it was weak through the flesh [because 

R1404 : page 149 

of the infirmities of our flesh on account 
of sin], God, sending his own Son in the likeness 
of sinful flesh [the human likeness], and 
for sin, condemned sin in the flesh [condemned 
the sin to an overthrow], that the righteousness 
of the law might be fulfilled in us who walk not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit. For they 
that are after the flesh [who have no ambition 
to keep the law of God, but simply try to please 
the flesh— the fallen, unregenerate nature] do 
mind [observe and follow] the things of the 
flesh; but they that are after the spirit [who 
desire and endeavor to cultivate in themselves 
the spirit of God], mind [observe and follow] 
the things of the spirit. To be [thus] carnally 
minded is death [Those so minded are still under 
condemnation— unjustified]; but to be spiritually 
minded is life and peace."— Rom. 8:3-6. 

While we are thus shown the blessed provision 
of the new covenant for the infirmities of 
our flesh, the fact is here made very clear that 
faith in Christ will profit nothing except to 
those who love God's law and who desire and 
endeavor to keep it, and who yet, realizing and 
acknowledging their short-comings, humbly 
claim the promised boon of life as the gift of 
God's bounty, through Jesus Christ, our Redeemer 
and Lord, whose righteousness, imputed 
to us by faith, makes up for our deficiency. 
Thanks be unto God, who giveth us this great 
victory over death and over the downward 
tendencies of our fallen nature, through Jesus 
Christ, our Lord. 

It will be observed that these two covenants 
are really one in substance and purpose; and 
that the only difference existing between them 
is in the special provision of the new covenant 
which releases man from the condemnation incurred 



under the old, and enables him to fulfil 
its righteous conditions by proxy (through 
Christ) in so far as he is unable to fulfil them 
actually and personally. 

The old covenant required perfect obedience 
to the fullest extent, as our Lord explained it 
(See Matt. 5:21,22,27,28), but the new covenant 
makes allowance for all the slips occasioned 
by our imperfections and takes cognizance 
of our efforts to discern and follow its 
spirit— its general disposition— while Christ our 
Redeemer makes up for our deficiencies, our 
faith in him being counted to us for righteousness 
—for full obedience to the perfect law. 
And it was with reference to this difference that 
the Apostle wrote (2 Cor. 3:6): "God hath 
made us able ministers of the new covenant, 
not of the letter, but of the spirit; for the letter 
[the absolute, strict, personal conformity to 
every jot and tittle of the law, as required under 
the old covenant] killeth, but the spirit 
[the manifest disposition to obey the law, and 
the acceptance of the righteousness of Christ 
to supplement our deficiency— the conditions 
of the new covenant] giveth life." 

This expression of the Apostle has been greatly 
abused by some who wish to have this understood 
as a general principle laid down by the 
Apostle for the interpretation of the Scriptures. 
Wishing to put various fanciful interpretations 
on the Word of God, different from its plain 
and obvious meaning, they call the former the 
spirit of the Word, while the real meaning of 
the Scriptures they thus characterize as "the 
letter which killeth." Very reckless, if not indeed 
deceitful, handling of the Word of God 
is this, and very far indeed from the Apostle's 
thought. Let the true sheep beware of all such 
false teachers who thus open wide the flood-gates 
of error and endeavor to swamp the 
Church in human philosophies and sophistries. 

It was that old covenant of absolutely perfect 
obedience to the very letter— to every jot and 
tittle of the law of God— that killed every 
man who came under its conditions, except the 
one perfect man— "the man Christ Jesus." To 
him alone was it a ministration of life. Under 
it he stood approved of God, and his willing 
sacrifice of the life to which he was thus proved 
worthy was therefore accepted by God as our 
ransom-price. But the new covenant, which 
requires only that we have the spirit or disposition 
of Christ with reference to God and his 
law, giveth life: "Now the Lord is that spirit" 
(2 Cor. 3:17)— he is a manifestation or pattern 
to us of the spirit or disposition which we 



should have toward God's law. We should 
love it as he loved it (Psa. 1 19:97); we should 
study and endeavor to conform to it as he did; 
and we should glory in it and by word and example 

R1404 : page 150 

teach it to others as he did. And in 
whatever heart this spirit of the Lord dwells 
together with the same trustful faith which he 
manifested in Jehovah's covenants, there indeed 
is liberty from the condemnation of the 
old covenant under which all the rest of the 
race still rest through Adam's transgression. 

Such is our favored condition, beloved household 
of faith. But let us observe particularly 
the glory of this divine covenant. When the 
old covenant was given to Israel, written on 
tables of stone, there were great manifestations 
of supernatural glory: A cloud enveloped the 
mountain where the presence of God was manifested; 
and there were thunderings and lightenings 
and the voice of a trumpet, and the 
mountain quaked.— Exod. 19. 

And when Moses came down from the mountain 
the skin of his face shone so that Israel 
could not behold him without a veil between. 
Such was the glory of that first covenant, which 
proved to be only a ministration of death. 
But the Apostle gives us to understand that 
that glory was only a typical representation of 
the greater glory of the new covenant— the 
glory that excelleth. That glory we may now 
behold by faith; but let us not, like Israel, put 
a vail before it, so that we cannot see it; for 
we all with open (unveiled) faces may behold 
in the mirror of God's Word the glory of the 
Lord as revealed in this new covenant. And 
as we thus behold his glory— the glory of his 
majesty and wisdom and power and love and 
grace— we ourselves shall be changed, transformed, 
into the same image from glory to glory, 
even as by the Spirit of the Lord.— Verse 18. 



R1406 : page 150 

JOURNALISTIC RESPONSIBILITY. 



The following letter, addressed to a certain 
journal which sets before its readers a medley of 
conflicting doctrines, is well worthy of notice; 
and the same remarks would apply to many 



more which evidently are not called of God to 
any such service. Our Lord said, "If ye continue 
in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed. 
And ye shall know the truth, and the 
truth shall make you free" (John 8:31,32). 
And we have no commission to set before the 
household of faith anything which we do not 
believe to be truth. "If the trumpet give an 
uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for 
the battle?" The letter is as follows:— 

"Dear Brother— The enclosed I clipped recently 
from your journal. Gladly would I help 
spread the truth of God, gladly shed light upon 
the path of those who are in darkness; but 
really, my brother, it seems to me your readers 
would hardly know what to believe, so varied 
are the theories set before them. And I ask 
you in all candor, Is such an array of doctrine 
conducive to stability of faith, or to leading 
the unsettled into the truth? Is it not rather 
calculated to drive them farther into skepticism 
and doubt, until they make final shipwreck amid 
the breakers of error or upon the rocks of infidelity? 
My own experience leads me to think 
it is. Conflicting theories, boldly advocated, 
came near driving me to doubt everything; but 
grace triumphed and I was led to the rock 
foundation of harmony which does exist in the 
Word of God despite the efforts of men, whether 
put forth with evil or good intentions, to cause 
the world to think otherwise. 

"I was much impressed with an article in the 
first number sent me, with the following title, 
'What do we Believe?' You declared yourself 
to be in the position of Paul, only on a very 
different subject, when he partly believed. In 
short, you acknowledged yourself 'unsettled on 
a good many points.' You say 'you are just foolish 
enough to investigate, and for that reason 
are at present a little agitated, but if there is a 
God in Israel, you believe you will be rooted 
and grounded in the faith.' Surely there is a 
God in Israel, and may he grant you to be 
rooted and grounded in the truth; for he has 
declared by the mouth of the great apostle that 
he 'hath from the beginning chosen us to salvation 

R1407 : page 150 

through sanctification of the Spirit, and 
belief of the truth,' thereby showing that belief 
of the truth is a necessary qualification for 
salvation. He then goes on, by the mouth of 
the same apostle, to exhort the Thessalonians— 
and he exhorts us as well— to 'stand fast and 
hold the traditions which they had been taught, 



whether by word (of the blessed Master) or our 
epistle.' 

"I know there are many in these days who 
think it of little consequence what one believes, 

R1407 :page 151 

if he is only sincere. It seems to me 
the first words of Paul above quoted would 
dispel that delusion of the adversary, and the 
second quotation should cause every one to see 
to it that the traditions they hold were given 
of God and not of men. We have a sure 
foundation given in the Word of God, upon 
which every doctrine must rest if it be of him, 
that of 'the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ 
himself being the chief corner-stone.' I would 
I might see you settled in the truth, and your 
little sheet advocating the same, instead of 
printing the medley of conflicting theories it 
now does. It is a positive fact they cannot all 
be truth; some of them must be errors, and we 
know, according to the Word, that the teaching 
of error overthrew the faith of some in 
Paul's day. Is it likely to do any different now? 

"Now, my brother, in Christian love, but 
also in candor, I can only say I fear it is not 
for the good of the cause of God to present 
matters thus. I wish you could look at it in a 
different light, then study the Word by the aid 
of the holy Spirit to lead you into the truth, 
and then use printer's ink, and writer's ink, for 
its dissemination. Then bear in mind that no 
scripture is to be taken by itself: that spiritual 
things are to be compared with spiritual. I 
pray you to be settled in the truth. Could I 
be of any service in the accomplishment of this 
object, I would be glad to render aid, but I 
pray God to lead you and that you may be 
willing to be led of him. Yours in the bonds 
of faith in Christ, MRS. 



O! THE DEPTH OF DIVINE WISDOM! 



"I would not choose the garden fair 

Which lieth full in view, 
All square and trim with faultless beds 

Of scarlet edged with blue. 
I love to wander unobserved 

Through many a leafy nook, 
And where the fragrant woodbine path 

Winds downward to the brook, 



With flowers in ambush, shy and sweet, 
Awaiting my returning feet. 

"Old ocean, too, would lose her charm 

Could I her depths explore, 
Or with a powerful telescope 

Discern her farther shore. 
I love the boundless mystery, 

The tireless ebb and flow, 
I love the wondrous history 

That hideth deep below: 
If all her secrets she should tell 
Old ocean would not please me well. 

"My friends were less my friends, I trow, 

If I could once suppose 
They had no yearnings high and strong 

They ne'er to me disclose. 
Kind, truthful tones of trust (regard 

Implied, yet not expressed) 
We hold the longest in our hearts, 

And value most and best; 
For, where the floods are swift and great, 
The waters sometimes will abate. 

"And shall I love thee less, my God, 

Because in thee I find 
A majesty outstripping far 

The finite human mind? 
Nay, rather, while for all thy grace 

I bless thee and adore, 
Because thy name is 'Wonderful,' 

I praise thee even more. 
This word within my heart I keep— 
'Thy judgments are a mighty deep.'" 
—Selected. 



R1405 :page 151 

THE EPISTLE OF JAMES. 



"James, a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, 
greeting."— James 1:1. 

It will be observed by the careful reader that 
this epistle, unlike any of the other apostolic 
epistles, is addressed, not to the Church, the 
sanctified in Christ Jesus, but to the twelve 
tribes of Israel scattered abroad. And from the 
incentive to patience held out in Chapter 5:8,9 
—viz., that "the presence [Greek, parousia] 



of the Lord has approached," and "Behold, 
the Judge is standing before the door"— we see 
that its special application is to the present day, 
the day of the Lord's presence as judge. 
Since he did not come as judge at his first advent 
(John 12:47), the reference is manifestly 
to his second advent. 
Notice too, that these are recognized by the 

R1405 :page 152 

apostle as brethren of the household of faith. 
(1:2,3.) So while this epistle is addressed to 
the twelve tribes scattered abroad, it is thus restricted 
to those who are also of the household 
of faith, who still have faith in the prophecies 
and who are getting their eyes open to see in 
Jesus the promised Messiah and Deliverer. We 
recognize it therefore, as a special message to 
those of scattered Israel in this day of the Lord's 
presence, from whom blindness is being and will 
be turned away, and who are coming to recognize 
the Lord Jesus as the promised Messiah. 

This thought calls to mind the words of the 
prophet Isaiah: "Comfort ye, comfort ye my 
people, saith your God. Speak ye comfortably to 
Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her appointed 
time is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned; 
for she hath received of the Lord's 
hand double for all her sins." (Chap. 40:1,2— 
see margin.) We have seen that Israel's double 
of chastisement was fully accomplished in the 
year 1878. (See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., 
page 232.) And since that time we have also 
seen a marked beginning and a gradual progress 
of the turning away of blindness from fleshly 
Israel. How characteristic it is of the Lord, 
that he should have a word of recognition and 
comfort recorded for those chastened and returning 
ones at this time, whom he is now 
ready to recognize by the old familiar term, 
"My people!" 

Observe now the character of the epistle. 
First of all it recognizes the fact of Israel's great 
trials* of faith and patience as now experienced 
in the special persecutions and hardships which, 
though they regard them as calamities and with 
fearful forebodings of greater trouble, are really 
working together for good to them in driving 
many of them back to the land of promise and 
preparing them for the blessings God is shortly 
to bring to them. And then it bids them rejoice 
even on these tribulations, and exhorts to 
patience, faith and stability of character and to 
dependence in God for wisdom— for further enlightenment 
concerning his plan, which he assures 



them they shall have if they ask in faith. 
-Chap. 1:1-8. 

Verses 9-11 strike first thing at their prominent 
national greed for gain, exhorting them to 
learn to rejoice in those principles of righteousness 
which are destined to equalize the conditions 
of men, by humbling the rich and mighty 
and exalting the meek and humble; and showing 
how the rich man, as such, must pass away 
in the great leveling process of this day of the 
Lord. 

Verses 12-15 trace the inevitable course of 
unrighteousness— how that lust, undue desire of 
any kind, brings forth sin, and sin when finished 
brings forth death. Therefore, "Blessed 
is the man that endureth trial [who does not 
follow the course of the depraved desires]; for 
when he is tried [i.e., when his trial is over], 
he will receive the crown of life which the Lord 
hath promised to them that love him"— the 
everlasting life provided for all mankind who 
will accept it on God's conditions. 

Verses 16-18 teach that though God is permitting 
persecution and trial to come upon his 
ancient people and will make them work together 
for good to them, yet they must not err in attributing 
these things to God. (Verses 16,13.) 
Only the good gifts come from God: such, for 
instance, as the truth whereby you are now begotten; 
for know ye not that Israel is to be a 
kind of first fruits unto God of his creatures? 
Mark the expression a kind of first fruits. The 
very first fruit of God's plan is the glorified 
Christ (Rev. 14:4), and Israel is not first in this 
sense, but is to be the first-fruits unto God of 
the nations. 

Verses 19-25 are most appropriate words of 
counsel in view of these things: "Wherefore, 
my beloved brethren [of Israel, and of the household 
of faith], let every man [of you] be swift 
to hear [the truth of God], slow to speak, [his 
own opinions, and] slow to wrath [Let him not 
waste his time in wrathful denunciations, etc., 
against the persecuting powers; but in the midst 
of it all let him humbly and thankfully recognize 
the hand of Providence which is about to 
work out such a deliverance as Israel never knew 
before— Jer. 16:14,15]; for man's anger does 
not work out God's righteousness." 

"Therefore, discarding all impurity and overflowing 
malice, embrace with meekness the implanted 



*The word rendered temptations in verse 2 should be 
trials, as in the Emphatic Diaglott. 



R1405 : page 153 

word which is able to save your souls. 

But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, 

deceiving yourselves; for if any be a hearer of 

the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man 

beholding his natural face in a glass; for he beholdeth 

himself and goeth his way and straightway 

forgetteth what manner of man he was. 

But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, 

and continueth therein, he, being not a forgetful 

hearer, but a doer of the work, this man 

shall be blessed in his deed." 

Verses 26 and 27 show the kind of character 
and disposition which pure religion or piety 
must necessarily manifest, viz., a character which 
refuses to be contaminated by worldly ideas and 
practices, and which takes delight in doing good. 
And if any man have not such a disposition, 
and the unbridled use of his tongue manifests 
the very reverse, a profession of piety on his 
part is vain and a mere self-deception. 

CHAPTER II. Verses 1-9 counsel humility 
and condescension to men of low estate 
rather than preferment of the rich, which respect 
to persons is a violation of that commandment 
of the law, to love our neighbors as ourselves. 
Verse 5 points to the fact of God's choice of 
some of the poor of this world to be exalted as 
heirs of the Millennial Kingdom. 

R1406 : page 153 

Verses 10-13 counsel charity and leniency in 
any judgment of fellow-men, in consideration 
of the weakness common to all, showing that if 
they are going to exact perfection of their fellows, 
that is, if they are going to judge them by 
the strict law of God, they also will be condemned 
under the same law. 

Verses 14-26 show that works of righteousness 
must follow a true faith, that they are inseparably 
linked, and that a faith which does 
not so manifest itself is dead. 

CHAPTER III. shows that as not many are 
qualified to be teachers, or expounders of divine 
truth, and in view of the responsibility of 
such to God, none should undertake it who are 
not so qualified of God. "Do not many of 
you become teachers, my brethren, knowing 
that [by so doing] we shall receive a severer 
judgment [trial]." The position of a public 
teacher or expounder of divine truth, while it 
is one of privilege, is one that must be held with 
meekness and sobriety, and when faithfully 



filled involves both labor and sacrifice. But if 

one assumes to become a teacher and permits his 

tongue to run at random according to his own 

imperfect will instead of the will of God, who 

can tell the extent of damage it may do in overthrowing 

the faith of many and in establishing 

error and beclouding the truth? But (verses 13-16) 

"Is any one wise and endued with 

knowledge among you, let him by honorable 

conduct show his works with meekness of wisdom. 

But if ye have bitter envying and strife 

in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against 

the truth. This [kind of] wisdom descendeth 

not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish; 

for where envying and strife is, there is confusion 

and every evil work. But the wisdom from 

above is indeed first pure, then peaceable, gentle, 

easily persuaded, full of mercy and of good 

fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy. 

Now the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace 

by those who practice peace." 

CHAPTER IV. is a continuation of the exhortation 
to humility and brotherly love, and 
points out pride and selfishness and greed of gain 
as the causes of all the wars and misery of the past. 

CHAPTER V. Verses 1-6 show that great 
distress and trouble shall come upon the wealthy 
classes of the world who have long held a monopoly 
of earthly blessings. Verses 7-9 proclaim 
the great Judge at the door— "The presence 
of the Lord has approached and behold, 
the Judge standeth before the door" and his 
wrath is about to be revealed against all evil 
doers. But ye, brethren, who are on the Lord's 
side, stablish your hearts and be patient in the 
midst of the great trial which shall culminate 
in the full establishment of the kingdom of 
God, under which you, as a first fruit unto 
God of the nations, shall be first blessed. Then 
follow the special counsels of verses 10-20 encouraging 
to patient endurance and cheerfulness, 
sobriety of conduct, trust in the Lord, and 
patience and helpfulness toward stumbling or 
erring brethren, etc. 

Verse 14 also counsels their looking to the 
Lord for the healing of physical infirmities, 
and promises that the prayer of faith shall save 
the sick. This promise, we believe, has its 

R1406 : page 154 

special application in the time indicated by 
verse 9— when the Judge has arrived and the 
Times of Restitution have begun. 

In no other time, we believe, could this promise 
have had full application; for had the promise 



been intended to apply to the whole Gospel 
age, and had it been verified to all who in faith 
claimed it, many faithful souls of the past would 
still be living. It would signify nothing short of 
full restitution and everlasting life, which cannot, 
according to God's plan, be granted to any until 
the appointed "Times of Restitution" have 
come. For God to make such an engagement 
would be to frustrate his own plans. At the 
time, therefore, when this message is due to 
Israel, and when they shall begin to recognize 
it, we believe that this promise may be fully 
claimed, and that any who ask in faith may 
have life and health continually renewed and 
need never die— the restitution time having 
come and the restitution work being thus begun 
in them. In answer to the prayer of faith 
together with humble confession of sin, sickness 
will be continually rebuked throughout the 
Millennial age, and health and life will be 
granted to all the willing and obedient. 

But in order to such faith, a knowledge of 
the facts upon which the promise is conditioned 
is necessary. While we see that death still 
reigns, so that not one of the generations past 
has escaped or eluded its grasp to witness the 
truth of this promise to the present generation, 
unless we can see some qualification which limits 
it to some particular time, either present or 
future, we cannot intelligently claim the promise. 
And many who have claimed it before the 
appointed time have been greatly disappointed. 
We think now of two most remarkable instances 
of misplaced faith on this subject. One was 
a dear young brother in a neighboring city, fully 
consecrated to the Lord and leading an exemplary 
life, who was prostrated with consumption. 
He was visited by friends who encouraged 
him to claim this promise, which he did, 
refusing medical aid, and trusting to miraculous 
healing. But he died; and his last whisper was, 
"Mother, I will soon be well. God is bringing 
me down so low only to manifest his power in 
raising me up." A moment more, and all was 
over; and the faith of many went out with that 
young life. 

Another instance was that of the wife of a 
brother from whom we heard the following circumstance 
related. The lady was an amiable 
and faithful Christian woman; she trusted in 
this promise, and several of her friends prayed 
with her and trusted for her recovery; a large 
circle of those who preach faith-healing were 
interested in the case, and her husband waited 
anxiously for the turning point toward health. 
But she died; and, said her husband to the 



writer, I for a time lost all faith in the Bible. 
But afterward, said he, mastering my feelings, 
I said to myself, Perhaps the old Book may be 
true after all, if we only knew how to read it. 
And since then God has been gradually leading 
him into the truth concerning his plan. 

These instances, related to us with an inquiry 
for light on the subject, led to this re-examination 
of the epistle of James with the above 
conclusions. When we thus locate the promise 
in the appointed time, all is plain. And while 
the epistle, as a whole, is addressed specially to 
scattered and now returning Israel, which is to 
be a first fruit of the nations, and which in the 
near future will greatly need its timely counsel 
and encouragement, its wise and helpful counsels, 
warnings and promises have a general application 
to all whose hope, in common with 
the hope of fleshly Israel, is in the restitution 
to human perfection and all its attendant blessings. 
And its lessons, though recorded specially 
for the restitution class, are profitable to 
the Church as well. 

When Israel comes to an understanding of 
the plan of God, with the systematic order of 
its times and seasons, they will see that the restitution 
time has actually come and that they 
may claim its precious promises at once. And 
so may all others who intelligently and heartily 
accept the truth, except those who appreciate 
the still higher privilege of presenting their 
bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to 
God, and who, in compliance with this covenant, 
cheerfully sacrifice the human nature 
even unto death, that in due time they may receive 
the divine nature and join t-heirship with 
Christ in his kingdom. MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1407 : page 155 

JEWISH ITEMS OF INTEREST. 

THE INFLUENCE OF JEWS IN EUROPEAN AFFAIRS. 



If any one suppose that the Jews are not a 
power in Europe even outside of the money 
market, he is mistaken. In England, though 
they number only one in eight hundred of the 
population, Jews recently occupied eight seats 
in the House of Commons. Though only two 
per cent, of the population of Germany, they 
hold in the universities seventy professors' chairs. 



And of the twenty-three Liberal and Progressive 
journals in Berlin, all but three are directly 
or indirectly under Jewish control. There 
are only 40,000 Jews in Italy, but eight of them 
are members of the Chamber of Deputies. In 
France, out of a population of 37,000,000, only 
60,000 are Jews; yet, says the London "Spectator," 
"The Jews sit in the Senate, three in the 
Chamber, four in the Council of State, and two 
in the Supreme Council of Public Education. 
One Cabinet minister, M. David Raynold, is a 
Jew, and so are no less than ten chiefs of ministerial 
departments, who are probably more 
powerful than ministers. Three Prefects are 
Jews, seven Sub-Prefects, and four Inspectors 
General of Education. The same community 
furnishes two Generals of Division, three Generals 
of Brigade, four Colonels, one Judge of 
the Court of Cassation (the President) and ten 
Provincial Judges."— Presbyterian Banner. 



The change in the position of the Jew within 
the last half century is one of most remarkable 
character. Fifty years ago the Jew was 
inert and imbecile: now he exercises a greater 
power than in the days of David and Solomon. 
The Jews to-day influence more people, control 
more bullion, and exercise more legislative 
power than they did when they had their temple, 
their land, and their sceptre. They have 
been stationary for eighteen centuries, and hunted 
into obscurity: to-day they attract wider attention 
than ever before in their history. Out 
of twelve hundred students of law in Berlin, 
six hundred were Jews. The Berlin and 
other Councils are ruled by a Jewish majority, 
and all offices are in the gifts of Jews. The 
German tradesman sinks to a secondary position 
alongside his Jew competitor, the best 
squares are filled with Jew shops, the best 
estates have passed into their hands. In Germany 
they have ousted the best families from 
their patrimonial possessions. This is true of 
Holland also. The Jew is the world's chief 
banker to-day. Almost the whole of the liberal 
press of Germany is in their hands. The 
two leading papers of Rome were, and possibly 
still are, edited by Jews. The power of the 
Jewish press of the continent of Europe is very 
great in matters political, scientific, and theological. 
...As the Jew has entered the civilization 
of the age and become a part of it, 
Rabbinical Judaism has necessarily undergone 
considerable modification. Amongst multitudes 



of them in Germany, the hope of a Messiah 
has totally disappeared. A spirit of skepticism 
has laid hold of the younger generation, 
so that conviction has disappeared.. ..All 
idealism is gone, and nothing is considered to 
be useful and worthy of effort but that which 
promises material advantage— wealth, honor, 
power and enjoyment. Of two thousand shops 
kept by Jews in the city of Paris, not over a 
hundred are closed on Saturday. Of the seventy 
thousand Jews in New York City not over 
twenty-five hundred are attached to the 
synagogue. —Missionary Herald. 



One of the most remarkable facts of the 
present age is the eagerness with which the New 
Testament is being read and studied among the 
Jews. They are not only reading the book, 
each in the vernacular of the country in which 
he resides, but many of their number are studying 
it in Hebrew. It is reported that the two 
principle Hebrew versions of the work have 
had circulations exceeding that accorded to the 
most noted books of fiction, and a complete 
Hebrew commentary on the New Testament is 
one of the latest things to be announced as in 
course of publication at Leipsic. Nor is this 
the only Christian literature that has found 
ready acceptance with them. Such works as 
Bunyan's "Pilgrim's Progress" and Milton's 
"Paradise Lost" have been translated into the 
same old language and meet with ready sale. 

All this proves that the Hebrew is far from 
being the dead language most folks suppose it 
to be. The fact is, the study of it has been revived 
among the Jews in the last few years, not 
so much in this country as in the Old World, 
and it is considered probable that as many human 
beings now speak it, either purely or in 
some jargon form, as spoke it at the time of the 
Exodus, when the Jews are supposed to have 
first asserted a claim to nationality. Furthermore, 
it may be stated as probable that the 
number of Jews who are reading the New Testament 
in Hebrew exceeds that of the Christians 
who are studying the Old Testament in the 

R1407 : page 156 

same language. The Jew is not necessarily 
reading the New Testament with intent to become 

R1408 : page 156 



a Christian. He does so rather because 
the story is an important one in the history of 
the race, even though the divine origin of Christ 
may not be conceded by him. And, in fact, 
there is not a vast amount of difference between 
many of the reformed Jews and some Unitarians 
in matters of faith, though it may be remarked 
that the orthodox Hebrews are the most 
noted for containing among their numbers men 
who read the New Testament. 

Another interesting point in this connection 
is the fact that not a few students are now disposed 
to believe that the Hebrew is the parent 
of a large part of the Saxon, German and 
other tongues which belong to the same sub-family 
of languages as they do. The work by 
Dr. Rodosi, recently published, in which many 
derivations from that to them are traced, is 
deserving of more attention than has yet been 
accorded to it, being really a remarkable production, 
though not the only effort made to 
prove a connection of lineage between the old 
and the comparatively new. Probably the one 
thing which chiefly stands in the way of accepting 
the theory is the fact that it is a discarded 
one. Up to about two centuries ago it was 
generally believed that the Hebrew was the 
parent of all other languages, and the revulsion 
came when it was discovered that the Latin, 
Greek, and most other European tongues have 
a close affinity with the Sanscrit, which was the 
language of the people who invaded India perhaps 
not far from the time of the Jewish exodus 
from Egypt. It is well known to be more 
difficult to obtain assent to a truth which has 
been once discarded because mixed with much 
that is false than if it had not been in such bad 
company. Yet it may be possible to admit a 
close connection without conceding all that 
was unwisely claimed when literary men knew 
far less than they do now. 

There can be no doubt that the Jews are rising 
to a prominence to which they as a people were 
strangers through many centuries. They are 
proving their right to it in commerce, science, 
literature and art, and now the eyes of the 
whole world are turned upon them as a consequence 
of the persecution in Russia. It is at 
least in harmony with this better recognition 
by other peoples that they should study the history 
of the Christian religion as closely interwoven 
with their own. Hence they do well to 
read the New Testament, and read it, too, in 
the language of their forefathers. 
—Chicago Tribune. 



R1409 : page 156 

TO WHOM SHOULD WE PRAY? 



Maryland. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-At one of our recent 
meetings I mentioned the subject of contributing 
to the "Home and Foreign Missionary 
Fund." Although the suggestion appeared 
in the Nov. '91 TOWER, I had not heard a word 
from any of the brethren, and was greatly surprised 
to find so much indifference manifested. 

It was not until Brother A mentioned the 

subject, and wanted an explanation, that I 
thought it was time to bring the matter before 
the meeting, which accordingly I did. There 
were but ten present. All, however, except one 
brother who has no income whatever, have 
promised to give something. It was suggested, 
instead of each individual member sending his 
name and the amount contributed by him, to 
have but one general fund, and to make it a 
contribution from the Church at Baltimore; to 
which all agreed, the amount ranging from five 
to twenty-five cents per week. I have not been 
able to see all our members, and so cannot 
state definitely what the total amount will be. 
I think, however, it will aggregate fifty or 
seventy-five dollars. I wish it were more. 

[If this union plan seems to suit you better 
than the individual one, we trust, nevertheless, 
that the names of all contributors may be sent, 
that they may appear upon the Tract Society 
records. We like to know all the dear sheep 
personally as well as by groups. 

In this connection we take pleasure in telling 
the friends that the apostolic plan of laying 
by weekly according as the Lord hath prospered 
them (1 Cor. 16) is proving to be a great 

R1410 :page 156 

blessing to the givers (who write us of their joy), 
as well as in forwarding the general spread of 
the Truth to others. -MRS. R., Secretary.] 



From early childhood I had been taught to 
address my petitions to God the Father, for 
Jesus sake. In fact, it is the general custom, I 
believe, of the nominal church to pray to the 



Father in the name of Jesus. Last night, however, 

R1410 :page 157 

at the house of Brother Davis, a lady 

friend who was present made a very strong plea, 

showing that our prayers ought to be addressed 

to Jesus; that in honoring him we honor the 

Father; and that the Father is well pleased 

when we go to Jesus in prayer. Furthermore, 

he is our head, and we, as members of his body, 

are dependent upon him for our life, and all 

power is given unto him in heaven and in 

earth. He is also our ambassador, and in approaching 

the throne we ought to lay our petitions 

before Jesus— just as now, should we 

have important business with the Queen of 

England, we would not think of dealing directly, 

but would communicate through our 

representative abroad. 

I was very much impressed with her remarks. 
On my return home my heart went to Jesus in 
prayer; language flowed freely and naturally, 
and I felt a nearness of his presence which I 
never experienced before. I believe it is right, 
and that we are by no means dishonoring the 
Father, but on the contrary are honoring him 
so much the more by honoring the Son. If I 
am wrong, dear brother, my earnest prayer is 
that I may be set right. 

Yours in the Redeemer, H. N. RAHN. 

REPLY-"ACCEPTED IN THE BELOVED." 



It is undoubtedly proper enough for us to address 
petitions to our Redeemer and Advocate, 
who loved us and gave himself for us. He is 
still interested in us— still loves us. He is still 
the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, and we 
are his sheep. He is still our faithful High 
Priest, who can be touched with a feeling of our 
infirmities and who is ready still to succor them 
that are tempted. And although we are nowhere 
instructed to make petitions to him, it 
evidently could not be improper so to do; for 
such a course is nowhere prohibited, and the 
disciples worshiped him.— Matt. 28:9,17. 

However, it would be a serious error to suppose 
that we ought to address our petitions to 
our Lord Jesus and not to the Father— "For 
the Father himself loveth you" [who are in 
Christ]. And it is proper to remember that 
every good and perfect gift cometh from the 
Father. All things [blessings] are of the Father, 



and are by the Son. (1 Cor. 8:6.) Jehovah 
is the fountain of our blessings, and our 
Lord Jesus is the channel through which they 
reach us. "We know that God heareth not 
sinners" (John 9:31); and consequently, we, 
who by nature were sinners even as others, 
could have no audience with Jehovah until justified 
by faith in the sin-offering, made on our 
behalf, once for all, in the offering of the body 
of Jesus, our Lord. As he declared, "No man 
cometh unto the Father but by me." But 
now, since we do accept of our Lord's sacrifice, 
and realize it as the price of our justification, 
we have boldness to enter into the Most Holy 
[into communion with God] by the blood of 
Jesus, and "draw nigh with cleansed hearts 
and with full assurance of faith," realizing that 
"we are accepted in the Beloved." 

Our Lord Jesus not only prayed to the Father 
himself, but instructed his followers as to 
the general style of their petitions, saying, 
"After this manner pray ye— Our Father 
which art in heaven," etc. And over and over 
again our Lord instructs us to ask of the Father 
in his name. (John 14:13,14; 15:16; 16:23,24,26.) 
In his name means more than 
merely by his authority; and it means more 
than the formal closing of a prayer with the 
words, "For Christ's sake." It means that the 
petitioner coming to the Father must realize his 
own actual unworthiness to be received at the 
throne of the heavenly grace, or to have his 
petition regarded and answered; and that therefore 
he presents it in the name and merit of 
Christ, his Ransomer— by faith accepting a 
share in the justifying merit of the great sin-offering 
which he made once for all. 

Adam had access to and communion with 
God, the Father, when he was perfect— before 
he sinned and fell under divine condemnation. 
As many of the redeemed race as shall accept 
of the grace of God to be extended to all 
through Christ shall, when perfected again, 
have back this communion and all that was lost. 
And we who in the present age are justified by 
faith in his blood— in his sacrifice for our sins 
—have now this communion— only, so long 
as we are not actually perfect, it must always 
be exercised through our Mediator; and hence 
to hold communion, we must recognize not 
only the Mediator, but the ransom which he 
gave for all, by which we are made acceptable 
to the Father, in him. 



page 158 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1408 : page 158 
NEBUCHADNEZZAR'S DREAM. 



LESSON IX., MAY 29, DANIEL 2:36-49. 

Golden Text— "All things are naked and opened unto 
the eyes of him with whom we have to do."— Heb. 4:13. 

Nebuchadnezzar's deeply significant and prophetic 
dream and the divinely inspired interpretation 
of it by the prophet Daniel, as 
recorded in this lesson, are worthy of the careful 
study of every earnest Christian who would 
follow the Apostle's injunction to take heed to 
the sure word of prophecy which shineth as a 
light in a dark place until the day dawn. 
(2 Pet. 1:19.) The reader is referred to MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. I., page 248 for an elucidation 
of this prophecy. 

May all the truly consecrated indeed see and 
appreciate their privilege of being part of that 
kingdom symbolized by the stone which in due 
time is to destroy and displace all the other 
kingdoms and fill the whole earth with its glory 
and its blessings of righteousness and peace. 

In the midst of the unsettled and unsatisfactory 
conditions of the past and the present, 
while the groaning creation waits for the establishment 
of God's kingdom in the earth, how 
comforting to the hearts of them that believe 
are the words of the golden text— "All things 
are naked and opened unto the eyes of him 
with whom we have to do." (Heb. 4:13.) In 
far-seeing wisdom God has permitted all the 
present disorders, yet, in the end, even the 
wrath of man shall praise him and the remainder 
he restrains. (Psa. 76:10.) See Vol. I., 
Chap, vii., "The Permission of Evil and its 
Relation to God's Plan." 



R1408 : page 158 

THE FIERY FURNACE. 



LESSON X., JUNE 5, DANIEL 3:13-25. 

Golden Text— "When thou walkest through the fire 
thou shalt not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle 
upon thee."— Isa. 43:2. 

The familiar story of this lesson is one full 
of instruction to the thoughtful, as viewed both 
in its historic and in its prophetic light. Nebuchadnezzar, 
the king of Babylon, had set up 
an image, and had commanded all his subjects, 
including Israel, the Lord's people, to bow 
down to it in idolatrous worship. And any refusal 
thus to acknowledge his supreme authority, 
even in matters of conscience, was made a 
treasonable offence, punishable with death, in 
the midst of a fiery furnace. 

Three Hebrews of the captivity, Shadrach, 
Meshach and Abednego, refused to obey the 
king in this instance, where such obedience 
would necessitate disloyalty to God. In their 
faithfulness to God, these three men preferred 
a dreadful death— should God permit them thus 
to die— rather than the alternative of disloyalty 
to the King of kings, whose command to Israel 
was, "Thou shalt have no other gods before 
me." Yet they confidently expressed their faith 
in God's ability, and their belief, in view of his 
promises, in his willingness to deliver them. 
(Verse 17.) Nevertheless, no matter what course 
he should see fit to take, they were fully determined 
to be true to God. 

Thus they proved themselves "Israelites indeed," 
and in consequence of their faithfulness 
the promise of the Lord, made to Israel 
as a people, and sure to them so long as they 
kept their covenant with God, was verified, 
even though it required a miracle to accomplish 
it. The promise reads— "When thou 
passest through the waters, I will be with thee; 
and through the rivers, they shall not overflow 
thee: [This was wonderfully verified to the 
whole nation when in faith they obeyed the 
Lord's command and passed through the Red 
Sea and then over Jordan.] When thou walkest 
through the fire thou shalt not be burned; 
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee." 
Doubtless this promise of deliverance from the 
power of the fire would have been verified to 



all the Israelites in Babylon, as well as to the 
three mentioned, had all, like them, proved 
their loyalty and faithfulness to God. God is 
faithful to all his promises, and blessed are all 
they that put their trust in him; for only the 
faithful can claim a share in his promises. 

It would be a mistake, however, for all people 
to claim and appropriate literally these 
promises which the Lord made literally to 
fleshly Israel only, as his peculiar and covenant 
people. God's remarkable dealings with Israel 
—his care, his guidance, his discipline and 
chastisements when they were disobedient and 
unfaithful, and his wonderful deliverances of 
them when loyal and obedient, as well as his 
instruction and training of them— were typical 
of his course with the whole world during the 
Millennial age; but in the present time no such 

R1408 : page 159 

promises belong to the world. Nor do they 
belong to Christians except as in a symbolic 
sense applied to them as new creatures in 
Christ, during this Gospel age. 

On the strength of these promises of temporal 
deliverance, no Christian, and certainly none 
of the world, can claim general exemption or 
deliverance from present calamities, though 
God does sometimes deliver them. God, who 
promised to defend Israel both nationally and 
individually whilst obedient, has never promised 
to defend so-called Christian nations against 
their national enemies, nor Christian communities 
nor individuals against persecution for 
conscience' sake by fire or sword, nor from calamities 
of various sorts, but on the contrary 
forewarns us, "They shall despitefully use you 
and persecute you." "Yea, and whoever will 
live Godly in this present time (the Gospel 
age) shall suffer persecution." Yet as an offset 
God has given us spiritual advantages and 
"exceeding great and precious promises," much 
more valuable than length of days under present 
conditions and deliverance from present 
persecutions. And we have his blessed assurance 
that all the temporal evils which are permitted 
to befall us shall work together for our 
good, so long as we remain loyal and faithful 
to God— "work out for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory." 

To be loyal and true to God in these days 
requires as much courage and true heroism as 
was necessary in the days of gross idolatry. 
True, in civilized nations there is now no compulsion 
to worship images; but, nevertheless, 



there are idols of another sort just as potent in 
their influence upon the public mind, and 
Christians (Spiritual Israel) as well as all others 
are called upon to do homage to these idols— 
the work of men's hands. We refer to the 
various creeds of Christendom, the traditions 
which men have set up to intercept the worship 
of the true and living God in whose Word 
alone is life and peace. 

Few are the faithful "Israelites indeed" 
who boldly stem the tide of opposition and declare 
themselves fully on the Lord's side by 
fearlessly discarding the traditions of men and 
daring to believe and teach the Word of God 

R1409 : page 159 

to the contrary. The many prefer the favor of 
men to the favor of God, and are quite willing 
to prove their disloyalty to God in order to 
obtain it. Rejecting the testimony of his Word, 
they blindly assent to the idols of human tradition 
and bow down to and serve them. But 
the devotion and zeal of the loyal and true are 
not unnoticed, and will not fail of their reward in 
due time, even though some such may yet be 
called upon to walk through the fiery furnace 
of affliction to prove their devotion to God in 
not bowing down with the majority. 

"When through fiery trials their pathway shall lie, 
His grace all-sufficient shall be their supply. 
The flames shall not hurt them— God only designs 
Their dross to consume and their gold to refine." 

Not only have there been in the past such 
trials of faith and loyalty, but there are also at 
the present time; and in some respects a still 
more fiery trial yet awaits God's consecrated 
ones, as we understand the Scriptures, and as 
the signs of the times read in the light of the 
Bible clearly attest. 

Of this indication, mention has already been 
made. The time is fast approaching when the 
religious liberty now enjoyed will be greatly 
restricted and when, as a consequence, the 
present work of disseminating the truth will be 
interfered with by the strong hand of combined 
civil and ecclesiastical power. And therefore, 
in view of such interference, we are forewarned 
by the Lord that "the night cometh, when no 
man can work" (John 9:4); and by the Prophet 
Isaiah (21:12) that "the morning cometh, and 
also the night." And those who properly heed 
the warning will let it have its designed effect 
of increasing their diligence in the use of present 
opportunities. 

That the persecuting power which is thus to 



interfere with and cut short the opportunities 
of the consecrated, to spread the truth, is to 
arise from the allied powers of Christendom, or 
more particularly from allied Protestantism under 
the direction and control of the spirit of 
the Papacy, is clearly indicated in the symbolic 
prophecy of Revelation 13th chapter, under the 
figures of the "Beast" and his "Image." Those 
of our readers whose file of TOWERS extends back 
to January, 1882 (we have no more), will find 
the teaching of Rev. 13th therein set forth. 
There we showed that the "Beast" which was 
to command and receive the homage of the 
world for 1260 years is the great Papal System; 
and the "Image of the Beast," subsequently set 
up, after the "Beast" had been largely shorn of 
its power, is the great Evangelical Alliance of 
so-called Protestant denominations. 

The image or likeness of this organization 
to the "Beast" consists in its doctrines and in 
its general policy. And although the likeness 
is not yet complete, the Revelator, in verse 15, 
indicates that the persecuting power will ere 
long complete this, and that the order will go 
forth practically that all who will not worship 
(reverence) either the Papal "Beast" or the 
Protestant "Image" shall be killed, although 
the killing is not necessarily to be understood 
as physical: it may be in some instances, though 
more probably it will be killing in a social 

R1409 : page 160 

sense— cutting off their influence, their name, 
etc., and allowing them no standing or liberty 
as Christians. 

The thoughtful observer of current events in 
ecclesiastical circles may readily note the trend 
of events in this direction. The ghost of the 
future power of this great Image is already filling 
the minds of scheming ecclesiastics of all 
the denominations of so-called Christendom, as 
their numerous utterances from pulpit and press 
clearly show. But let the loyal and faithful 
few be fully determined within themselves to 
be firm and uncompromising in their zeal for 
God and the truth, assured that, even though 
they may be called upon to go through a furnace 
of affliction, God will be with them in 
the midst of the fiery trial, and, as spiritual 
new creatures in Christ, they shall not be hurt 
—but blest by the Master's presence and 
communion. 

R1409 : page 160 



THE DEN OF LIONS. 



LESSON XL, JUNE 12, DANIEL 6:19-28. 

Golden Text— "No manner of hurt was found upon 
him, because he believed in his God."— Dan. 6:23. 

The teaching of this lesson is the same as 
that of the preceding lesson. Because of his 
faith and loyalty to God Daniel was delivered, 
according to the Lord's covenant of blessing 
and protection to Israel as long as they were 
loyal and obedient. See Deut. 28:1-14 and 
Isa. 43:1,2. 

And yet, notwithstanding all the promises 
of protection and defence to Israel, both as a 
nation and as individuals, so long as they continued 
loyal and obedient, the Apostle Paul 
reminds us of the fact that God permitted some 
of them to prove their loyalty and faithfulness 
by willingly enduring great persecutions, even 
unto death. He says they had trials of cruel 
mockings and scourgings and of bonds and 
imprisonment. They were stoned, they were 
sawn asunder, they were tempted, were slain 
with the sword: they wandered about in sheep-skins 
and goat-skins, being destitute, afflicted, 
tormented; (of whom the world was not worthy:) 
they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, 
and in dens and caves of the earth; and 
they were tortured, not accepting deliverance 
[on ignoble terms which would necessitate disloyalty 
to God].~Heb. 11. 

But why did they endure all these things, 
even in the face of an apparent failure of God's 
promises for their protection? Was it because 
of any direct promise of God that such faithfulness, 
even unto death, should receive a special 
reward in the resurrection? No; we know 
of no such promise in the Law or the Prophets, 
although the Apostle (Heb. 11:35) says they 
did it in hope of a "better resurrection." 

What ground was there for such hope? We 
answer that it was a fair inference based upon 
their knowledge of the character of God and 
his promises to Israel. With the nobility and 
grandeur of a fixed purpose they said, "We 
will be loyal and true to God at any peril and 
at any cost; and if, as we know, God appreciates 
faithfulness at small cost, much more will 
he appreciate it when manifested under the 
severest tests. And such faithfulness will not 
fail of special recognition in the resurrection, 
if not before." Such was their love for God 



that they longed for the fullest possible manifestation 
of his love and favor in return when 
the full trial of their faith and patience should 
prove their worthiness. 

In the clearer light of the Gospel dispensation, 
and especially of this day of the Lord, 
we see the blessed reward that awaits those 
ancient worthies who shall be made princes in 
all the earth during the Millennial reign of 
Christ (Psa. 45:16-See also MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. I., Chap, xiv.); whose probation being 
ended, they may from the dawn of their new 
existence— in the resurrection— be perfect men 
and exalted to power and great honor and 
glory. Such was God's purpose towards them 
in permitting them thus to suffer that he might 
exalt them in due time. Indeed, they shall 
shine as the stars forever. (Dan. 12:3.) These 
righteous ones shall be held in everlasting remembrance 
among the restored human race 
as noble examples worthy of all honor and imitation. 
-Psa. 112:6. 

Evidently Daniel, as well as the three Hebrews 
of our last lesson, believed that God was 
able and also willing to deliver them according 
to his covenant of favor to Israel, if he saw fit; 
but, nevertheless, they believed that if he should 
not grant them a present deliverance, he would, 
in his own good time and way, grant them a 
still more glorious deliverance and reward of 
faithfulness. See Dan. 6:10 and 3:16-18. 

page 160 

QUARTERLY REVIEW. 



LESSON XII., JUNE 19. -Comment unnecessary. 



page 162 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



PROVIDING FOR COLPORTEURS' EXPENSES. 



"GO YE ALSO INTO THE VINEYARD." 



During the Colporteurs' Meetings which followed 
the regular meetings of the recent Convention, 
some of the older and more experienced 
Colporteurs made the suggestion that hereafter 
all colporteurs be authorized to sell the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series of books at Thirty-five 
cents per volume, or three volumes for One 
Dollar— explaining to any who might notice 
and inquire, that the books could be had at 
Twenty-five cents each if they chose to send to 
the Allegheny office; but that the Colporteurs 
are allowed to charge the ten cents to cover 



their additional expense connected with delivering 
the books. With the consent of the office 
several had tried the higher price plan and the 
results had been highly satisfactory: they had 
sold about as many as at Twenty-five cents. 

The object of the suggestion on the part of 
those proposing the higher price was not money-getting, 
but a desire to forward the work. 
While they are able to meet their traveling and 
living expenses and a little more at twenty-five 
cents, they well know that many others cannot 
do so on account of being less successful salesmen, 
or of having encumbrances in the way of 
family duties and expenses. Indeed, the plan 
proposed is that all who can do so shall return 
to the Lord's treasury all that can be spared 
from their actual expenses, that it may assist 
in the general work of spreading the Truth, to 
which all of our lives are consecrated. 

We requested all the Colporteurs present at 
the meeting to make a trial of the Thirty-five 
cent rate for one week, and then to report their 
success or failure. And the reports turned in 
confirm the view of the suggesters, that the additional 
ten cents will be no hindrance; but 
that people concede that a book of 350 pages 
on good paper is cheap at 35 cents— or over 
1100 pages for $1.00. As a consequence we 
have decided on this change. 

There are at present about forty Colporteurs, 
and we trust that the new price will soon double 
the number; for quite a number who started 
and were unable to fully meet expenses, and who 
got deeply in debt to the Tract Society at the 
twenty-five cent rate, will now be able to meet 
their expenses and perhaps a little more. Thus 
the cause of the Lord will, we trust, be prospered 
by the new arrangement. It is not the 
thought to attract worldly people into the work 
of selling Dawn. We desire only such as engage 
in the work as ministers of the gospel, 
and from the conviction that what they are 
presenting is the Truth, and in no other manner 
can they so fully and faithfully serve the 
Lord and his people. We do not know of 
one now in the colporteur work merely as a 
business: all are doing what they can as unto 
the Lord. We know of several who could earn 
nearly or quite a thousand dollars a year in 
other occupations, who gladly give their all for 
the Truth for the mere necessities of food and 
clothing; and one at present getting two thousand 
dollars a year is about to leave it and engage 
his time and talents in the Lord's service. 
He has already tried it and finds that he can 
make expenses, and seeks nothing more. 



COLPORTEURS' RATES ON MILLENNIAL DAWN 
IN PAPER COVERS. 

Single copies delivered by colporteurs, 35 cents. 
Three " " " " $1.00. 



Single copies by mail from the office, 25 cents. 

Five (or multiples of five, 10, 20, 40, 
etc.) copies of any one volume by mail, 
post-paid to one address, each, ... 15 " 

Five copies or more of any volume by 
express or freight at colporteur's charges, 12-1/2 " 

As a result of this arrangement we hope soon 
to hear of many ready and glad to give all their 
time to the work. The Master, the Chief 
Reaper, saith, "He that reapeth receiveth wages 
and gathereth fruit unto everlasting life." 



The DAWNS in the German language are now 
under the full control of Brother Zech, and all 
orders for them should be addressed to— 
Otto von Zech, Euclid Ave., Allegheny, Pa. 



R1410 :page 163 

VOL. XIII. JUNE 1 & 15, 1892. NOS. 11 & 12. 

"TO US THERE IS ONE GOD." 

1 COR. 8:5,6. 



"Hear, O Israel! Jehovah our God is one— Jehovah. 
Deut. 6:4. 

The word "god" signifies mighty one, but 
not always the all-mighty one. It is used as 
the translation of each of four Hebrew words— 
—el, elah, elohim and adonai— all, in the common 
version of the Bible, signifying the mighty, 
or great. It is a general name, often and 
properly applied to our heavenly Father, as well 
as to our Lord Jesus, to angels and to men. 

In Deut. 10:17 elohim— a mighty or great 
one— is used in referring to Jehovah the almighty 
God, as well as to other gods. "Jehovah 
is a God of gods." 

In Gen. 32:24,30 and in Judges 13:21,22 
an angel is called god— elohim. 



In Jer. 16:13 earthly heathen kings and governors 
are called gods— elohim. 

In Exodus 7:1 Moses is called a god— elohim. 

In Exodus 21:6; 22:8,9,28, the word elohim 
is evidently used to refer to the Judges 
of Israel appointed by Moses, because they were 
mighty ones, or persons in authority; and the 
translators of the common version have rendered 
the word "judges" except in the last instance, 
when they rendered it "gods." They 
were corrected by those who arranged the 
marginal readings; but remember, it is this 
same word— elohim. 

In Exodus 12:12 the princes of Egypt are 
referred to as gods— elohim. See margin. 

In Psa. 82 the distinction of beings referred 
to by the word god is very marked— "God 
[elohim] standeth in the congregation of the 
mighty [el]: he judgeth among the gods [elohim]." 
Here the first word god evidently refers 
to Jehovah, the Almighty One, while the 
others refer to other mighty ones— the Church, 
the sons of God, of whom Jesus is the head or 
chief, and of whom it is written (verse 6), "I 
have said, Ye are gods [elohim]; and all of you 
are children of the Most High [el yon, the 
highest God]." 

But, says Paul, "Though there be [many] that 
are called gods (as there be gods many and 
lords many), to us there is but one God, the 
Father." (1 Cor. 8:5,6.) The Father is the 
mighty one over all other mighty ones— the 
One God over all. None others are mighty or 
great, save as they receive their greatness, as well 
as their existence, from him. And it is to this 
one fact that the attention of Israel is called 
in the above words of Moses— "Hear, O Israel! 
Jehovah our God is one— Jehovah." 

The word Jehovah is not a general name, 
like the word god, but a proper name, the 
distinctive personal name of the Almighty Father, 
and is never applied to any other being. 
The name Jehovah, like other proper names, 
should not be translated. In our common version 
of the Old Testament its distinctiveness 
as a name is lost by being generally translated 
LORD. Some erroneously suppose that the name 
Jehovah applies also to Christ. We therefore 

R1410 :page 164 

cite a few of the many scriptures to prove that 
this name belongs exclusively to the great First 
Cause of all things. "I am Jehovah; this is 
my name, and my glory will I not give to another." 
(Isa. 42:8). "I appeared unto Abraham, 



unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name 

El Shaddai [God Almighty], but by my name 

Jehovah was I not known unto them." (Exod. 6:3.) 

"That men may know that thou, whose 

name alone is Jehovah, art the Most High over 

all the earth. "-Psa. 83:18. 

Jehovah is frequently declared to be the Savior 
of men because he was the Author of the 
plan of salvation, our Lord Jesus being the savior 
in a secondary sense, as the instrumentality 
through whom the plan of Jehovah was executed. 
David makes the distinction between 
Jehovah and our Lord Jesus very marked in 

R1411 :page 164 

Psa. 110:1— "The Lord [Jehovah] said unto 

my Lord [adon, master— Christ] sit thou at my 

right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool." 

Our Lord Jesus and Peter call attention 

very forcibly to this scripture and to the distinction 

made. -Luke 20:41-44; Acts 2:34-36. 

While the Scriptures are so very clear concerning 
the distinct individuality and exact 
relationship of Jehovah and our Lord Jesus, it 
seems marvelous that the idea of a triune God 
—three Gods in one, and at the same time one 
God in three— should ever have gained prominence 
and general acceptance. But the fact 
that it has been so generally accepted only goes 
to show how soundly the Church slept while the 
enemy bound her in the chains of error. We 
believe in Jehovah and in Jesus and in the Holy 
Spirit, and fully accept the fact that our Lord 
Jesus is a god— a mighty one— though we cannot 
accept the unscriptural and unreasonable 
theory that he is his own father and creator, 
and must reject as unscriptural the teaching 
that there are either three gods in one person 
or one god in three persons. The doctrine of 
the Trinity had its beginning in the third century, 
and has a very close resemblance to 
the heathen doctrines prevalent at that time, 
particularly Hindooism. The only text in the 
Scriptures which was ever claimed to affirm that 
the Father, Son and Spirit are one god is a 
portion of 1 John 5:7,8, which reads: "For 
there are three that bear record in heaven, the 
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and 
these three are one; and there are three that 
bear witness in earth, the spirit and the water 
and the blood: and these three agree in one." 
We state an undisputed and indisputable fact 
when we say, that this is the only text favorable 
to the Trinitarian view, and that the words 
above in italics are spurious, and were introduced 



here by Trinitarians in the fifth century, 
because there was no scriptural statement to 
support their theory, which was then becoming 
popular. Trinitarians themselves admit this, 
and in all recent translations the spurious 
words are omitted. See the Emphatic Diaglott, 
Young's Translation, the Revised Version, the 
American Bible Union Translation and the Improved 
Version. The latter says:— 

"This text concerning the heavenly witnesses 
is not contained in any Greek manuscript 
which was written earlier than the fifth century. 
It is not cited by any of the Greek ecclesiastical 
writers; nor by any of the early Latin 
fathers, even when the subjects upon which 
they treat would naturally have led them to 
appeal to its authority: it is therefore evidently 
spurious." 

It will be observed that the sense is complete 
without the interpolated words italicized above, 
and the teaching in perfect harmony with the 
context, which would not be the case were the 
interpolated words admitted. The inspired 
Apostle is showing that "the Son of God 
is he that came by water and blood" to be the 
Redeemer of mankind; that is, he came by 
baptism into water, the symbol of his full consecration 
even unto death, and also by blood, 
the actual fulfilling of his consecration vow, 
even unto death, the shedding of his blood. 
He came, "not by water only [not by consecration 
only], but by water and blood"— both 
the typical and the literal baptism into death. 
"And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, 
because the Spirit is truth." (1 John 5:6.) The 
Spirit of God bore witness after the water baptism 
that this was his well beloved Son in 
whom he was well pleased. (Matt. 3:17.) And 
again, after his baptism into death, the Spirit 
bore witness to his still being the well beloved 
Son, in raising him from death and highly exalting 

R1411 :page 165 

him to the right hand of power. Thus, 
as verses 7 and 8 assert, There are three that 
bear witness that this Jesus is the Son of God— 
the Spirit, the water and the blood. The testimony 
of the Spirit at his consecration and 
symbolic baptism in water, and again at his 
resurrection, marks our Lord Jesus as indeed the 
Son of God. 

Touching the rise of the Trinitarian view, 
Abbott and Conant's Religious Dictionary, 
page 944, says:— 

"It was not until the beginning of the fourth 



century that the Trinitarian view began to be 
elaborated and formulated into a doctrine and 
an endeavor made to reconcile it with the belief 
of the Church in ONE GOD." "Out of the 
attempt to solve this problem sprang the doctrine 
of the Trinity." Trinity "is a very marked 
feature in Hindooism, and is discernible in Persian, 
Egyptian, Roman, Japanese, Indian and 
the most ancient Grecian mythologies." 

In Lange's Critical Commentary, in reference 
to this spurious passage, we read: "Said words 
are wanting in all the Greek Codices; also in 
the Codex Sinaiticus [the oldest known MS.], 
and in all the ancient versions, including the 
Latin, as late as the 8th century; and since that 
time they are found in three variations. Notwithstanding 
the Trinitarian controversies, they 
are not referred to by a single Greek father, or 
by any of the old Latin church fathers." 

This passage is pronounced an interpolation 
by such authorities as Sir Isaac Newton, Benson, 
Clarke, Home, Griesbach, Tischendorf 
and Alford. 

In Hudson's Greek and English Concordance 
we read: "The words are found in no Greek 
MSS. before the 15th or 16th century, and in 
no early version." Says Alford, "unless pure 
caprice is to be followed in the criticism of 
the sacred text, there is not a shadow of reason 
for supposing them genuine." Tischendorf says, 
"That this spurious addition should continue 
to be published as a part of the epistle, I regard 
as an impiety." T. B. Woolsey inquires: "Do 
not truth and honesty require that such a passage 
should be struck out of our English Bibles 
—a passage which Luther would not express in 
his translation, and which did not creep into 
the German Bible until nearly fifty years after 
his death?" 

Dr. Adam Clarke, the learned Methodist 
commentator, in his notes on this passage, says: 
"It is likely this verse is not genuine. It is 
wanting in every MS. of this epistle written before 
the invention of printing, one excepted— 
Codex Montfortii, in Trinity College, Dublin. 
The others which omit this verse amount to 
one hundred and twelve. It is wanting in both 
the Syriac, all the Arabic, Ethiopic, Coptic, 
Sahidic, Armenian, Slavonian, etc.; in a word, 
in all the ancient versions but the Vulgate; and 
even of this version many of the most ancient 
and correct MSS. have it not. It is wanting, 
also, in all the ancient Greek fathers; and in 
most even of the Latin." 

John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, endeavored 
to support the doctrine of the Trinity, 



because he supposed this text to be genuine: 
yet in one of his sermons from this text, 
he quoted the words of Servetus— "I scruple 
using the words 'trinity' and 'persons,' because 

1 do not find those terms in the Bible"— 
and added, "I would insist only on the direct 
words unexplained, as they lie in the text." 

He labored hard to prove the doctrine of the 
Trinity, because he believed this spurious passage 
was genuine, the information regarding the 
ancient manuscripts of the Bible being recent. 
For instance, at the time of the preparation of 
our King James' or Common Version, the translators 
had the advantage of but eight Greek 
MSS., and none of them of earlier date than 
the tenth century. Now, however, there are 
about seven hundred MSS., some of which, especially 
the Sinai tic MS. and the Vatican MS. 
No. 1209, are very old, reaching back to the 
third century. 

R1410 :page 165 

Like some other doctrines received by Protestants 
through Papacy, this one is accepted 
and fully endorsed, though its educated adherents 
are aware that not a text of Scripture can 
be adduced in its support. Nay, more: any one 
who will not affirm this unscriptural doctrine 
as his faith is declared by the articles of the 
Evangelical Alliance to be non-orthodox— a 
heretic. 

However, it behooves us as truth seekers to 
deal honestly with ourselves and with our Father's 
Word, which is able to make us truly 

R1410 :page 166 

wise. Therefore, ignoring the traditions and 
creeds of uninspired men and corrupt systems, 
let us hold fast the form of sound words received 
from our Lord and the Apostles.— 

2 Tim. 1:13. 

Let us inquire of these standards of the true 
Church what is truth on this subject. Paul answers 
clearly and forcibly— There is "one God 
and Father of all." (Eph. 4:6.) And again 
he says, "There be gods many and lords many, 
but to us there is but one God, the Father, out 
of whom are all things, and we of him; and 
one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all 
things, and we through him." (1 Cor. 8:5,6.) 
We believe this exactly: All things are of our 
Father— he is the first cause of all things; and 
all things are by our Lord Jesus. He, "the beginning 
of the creation of God" (Rev. 3:14), 



has been the agent of Jehovah in all that has 
since been done— "Without him was not anything 
made that was made."— John 1:3. 

Jesus' testimony is the same. His claim was 
that he was a son, an obedient son, who did not 
do his own will, but the will of his Father who 
sent him— "Not my will but thine be done." 
Again, Jesus said, "The Son can do nothing of 
himself"— "The Father that dwelleth in me, 
he doeth the works." (John 5:19; 14:10.) 
True, he also said, "I and my Father are 
one;" but he shows in what sense they are one 
by his prayer that just so his disciples all might 
be one. (John 10:30; 17:11.) This desirable 
oneness is that which results from having 
the same mind or spirit, a oneness or harmony 
of heart, plan and action. 

Many dishonor the Master, though they think 
they honor him, when they contradict his direct 
teachings, affirming that the Father and the Son 
are one and the same being and equal in all respects. 
No, says Jesus, "My Father is greater 
than I." (John 14:28.) And he also says that 
God is not only his Father, but ours:— "I 
ascend to my Father and your Father, to my 
God and your God." (John 20: 17.) A better 
translation of Phil. 2:6, given in the 
Emphatic Diaglott, settles the question of the 
Father's supremacy, in harmony with other 
scriptures, such as 1 Cor. 15:28 and John 14:28. 
It reads thus: "Who, though being in a 
form of God, yet did not meditate a usurpation, 
to be like God." See also quotations 
from other translators in Diaglott foot note, 
all giving the same sense. The idea here is the 
very opposite of equality, as conveyed in the 
King James translation. Jesus did not claim 
equality, nor aspire to a usurpation of God's 
authority. That was Satan's claim and effort, 
who said, "I will exalt my throne above the 
stars of God. ...I will be like the Most 
High."-Isa. 14:12-14. 

Jesus said: "Ye call me Lord and Master, 
and ye say well, for so I am;" but "call no 
man on earth Father, for one is your Father, 
which is in heaven." (John 13:13; Matt. 23:9.) 
Peter and Paul convey the same thought, 
saying, "The God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ hath begotten us." (1 Pet. 1:3; Eph. 3:9-11; 
Gal. 1:3,4; Rom. 16:25-27.) How 
clear and harmonious are these words of our 
standards; and we could quote much more in 
perfect harmony. 

Briefly stated, then, we find the Scriptures to 
teach that there is but one Eternal God and 
Father— who is "from everlasting to everlasting" 



(Psa. 90:2; Rom. 16:26,27)-and that 

the one who was the beginning of his creation, 

since called Jesus, though inferior to the Father, 

was superior to all other and subsequent 

creatures, in whose creation he was the active 

agent of Jehovah. When a redeemer was needed 

for mankind, in harmony with the Father's 

wish, but not of compulsion, the chief and first-created 

Son of God was, by divine power (the 

philosophy of which is beyond our full comprehension) 

transferred to a lower plane of existence 

—the human: he was born and grew to mature 

and perfect manhood. Hence his life principle 

was not derived from the human channel, 

and was not that which was forfeited by the sin 

of Adam. 

He was a fully developed, perfect man, according 
to the Law, at the age of thirty years, when 
he immediately consecrated himself as a man 
to the Father's will, offering himself a living 
sacrifice on our behalf at baptism. The sacrifice 
was accepted, and he was filled with the 
holy Spirit of the Father. (Matt. 3:16,17.) 
The power of God came upon him there. (Acts 10:38.) 

R1410 :page 167 

This power of God in him was that 
to which he continually referred. It was the 
same power that was afterward manifested 
through Peter, Paul and others, though in our 
Lord's case it was more marked, because he, 
being a perfect man, could receive the spirit 
without measure, whereas all imperfect members 
of his Church can have only a measure 
of the spirit. -John 3:34; 1 Cor. 12:7. 

When Jesus' sacrificial ministry was over, 
ending at the cross, he had finished his work- 
ins work as a man. When he arose he was no 
longer a human being, but a "new creature" 
perfected. Since his resurrection, Jesus has 
been a partaker of the divine nature, the same 
nature as the Father. This present highly exalted 
condition of our Lord was given him as 
a reward of obedience to the Father's will. 
(See Phil. 2:8,9.) This scripture implies that 
his present glory is greater than the glory he 
possessed before becoming a man: otherwise it 
would not have been an exaltation. Now, having 
the divine, immortal nature, he cannot die. 
And being thus highly exalted, all power in 
heaven and in earth is now given unto him 
(Matt. 28:18), so that he is able to save to the 
uttermost, to save completely— to awaken from 
death and restore to full perfection. 

How straightforward and simple is the Scriptural 



statement compared with human traditions. 

For instance, in what a jumble of contradictions 

do they find themselves, who say 

that Jesus and the Father are one person. This 

would involve the idea that our Lord Jesus 

acted the hypocrite, and only pretended to address 

the Father in heaven, when he himself 

was the same Father on earth. Such must conclude, 

too, since we read that God tempteth 

not, neither is tempted of any, that the temptation 

of the devil (Matt. 4) was only a farce. 

So with the death of Jesus: The Father is and 

always has been immortal, and hence cannot 

die, and if Jesus was the Father, then he must 

have only pretended to die. Then all the statements 

of Jesus and the prophets and apostles 

relative to Jesus' death and resurrection are 

false, and they were false witnesses in testifying 

that God raised Jesus from the dead, if he did 

not really die. 

If they admit that Jesus really died, they take 
the other horn of the dilemma; for, believing that 
their three Gods are one in person, when Jesus 
died they must all three have died. If they all 
died, who raised them to life? This, too, would 
conflict with the statement of Paul (1 Thes. 1:10) 
that the Father raised up Jesus from death; 
for if the Father and Son are the same being, 
then the Father was dead when the Son was 
dead. 

Shall we thus contradict the Apostles and 
Prophets and Jesus himself, and ignore reason 
and common sense, in order to hold to a 
dogma handed down to us from the dark ages 
by a corrupt, apostate church? Nay; "To the 
law and the testimony; if they speak not according 
to this word, it is because there is no 
light in them." (Isa. 8:20.) We thus see that 
the Father and the Son are two separate and 
distinct persons, though one in mind, purpose, 
aim, etc., the Son having submitted fully to 
the Father's will and plan in all things. 

THE HOLY SPIRIT. 



We next inquire, What saith the Scriptures 
with regard to the holy Spirit? The nominal 
churches, Papal and Protestant, affirm that the 
holy Spirit is a distinct person, and they also 
say that these three persons are at the same 
time one person— "a great mystery." Yes, 
truly it is a mystery, such as is characteristic of 
Babylon's confusion. But to those who turn 
away from the traditions of men to the Word 



of God, all is clear and plain. 

We suggest that whatever definition of the 
term "holy Spirit" will meet all known conditions, 
and harmonize all passages of Scripture 
bearing thereon, may be understood to be the 
true meaning of the term. We will first give 
what we conceive to be such a definition, and 
then examine the Scriptures bearing on the subject 
which might be supposed by some to conflict 
with the views we shall present. 

We understand the Scriptures to teach, in the 
manner just suggested, that the holy Spirit is 
not a distinct person, but that it is the divine 
will, influence or power, exercised everywhere 
and for any purpose, at the divine pleasure. 
God exercises his spirit or energy in a variety 

R1410 :page 168 

of ways, using various agencies, and accomplishing 
various results. 

Whatever God does through agencies is as 
truly his work as though he were the direct 
actor, since all those agencies are of his creation; 
just as a contractor for a building is said 
to build a house, though he may never have 
lifted a tool toward it. He does it with his 
materials and through his agents. Thus, when 
we read that Jehovah God created the heavens 
and the earth (Gen. 2:4), we are not to suppose 
that he personally handled them. He used 
various agencies— "He spake, and it was done 
[He gave his orders, and they were promptly 
executed]; he commanded, and it stood fast." 
(Psa. 33:6-9.) It did not spring instantly to 
order; for we read that time was used in creation 
—six days, or periods of time. 

We are told plainly that all things are of the 
Father— by his energy or spirit; yet that energy 
was exercised through his Son. The Son of 
God, afterward called Jesus, was used in the 
creation of the world. (John 1:3; Heb. 1:8-12.) 
And when we turn to Genesis, we find 
it stated that the power which created was God's 
Spirit— "The Spirit of God brooded over the 
face of the waters." (Gen. 1:2.) Hence the 
only reasonable inference is that it was the 
spirit, energy or will of Jehovah, active through 
his Son— or the plan of God, executed by the 
Son. 

Another way in which God's Spirit was exercised 
was through the prophets. They "spoke 
as they were moved by the holy Spirit"— by 
the will or energy of Jehovah. (2 Pet. 1:21.) 
That is, God used them to express his mind, 
though his mind, his spirit, his thoughts, were 



not in them; for though they expressed it they 
could not understand his mind. (1 Pet. 1:12.) 
God's spirit acted upon, but not in them. In 
that servant age (Heb. 3:5; Gal. 4:4-7), the 
faithful servant carried the Lord's message as 
it was laid upon him; but the sons of God, during 
this Gospel age, are brought into fellowship 
with their Father and made acquainted with his 
plans. Thus they are not merely acted upon 
mechanically by God's spirit or energy, but 
they partake of, or imbibe, his mind or spirit 
through his revelation of his plans to them, 
which they can receive in proportion as they 
submit their own wills and plans to his. And 
having his mind, they become co-workers together 
with him in carrying out his plans. 
"The servant," though faithful, "knoweth not 
what his Lord doeth," but the confidential son 
is made acquainted with the plans and partakes 
of the Father's spirit and interest in his work. 

The masculine pronoun he is often and properly 
applied to the holy Spirit, because God, 
whose spirit it is, is represented as masculine, 
indicative of strength. It is called the holy 
Spirit, because God is holy, and because there are 
other spirits (powers, influences), somewhat similar 
in operation, which are evil. God is true 
and righteous, hence the spirit of God is called 
the "Spirit of truth." It is thus contrasted 
with the "spirit of error," and the influence 
which error exerts. (1 John 4:6.) Satan is recognized 
as the chief or prince of evil, during 
the present time, and his influence or spirit is 
exercised in his servants, in much the same way 
that the spirit of God works in his children. 
This is "the spirit which now worketh in the 
children of disobedience."— Eph. 2:2. 

The number seven is often used to represent 
perfection or completeness, and so we read 
of the seven spirits of God. (Rev. 1:4; 3:1.) 
And in like manner we read of seven wicked 
spirits. (Matt. 12:45.) The spirit or influence 
of evil proceedeth from the "father of lies;" 
and the spirit or influence of truth proceedeth 
from the heavenly Father.— John 15:26. 

Man is to some extent independent of either 
of these influences. He has a mind or spirit 
of his own (1 Cor. 2:11), but he is so constituted 
as to be subject to influence from without, 
either good or evil. In the present time God 
permits evil to triumph to some extent, for 
the testing and development of the "body of 
Christ," and also for the discipline of mankind 
in general. Now, the spirit of evil often transforms 
itself into an angel of light (truth), and 
what wonder if he puts forward the children of 



disobedience, in whom the spirit of error works, 
and palms them off as saints? (2 Cor. 11:14,15.) 
What wonder if, under the guise of greater 
honor to our Lord, he succeeds in deceiving many 
into unscriptural doctrines, thus beclouding the 

R1410 :page 169 

mind and covering many glorious truths? During 

this age, when justified believers fully surrender 

their human minds to God to be moulded 

and fashioned after the divine mind, under 

the guidance and influence of the Spirit of 

truth, they are brought to the divine standpoint 

of purpose, will and aim, and thus to this extent 

of mental conformity they become partakers 

of the divine nature, which nature they 

will receive in its fulness when they have obediently 

followed the Spirit's guidance, even unto 

death. 

Thus the consecrated are transformed (made 
new creatures) by the renewing of their minds 
by the holy Spirit of God. Thus we are changed 
from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. 
(Rom. 12:2; 2 Cor. 3:18.) This is termed 
the begetting of the spirit: that is, it is the beginning 
of the divine life. Such are therefore 
reckoned as sons of God on the divine plane. 
In surrendering the mind, the whole being is 
surrendered, since the mind or will is the controlling 
power. 

Those who resign themselves to God are "led 
of God," "taught of God," andean "serve 
the Lord in newness of spirit." They will have 
a "spirit of meekness," and the God of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, can give unto 
them the "spirit of wisdom and revelation" 
in the knowledge of him, the eyes of their 
understanding being enlightened; that they 
may know what is the hope of his calling, and 
what the riches of the glory of his inheritance 
in the saints.— Eph. 1:17,18. 

By contrast, too, we can see that as Satan is 
the adversary of God and his saints, and his 
plans to usward, his spirit, mind, energy, influence, 
would be exercised to oppose the Church. 
He does not oppose openly, but under guise of 
the Spirit of God. As the "spirit of fear" he 
attacks many, and if they follow him, they 
never make progress, but become unfruitful in 
the knowledge and love of God. The spirit of 
fear says, It is a great mistake to think that 
Christ died for all, and it is presumption to believe 
that all will eventually be released from 
bondage to death. The same spirit of fear says, 
Your own sins are not forgiven; you are still 



a miserable sinner. Thus does the spirit of 
"error," "fear" and "bondage" give the lie 
to the statements of the Spirit of truth, which 
says that Christ gave his life a ransom for all, 
to be testified in due time (2 Tim. 2:6); that 
all that are in their graves shall hear the voice 
of the Son of man and come forth (John 5:28); 
and that there is now no condemnation 
to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not 
after the flesh but after the Spirit.— Rom. 8:1. 

As the spirit or mind of God leads to peace, 
joy and faith in his promises, the spirit of error 
leads to faith in unpromised things, joy in 
earthly pleasures, and peace in slumber. As we 
read (Rom. 11:8), it is a "spirit of slumber," 
and alas! how many have been deluded into this 
condition. Because the influence of the spirit 
of error is exerted in this subtle way, it is 
called a "seducing spirit; and the Apostle assures 
us that "The spirit [of truth] speaketh 
expressly, that in the latter times some shall 
depart from the [true] faith, giving heed to seducing 
spirits." (1 Tim. 4:1.) To what extent 
Satan has succeeded in seducing God's children, 
and supplanting truth with error, all must judge 
by noting the testimonies of the Word of truth. 

The spirit of the world is another name for 
the "seducing spirit," the world being largely 
under the control of the spirit of the prince of 
this world. His spirit or influence works in 
and largely controls the children of this world. 
And the spirit or influence of the world is one 
of the mighty levers wherewith the prince of 
this world opposes the spirit of truth. 

Alas! how great an influence, and how strong, 
is exercised by these evil spirits or influences— 
the spirit of Satan, the spirit of the world under 
his control, the "spirit of Antichrist" 
(John 4:3), the spirit of bondage, of fear, of 
pride, of error and of sin. Hence the injunction 
that we test, try and prove the spirits, not by 
their claims and outward appearances merely, 
but by the Word of God. "Beloved, believe 
not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether 
they be of God"— and know "the spirit of 
truth" from "the spirit of error."— 1 John 4:1,6. 

Those having the mind or spirit of God are 
said to be heavenly or spiritually minded. The 
spiritually minded are so transformed, so entirely 
different from what they were in their former 

R1410 :page 170 

earthly minded condition, that they are called 
"new creatures." However, the new mental 
creation or transformed mind is still identified 



with the human body— the body of its humiliation. 
But when the earthly house is dissolved, 
sacrificed, dead with Christ, we shall have a 
building of God— a new house— a glorious body, 
in harmony with, and fit for, the indwelling of 
the new mind. (2 Cor. 5:1.) As in Jesus' case, 
so in ours, the new body will be received in the 
resurrection— not by all, but by those now 
mentally or spiritually begotten of the spirit of 
truth. The resurrection is the birth of this new 
creation. Jesus was the first thus born. (Rev. 1:5. 
— Diaglott.) Thus we reach the perfect 
spiritual condition, and become spiritual beings, 
fully changed into the glorious likeness of 
our Lord (Rom. 6:5), who is now "the express 
image of the Father's person." (Heb. 1:3.) 
Such things as pertain to the heavenly condition, 
and can be seen only by the eye of faith 
through God's Word, are called spiritual things. 

Now we are prepared to understand Paul's 
teaching in 1 Cor. 2:9-16: "Eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into 
the heart of man (the natural man), the things 
which God hath prepared for them that love 
him. But God hath revealed them unto us by 
his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, 
yea, the deep things of God." That is, having 
the mind or spirit of God, that new mind 
prompts us to search into the deep things of 
God, to study that we may know and do his 
will as obedient sons. Having the mind or 
spirit of our Father, we will take heed to his 
Word and plans, that we may work in harmony 
with him. "For what man knoweth the things 
[mind, will, plans] of a man, save the spirit 
[mind] of man which is in him? Even so, the 
things of God knoweth no man, but the spirit 
ofGod."-l Cor. 2:11. 

"Now we have received the spirit [or mind] 
of God, that we might know the things that 
are freely given to us of God." But "the 
natural man receiveth not the things of the 
spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, 
neither can he know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned." They are understood 
only by those who have the spirit or mind of 
God, the spirit of his plan, and the spirit of the 
truth. These are more and more filled with 
the spirit of the truth and the spirit of obedience 
to it, not by comparing spiritual things 
with natural things, as the natural man does, but 
by "comparing spiritual things with spiritual." 
(1 Cor. 2:13.) "He that is spiritual judgeth 
all things [he is able to understand and properly 
estimate both human and spiritual things], 
yet he himself is judged of no man." No natural 



man can understand or rightly judge of the 

motives which prompt the spiritually minded 

"new creature" to willingly sacrifice things 

valuable to the natural man. Hence we are 

counted as fools by the worldly minded (1 Cor. 4:10), 

by those who have "the spirit of the 

world." 

This mind or spirit of Christ is the same as 
the spirit of God, for Christ sacrificed his own 
spirit (will), and was filled with the spirit of 
God— "For even Christ pleased not himself." 
-Rom. 15:3. 

Jesus said, "The words that I speak unto 
you, they are spirit and they are life." That 
is, they express the mind or spirit of God, in 
giving heed to which is life. It is for this 
cause that Jesus said, "Search the Scriptures." 
We are not merely to read them as a duty, but 
to search them diligently as a privilege, to the 
intent that we may know the spirit or mind of 
God. If we would be filled with the spirit of 
God we must drink deeply of the fountain of 
truth— his Word. Our earthen vessels are very 
imperfect and leaky, and it is easy to let the 
spiritual things slip (Heb. 2:1), in which case 
the spirit of the world, which is all around us, 
quickly rushes in to fill the vacuum. Therefore 
it behooves us to live very close to the 
fountain of truth, the Word of God, lest the 
spirit of God be quenched, and we be filled 
with the spirit of the world. But if constantly 
filled from the fountain of truth, we will not receive 
the spirit of the world, but the spirit 
which is of God. And it is thus that we may 
know the things which God has in reservation 
for us— even the deep things of God. Thus we 
see that what the natural man could not know, we, 
receiving the mind, influence, or spirit of God, 
may know. (1 Cor. 2:12.) Therefore, "Let 
the same mind be in you which was also in 
Christ Jesus," for "if any man have not the 

R1410 :page 171 

spirit of Christ he is none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

The holy spirit or mind should not be confounded 
with the fruits of the spirit or the gifts 
of the spirit, though its possession always yields 
the peaceable fruits of patience, meekness, love, 
etc. In the beginning of this age its possession 
was often accompanied, not only by fruit, 
but also by miraculous gifts of teaching, tongues, 
miracles, etc. (1 Cor. 12); but these, as well as 
their necessity, have largely passed away, as the 
Apostle foretold they would, the gift of teaching 
still remaining because still needful to 



"the body." 

Believing that the foregoing is a consistent 
and correct statement of the Bible teaching on 
this subject, which the Scriptures quoted, we 
think, prove, we proceed to examine the texts 
generally supposed to conflict with this understanding 
It should be borne in mind, however, 
that the translators of the Scriptures from 
Greek into English were Trinitarians, and naturally 
translated as much in harmony with their 
belief as they could. 

OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 



(a) "Quench not the spirit." (1 Thes. 5:19.) 

To quench signifies to extinguish, as to extinguish 
a fire or light. The Greek word from 
which it is translated occurs eight times in the 
New Testament, and in every other text it refers 
to quenching fire or light. Carry this 
thought with you and observe that by reason 
of having God's holy mind or spirit we are 
called "the light of the world" (Matt. 5:14); 
but if we should be seduced into worldliness by 
the spirit of the world, our light would be 
quenched, or extinguished. "If the light that 
is in thee become darkness [be extinguished], 
how great is that darkness!"— Matt. 6:23. 

(b) "Grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby 
ye are sealed unto the day of redemption." 
(Eph. 4:30.) To seal is to mark or designate. 
The children of this world may be distinguished 
by certain marks, and so may the children of 
God, the new creatures in Christ. The mark 

of the one class is the spirit (mind, disposition, 
will) of the world; in the other class the seal 
or mark is the spirit (mind, disposition, will) 
of God. From the moment of true consecration 
to God, the evidence, marks or sealing 
may be seen in words, thoughts and actions. 
These marks grow more and more distinct daily, 
if we keep growing in grace, knowledge 
and love. In other words, the spirit (mind) of 
God becomes our mind or spirit in proportion 
as we give up our own human will or spirit, and 
submit in all things to the will or spirit of God. 
Thus we are to let or permit the same mind to 
be in us that was also in Christ Jesus our Lord 
—a mind to do only the Father's will. Hence, 
our new mind or spirit is holy or God-directed. 

In this text the Apostle urges that we do 
nothing which will be a violation of our covenant, 
and thus a grief to the holy spirit or 
mind of God in us, or in other words, which 



would wound our conscience as new creatures 
in Christ. "Grieve not the holy Spirit [mind] 
of God [in you], whereby ye are sealed." 

(c) The spirit of truth— "shall not speak of 
himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, he shall 
speak, and he will show you things to come." 
(John 16:13.) The disciples, as Jews and natural 
men, had been looking at things from an 
earthly standpoint, expecting a human deliverance 
and a human kingdom. Jesus had talked 
of the kingdom, but not until now had he explained 
that he must die, and must leave them 
to go into a far country to receive the kingdom 
and to return. (Luke 19:12.) Comforting them, 
he assures them of another who would lead them 
and teach them— a Comforter that the Father 
would send in his name, or as his representative 
for the time. They must not get the idea that 
the coming comforter is to be another Messiah, 
or a different teacher; hence he says, "He 
shall not speak of himself;" that is, he shall 
not teach independently and out of harmony 
with my teaching, "but whatsoever he shall 
hear, that shall he speak." That is, the same 
things which I have taught, which you have 
been hearing, he will elaborate and teach more 
fully— "He shall glorify me, for he shall receive 
of mine and shall show it unto you." 
"All things that the Father hath are mine [his 
plans and my plans are all one]; therefore said 
I that he shall take of mine, and shall show it 
unto you." The new teacher will not turn 
your minds from me to himself; but all the 

R1410 :page 172 

teachings of the coming Comforter will be in 
harmony with my teachings, and to show you 
more fully that I am the Messiah. Neither 
need you doubt the truth of the Comforter's 
teachings, for it is the Spirit of Truth, and proceeds 
from the Father. (John 15:26.) This 
Spirit of Truth will be my messenger to communicate 
to you my doctrines, and will show 
you things to come. 

Even so it has been: the Spirit of Truth has 
been showing to the Church during this age 
more and more of the coming glory and glorious 
work of Christ and the depth of the riches 
of God's plans to be fulfilled in him. Thus 
Christ has been glorified in the Church. 

Jehovah is the author of truth, and all the truth 
which has reached and guided the Church during 
this age has therefore proceeded from him, 
from whom cometh every good and perfect gift. 
He has sent it through channels long since prepared 



—through the prophetic and typical teachings 
of the past, opened up to us through the 
inspired words of Jesus and the apostles. Thus 
has God's spirit, the spirit of the truth, led us 
day by day and shown us "things to come." 

(d) "But the Comforter, which is the Holy 
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, 
he shall teach you all things, and bring all 
things to your remembrance whatsoever I have 
said unto you." (John 14:26.) "Ghost" is but 
another and bad translation of pneuma, generally 
rendered "spirit." 

The fact that the Father sends the holy Spirit 
shows that it is under his authority and control, 
just as your powers are under your control. (See 
1 Cor. 14:31.) Only those who have followed 
in the footsteps of Jesus, sacrificing the human 
will and receiving the mind or spirit of God, 
can understand the import of these words of 
Jesus. To the natural man, an explanation of 
this text is impossible; but he who has the 
mind of Christ realizes that it is a comfort indeed. 
No matter how painful the crucifying of 
the flesh may be, we have learned to view it all 
from God's standpoint, and to esteem present 
affliction as light, compared with the glory that 
shall be revealed in us. Thus the holy spirit 
shall be in you; your spirit or will having been 
transformed, made new, is now holy. Produced 
by the truth, it is the spirit of the truth 
and may be lost only through your receiving a 
spirit of error, a spirit of slumber, or the "spirit 
of the world," any of which, if received, will 
quench and drive out the holy spirit of truth 
from the heart. 

The mind of Christ, or the new spirit, leads 
us to search the Scriptures, God's storehouse of 
truth. Thus the spirit of truth works in us. It 
also enables us to comprehend God's Word; 
for the more we can get to see from God's 
standpoint the more reasonable to us does his 
Word become, that we through patience and 
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, while 
enduring present afflictions.— Rom. 8:26; 15:4. 

(e) "And they were all filled with the Holy 
Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues, 
as the Spirit gave them utterance." (Acts 2:4.) 
In this case, not only were the disciples filled 
with the Spirit or mind of God, which was God 
working in them, but God by his Spirit also 
acted upon them, conferring special "gifts," for 
a special purpose. 

It must seem absurd to every one to talk 
about a person being in several hundred persons, 
but many feel compelled to say so, because 
of their unscriptural theory. In thinking of it, 



every intelligent person has to think of the 
power or influence of God in those men, no 
matter how stoutly they say that it is a person who 
is diffused into a number of persons. We cannot 
too carefully discriminate between the 
Spirit of God and these miraculous "gifts" 
by which those acceptable to God were at first 
marked out. These "gifts" were for the establishment 
of the Church, and were different in different 
members; but they were not to be compared 
with "the fruits of the Spirit"— joy, peace, faith, 
patience, love, etc. To have the latter proved 
adoption, but not so the gifts, for though a 
man had gifts of tongues and of miracles, he 
might be but a sounding brass and a tinkling 
cymbal. The holy Spirit has abode in the 
members of the Church throughout the Gospel 
age, as was promised, though many of the 
"gifts," being no longer needful, have passed 
away, as the Apostle predicted.— 1 Cor. 13:8-11. 

(f) "But Peter said, Ananias, why hath 
Satan filled thine heart, to lie to the Holy Spirit 

R1410 :page 173 

and to keep back part of the price of the land?" 
(Acts 5:3.) Satan had filled Ananias' heart with 
his spirit of covetousness. God had filled Peter 
with his spirit, and one of the gifts of God's 
spirit, conferred upon Peter, was the gift of 
"discerning of spirits." (1 Cor. 12:10.) In 
verse 3, the lying is said to be unto the Holy 
Ghost (spirit or mind of God), and in verse 5, 
it is said to be unto God. The idea is the same, 
and thus we have the term Holy Ghost or Holy 
Spirit defined to be the mind of God, whether 
in the Father or in his representatives and 
agents— as in this instance in Peter. 

(g) "Then Peter said unto her [Sapphira], 
How is it ye have agreed together to tempt 
the Spirit of the Lord?" (Acts 5:9.) As with 
Ananias, so with his wife, their lying was 
reckoned to be not to Peter and the Church as 
men, but to God, whose agent and representative, 
through the Spirit, Peter was. 

(h) "But whosoever speaketh against the 
holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither 
in this world, neither in the world to come." 
(Matt. 12:32.) Read the context: Jesus had 
just exercised the power of God by casting out 
a devil. The Pharisees saw the miracle and 
could not deny it; but, to turn aside its force, 
they said it was performed by the power of the 
devil and not by God's power. But in answer, 
Jesus claims that he cast out devils by the Spirit 
[influence or power] of God. Then he upbraids 



them for being so malicious— a generation 
of vipers, so set on the traditions of their 
church that their eyes were blinded against the 
simplest kind of reasoning. It was so plainly 
evident that the power which opposed and cast 
out evil must be good, that they were inexcusable 
in ascribing it to Satan. They might and 
would be freely forgiven for supposing him, as 
a man, an impostor, and hence for blaspheming 
him; but they were wholly inexcusable for that 
gross prejudice which would ascribe such a 
good deed to the power of Satan. This, their 
sin, would not be among those forgiven. It 
must be punished; it will neither be forgiven in 
this present life, nor in the next, the Millennial 
age; it indicates more than Adamic depravity, 
and must have stripes. 

(i) "The spirit said unto Philip, Go near, 
and join thyself to this chariot." (Acts 8:29.) 
We fail to see in this anything demanding another 
God. We think the influence or spirit 
of God could indicate this to Philip in a variety 
of ways. In what way he was influenced 
is not stated and is immaterial to us. 

(j) "The Spirit said and unto him, Behold, 
three men seek thee." (Acts 10:19.) We would 
make the same criticism of this as of the 
former objection. It is immaterial how the 
power or spirit of God addressed to Peter this 
information. Possibly it came as an inspired 
thought into his mind, or possibly he was guided 
by three men's voices and the three visions, 
and accepted these as evidences of the mind or 
will of God as to his going. 

(k) "The Holy Ghost said, separate me 
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I 
have called them." (Acts 13:2.) We are not 
told in what manner the holy Spirit said or indicated 
the setting apart specially of these two. 
It is very probable, however, that they were 
"called" and "set apart" by the holy Spirit 
in much the same manner that all true ministers 
of God are now called and set apart. All 
the fully consecrated— begotten— children of 
God are called to preach, each according to 
his ability. The Spirit says to us all, "Why 
stand ye idle?... go ye also into the vineyard." 
But, where special ability and opportunity to 
teach or expound God's Word is possessed by 
any of the consecrated, that special ability and 
opportunity should be recognized as a special 
call to the more public work of the ministry— 
the talents possessed emphasizing the general 
call of the holy Spirit. 

In speaking of his call to the ministry (Gal. 1:1), 
Paul mentions his authority of the Father 



and Son, but ignores the holy Spirit entirely; 
which would be inexcusable if the holy Spirit 
were a person, and, in fact, the person actually 
appointing him. But it is entirely consistent 
when we regard the holy Spirit as the holy influence 
from the Father or the Son, or from 
both conjointly, as their purposes are one. 
Gal. 1:1 reads, "Paul, an apostle, not of men, 
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God 
the Father, who raised him from the dead." 
(1) "For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost 
and to us," etc. (Acts 15:28.) The decisions 
reached in the matter under consideration 

R1410 :page 174 

seemed to be the judgment of the Church, and 
in harmony with God's will and plan. 

James, the chief speaker at the council, gives 
the clue to how God's will or mind was then 
ascertained; and we find it the same method 
which we use to-day. He argues from Peter's 
statement of God's leadings in the matter of 
Cornelius, and from an unfulfilled prophecy 
which he quotes. The conclusion drawn from 
these, he and all the Church accepted as the holy 
Spirit's teaching. Examine Acts 15:13-18. 

(m) "And were forbidden of the Holy Ghost 
to preach the Word in Asia." (Acts 16:6.) 
Like the others, this text in no way indicates 
that the holy Spirit is a person. As to how 
God's power or influence was exercised to direct 
their course away from Asia we know not, but 
possibly by unfavorable circumstances, or by a 
vision. No matter how, the lesson is that God 
was guiding the apostles. An illustration of 
one of the Spirit's ways of leading them is 
given in the context, verse 9. "A vision appeared 
to Paul in the night. There stood a 
man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, 
'Come over into Macedonia, and help us;' and 
after he had seen the vision, immediately they 
endeavored to go into Macedonia, assuredly 
gathering that the Lord had called them for to 
preach the gospel unto them." All these various 
dealings teach us that the methods by 
which God taught and led in those days were 
not very different from those he now uses. 

(n) "Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth 
in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions 
abide me." (Acts 20:23.) Nothing here indicates 
personality. As an illustration of the 
agencies by which the holy power of God informed 
Paul of the bonds awaiting him at 
Jerusalem, see Acts 21:10-14. 

(o) "The flock over which the Holy Ghost 



hath made you overseers, to feed the Church of 

God." (Acts 20:28.) Paul, addressing the 

Church, not the world, says, "The manifestation 

of the Spirit is given to every man [in 

Christ] to profit withal"— "GOD hath set some 

in the Church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, 

thirdly teachers," etc.— "and there are 

diversities of operations, but it is the same GOD 

which worketh all in all." (1 Cor. 12:6,7,28.) 

This explains how God through his holy Spirit 

sets men apart to various offices which he 

deems needful to the Church. It contradicts 

the thought of the holy Spirit being another 

person, and shows that God did the work by 

his Spirit. These elders of the Church had consecrated 

themselves to the Lord's service, and 

were chosen because of special fitness and talents, 

by their brethren (in whom also was the 

holy Spirit, the will of God), to be overseers of 

the flock. And though called to office through 

human instrumentality, they accepted the service 

as of God's direction and appointment. 

(p) "God hath revealed them unto us by 
his Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, 
yea, the deep things of God." "Which things 
also we speak, not in the words which man's 
wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost 
teacheth." (1 Cor. 2:10,13. Read the context.) 
This, as we have already shown, proves that 
the holy Spirit or mind of God in us, as his 
children, enables us to comprehend his plan, 
etc., even the deep things of God, by coming 
into full harmony with him through his Word. 
We have also noticed the context (verse 12), 
where Paul, in explaining the subject, tries 
to make it plain by comparing "the Spirit 
which is of [from] God," in us, with "the 
spirit of the world," which influences "the natural 
man." It is clear that the spirit of the 
world is not a person, but a worldly mind. 
The spirit or mind of God in his children is 
no more a person than is the spirit of the world 
with which it is here contrasted. 

(q) "But the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness 
unto him: neither can he know them, 
for they are spiritually discerned." (Verse 14.) 
This is a forcible statement of what we have 
already seen. A man who is filled with the 
worldly spirit is unprepared to see the "deep" and 
glorious things of God— the things which God 
hath prepared for them that love him. This is 
a close test if applied. Have you the Spirit of 
God? Have you been taught by it (through 
the Word) any "deep things" which the natural, 
worldly man cannot appreciate? 



Alas ! how often have we felt the force of 
this distinction between natural and spiritual 

R1410 :page 175 

as we have talked with some of the professed 
teachers of to-day, many of whom are blind 
leaders of the blind, when they confessed and 
sometimes boasted of their ignorance of "the 
things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him." Thereby they proclaim that they 
have not the mind of God, do not know his 
plans, and cannot have much of his Spirit, the 
Spirit of the Truth, when they have not much 
of the truth from which that Spirit flows. The 
test here given of our possession of the Spirit 
is our ability to discern and appreciate the deep 
things of God which are hidden from the worldly 
—"God hath revealed them unto us by his 
Spirit." 

INEXPRESSIBLE GROANINGS. 



(r) "The Spirit itself maketh intercession 
for us with groanings which cannot be uttered, 
and he that searcheth the hearts knoweth the 
mind of the Spirit."— Rom. 8:26,27. 

How much this expression of our Father's 
loving care has been misunderstood by his 
children! Who that has been taught that the 
holy Spirit is a person, and, as the catechisms 
state it, "equal in power" with the Father, has 
wondered why it could not utter groanings. 
Many a Christian brother has endeavored to 
make up for this supposed weakness or inability 
of the holy Spirit to express itself, by redoubling 
his own groanings. But it would be 
equally strange if it be understood to mean 
that the holy Spirit, as the influence or power 
of the Almighty Jehovah, is unable to express 
itself. We know that in past ages this influence 
found abundant expression by words and 
deeds of the prophets. We know that in this 
age all the apostles attest its power over 
them. What can it mean, then— "The Spirit 
itself maketh intercession for us with groanings 
which cannot be uttered?" The mistake is in 
supposing that it is God's Spirit which supplicates. 
It is the spirit of the saints which supplicates 
and often cannot express itself. 

Let us look at the text with its connections, and 
the ground for our conclusion will be evident. 
Paul had just been speaking of sin-burdened 
humanity groaning in its fetters. He assures 



us that it shall be given liberty from this 

bondage when the Church is selected from the 

world, and when as sons of God the great Deliverer 

whom Jehovah raises up to bless all the 

families of the earth is manifested in power. 

(Verses 19-21.) He then passes from the groanings 

of the world to the present condition of 

the Church, in which we groan: "Ourselves also, 

which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even 

we groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption." 

—Verse 23. 

Our renewed, transformed mind or spirit, 
once worldly, is now holy and spiritual, but 
our bodies are still human, and have the Adamic 
imperfections. Hence we, as new creatures, 
are burdened by the flesh, and groan for the 
promised deliverance into Christ's likeness. 
Paul explains how we may, by faith, reckon the 
earthly body dead, and think of ourselves as 
new creatures perfected, and thus realize ourselves 
saved now— "Saved by hope." (Verse 24.) 
Then, having seen how we may view ourselves, 
he tells us how the matter is viewed from God's 
standpoint— God reckons us "new" and "holy" 
—"spiritual" beings— and he recognizes as 
ours only those deeds of the flesh to which our 
minds consent. God knows when your holy 
spirit (new mind) is willing and your flesh weak. 

As the receiving of the new mind brought us 
into a new relationship to God, and into new 
hopes, so "likewise the spirit [our new holy 
mind] also helpeth [maketh up for] our [bodily] 
infirmities. For we know not [even] what 
we should pray for as we ought [much less are 
we always able to do as we would like]; but the 
spirit itself [our holy mind] maketh intercession 
[for us— omitted in old MSS.] with groanings 
which cannot be uttered. And he that searcheth 
the hearts [God] knoweth what is the mind 
[Greek, phronema— inclination] of the [our] 
spirit; because he [it] maketh intercession for 
the saints according to the will of God." It is 
God's will that the heart-desires of his children 
be accepted, in both prayer and service, 
notwithstanding the imperfections of their 
vessels. 

O, how comforting is this thought! How 
often you have experienced it. You were perhaps 
overtaken in a fault, entrapped by some 
weakness of the human nature, and, almost disheartened, 

R1410 :page 176 

you went to your Father in prayer. 

You had no words for utterance, but you groaned 

in spirit to God— "being burdened." God heard 



you and blessed you, answering your unuttered 
prayer and giving strength. Paul's conclusion 
is ours: we have every cause for rejoicing. 
What shall we say then? God is for us, evidently, 
and disposed to accept our heart-intentions 
rather than our imperfect prayers and 
deeds. "If God be for us, who can be against 
us?"— Verse 31. 

(s) "The Spirit itself beareth witness with 
our spirit that we are the children of God."— 
Rom. 8:16. 

Nothing in this text teaches that the holy 
Spirit is a person, but the contrary: it indicates 
that as each man has a spirit or mind, so God 
has a spirit. Read this text in the light of 
1 Cor. 2:11,12, and it will be seen that it does 
not teach of a personal holy Spirit. 

THE WITNESS OF THE SPIRIT. 



On few subjects have Christians in general 
felt more disturbed than on this. Not knowing 
what the witness of the spirit is, they know 
not surely whether they have it or not. And 
some, more full of assurance than of knowledge, 
claim that they have it, and refer to their own 
changeable feelings as evidence. The Calvinist, 
repudiating the idea of positive knowledge 
of sonship, sings, 

"Tis a point I long to know- 
Oft it causes anxious thought: 
Do I love the Lord or no? 
Am I his, or am I not?" 

This comes from a misapprehension of the 
doctrine of Election. Other Christians, equally 
misunderstanding the subject, claim that when 
they feel good these feelings are the witness of 
sonship. Because the Scriptures say, "Thou 
wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is 
stayed on thee," they judge of their sonship 
solely by their peace, and often by their prosperity. 
They lose sight of the words of Jesus 
—"In the world ye shall have tribulation, but 
in me ye shall have peace." 

When things move smoothly they feel good, 
and consider this the witness of the Spirit. 
But when they look at the heathen and at the 
worldly, and see that many of them apparently 
have peace of mind too, their supposed witness 
proves insufficient. Then the dark hour comes, 
and they say, How easy a matter to be deceived, 
and they sing— 

"Where is the peace I once enjoyed, 
When first I found the Lord?" 



They are in torment lest they have grieved 
the Spirit— for "fear hath torment." This is all 
because of the unscriptural view taken of the 
Spirit and its dealings and witnessings. Let 
us take the Bible view of the witness of the 
Spirit (mind) of God with our spirit (mind), 
and the song of God's children shall be— 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word." 

As we would know of a man's mind or spirit 
by his words and dealings, so we are to know 
of God's mind or spirit by his words and dealings. 
God's Word is, that whosoever cometh 
unto him by Jesus (consecrates himself) is accepted. 
(Heb. 7:25.) Then, the first question 
to ask yourself is, Did I ever, during the acceptable 
time, fully consecrate myself— my life, 
time, talents, influence, my all— to God? If 
you can candidly answer before God— Yes, I 
gave myself wholly to him, then be assured, 
on the authority, not of your feelings, but of 
God's Word, which, unlike your feelings, is 
unchangeable, that you then and there instantly 
became a child of God— a probationary 
member of the true Church, a branch of the 
true vine. (John 15:1.) This is a witness that 
you have joined the true Church, which is 
Christ's body: it is a witness given to your 
mind or spirit, by the testimony of God's spirit 
through his Word. 

Whether or not you are abiding in him now, 
depends on whether you have grown as a branch, 
and are bearing fruit: "Every branch in me 
that beareth not fruit he taketh away, and every 
branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth [pruneth] 
it, that it may bring forth more fruit." 
Here is stated the rule in our Father's family 
—chastisements, pruning, taking away of dross, 
and a development of fruit-bearing qualities. 
If you lack these indications of parental care 
and personal growth in grace you lack one evidence 
or witness that you are a child. "Whom 

R1410 :page 177 

the Lord loveth, he chasteneth, and scourgeth 

every son whom he receiveth. If ye be without 

chastisement, then are ye bastards and not 

sons." (Heb. 12:8.) Afflictions and troubles 

come upon the world as well as upon the Lord's 

saints, but they are not marks of sonship except 

to those fully consecrated to his service. 

Nor is the pruning and chastising in the divine 

family always the same. As with earthly children, 

so with God's children: to some, a look 

of disapproval, to others, a word of rebuke, is 



an all-sufficient reproof, while others must be 

scourged repeatedly. An earthly parent rejoices 

most in the child so obedient and submissive 

that a look or word is sufficient to prune off 

evil; and so does our Father in heaven. Such 

are those who judge themselves, and who therefore 

need less of the chastising of the Lord. 

(1 Cor. 1 1 :3 1 .) To be of this class requires 

a full consecration; and these are the overcomers 

deemed worthy of being joint-heirs 

with Jesus Christ their Lord, whose footsteps 

they thus follow. To this obedient, watchful 

class the Lord says, "I will guide thee with 

mine eye." Those who can be guided only by 

the scourge are not the overcoming class, destined 

to be the Lord's bride. 

The chastening, however, is not always suffering 
for our faults, but with the saints it is 
often the suffering which strict adherence to 
their covenant of sacrifice involves. Even so 
our Lord was chastened for our transgressions, 
not his own, because he bore the sins of many. 
And so we must suffer as joint-sacrifices with 
him. 

Here is one testimony of the Spirit, then— 
that every true child or branch needs and will 
have continual pruning. Are you being pruned? 
If so, that is an evidence of your being a 
branch; in this pruning the Spirit of truth bears 
witness with your spirit that you are God's child. 

Again the Spirit witnesseth that "whosoever 
is born [begotten] of God sinneth not." (1 John 5:18.) 
Such may be overtaken in a fault, may 
err in judgment, may be overpowered by the old 
nature not yet under control, but will never 
wilfully transgress God's will. Now can your 
mind answer that you delight to do God's will 
and would not willingly violate or in any way 
oppose it, but would rather have his will done, 
his plan carried out, even though it should 
dash your former hopes and break every tender 
tie? If so, the witness of your spirit or mind 
agrees with the spirit of truth, indicating that 
you are a child of God, acceptable to him. 

The witness of the Spirit is, that the true 
branches of the vine, like the vine Christ Jesus, 
are not of the world— "If ye were of the 
world, the world would love his own; but because 
ye are not of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you." "Yea, and all that will 
live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." 
(2 Tim. 3:12.) Does your mind testify 
that it is thus in your experience? If so, 
then the Spirit of God again witnesseth with 
your spirit that you are his child. Remember 
that the world spoken of by Jesus included all 



worldly-minded ones, all in whom the spirit of 
the world has a footing. In Jesus' day, this was 
true of the nominal Jewish Church. In fact, 
all of his persecution came from professors of 
religion. Marvel not if you should have a 
similar experience. It was the chief religionists 
of his day that called Jesus Beelzebub, a 
prince of devils; and he tells us, "If they have 
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how 
much more shall they call them of his household." 
(Matt. 10:25.) If Jesus had joined 
hands with them he would not have had "hatred" 
and "persecution." Even had he kept 
quiet and let their hypocrisies, shams, long 
prayers and false teachings alone, he would 
have been let alone and would not have suffered. 
So it is with us: it is from a similar class that 
the truth and those who have the spirit of the 
truth, and who let their light shine, now incur 
hatred and persecution. If we have this witness 
it is another testimony of the Spirit that 
we are overcoming the spirit of the world— 
therefore the worldly-spirited hate us. 

The Spirit witnesseth that whosoever is 
ashamed of Jesus and his words, of him shall 
he be ashamed. (Mark 8:38.) Does your spirit 
witness that you are one whom he here promises 
to confess? If so, rejoice: this is another 
good witness of the Spirit that your present 
standing is that of a child and heir. 

The Spirit witnesseth that "Whosoever is 

R1410 :page 178 

born [begotten] of God overcometh the world: 

and this is the victory that overcometh the 

world, even our faith." (1 John 5:4.) Is this 

your experience? To be an overcomer signifies 

that you are not in harmony with the spirit 

—the aims, hopes and ambitions— of the world. 

Have you this witness that you are overcoming 

the world? Wait a moment— you are not to 

overcome the world by flattery, nor by joining 

in its follies, nor are you to overcome the 

world by teaching a Sunday class, or joining a 

sectarian church; no, but by your faith. To 

be an overcomer, you must walk by faith, not 

by sight. Looking not at things that are seen 

—popularity, worldly show, numbers, denominational 

greatness, etc., but looking at the 

things which are not seen— the spiritual and 

eternal things.— 2 Cor. 4:18. 

Again, the Spirit witnesseth that if you are 
a child of God, you will not be ignorant of 
his Word, and will not only be in the light 
as to present truth, but will know something 



about "things to come." The maturing 
child will grow in grace, knowledge and love, 
adding daily the graces of the Spirit— faith, 
virtue, knowledge, charity, etc. And surely 
"If these things be in you and abound, they 
make you that ye shall neither be barren nor 
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. But he that lacketh these things is 
blind and cannot see afar off.... For if ye do 
these things ye shall never fall; for so an entrance 
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, 
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ." (2 Pet. 1:5-11. Compare 
John 16:12-15.) Ask yourself whether 
you have this witness of growth, and the sort 
of fruit mentioned. Remember, too, that you 
cannot grow in love faster than you grow in 
knowledge; and you cannot grow in favor except 
by complying with God's instructions. 
This instruction, this knowledge, is found in 
his Word. Hence we are exhorted to "search 
the Scriptures," that we may be thoroughly 
furnished unto every good work.— 2 Tim. 3:17. 

These are the witnesses of the Spirit by which 
we may know just how we stand. You may be 
a young sprout in the vine; then, of course, 
God does not expect ripe fruit instantly; but 
there should be budding at once, and soon the 
fruits. And if you are a developed and advanced 
Christian, every testimony of the Spirit above 
cited should witness with your spirit. If in 
any of these testimonies of the Spirit you find 
yourself lacking, give diligence, give earnest 
heed, that you may possess every experience 
described. Then you will no longer sing— 

"Tis a point I long to know," etc., 
but will know, and be rooted and grounded, 
built up and established in the faith. In this 
divinely arranged way, we escape from fear and 
from what Bunyan called "Doubting Castle," 
for our trust rests securely on God's promises. 

"When darkness seems to vail his face, 
You'll rest in his unchanging grace; 

His oath, his covenant and his blood 

Supporting 'neath the whelming flood." 

JUSTIFIED AND SANCTIFIED BY THE SPIRIT. 



"But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 
but ye are justified, in the name of our Lord 
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.— 
1 Cor. 6:11. 

Sanctification means a setting apart or separating. 
Those who are sanctified, set apart, 



fully consecrated to God, must first be justified 
or cleansed from Adamic sin by accepting in 
faith the testimony of God, that "Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures." Being 
then justified by faith, we have peace with God, 
and can approach him and begin to do works 
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. The evidence 
which we have of our justification and 
sanctification is the testimony of the spirit of 
truth in the Word, and the "seal" and "witness" 
in ourselves— our transformed mind. 

The power which enables us to live up to our 
consecration vows is the Spirit or mind of our 
God of which we receive. The Spirit of truth 
received by the study and obedience of our 
Father's words gives the needed strength for 
the overcoming of the human nature and the 
spirit of the world. 

To this agree other scriptures. Paul prayed: 
"The very God of peace sanctify you wholly." 
Peter says: Ye are "elect [chosen], through 
sanctification [setting apart] of the Spirit, unto 
obedience." Again, that the sanctifying 

R1410 :page 179 

power or spirit in us is the spirit of truth is 

shown by Paul's statement, that Christ sanctifies 

and cleanses the Church by the Word. (Eph. 5:26.) 

Our Lord Jesus prayed: "Sanctify 

them through thy truth: thy Word is truth." 

(John 17:17.) So, then, these scriptures taken 

together teach, as the foregoing, that our sanctification 

is accomplished by the spirit of truth 

freely imparted to the consecrated followers of 

the Redeemer through the Word of God, which 

he has provided for this purpose. 

All thus sanctified are reckoned new creatures 
in Christ, and are addressed as "them 
that are sanctified in Christ." (1 Cor. 1:2.) 
That it is by reason of our sanctification of 
spirit that we are one with Christ, is shown by 
the statement: "Both he that sanctifieth and 
they who are sanctified are all of one, for which 
cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren." 
(Heb. 2:11.) Thus it is that we are "washed, 
sanctified, justified, in the name of our Lord 
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God"— the 
spirit of the truth, communicated to us through 
his Word. 

THE SPIRIT WILL REPROVE THE WORLD. 



"When he ['the Spirit of truth'] is come 



he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, 
and of judgement."— John 16:8-11. 

Many gather from this text that the holy 
Spirit operates in sinners for their reformation. 
This is not the right view. The spirit of God 
is not in the children of this world. Theirs is 
"the spirit of the world." The "spirit of the 
world," or "the carnal mind, is enmity against 
God." The Spirit or mind of God is in believers 
only. Hence, wherever we find it, it is 
a seal or mark of sonship— "By whom also 
ye were sealed after that ye had believed the 
gospel of your salvation." (Eph. 1:13.) "If 
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is 
none of his." The Spirit of God, by means of 
its fruits, and its witness through the Word, is 
the evidence of our begetting to the family of 
God; it is "the spirit of adoption whereby we 
cry, Abba, Father." (Rom. 8:15.) It must be 
evident to all, then, that the Spirit in us is not 
the spirit which is in the worldly, and that the 
Spirit of God is in no sense in the worldly. 

In what sense, we inquire, does the Spirit of 
truth, the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ, 
reprove the world? We reply that this spirit 
in the true Church is the light of the world. 
It is the light which shines from the true 
Christian, which reproves or condemns and opposes 
the darkness of this world. Jesus, when 
anointed by the Spirit of God, declared, "I am 
the light of the world." And again, "As long 
as I am in the world, I am the light of the 
world." (John 8:12; 9:5.) Addressing his 
Church of this age, sanctified by the same holy 
Spirit, he says, "Ye are the light of the world. 
...Let your light shine before men." (Matt. 5:14-16.) 
Paul, addressing the same body of 
Christ, says, "Ye were at one time darkness, 
but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children 
of light." (Eph. 5:8; 1 Thes. 5:5.) "For 
God [the spirit of God, the spirit of truth] 
...hath shined in our hearts to give the light 
of the knowledge of the glory of God." (2 Cor. 4:6.) 
Thus we see that it is the light of 
God's truth, his spirit or mind shining in our 
hearts, which shines out upon the world; and 
we are to "do all things without murmurings 
and disputings, that ye may be blameless and 
harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, in 
the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, 
among whom ye shine as lights in the world, 
holding forth the word of life."— Phil. 2:15. 

It is, thus, not directly, but by a reflex light, 
through those who possess it, that the Spirit 
operates upon (but not in) the world; for the 
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit 



of God, neither can he know them. (1 Cor. 2:14.) 
The Apostle thus explains the reproving of the 
world by the Spirit in the saints, saying, 
"Walk as children of light.. .and have no 
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, 
but rather reprove them. ...All things that 
are reproved are made manifest [shown to be 
wrong] by the light." (Eph. 5:8-13.) The 
light of God's truth, which is the expression 
of his mind or spirit, as it shines through a 
sanctified life, is the holy Spirit reproving 
the darkness of the world, showing those 
who see it, what is sin, and what is righteousness, 
from which they will reason of a coming 
judgment, when righteousness will receive some 

R1410 :page 180 

reward and sin some punishment. Thus a godly 
life is always a reproof to the ungodly, even 
where no word of reproof may be possible, or 
proper. The spirit in you reproves them; for 
if sanctified ye are "living epistles known and 
read of all men." 

The true Church has always been a light in 
the world; but, as with its Head, the light has 
shined in the darkness; and though the darkness 
recognizes the reproof of its presence, it 
comprehends it not. Therefore they have always 
persecuted the light-bringers, because 
they knew not our Father, nor our Lord, nor 
his body. (John 16:3.) It has always been a 
part of the Church's mission to let the truth shine 
through it to reprove evil. And this reproof 
has always been chiefly to nominal systems and 
nominal professors, as were our Lord's reproofs. 
But "if the light that is in thee be [become] 
darkness, how great is that darkness!"— both 
to the individual soul in whom the light has 
gone out, and to the world from whom the light 
is thus obscured. Satan achieves no greater 
triumph than when he seduces a soul which was 
once enlightened and sanctified by the truth; 
and the influence of such a one for evil is more 
than doubled. "Let him that thinketh he 
standeth take heed lest he fall." 

BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 



A common error among God's children today, 
arising also from an improper conception 
of the holy Spirit, is the supposed necessity for 
frequent baptisms of the Spirit. We are told, 
"Be ye filled with the Spirit;" and we would 



urge the necessity of constantly receiving supplies 

of grace to help our infirmities. We all 

need constantly to go to the fountain to replenish, 

because our "earthen vessels" are 

very defective and the spirit of Christ easily 

slips out, being under constant pressure from 

the spirit of the world. But to be filled with 

the Spirit is something totally different from 

the baptism of the Spirit. 

So far as we are informed, there have been 
but three baptisms of the Spirit in all: first, 
Jesus was so baptized: second, the disciples at 
Pentecost were similarly baptized; third, Cornelius 
and his family were so baptized. These 
three baptisms were in reality but one, as already 
shown from the Levitical type. The 
holy anointing oil was poured upon the head 
and ran down over the body of the typical 
priest; and so the spirit of anointing given to 
our Head, Jesus, descended on the Church at 
Pentecost, and has since been running down 
over and anointing all that are members of his 
body. In the three cases mentioned above, 
then, it was an outward manifestation which 
witnessed specially that God recognized the 
baptized as his. To convince the natural man, 
this acceptance was accompanied by various 
"gifts." (1 Cor. 14:22.) To them these 
gifts were the evidences of the possession of 
the Spirit and of acceptance with God. 

The spirit or mind of God is now received 
without the gifts and without outward manifestation, 
those manifestations and gifts being 
now recorded in the Word of God, and not 
(or with few exceptions) in the persons and 
deeds of his children. Paul testified that he 
might have gifts, or be acted upon by the Spirit, 
and yet be almost destitute of the spirit of love 
and sacrifice itself— and thus be but a "tinkling 
cymbal." (1 Cor. 13:1.) Thus we see 
that the gifts were not a mark of special favor 
toward those exercised by them. What we 
may have of the "witness" of the Spirit is a 
far better criterion of our spiritual condition 
than if possessed of the mountain-moving, 
tongue-speaking and miracle-working power, 
without the internal witness of harmony with 
God's Word. 

Since Cornelius, there have been no such 
baptisms or outward manifestations of God's 
favor; but instead, the inward, unseen witness 
of the Spirit of Truth with our spirit, that we 
are children and heirs of God. 

Nor should we wonder at this: the Church 
was like two rooms, hitherto unopened— locked 
up. The one room represents the Jewish believers 



in Jesus; the other the Gentile believers. 
Both were to be henceforth thrown open 
and used. There must be an opening and 
demonstration, after which the doors, standing 
open, needed not a further re-opening. Peter 
unlocked or opened both of these doors. At 
Pentecost he did the opening work to the Jews 

R1410 :page 181 

who had believed. (Acts 2:14-41.) And 
when, about three and one-half years after, it 
became God's due time to receive Gentile believers 
into the same privileges of sonship, 
Peter was again used to open that door— being 
sent to Cornelius, the first Gentile convert. 
(Acts 10.) Thus he used the "keys of the 
kingdom of heaven" (the Church), and opened 
the way, as Jesus had foretold. (Matt. 16:19.) 
Keys represent power and authority. 
He needed more than one, because hitherto 
Jews and Gentiles had been recognized as totally 
distinct, and the Gentiles were not fellow-heirs, 
and of the same body. 

If the acceptance of Jewish-born believers 
was indicated once for all at Pentecost, why 
should God repeat it to others now? If the 
acceptance of Gentile-born believers was clearly 
shown in Cornelius' case, why should a repetition 
be asked? There is nothing in the 
Scriptures to indicate that these baptisms were 
ever repeated. 

Some now meet and pray for a Pentecostal 
baptism of the holy Spirit. They look back 
to that with special longings, thinking that it 
was something not now possessed by the saints, 
whereas the things not now possessed are merely 
the gifts of the Spirit. This is wrong— it is 
looking from the standpoint of the natural 
mind. It is looking at the things that are seen, 
and not at the things unseen and eternal, for a 
basis of faith. When just coming out of the 
fleshly into the spiritual dispensation, it was 
very necessary to have something which the 
natural man might recognize to mark the new 
era. The gifts were in the Church, not to convince 
the saints of their acceptance with God, 
but to convince others of the divine authority 
of Christianity. (See 1 Cor. 14:22.) The 
witness of the Spirit was for the saints. 

The Church in general had the gifts, but 
they did not all receive those gifts at Pentecost, 
nor by a baptism of the Spirit. The eleven 
apostles, with Paul, the Lord's choice for the 
place of Judas, possessed the special power of 
communicating those gifts by laying on of 



hands (Compare Acts 8:13,14,17-19); but 
those who received the gifts from their hands 
could not re-communicate them to others. 

Though entirely out of harmony with God's 
Word to pray for another baptism of the holy 
Spirit, it is right to pray to be kept filled with 
the holy Spirit. The Father in heaven is more 
willing to give the Spirit to those that ask him 
than earthly parents are to give good gifts to 
their children. (Luke 11:13.) When we 
ask for anything, it implies that we want it; 
and if wholly consecrated we should want to 
receive the holy Spirit in the way God wishes 
to give it. We pray for daily food, and properly, 
but we must do more than pray. God 
puts within our reach the needful means of procuring 
the food, and thus the food comes from 
him from whom cometh every good gift. When 
we pray for the Spirit, and desire to "be filled 
with the Spirit," it is well. God has already 
provided all the means necessary to the fulfilment 
of our request. The "Spirit of truth" 
will give the very filling we desire, but we must 
partake of, must eat the feast, or we will not 
be filled. He who will not eat of a full table 
will be empty and starve, as truly as though 
there were no food. The asking of a blessing 
on food will not fill us; we must eat it; so 
the possession of a Bible and a petition for spiritual 
food will not do: we must eat the Word 
of God if we would derive his spirit from it. 

The Spirit of truth speaks to us through the 
Word, and by obedience to the Word we shall 
be filled with the Spirit. Our Lord said, "The 
words that I speak unto you, they are spirit 
and they are life." (John 6:63.) And of 
those who are filled with the Spirit it is true as 
spoken by the prophet, "Thy words were 
found and I did eat them." (Jer. 15:16.) It 
is useless, then, for us to pray, Lord, Lord, give 
us the Spirit, if we neglect the Word of truth 
from which that Spirit is supplied. It is for 
this reason that many who meet often and pray 
much for the holy Spirit are still but "babes 
in Christ;" and many seek the outward signs 
as proof of relationship, instead of the inward 
witness through the Word of truth. 

As we have just seen, it is because we have 
something to do if we would be filled with the 
Spirit, as surely as we have something to do if 
we would have natural food, that the Apostle 
addresses us— "Be ye filled with the Spirit" 

R1410 :page 182 

(Eph. 5:18), indicating that it rests entirely 



with us, since the doors were opened wide at 
Pentecost and at Cornelius' house. 

"He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost 
and with fire." (Matt. 3:10-12.) These words 
were spoken to the Jews as a nation, and our Lord 
was the one who would do the baptizing. As 
many of that nation as received him were baptized 
of the holy Spirit at Pentecost, and the 
remainder were afterward baptized with fire- 
trouble. The time of trouble which finally, in 
A.D. 70, destroyed their national existence 
was the fiery baptism foretold by the Prophets, 
and here by John. The three verses here connected 
(10-12) refer to the same fire. The 
unfruitful tree cast into the fire and the chaff 
burned represent those of that nation who 
"knew not the time of their visitation." 

R1411 :page 182 

I WILL POUR OUT MY SPIRIT UPON ALL FLESH. 



There is a remarkable prophecy in Joel (2:28-32,) 
which clearly distinguishes between 
the present age in which the possession of 
God's spirit is by the few, and the Millennial 
age in which the truth will be generally diffused 
among men, and its spirit generally accepted 
by men. The prophecy is stated in a manner 
likely to be misunderstood, in that the 
blessing upon the many is mentioned first, and 
the blessing upon the little flock, which comes 
first, is mentioned last. Even so, many of 
God's testimonies are so arranged and stated 
as not to be clearly seen until fully due— as 
meat in due season to the household of faith. 

Joel says [transposing his words to the order 
of their fulfilment]: "In those days I will 
pour out my spirit upon my servants and upon 
my handmaids: And it shall come to pass 
after those days, that I will pour out my spirit 
upon all flesh." (Joel 2:29,28.) Peter at 
Pentecost referred to this prophecy (Acts 2:16-21), 
saying, "This [outpouring of the spirit 
of God which you see— upon his servants and 
handmaids] is that which was spoken by the 
prophet Joel." All that Joel had prophesied 
was not fulfilled before their eyes, but what 
they saw was all foretold by Joel in that 
prophecy, and more too. Joel foretold the 
blessing of Pentecost upon the servants and 
handmaids, and also the blessing of all flesh in 
the "great day of the Lord," the Millennial 
day; and he also foretold the day of trouble 



preceding that Millennial day of blessing, referring 
to it under the symbolic statement of 
"wonders in the heavens above and signs in 
the earth beneath, blood, and fire, and vapor 
of smoke," etc. 

The coming of the spirit upon all flesh (i.e., 
in general, upon all mankind) in the next age 
will be in much the same manner that it comes 
now to the special servants of God. Then, as 
now, it will be the spirit of truth, and cannot 
be received without the recipients first coming 
to a knowledge of at least the first principles of 
THE TRUTH, and being consecrated to God's 
service. 

There will be no difference between the 
spirit received by the Church in this Gospel 
age and by the human family in general in the 
next age: it is the same spirit; and, as we 
have just seen, it will be received in the same 
way, from the same source (God), and through 
the same channel— his Word of truth. But 

R1412:page 182 

the sealing and witnessing of the Spirit of God 
then to the converted world will be very different 
from the sealing and witness which it now 
gives to the Church. Some may not at once 
see how the same spirit could in the same way 
testify, witness and seal differently in the two 
ages, but we trust we shall be able to make this 
abundantly clear. 

Note clearly the dissimilarity of the two 
ages. In the Gospel age evil predominates, 
Satan rules, gross darkness covers the people, 
and the god of this world takes advantage in 
thousands of ways of the weakness of fallen 
men, misrepresents the truth and clothes error 
in the garb of truth. In the Millennial age 
evil will be restrained, Christ will rule and 
bless and the light of truth shall penetrate 
every dark corner. Mankind will be helped 
out of the weakness of the fall, and right and 
truth on every subject shall triumph. 

All this, God saw beforehand; and he saw 
that the trial or testing of any who possess and 
who would be led by his Spirit would be seven-fold 
as severe in this Gospel age as in the Millennial 
age. Yet he designed to have it so, in 

R1412:page 183 

order that thus he might select the "little 
flock" of peculiarly zealous ones for the work 
of blessing others, as well as for illustrations of 
the exceeding riches of his favor toward those 



willing to serve him at the cost of self-sacrifice. 

God knew beforehand that whosoever would 
live godly in this present world [age]— whoever 
would receive the Spirit of the truth and 
be led of it— would suffer persecution and present 
loss; that whoever would have and obey 
the leadings of his holy Spirit, among those 
having the opposing "spirit of the world," 
would do it only at the cost of self-sacrifice. 
And God had a perfect right to promise such 
sacrificers, of whom our Lord Jesus is the head 
and exemplar, a special "prize," a "high calling," 
exceeding great and precious, and a 
change from the human to the divine nature if 
he chose; and he did choose to do this very 
thing. "This is the promise which he hath 
promised us." The promises to be like Christ 
our Lord, and to live with him, and to reign 
with him, and to be his joint-heirs, are not 
made to all who will receive the holy Spirit of 
the truth, but to those who suffer for righteousness 
sake, who hazard and lay down their lives 
for the truth, who suffer with Christ and become 
dead with him, filling up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ in the earnest 
desire to serve his body, which is the Church. 

Just so surely as the "sufferings of Christ" 
are completely filled up and end with this age, 
and the glories to follow enter with the next 
age, just so surely it will be impossible for those 
who in the next age have the spirit of truth to 
suffer and sacrifice themselves in obeying it. 
Consequently they could never have the witness 
of the Spirit that they are joint-heirs with 
Christ, nor that they shall be made new creatures, 
partakers of the divine nature. 

The Spirit's testimony is that they for whom 
those exceeding great things were prepared of 
the Father were sacrificers, who through much 
opposition, tribulation and gainsaying should 
be recognized as "overcomers," members of 
"the body of Christ." 

But those who receive the Spirit of the truth 
in the Millennial age will have in it a witness 
also. It will witness to them their acceptance 
with God through faith in Christ their Redeemer. 
And it will witness then almost the 
reverse of what it now witnesses, so far as tribulation 
is concerned. He who then suffers 
tribulation will have it as a witness of wrong 
doing and of the King's displeasure; while he 
who flourishes well in his affairs will have that 
as a witness of his well doing and of the King's 
good pleasure toward him, as it is written: 
"In his day [the Millennial Day] the righteous 
shall flourish," and the evil doers shall be cut 



off; and again, "He shall visit tribulation and 
anguish upon every soul of man that doeth 
evil, to the Jew first and also to the Gentile." 
(Psa. 72:7; Rom. 2:9.) And under that 
blessing the well doers will progress toward 
human perfection. Be it remembered, MAN is 
an earthly image of God, and hence the spirit 
or mind of a perfect man would be in harmony 
with God's spirit or mind. Especially will this 
be the case with restored men, who, during the 
fall and rising again, will have well learned to 
rely upon and obey implicitly the divine 
Spirit's leadings, and thus be led by the Spirit 
of the truth. 

The opening work for the world may furnish 
some marked evidence of divine acceptance, as 
at Pentecost a special manifestation of divine 
acceptance was given; but not necessarily so. 
The Word of truth and its witness may be all 
that will be given; and if so, it will be quite 
sufficient evidence for faith. 

The Spirit of truth would be, to them, a spirit 
of begetting also, begetting again as human 
sons of God; for such was Adam before he 
sinned, since whose fall all his posterity are 
counted as cut off, dead, except as brought 
back to perfection through redemption and 
restitution. And though begotten by the Spirit 
of truth, such must prove themselves worthy of 
being restored to full sonship (born), until the 
end of that age, when, being made complete 
through Christ, they can be presented to the 
Father as sons.— 1 Cor. 15:24. 



As we thus bring the light of one scripture 
to bear upon another we see how God brushes 
away the mists of traditional error, revealing 
his own glorious character, and making us better 

R1412:page 184 

acquainted with himself and with his dear 

Son, through whom he accomplished our redemption. 

With a clear understanding of the 

distinct personality of each comes a clearer 

understanding of much more truth. We are 

able to appreciate more intelligently what both 

our heavenly Father and our Lord Jesus have 

done for us, and to give to each the honor due. 

And as we observe the beautiful harmony of 

parental and filial affection, and study it in all 

its workings as revealed in the great plan of 

God, we have a theme for our praise and imitation 

throughout eternity. 



"Hear, O Israel! Jehovah our God is one- 
Jehovah. And thou shall love the Lord thy 
God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, 
and with all thy might;" for he is worthy. 
Study his character, behold his glory— of wisdom, 
love and power— and when you fully apprehend 
him, and recognize him as the fountain 
of every virtue and of every blessing, no 
creature in heaven or in earth will be able to 
take his first and rightful place in your heart's 
affections. 

Even our blessed Lord Jesus is no rival with 
Jehovah for that first, chief place. He himself 
said, "My Father is greater than I," and his 
highest ambition was to honor him at any cost 
to himself; at the cost of abasement and humiliation 
even unto death. And yet the Father 
hath so highly honored him as to place him at 
his own right hand of power and glory, and 
bid all his creatures honor the Son, even as 
they honor the Father. And being in character 
and glory the express image of the Father, and 
so intimately associated with all his plans, the 
love of our hearts that goes out toward one 
naturally falls upon both, and the only distinction 
we can see or feel in our love toward them 
is that the one is the eternal fountain and the 
other the perennial stream of unalloyed goodness 
and glory and blessing. 

But before leaving this important subject let 
us pursue it a little further, and consider what 
the Apostle Paul meant by 

THE SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND- 

a spirit so necessary both to a clear understanding 

and to obedience of the truth; and may 

God grant that through the careful and prayerful 

study of this whole subject his children may 

be more and more filled with his holy Spirit 

and adorned with its precious fruits. The 

Apostle says: "For God hath not given us 

the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and 

of a sound mind."— 2 Tim. 1:7. 

The word spirit is here used in the sense of 
mental disposition. Thus we sometimes speak 
of a bad spirit, meaning an evil disposition; or 
of a good, true spirit, meaning a pure, noble 
and amiable disposition. So the Apostle here 
refers to the disposition of a sound mind. 

A sound mind is a mind in a sound, healthy 
condition, and in full possession of all its faculties. 
Its perceptive faculties gather up various 
data and store them away in memory's garner; 
and its reasoning faculties arrange and 
compare them, and thus arrive at conclusions 



that otherwise could not be gained. However, 

if the mind is not in a sound, healthy condition, 

reason will not act properly. It will receive 

memory's store of facts, and, by misapplying 

and misappropriating them, arrive at erroneous 

conclusions. If the mind is disturbed 

by undue fear and dread, or by superstition or 

prejudice, or hate, or revenge, or undue ambition, 

or pride, or self-conceit, or avarice, or any 

depraved passion, reason will be so influenced 

by such dispositions as to render its conclusions, 

or judgment, untrustworthy. The mind is sound 

only when in the full possession of all its faculties, 

and when it is entirely free, in the use of 

those faculties, from prejudice or bias in any direction. 

Those among men who are freest from 

prejudice in the use of reason we sometimes, 

and very properly, speak of as cool-headed, while 

those of the opposite disposition are called 

hot-headed. 

Strictly speaking, there is not a perfectly 
sound mind in the world. The mind could not 
be perfectly sound unless the body were so. 
Both mind and body are sadly bruised by the 
fall; and in the fallen race we see all shades and 
grades of mental as well as physical derangement. 
Mark the varieties of physical derangement: 
Here is one with a deranged stomach— 
a dyspeptic; and that derangement affects the 
whole body to a greater or less extent. Another 
is afflicted with an improper action of the 

R1413 :page 185 

heart; and the whole body is therefore in trouble. 

The same is true if the lungs do not fill 

their appointed office, or if the liver will not do 

its duty, or if the nervous system be unstrung. 

In such cases the mind is always more or less unfavorably 

affected. If the body is burning with 

fever, or racked with pain, or agitated by an excited 

nervous system, or oppressed by the distresses 

of a dyspeptic stomach, or excited by a 

palpitating heart, or enfeebled by inactive and 

diseased lungs, the mind is correspondingly 

weak and diseased: it is unsound, fettered in 

the use of its powers, and unable fully to govern 

and rightly use them. 

The curse of sin and its penalty has laid its 
heavy hand on the entire man— mind and body. 
If one member of the body suffer, the whole 
body, and no less the mind, suffers with it. 
And in addition to those sufferings of the mind 
which come directly from physical disabilities 
are many others which come from its own derangement, 
from the undue cultivation of its inferior 



instincts and the dwarfing of its nobler 

faculties through sin and the necessities of painful 

toil— the labor and sweat of face which are 

parts of sin's penalty. Truly, as the prophet expresses 

it, There is none perfect (sound, either 

in mind or body), no, not one. (Psa. 14:3.) 

All are covered with wounds and bruises and putrefying 

sores— both mentally and physically, 

though there are various degrees of unsoundness. 

Oh! says one, I do not see that the world is 
so much out of gear mentally. Men are considerably 
out of sorts physically, greatly out of 
order morally, but it seems to me that mentally 
they are pretty straight. What evidence is 
there of such general mental derangement? 

Well, let us see. If we go into an insane 
asylum we find people who are so far unbalanced 
mentally as to be incapable of managing their 
own affairs, and often in danger of damaging 
the interests of others as well, because unable 
to exercise even moderate judgment. But we 
all know that we have neighbors on every side 
whose judgments, as well as our own, are very 
imperfect. And not infrequently many give 
evidence of inability to manage their own affairs 
creditably, who are a great annoyance in 
attempting to manage the affairs of others. 
Through self-conceit they are gossips and busybodies 
in other men's matters, though incapable 
of managing their own. This is one evidence 
of an unsound mind— a measure of 
insanity. 

What business man will not admit that, over 
and over again, when he has used his very best 
judgment, he has actually done the wrong 
thing when he should have known better? 
The large number of failures in business, and 
ill-successes generally, attest that the majority 
of people are very unsound in judgment. And 
likewise the numbers of badly raised families, 
of mismatches in matrimony, of ungoverned 
tempers, and of miserly, or extravagant, or 
foolish habits, etc., etc., all bear witness to 
the same fact. The great trouble in every case 
is an unsound mind. And no one knows better 
than the man who has precipitated financial 
disaster, or who has made a bad mistake in 
choosing a wife, or the woman who accepted a 
worthless man for a husband, that bad judgment, 
unsoundness of mind, was the cause of 
the trouble. And so avarice, selfishness, and 
other bad habits are evidences of mental as 
well as of moral and physical unbalance. 
Sometimes a man has average soundness of 
mind on most subjects, but is greatly astray on 
some one. He can reason intelligently on 



other subjects, but on this one he cannot: he 
reasons absurdly and draws false conclusions. 
There are some subjects on which so many are 
astray that mankind in general do not regard 
the wrong course as wrong, and are ready to 
pronounce those unbalanced who do not run 
with them to the same excesses. 

Suppose a man down on the river bank with 
a long rake, raking up old corks, and sticks, 
and rubbish out of the water, and having them 
at considerable expense carted off and stored 
in a barn somewhere. You see him day after 
day toiling away to no reasonable purpose, and 
you say, the man is insane. Why do you think 
so? Because he is spending his time and effort 
at that which, when looked at from a reasonable 
standpoint, is foolish. Now while all are 
not so bad as the illustration, there is a disposition 
of the same kind running through the 
whole race with reference to some subjects: 

R1413 :page 186 

for instance, that of accumulating money. 
That is an evidence of an unsound mind, but 
the popular opinion does not so regard it. 
There are thousands of men who have plenty 
of money, more than they know what to do 
with. It gives them great care and anxiety to 
take care of it, and great labor and weariness 
in one way or another to accumulate it. And 
yet, notwithstanding their superabundance, 
they will lie, and cheat, and steal, and defraud 
their best friends, to get more— only to add 
greater burdens to their already heavy load, 
and to heap upon themselves the calumnies and 
hatred of those whom they have defrauded. 
What is the natural inference? The man who 
acts so has an unsound mind. But it is on a 
popular subject; and others of similar disposition, 
though not always so successful, say, That 
is a great man; his aim is the grand acme of 
life; go on, become a ten times ten-millionaire 
(unless I should succeed in out-witting you). 

How should a really sound mind regard such 
proceedings? How does God view it, as he 
looks down upon men cheating and fighting 
and stealing from one another to get money, or 
wheat, or corn, into a "corner" from other 
men, and then guarding it, and keeping it, and 
fighting for it, as if it were very life itself. 

He sees it as the result of an unsound mind, 
as the mental and moral unbalance brought 
about through sin. If the mind were well balanced 
its energies would be divided between 
accumulating and using; and good and noble 



uses would be thought out whereby he and his 
fellow-men might receive some real advantage. 
But the common practice of all the world is to 
lay it up for posterity, and posterity receives it 
with mean ingratitude and generally uses it to 
its own injury.— Psa. 49:10,13. 

Another subject upon which the masses of 
men are unsound of mind, but which is not 
popularly so regarded, is the reckless propagation 
of the race without due regard to means 
of support, or health, or the Lord's special 
service to which some have consecrated their 
all, and often regardless of the barest necessities 
of life, overburdening wives whom they 
profess to love, and covenanted to support and 
defend, with weights of care which they are 
mentally and physically unable to endure, and 
from which they often gladly find refuge in the 
silent tomb; while the mentally and physically 
diseased offspring, which she was thus unfitted 
to rear, and which the father is incapable of 
supporting, are left to add their burden of misery, 
and mental and moral and physical depravity, 
to the world's long moan of distress 
and sorrow. 

True, the command was given, increase and 
multiply and fill the earth, but human fatherhood 
should be after the likeness of the divine 
fatherhood, which provides for every son— "If 
a son, then an heir." If a sound mind were in 
control, a man would not incur the responsibilities 
of a husband, or of fatherhood to a numerous 
family, with known inability to produce a 
healthy offspring, or to provide for them the 
necessities of life until able to do for themselves. 
The unsoundness of mind thus displayed 
has raised the wail of distress from thousands 
of homes, and nipped in the bud the tender 
plants of love and peace; and the struggle for 
bare existence has driven out every element of 
harmony and right-mindedness. 

If the spirit of a sound mind were in control 
here, love and harmony would prevail to a 
vastly greater extent, and a healthy, happy and 
welcomed offspring would rise up to bless a 
mother's training hand of care, to honor a 
father's kindly providence, and to walk in their 
honorable footprints. 

Is it not true, too, that such as have consecrated 
all to the Lord's service have little 
enough to give at best without tying their 
hands with more than indispensable earthly 
burdens and cares? Is it not, rather, the mission 
and privilege of such to feed and clothe, 
spiritually, God's little ones? 

But there are many other evidences of unsoundness 



of mind not so general among men, 
and yet very numerous in one form or another. 
For instance, one is a miser: he clutches a 
penny with almost a death grip; he would bargain 
and contend with a poorer man to induce 
him to undersell his little stock of goods on 
which he depends for the support of his family; 
he would deprive his own family of the necessary 
comforts of life, which he and they know 

R1413 :page 187 

he is able to supply, but will not, and thus introduce 

an element of discord into what might 

be a happy and prosperous home. Hugging 

his hoarded dollars he goes to his grave, and 

his children gather to quarrel over them and to 

hate his very memory. O, what a mistake! 

Another man is a spendthrift: self-gratification 
he will have, in every possible direction, 
regardless of consequences for the future. This 
is better than the miserly extreme, yet it is 
founded on the same mean principle of selfishness, 
regardless of the interests of others, and 
even of self-interest beyond the present moment. 
Neither of these extremes of unsoundness 
is realized by those thus afflicted. The 
miser congratulates himself that he is not a 
spendthrift, and the spendthrift that he is not 
a miser, and neither ever dreams that he has 
gone to the opposite extreme. 

O, that all the world might be blessed with a 
sound mind! What a renovation it would 

R1414:page 187 

make! What a transformation of all things! 
This is just what men will have when the great 
restitution work is all complete. 

But, notice that the Apostle in the above 
text speaks of the saints as now having the spirit 
of a sound mind. They are not actually sound, 
either in mind or body; they have mental and 
physical and moral weaknesses like other men; 
but they have received from God the spirit, the 
disposition, of a sound mind, which, under 
God's direction, is able to a very great extent 
to correct, control and direct the whole man. 
To have a sound mind, then, is the thing to be 
desired above all others, and all who realize 
their unsound condition should apply at once 
to the great Physician, who says, "Come unto 
me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and 
I will give you rest." And those who have 
come to this great Physician can testify to his 
power; for lo, under the magic of his healing 



touch, old things— the old disposition of fear 
and superstition, and evil inclinations, and 
weakness, and imbecility— have passed away, 
and all things have become new. The spirit 
of love and of a sound mind has taken its place, 
giving increasing power to govern the whole 
being as we grow up toward the stature of the 
fulness of Christ— complete in him. 

In line with these suggestions is the Apostle's 
advice, that those who have received the 
new mind— the spirit of a sound mind— we are 
not to know after the flesh, as men, but according 
to their real spirit or intention— as 
God knows or recognizes them. (2 Cor. 5:16.) 
And the Apostle Peter declares (1 Pet. 4:6) 
that "For this purpose the gospel is preached 
to them that are dead [those reckoned dead to 
sin, but alive toward God and righteousness]: 
that they might be judged of God in spirit 
[according to their real motives and intentions], 
although judged by men merely according to 
[the outward deeds] the flesh." (The Greek 
text supports this rendering, while the common 
version shrouds this text in mystery.) 

In coming to our Lord, his first requirement 
is, that we submit our minds entirely to his 
control, setting aside our ideas and plans entirely, 
to be guided henceforth by his sound 
mind. And only those thus consecrated to the 
doing of his will have the spirit, or disposition, 
of a sound mind. 

As soon as this spirit of a sound mind comes 
in, it begins at once, under the divine guidance, 
to set the whole man in order. And it begins 
in the right place: it commands the will to 
assert its power and hold its commanding place 
over body and mind; it puts reason at the 
helm with the divine Word as its guide book; 
it searches the heart with the lamp of divine 
truth lighted by the Holy Spirit, to see what 
form the malady of sin has taken; and then, 
looking to the divine healer by faith and the 
energy of resistance, the transforming work begins 
and progresses, bringing the mind into a 
more and more sound and healthy condition, 
notwithstanding the infirmities of the body 
may tend in an opposite direction. Thus the 
children of God are "transformed, by the renewing 
of their minds." And it is only these 
who have the transformed mind, who can know 
or prove what is the holy and perfect will of God. 

Sometimes the children of God get cold and 
listless and almost cease to aspire to and seek 
this soundness of mind, but let such remember 
that this is the lukewarm condition of which 
the Master declares his abhorrence. (Rev. 3:16.) 



Let the consecrated ones who look for 

R1414:page 188 

the reward of our high calling remember that 
ceaseless vigilance and earnest striving against 
the dispositions of the old unsound mind, and 
a constant submission to the divine will in the 
smallest affairs of every -day life, are the most 
thorough proofs of our faithfulness to God. It 
is all-important that while we endeavor to 
serve the Lord faithfully by bearing the good 
tidings of his truth to others, we should not 
fail in this most important work of self-discipline 
and self-culture under the divine direction. 
The every-day life of faithful saints will preach 
a sermon to all who know them, which their 
lips could never speak. And if it does not so 
do; if avarice, or penuriousness, or pride, or 
selfishness, or bad tempers, or slovenly habits 
in conversation still continue, our lips had best 
keep silence regarding godly matters, except 
before God in our closets. There we may 
speak freely, and ask largely for fresh supplies 
of grace to help us overcome the dispositions 
of the old unsound mind, that our daily life 
may speak a volume to our Redeemer's praise. 
Our children, our neighbors, our friends, and 
all who know us as exponents of divine truth, 
are looking for its fruits in our daily life, and 
judging of it accordingly, whether they tell us 
so or not. Let us endeavor to let our light 
shine in this way. We should never be too 
busy to let those about us see that our mind is 
under control of the divine mind— to let them 
see what carefulness the spirit of a sound mind 
hath wrought in us. 

As the divine mind takes the control of our 
minds, it cultivates the nobler qualities; it 
nourishes them with divine truth and bids them 
expand and take possession of the man; it 
subdues the lower propensities and appoints 
their definite and proper place in the service of 
the new higher nature. It also lifts the mind 
out of the narrow sphere of self, and sets the 
man to work in the Lord's benevolent service 
of blessing others; it shows him the divine 
plan and tells him he may have a share in it— 
not only in its benefits, but also in its great 
work as a co-laborer together with God. Thus 
the saint approaches the divine likeness and 
enjoys communion and fellowship with God. 

Well, says one, while we criticise some who 
spend their lives in gathering dollars, and 
others who spend it otherwise, they also criticise 
us, and say that we are unsound in mind, 



"peculiar," because our view of life is turned 
so much from the ordinary channel. What 
shall we say to this? 

We cannot help that: we once thought much 
as they do, but now have received the mind of 
Christ. We cannot expect any but those governed 
by the same heaven-directed view of 
matters to agree with us, or to commend our 
mind and course. The only way we could 
please all the insane people in an asylum would 
be to agree with their ideas and do as they do. 
And just so, the only way we can please the 
unsound world is to agree with their erroneous 
ideas and do as they do; but when we receive 
our ideas from God's Word, and recognize the 
world's ideas as contrary to that Word, then 
we know, on God's authority, that we have the 
spirit, the disposition, of a sound mind, though 
we are constantly reminded of the unsoundness 
of our natural mind by the effort which it costs 
us to keep it in subjection to the divine ruling. 
Often, the children of God are no better than 
average men of the world; and sometimes they 
are more imperfect naturally than many of the 
world. Among them, as natural men and women, 
there are all sorts of imperfections, but 
when the spirit of a sound mind, under God's 
direction, takes hold of them, it transforms 
and beautifies them in deed and in truth. 
And, dearly beloved, if this transforming work 
is not going on within us, we are either dead 
or dying branches that must sooner or later be 
severed from the vine. "Every branch in me 
that beareth not fruit [fruit of the spirit] he 
taketh away."— John 15:2. 

We must then let the transforming work go 
on within our own hearts, while we do all in 
our power to inspire and cultivate the same 
spirit in others. God hath not given to us the 
spirit of fear and superstitious dread of him, 
but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. 
And when we have discarded our own unsound 
mind, and taken God's mind as expressed in 
his Word, we know that we have the disposition 
of a sound mind, no matter how other 
men regard it. 



page 189 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 



READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1414:page 189 
MESSIAH'S REIGN. 



II. QUAR., LESSON XIII., JUNE 26, PSALM 72:1-19. 

Golden Text— "All kings shall fall down before him: 
all nations shall serve him."— Psa. 72:11. 

In Acts 3:19-21 we read that "Times of refreshing 
shall come from the presence [Greek, 
prosopon— face or countenance] of the Lord 
[Jehovah— from his favor, as indicated by the 
figure of his face turned toward us]; and [at this 
appointed time of refreshing] he shall send 
Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto 
you; whom the heaven must retain until the 
times of restitution of all things which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets, 
since the world began." 

This is a very sweeping declaration of God's 
benevolent purpose toward the whole world, 
whom he so loved that he gave his only begotten 
Son to accomplish their redemption. Having 
thus at great cost redeemed them from the 
power of the grave, he here tells of a fixed, appointed 
time wherein it is his purpose to give 
to men the blessings thus legally secured for 
them through Christ, and bids us note the fact 
that this glorious time of blessing is the inspiring 
theme of every one of his true prophets. 

The psalm chosen for this lesson is one of 
those blessed prophecies which tells us of the 
glorious reign of the risen and "highly exalted" 
Son of God, whose coming presence shall 
be "like rain upon the mown grass, and as 
showers that water the earth"— "times of refreshing," 
truly. 

How wide shall be his dominion? Oh, says 
the Psalmist, "He shall have dominion from 

R1415 :page 189 

sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of 
the earth." (Verse 8.) Yes, "As truly as I 
live," saith the Lord, "the whole earth shall 
be filled with the glory of the Lord." [Mark! 



this earth: it is not heaven that is here spoken 
of, though the heavens too, are, and shall be 
yet more, filled with his glory.] 

What shall become of the present kings and 
potentates of earth when the Lord thus begins 
his reign? And how will the nations receive 
him? The Psalmist answers (verse 11) that 
"all kings shall fall down before him, and all 
nations shall serve him." 

But will none oppose him, or endeavor to 
withstand his power? Oh! yes: he will have enemies 
and meet with the determined opposition 
of the present ruling powers, but it is written 
again (verses 4,9) that he shall break in pieces 
the oppressor (that he will destroy all oppressive 
systems and institutions), and that "his 
enemies [those who after full knowledge oppose 
Christ's Kingdom and laws] shall lick the dust" 
—be destroyed. And as evidence of his glorious 
triumph and his conquest of even the 
hearts of his subjects, it is written that the kings 
(the prominent and influential among men) 
will bring presents and offer gifts to manifest 
their loyalty to the new government; that 
eventually "all nations shall call him blessed;" 
and that even "they that dwell in the wilderness 
[the nations beyond the pale of Christendom 
and all the half-civilized and savage tribes] 
shall bow before him."— Verses 10,17. 

What will be the characteristics of his reign 
which will thus captivate the hearts of men and 
bind them in loving loyalty to the new king? 
The chief characteristic of his reign will be that 
justice will be established in the earth— that by 
strong and severe measures it will at first be 
secured, and that afterward it will be maintained 
and exercised with vigor and abundant 
success. Although the "iron rod" of justice 
will at first dash the nations to pieces as a potter's 
vessel and break in pieces every system 
and device of oppression (verse 4)— civil, social, 
financial and religious— yet, like a magnet, it 
will afterward gather up the broken fragments 
(the individuals that composed those nations 
and systems) and bind them together in a 
stronger, firmer bond of righteousness and 
peace which shall never be broken. 

Thus it is written (verse 2), "He shall judge 
for thy people with righteousness, and for thy 
afflicted with justice;" (verse 3), "The mountains 
[new ruling powers of Christ's kingdom] 
shall bring peace to the people, and the little 
hills [—the tributary powers under the main 
government— shall also be agencies of blessing 
and peace] through righteousness." 

Verse 4— "He shall judge the afflicted of 



the people, he shall give help to the children 
of the needy; but he shall crush the oppressor." 

Verse 7— "In his days shall the righteous 
flourish, and abundance of peace (shall be) so 
long as the moon endureth." 

Verses 12-14— "He will deliver the needy 
when he crieth; the afflicted also who hath no 
helper. He will spare the poor and needy; 

R1415 :page 190 

and the souls of the needy will he assist. From 
wrong and violence will he deliver their soul; 
and precious shall their blood [lives] be in his 
sight. 

As a result of this blessed reign of righteousness, 
not only will justice and peace be established 
in the earth, but a great abundance of 
blessings from the King shall follow as the rewards 
of righteousness, as it is written (verse 16): 
"There shall be an abundance of corn in 
the land; upon the top of the mountains [as a 
blessing from the King] its fruit shall shake 
like [the trees of] Lebanon: and they of the 
city [the subjects of this government— a city being 
a symbol of a government] shall flourish 
like grass of the earth." 

When men come to realize these blessings 
and to recognize the righteous authority by 
which they are secured to them, what wonder 
if many of their hearts are won, and their loyalty 
evinced by hearty co-operation, as indicated 
by verses 10,11,17! Truly, in view of 
all that the prophets have to say of the blessed 
times of refreshing under the reign of Christ, 
we see the force of the Psalmist's joyful expression: 
"He shall come down like rain upon 
the mown grass, as showers that water the 
earth."— Verse 6. "His name shall be as of 
a son continuing his father's name forever; it 
shall increase as the sun [as the sun's brightness 
increases to full noon-day glory, so shall 
the honor of Messiah grow brighter and brighter 
as the mists and gloom of sin are driven away]. 
Men shall bless themselves through him [they 
shall wash their robes, but it will be in and by 
the blood of the Lamb that this opportunity 
for cleansing shall come to them] and all people 
shall honor him." 

The general blessed results of the Millennial 
age are portrayed in this prophecy— those who 
shall "lick the dust" being treated as exceptions. 
And surely the grand outcome of God's 
plan, when Christ shall have put all enemies under 
his feet and shall have fully restored all the 
willing and obedient, is cause enough for every 



one who realizes it to join with the Prophet in 
the glad shout with which he closes this prophecy 
in verses 18,19, "Blessed be Jehovah God, 
the God of Israel, who alone doeth wondrous 
things [whose wisdom alone deviseth the wondrous 
plan, and none hath been his counselor]; 
and blessed be his glorious name forever; and 
let the whole earth be filled with his glory. 
Amen and Amen." And in view of the glorious 
character and record of him whom Jehovah 
hath appointed to be king over all the earth in 
that day (Zech. 14:9), we, with the Psalmist, 
would express our recognition of his wisdom 
and grace, and say (verse 1), "Give the king 
[this king whom thou hast appointed] thy 
judgments and thy righteousness unto the 
King's [Jehovah's] son"— Entrust him with 
the execution of the grand designs: we have 
full confidence in his ability and in his willingness 
to bring forth judgment unto victory and 
to fill the world with thy peace and thy praise. 



R1415 :page 190 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 



OUR LORD'S ASCENSION. 



III. QUARTER, LESSON I., JULY 3, ACTS 1:1-12. 

Golden Text— "When he had spoken these things, 
while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received 
him out of their sight."— Acts 1:9. 

VERSES 1,2. The writer of the account of the 
Acts of the Apostles was Luke; and the "former 
treatise" was that called the Gospel by Luke. 

VERSE 3. Although the previous account 
had covered many of the incidents of the forty 
days following our Lord's resurrection (See 
Luke 24), it had by no means told all; and 
this further account, explanatory of the opening 
work of the Gospel dispensation, properly 
linked with the other, tells us that the special 
theme of our Master in the instructions of those 
forty days was— "the things pertaining to the 
Kingdom of God." 

Luke does not give us the particulars; but 
we are safe in assuming that they required considerable 
instruction, as they not only had the 



hopes common to all Jews, that God would, 
under Messiah, exalt Israel to be the chief nation 
of earth (and use that nation as his channel 
for communicating his laws to the world, 
and thus bless all the families of the earth in 
the seed of Abraham), but they had in mind, 
too, the special promises which the Lord had 
made to them before his death: that they 
should sit on thrones in Israel in his Kingdom. 
So great a power had these promises of the 
Kingdom in their minds that they had willingly 
left business prospects and endured the scorn 
of their fellows that they might become joint-heirs 
with Christ in his Kingdom. And the 
Master had invariably encouraged these hopes 
and ambitions. His reproofs were merely 
against their strifes as to which should be greatest 
and sit the one on his right and the other 
on his left in that Kingdom. --Matt. 18:1-4; 
Mark 9:33-37; Luke 22:24-26. 

R1415 :page 191 

They had seen all these hopes and prospects 
dashed when the Lord was crucified. Naturally, 
therefore, after they realized their Lord's 
resurrection, their thoughts and questions, and 
consequently his teaching, would be of the 
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. It 
was needful to explain to them that the nation 
of Israel had been rejected from join t-heirship 
in his Kingdom because, although naturally 
Abraham's seed, they did not have Abraham's 
faith, and hence could not be recognized as heirs 
with Christ of the promise made to Abraham. 
It was necessary to tell the little handful of 
faithful disciples ("about five hundred brethren") 
that they had not been rejected with the 
nation, but were still recognized as heirs of 
the Kingdom, although the time for setting up 
the Kingdom was necessarily deferred until the 
full number (predestinated) should be selected. 
But they would speedily be recognized of 
the Father and granted blessings of the Spirit 
as sons of God and prospective joint-heirs with 
Christ, even though their exaltation to the 
honor and glory of kingdom power would be 
deferred. Accordingly we read, in 

VERSES 4,5, that he instructed them to tarry 
at Jerusalem, to expect and wait for the begetting 
of the spirit of God as sons and heirs- 
pointing out that so it had already been foretold 
them by himself and by John the baptizer. 

R1416 :page 191 



VERSES 6-8. But having been thus assured 
of their divine recognition as prospective joint-heirs 
with Christ in his kingdom "not many 
days hence" (verse 5), they put the question 
still close to their hearts— How about the 
kingdom in the full sense of the word? will it 
come at the same time? Will it, too, come 
not many days hence? 

The Master's answer was not a reproof, nor 
even a correction or contradiction of their expectations 
in general. He merely told them 
that the times and seasons for the full establishment 
of the Kingdom God had in his own 
power, and that it was not then proper for 
them to know; but that they should receive 
power [ability to understand the deep things of 
God— 1 Cor. 2:10— and be guided (gradually, 
as it would be due) into all truth, and shown 
"things to come"— John 16:13] after the 
holy Spirit had come upon them— the spirit of 
adoption, of sealing, as no longer servants but 
sons (John 15:15); and then they should be 
his witnesses everywhere— witnessing to the 
truths which he had taught them: that he is to 
be the King of the world— Jehovah's Anointed 
representative, whose kingdom is to be under 
the whole heavens; and all nations and kingdoms 
shall serve and obey him. They were to 
witness that God's promises concerning the 
establishment of his kingdom to bless the 
world are all true; that our Lord's death was 
merely a means toward that great end; that it 
was needful that Messiah should die for the 
sins of the world before those sins and their 
penalties could be remitted, and before those 
sinners could be blessed and restored to divine 
communion and favor. They were to tell believers 
to keep on praying as the Master had 
instructed, saying: Thy Kingdom come, thy 
will be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 
They were to witness that none of his words or 
promises were false, but that all things promised 
should be fulfilled "in due time." 

VERSES 9-12. Our Lord's ascension might 
have taken place without being seen by any; 
for since his resurrection he is a spirit being, 
and "a spirit hath not flesh and bones." He 
was indeed put to death in the flesh, but he 
was quickened or made alive in spirit. He was 
there born of the spirit, "the first-born from 
the dead;" and as that which is born of the 
flesh is flesh, so that which is born of the spirit 
is spirit, and can go and come as the wind, 
without being seen of men. (John 3:8.) 
But as our risen Lord, a spirit being, in order 
to prove his resurrection, appeared at various 



times and in various forms or bodies (some of 
which resembled the body of flesh which had 
been crucified), so he showed himself in a 
body of flesh when he ascended, to prove this 
fact to his disciples. 

We must remember that he was present with 
the disciples for forty days before he ascended, 
yet was visible to them at most only seven times, 
and for only a few moments each time, during 
all those days; and to the world he was always 
invisible, as he had said before, "Yet a little 
while and the world seeth me no more." The 
Apostle Paul, enumerating these manifestations 
of our Lord after his resurrection, says, "He 
was seen of above five hundred brethren," 
"and, last of all, by me also." It was the 
same Jesus who appeared in flesh and as a 
gardener to Mary, who appeared in another 
form as a stranger to the two disciples going 
to Emmaus, and who appeared in the midst of 
the disciples while the doors were shut and 
showed them a body of flesh and bones pierced 
by nails and a spear as an evidence or proof of 
his resurrection, but who the next instant 
showed them that he was now highly exalted 
and different from flesh and blood, by dissolving 
the flesh and bones and clothes before their 
eyes and vanishing out of their sight. It was 
this same Jesus, no longer flesh and bones but 
"a quickening spirit," who appeared also to 
Saul of Tarsus, but without any vailing of the 
spirit body under a fleshly one, and gave him a 

R1416 :page 192 

glimpse of the glory of a spirit being which 
felled him to the earth and cost him his sight. 
(Acts 26:13,14; 9:8.) This is the glorified 
Jesus, who was raised from death a spirit being 
(1 Cor. 15:40-44), but who vailed the glories 
of that spirit-body from his disciples, under 
bodies of flesh, in order that he might teach 
them the things pertaining to the Kingdom, 
who is to come again as the angels declared. 

Many stumble over the statement of the 
eleventh verse— especially our dear brethren 
who call themselves Second Adventists. They 
think of the passage as reading— Ye shall see 
him come in like manner as ye have seen him 
go. But it does not so read. Those disciples 
who saw him go are long since dead, and if 
others even should see him come they would 
not. But the angels do not say that any one 
will see him come: they merely affirm that the 
manner of his coming will be like the manner 
in which they had seen him go. 



Now what was the manner of his going? 
What was there peculiar about the manner of 
his ascension? Whatever it was, that is the 
peculiarity to be expected as marking his coming 
again. Let us note again that the manner 
of his going was quiet, unseen by the world, 
unknown to the world, unbelieved by the world. 
It was known, however, by the "brethren," 
it was manifested to the "brethren," and it 
was believed in by the "brethren." So his 
second coming is as a thief— secretly— without 
outward demonstration— unknown to the world 
—known only to the brethren who are not in 
darkness, but who as children of the light are 
walking in the light. (1 Thes. 5:1-5.) For 
a fuller explanation of the Manner of our 
Lord's Second Coming, see Millennial Dawn, 
Vol. II., chapter 5. 

R1416 :page 192 

THE SPIRIT OF ADOPTION SHED FORTH. 



III. QUARTER, LESSON II., JULY 10, ACTS 2:1-12. 

Golden Text— "When he, the Spirit of truth, is come, 
he will guide you into all truth,. ..and he will 
show you things to come."— John 16:13. 

VERSES 1-4. The most notable day in the 
history of the Church is the day of Pentecostal 
blessing which followed our Lord's ascension. 
It marks definitely the beginning of Church 
history by marking the beginning of the 
Church. For although the disciples were 
called, and followed the great Teacher during 
the three and a half years of his ministry and 
sacrifice, they were not recognized by God as 
his sons until Pentecost, when the spirit of adoption 
was given. 

True, they had consecrated themselves; they 
had even left all to follow Christ; but yet they 
were under condemnation as sinners and could 
not be recognized or treated as sons until their 
sins had been atoned for by the great sin-offering 
of "the Lamb of God which taketh away 
the sin of the world." For this they must 
wait. And even after the Redeemer had 
"poured out his soul unto death" as our sin-offering, 
and after he had been raised from the 
dead by the glory of the Father, they must still 
wait until by the gift of the spirit of adoption 
God should recognize them as sons and empower 
them to teach in his name the forgiveness 



of sins: they must wait until he who gave our 
redemption price should ascend on high and 
there appear in the presence of God and offer to 
justice that sin-offering on our behalf— making 
it applicable to all those who believe in and obey 
him. The Pentecostal blessing was of the Father, 
but by the Son (Acts 2:33). It was the Father's 
recognition of the merit of the sin-offering. 

True, the Master had sent them out to declare 
the Kingdom at hand, etc., and they returned 
rejoicing, saying, "Lord, even the devils 
are subject unto us in thy name;" but the 
power by which they did their miracles then, 
while it was holy spirit or holy power, was not 
their own, but the Lord's. He sent them forth 
in his name and gave them power over all manner 
of diseases, etc., but they received no 
power, no other recognition, direct from God, 
until Pentecost. Our Lord Jesus had the holy 
spirit or holy power, and that without limit, 
because he was a holy, harmless, undefiled son 
(John 3:34), but all others were debarred 
from this, because they were sinners until he 
had made reconciliation for iniquity. The 
disciples, then, had merely imputed or delegated 
holy power or holy spirit until the sacrifice was 
made and offered and until the Pentecostal 
blessing gave evidence to them and to us and 
to all that God accepted of Christ's sacrifice— 
"the just for the unjust."— 1 Pet. 3:18. 

To this agrees the statement that "the holy 
spirit was not yet given, because Jesus was not 
yet glorified" (John 7:39); and that other 
statement that to "as many [of the house of 
servants] as received him, to them gave he 
liberty [ability, power, privilege] to become 
SONS OF GOD. "-John 1:12. 

VERSES 4-12. Concerning the gifts of the 
spirit which followed the begetting by the spirit 
in the early Church, for the purpose of attesting 
God's favor to the newly begotten "sons," as 
well as for manifesting them as teachers to 
those without, and the distinction between those 
gifts and the fruit-gifts of the spirit which 
now give evidence of divine favor and begetting, 
the student is referred to the leading 
article of this issue of this journal. 



page 194 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



MORE LABORERS IN THE VINEYARD. 



All interested in the Colporteur work will be 
glad to learn that the change of the price of 
DAWNS, when sold by Colporteurs, to 35 cents 
has, as was hoped, made it possible for others 
to enter this most fruitful field of service for 
our Redeemer. Several new laborers have 
started and others are preparing to start soon. 
(For particulars of price see our last issue.) 

As for the old Colporteurs, some who were 
behind are now getting caught up and will be 
able to keep ahead; while others who were able 
to more than meet expenses at the 25 cent rate 



are now enabled to contribute to the general 
work. The first letter of this kind received 
was from Sister Erlenmyer, May 29th. While 
saying that the wet season had hindered her 
greatly, she adds, "I have sold only a little 
over 300 DAWNS since the Anniversary Meeting, 
having lost so much time by reason of my 
present route being amongst small towns, and 
the weather so wet; but I have made expenses, 
and am able to send in to the general Tract 
Fund work the extra ten cents now charged, 
and accordingly enclose a Money Order for 
$30.00. Use it according to your judgment 
for the Master's glory. With much love to you 
and Sister Russell, I am yours in the glorious 
service!" 

Surely there are many other brethren and 
sisters so situated that they could, with some 
effort, enter this specially useful and fruitful 
service. While every service, great or small, 
done from love for the Redeemer is owned and 
blessed, this one yields specially large results 
both to the "reapers" and to those whom they 
reach with the sickle of truth. 

"THE WONDERFUL STORY ILLUSTRATED," 
AND "TABERNACLE SHADOWS." 



These two neat pamphlets, bound in Leatherette 
(the former of 64 pages, specially for children, 
and the latter of 108 pages, specially for 
developed Christians) are well adapted for use 
by Colporteurs. Not that we would have any 
stop selling DAWN to sell these; but there are 
some who cannot go away from home, and 
who have already canvassed their home city for 
DAWN, who could now make a success and do 
a good work for the great Master in seeking his 
sheep with this food. The Wonderful Story, 
even, although a child's booklet, most assuredly 
is reaching also the older folks, who read it 
to and with the children. Our price is 10 cents 
each; Colporteurs' price, 15 cents each— the 
two booklets, 25 cents. Special price to Colporteurs, 
seventy-five cents per dozen. 

LETTERS CROWDED OUT OF LATE. 



The following extract from Brother J. H. 
Brown's letter, just at hand, represents many of 
the encouraging letters recently received. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-! drop a line to 



tell you how much I have enjoyed reading from 
first to last, perhaps especially that under the 
last heading, the long article in last TOWER. 

To one weighed down, as I have been from 
birth, with that spirit of fear, such words come 
as a cool, refreshing draught from the waters of 
life. But Oh! that I might come into the full 
stature of a man in Christ Jesus. 

In love, Your brother, J. H. BROWN. 

R1425 : page 194 

TRACTS IN SWEDISH AND NORWEGIAN. 



Tract No. 1, "Do the Scriptures Teach that 
Eternal Torment is the Wages of Sin?" has 
been translated into Swedish, which is Tract 
No. 9; and into Norwegian, which is Tract 
No. 13. We do not send these out except when 
specially ordered. Any who can use these 
judiciously are welcome to order them— freely. 
These, as well as Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10 and 
14, are supplied in quantities without charge- 
out of the Tract Fund. 



R1417 :page 195 

VOL. XIII. JULY 1, 1892. NO. 13. 

PULPIT INFIDELITY OF TO-DAY. 



In discussing this subject it seems necessary 
to call attention first to the difference between 
Infidelity and Atheism; because the popular 
mind is confused on the subject, and because 
when mentioning the Infidelity of the Pulpit 
we do not wish to be understood as claiming 
that ministers are becoming atheists. We cannot 
do better than quote on this subject from 
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary as follows:— 

"An infidel, in common usage, is one who denies 
Christianity and the truth of the Scriptures. Some have 
endeavored to widen the sense of infidel so as to embrace 
atheism and every form of unbelief; but this use does not 
generally prevail.... An atheist denies the being of 
God." 

What we desire to call attention to is that, 
in the Protestant pulpits of leading influence 
in these United States, infidelity (the denial of 
the truth of the Scriptures, and of the doctrines 



taught by Christ and the apostles— Christianity) 
is fast displacing faith (in the Bible as the 
Word of God, and hence in the doctrines which 
it sets forth as being of divine revelation). 

This strong statement we are abundantly able 
to prove by quotations from the public addresses 
of ministers recognized as the "great lights" 
of various denominations— men honored with 
titles such as neither our Lord nor any of the 
apostles ever owned— Reverend Doctors of Divinity; 
men who receive salaries such as no 
apostle ever received, ranging from six thousand 
to twenty-five thousand dollars a year; men 
who are recognized as among the best educated 
in all things pertaining to worldly wisdom; 
men, consequently, of more than ordinary ability 
and influence, either for or against the faith 
they have pledged themselves to defend, but 
which in reality they are doing far more than 
outward infidels to undermine and cast aside as 
rubbish good enough for the ignorance of the 
past, but unable to bear the light of what they are 
pleased to term the "higher criticism" of to-day. 

Fed with this bread of worldly wisdom, which 
does not recognize God's providential care of 
his people in supplying them a revelation of his 
past dealings and of his future purposes in connection 
with them, but which prefers to arraign 
that revelation before an inferior court of 
fallible human philosophers and incompetent 
judges who vainly overrate their own knowledge 
and wisdom, what wonder that the pews also 
are skeptical— especially when we consider that 
aside from such food from the pulpit they are 
beset by the same spirit in the world, in the 
every-day walks of life. These worldly philosophers, 
instead of recognizing modern inventions 
as the God-given precursors of the yet 
greater blessings of the Millennial Day, account 
for them by a supposed greater brain-capacity, 
and call this the Brain-age. They sneer at the 
teachers and the philosophies of the past, and 
especially at the teachings of the prophets, our 
Lord and the apostles— that man, created in the 
glorious image of God, fell from that original perfection 
into sin and degradation, and needed to 
be redeemed and restored to "that [original perfection 
and God-likeness] which was lost." 

R1417 :page 196 

While exposing the infidelity which these 
"great teachers" are publishing from pulpits 
dedicated to God, we are far from accusing 
them of any desire to do evil. On the contrary, 
we believe them to be conscientious, but 



so misled by their own and other men's supposed 
wisdom that they can now see nothing of 
God in the Bible, and have therefore come to 
reverence it merely as an ancient and curious 
document, a relic of the remote past upon 
which these, its critics, could improve amazingly. 
They tolerate it as a book of texts from which 
to preach sermons (generally in direct opposition 
to the contexts) merely because the common 
people still reverence it and can as yet be 
better appealed to thus than in any other way. 
They tolerate the Bible only because of what 
they believe is the superstitious reverence of the 
people for it. And they are seeking quietly 
and skilfully to remove that superstition. 

Of course it is true that some superstitions do 
attach to the popular reverence for the Bible, 
as for all sacred things. For instance, some 
keep a Family Bible upon the table, unused, as 
a sort of "charm," just as some hang an old 
horseshoe above their door. Others use it as 
an "oracle" and after prayer upon any perplexing 
point open their Bible and accept the 
verse upon which the eye first lights as an inspired 
answer to their petition— often torturing 
the words out of all proper sense and connection 
to obtain the desired answer. And some 
ignorantly presume that the English and some 
that the German translation is the original Bible, 
and that every word in these imperfect, uninspired 
translations is inspired. For this much 
of ignorance and superstition the Protestant 
ministers of the world are responsible; because 
they should have taught the people by expounding 
God's Word, instead of tickling their ears 
with pleasing essays upon other topics. And 
it is upon this degree of superstition which they 
helped to inculcate, that these "wise men" are 
now placing their levers and exerting the whole 
weight of their influence and learning to overthrow 
entirely the faith of many, their own faith 
having first perished in their culpable negligence 
of the prayerful study of the Word and their 
pride in human philosophies and speculations. 

People of the world seem to realize the true 
state of affairs better far than many of God's 
children, most of whom seem to be asleep on 
the subject. As an instance, see the illustration 
which we give upon pages 200 and 201. It 
was published by "Life," a New York journal, 
in its issue of April 28th. Its publishers kindly 
granted us the privilege of reproducing it. 
It shows leading ministers and colleges* of 
the country in the forefront— blind leaders of 
the numerous blind followers who are shown 
groping after them in the background. The 



miasm of infidelity ["doubts"] is shown hovering 

over them as smoke, helping to injure 

their already darkened vision. All are shown 

as approaching, unconsciously, a great precipice 

into which some have already fallen headlong. 

The illustration brings forcibly to mind 

our Lord's words to the leaders and Doctors 

of the Jewish Church— "If the blind lead the 

blind both will fall into the ditch." And so 

it was fulfilled in the case of that typical House 

of Israel: they stumbled over that stumbling-stone 

—Christ; and the Apostle declares that 

the particular doctrine of Christ over which 

they stumbled was "the cross of Christ, to the 

Jew a stumbling-block and to the Greeks foolishness," 

but to us who believe the power and 

the wisdom of God.— 1 Cor. 1:18. 

And as God foresaw and foretold the fall of 
all the fleshly House of Israel except the believing 
little remnant, so he has foretold the 
stumbling and fall, not only of these blind 
leaders of the nominal spiritual House of Israel 
whom we see already stumbling, but the fall 
also of all, except "a remnant," of the great 
mass of the nominal Church, who will follow 
the pernicious ways of these false teachers and 
fall with them into the ditch of infidelity. 
Thus it is written— He will be for a stone of 
stumbling and rock of offense to both the houses 
of Israel. As the nominal fleshly house stumbled 
eighteen centuries ago, so the nominal 
spiritual house is now stumbling. And, as already 
pointed out, the present stumbling is 



*Union Theological Seminary (representing Dr. Briggs 
and his friends) figures as the man laden with ponderous 
books and manuscripts illustrating the claim of higher 
criticism. Princeton College is shown as led by the Westminster 
Confession and about to collide with Union. 

R1417 :page 197 

like the former— over the doctrine of the pardon 
of sins by virtue of the death, the cross, of 
Christ. This now, as then, seems foolishness 
to the worldly-wise and proves a stumbling-block 
to all who are unworthy of the truth. 

Those who have the TOWERS as far back as 
1879 and '80 will notice that we then called 
attention to this very condition of testing upon 
this subject— as coming first upon those most 
advanced in the light, those upon the housetop 
of Babylon; and later upon all in her; and here 
we applied the words of the Apostle: "If it 



begin first with us [if some amongst us need to 
be sifted out and to fall], what shall the end be" 
to others? What, indeed, but that which God 
represents, a falling on every hand? "A thousand 
shall fall at thy side"— a thousand shall 
fall to one who will stand. No wonder the 
Apostle counsels: "Take unto you the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all to stand." 
-Eph. 6:13. 

Whilst Colonel Ingersoll is thundering against 
the Bible and its inconsistencies— because he 
misinterprets it in the light of the conflicting 
creeds of Christendom— professed Bible expounders 
in some of the leading pulpits are exerting 
a ten-fold greater influence toward infidelity. 
They are handing stones and serpents 
to those who look to them for food. Under 
the name of The Findings of the Higher Criticism, 
they assure their confiding supporters 
that the Bible is not reliable; that, for instance, 
the finding of shells upon the tops of mountains 
was probably the origin of the story of the 
deluge in Noah's day, and that now these are 
known to have resulted from the upheaval of the 
mountains; that it has been discovered that although 
a whale has an enormous mouth it has 
a small throat, and that consequently the story 
of Jonah must be a fable; they proceed to deny 
that God created man in his own likeness 

R1418 :page 197 

and that he fell into sin and thereby lost almost 

all of that likeness, and insist that this 

and other accounts of Genesis are wholly unreliable 

and contrary to reason. They then 

claim that reason teaches evolution; that only 

a beginning of man's creation took place in 

Eden, and that, so far from falling from divine 

favor into sin and degradation, man has gradually 

been growing into God's likeness and 

favor for the past six thousand years. 

They proceed to say that "higher criticism" 
shows that the canon of the Old Testament Scriptures 
was not completed until after the return of 
Israel from the Babylonian captivity, and that 
in that compilation serious errors were made— 
for instance, that the collection of Psalms was 
merely a collection of Hebrew poetry and ascribed 
to David because he had written a few 
of them, and because of his reputation; and 
that the other psalms were written by various 
parties and are therefore to be considered as 
uninspired. Similar claims are made regarding 
others of the Old Testament books: for 



instance, that not more than the first twenty -eight 

chapters of Isaiah are really the writings 

of that prophet; that the remainder of the 

book bearing his name has distinctive peculiarities 

indicating that they were written by two 

or three other parties than wrote the first 

twenty-eight chapters. 

We reply to this "higher criticism" that it is 
altogether too high— that it takes the standpoint 
of unbelief and therefore not the standpoint 
proper for the child of God, who reasonably 
expects that his Heavenly Father has given a 
revelation, and who, finding in the Bible that 
which commends it to his heart and head as 
being that revelation, seeks to prove rather than 
to disprove its authenticity and its truthfulness. 
Higher worldly wisdom ignores God's supervision 
of his Book, but the higher heavenly 
wisdom recognizes that supervision and therefore 
studies it reverently and expectantly. 

The truly higher criticism would reason that 
as the olden-time prophets generally used 
scribes, to whom they dictated, so probably had 
Isaiah; and that as Isaiah's prophecy covered 
a number of years, he probably had several 
scribes, and while each scribe may have had 
his own peculiarities, the same God who was 
able and willing to give a revelation of his will 
through his prophet, Isaiah, was willing and 
able to overrule the scribes provided, so that 
the revelation should reach his people as he 
designed to give it. 

The truly higher criticism, instead of being 

R1418 :page 198 

surprised that all the psalms of the Book of 
Psalms were not indited by King David, should 
remember that the book does not claim to be 
a book of David's Psalms, but a book of Psalms. 
It should notice, too, that whilst a majority of 
the psalms particularly claim that David was 
their author, some do not name their authors. 
One at least (Psalm 90) claims Moses as its 
writer. And although twelve are credited to 
Asaph, a Levite whom King David made Musical 
Director in the services of the Sanctuary, 
it is by no means certain that their dedication 
should not read as some scholars claim— "A 
Psalm for Asaph"— to set to music. 

But no matter: suppose it could be proved 
conclusively that one fourth or one half or all 
of the Psalms had been written by some one 
else than David, would that invalidate their 
divine censorship? It is nowhere stated that 
David alone of all the prophets was permitted 



to put his messages into poetic form. The Jews 
recognized the Book of Psalms as a whole, as 
sacred scripture— as a holy or inspired writing. 
And our Lord and the apostles (the highest 
possible critics, in the estimation of God's 
people) made no objection to that popular 
thought of their day, but, on the contrary, they 
quoted directly or by allusion from sixty-one 
of the psalms, some of them repeatedly. Our 
Lord himself quoted from nineteen of them. 
And these quotations embrace, not only some 
of those definitely ascribed to David, but equally 
those whose authorship is not definitely stated. 
And in one case (John 10:34,35), our Lord, 
quoting from Psalm 82:6 ("A Psalm of Asaph") 
distinctly terms it a part of the "Scriptures" 
which "cannot be broken." This, the highest 
possible criticism, makes the Book of Psalms 
entirely satisfactory to God's humble "little 
ones," whether or not it be hid from the wise 
and prudent according to the course of this 
world, whom the god of this world hath blinded 
with the brilliancy of their own earthly 
learning and with their love of honor of men. 
-Compare Matt. 11:25-30; 1 Cor. 1:19-31; 
2 Cor. 4:4. 

The arguments against the story of Jonah 
and the whale and against the story of the flood 
are fully met by the reminder that the Scriptures 
do not say that a whale swallowed Jonah, 
but that the Lord specially prepared a great fish 
for the purpose, and that our Lord and the 
apostles refer to both of these narratives without 
in any degree modifying or correcting them. 
If they were deceived upon such points we 
could place no reliance upon their superior 
guidance and inspiration upon other points. 
The "meek" will recognize that there is much 
more likelihood that the error lies with the 
modern critics. See Isa. 29:10-14. 



But some of these wise men, whose wisdom 
is perishing, wax very bold and not only discredit 
the truthfulness of the records of the 
past, but declare that, if assured of their truthfulness, 
there is no reason to think them more 
inspired, nor even as much so, as the writings 
of good men of to-day. They claim that the 
prophesying of the past was merely the expression 
of the longing desires of naturally good 
hearts looking for and predicting a better state 
of things coming after. They assert that this 
is the natural order of evolution; that men desire 
something better and then aim for and attain 



it; they make light of the teaching of 
Genesis that man was created in God's image 
and fell from it; asserting that by a process of 
evolution the world has each century approached 
nearer and nearer to the likeness of God. The 
Rev. R. Heber Newton declares:— 

"If the dear Christ's throne stood on any 
such flimsy basis of prophecy as men have built 
up under it, then, when the underpinnings [of 
faith, which he has been actively engaged in 
removing] come tumbling out, as to-day they 
are doing, we might fear that his authority was 
dropping in with them; that no longer we were 
to call him Master and King; that criticism had 
pronounced his decheance. But his throne really 
rests on a nation's [the Jews] growth of the 
human ideal and divine image. And since this 
nation's growth was on the same general basis 
as the religious and ethical progress of other 
races [i.e., there was nothing peculiar about 
the Jews religion— nothing better than that of 
other nations, except that they were more religiously 
inclined, as the writer elsewhere claims 
—although on the contrary, the Scriptures 
claim and show by their history that the Jews 
were "a stiff-necked" and idolatrously inclined 
people], his throne rests on no less secure 

R1418 :page 199 

foundation than humanity's evolution of the human 
ideal and divine image." 

Here is a repudiation of all that Christ taught 
on the subject of the "things written" which 
"must be fulfilled," a repudiation of all his 
quotations from the Law and the Prophets; a 
repudiation of his repeated statements of God's 
choice of that nation and the house of David 
and seed of Abraham as heirs of the promises 
that of these should come the predicted Messiah; 
a repudiation of his statement of the necessity 
of his death: that thus it was written, 
and thus "it was necessary" that the Son of 
Man should suffer and rise from the dead in 
order that salvation and remission of sins, and 
consequently restitution from the penalty of sins, 
should be preached in his name unto all people. 
But whilst showing Christ to have been a wonderful 
Jew, and the great exemplar for both 
Jews and Gentiles, he utterly repudiates him as 
a Savior in the sense that the Master taught— 
that he "gave his life a ransom for many"— 
"to save [recover] that which was lost." 
Then, fearing to break the idol of our hearts 
too suddenly, and a little shocked by his own 
boldness as an iconoclast, he for the moment 



pacifies his own and his hearers hearts by (so 
to speak, saying, Hail, Master! and kissing the 
very one whose teachings he, as a "higher critic," 
is betraying) saying, "The dear Christ." 

The Master prophetically rebuked such as say 
Lord, Lord, yet follow not his teachings. 
(Matt. 7:22.) And they still need rebuke, 
and it is the duty of every true disciple to rebuke 
them; for the outward opponents do far 
less harm than those who wear the Master's 
name whilst denying his doctrine. 

As for the average nominal Christian, overcharged 
with the cares and business of this 
present life, and wholly ignorant of prophecy 
and its past, present and future fulfilments, he 
is just ready to swallow these suggestions of unbelief. 
The Apostle Peter's statement (2 Pet. 1:21) 
is that "prophecy came not in old time 
by the will of man [that they were not the imaginings 
of longing human hearts], but that holy 
men of old spoke as they were moved [to speak] 
by the holy spirit" of God. And so far from 
their utterances being their own ideas of what 
would come to pass, the Lord sends us word, 
through the Apostle Peter (1 Pet. 1:10,11), 
that the prophets did not know, but searched 
diligently to know what and what manner of 
time (whether literal or symbolic) the spirit 
which was in them did signify, when it testified 
beforehand concerning the sufferings of Christ 
and concerning the glory and restitution of all 
things (Acts 3:21) that would follow as a result 
of his suffering— the just for the unjust. 
And not only does the Apostle tell us of this, 
but the prophets themselves acknowledge their 
own ignorance (Dan. 8:26,27; 12:4,8,9; 
Ezek. 20:49); and the Apostle exclaims that 
they spoke and wrote not for themselves and 
the people then living, but for the instruction 
of the Gospel Church, and especially for the 

R1419 :page 199 

two ends, the opening and the closing of the 
Gospel age.-l Pet. 1:12; 1 Cor. 10:11. 

But these worldly-wise teachers who put light 
for darkness and darkness for light go farther 
and farther into the "outer darkness" in their 
efforts to justify their theories and still be logical. 
They openly claim that the apostles were not 
inspired; that their belief in the inspiration of 
the prophets misled them; and that, although 
they were good-intentioned men, their writings 
are very misleading. Indeed, one of these 
preachers has attempted to prove from their 
own words that the New Testament writers did 



not claim infallibility, or a divine supervision 
of their writing. He quotes the preface to the 
Gospel according to Luke, saying: "No Biblical 
writer shows any consciousness of such 
supernatural influences upon him in his work as 
insured infallibility." We answer that it should 
not require a special inspiration to enable an 
honest man to set forth in historical form facts 
known to himself or testified to by his honorable 
friends who had been eye-witnesses of the 
facts recorded. The first five books of the 
New Testament are merely histories— good 
histories, reliable histories, histories written 
by men who gave their lives in devotion to the 
matters concerning which they here bear witness. 
The only superhuman influence that 
could be desired in this would be that the Lord 
should facilitate their work by bringing important 
matters clearly and forcibly to the attention 

R1419 : page 202 

of these historians, and guarding them 
against misunderstandings. This our Lord 
promised to do (John 14:26); and this we 
have every reason to believe he has done. But 
this "higher critic" declares that the Apostle 
Paul, the greatest of the New Testament 
writers, did not claim divine direction, or more 
than ordinary knowledge or authority for his 
teachings. In proof of this statement he cites 
us to 1 Cor. 7:10,12,25,40. He argues from 
these citations that the Apostle was quite uncertain 
about his own teaching. We reason 
contrariwise, that the man who thus carefully 
marked off his own judgment or opinion and 
clearly specified that these particular items were 
his, and not of divine inspiration, not only implies 
that the remainder of his teachings are of 
divine authorization, and very positively so, 
but that his candid admission that some things 
here taught were without divine authorization 
proves that if his teachings had all been merely 
his own judgment, he had the courage which 
would have told the truth— the honesty which 
love of human approbation could not affect. 

Let us hear what the Apostle has to say relative 
to the divine authority for his teachings 
aside from what is implied and stated in the 
citations already mentioned.— 
1 Cor. 7:12,25,40. 

He declares that "God hath set" first or chief 
in the Church the Apostles, as rulers and teachers 
of all. (And that the early Church so recognized 
the apostles is very evident.) He declares 
that he is one of the apostles— the last; 



points to the evidences of his apostleship— 
how the Lord used him, not only in imparting 
to others through him a knowledge of the truth, 
but also in communicating the gifts of the spirit, 
which at that time outwardly witnessed the 
acceptance of all true believers, but also witnessed 
who were apostles— since only apostles 
could impart those gifts.— 1 Cor. 12:28; 2 Cor. 1:1; 
1 Cor. 9:1,2; 15:8-10; 2 Tim. 1:6. 

Every time, therefore, that Paul announced 
himself an apostle, he declared (to those who 
appreciate the meaning of that office) that he 
was one of those twelve specially commissioned 
of God and recognized of the Church as God's 
representatives, through whom he would promulgate 
and establish in the world the truths 
concerning the New Covenant which had just 
been sealed with the precious blood [sacrificial 
death] of Christ. Every time he referred to 
his apostleship he announced himself one of 
those specially commissioned "by the holy 
spirit sent down from heaven" to preach and 
to establish the Gospel.— See 1 Pet. 1:12. 

His writings are toned not only with meekness, 
but also with that authority which should 
mark one who knows what he teaches to be the 
truth— unlike the uncertain "scribes." Not 
only so, but he affirms, "I have not shunned 
to declare unto you [not my own opinions, but] 
all the counsel of God."— Acts 20:27. 

Hear the Apostle:— "I certify unto you, 
brethren, that the gospel which was preached 
by me is not after man. For I neither received 
it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the 
revelation of Jesus Christ." "But though we, 
or an angel from heaven, preach any other 
gospel than that we have preached unto you, 
let him be accursed." (Gal. 1:8,11,12.) 
"For my gospel [message of good tidings] 
came not unto you in word only, but also in 
power, and in the holy spirit, and in much assurance." 
"As we were permitted of God to 
be put in trust with the gospel, even so we 
speak; not as pleasing men, but God." "We 
preached unto you the gospel of God"— exhorting 
"that ye would walk worthy of God, 
who hath called you unto his kingdom and 
glory;" and we thank God that "when ye received 
the word of God WHICH YE HEARD OF US, 
ye received it not as the word of men, but, as 
it is in truth, the word of God." (1 Thes. 1:5; 
2:4,9,12,13.) "God.. .hath chosen 
you to salvation through sanctification of the 
spirit and belief of the truth: whereunto he 
called you by our gospel."— 2 Thes. 2:13,14. 

And yet so dense has the "outer darkness" 



become in some instances, that ministers who 
should know what the Apostle Paul claimed, 
and who would know if they studied his writings 
as much as they study the findings of "higher 
criticism," declare in the face of the foregoing 
and other statements of the Apostle that— 

"Against his [Paul's] modest, cautious discriminations, 
our doctors [of divinity] set up 

R1419 : page 203 

their theory of the Bible, clothe all his utterances 
with the divine authority, and honor 
him with an infallibility which he explicitly disclaims." 
— R. Heber Newton. 

Commenting upon the teachings of the Apostle 
Paul, Mr. Newton says: 

"His intensely speculative mind had furnished 
a system of thought into which he built 
such ideas as these: The pre-existence of Christ, 
as in some mystic, undefined way the head of 
Humanity; the sacrificial nature of his death; the 
justification of the sinner through faith;... 
the speedy return of Christ to reign on earth; 
the resurrection of the pious dead; the translation 
of the living believers; the final victory of 
goodness over evil; and the ending of the mediatorship 
of Christ, God then becoming all in 
all.... With the incoming of a more rational, 
ethical and spiritual age, we may surely expect 
a finer fashioning of the forms of thought." 

As this higher critic philosophizes that Peter 
and James and Paul and especially Jesus were 
the developments of the Jewish age, by processes 
of moral and physical evolution, what wonder 
if he concludes that himself and his co-critics, 
as the developments of this Brain-age, are much 
better able than they to teach the world— and 
to doctor divinity. The fact that Christ and 
the apostles taught the doctrines of justification 
by faith in the great sacrifice for sins, of a second 
coming of Christ, and of the resurrection 
of the dead, would, of course, be the best of 
reason for the rejection of all those doctrines 
by the new lights of higher criticism; for, disbelieving 
in a plenary inspiration, they ask, 
How could any one get the true light eighteen 
centuries ago? 

So far from regarding our Lord Jesus as the 
one and only and true Light of the world 
which sooner or later, in this or the next age, 
shall lighten every man that cometh into the 
world, this "higher criticism" asserts that the 
heathen "Bibles," as well as ours, though mostly 
error, were rays of the light which is now, as 
a result of their "higher criticism," about to 



burst upon the world with electrical brilliancy. 
But lo! we perceive that what they offer is only 
a rehash of the old heathen doctrine of evolution 
—the wisdom of the East— which has done 
so little for its votaries, whilst the Word of God, 
even misinterpreted, has been carrying blessings 
to every land. 

But the most forcible element of this attack 
upon the Bible— to the average mind— is that 
which claims that there are discrepancies of 
statements between the books of Chronicles 
and the books of Kings; and that the Old Testament 
contains narratives too indecent for promiscuous 
reading. The argument is that the 
former prove the Bible to be uninspired and 
unreliable, and that the latter is a reason for 
believing it to have been written by men of impure 
minds, and gives the book an impure influence, 
and hence proves that it is not of God 
and is unfit for use by the pure minded and the 
young. 

We answer that the Old Testament Scriptures 
comprise three classes of writings, viz.: History, 
Prophecy and Law. The history neither needed 
nor claimed any special inspiration, though 
we believe that God's supervision of the historical 
writings was exerted to the extent of seeing 
that such items were recorded by the historians 
as would be of special value in connection 
with the revelation of the divine plan of the 
ages. And so also we believe that God's supervision 
has to some extent been over modern 
history, by means of which we are enabled 
to read, upon reliable authority, the fulfilments 
of many ancient prophecies. 

The errors or chronological differences between 
the books of Kings and Chronicles are, therefore, 
not to be considered errors of inspiration, 
but merely such slight discrepancies as we 
might expect to find in any history, and which 

R1420 : page 203 

God permitted for a purpose, while he supplied 
this deficiency in the Old Testament chronology 
by a fuller record on these obscure points 
in the New Testament. Thus we are assured 
of his supervision of the historical features of 
the Bible as a whole. At the same time, the 
Lord thus hid the exact chronology of events, 
and hence the knowledge of his times and seasons, 
both from Israel and from "the wise and 
prudent" of to-day, whose pride in human 
philosophies impels them more toward adverse 
criticism of the Bible than toward a reverent 
study of its hidden treasures of truth and grace. 



We claim and have shown (MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. II., pages 44-49) that upon those very 
points where, by the historian's error or our 

R1420 : page 204 

misunderstanding, our faith in the chronology 
would be influenced, God has supplied the 
needed evidence through the apostles— thus 
cultivating the confidence of "the meek" in 
his supervision of the entire matter, and emphasizing 
his special use of the apostles. 

In his eternal purpose God had designed 
not only the sending of his Son to be man's 
Redeemer and Deliverer, but also that when 
made flesh it should be in the line of the seed 
of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and David. He designed 
also that every item of his plan should 
be accomplished "in due time," "in the fulness 
of the times appointed," and he desired 
that his reverent children should, in due time, 
know of his good purposes and their times and 
seasons. For these reasons it was expedient 
that records be clearly kept— including family 
genealogies. And it is in keeping a clear record 
of these necessary genealogies— the showing 
of who was the father and who the mother 
—that most of the unchaste narratives are introduced, 
none of which are approved, but 
many of them reproved. The reasons for mentioning 
these features of history are not always 
apparent without study. For instance, the narrative 
of King David's relations with Bathsheba 
were necessary, because her son Solomon 
succeeded to the throne, and his title to it depended 
on his relationship to David. Then 
the account of Absalom's estrangement from 
his father David made necessary the statement 
of his relationship to Tamar; and the account 
of Absalom's conduct toward his father's concubines 
was necessary as an item of history to 
prove that the Lord's penalty against David 
for his injustice toward Uriah was fulfilled. 
Another account of base wickedness in detail 
is made necessary as an item of Jewish history 
to account for the almost complete annihilation 
of the tribe of Benjamin. And so with other 
cases: if the reason for the account is not on 
the surface, let us look deeper, assured that in 
every instance there is a good reason. Furthermore, 
the fact that our Lord's ancestors, according 
to the flesh, were far from perfect, 
proves that his perfection did not result from 
evolution, but, as the Scriptures declare, from his 
divine origin and his miraculous conception 
and birth. But even its enemies must concede 



that these unchaste elements of Bible history 
are told briefly, and evidently without desire 
to awaken morbid sentiments, or to do more 
than the historian's simple duty of keeping the 
lines of history free from obscurity. This was 
specially needful because the line of our Lord's 
descent was to be traced, and because for a 
part of the course that was Israel's royal line 
or family. And it seems to have been a peculiarity 
of the Jewish historian to tell the story 
fearlessly, regardless of whether it related to 
king or peasant. 

All familiar with ancient history know that 
the Jewish social system was much purer than 
that of other nations, and few are not aware 
that to-day the history of any large city of the 
world, for one week, if written as boldly as 
Scripture history, would record more unchastity 
than the Bible account of an entire nation 
covering centuries. 

We do not urge a promiscuous reading of 
these unchaste portions of ancient history 
(either from the Bible or other works) before 
the family or to the young. The Bible is not 
a child's book, but a book for "believers." 

And while the New Testament might be freely 
given into the hands of children, only selections 
from the Old Testament should be read 
to those of immature mind. Such was the custom 
in the days of the apostles: selections from 
the Law or from the Prophets were read to the 
people by the scribes: and the historical books 
were open for reference for any who had use 
for them. 

As for persons of matured minds, the unchaste 
elements of Bible history can work no 
injury: the morbid and impure mind can find, 
alas! far more attractive tales upon the counter 
of every book-store and upon the shelves of 
every public library. The true Christian can 
trust himself to read and get a lesson from every 
department of God's Book— and it is for such 
only, and not for the worldly, nor for children; 
"that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly 
furnished unto every good work." 

As a further element of this discussion the 
reader is referred to Chapters ii., iii. and x. of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I. And thus we rest 
our argument for the present: urging all who 
have "laid hold upon the hope set before us in 
the gospel" to hold fast the confidence of their 
rejoicing firm unto the end— to hold fast to the 
Book. And how much more easy it is and will 
be for those who have learned the real plan of 
God and seen its beauty to stand firm upon the 
Bible, than for others. To many, alas! it is a 



jumbled mass of doctrinal contradictions, but 
to us it is the foundation of a clear, definite, 
grand plan of the ages. So grandly clear and 
symmetrical is the wonderful plan that all who 
see it are convinced that only God could have 
been its author, and that the book whose 
teachings it harmonizes must indeed be God's 
revelation. 



page 205 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1420 : page 205 

THE EARLY CHURCH-ITS SIMPLICITY. 



III. QUAR., LESSON III., JULY 17, Acts 2:37-47. 

Golden Text— "The Lord added to the Church daily 
such as should be saved." 

VERSES 37-41. As soon as the disciples had 
received the begetting spirit and the qualifying 
gifts, they became preachers— all who received 
the spirit received a gift or ability to preach 
the truth in some way. They did not tarry to 
build colleges and seminaries, and to study 
astronomy, or geology, or even elocution, but 
straightway preached— using whatever talents 
they had, God being willing to use all who desired 
to serve him. They did not even stop to 
dispute about how they would "organize" and 
who should be the officers and which should be 
Reverend and which Most Reverend. They did 
not say, Let us make a creed which will elaborately 
state all that must be believed regarding 
this life and the next. Already, in being united 
to Christ, they had the only proper organization. 

What then did they do? They preached! 
What did they preach? The words of Peter 
are briefly stated (verses 14-36) and were doubtless 



the text for all, as all preached. He simply 
explained to the people that these gifts of 
the spirit, which they saw displayed, were 
meant to designate these as acceptable to God, 
as the Prophet had foretold (see June TOWER); 
that their acceptance with God was the result, 
not of works of their own, but of faith in 
Christ's work (verse 21); then he explained 
about Christ, the Messiah, and how they as a 
people had slain him; how God had foreknown 
and foretold this, and how he had raised Christ 
from death, as also foretold by the prophets; 
and how this Messiah was now highly exalted 
by God and would yet conquer every foe; and 
that he had secured for his followers divine 
favor and adoption into the family of God, of 
which these gifts of the spirit of adoption were 
the outward witness. And with many other 
words and arguments in this same line Peter 
and the others preached the gospel and said to 
the people, "Save yourselves from this crooked 
generation," accept of Christ and through him 
have God's favor and unite with us in his service 
—telling the good tidings. 

Some believed this plainly-told story, and 
asked, What must we do to be saved from the 
fate of our cast-off nation and to obtain the 
divine favor as you have it? The answer came 
quickly, Repent and be baptized in the name 
of Jesus Christ. They did not say, You are 
all right now since you BELIEVE: there were 
certain works proper to show their belief. 
Their course of conduct as well as their belief 
was to be changed in conformity to the words 
of Jesus, whom they now accepted as Messiah, 
and they were to give outward expression to 
this change, and to show publicly that they believed 
in him and had consecrated their lives 
to his service, by baptism into his name. 

They did not ask them which Church they 
would join, for there is but one true Church— 
"The Church of the Living God," of which 
Christ is the Head, and of which every truly 
consecrated one who believes in him as his 
Savior is a member. They did not ask them 
to assent to a fixed creed devised by men, nor 
to bind or commit themselves in any manner, 
except as their faith in Christ and their allegiance 
to him would be expressed by their baptism 
into his name, in the likeness of his death. 
How beautifully simple was the organization of 
the early Church. The names were "written 
in heaven" (Luke 10:20), but we have no 
record to indicate that they were enrolled on 
earth. And all were just as free to leave the 
Church as to come into its gatherings; and 



when any "drew back" or proved unworthy, 

R1421 : page 205 

their names were "blotted out" in the heavenly 
records only, for no other records are mentioned. 
(Rev. 3:5.) About three thousand 
souls were added to the Church by that first 
day's preaching— but it is not stated that they 
were all immersed in the one day. 

The statement that they were to be baptized 
for the remission of their sins is generally misunderstood. 
It should be remembered that 

those addressed were all Jews— already in covenant 
relationship with God, but about being 
cast off because of failure to live as nearly as 
they could up to the terms of their covenant. 
There was a difference, therefore, between them 
and the Gentiles who had always been aliens 
and strangers, afar off from God— "without 
God and without hope." And it was proper 
to tell the Jews to repent— to turn again to God 
and to their covenant— to be his people and to 
seek to do his will. To the Jew who had 
wandered away from God, baptism in the name 
of Jesus became a fresh witness of a covenant 

R1421 : page 206 

relationship with God which recognized Jesus 
as his appointed Messiah. If they would thus 
accept and acknowledge Christ, their sins 
against their covenant and their share in the sin 
of their nation in rejecting and crucifying him 
would be remitted or forgiven. Compare Mark 1:4; 
Luke 3:3; Acts 13:24 and particularly 
Acts 22:16. These instances all relate to Jews, 
either natural born or proselyted. 

VERSE 42. Recognizing the Apostles' teachings 
as divinely inspired, the early Church had 
a grand unity of sentiment, and "all believed 
the same things" (1 Cor. 1:10); they did not 
each try to rack his brain to make a new theory 
or a new kind of theology. How blessed it 
would be for the Church to-day if she were delivered 
from the confusion (Babel) of tongues- 
doctrines— which now prevails, and if, instead 
of studying and endeavoring to harmonize the 
inconsistent teachings of men, all would unite 
in discussing the teachings of the Lord and the 
apostles, with a view of learning just what they 
(God's mouthpieces) meant to teach. How 
soon would "the faith once delivered to the 
saints" illuminate the hearts of all the humble. 

The "breaking of bread" does not refer to 
the Lord's Supper; for in it the wine is no less 



important than the bread, and would surely 

have been mentioned had that yearly memorial 

been meant. Our Lord's resurrection from 

death on the first day of the week seems to 

have given rise to the custom in the early 

Church of meeting together on that day, so 

precious in its memory of revived hopes. And 

since after his resurrection our Lord made himself 

known to them several times in connection 

with their partaking of food (Mark 16:14; 

Luke 24:30,31; John 21:5-12), the early 

Church appears to have gotten into the habit 

of having a simple meal in common in remembrance 

of this— a sort of love-feast. 

Prayers, of course, were not neglected. No 
soul appreciative of the great privilege of communion 
with the great Creator, opened to us by 
our Mediator through the sin-offering which he 
gave for our transgressions, would fail to use so 
precious a boon— to express his thanks for mercies 
received and to seek fresh supplies of grace 
and wisdom in the Redeemer's name. 

VERSES 44,45. The tendency with all whose 
hearts are touched and sealed with God's spirit, 
the spirit of love, is to live together as one 
family— the new-found cup of blessings, joys 
of the Lord, being rendered the more sweet 
and precious by being shared in common; and 
if the spiritual so also the temporal joys and 
sorrows would be gladly shared. So it was in 
the early Church: such a spirit of love prevailed 
and speedily led to community of goods— 
"They had all things in common"— "possessions 
(houses, etc.) and goods"— as one family, 
the family of God. 

This beautiful and desirable condition of affairs 
doubtless affords a foreview of the blessed 
state of affairs already existing in heaven and 
of what will be found also upon earth when 
that which is perfect is come, and when as a 
result of the promised "times of restitution" 
God's will shall be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven. And God no doubt arranged for this 
sample of Christian Communism as an illustration 
of what a full measure of the holy spirit 
would lead to. But that God did not intend 
that such a communism should continue throughout 
this Gospel age seems evident. Having 
served its intended use as an object lesson, it 
was permitted to die. Indeed, it should be evident 
to all that the children of this world would 
be led into such a community by a spirit of 
selfishness and indolence as surely as if not more 
numerously than saints would be drawn into it 
by the spirit of love. And it is evident that 
it required the exercise of those special powers 



conferred upon the apostles, to keep the community 
from being imposed on by such selfish 
characters. --Acts 5:1-11; 8:18-24. 

When our Lord traveled throughout Palestine 
with his twelve disciples they had a common 
"bag" into which freewill offerings were 
put. Judas, who had a devil, was the treasurer, 
being naturally drawn to the position by his 
love of money, selfishness. And yet theirs was 
not a communism in the full sense; for John 
at least had "his own home."— John 19:27. 

Furthermore, neither our Lord nor the apostles 
in any of their teachings urged believers to 
communism of goods; but, on the contrary, 
they urged each to esteem himself a steward of 
God's favors, temporal and spiritual, and to 
use them— "distributing to the necessities of 
the saints"— laying by on the first day of the 
week, according as God had prospered each, a 
fund from which the Lord's cause could be forwarded. 
And those who have, from time to 

time since, attempted religious socialism or communism 
have, as a rule, found the matter impracticable, 
because, although the spirit may 
be willing, the flesh is weak. 

VERSES 46,47. Whilst it lasted, their full 
fellowship was delightful, and made even the 
ordinary affairs of life more blessed— "They 
ate their food with gladness." Such a blissful 
condition was well calculated to draw the attention 
and hearts of all Israelites indeed. 
And thus did the Lord draw out of the rejected 
nation into the Church such as it was proper to 
rescue or "save" from the "blindness" which 
he had sent upon that nation, because of unfitness 
of heart to share the blessings of the 
Gospel age.— Rom. 11:7-11. 

R1421 : page 207 

THE LAME MAN HEALED. 



III. QUARTER, LESSON IV., JULY 24, ACTS 3:1-16. 

Golden Text— "And his name, through faith in his 
name, hath made this man strong."— Acts 3:16. 

VERSE 1 . Peter and John were promptly 
about the Master's business. The Pentecostal 
blessing had filled their hearts, and in their zeal 
to find some opportunity for service they went 
up to the temple at the hour of prayer, hoping 
and expecting to find there some opportunity 
for testifying to the truth. 



VERSES 2,3. At the gate of the temple they 
met a poor beggar, lame from his birth, who 
asked for alms; and immediately the Spirit of 
God suggested to Peter the healing of this man 
in the name of the Lord Jesus as a means of 
calling the attention of the people to the fact 
of his resurrection and power. The suggestion 
was accompanied by the gift of faith (1 Cor. 12:9), 
and the inspired Apostle, strong in the 
assurance that the Lord would work with him 
in this matter, boldly commanded the man in 
the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth to rise up 
and walk. 

VERSES 4-7 show that a remarkable cure was 
effected as soon as the man made the effort to 
obey the command of the Lord Jesus through 
Peter. Herein is a lesson for us to manifest 
the disposition to obedience to the Lord if we 
would secure his blessing. 

VERSE 8 declares the completeness of the cure 
and the surprise and joy and gratitude of the 
man, as, walking and leaping and praising God, 
he entered the temple with Peter and John, a 
living witness to the power of the risen Lord 
Jesus whom they preached. 

VERSES 9-11 show that the miracle had the 
desired effect of drawing the attention of the 
people to the apostles' teaching. 

VERSES 12-16 are a part of the testimony 
concerning the Lord Jesus. How bold and 
fearless Peter here appears since that pentecostal 
baptism of the holy spirit. There is no disposition 
now to deny the Lord: he fearlessly 
stands before the people who only a few months 
previous had crucified the Lord, and charges 
them with the crime; describing, too, the enormity 
of their guilt, and then declaring the fact 
of his resurrection, of which fact he claimed 
to be one of the witnesses. And this miracle 
which had been wrought in their sight, in the 
name of Jesus, he pointed to as an evidence 
of his exaltation and power. 

Here, strange to say, just at the most interesting 
point of his discourse, our lesson closes, 
and the succeeding lesson is chosen from the 
next chapter, thus omitting the glorious doctrine 
which Peter that day set forth to the eager 
listeners, and which the miracle was only intended 
to introduce to their attention and to 
prove to them that the doctrine was of God. 
But let us proceed. 

VERSES 17-19 were intended to encourage 
any who began to realize their national sin and 

R1422 : page 207 



their individual part in it, by showing that their 
sin might be forgiven, because they, as well as 
their rulers, had done it in at least partial 
ignorance. Thus he urges them to repentance 
in view of the fact that times of refreshing are 
coming from the presence of the Lord. 

VERSES 20-24 declare that the Lord Jesus 
is coming again, and that the times of refreshing 
or restitution are due at his return. Then 
the apostle calls attention to the fact that this 
promised restitution was the theme of all the 
prophets, and bids them specially note what 
Moses had to say about Christ as a great prophet 
and teacher with authority and power, all of 
which will be fully realized at his return. 

Glorious tidings were these for those who 
heard in faith. They had before them that 
very day an illustration of the restitution blessings. 
These things did Jesus through his faithful 
witnesses and thus shadowed forth the glory 
and blessings of his future kingdom. Then the 
Apostle reminded them of the promise made 
to their father Abraham— "In thee and thy 
seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed:" i.e., that through the children of 
Abraham, exalted to power and great glory, 
these blessings of restitution were to flow to 
the whole world; and that they, as the children 
of Abraham and of the prophets who foretold 
these things, were the natural heirs of this 
promise— of the grand privilege of being exalted 
to such a position of favor with God and 
of power and influence as to be able to bless 
all the families of the earth. 

Then he declares that it was for this very 
reason— because they were the natural seed of 
Abraham— that God was so gracious toward 
them as to offer to them first this special favor, 
over and above the great favor of restitution 
which he had promised for the whole world 
(verses 25,26); for, in order to bless others, 
they must of necessity be the more highly exalted. 
(Heb. 7:7.) Not indeed because of 
their personal worthiness was this offered to 
them. Ah, no: they had most signally manifested 
their unworthiness in killing the Prince 
of life. Nevertheless, they were told that God 
would forgive this terrible sin if they would 
repent and turn to their crucified and now 
highly exalted Lord and receive his great salvation. 
But if they would not repent they had 
no inheritance in the Abrahamic promise or 
covenant; they would not be owned as children 

R1422 : page 208 



of Abraham, but would be disinherited; 
"for God," said Jesus, "is able of these stones 
to raise up children unto Abraham." 

The sermon that Peter preached that day, 
accompanied, as it was, by an actual demonstration 
of the Lord's power to accomplish the 
great restitution work, must have made a deep 
impression upon the minds of his hearers. 
And as we read it to-day, in the early dawn of 
the blessed times of restitution, our hearts are 
made to rejoice also in the glorious prospect; 
especially since we have come to realize that 
the special favor which the natural seed of 
Abraham, except a small remnant, failed to appreciate 
and accept, we, Gentile believers, being 
by faith counted as the seed of Abraham, 
have fallen heirs to. Blessed inheritance! How 
little poor, prejudice-blinded Israel realized 
what they were rejecting; and how careful 
should we be who have been adopted in their 
stead into the family of God, lest we become 
blinded by the god of this world to the great 
value of this favor, and so fall after the same 
example of unbelief. Let us remember the 
Apostle Paul's admonition— "Thou standest 
by faith. Be not high-minded, but fear." 

Referring again to the subject of the lesson 
—the healing of the lame man— let it be observed 
that this was not a prayer-cure, since 
there was no prayer offered, nor was the subject 
anointed according to the directions of the 
Apostle James; nor was it a faith-cure, since 
the subject evidently had no faith or expectancy 
of such a thing; nor was it a mind-cure; nor 
was it a partial cure gradually effected in the 
course of days or weeks. It was instantaneous, 
miraculous and complete, and in all of these 
respects different from the healings witnessed 
to-day, some of which we regard as a beginning 
of the restitution work, or rather, as an introduction 
to that work, and designed principally 
to call attention to the possibilities of the restitution 
times. It was one of the results of the 
special gifts granted to the early Church for 
the purpose of confirming their testimony and 
establishing the truth in candid and pious 
minds. 

To witness for the truth in those days required 
special power: a mere statement of the fact 
that the despised and hated Nazarene, against 
whom the nation had conspired, and whom 
they had very recently put to a cruel and ignominious 
death, would not suffice to convince 
the people that this was indeed Jehovah's 
Anointed, the long promised Messiah. Consequently, 
it was necessary for these chosen 



witnesses to these wonderful truths to have some 
supernatural powers granted to them to enforce 
their testimony, else they would be regarded 
merely as deluded fanatics; and, therefore, in 
addition to the blessings of the day of Pentecost, 
special gifts were conferred upon all the 
various members of the early Church, whereby 
the Lord endorsed their testimony. 

There were, as Paul enumerated them (1 Cor. 12:8-10) 
gifts of wisdom, of knowledge, of 
faith, of healing, of miracles, of prophecy, of 
discerning of spirits, of speaking with unknown 
tongues. These gifts were necessary in those 
days, both for convincing the honest-hearted 
Israelites and for the edification of the infant 
Church, which was not then possessed of the 
bountiful supply of spiritual food now granted 
to us in the completed canon of both Old and 
New Testaments, with ability and helps to 
read them. 

In the instance of our lesson two special 
gifts were exercised by the Apostle Peter, viz.: 
the gift of faith, and the gift of healing. Ordinarily, 
faith is not a gift, except in the remote 
sense of the God-given basis whereon a 
reasonable and sure hope may rest. But, in the 
case under consideration, Peter was made to 
know assuredly that the man before him was to 
be healed for the glory of God. This God-given 
persuasion seemed to come to him instantly, 
as soon as the lame man asked for alms. 
Observe that the man did not pray, either to 
God or to Peter and John, for healing. He 
evidently never thought of such a thing, much 
less expected it. Neither did the apostles pray 
for the man or ask the man to pray for himself; 
but, in the full assurance of the gift of special 
faith for this occasion, he exercised his gift of 
healing, commanding the man who had never 
walked before and who never expected to walk, 
and who needed the assuring hand of Peter to 
encourage him to make the effort, in the name 
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth to rise up and walk. 

The cure which immediately followed was 
evidently a complete soundness of the lame 
ankle. The man, filled with wonder and surprise, 
could at first hardly believe it himself. 
He tried standing, then began to step; and 
then, realizing his new strength and soundness, 
he leaped for joy, and, praising the Lord, entered 
with the apostles into the temple to hear 
what more these men would have to say about 
this one in whose name the miracle had been 
performed. 



page 210 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



PROVIDING FOR COLPORTEURS' EXPENSES. 



During the Colporteurs' Meetings which followed 
the regular meetings of the recent Convention, 
some of the older and more experienced 
Colporteurs made the suggestion that hereafter 
all colporteurs be authorized to sell the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series of books at Thirty-five 
cents per volume, or three volumes for One 
Dollar— explaining to any who might notice 
and inquire, that the books could be had at 
Twenty-five cents each if they chose to send to 
the Allegheny office; but that the Colporteurs 
are allowed to charge ten cents extra to cover 
their additional expense connected with delivering 
the books. With the consent of the office 
several had tried the higher price plan and the 



results had been highly satisfactory: they had 
sold about as many as at Twenty-five cents; 
that people concede that a book of 350 pages 
on good paper is cheap at 35 cents— or over 
1100 pages for $1.00. As a consequence we 
have decided on this change. 

The object of the suggestion on the part of 
those proposing the higher price was not money-getting, 
but a desire to forward the work. 
While they are able to meet their traveling and 
living expenses and a little more at twenty-five 
cents, they well know that many others cannot 
do so on account of being less successful salesmen, 
or of having encumbrances in the way of 
family duties and expenses. Indeed, the plan 
proposed is that all who can do so shall return 
to the Lord's treasury all that can be spared 
from their actual expenses, that it may assist 
in the general work of spreading the Truth, to 
which all of our lives are consecrated. 

It is not the thought to attract worldly people 
into the work. We desire only such as engage 
in the work as ministers of the gospel, 
and from the conviction that what they are 
presenting is the Truth, and that in no other 
manner can they so fully and faithfully serve the 
Lord and his people. We do not know of 
one now in the colporteur work merely as a 
business: all are doing what they can as unto 
the Lord; and several who could earn nearly or 
quite a thousand dollars a year in other occupations, 
gladly give their all for the Truth. 

RATES ON MILLENNIAL DAWN, PAPER COVERS. 



Single copies delivered by colporteurs, 35 cents. 
Three " " " " $1.00. 



Single copies by mail from the office, 25 
Five (or multiples of five, 10, 20, 40, 
etc.) copies of any one volume by mail, 
post-paid to one address, each, ... 15 " 

Fifty or more copies by express or one 
hundred or more by freight at colporteur's 
charges, 12-1/2 " 

PRICES IN LEATHERETTE BINDING. 



Single copies delivered by colporteurs, 50 cents. 
Three " " " " $1.25 



Single copies from TOWER office, 35 

Five " (or multiples) of any 
one volume, each, 20 " 

PRICES IN CLOTH BINDING. 



Single copies, retail price, post-paid $1.00. 
To TOWER subscribers at wholesale 

rate, post-paid, 50 " 

To Colporteurs by express, etc., 35 " 

The DAWNS in the German language are now under 
the full control of Brother Zech, and all orders for them 
should be addressed to— Otto von Zech, Euclid Ave., 
Allegheny, Pa. Vol. I. same prices as the English. Vol. 
II. costs more, because of small edition. Retail price, 35 
cents; to Colporteurs, 20 cents. 

As a result of this arrangement we hope soon 
to hear of many ready and glad to give all their 
time to the work. The Master, the Chief 
Reaper, saith, "He that reapeth receiveth wages 
and gathereth fruit unto everlasting life." 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY. 
"BIBLE HOUSE," ALLEGHENY, PA. 

None but WATCH TOWER subscribers can be recognized as 
Colporteurs, for two reasons: (1) The DAWNS are special issues of 
the ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and if mailed to others than subscribers 
the postage would cost us extra, and (2) those really interested in 
the DAWNS will surely want the TOWER (the terms of which are 
liberal enough to suit all), and we seek only such interested ones for 
Colporteurs or ministers of this gracious gospel. 



R1422: page 211 

VOL. XIII. JULY 15, 1892. NO. 14. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



Pittsburg has been kept prominently before 
public attention for some days past by reason 
of the rioting and bloodshed in the suburb of 
Homestead. While all lament the sad state of 
affairs, great diversity of opinion prevails regarding 
the responsibility, some taking sides 
with the Carnegie Steel Company, and others 
with their former employees who have practically 
taken posession of the works and declare that 
none others than themselves shall operate them, 



and they upon their own terms. 

At first it might appear that not only the law, 
but also justice, is upon the side of the Steel 
Company, since the men admit that the wages 
proffered them are as good or better than is usually 
paid for similar service: namely, from $2.14 
per day for "sweepers" to $9.45 per day for chief 
"rollers." But there is another side to the 
case: although the firm offers no objection to 
their employees being members of "The Amalgamated 
Association," it refuses any longer to 
recognize that union or to be controlled by its 
rules and regulations. This is the real difficulty. 
The officers and members of that association, 
although not claiming that present 
wages are "starvation wages," do claim that, 
had it not been for their organization, past and 
present, wages would be much less than they 
are. And their fear now is that if the dignity 
of their association is permitted to go down, 
in this, the largest works of the country, the result 
would ultimately be to their disadvantage, 
which, no doubt, is true. 

With this brief summary of the situation it 
is the less difficult to appreciate the frenzy exhibited 
in the attack upon the three hundred 
watchmen sent by the Steel Company to take 
possession of and guard the works. It is no 
doubt true that much of the fiendish work was 
done by common laborers whose wages were 
not at all affected by the proposed changes, 
and who are not even admitted to membership 
in the Amalgamated Association. Being mostly 
Hungarians, Slavs and Poles, they, of course, 

R1423 : page 211 

understand the language, laws, etc., of this 
country but poorly, and know no law but force. 
These got the impression that non-resistance 
meant starvation for themselves and families, 
and so fought like savages to keep possession 
of what they would not claim to be their property 
in any sense of the word. 

We mention this matter not to take sides in 
the controversy, not to endorse or to exonerate 
either party; for usually, in all struggles of 
which selfishness is the basis, rights and wrongs 
are to be found on both sides. But we desire 
to remind our readers that this last development 
is exactly in line with what we have 
been pointing out for the past sixteen years as 
the Scripturally predicted evidences, showing 
that we are living in the "harvest" or end of 
the Gospel age, which is to close, and to be 
merged into the Millennial age, with "a time 



of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation."— Dan. 12:1. 
When we reflect that many of these Homestead 

R1423 : page 212 

workmen are professed Christians— Presbyterians, 
Methodists, Catholics, etc.— who not 
only believe that "no murderer hath eternal 
life abiding in him," but who also believe that 
those who were shot down not only departed 
this life, but went to an eternity of torment, we 
ask ourselves— If self-interest and excitement 
lead to such excesses now, what can be expected 
when superstition gives way and Churchianity 
shall fully lose its already vanishing influence 
upon the masses? Then what has just 
shocked the world will seem tame— the Scriptures 
intimating that the scenes of the French 
Revolution were but a prelude to and illustration 
of the coming universal trouble. 

While recognizing in these troubles some of 
the events marking this Day of the Lord, let 
us not be premature. Much remains to be 
done before the great and awful climax of 
these troubles is reached, when human selfishness 
will be fully arrayed against human selfishness 
and equally matched. Then widespread 
anarchy will demonstrate the necessity for the 
reign of the Prince of Peace, whose first work 
will be, in the culmination of this struggle of 
human selfishness, to dash the nations to pieces 
as a potter's vessel, and to rule them with a rod 
of iron— of unbending and just retribution— 
until their pride and their power are humbled 
in the dust, and they shall learn in the depths 
of their humiliation to be still and to recognize 
God, and Christ who will be exalted in the earth 
as king over all the earth, to lift up and bless 
all who love righteousness and peace.— Psa. 2:9; 
Rev. 2:27; Psa. 46:10. 

But first and chiefly the intervening work will 
be the sealing of the servants of God in their foreheads. 
(Rev. 7:3.) And each should ask himself 
—What am I doing to assist in sealing others 
since I received the intellectual sealing of the 
knowledge of the truth? And each should 
resolve that whilst others are battling for earthly 
advantages and willing to lay down their 
lives for the same, "We ought also to lay down 
our lives for the brethren"— in carrying the 
present truth to all who have an ear to hear. 

Without taking either side in the selfish 
struggles which will from time to time come 
with increasing violence, without assuming that 
all the right is with one party, and all the wrong 



with the other, let us have charity for both 

the parties to these struggles— for the rich in 

their morbid selfishness which takes pleasure in 

hoarding millions, while some of their employees 

(laborers at $ 1 .48 per day) have scarcely 

enough for the bare necessities of life for themselves 

and their families;— for the workmen in 

that while they are lately tasting of the advantages 

of education and home comforts, and even 

luxuries, they fear lest they should let slip advantages 

now possessed. They fear lest labor 

should become degraded as in by-gone days, 

or even to the European level of to-day. And 

who could blame them for having these sentiments, 

seeing that selfishness is the law of "this 

present evil world?" 

The entire trouble between labor and capital 
centers in selfishness! The mechanic wants from 
three dollars to nine dollars a day, and thinks 
the laborer well paid at one dollar and a half, 
because of his inferior skill, and yet unreasonably 
expects his employer to act upon different 
principles— to risk capital and invest still 
greater ability on philanthropic principles. 
Like all the rest of the world, he recognizes 
the royal law of Love, which Christ taught, 
and would like to have it in force toward himself, 
but is not ready to exercise its principles 
toward others. The great trouble will be 
gradually precipitated by this very conflict of 
the principles of Selfishness and Love— the 
masses longing for the blessings that would 
flow from the operation of the principle of 
Love, yet unwilling to submit themselves to 
the same, because they see no way of enforcing 
that law upon all. Many, who name the name 
of Christ only in blasphemy, are selfishly ready 
to quote to others the words of the great Teacher: 
"Do unto others as you would that they 
should do to you" and "Love thy neighbor 
as thyself" but are wholly unwilling to obey these 
commands toward others. It will be their attempt 
to realize for themselves their ideal of 
true Brotherly Love that they have not yet 
learned to practice toward others which will, as 
the Scriptures show, eventuate in anarchy— 
"a time of trouble such as never was since there 
was a nation." 

R1423 : page 213 

How different is and should be the attitude 
of those who, realizing that they were bought 
with a price, have surrendered their own selfish 
wills and plans and committed their interests, 
present and future, to Christ. To such the 



Lord makes known the mystery of his will- 
that though in the world, they should not be 
of it; that they should not seek to amass 
wealth, but rather to spend and be spent in his 
service; that they should not share the world's 
fear, but entrust the entire matter to their 
Lord's overruling providence. To such the 
Lord now gives, as "meat in due season," the 
assurance that he is about to set up in the earth 
the long-prayed-for Kingdom of God, whose 
will, the law of Love, shall be enforced for 
the blessing of all the families of the earth, 
after this trouble is over. Such, while deprecating 
violence and sympathizing with both 
sides of the controversy, are to avoid taking 
any part in the conflict, but rather to counsel 
peace and a reliance upon the Lord for the 
ushering in of the Golden Age in his own time 
and way. 

How long the present spasm of trouble may 
last, and how great the proportions it may yet 
assume, no man can foretell; but that it is merely 
a spasm, and not the final catastrophe which 
will utterly wreck society, we are confident. 
It will probably result in a general back-set to 
labor organizations and to greater confidence 
on the part of the capitalists. But the world 
is longing for a government based upon Love, 
and does not realize that such a condition is 
beyond the grasp of selfish human beings and 
can come about only through the interposition 
of Christ's Millennial Kingdom. Ah! little do 
they realize that their own failures are to be 
used of the Lord as his instrumentality in setting 
up his kingdom— that the pent up fires in 
selfish breasts will eventuate in the destruction 
of society, and that upon its ashes the Lord 
from heaven will establish the Kingdom of 
which the law will be Perfect Love. 

"Go to, now, ye rich men, weep and howl for 
the misery that shall come upon you. ...Behold, 
the hire of your laborers, who have reaped down 
your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, 
crieth...into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth." 
— Jas. 5:1-8. Even though all rich men have 
not done so, even though some of them in 
this our day have been no more selfish and 
grasping than others— perhaps, indeed, much 
more generous, giving liberally for the endowment 
of Hospitals, Colleges, Libraries, Homes 
for the Blind, for the Deaf and Dumb, for Incurables, 
for Orphans, for the Aged, etc., etc.— 
yet they will be judged as a class in this day 
that shall try every man's work— this day of 
trouble which shall "burn as an oven, in the 
which all the proud, as well as all that do wickedly, 



shall be as stubble." The judgment of the 
masses will be that those who possess great 
wealth never justly and rightly obtained so much 
more than their fellows, even though imperfect 
laws and social customs may endorse as honest 
the methods used for its accumulation. And 
upon the wealthy class of this generation shall 
be visited the penalty due to those thieving 
Barons of past centuries who kept their dependent 
neighbors in serfdom and grew rich at the 
expense of those who reaped their fields— of 
much of whose proper wages they fraudulently 
deprived them. This will be on the same 
principle as that of Luke 11:50,51; Rev. 18:5-7,24. 
A realization of the wrongs done 
by the rich toward their poor brethren in past 
times should, under the light of this day, lead 
the same class to the greater sympathy for 
their less fortunate fellows. And if it does 
not, the relentless argument of the masses soon 
will be— Your class defrauded our class in the 
past, and now our class will defraud your class 
to even up matters. 

At present all is quiet at Homestead, with 
the Volunteer State Guard in possession. But 
the socialistic flame is spreading amongst various 
other labor organizations, in all parts of 
the land, some of which have passed resolutions 
of sympathy for the workmen, and some 
have contributed funds to enable them "to fight 
capital." (The Amalgamated Association, 
however, claims to have $250,000 in its treasury.) 
Some Labor Unions propose that now 
they must arm themselves, with improved 
weapons, to defend their rights. Mr. Powderly, 
president of the Knights of Labor, is quite revolutionary: 
he is publicly reported to have said: 

R1423 : page 214 

"This fight is but the rumbling of a coming 
revolution, that is to say whether Wall Street 
[the financial centre] shall or shall not control 
the country. It is the fight of labor; and the 
labor organizations of the country should stand 
firmly at the back of these men who are fighting 

R1424 : page 214 

at Homestead." 

So strong and so rapidly growing is the animosity 
toward millionaires, even though they pay 
better wages and pay more promptly than others, 
that they will "weep and howl"— be in misery 
in this great day of the Lord. But in the outcome 
—when Anarchy shall have blighted all 



human hopes and destroyed all human government 

—the Lord will set up his kingdom under 

the whole heavens; and, under its beneficent 

rule, all shall be blessed and brought to a knowledge 

of good under the law of Love, as they 

now have a knowledge of evil under the law 

of Selfishness. Then, at the close of that Millennial 

Kingdom, will come the final test to all 

—to manifest whether, with full knowledge of 

the two laws and their respective workings, they 

prefer Love or Selfishness. Those who choose 

Love shall be granted life— everlasting. Those 

who prefer Selfishness shall be esteemed unworthy 

of further life and shall die the Second 

Death. 



How wise, and how beneficial in the end to 
all classes, it might prove for the masses to 
adopt a different principle of dealing with this 
question: If they should enact laws providing 
that whenever any man dies possessed of over 
one million dollars worth of money and property 
all the surplus above one million should be divided 
equally between funds for public secular 
education, for the improvement of public highways 
and water-ways and for charitable unsectarian 
hospitals and homes for unfortunates. 

The effect of such a law would be rapidly experienced: 
wealthy men would at once give 
away their surplus millions without waiting to 
have it forfeited at their death. Such a law would 
scatter capital, and, without destroying the 
energy of the world's active minds, would turn 
that activity to good account— for the ambition 
to make a name and leave enduring monuments 
in colleges, hospitals and public benefactions 
would take the place of the ambition 
to be the richest man. 

If necessary the limit could afterward be reduced 
to half a million dollars (as each member 
of the family could hold, and transfer at 
death, an equal sum). And lest some should 
hold their millions until near death's door, the 
law could provide that transfers of property by 
a sick man or woman made within thirty days 
of death should be invalid and void. 

But while some such law would be beneficial, 
we have no expectation of seeing so simple a 
method for all adopted. Both sides will evidently 
fight the matter out to the wrecking of 
the present social system. Thank God for the 
higher than human government, long promised 
and now at hand— even though it come to men 
through a baptism of bloody trouble— the breaking 



of present imperfect systems with the "rod 
of iron."— Rev. 2:26,27. 



R1431 : page 214 

THE FAITHFUL SERVANT. 

[TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN BY MRS. O. VON ZECH. 



Good servant, enter in: 

Thou hast been faithful found 
In righteous stewardship 

O'er the entrusted pound. 
The honor of my house, 

My Kingdom, thou hast sought; 
Thy life thou more and more 

A sacrifice hast brought. 

In nothing hast thou had 

Self-interest for thine aim. 
Naught seemed too small nor great 

To glorify my Name. 
My yoke hast easy called, 

My burden took on thee, 
And every day with joy 

Hast borne it after me. 

Good servant, enter in, 

And faith's reward now share; 
With me upon my throne 

A crown of life now wear. 
For he who, without fear, 

In small the great hast traced, 
O'er few things faithful here, 

O'er many shall be placed. 

A thousand years full soon 

Thou mayest reign with me; 
Thee will I also grace 

With priestly dignity, 
Till all the tribes of earth 

Claim God to be their Lord, 
To whom I then return 

The Kingdom at his word.— J. KUEHN. 



page 215 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 



SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1424: page 215 

PETER AND JOHN BEFORE THE COUNCIL. 



LESSON V., JULY 31, ACTS 4:1-18. 

Golden Text— "There is none other name under 
heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.' 
Acts 4:12. 

This lesson continues the narrative of the 
preceding one, and shows how the glorious doctrine, 
of redemption and restitution through 
the death and resurrection of Christ, was received 
by those who heard. We learn that so 
many of the people believed that the number 
of disciples who openly espoused the cause of 
Christ was greatly increased. (Verse 4.) This 
manifestation of power, to influence the people 
to believe in the crucified Jesus and in the doctrine 
he taught, greatly incensed the priests, 
who resolutely refused the truths of the new 
dispensation, and were determined, so far as 
lay in their power, to hinder the people from 
believing them, and thus to retain their own 
former prestige and honors and influence. 

The Sadducees also, a large sect of the Jews 
who denied, not only the doctrine of the resurrection 
and a future life, but also the existence 
of spirit beings, were greatly annoyed by 
this teaching, and joined with the priests and 
the captain of the temple in an effort to put an 
end to it. Then Peter and John were seized 
and put into prison, and afterward brought before 
the rulers and elders and scribes to answer 
for this heresy. 

Evidently they appreciated the privilege of 
thus enduring reproach for the cause of Christ. 
With great boldness Peter again affirmed before 
the rulers that this miracle had been performed 
in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom 
they had crucified. They were so filled with 
the spirit of the glorious message they bore, 
that prisons and persecution and even the possibility 
of sharing their Master's fate did not 



deter them from speaking boldly in his name, 
and of the blessed tidings of his coming kingdom 
and glory. "Be it known unto you all," 
said Peter, "and to all the people of Israel, 
that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, 
whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the 
dead, even by him, doth this man stand here 
before you whole. This is the stone which was 
set at naught of you builders, which is become 
the head of the corner [the chief corner stone 
in the divine plan of the ages]. Neither is 
there salvation in any other: for there is none 
other name under heaven given among men, 
whereby we must be saved." 

How differently the truth affects men according 
to the attitude of their hearts with reference 
to it. Here was the man who had been healed 
of his lameness gratefully acknowledging the 
favor of God by accompanying God's accused 
servants to prison and to judgment, bearing his 
witness to the truth thus by his personal presence 
with them, and willingly enduring with 
them whatever of reproach or persecution this 
testimony might bring. And how eloquent and 
convincing was the silent testimony of his presence; 
for these priests and rulers, the enemies 
of Christ and his doctrine, "beholding the 
man which was healed standing with them, 
could say nothing against it." Then there 
were numerous others who openly identified 
themselves with the Church, ready and willing 
to bear whatever of reproach or persecution it 
might bring to them. On the contrary, there 
were those priests and rulers, the professed 
leaders and teachers of the people, forced to 
admit in their own hearts the truth of this 
miracle, yet, blinded by prejudice as to the 
teaching, secretly plotting and scheming as to 
how they might be able to hedge up its course 
and stamp it out, and secretly conferring 
among themselves, saying, "What shall we do 
to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle 
had been done by them is manifest to all 
them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot 
deny it." And they finally decided that it 
would not be advisable to rashly antagonize 
the numerous followers of the apostles who had 
been so impressed by their teaching. And 
therefore they let them go after strictly charging 
them to speak no more in this name. 

To the one class the truth brought peace and 
joy and the blessed hope of everlasting life; 
while to the other class— the prejudice-blinded 
rejectors of God's truth, though professedly his 
chosen leaders and teachers of the people in 
the truth— it brought only condemnation, and 



deepened and intensified their darkness. "Ye 
serpents, ye generations of vipers," said the 
Master, "how can ye escape the condemnation 
to gehenna" [symbol of the second death]?— 
Matt. 23:33. 

Those who cultivate a spirit of opposition to 
righteousness and who plot and scheme to withstand 

R1424 : page 216 

God are trifling with a dangerous propensity 
to evil which will sweep them on to destruction 
with almost irresistible force, rendering 
it next to impossible for them ever to turn 
to righteousness and truth. How great is the 
responsibility, then, of those who hear and 
understand the truth, both toward themselves 
and toward their fellow men. We cannot trifle 
with God's truth with impunity: when it is 
testified to us it is our part to receive it into 
good and honest hearts, to act upon it and to 
let it have its proper effect upon our lives; 
and then, with grateful hearts toward God the 
giver, to bear its precious testimony to others 
in whatever way we can. If, like the man that 
was healed of his lameness, we have no talent 
of eloquence, we can at least company with 
those who love and serve the truth and let 
others see what the Lord has done for us, and 
in simple language we can tell how we who 
were once lame with ignorance and superstition 
and doubt and fear have been healed of 
our lameness and can now run and not grow 
weary, and walk and not faint; and how that 
through faith in the crucified and risen Lord 
Jesus the great work has been accomplished. 

Let all who have heard the blessed gospel of 
redemption and a restitution of all things, and 
of the precious promises to the Church of being 
made co-workers with the Lord in bringing to 
all mankind the blessings of restitution, and of 
being made joint-heirs together with him in his 
kingdom, be faithful to the truth— faithful in 
esteeming it of highest importance, faithful in 
complying with its conditions of life, faithful 
in declaring it to others, faithful in standing up 
with and for those who publicly proclaim it, 
and faithful in holding it firm to the end. 

The Golden Text of this lesson deserves 
more than a passing notice; for too many seem 
to lose sight of its import. As it was "through 
faith in his name"— the only name given, 

R1425 : page 216 

whereby we can be saved— that the impotent 



man was healed, so it is and is to be with all 
men and with all diseases of body and of soul. 
Only through the channel of faith in Christ 
flows the blessing of God. Not through faith 
without Christ, and not through Christ without 
faith, but through faith in him whom God hath 
set forth to be a propitiation [satisfaction] for 
our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the 
sins of the whole world.— 1 John 2:2. 

As men's hearts expand and as they come to 
realize that but a very small proportion of humanity, 
now living or dead, ever heard of the 
ONLY NAME WHEREIN IS SALVATION, they rebel 
against this text and either twist it or deny it, 
because they hold as truth the human teaching 
that the present life ends all probation and all 
hope. On the contrary, how much better it 
would be for them to say with the Apostle: 
Let God be true though it prove all humanity 
to be in error; and, affirming with Peter and 
all the apostles that there is no salvation without 
faith and no other name in which faith will 
avail, they should seek for the Scriptural solution 
of their difficulty. They would find it in 
the words of all the holy prophets and apostles, 
as well as in our Lord's words: that as the 
man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all, 
this glorious gospel must be testified to all in 
due time (1 Tim. 2:6), and that this "due 
time" is coming in which the knowledge of the 
Lord will fill the whole earth. Then the eyes 
of the blind shall be opened and the ears of 
the deaf shall be unstopped. (Isa. 1 1:9; 35:5.) 
Then all that are in their graves shall 
obey the voice of the Son of Man and come 
forth— and they who then obey him shall live in a 
sense and to a degree that they never lived before 
—an everlasting life.— John 5:25,28. 

R1425 : page 216 

THE APOSTLES' CONFIDENCE IN GOD. 



LESSON VI., AUGUST 7, ACTS 4:19-31. 

Golden Text— "They spake the word of God with 
boldness."— Acts 4:31. 

VERSES 19,20. Here Peter and John called 
upon the rulers and elders and scribes in council 
to judge for themselves whether it would be 
right in the sight of God to obey earthly rulers 
rather than God, and boldly declared their own 
convictions and purpose to continue to declare 



the things which they had seen and heard, notwithstanding 
their command to the contrary; 
for, said they, we cannot do otherwise: we are 
so full of the spirit of this glorious truth that 
we must give utterance to it. The basis of 
their confidence was not superstition, but a 
knowledge of the truth— of the sacrificial death 
of the Lord and the clearly demonstrated fact 
of his resurrection, which was to them a pledge 
of the promised resurrection of all the redeemed 
race of men. "Ye shall know the truth," said 
our Lord, "and the truth shall make you free" 
—free from ignorance and superstition, and 
bold to declare the whole counsel of God. 
These opposers of the truth, be it noted, 
were not professed infidels, nor worldly people: 
they were the greatest religious teachers of their 
day; and one was the great high priest. According 
to God's own arrangement for the Jewish 
nation during the Jewish age, these were the 
appointed guides of the people; but now a new 
dispensation was dawning, and these professed 
teachers, who had been unfaithful to their 
trust, and who had grown proud and self-righteous 
and out of all harmony with the spirit of 

R1425 : page 217 

God, were entirely unprepared for it, so that 
when the glorious gospel of the new dispensation 
reached their ears they could not receive 
it. Their learning and their leisure to devote 
to the study of the divine Word were of no avail 
to them in finding the truth, for their hearts 
were not in the proper attitude of humility before 
God. Consequently the lowly and untitled 
—the humble fishermen, yea, and the publicans 
and reformed harlots— went into the 
kingdom before them. 

And so it has been ever since those days: 
the most determined opposition to the truth 
has always come from the recognized religious 
leaders in whom pride and ambition were fostered 
and cultivated. And these were nearly 
always followed by the multitude, while the 
few who dared to be true to God and his Word 
have always endured persecution from them in 
some form. This is none the less true of our 
day than of the past. It is the clergy to-day 
that offers the most strenuous opposition to the 
truth; and it is only here and there that a few 
faithful souls are found brave enough to believe 
and teach the truth as the Lord is now unfolding 
it to us in the dawning light of the Millennial 
day. 

It is indeed the right and proper course 



to believe God rather than men, to declare 
his truth with humble boldness, and to be 
ready always to give an answer to every man 
for the hope that is in us, with meekness and 
reverence. This we can do if we keep filled 
with the spirit— filled with the truth, and with 
love of the truth, and with the joy and peace and 
comfort that the truth alone can give, and with 
the zeal for God and for the blessing of our 
fellow men which the truth alone inspires. 

VERSES 21,22. So strong was the evidence 
of the truth that the masses of the people disregarded 
the opposition of the clergy; and the 
latter, unable to deny the testimony, were 
obliged to let the apostles go. 

VERSE 23 shows the beautiful bond of sympathy 
that existed among the various members 
of the early Church. They shared each others 
joys and sorrows and comforted and encouraged 
one another to be firm and true to God in the 
midst of the severest trials. 

VERSES 24-30 record their prayer of thankful 
acknowledgment of the favor of God in the 
deliverance of these two faithful witnesses, thus 
showing that they did not attribute their success 
in convincing the people to their own eloquence 
or power, but to the favor and blessing of God. 
As the beloved Apostle Paul wrote (1 Cor. 3:5,6), 
"Who is Paul, and who is Apollos, but 
ministers by whom ye believed. I have planted, 
Apollos watered; but God gave the increase." 
All praise is due to God; but we may truly rejoice 
in being honored as servants of his truth. 

The reference in verses 25,26 to David's 
prophecy (Psa. 2) had a proper application, 
not only upon that occasion when Peter and 
John were brought before the rulers, but also 
upon many subsequent occasions all through 
this gospel age. The prophecy, however, has 
special application to the time indicated in 
verse 6, when Jehovah is about to set his king 
upon his holy hill of Zion— when he is about 
to establish his kingdom and set up his Anointed 
as king over all the earth— when, as other 
scriptures show, there will be "a time of trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation." 
We are even now upon the eve of this great 
time of trouble, which will ere long culminate 
in the complete and final overthrow of all the 
kingdoms of the world and the full and permanent 
establishment of Christ's kingdom. 

While the kings and rulers, civil and religious, 
set themselves in determined opposition 
and take counsel together against the principles 
of truth and righteousness that are now 
being brought to the front and urged upon the 



attention of all mankind in the heated disputes 
between capital and labor, between rulers and 
subjects and between the clergy and the laity of 
all Christendom, they little realize that they are 
arraying themselves against the mighty power 
of the Lord of hosts, who will surely lay justice 
to the line and righteousness to the plummet, 
and effectually sweep away every refuge of lies. 
-Isa. 28:17. 

VERSES 29,30 are a petition for special grace 
and courage, in view of the threatenings of persecution, 
that they might not grow faint-hearted, 
but, being filled with the spirit, might 
speak the truth with great boldness, regardless 
of the consequences to themselves; and for 
such miraculous endorsement of their teachings 
as he would be pleased in his wisdom to grant. 

What a sweet, Christlike spirit was manifested 
in this prayer. Mark the love and harmony 
and sympathy among the brethren; the 
love and zeal for the truth which was evidently 
paramount to every other consideration, 
their gratitude and humble recognition of the 
divine favor, and the realization of their own 
weakness and desire for more and more of the 
power from on high and for special aid to enable 
them to endure hardness as good soldiers 
of the cross. Such is the proper attitude of the 
Church at all times; and such a spirit and such 
a prayer are sure to bring to the Church now 
as well as then the same answer of peace and 
joy. It is written that they were all filled with the 
holy spirit, and they went forth from that place 
of prayer and spoke the Word of God with 

R1425 : page 218 

boldness. The place also where they were was 
shaken while the blessing of the spirit came 
upon them. This, like the gifts that were then 
given, was evidently to supply what was then 
needed— an aid to their faith— in an hour of 
trial just at the beginning of their great work. 

R1426 : page 218 

ANANIAS AND SAPPHIRA. 



LES SON VII. , AUGUST 1 4, ACTS 5:1-11. 

Golden Text— "Be not deceived: God is not mocked; 
for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap."- 
Gal. 6:7. 



The lesson of this sad narrative is one of special 
warning to the whole Church. It is the 
only case in the Church on record where the 
penalty of wilful violation of a covenant with 
God met with summary punishment. Many 
since that day have doubtless similarly violated 
their covenant and no such results followed. 
With great boldness many have not only done 
so, but they have gone still farther and made 
merchandise of the interests of the truth; and 
still judgment tarries. Nevertheless, the Lord's 
eye is upon every one of the consecrated household, 
and no inequality will be seen in his 
dealings when his work is completed. 

We have seen from the preceding lessons 
that the Lord's dealings with the early Church 
were peculiarly adapted to the needs of the inception 
of so great a cause, and different from 
his dealings after the Church had been fairly 
set upon her course for the prize of her high 
calling. The particular lesson which the Lord 
in this case desired to impress upon the whole 
Church from then till now was the solemn obligation 
involved in our covenant with him of 
entire consecration to his service. 

While this property remained in thy hand 
was it not thine own? said Peter; and after it 
was sold was it not in thine own power? 
Why hast thou conceived this thing in thine 
heart? thou hast not lied unto men, but unto 
God. The complicity of the husband and wife 
in the deception made very manifest the wilfulness 
and deliberate intention of both; and the 
penalty which followed was a warning of God's 
righteous indignation against all hypocrisy and 
deceit and the holding of the truth in unrightness. 
-Rom. 1:18. 

We are not called upon to decide in this 
case whether the death of these two was the 
final or "second death" or not. If they sinned 
wilfully against sufficient light and ability to 
walk in it, the penalty must have been final; 
for it is impossible to renew in righteousness 
and holiness those who have once enjoyed and 
then abused the full measure of divine favor. 
(Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26.) And indeed these 
words seem to imply that such a deplorable 
condition may be reached before the fullest 
measure of light has been received; but such 
a one must at least have tasted a considerable 
measure of the heavenly gift and of the powers 
or advantages of the coming age. 

We are told that in the Millennium the 
sinner a hundred years old shall be cut off 
(Isa. 65:20) without receiving all the benefits 
of the Millennial reign. Those who are obedient 



and who patiently submit themselves to 
the reformatory measures of Christ's government 
will go on and on until at the end of that 
age they will have reached perfection, when all 
will receive the final testing which will prove 
their worthiness or unworthiness of eternal life. 
But the sinner who dies at a hundred years of 
age will certainly not have enjoyed all of those 
advantages, simply because he refused to avail 
himself of them; and his cutting off from life 
will be because he has so hardened his heart by 
persistent opposition to the law and discipline 
of the Lord that it has become impossible to 
renew him in righteousness and truth. 

If such conditions may obtain in the Millennial 
age, when the world is on trial for life, 
it is equally possible to the Church in this our 
day of trial or judgment. We do not count 
ourselves competent to decide on the case of 
Ananias and Sapphira or any other individual; 
we know not what extenuating circumstances 
God's merciful eye may see in their cases; but 
we would counsel all to take heed that they hold 
not the truth in unrighteousness. If we have 
consecrated all to the Lord let us ever bear in 
mind the solemn obligation of our covenant. 
This is the lesson which God designed to impress 
upon us all, and let us lay it well to heart. 
But while we would carefully heed the lesson, 
let us not fear that God will not patiently and 
tenderly bear with our weaknesses while our 
hearts are right toward him and while we strive 
to overcome them. God is just, loving and 
merciful— slow to anger and plenteous in mercy. 

page 218 

THE APOSTLES PERSECUTED. 



LESSON VIII., AUGUST 21, Acts 5:25-41. 

Golden Text— "We ought to obey God rather than 
men."— Acts 5:29. 

This lesson is a continuation of the narrative 
of the Apostles' faithfulness, even under great 
persecution, and of the desperately evil course 
of the religious persecutors of that day. But 
the circumstances are so similar to those of 
Lesson VI. that further comment is unnecessary. 

May the simple story of the zeal and heroism 
of these faithful witnesses of the Lord be 
emulated by all his consecrated followers. 



R1426 : page 219 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



Tennessee. 

DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER:--! have just 
received my outfit from the WATCH TOWER 
PUBLISHING CO., and shall commence the canvass 
in a few days. Will you please answer the 
following inquiry, which is made in all good 
faith: Is there any organization among those 
who espouse the doctrines and gospel truth as 
taught by you in the DAWN Series? and, if so, 
by what name are they known? I have been 
a minister in the Baptist ranks for about four 
years, and in love with a full Gospel; and with 
the bright light of the DAWNS shining upon me 
I feel like breaking away from all hindrances 
and spreading the truth from platform and pulpit 
and in all other proper ways. Please write 
me and in addition to above inquiry make any 
suggestions you may feel willing. Yours in 
love and work for Christ, A. McHAN. 

REPLY.-DEAR BROTHER: I rejoice to know 
of your growth in the fulness and freedom of 
the truth as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ, 
our Lord. 

To the majority of ministers, used as they 
are to a more or less easy living and to the 
honor and almost reverence of the people, to 
take a step away from these is a great trial. 
But considering that they have had more light, 
more opportunities for study, more advantages 
in every way than most people, it seems but 
reasonable that they should have greater trial 
—on the principle of more light, more responsibility. 
The truth has never been popular, and 
the one who would follow it must leave the approbation 
of the world and the worldly-minded 
nominal church. 

We have, however, no organization into 
which to invite you, dear brother. The only 
one which we recognize is the one to which 
our Lord Jesus is the door, and the members of 
which have their names written in Heaven. It 
includes, probably, some in as well as out of 
all denominations— every consecrated Christian, 
known to us or unknown. We believe 
that you will already recognize yourself as a 
member of this one, true Church— our Church, 
because we are Christ's. But, while recognizing 
many in the denominations of Babylon as 



members of this true Church, it is our duty to 
re-echo the Lord's words, "Come out of her, 
my people!"— and then to assist them as much 
as possible by the truth which affords the necessary 
grace and strength. 

I would, therefore, think it proper for you 
to use any opportunity or talent in any pulpit, 
etc., from which you can gain a hearing, so 
long as you are able to present therein what 
you believe to be the truth; and as long as you 
do not hide your light through fear of offending 
the worldly-wise. As the Baptists are professedly 
less sectarian and are governed more 
by pure Bible principles than most of the other 
denominations, probably your liberty there 
would last longer and your work among them 
prove more fruitful. 

But the method from which, according to 
the experiences of others, best results are to be 
expected, and in which I see it to be your intention 
to engage, is the Colporteur work. As 
at the first advent, work from door to door, instead 
of pulpit preaching, seems to be receiving 
the Lord's special blessing. Then the disciples 
stood at the door with the simple message, 
"The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!"— 
while now with the same message we can present 
literature (which they did not then have) 
showing why and how and when it is to be 
introduced. 

In introducing the Dawns, however, it is 
better not to say much about the doctrines, except 
where a person is found who is ripe and 
ready for it, leaving it for the books to present 
them gradually, in a way not to excite prejudice 
before enough truth has been gained to 
offset it and to give a taste for more with the 
desire to search diligently for it. The suggestions 
already sent you, you will see are along 
this line of wisdom— speaking the truth in love. 

A back number of the Watch Tower has been 
sent, in which you will find more concerning 
the true Church. May the Lord bless you in 
your service for him, and may you become 
more and more in touch with him and his plans. 
I shall be glad to hear from you whenever you 
feel like writing. 

Yours in the Redeemer, —EDITOR. 

R1426 : page 220 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Enclosed find 
$6.00, for which please send me 20 copies of 
Dawn, Vol. I., and a quantity of Tracts. 

I would like to give you some experiences of 



our little "church" of three. Last week each 

of us withdrew from the nominal church— myself 

from the Presbyterian, Brother D , 

from the Baptist, and Brother F , from the 

Methodist. Although it was the most difficult 

step I have ever taken, yet the way was made 

very clear, and the Lord has greatly blessed 

me since, because new floods of light have 

come from his Word, and whenever I have occasion 

to speak about it, I always have Scripture 

given to me, to prove wherein I am right. 

How true is that promise that "The path of 

the just shineth more and more unto the perfect 

day." I see it so plainly since I have 

given my will completely to God. 

R1427 : page 220 

Many, many thanks for the Towers sent me 
in regard to Baptism and The Thief on the 
Cross. The proper mode for immersion is now 
very clear, and the light on the other came almost 
instantly upon reading the article. Thank 
God for a receptive mind! 

I have been told that an infidel in this city 
was brought to Christ through one of the 
Dawns that we loaned, so you see the Harvest 
work is going on, and God gives his messengers 
plenty to do. 

My constant companion is the Word of God, 
and his plan of salvation is scarcely out of my 
mind a moment. The light grows brighter 
every day. I received much good yesterday 
from reading the "Tabernacle Shadows." 
Believe me, dear Brother, although never having 
seen you, yet I feel very near to you. 

Yours in Christian love, 

MORGAN T. LEWIS. 

REPLY.-DEAR BROTHER LEWIS: Your enclosure 
is applied as directed. Allow me to 
congratulate you and the other dear brethren 
on your new-found freedom from the Nominal 
Church. "Be not again entangled in any 
yoke of bondage," that you may render all allegiance 
to the one Lord and Master. 

I very much appreciate the spirit of your 
closing remark. I think that is how all who 
truly love the Lord feel toward each other. 
We are one with him, and love binds us more 
and more closely to him and each other as we 
see his spirit, "the spirit of a sound mind," 
manifested in each other and working out in 
the life. 

You have been growing very fast in the 
knowledge of the truth, dear Brother; in just 
a few months you have partaken of much 



"strong meat," in the three volumes of Dawn, 
all the back numbers of Tower obtainable, etc.; 
or, to use another figure, you have been putting 
on the "armor" very rapidly. All this is 
for a purpose: that you may have the strength 
and the proper armor to enable you to 
stand in this evil day; and not only to stand 
yourself, but also to protect and assist others. 
You must use the shield of faith to resist the 
fiery darts of the adversary, coming from many 
directions, and learn to handle skilfully "the 
sword of the spirit," which is the Word of 
God, as well as to have your intellect protected 
by the helmet of salvation. 

Now I suggest that you re-examine your 
armor to see if you have on each necessary 
piece, in its proper place; in order that you 
may not be taken unawares when the battle 
grows hotter. In other words, that you go 
back and read again what you have received, 
so as to make it entirely your own. As in 
armor the shield does not change into the 
sword, or the helmet into the breastplate, or 
the one usurp the particular office of the other, 
so each distinct feature in the plan of salvation 
retains its own place and use in the general 
whole; and as there are only a certain number 
of pieces in a suit of armor, and when you 
have them on you need no more, only to see 
that they fit together and are tightly fastened, 
leaving no crevice for a stray arrow to penetrate, 
so with the truth: once a truth, always 
a truth, and needing only to be properly adjusted, 
secured and used; and no more can be 
piled on without disastrous effects, weighting 
one down with a multitude of pieces of unnecessary 
or poor armor which would permit the 
enemy to overpower and capture. 

It is necessary to consider these things, because 
the Adversary, seeing that you and others 
cannot be hindered from studying the truth, 
transforms himself into an angel of light, and 
tries to lead such beyond the true light into 
realms of unwarranted speculation which in the 
end carries the expectant and eager student as 
far or farther away than the nominal church or 
some less subtle foe could at the beginning of 

R1427 : page 221 

his studies. A time will come when we shall 
know all things, even as we are known; and as 
we approach nearer to the end of our earthly 
course and apprehend more fully the heights 
and depths and lengths and breadths of our 
Father's plan, we must learn to take the same 



pleasure in its completeness that we formerly did 
in searching out "deep things"— just as God 
enjoys the grand and good and finished features 
of his work. 

We should expect completeness now, so far as 
God's revelation is concerned, because such 
was the promise. For instance, Daniel was 
told, "Go thy way, Daniel, for the thing is 
closed up and sealed until the time of the end 
—then (1) many shall run to and fro, (2) knowledge 
shall be increased, (3) the [truly] wise 
shall understand,. ..and (4) at that time 
Michael [Christ] shall stand up. ..and there 
shall be a time of trouble such as never was 
since there was a nation." Here, then, we 
have an assurance that the truly wise will 
understand, or, as the Apostle says, speaking of 
the same class and the present time, "Ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness, that that day 
should overtake you as a thief." And as our 
Lord promised (to his people throughout this 
age), "Ye shall know the truth," and "If any 
man will do my Father's will he shall know of my 
doctrine." Then again, we have the assurance 
that, "In the days of the voice of the seventh 
angel ['seventh trumpet']— when he shall begin 
to sound-the MYSTERY OF GOD [His plan 
and his Church] SHALL BE FINISHED "-matters 
"kept secret from the foundation of the world." 
-Rev. 10:7; Matt. 13:35. 

I mention these points, dear Brother, because 
the tempter will sooner or later bring to 
you as to others suggestions of doubt and uncertainty 
upon the very points which now you 
see so clearly, and for which there is such 
abundant proof in God's Word. These suggestions 
will be human speculations, "May be" 
and "What if" and "Who knows," which 
finally end in the "outer darkness" of agnosticism, 
in which the worldly-wise have always 
wandered, and into which the nominal 
church is fast falling. These doubts will start 
with suggestions that, Perhaps if God is good 
and loving enough to provide a redemption for 
all, and an opportunity for all to escape the 
penalty which came upon all through Adam's 
sin, and to come to righteousness and harmony 
with him through Christ— perhaps he will force 
all to accept of his loving plans and thus ultimately 
force salvation upon all, by taking away 
their choice or free agency. 

When these unscriptural suggestions of the 
Adversary (based upon purely human reasoning) 
come, the test begins. If your faith is 
built upon the wisdom of men, you will begin 
to say: My wisdom is just as good as that of 



Brother Russell or any other man, and I will 
think for myself. Then you will begin to imagine 
how things might be; and the Adversary 
will send you plenty of assistance in turning 
and twisting every Scripture statement seeming 
to interfere with YOUR OPINIONS. At first you 
might be disposed to base all such claims for 
universal, everlasting salvation upon the merit 
of Christ's redeeming sacrifice. But when you 
begin to reason on the subject you will see that 
— (1) God's law has held Adam and his race 
under its penalty, death, for these thousands of 
years; (2) The sinner could be released only 
by the payment for him of the death-penalty 
by the great Redeemer; (3) The new trial of 
all under the new Covenant by Christ the 
Mediator implies a possibility of failure and 
second death, as well as a possibility of success 
which would confirm the redeemed life and 
make it everlasting; (4) Since God's laws never 
alter, it follows that if, after being forgiven— 
justified— from the Adamic condemnation, any 
shall sin wilfully after receiving full light and 
knowledge, and with full desire to do sin, the 
penalty, death (the second penalty— "second 
death"), would come against such as surely as 
it came against Adam at first; (5) Reason then 
urges that as surely as God's law required a 
ransom price to be paid before any could be released 
from the first penalty or first death, so 
the same unchangeable law would require another 
or second ransom before releasing any 
from the penalty of the second trial— second 
death. Reason says that it is scarcely probable 
that Christ would die again to give anyone a 
third chance for life, after he had been granted 

R1427 : page 222 

fullest opportunity under the second. And 
Scripture answers, "In that he died, he died 
unto [or because of] sin [our sin] once," but 
"Christ dieth no more!" 

But the person infatuated with his own thinking 
and bent on making some new light for 
himself cannot be stopped by reason based on 
Scripture. So he is merely stunned by his reasoning. 
He hesitates but a short time, and 
then decides— my thinking must be right: all 
must be saved eternally, and not merely all 
saved from the first or Adamic death and 
granted a trial for life-everlasting. I must set 
aside the doctrine of the fall and its penalty, 
death, and the ransom from it by our Lord's 
death. I must make a new theory on this which 
will harmonize with universal salvation. And 



soon he begins twisting and turning language 
in every conceivable form to get rid of those 
statements so clearly set forth in Scripture, in 
which he at first delighted as the very bulwarks 
of the good tidings of great joy for all people 
—that "Christ died for our sins"— that "he 
died the just one for the unjust" that he 
might "open up for us a new way of life" and 
"bring us to God." He may or may not hold 
to the word ransom and affect to hold to the 
Bible's teaching, but in fact all such deny the 
ransom and the entire plan of salvation which 
God has revealed— whatever of their own or 
other men's wisdom they may adopt instead. 
So, dear Brother, you see my solicitude for 
you and the reason for my urging that you 
study again and very thoroughly the subjects 
presented in DAWN, Vols. I., II., III., looking 
up every passage cited and noting the contexts. 
I would have your faith rest not in the wisdom 
of man— (neither my wisdom nor your own 
nor any other man's) but in the wisdom of God 

R1430 : page 222 

and in the power of God as revealed to us, his 
children, through his Word.— 1 Cor. 1:24. 

May the Lord bless you and your associates 
—"establish, strengthen, settle you," and fit 
you for usefulness in present "harvest" work. 

Yours in our Redeemer, —EDITOR. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel that I want 
to do something in the vineyard of our Lord; 
but fear I may not be humble enough— or 
perhaps I am too ambitious, or may undertake 
"eye" or "hand" work, rather than that belonging 
to members of lower degree in "the 
body." 

My health both physically and spiritually 
leaves me to a certain extent strengthless. Oh! 
how I do realize this— even more keenly spiritually 
than otherwise. The suggestions you gave 
me have found lodgment in my heart. I want 
them to remain there. I want to ponder over 
them. I do not know just what the result will 
be, but I want to loose my hold on business at 
least to the extent that it has overcharged me 
with this world's cares. My first work will be 
partly to regain lost ground. While getting 
business in shape to get more time to devote to 
the Lord's service, I will have time to study 
and exercise my senses, both in getting an 



understanding of, and in defending, the divine 
plan (which embraces the glad tidings to both 
Church and world). 

For want of practice I cannot make as good 
"music" on my "harp" as I could a few 
years ago. Then I had great confidence, so 
that I did not fear to meet and fight with a 
Goliath; becoming rather an expert with the 
two-edged sword. How ashamed I have felt 
sometimes within the past year or two, when I 
realized that I was concealing my light, fearful 
lest some "Philistine" giant might get the 
better of me in discussion, if he saw and accused 
me of being "one of them." I am truly 
glad that I never denied my Lord, nor indeed 
ever denied being one of his disciples; 
but realizing that I had to a great extent lost 
my power to use the Scriptures in defense of 
my views, I often felt it prudent to keep quiet, 
when otherwise I might have improved a good 
opportunity for exposing error, spreading the 
truth, or putting to flight its adversaries. 

How thankful I am for the vivid glimpses of 
truth I had at different times while attending 
the Convention. I do not know to what to compare 
them— unless to what I have seen at night, 
during a terrible thunder storm, as I lay in bed 
looking out of a window. A few flashes of 
lightning divided the heavy, choking darkness, 
and for an instant revealed objects such as 
trees, houses, etc. These glimpses of truth 
seemed very, very distinct, and the impression 
they made remains with me. If the presentation 
of truth to the mind may be compared to 
the brightness of the sun at noon-day, these 
glimpses or pictures seen might be compared 
to the clean-cut flashes of lightning, even more 
dazzling than the brightness of the sun. 

The feeling that always followed was like 
this: Oh, that I could always, constantly, have 
such clear conceptions of truth. Oh, that this 

R1430 : page 223 

bright shining, with the confidence it inspires 
and the love it enkindles in my heart, would 
remain. Then, how I could with confidence 
go into the vineyard, knowing that I would 
succeed— that I could hold fast, that I could 
stand, that I could overcome, that I could win 
the prize and wear the crown. 

How sweet to leave the world a while, to retreat 
from its busy scenes, and to seek the 
fellowship of our Lord and the wise virgins. 

In Christian love, yours, 

WM. C. MACMILLAN. 



Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been in 
the Christian ministry for twenty years, during 
fifteen of which I have studied the prophecies diligently 
—which resulted in bringing me to some 
of the same conclusions you give in Millennial 
Dawn. It would be difficult for any one to imagine 
my delight in reading your books. I am 
profiting by the information thus gained and I 
am talking and preaching it wherever I go; 
and it is wonderful to find so many people 
ready to receive new truth, however much it 
may differ from the old stereotyped systems of 
theology in which they have been reared. I 
was pleased with the copies of Tower sent, 
especially with the one containing your article 
on "The True Church." I intend, by the help 
of God, to proclaim all that I learn from His 
Word, believing it is perfectly safe. I am Pastor 
of the Christian Church here, it is in a prosperous 
condition, and I fancy I have the love 
and confidence of my people; but there is no 
sacrifice too great for me to make for the cause 
of God and humanity. 

I have no doubt that you are asked many 
questions by your many correspondents, and I 
am aware that your time is too valuable to waste 
on those of carping critics; but if it is not asking 
too much I should like to know how you 
harmonize the doctrine of the utter destruction 
of the finally wicked (which I also believe) 
with Rev. 20:10; 22:15. Believe me, dear 
Brother, that I ask this only for information. 
I make no secret of my nonbelief of eternal 
torment, and have a theory in reference to the 
scriptures referred to, but fearing it might not 
be the best I ask your views. [This question 
will be briefly answered soon in a tract— A Rejoinder 
to Mr. Ingersoll.-ED.] 

I am studying these things with a view to 
devoting the remainder of my life to their 
proclamation, as soon as I can master the 
lessons. I am only forty-six years old, strong 
and vigorous, just in the prime of manhood 
and well inured to hard work; and hence I 
think I can do much in the name of Him to 
whom I belong— who bought me with His own 
blood. God bless you in your grand work. 

Fraternally yours, N. G. MURPHY. 



Iowa. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The time draws 
near again to send in our "Good Hopes." I am 
glad that I am permitted to help even so little 
in the work, and perhaps, as I long to be useful 
in the Master's service, if I am faithful in a 
little, he will give me more to do. 

I am very much interested in the young boys 
of this neighborhood. There are so many 
temptations to lead them astray. With this 
end in view, of lifting up a higher standard of 
morality and truth, we canvassed the neighborhood 
for means to buy a tent and started a 
Union Sabbath School. We also hold Bible 
readings; but our way is encountered with many 
difficulties, and it is only by prayer and earnest 
zeal that we are enabled to keep up. I 
have a class of young boys which I long to 
start out in the world as little soldiers to battle 
for the right. 

Pray the dear Lord to help us in our weak 
efforts to do good and to guide us aright; and 
may he bless all of the dear workers everywhere, 
and hasten the glad day when all shall know 
and serve him. 

One who is trusting in Him, 

MRS. H. C. P . 

REPLY. --DEAR SISTER: Your enclosure has 
been applied as directed— and appreciated as 
your thank-offering to the Lord and as an evidence 
of your love and zeal. May it be blest 
in the service of our King, and may the sacrifices 
in earthly things, which it has cost you, be 
more than compensated for in spiritual blessings. 

I am glad that you desire to be led of God 
into that service which will most honor him 
and put yourself in more nearly perfect touch 
with his will; yet I am not surprised that in 
the work for the boys of your neighborhood you 
find it very much up-hill. Ordinarily it would 
be a good work— better far than a bad or selfish 
way of spending or wasting the time— and 
accomplishing something for them also; but accomplished 
only with difficulty. And perhaps 
the Lord does not remove the difficulties, as 
you might like, in order to show you a better 
work— good though the present one is, and 
undoubtedly receiving his blessing on account 
of your earnestness and love. 

Have you never thought that the Lord could, 

R1430 : page 224 

very easily, close the liquor establishments and 
other doors of temptation? and that the reason 
he does not do it is that his time has not yet 
come? When his time does come, in the Millennial 



age, humane work of reform will be far 
more successful, because evil will be restrained, 
temptations, etc., removed, and it will be his 
will that all shall be blessed. 

So I want to suggest, as before stated, that 
he may desire to show you what his work is 
now, according to the times and seasons which 
he observes in all his dealings with us. This 
age has been for the selection of the bride of 
Christ, who is to be associated with him in the 
Millennial reign of blessing; and the work of 
the prospective bride now is to make HERSELF 
ready (Rev. 19:7)— not specially the blessing 
of the world, which her Lord designs shall be 
done after she becomes united to him. 

Or, as pictured in a parable, this is the 
"harvest" of the age, when, instead of sowing 
the good seed, as you are trying to do in the 
case of the boys, the time for reaping has come, 
when the wheat (those who have already received 
the word of truth and been developed by it) is 
to be separated from the tares by the sickle of 
present truth. Surely there are many developed 
Christians within your reach in need of your 
sickle lest they be choked under the mass of 
tares.-See DAWN, VOL. III., Chapter vi. 

The Lord said, as represented by the prophet, 
that he was anointed to preach the glad tidings 
to the meek. We, as the members of his body, 
have received the same anointing, and therefore 
must likewise seek THE MEEK. The meek 
are generally not found amongst wild boys or 

R1431 : page 224 

in the slums, but among Christians— those whose 
experiences in life have made them willing to 
seek refuge in Christ— whose hearts have been 
"broken." Surely if your boys were "meek" 
and willing your difficulties would be removed. 
But you are trying to force on them that which 
rightfully belongs to the meek, who are perhaps 
waiting and longing for your message of peace. 

This is only a suggestion, dear Sister, inspired 
by the earnest tone in which you write. 

May the Lord bless you and lead you to His 
praise and the accomplishment of his purpose. 

Yours in our Redeemer, —EDITOR. 

page 224 

Connecticut. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have read 
with great interest and, I trust, profit, the 
double number of TOWER in which you treat 
the subject of the "Trinity." It is a view that 



seems to harmonize with the Scriptures and 
sanctified common sense. I have also received 
the Quarterly giving an epitomized statement 
of the Plan of the Ages. I think this particularly 
good, and will be adapted to prepare the 
way for some busy people, who would not think 
at first that they could read 350 pages of matters 
ethical. I would like to have you send me 
fifty copies of it, and I will try to use them in 
a way that will help the great cause. I enclose 
my check for $5.00, which I think will pay for 
them and leave a little balance, which you may 
use in the Lord's work as you think he desires. 
I think "The Tabernacle and the Better Sacrifices" 
is excellent in pamphlet form. 

Yours truly, R. P. CHAPMAN. 

[Glad to know that our recent publications 
are giving so much satisfaction to you and 
others whose approval and co-operation we so 
much value.-EDITOR.l 



Canada. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I inclose one 
dollar for a year's subscription to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, beginning with July. 

My wife and I have lately read MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, and you will know it has changed our 
whole lives. With my brother in the flesh, 
we had consecrated our lives to the service of 
the Lord in heathen lands, purposing to support 
ourselves with the Lord's help. Now all 
is changed. I have given up my pastoral work: 
the Bible alone must receive my whole attention 
for a time at least. The way is not clear, 
but we trust the Lord to lead us. We pray, 
God bless Brother Russell, as a faithful servant 
in the Lord's house, for the meat he has given 
us "in due season." 

My work, pastoral and evangelistic, has been 
quite remunerative (about $1200 per year); but 
even before I read the DAWN, I felt I could no 
longer work for a salary. I have ordered 12 
copies of the DAWN, and shall use my opportunities 
to spread the light. 

In the hope of immortality, E. R. BLACK. 



page 226 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1432 : page 226 

GLEAN CAREFULLY. YET THERE IS ROOM. 



Many new laborers have recently entered the 
ranks of the Dawn colporteurs, and we are 
glad to be able to announce that they are generally 
doing excellent service. One sister who 
gave up a good situation as a school-teacher 
reports that she has been able to average twenty 
books a day, even during the recent extremely 
hot weather. 

Whilst there is still plenty of room for more 
workers in this part of the harvest work, which 
our Master is so abundantly blessing, we are 
impressed with the necessity of making the 
work done more thorough than heretofore. And 
we desire to impress this thought upon all the 



Colporteurs. Make thorough work of every 
town you touch and pass by no town of one 
thousand or more population. Indeed, experience 
is proving that the small places are 
amongst the best, except where affected by 
some local labor-strike. 

In the interest of all and of the work we are 
now laying out specific routes for the colporteurs 
instead of allowing a promiscuous running 
about. Any colporteur not having received 
such an outline route will please correspond 
with us some days before ready to leave his 
present field. 

In view of the fact that we sometimes refer to 
the Colporteur work as the "harvest work" 
some have inquired whether we mean that it 
alone is "harvest work." We answer, No. 
Although it seems to be the work that the Master 
is chiefly blessing and using, in gathering his 
saints into oneness and harmony with himself 
and each other through the knowledge of the 
truth, and therefore the work that all desire to 
engage in who can do so, it is not the only way 
of serving. Some are using their voices publicly, 
some privately. Some are using their pens publicly, 
some privately. Some are using the tracts 
and some the DAWNS— some publicly, some privately. 
Any way that you can best serve the 
Lord and his true sheep by circulating the present 
truth, "meat in due season," is harvest work; 
and if done with a pure, unselfish desire, in 
the name of the Redeemer, it is acceptable 
service. God bless all the co-laborers. Go on 
and on, from grace to grace and from service 
to service! His grace is sufficient for you,— 
each and all. 



page 226 

A WORD TO CORRESPONDENTS. 



Letters containing money or orders should 
be addressed to the Tower Publishing Co. 
Private letters to the Editor may be enclosed, 
sealed, in the same envelope. Make no allowance 
for our remembering previous orders and 
explanations. Make each letter complete in 
itself. When changing your address give the 
old as well as the new one. Remit by Draft, 
Money Order or Registered letter. Give your 
full address at the beginning of each letter. 



TRACTS IN SWEDISH AND NORWEGIAN. 



Tract No. 1, "Do the Scriptures Teach that 
Eternal Torment is the Wages of Sin?" has 
been translated into Swedish, which is Tract 
No. 9; and into Norwegian, which is Tract 
No. 13. We do not send these out except when 
specially ordered. Any who can use these 
judiciously are welcome to order them— freely. 
These, as well as Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10 and 
14, are supplied in quantities without charge- 
out of the Tract Fund. 



R1432 : page 227 

VOL. XIII. AUGUST 1, 1892. NO. 15. 

"UNDER HIS WINGS." 



"He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his 
wings shalt thou find shelter."— Psa. 91:4. 

In the midst of the "perilous times" of this 
"evil day," and of the warning voices of prophets 
and apostles pointing out snares and pestilences 
and subtle dangers on every hand— and 
in the midst, too, of a realizing sense of the actual 
existence of such evil besetments and perils— how 
precious to the saints are the assurances of divine 
protection and care and personal love. 

We call to mind the gracious promises of 
our Lord— "The Father himself loveth you;" 
"Fear not, little flock, it is your Father's good 
pleasure to give you the Kingdom;" and "He 
that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, 
and I will love him and will manifest myself to 
him;. ..and my Father will love him, and 
we will come unto him and make our abode 
with him. ...Peace I leave with you, my 
peace I give unto you. Let not your heart be 
troubled, neither let it be afraid."— John 16:27; 
14:21,23,27; Luke 12:32. 

But warning voices and wholesome counsel 
are also necessary; and he is not wise who 
turns a deaf ear to them, and takes cognizance 
alone of the comforting assurances which are 
designed only for those who faithfully "watch 
and pray lest they enter into temptation." 



Every soldier of the cross needs to heed the 
Apostle's warnings— "Take unto you the whole 
armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand 
in the evil day, and having done all to stand;" 
and again, "Let us fear lest, a promise being 
left us of entering into his rest, any of you should 
seem to come short of it;" and fear also "lest, 
as the serpent [Satan] beguiled Eve, through 
his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted 
from the simplicity that is in Christ;" "for 
grievous wolves shall enter in among you, not 
sparing the flock. Also of your own selves 
shall men arise, speaking perverse things to 
draw away disciples after them." "Behold," 
said our Lord, "I send you forth as sheep in 
the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves."— Eph. 6:13; 
Heb. 4:1; 2 Cor. 11:3; Acts 20:29,30; 
Matt. 10:16. 

It is necessary for the discipline, trial and 
final proving of the Church of God that they 
should be subjected to these adverse influences; 
for to him that overcometh them is the promise 
of the great reward. If we would reign with 
Christ, we must prove our worthiness to reign by 
the same tests of loyalty to God, of faith in his 
Word, of zeal for the truth, of patient endurance 
of reproach and persecution, even unto 
death, and of unwavering trust in the power 
and purpose of God to deliver and exalt his 
Church in due time. To such faithful ones are 
the blessed consolations of Psa. 91. Hearken— 

Verse 1. "He who abideth in the secret 
place of the Most High [typified by the Most 
Holy or Sanctuary] shall rest under the shadow 
of the Almighty." We thus place ourselves 
under the divine protection when, having come 
to a knowledge of God's willingness to accept 

R1432 : page 228 

us as his children, we gratefully accept the invitation 
and approach in his appointed way, 
through Christ our Redeemer, and consecrate 
ourselves fully to his service. Such may sweetly 
rest in the precious promises of God, all of 
which are yea and amen in Christ Jesus. 
(2 Cor. 1:20.) The world does not see the 
overshadowing wings of divine protection, but 
the faithful have a blessed secret realization of 
it. Praise the Lord! 

Verse 2. "I [Christ Jesus, whom David here, 
as elsewhere, personifies, and who thus addresses 
his body, his Church] will say of Jehovah, who 
is my refuge and my stronghold, my God in 
whom I ever trust" (John 20:17)— 



Verse 3. "That he will surely deliver thee 
from the snare of the fowler, [From the deceptions 
of Satan, in which all those not protected 
shall stumble; for our Lord said that so subtle 
and deceptive will they be that, if it were 
possible, they would deceive the very elect. 
But this is not possible, for those who are making 
their calling and election sure abide under 
the protection of the Almighty.] and from the 
pestilence of destruction." [Not from the destructive 
pestilences of physical disease, but 
from the moral and spiritual pestilences of destruction 
—from the sinful propensities of the 
old nature which in unguarded moments are 
liable to assert their mastery and overwhelm 
the souls of those who are not abiding under 
the secret protection of the Most High; and 
from the spiritual pestilences of false doctrine 
which, with subtle sophistry, destroy the faith 
of the unwatchful. Such pestilences are already 
abroad in the shape of so-called Christian 
Science, Spiritualism and the various no-ransom 
theories which take the name of The 
Larger Hope, and which bid fair, both from 
present prospects and from the prophetic outlook, 
ere long to become epidemic. From all 
these pestilences the Lord's elect shall be protected, 
resting sweetly under the shadow of the 
Almighty.] 

Verse 4. "He shall cover thee with his 
feathers, and under his wings shalt thou find 
shelter. [So close to his heart does Jehovah 
gather his loyal and faithful children that they 
feel the warmth of his love, and the responsive 
language of their hearts is, "I will abide in thy 
tabernacle"— under thy protection— "forever: 
I will trust in the covert of thy wings; for thou 
hast been a shelter for me and a strong tower 
from the enemy; for thou hast heard my vows" 
—my consecration— "thou hast given me the 
heritage of those that fear thy name."— Psa. 61:4,3,5.] 
His truth shall be thy shield and buckler" 
—thy protection. Yes, his truth— that grand 
system of truth comprised in the divine plan 
of the ages— is an ample shield and buckler 
to all who in simplicity of heart receive it and 
prove faithful to it. It is the armor of God 
which the Apostle urges all the faithful to put 
on— to appropriate, to meditate upon and to 
store up the truth in mind and heart— that they 
may be able, by its use, to withstand error and 
evil in every form presented to them in this 
evil day. 

Verse 5. "Thou shalt not be afraid of the 
terror of the night [the dark night of which 
the Prophet Isaiah and also the Lord spoke, 



saying, "The morning"— the Millennial morning 
— "cometh, and also the night"— the great 
time of trouble which shall immediately precede 
it, the night "wherein no man can labor" 
for the dissemination of divine truth: so great 
will be "the terror," the tumult and trouble 
and persecution of that night— Isa. 21:12; 
John 9:4]; nor for the arrow ["even bitter 
words" of the opponents of the truth— Psa. 64:3] 
that flieth by day" [at the present time, 
which, in comparison with the dark night that 
is coming, is called day]; 

Verse 6. "Nor for the pestilence [moral 
and spiritual] that walketh in darkness [that 
spreads and makes its victims among those 
who are ignorant of the truth, or who are 
unfaithful to it and hence unworthy of it, 
and who therefore lack the divine protection 
and are subject to the "strong delusions" of 
error— 2 Thes. 2:11]; nor for the destruction 
[caused by these pestilences] that wasteth at 
noon-day [that subverts the faith and hope of 
many, just when the light of divine truth is 
shining clearest upon the faithful, as it is 
shining upon us to-day]. 

Verse 7. "A thousand shall fall at thy side, 
and ten thousand at thy right hand [so great 

R1432 : page 229 

will be the falling away from the truth, even 
among those who, like ourselves, received it 
once with joy and who did for a time run well]; 
but it shall not come nigh thee."— Because of 
thy loyalty and uncompromising faithfulness 
and because of the ample armor of truth and 
righteousness, thou shalt stand and not fall. 

Verse 8. "Only with thine eyes shalt thou 
behold and see the recompense of the wrongdoers" 
—who reject the truth or who prove 
unfaithful to it. 

Verses 9,10. "Because thou hast said, 
'The Lord is my protection;' because the Most 
High thou hast made thy refuge, no evil shall 
befall thee" [no evils of the kind above referred 
to; and any other seeming evils shall, under 
divine providence, work together for your good 
-Rom. 8:28]. 

Verse 11. "For he shall give his angels [his 
messengers] a charge concerning thee, to guard 
thee in all thy ways. [That is, God will raise 
up some faithful pastors and teachers who will 
"watch for your souls as they that must give an 
account." True, there shall arise false teachers, 
perverting the Word of the Lord and seeking 
by cunning sophistries to subvert your souls; 



but if in simplicity of heart God's children 
require a "Thus saith the Lord" for every 
element of their faith, and carefully prove all 
things by the Word, they will be able to distinguish 
readily the true from the false. And 
having done so, the Apostle Paul (Heb. 13:17) 
counsels us to have confidence. The Lord 
our Shepherd will care for the true sheep. 

Verse 12. "They shall bear thee [all the 
members of the body of Christ, individually 
and collectively] up in their hands [using their 
strength], lest thou dash thy foot against a 
stone"— any stumbling-stone of false doctrine, 
and especially that great fundamental 
rock-doctrine of the redemption through the 
precious blood of Christ;— that "rock of offence 
and stone of stumbling" to both the 
houses of nominal Israel (fleshly and spiritual). 
(Isa. 8:14.) The "feet" of the body are its 
last members: the saints now living are members 
of the "feet of Him" (Christ), the ones 
who are now in danger of being stumbled, as 
the feet of the Jewish house of servants were in 
danger in the end or harvest of the Jewish age. 

How do such messengers of the Lord bear 
up the feet of Christ? By helping them to a 
clear understanding of the truth, and teaching 
and encouraging them by word and example 
how to be faithful to the truth, and how to run 
so as to obtain the prize of our high calling. 

Verse 13. "Thou shalt tread upon the lion 
and adder; the young lion and the dragon 
shalt thou trample under feet."— Thus borne 
up in the hands of the Lord's faithful messengers 
and guarded by their vigilant watchfulness, 
and under the constant protection of the 
Most High, God's trusting, faithful children 
shall triumph over every device of Satan either 
to overpower or to beguile them— whether he 
boisterously goes about as a roaring lion, or, 
whether, serpent-like, he stealthily lurks about 
to insert his venomous poison. 

Verse 14. "Because he hath set his love 
upon me [saith Jehovah], therefore will I deliver 
him [from the pestilence, etc.]: I will set 
him on high [exalt him to joint-heirship with 
Christ, make him a member of the "Royal 
Priesthood," and a "partaker of the divine 
nature"], because he hath known [appreciated] 
my name." 

Verses 15,16. "He shall call upon me and 
I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble; 
I will deliver him and honor him. With 
long life [eternal life-John 10:28,29; Rom. 2:1] 
will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation" 
—make him understand my plan. 



Praise the Lord for such assurances of his 
loving care! Bless the Lord, O my soul; and 
all that is within me, praise his holy name! 



The great Infidel-Philosopher Herbert Spencer sees the 
trouble coming and helps fulfil our Lord's prediction, 
Luke 21:26. He says:— 

"Since I began to write there has been a clear reaction 
against individual liberty. We are certainly tending toward 
State Socialism, which will be a worse form of tyranny 
than that of any government now recognized in civilization. 
At present the State is absorbing the individual 
activity of men. It is intermeddling in all manner of 
ways in what should be private enterprise. Gradually 
the State will usurp the functions of private enterprise to 
such an extent that the people will one day awake to it; 
but it will be long before they will make an effective resistance. 
I can not but think that the trouble will be severe 
—something terrible to contemplate; but I do not begin to 
set a date for the catastrophe, or to anticipate its horrors." 



R1434 : page 230 
RESIGNATION 



Source of my life's refreshing springs, 

Whose presence in my heart sustains me, 

Thy love appoints me pleasant things, 
Thy mercy orders all that pains me. 

If loving hearts were never lonely, 
If all they wish might always be, 

Accepting what they look for only, 
They might be glad, but not in Thee. 

Well may Thine own beloved, who see 
In all their lot their Father's pleasure, 

Bear loss of all they love, save Thee, 
Their living, everlasting treasure. 

Well may Thy happy children cease 
From restless wishes prone to sin, 

And, in Thine own exceeding peace, 
Yield to Thy daily discipline. 

We need as much the cross we bear 
As air we breathe— as light we see: 

It draws us to Thy side in prayer, 
It binds us to our strength in Thee. 



R1432 : page 230 

THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD 



"Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an 
holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth 
the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness 
into his marvelous light.. ..Ye have tasted that 
the Lord is gracious, to whom coming as unto a living 
stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and 
precious, ye also as living stones are built up a spiritual 
house, an holy priesthood, to offer up sacrifices* acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ."-- 1 Pet. 2:9,3-5. 

At no time in the Church's history has our 
great adversary been so active in multiplying 
false doctrines and in diverting attention from 
the truth by introducing unprofitable and irrelevant 
questions as at present. Just when the 
exaltation and glory of the Church are soon to 
be accomplished, and when the faithful are about 
to be received into the joy of their Lord, every 
device is resorted to to beguile them of their 
reward and to frustrate this feature of the divine 
plan. To really frustrate any part of the 
divine plan is impossible: God has purposed 
to take out from among men a "little flock," 
"a people for his name," a royal priesthood; 
and such a company is assuredly being gathered; 
but whether all those now in the race 
for the prize will surely be of that company, is 
still an open question. Take heed, beloved, 
that no man take thy crown. (Rev. 3:11.) 
If any come short of their privileges and prove 
unworthy of the rich inheritance, there are 
others who will quickly fill their places. 

We beseech you, brethren, as you value the 
glorious hope set before you in the gospel, that 
you give no heed to seducing spirits and doctrines 
of devils, as the Apostle terms them 
(1 Tim. 4:1), but that, with fixedness of purpose, 
you apply yourselves to the one thing 
which you are called and privileged to do as 
members prospectively of that Royal Priesthood. 
Let us never forget that we are a "peculiar 
people," separate from the great body of 
nominal Christians as well as from the world, 
having higher hopes, aims and ambitions and 
favored with a clearer insight into the deep things 
of God, having been called out of our former 
darkness into his marvelous light. And if thus 
separate from the world and from Christians 
who partake largely of the worldly spirit, what 



wonder if we find them all out of harmony with 
us and either ignoring or opposing us. 

Such opposition is to be expected and will 
doubtless continue until we finish our course in 
death. To submit patiently to this opposition 
is to sacrifice our own natural preferments for 
the friendship and the pleasures of the present 
life and to endure hardness as good soldiers 
for the truth's sake, in whatever shape that hardness 
may come, in our effort to do the Lord's 
will and work of advancing the interests of his 
Kingdom. This is what is meant by the presenting 
of our bodies living sacrifices in the 
divine service. To be really in this service 
involves first, the careful and continual study of 
God's plan; second, the imbibing of its spirit; 
leading, thirdly, to an enthusiastic zeal for its 
accomplishment, and to activity to the extent 



*Sinaitic MS. omits spiritual before sacrifices. 

R1432: page 231 

of ability in its service, at whatever cost or 
sacrifice it may require. 

If we are faithful in this service we have no 
time, nor have we the disposition, to give heed 
either to false doctrines or to other themes 
which have no bearing on the one thing to 
which we have solemnly dedicated our lives. 
Our time is not our own if we have consecrated 
all to God; and consequently we have none to 
spare for the investigation of fanciful false theories, 
built upon other foundations than that 
laid down in the Scriptures; nor have we time 
to devote to the ideas and pursuits which engross 
the world's attention, many of which are 
harmless in themselves, but would be harmful 
to us if we were to allow them to occupy consecrated 
time and to divert our attention from 
the one thing we ought to be doing. The 
Apostle warns us "to shun profane babblings, 
for they will increase unto more ungodliness;" 
but adds, "Study to show thyself approved unto 
God, a workman that needeth not to be 
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth." 
"Teach no other doctrine: neither give heed 
to fables and endless genealogies, which minister 
questions rather than godly edifying which 
is in faith. "-2 Tim. 2:16; 1 Tim. 1:3,4. 

Each consecrated believer should ask himself, 
How carefully have I studied that which I have 
clearly recognized as divine truth? and how 
fully capable am I, therefore, of handling the 



sword of the spirit? Few indeed are those who 
can say they have fully digested and assimilated 
all they have received; that they have let none 
of these things slip from memory; that they 
have so treasured it up in their hearts that it is 
their meditation by day and by night; that they 
have a ready answer— a "Thus saith the Lord" 
—for every man that asks them a reason for 
the hope that is in them, concerning any point 
of doctrine; that they can clearly and intelligently 
portray the divine plan, quote the divine 
authority for each successive step of it, and, if 
need be, point out its place in the divine system 
of types. To gain such proficiency in the Word 
is indeed the work of a lifetime, but every day 
should see a closer approximation to that proficiency, 
and will, indeed, if we are faithful students 
and faithful servants of the truth. 

If all the consecrated were thus busily engaged 
putting on the armor of God, and in 
proving it by actual use in zealous endeavors 
to herald the truth and to help others to stand, 
there would indeed be no time left for disputings 
on the Anglo-Israel question, or whether 
the earth is a plane instead of a globe, or 
whether the principles of socialism would be 
advisable among Christians in their management 
of their temporal affairs. Nor would 
there be time for politics, nor even for the good 
temperance-reform work, nor the work among 
fallen women, nor among the slums of the great 
cities, nor even for preaching the doctrine of 
divine healing. All this is work which can 
and will be effectually accomplished in "the 
Times of Restitution," now in the near future; 
and, besides, there are others interested in these 
works (and we are glad of it and bid them God-speed) 
while we recognize and seek to accomplish 
the work set before us in the divine plan. 
And if indeed we have no consecrated time for 
these things, which are only side issues and 
not harmful in themselves, except as they divert 
attention and consume valuable time which 
has been consecrated to another and higher 
use, surely there is none whatever for giving 
heed to false doctrines such as so-called Christian 
Science, and the various no-ransom or 
Evolution theories, all of which are attempts 
to show men how to climb up to everlasting 
life by some other way than that which the 
Scriptures point out, viz.: by faith in the precious 
blood of Christ shed on Calvary for our 
redemption. He that climbeth up some other 
way, the same is a thief and a robber (John 10:1); 
and we are commanded to have no 
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, 



but rather to reprove them.— Eph. 5:11. 

How narrow this way! say some contemptuously 
of those who, like Paul, devote their 
energies to the one thing— the service of the 
truth. Yes, that will be the verdict against 
you, of all except the few who, like yourself, 
have carefully sought out this "narrow way," 
and who are determined to walk in it regardless 
of the reproach it brings. The way to the 
prize of our high calling is not wide enough to 
admit all the vain philosophies and foolish 

R1432 : page 232 

questions and babblings and speculations of 
science, falsely so called. It is only wide enough 
to admit the Lord's plan and those who are 
willing to discard all other plans and projects 
and questionings and to devote themselves fully 
and entirely to its service, and who are quite 
willing to bear any reproach it may bring. 

Consider your calling, brethren, for ye are a 
chosen generation, a royal priesthood to offer 
sacrifices acceptable to God; a holy nation, a 
peculiar people, that ye should show forth the 
praises of him who hath called you out of darkness 
into his marvelous light. The very object 
of our being called into this light is that we 
may let it shine. If we do not let it shine we 
are unworthy of it, and the treasure will be 
taken away and we will be left in darkness. 
If indeed we have received the light and have 
consecrated ourselves fully to God, let us ask 
ourselves, What am I doing to show forth the 
praises of him who hath called me out of darkness? 
Am I going forth with these tidings to 
my neighbors near and far? am I busy from 
day to day in seeking to vindicate the divine 
character, and to make known God's righteous 
ways? am I economizing time and means, and 
so arranging my temporal affairs as to give as 
much time as possible to the work? and, then, 
am I diligently studying to make myself thoroughly 
familiar with the truth, so that I may 
indeed be a living epistle known and read of 
all men within the circle of my influence?— a 
workman indeed that needeth not be ashamed? 
Can I truly affirm that I am 
"All for Jesus, all for Jesus- 
All my being's ransomed powers; 
All my thoughts, and words, and doings, 
All my days, and all my hours?" 

If so, then we are just narrow minded enough 
to say, This one thing I do; and I make every 
thing else bend to this one thing of showing 
forth God's praises and helping others into his 



marvelous light. And to this end I cultivate 
and use what talents I possess, as a wise steward 
of my heavenly Master. 

Dearly beloved, we impose no vows or bondage 
upon each other, but the call has its own 
limitations: the Master has directed us, saying, 
"Go ye and teach all nations [for the gospel 
is no longer confined to the Jewish nation], 
baptizing them in the name of the Father and 
of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching 
them to observe all things"— concerning our 
(questionable) Anglo-Israelitish origin? No. 
—All things concerning the shape of the earth? 
No.— All the vain philosophies of men who have 
erred from the truth, and all the subtle sophistries 
by which they made void the Word of 
God? No; preach "all things whatsoever I 
have commanded you."— Matt. 28:19,20. 

This is just what the apostles did. There 
were plenty of errors and side issues in their 
day; but, ignoring them, they resolutely devoted 
themselves to the promulgation of the 
truth. Paul paid no attention to his fleshly 
genealogy, because he recognized himself as a 
new creature in Christ Jesus. It was easier for 
him to prove his fleshly origin as an Israelite 
than for any of us to do it; but he cared nothing 
for that. He did not care whether he was of 
the ten tribes or of the two tribes; for he had 
on none of the tribal righteousness of the law. 
His only ambition was to be found "in Christ, 
not having on his own righteousness, which is 
of the law, but that which is through the faith 
of Christ— the righteousness which is of God 
by faith." (Phil. 3:9.) He says (verses 3-7), 
"We [new creatures in Christ] are the [real] 
circumcision, which worship God in spirit and 
rejoice in Christ Jesus and have no confidence 
in the flesh [or the fleshly relationships], though 
indeed I have had confidence also in the flesh. 
If any other man thinketh that he hath whereof 
he might trust in the flesh, I had more: 
Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, 
of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of 
the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee; 
concerning zeal, persecuting the Church; 
touching the righteousness which is of the law, 
blameless. But what things were gain to me, 
those I counted loss for Christ." 

Hear him again in his zeal for this one thing 
to which he had devoted his life: "And I, 
brethren, when I came to you, came not with 
excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring 
unto you the mystery of God; for I determined 
not to know anything among you save Jesus 
Christ and him crucified. [I riveted your attention 



R1432 : page 233 

on this one thing ! I kept this one 
thing continually before you]. And my speech 
and my preaching were not with enticing words 
of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the 
spirit and power [of the truth], that your faith 
should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in 
the power of God."— 1 Cor. 2:1-5. 

Paul was a plain, uncompromising teacher. 
When he knew he had the truth, he spoke it 
with confidence, and boldly declared that everything 
contrary to it was false doctrine; and he 
taught his disciples that it was not only their 
privilege, but their duty also, to be established 
in the faith and to know, on the evidence of 
God's Word, why they believed, and to be able 
to give to every man that inquired for it a 
reason for the hope that was in them. 

There is among Christians to-day a great lack 
of established faith on any point of doctrine. 
They say, "I think, I hope," or "Perhaps it 
may be so; but this is only my opinion, and it 
may be right or it may be wrong. I have charity, 
however, for your opposing opinion and for 
every man's opinion; for who knows which is 
right? I'm sure I cannot say; but, nevertheless, 
I have great faith and charity (?). I shake 
hands with every body and call him brother if 
he claims to be a Christian, no matter what he 
believes and teaches, whether he is pointing to 
Christ as the door to the sheepfold, or whether 
he is trying to teach men how to climb up some 
other way. In Christian love I bid them all 
God-speed and pray for the success of all their 
teachings, no matter how antagonistic they 
may be to each other or to the Scriptures as I 
read them." 

All this passes among Christians generally 
for large-hearted benevolence and personal humility, 
while in fact it is an ignoble, compromising 
spirit that is unwilling to forego the 
friendship of those who oppose the Lord by opposing 
the truth; and which would rather see 
the truth suffer, and those weak in the faith 
stumbled, than that they should bear the reproach 
of Christ. Those who have real and 
sincere faith in God are willing to take him at 
his word; and with these the first principles of 
the doctrine should long ago have been established, 
much of the superstructure of gold and 
silver and precious stones should already be 
erected, and the work steadily progressing. Such 
are able, if they are loyal and true to God, to 
discern between truth and error. The Apostle 



John, recognizing this ability, says, "If there 

come any unto you and bring not this doctrine, 

receive him not into your house, neither bid 

him God-speed; for he that biddeth him God-speed 

is partaker of his evil deeds." (2 John 10.) 

We ought to know what we believe and why 

we believe it, and then should be bold and uncompromising 

in declaring it; "For if the 

trumpet give an uncertain sound who shall prepare 

himself to the battle?" 

Again, says the Apostle (1 Cor. 2:6-10), 
"However we speak wisdom among them that 
are perfect [developed— We are not to cast our 
pearls before swine]; yet not the wisdom of 
the world, nor of the princes [the popular leaders 
and teachers] of this world that come to 
naught. But we speak the wisdom of God, which 
was hidden in a mystery, which God ordained 
before the world unto our glory; which none 
of the princes of this world knew. ...Eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered 
into the heart of man the things which 
God hath prepared for them that love him. But 
God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit; 
for the spirit [or mind of God in us, is so anxious 
to know his truth, that it] searcheth all 
things; yea, the deep things of God." 

The princes of this world do know something 
of Astronomy and Geology, and have 
their ideas of the shape of the earth, etc., but 
they have not known this hidden wisdom of 
the divine plan, which maps out a destiny so 
glorious to the faithful saints who will constitute 
the royalty of the age to come. Let the 
world speculate as it may about its own themes 
of interest, but let us devote ourselves to the 
one thing in hand, avoiding foolish questions 
and genealogies and contentions, ...for they 
are unprofitable and vain. (Titus 3:9.) Let 
us be faithful to our commission to preach this 
gospel to the meek who are ready to hear it 
(Isa. 61:1). Let the bride of Christ be diligent 
in making herself ready (Rev. 19:7), for 
the marriage of the Lamb is the event of the 
very near future. 



page 234 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 



LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1432 : page 234 

THE FIRST CHRISTIAN MARTYRS. 



LESSON IX., AUG. 28, ACTS 7:54-60; 8:1-4. 

Golden Text— "He kneeled down and cried with a 
loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge."— 
Acts 7:60. 

Stephen was one of the seven deacons chosen 
by the early Church to manage some of its temporal 
affairs, and thus relieve the burden of 
the apostles, that they might give their whole 
attention to its spiritual oversight— to prayer 
and to the ministry of the word. (Chapter 6.) 
But the early Church were all ministers according 
to their ability and opportunity, and so while 
Stephen thus endeavored to relieve the apostles 
of temporal cares, that the Church might have 
the full benefit of their superior service, he was 
active also in declaring the truth in harmony 
with the apostles. 

And the Lord was with Stephen and corroborated 
his teaching by granting him power to 
work "great wonders and miracles among the 
people." The rapid growth of the Church under 
the spur of its early zeal and faith, and the 
clear testimony of the Lord working with them 
by miracles and signs, excited and greatly increased 
the hatred and opposition of a conservative 
class, who were determined to perpetuate 
the old institutions of Judaism at any 
cost; and this hatred ripened into bitter persecution, 
of which Stephen was the first martyred 
victim. 

The charges brought against Stephen were 
(1) that he spoke blasphemous words against 
the holy place [the temple], saying that Jesus 
of Nazareth would destroy it; and (2) that 
he would change the customs of Moses. — 
Acts 6:13,14. 

These accusations were likely partial statements 
of the truth. Stephen had probably 
been telling the people how that material temple 
must pass away, and how God was about to 
rear a more enduring spiritual temple in which 
it was their privilege to become living stones; 



and that their temple and in fact the whole system 

of Judaism was only a shadow or type of 

the glorious spiritual favors of the new dispensation 

which it was now their privilege to enjoy, 

and that their typical system must now pass 

away, since the antitypical spiritual dispensation 

had come. We can easily see how these blessed 

truths would be misunderstood and misrepresented 

by those who were blinded and excited 

by prejudice and bitter hatred of the 

crucified Lord and his followers. 

Being unable to resist the wisdom of the 
spirit by which he spoke, they were the more 
infuriated against him, and finally they seized 
him and brought him before the council, the 
Sanhedrim, and preferred the above charges 
against him. Stephen doubtless realized the 
dangers of the hour, but he was so filled with 
the spirit of God, and so enthusiastic over the 
glorious gospel he had to proclaim, that he 
seemed to lose all fear and all concern as to 
what they would do to him in his eagerness to 
improve this opportunity of testifying for the 
Lord before the assembled elders of Israel; 
and the peace and joy of his heart shone from 
his eyes, and so illuminated his whole countenance 
that his face is said to have been like the 
face of an angel. 

In his reply to the charges he briefly rehearsed 
the whole history of Israel, showing most 
clearly his faith in the fact that God had marked 
out the whole economy of that dispensation 
and that he accepted the teaching of Moses 
and the prophets, and honored them as God's 
chosen witnesses of that dispensation. (Acts 7:1-50.) 
In verses 48-50 he began to show 
the difference between the material temple in 
Jerusalem and the glorious temple which God 
was about to build, and how the former must 
therefore pass away. But here he seems to have 
been interrupted; for there is a sudden break 
in the discourse. They had heard enough, and 
probably his voice was for a time drowned in 
the din of many voices to the effect that his 
last statements were sufficient proof against him. 

VERSES 51-53 were probably spoken above 
the clamor of many excited and angry voices— 
"Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and 
ears, ye do always resist the holy Spirit: as 
your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the prophets 
have not your fathers persecuted? and they 
have slain them which shewed before of the 
coming of the Just One, of whom ye have been 
now the betrayers and murderers; who have 
received the law by the disposition of angels 
[through the agency of God's messengers] and 



have not kept it." 

VERSES 54-56. This was enough: they could 
endure no more. They knew the accusations 
were only too true, but being far from penitent 

R1432 : page 235 

and excited to the more desperate and 
determined opposition, they ground their teeth 
with rage, and doubtless looked one upon 
another to see who would make the first move 
to lay violent hands upon him; and in the interval 
before the storm broke forth, Stephen, 
"being full of the holy Spirit [full of a holy 
enthusiasm for the Lord and the truth] looked 
up steadfastly toward heaven" [a prayerful look 
heavenward for grace to help in this time of 
need, just when the storm cloud was about to 
burst in its fury]. 

As he thus looked heavenward a picture of 
the glory of the Lord floated before his mental 
vision, and he said, "Behold, I see the heavens 
opened and the Son of man standing on the 
right hand of God." His mind was carried 
forward to the glorious Millennial reign of 
Christ— the new heavens and the new earth- 
where he saw Christ stand at the right hand of 
God [the chief place of power and dominion]. 
He saw it just as we see it to-day— by faith "in 
the sure word of prophecy"— and in his mental 
vision of that future glory caught by the 
eye of faith, he was refreshed and strengthened 
in spirit while the merciless stones crushed out 
his consecrated life. 

VERSES 59,60. In the midst of his dying 
agonies his persecutors heard him commending 
his spirit, his new life to the Lord, and then praying 
that this sin might not be laid to their charge. 

CHAPTER 8:2 shows again the brotherly love 
of the early Church: how devout men— men who 
were not afraid to be counted among the friends 
and brethren of the faithful martyr— carried 

R1433 : page 235 

him to his burial and mourned over him. 

VERSES 1,3 show the zeal of one, Saul of 
Tarsus, in the persecution of the early Christians 
and his part in the persecution of Stephen, 
even unto death. He consented to his death 
and took charge of the cast off outer garments 
of those who stoned him; and he made havoc 
of the Church: entering into every house and 
haling men and women, he committed them to 
prison. Yet Saul's was not a hopeless case, and 
Stephen's prayer for his persecutors did not go 



unanswered; for from their midst this one was 
shortly after raised up to be a most efficient 
and devoted servant of the truth. 

VERSES 1,4 show how the persecution spread 
to all the Church, causing all except the apostles 
to leave Jerusalem and remove to other 
parts. The apostles bravely determined to 
stand their ground there, doubtless in order to 
give courage to the scattered flock who might 
still look to them at Jerusalem as representatives, 
overseers and counsellors of the Church. Had 
they gone it would have seemed as if the 
Church were broken up. But as the others went 
forth they went everywhere preaching the word, 
and so the persecution did not really hinder, 
but it actually helped to spread the truth more 
and more. They all recognized their commission 
from God to preach the truth as soon as 
they received it. 

There was no such false idea of preaching 
then as we find in the churches of to-day. Now 
chiefly those who are ordained of men, and who 
have gone through a certain course of human 
training in so-called theological schools (all of 
which greatly pervert the Word of God), and 
who wear broadcloth suits and white neck-ties, 
and stand in the pulpit of a fine church building, 
are regarded as preachers of the gospel. 
But then every member of the Church recognized 
his obligations, and his divine ordination 
to the work of the ministry. And so it should 
be to-day; for, says the Apostle Peter (1 Pet. 2:9), 
"Ye are a royal priesthood, a holy nation, 
a peculiar people, that ye should show forth 
the praises of him who hath called you out of 
darkness into his marvelous light." 

This is the work of the whole Church, every 
member of which is a priest, and every member 
of which should therefore diligently proclaim 
the word "in season and out of season" 
(whether at his own convenience or not) whenever 
and wherever he can, and by whatsoever 
means he is able to command— by word of 
mouth, by the pen or by the press, or by all 
the agencies he can employ. 

Let us mark and profit by the example of 
the faith and zeal and courage and true Christian 
heroism of the early Church. 

R1433 : page 235 

PHILIP PREACHING AT SAMARIA. 



LESSON X., SEPT. 4, ACTS 8:5-25. 



Golden Text— "And there was great joy in that city." 
-Acts 8:8. 

VERSE 5. This Philip was another of the 
seven deacons chosen to relieve the apostles of 
the temporal affairs of the Church; and, like 
Stephen, he not only helped in this way, but 
did good service also in preaching Christ in 
Samaria when driven out of Jerusalem by the 
persecution. 

VERSES 6-8 show how the Lord worked with 
him and endorsed his teaching, and how the 
people believed and were blessed and filled 
with great joy. 

VERSES 9-13 mention the admission into the 
Church, on profession of faith in Christ and 
by baptism, of one who was not a true convert 
to Christianity and who was not really consecrated 
to God, as his symbolic baptism implied. 
Nevertheless he floated along with the Church 
and companied with Philip and for a time was 

R1433 : page 236 

not recognized. Thus, even in those days, we 
see that there was a nominal church which 
comprised both the wheat and the tare element. 
On the contrary, the real Church, "whose 
names are written in heaven," has never included 
any but true and consecrated believers 
—the wheat. As time advanced and the Church 
increased in numbers, and the mystery of iniquity 
continued to work, and especially when 
persecution abated, the numbers of the tares 
greatly multiplied, until to-day the whole field 
of "Christendom" is so overrun with tares that 
the wheat can only be found by careful searching. 

The tare element in the Church is not a vicious 
element: as in the illustration, they are, 
in general conduct and appearance, like the 
true wheat class, and can scarcely be distinguished 
from them until some test of character 
reveals the unregenerate heart, as in the case of 
Simon. The truth due and revealed in the 
harvest or end of this age is the sickle in the 
Lord's hand for the separation now in progress. 

VERSES 14-17 show how the Lord marked 
the apostles above all others of the Church as 
his specially chosen and empowered witnesses. 
While he endorsed the faithful testimony of 
Philip, Stephen and others, by miraculous signs 
and wonders in them, the power of conferring 
spiritual gifts on others by the laying on 
of hands was reserved for the apostles only. 
Accordingly, we read that, as soon as the information 



reached the apostles at Jerusalem that 
Samaria had received the Word of God and 
been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, 
they sent the apostles Peter and John, to lay 
their hands on them, to communicate the gifts 
of the spirit which at that time were tokens of 
fellowship as well as of the Apostolic office. 

It is clear, then, from this necessity of sending 
for the apostles in order that these might 
receive the holy Spirit, that none could communicate 
spiritual gifts except the apostles. 
We remember also that Paul, the Lord's choice 
for the place of Judas, had this seal to his 
apostleship.— See 2 Tim. 1:6. 

The expression, "received the holy Spirit," 
we understand to refer specially to the outward 
manifestation of their acceptance with God in 
the receiving of the gifts of the Spirit, then 
conferred upon every member of the Church. 
This is clear from the fact that every one, even 
the unconverted, such as Simon Magus, could 
at once recognize it. Simon evidently looked 
upon this new and strange power from a mercenary 
standpoint, and therefore he desired, 
not only the gifts which all members of the 
Church received, but also the apostolic power 
of conferring those gifts upon others by the laying 
on of hands.— Verses 18,19. 

The possession of these gifts of the spirit did 
not always indicate saintship: they were evidently 
given to all professed Christians in 
order to distinguish the Church of that day 
from the world by these marks of divine recognition 
of the Church as a whole. And yet, as 
the apostle Paul affirms, one might possess any 
one, or even all of them, and be but as a 
sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal— a mere 
empty professor, lacking the chief and all-important 
gift of the holy Spirit, which is love; 
for without this chief gift the others profited 
nothing to the individual possessing them.— 
See 1 Cor. 13:1-3. 

It is no loss to the Church of to-day that she 
is not possessed of many of the gifts of the 
Spirit which have passed away, as the apostle 
predicted they would. (1 Cor. 13:8.) But 
three essential gifts of the Spirit were always to 
remain in the Church; and, thank God, they 
have not passed away; for still "abideth faith, 
hope and charity, these three; but the greatest 
of these is charity."— 1 Cor. 13:13. 

VERSES 20-23. Peter's rebuke to Simon was 
a severe one, indicating that death is the legitimate 
reward of hypocrisy, if it be persisted in. 
Peter was very plain in his denunciation of the 
man's character— and that to his face, and not 



indirectly or behind his back— saying, "Thou 
hast neither part nor lot in this matter; for thy 
heart is not right in the sight of God, for I 
perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness 
and in the bond of iniquity." Some of the 
worldly-wise of the present day would be inclined 
to complain of Peter's straightforward 
course and to say that he was uncharitable in 
thus endeavoring to rid the Church of a hypocritical 
impostor. In their desire to be all 
things to all men— not indeed that they may 
win them to Christ, but that they may increase 
the numerical and financial strength and prestige 
of the nominal church— they willingly 
fellowship all forms of iniquity if it is hidden 
under an outer robe of Christian profession. 

But Peter was not uncharitable: while he 
thus threw off the mask and unveiled the really 
unregenerate heart and the hypocrisy which 
sought to make merchandise of the Lord's 
favors, he also kindly urged the sinner to repentance 
that he might become truly a child 
of God. And in so doing, he at least saved 
the Church of Samaria from the imposition of 
one whom otherwise they would have esteemed 
as a brother, and whose erroneous teaching 
might have led many astray from the truth. 

VERSE 24 indicates at least some measure of 
repentance on the part of Simon which was 
due only to Peter's plain rebuke. 

VERSE 25 shows the zeal of the apostles. 



R1433 : page 237 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 

page 237 

Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I enclose 
$10.00, our regular donation to Tract 
Fund. Am sorry I could not remit sooner, but 
we have been rather pressed for ready money. 
We will try to send more as we find ourselves 
able to do so. 

Next Sunday afternoon I shall bring a Methodist 
friend to the chapel. I have been working 
with him for ten years, and though he is 
beginning to give an intellectual assent to the 
truth, he will not yet accept it, for prudential 
reasons. I have given him the three volumes 
of DAWN, a few TOWERS and all the Tracts, and 
I wish him now to hear one of your restitution 
sermons. 



The great topic among us here is the conversion 
—his own term— of Brother Rogers. I 
gave him up three or four years ago, and so did 
Brother West during his canvass here; and now 
the dear old man can scarce contain his joy. 
He has spent the last few Sabbaths at our home, 
and they are love-feasts indeed. 

At the last M.E. Quarterly Conference, charges 
were preferred against him and he supported 
his new position right nobly and at considerable 
length. He concluded by resigning his 
offices and membership in the M.E. church, 
and now is a free man in the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Praise the Lord. Hallelujah! 

We are continually talking and praying about 
the coming of the Kingdom and doing a little 
work, too— but oh! such a little; and that little 
seems often to be very unsuccessful. 

Affectionately yours, 

ARTHUR AND JENNIE ELLIS. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I give below extracts 
from a letter recently received from my 
own dear sister in the flesh. Undoubtedly it 
will be of interest to the readers of the TOWER, 
as it was exceedingly so to Sister W. and myself. 

Dear Brother and Sister:— Your welcome 
letter of the 1 1th received. We were indeed 
glad to hear from you, and thank you for your 
gift, "The Wonderful Story." It is beautiful 
—a wonderful story indeed! I can see its 
beauty as I never saw it before. It now has 
a new meaning to me. We would like to have 
the second volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
Please send it as soon as possible. I can hardly 
wait for it. 

I have just finished reading the first volume 
for the second time. It has done more for me 
than any other book in helping me to understand 
God's Word. And I am only beginning 
to see the truth. I enjoy greatly the new light 
which I received through the reading of "The 
Wonderful Story" and "THE PLAN OF THE 
AGES." The truth has indeed made me very 
happy, and I am hungry for more such Bible 
truth. Now I am beginning to understand why 
you left the pulpit and the Baptist church, and 
what you spoke of when on your last visit, although 
at that time I could not comprehend it 
on account of the muddy waters of tradition. 
But thanks be to God through our Lord Jesus 
for "the shining light" upon the sacred pages 
of the Word of God, which "light" has now 



shone into my heart. I realize that I am only 
a babe in faith, but with the help of God I desire 
to grow in knowledge, love and grace. I 
also feel very thankful that he has permitted 
me to see his harmonious and reasonable plan 
before "the day of trouble" comes. 

Dear Brother and Sister, what I have written 
is my own experience. We have loaned the 
books to friends, and trust they will perform 
their mission. There are some who do not believe 
this wonderful truth, but that does not 
discourage us. 

Affectionately, your sister, L. H . 

The above letter verifies the words of the 
Scriptures, "Your labor is not in vain in the 
Lord." What a comfort lies in such a promise! 
It was a comfort to us in times past, and 
is now still more so; for after we had been so 
highly favored as to receive the truth ourselves, 
our desire went out for those who were connected 
with us by the ties of flesh and blood. 
The majority, however, did not seem able to 
see the truth— Matt. 7:14; but it seems my 
trip four years ago to Maryland, where my sister 
and her husband resided at that time, was not 
in vain, although for about two and a half years 
it seemed as if she had forgotten the testimony. 
From her letter, however, we see that she still 
remembered the tidings of great joy which shall 
be unto all people (Luke 2:11.); and when 
"The Wonderful Story" reached her it refreshed 
her mind and heart. Praise the Lord! 
It became, indeed, a wonderful story to our 
sister. J. A. WEIMAR. 



Michigan. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your kind favor 
is at hand, and I thank you very much for it. I 
think your expressions regarding Prof. Totten 
and his writings are quite correct. I have read 
his views, and while I have found some Scripturally 
supported arguments, I have found much 
that is merely assertion, for which I can see no 
proof. Certainly only the very learned (?) can 

page 238 

understand him all the way through: I cannot. 
But not so with the DAWNS. They are plainly 
written, easily understood by application, and 
to my mind well supported by the Scriptures, 
else I would not try to place them in the hands 
of others. 
I have nearly finished Volume II., and it is 



my purpose to re-read both volumes and know 
every argument and point and have them all 
ready for use. I hope I can use them to the 
glory of God and the good of others. 

Kindly let me know how far back you can 
furnish copies of the ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
and at what cost? [Old TOWERS are supplied 
at the rate of five cents each. We can supply 
about two-thirds of the issues as far back as 1884. 
—PUBLISHERS.] I have already received much 
help from a few back numbers and desire to get 
more copies of other numbers. Also please 
name price of Old Theology Tracts in assorted 
lots of 50 or 100. [Since January 1st the O.T. 
Tracts, Nos. 1 to 6, 9, 10, 12 to 14 are supplied 
free for gratuitous distribution, and the 
expense is met by voluntary donations to the 
Tract Fund. -PUBLISHERS.] 

I thank you very much for your kind wishes, 
and earnestly pray that I may "grow in grace 
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior, 
Jesus Christ." I thank God for the DAWNS 
and the light they have given me; and may 
his blessing rest on you and the able work you 
are doing for his name. 

Yours in Christ and seeking to do his will, 
F. A. FULLER. 



Louisiana. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Please accept the 
inclosed P.O. order for $35.00 as my ministration 
to the public service for the saints, for the 
past three months. It is short of my proposed 
"hope," but this on account of obedience to the 
commandment, "Give to every one that asketh 
of thee, and him that would borrow from thee 
turn not away." Indeed, I have found the saying 
verified, viz.: "It is more blessed to give 
than to receive." And I know that the Lord 
is abundantly able to make all things abound 
unto such as take heed unto his Word, walking 
by faith and not by sight, having laid hold of 
the glorious hope, which we have as an anchor 
of life, both sure and firm, and entering the 
place within the vail. 

The large package of Tracts came duly to 
hand, and I shall exert myself the more in the 
blessed service of distributing them. I did so 
last Sunday and also this (Sunday) morning. 

The Norwegian Tract was quite a glad surprise. 
It will be used to supply many Norwegian 
vessels that come into port. I have 
sent samples to Norway, and— if you can afford 
it— you may send one hundred of them to my 



father in Norway. As a good many people go 
to his place of business, it will be convenient 
for him to distribute the same. 
With much Christian love, your brother, 
CHARLES STRAND. 



R1433 : page 238 

California. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-While examining 
Zech. 11:8, 1 came across Hosea 5:7. 
The clear, emphatic context of the latter adds 
force to the exact thirty years [one month] of 

R1434 : page 238 

the prophet as the divinely set time during 

which the "false shepherds" with their "portion" 

or "possessions [Leeser's trans.] shall 

be devoured." "Now" (see preceding verse, 

noting that Israel, Ephraim and Judah, with 

their flocks, "go to seek the Lord, but they 

shall not find him, he hath withdrawn himself 

from them"), "Now," while in that rejected, 

spewed-out condition— "Now shall one month 

devour them with their possessions." The devouring 

of these is the last thing mentioned in 

this paragraph. Benjamin and Ephraim are 

next made desolate, "broken through punishment." 

Previous to this time God said, "Ephraim 

is joined to his idols, let him alone." It 

is in their afflictions— in the great time of 

trouble— that they will come to acknowledge 

their guilt, and to seek the Lord and his presence, 

saying, "Come, and let us return unto 

the Lord, for he hath torn, and he will heal us; 

he hath smitten, and he will bind up our 

wounds." Another thought: In Hosea 2:21,22 

the Lord says he will answer prayer [Leeser], 

and the way or channel through which he will 

answer is indicated. He says, "I will answer 

the heavens and they shall answer the earth," 

etc. The thought is that the Anointed Christ 

(head and body), as a royal (heavenly) priesthood, 

shall make successful intercession for 

the earth (represented through its princes), and 

these princes answer the people, and so the 

great antitypical day of Jezreel is to be realized. 

—Hosea 1:11; 2:2.— Leeser. 

So we are to look for the existence of the 
"false," "foolish," "idol" shepherds, whose 
"arm" of power shall not be "clean dried 
up," and whose "right eye" (mind's eye or 
right understanding) shall not be "utterly 



darkened" till the end of the thirty years, 
1908.-Zech. 11:17. 

That the overthrow of the present nominal 
ecclesiastical systems shall precede the overthrow 
of the civil powers is thus indicated— 
the former continuing only until A.D. 1908 
and the latter until A.D. 1914. [We differ 
slightly here. The Editor expects from Rev. 19:20 
that the final overthrow of present governments 

R1434 : page 239 

will be at the same time as the fall 
of ecclesiasticism and will be followed by from 
five to seven years of socialism and anarchy, to 
end with 19 14 by the establishment of Christ's 
Millennial government] 

The union of the two systems [political and 
ecclesiastical], now so generally suggested, will 
be only partial, for the present "shaking" is preparatory 
to their destruction. "General creed 
smashing" is on time. The two ends of the ecclesiastical 
heaven— Protestantism and Romanism 
—shall roll together, come closer and closer together, 
for the purpose of more effectually opposing 
free thought and action. The fate of these 
powers has thus a little while to tremble in the 
balance before the ever darkening war clouds will 
burst in all their destructive fury. The three 
chapters of Zephaniah and thirteen of the fourteen 
chapters of Zechariah seem to apply in the 
Millennial age, including the "lapping period." 
How new and blessed the Bible of to-day— God's 
holy Word! 

I rejoice that I can share with the Chief 
Reaper in the present harvest. 'Tis mine to 
thrust in the sickle of truth every day, though 
not by a set form of words, in a snug, well-arranged, 
lengthy discourse; but we know that 
the spirit of the message, accompanying the 
word fitly spoken to a fellow-toiler, is the 
most effective means of preaching. Then the 
judicious distribution of the TOWER, Old Theology 
Tracts and the Dawns enables us each to 
preach many sermons in a comparatively short 
time. 

How many of us, who are now rejoicing in 
the present glorious harvest truth, came into 
possession of it by reading! How few by the 
sermons we have heard preached! I might say 
that in my own experience I never have heard 
a sermon on any Millennial-dawn theme 
(though it has been mine to make and fill a 
goodly number of appointments for public 
meetings), yet I have read and re-read all that 
Brother Russell and those laboring with him 



have published for several years past, with ever 
increasing interest. Nearly all that the prophets 
have written has, during the past, been 
sealed— not understood— having been written 
for us who are living in the present "due 
time" for its fulfilment. Thus enlightened, 
we shall not walk in darkness, nor fail of our 
share in the work and its reward. 

How unmistakably we witness the sealing 
effect of the harvest truth we preach. We witness 
the wheat, the consecrated, one by one, 
with zeal embracing it, and soon in the love 
of it joining the reapers, while the tares are 
gathered in bundles. Praise the Lord! Thus 
the work goes on. E. J. ROGERS. 



Iowa. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: -Yours of the 17th 
at hand. Thank you for your advice. In the 
last lot of books you sent me there was a copy 
of TOWER for July '88, and I can not tell you 
the joy it has given me. Although an old one, 
it was new to me, and contained just what I 
needed, viz.: "Ask What Ye Will" and "The 
Prayer of Faith." I freely admit that I had 
altogether erroneous views on these subjects. 
Your explanation under the latter heading, of 
sickness and how we should receive it, was 
needed, for I had never understood the difference 
between chastisement and rebuke. Thank 
God for his wondrous gifts to the Church! 

Revival and sanctification meetings seem to 
be the order of the day here. Sanctification, 
as taught by some, is not the pure white garment 
of Christ's imputed righteousness, but the filthy 
rags of their own righteousness, claiming that 
it is impossible for them to sin, and that they 
stand before God pure and holy. Some claim 
that they have not sinned for a year and some 
for a longer period of time. None seem to 
understand the Bible view, that sanctification 
is through the imputed righteousness of Christ 
supplying all our unwilling deficiencies. 

How glorious it is to be permitted rightly to 
divide and understand the word of truth, and 
possess these privileges in the service. I had 
good success this week, selling 120 books. 

Your servant in Christ, C. C. WRIGHT. 



page 239 

N. Carolina. 



VERY DEAR BROTHER:-I still feel grieved 
that I was under the necessity of quitting the 
Colporteur field, and am hoping that my providential 
wheel may yet turn again in that direction. 
I do feel that I never can do enough 
for the Master, and often ask myself the question, 
Why am I so highly favored as to receive 
the message and to behold the light of the unfolding 
Word now due to be made known, 
while the world is permitted to see and not 
perceive, to hear and not understand. 

The field here is rather limited; and what 
with a non-reading people under powerful pulpit 
influence, the good work progresses slowly; 
yet there are a few precious sheaves already 
garnered, and an impression made that I feel 
sure will not be effaced. 

Am pleased with the last WATCH TOWER. 
Yes, the blind leading the blind; for many 
years I have been groping in the rear, but the 
scales have fallen, the bands are broken and I 
am free. RICHARD MARSTON. 

[We rejoice with you that you have found the 
shining path of Truth. Do what you can and 
opportunity will increase.— EDITOR.] 



page 242 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 



FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



We have made arrangements by which we 
can supply our readers with this work, post free, 
at 17 shillings in cloth binding, 20 shillings in 
half leather binding. The usual prices for the 
same are 24 and 28 shillings respectively, postage 
extra. A number of our friends in Great 
Britain have been desirous of securing this volume, 
but we have heretofore been unable to 
offer it at prices corresponding to that of the 
American edition. 

Our friends will please not ask for credit on 
this book, nor on any of those we offer for sale 
(--except the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, to colporteurs 
on special terms). We are enabled to 
procure them at so low prices only by cash in 
advance payments. 



"THE NEWBERRY BIBLE." 



This is a valuable work for those who have 
a thorough, grammatical English education. 
It will enable such to form correct, grammatical 
ideas of the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures; and 
thus gives to such an advantage above that enjoyed 
by the ordinary Greek and Hebrew scholar 
—for only a few of the latter have a grammatical 
appreciation of the Bible in its originals. 

We describe the Bible in the words of another 
thus:— 

"Mr. Newberry annotated the Bible throughout, 
with immense care and patience, on a new 
system. By an arrangement of signs attached 
to the words of the text, he conveys to the English 
reader the precise nature of the article, 
moods, tenses and particles. Foot-notes supply 
succinct apparatus for textual criticism. 



Side-notes provide the originals of many of the 

most important words, as well as copious references. 

A work so complete, so ingenious and 

so helpful to the Bible student ought in this 

new form to enjoy extended popularity." 

The late Horatius Bonar says: "It is beyond 
all price. Its minuteness of detail, its accuracy, 
its perspicuity, its scholar-like finish, are 
such as to make one of the most trustworthy 
and precious volumes in connection with 
critical study that have ever issued from the 
press." 

We can supply this work, very valuable to 
the class we describe (but not specially valuable 
to others), in handsome stiff Persian 
leather binding, gold edges, postage prepaid, 
for four dollars per copy— much below the 
regular price. 



AN INDEX TO YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE. 



This, too, is a very valuable work, but only to 
those who can appreciate it. Indeed, we fear 
that to some, who do not understand something 
about translating, it might be injurious. 
It shows all the various ways in which the Hebrew 
and Greek words have been translated in 
our Common Version Bible; and the unsophisticated 
might get the impression that a 
Greek or Hebrew word may be translated by 
any English word at the caprice of the translator; 
—not knowing the difference in the arrangement 
of English sentences. It is the entire 
phrase of the Greek and Hebrew that must 
be compared with the English phrase which 
translates it and not always word for word. 
Price, postpaid, 50 cents. 



Do not forget the Missionary Envelopes. We 
have a new lot and supply them now at the reduced 
price of 25 cents per hundred, and $2.00 
per thousand. This includes free delivery to you 
at your Postoffice. 



R1434 : page 243 

VOL. XIII. AUGUST 15, 1892. NO. 16. 



ENOCH, ELIJAH AND THE SENTENCE. 



The answer to the following query may interest 
others than the inquirer:— 

"Since 'death passed upon all men,' because 
of Adam's sin, and since all had to be redeemed 
before they could escape from that death sentence, 
how came it that Enoch and Elijah 
escaped from it before the redemption-price 
was paid?" 

We answer, that they did not escape, but 
were still under the sentence of death until the 
ransom was paid. The execution of the sentence 
was deferred in their cases, and their 
lives prolonged; but they would eventually have 
died had they not been redeemed. After father 
Adam was sentenced he lived nearly a thousand 
years, but under his particular sentence he 
could not have lived more than a thousand 
years; because the sentence read "In the day 
that thou eatest thereof, dying thou shalt 
die." And since "a day with the Lord is 
as a thousand years" (2 Pet. 3:8), his death 
was fixed to take place within that "day." 
But God left the way open to make types of 
Enoch and Elijah, and hence, so far as they 
and the remainder of the human family were 
concerned, no limit of time for the execution 
of the sentence was fixed. If, therefore, it 
pleased God to have it so, they might have continued 
to live for thousands of years, under the 
death sentence, without dying. In Elijah's 
case, although he was translated, it is not said 
that he did not die afterward. His translation 
made a type, as we have seen (MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter viii.), and he may 
have died and been buried afterward, unknown 
to men, as was Moses.— Deut. 34:6. 

But with Enoch the case was different, as we 
are expressly told that he did not die. In his 
case, therefore, it is evident that the execution 
of the sentence was deferred, but there is no 
evidence that it was annulled. He, therefore, 
remained under that sentence of death until he 
was ransomed by our Lord's death. As a member 
of the fallen race, he was an imperfect man, 
and although redeemed, and although a restitution 
to human perfection is provided for him 
in the divine plan, we are not certain that he 
is yet a perfect man. For the Apostle seems to 
teach that none of those whose faithfulness was 
attested before the Gospel call was made will 
be made perfect until after Christ and his Bride 
are made perfect. He says (Heb. 11:39,40), 



after enumerating many of the ancient worthies, 
Enoch included, verse 5, "These all, having 
obtained witness through faith, received not the 
promise [everlasting life, etc.], God having provided 
some better thing [priority of time as well 
as of honor and position] for us [the Gospel 
Church], that they [the ancient worthies] without 
us [apart from us] should not be MADE PERFECT." 
And since the Church, the body of 
Christ, has not yet been perfected in glory, it 
is but a reasonable inference that wherever 
Enoch is and however happy and comfortable 
he may be he is not yet made a perfect man, 
and will not be until all the members of the 
body of Christ have first been made perfect in 
the divine nature. 

R1434 : page 244 

As to where God took Enoch, we may not 
know, since God has not revealed that. Should 
we speculate as to whether God took him to 
some other world, and for what purpose, it 
would be but an idle speculation. We may 
not be wise above what is written. We may 
be certain, however, that Enoch did not go to 
heaven— the spiritual state or condition— for 
such is the record: "No man hath ascended up 
to heaven but he that came down from heaven- 
even the Son of Man." (John 3:13.) Elijah 
is said to have ascended to heaven; but, from 
our Lord's statement above quoted, that must 
be understood to refer to the air— as, when it 
is said that "the fowl fly in the midst of heaven," 
it certainly can not refer to the heavenly 
condition, which flesh and blood cannot enter 
nor even see without a change of nature, which 
has been promised only to the Gospel Church. 

Understanding, as above shown, that Enoch 
was preserved from actual dissolution in death 
—although, already under that sentence, legally 
dead (Rom. 5:12; Matt. 8:22) until the ransom 
price for all was paid by our Lord's death— 
we can see that there will now be no necessity 
for his dissolution, but that when the due time 
shall have come he may be fully and completely 
restored from even the measure of human imperfection 
he had inherited, to full, perfect 
manhood. 

So, too, it will be with those of the world 
who will be living when the "times of restitution" 
are fully ushered in: it will not be 
necessary for them to go into the tomb. For 
although they are already legally dead, in that 
condemnation [or sentence] to "death passed 
upon all men," yet their penalty has also been 



legally met by another, Christ. He now holds 
the judgment against all, but graciously offers 
to cancel it entirely for each one who will accept 
restitution to life and perfection on the 
conditions of the New Covenant. 

As during this Gospel age the Church, although 
once, under sentence, they were dead 
in trespasses and sins, are reckoned as freed 
from condemnation, as justified, and as having 
passed from death unto life when they accept 
Christ's merit under the New Covenant, so 
it will be in the Millennial age with those of 
the world who, upon learning it, accept God's 
offer of life. They also will be reckoned as 
having passed from death unto life— as though 
they had been utterly dead and then been 
awakened. So complete is the reckoning that 
those who then sin wilfully, and forfeit their 
reckoned life, die the second death, although 
they all may not actually have died before. 
And indeed so, too, it is now with the Gospel 
Church— if after we, through faith in Christ, 
are reckoned as no longer dead, but alive toward 
God through Jesus Christ, we were to sin 
wilfully, intentionally, we would thus bring 
upon ourselves again (a second time) the full 
penalty of sin, death, and this would be the 
second death. 

But while there are such similarities between 
the Lord's methods now and in the next age 
for justification to life, or passing from death 
unto life reckonedly, there are very different 
arrangements for the two ages for the actual 
passing out of death into life, when the trial 
of each is finished. The Church of the Gospel 
age walks by faith entirely, and not by sight. 
Her trial occurs before the actual setting up of 
the Kingdom, and hence each one, as he finishes 
his course, must wait for the crown of 
life. They "all die like men," and the world 
recognizes no difference. But while they actually 
die the same as other men, God keeps up 
the reckoned difference between those who have 
accepted his offer of life and become his children 
and others who have not done so. Hence 
in Scripture believers are not said to be dead, 
but to be sleeping until the "morning," when, 
according to God's pre-arranged plan, such shall 
have actually and in full measure the life now 
reckoned as theirs under God's covenant in 
Christ. Thus our Lord spoke of Lazarus and 
others as sleeping, and the Apostles' writings 
refer to "those who sleep in Jesus." And the 
Scriptures, throughout, preserve the same sentiment, 
saying: "Weeping may endure for a 
night, but joy cometh in the morning;" "I 



shall be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness," 
etc. The only exceptions to this "sleeping" 
are particularly mentioned by the Apostle when 
he says, "We shall not all sleep, although we 
must all be changed." Those living in the 

R1434 : page 245 

time when our Lord begins to take his great 
power and reign, although they all must die, 
because consecrated even unto death, yet they 
will not "sleep," their "change" to spirit-being 
coming in the moment of dying. And 
in this blessed time (according to the evidences 
presented in Millennial Dawn, Vols. II. and 
III.) we believe we have been living since 
April, 1878 A.D. What a blessing this is we 
find stated by our Lord, saying, "Blessed are 
the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth 
—yea, saith the Spirit, they rest from their 
labors [from weariness, etc.], but their works 
[not discontinued in the sleep of death] follow 
with them. "-Rev. 14:13. 

But during the Millennial age it will be somewhat 
different. While then, as now, all who 
accept the New Covenant will at once be 
reckoned as having passed from death unto life, 
they will no more get the perfect life instantly 
than we do now. They will get it at the end 
of the Millennial age, as we get it in the end 
of the Gospel age. Yet not just the same; for 
the Gospel Church, as we have seen, has waited 
in the sleep of death for the close of the age 
and the reward of the perfect life, while the 
faithful of the Millennial age, instead of dying, 
will gradually improve in health— mental, moral 
and physical— until perfection will be reached 
by all such, at the close of the Millennial age. 
Meantime, those who sin wilfully against full 
light and full ability will be accounted to have 
committed the sin unto death; and death to 
such, even if born in the Millennium, will be the 
second death, because they will be reckoned as 
having passed out of Adamic death when brought 
to a knowledge of the ransom and of their probation 
for life through the New Covenant. 



R1434 : page 245 
"ONE HOPE." 



There has been a great deal said and written 



on hope; there is being a great deal said and 

written on it; and yet what constitutes the 

"One Hope" seems to be, to many minds, as 

vague as ever. Some claim "the large hope," 

others "the larger hope," and others again 

"the largest hope." Anything more vague 

than such phrases is scarcely conceivable. In 

the same way, some seem to prefer the small 

hope, others the smaller hope, and others again 

the smallest hope, as though they had concluded 

that the smaller their hope the more 

certain would be its genuineness. The extent 

of the hope, whether it be large or small, 

does not constitute its genuineness. It may 

be the largest conceivable and yet be a counterfeit, 

and it may be the smallest conceivable 

and still be no better. All depends upon the 

elements of the hope being right and its foundation 

R1435 : page 245 

adequate. There is much to be learned 

by considering the phrases which inspired men 

have used regarding hope. 

"NO HOPE." 

In writing to the Ephesians, the Apostle Paul 
reminded them of a time when they had no 
hope: "Remember [said he] that ye, being in 
time past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called 
Uncircumcision by that which is called Circumcision 
in the flesh made by hands: that at that 
time ye were without Christ, being aliens from 
the commonwealth of Israel and strangers from 
the covenants of promise, having no hope, and 
without God in the world." (Eph. 2:11,12.) 
The Apostle did not mean that they had no 
hope of anything. Like other men, those 
Ephesians had hope of a great many things, but 
at the time referred to they had no hope of the 
things in question. The things in question are 
"the unsearchable riches of Christ," and at 
the time referred to they were "without Christ." 
Before Christ came the descendants of Israel, 
called "the Circumcision," had a polity or 
citizenship of their own, but the other nations 
of the earth, called "the Uncircumcision," 
had neither part nor lot in the matter. Before 
Christ came the Circumcision were under "covenants 
of promise," but the Uncircumcision 
were "strangers and foreigners" to all that they 
contained. The Ephesians were a fair sample 
of the Gentiles generally. Without the Christ 
all men are without "the hope" in the world. 



R1435 : page 246 

"THE HOPE." 

The one hope is designated "the hope of the 
gospel" (Col. 1:23), "the hope of eternal 
life" (Tit. 3:7), "the hope of salvation" 
(1 Thes. 5:8), "the hope of glory" (Col. 1:27), 
etc. Nothing could be more specific. It 
is not a hope, but the hope. It is not some 
general hope, but this particular one— the hope 
comprising the specified elements. The specific 
character of the hope is emphasized by all 
the apostles, but by none more so than the 
Apostle Paul. Take another example. Referring 
to the Gentiles in Christ being built upon 
the same foundation as the Israelites in Christ, 
he says: "Now therefore ye are no more strangers 
and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the 
saints, and of the household of God: and are 
built upon the foundation of the apostles and 
prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief 
corner-stone." "For this cause I, Paul, the 
prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles, if ye 
have heard of the dispensation of the grace of 
God which is given me to you-ward: how that 
by revelation he made known to me the mystery, 
which in other ages was not made known 
unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed 
unto his holy apostles and prophets by the 
Spirit, that the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, 
and of the same body, and partakers of his 
promise in Christ by the gospel." "I, therefore, 
the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that 
ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye 
are called, with all lowliness and meekness, 
with longsuffering, forbearing one another in 
love; endeavoring to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one 
body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in 
one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, 
one baptism, one God and Father of all, who 
is above all, and through all, and in you all." 
(Eph. 2: 19 to 4:6.) "The household of God" 
is no longer composed exclusively of Israelites, 
but of those out of every nation; and its one 
foundation is occupied by Israelites and non-Israelites 
alike. The anxiety of the apostle is 
that "the unity of the Spirit" may be kept in 
the bond of peace. He enumerates the elements 
of that unity. They are seven units; 
and one of those units is the "one hope." 
There can no more be two hopes in "the unity 
of the Spirit" than there can be two Lords or 
two Gods in it. 



"THE HOPE OF ISRAEL." 

The one hope is the hope of Israel. The 
Jews accused the Apostle Paul of heresy, and 
he was under examination before Felix. When 
Festus succeeded Felix, Paul was in prison at 
Caesarea. The Jews wanted Paul sent to Jerusalem 
for trial, Paul appealed unto Caesar, and 
Festus sent him to Rome. At Rome Paul 
called the chief of the Jews together, and having 
explained to them his position he declared: 
"For this cause therefore have I called for you, 
to see you, and to speak with you, because for 
the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain." 
They expressed their desire to hear him concerning 
the "sect" which was everywhere 
spoken against, "and when they had appointed 
him a day, there came many to him into 
his lodging; to whom he expounded and testified 
the kingdom of God, persuading them 
concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses 
and out of the prophets, from morning till evening. 
And some believed the things which 
were spoken, and some believed not." Then 
Paul applied to those who believed not the 
words of "the Holy Spirit by Esaias the 
prophet" (Isa. 6:9,10), and concluded with 
this emphatic announcement: "Be it known 
therefore unto you, that the Salvation of God 
is sent unto the Gentiles, and that they will 
hear it." (Acts 28:16-31.) There are three 
phrases here— "the Salvation of God," "the 
kingdom of God," and "the hope of Israel." 
They are practically the equivalents of each 
other, and cover "those things which concern 
the Lord Jesus Christ." Israel, of course, is 
the nation composed of the patriarchs, Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob, and their descendants; 
and the hope of Israel is the blessedness promised 
to that nation, and through it to all the 
nations of the earth. The Salvation of God is 
another way of expressing the blessedness promised 
in the Abrahamic covenant, and the Kingdom 
of God is the medium through which that 
blessedness is to be realized; so that whatever 

R1435 : page 247 

there is in the Kingdom of God, and in the 
salvation of God, there is also in the hope of 
Israel, and vice versa. 

"THE HOPE OF THE PROMISE." 

The hope of Israel is the hope of the promise. 
Before the Apostle Paul was sent to Rome, 



and while under examination at Caesarea, he 
testified, saying: "My manner of life from my 
youth, which was at first among my own nation 
at Jerusalem, know all the Jews; which knew 
me from the beginning, if they would testify, 
that after the most straitest sect of our religion 
I lived a Pharisee. And now I stand and am 
judged for the hope of the promise made of God 
unto our fathers: unto which promise our twelve 
tribes, instantly serving God day and night, 
hope to come. For which hope's sake, King 
Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews. Why 
should it be thought a thing incredible with 
you that God should raise the dead?" (Acts 26:4-8.) 
Hope is impossible without a promise. 
Genuine hope is impossible without an 
adequate promise. The one hope is impossible 
without the Divine promise. The Divine promise 
is the foundation upon which the one hope 
rests. The foundation of the one hope is not 
any Divine promise, nor every Divine promise, 
but the Divine promise— "the promise made 
of God unto our fathers." The particulars of 
the promise can be easily traced. To Abraham 
the Lord said: "Get thee out of thy country, 
and from thy kindred, and from thy father's 
house, unto a land that I will show thee, and I 
will make of thee a great nation, and I will 
bless thee and make thy name great; and thou 
shalt be a blessing; and I will bless them that 
bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee, 
and in thee shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed." "And I will establish My covenant 
between Me and thee and thy seed after 
thee in their generations for an everlasting 
(age-lasting) covenant, to be a God unto thee 
and thy seed after thee." To Isaac the Lord 
said: "Go not down unto Egypt, dwell in the 
land which I shall tell thee of; sojourn in this 
land, and I will be with thee, and will bless 
thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give 
all these countries, and I will perform the oath 
which I swore unto Abraham thy father; and 
I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of 
Heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these 
countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations 
of the earth be blessed." And to Jacob the 
Lord said: "I am the Lord God of Abraham thy 
father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon 
thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy 
seed; and thy seed shall be as the dust of the 
earth, and thou shall spread abroad to the west, 
and to the east, and to the north, and to the 
south; and in thee and in thy seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12:2-3; 
17:1-7; 26:1-4; 28:10-15.) In these 



particulars of the promise there are several elements, 
some of which require special attention. 

1 .—The Blessedness promised. The root of 
the blessedness is the resurrection of the dead. 
Hence the interrogation which the Apostle 
Paul addressed to King Agrippa touching the 
hope of the promise: "Why should it be thought 
a thing incredible with you that God should 
raise the dead?" (Acts 26:8.) It is the fact 
that the resurrection of the dead is the root of 
blessedness promised which gives to the interrogation 
its point. Were the resurrection of the 
dead not the root of the blessedness promised, 
Paul's question in such a connection would be 
senseless. But Paul did not indulge in senseless 
questions; and this one is most pertinent. 
The blessedness promised is the removal of the 
curse which is resting upon man and his entire 
environment, and that curse cannot be removed 
without his resurrection from the dead. Resurrection 
is a re-standing or standing again, 
not in some stage of a fallen or lapsed state or 
condition, but in Adam's original state and 
condition, which was in every respect "very 
good." (Gen. 1:31.) Resurrection is complete 
restoration to the state and condition in 
which Adam left the hands of his Creator. 
The resurrection of a "blind" man is complete 
when he sees as clearly as Adam ever saw; 
the resurrection of a "deaf" man is complete 
when he hears as acutely as Adam ever heard; 
the resurrection of a "dumb" man is complete 
when he speaks as fluently as Adam ever spoke; 
the resurrection of a "leper" is complete when 
he is as clean as Adam ever was; and the resurrection 

R1435 : page 248 

of a "lunatic" is complete when he is as 

sane as Adam ever was. In like manner every 

element of every disease, defect, deformity, 

R1436 : page 248 

weakness, etc., physical and mental, might be 
enumerated, and whatever it may be the resurrection 
of its subject is complete when he is 
delivered from it. The resurrection of the dead 
varies as to time, order, manner, etc. That is 
only of secondary importance. It is of first 
importance, however, to see that the resurrection 
is re-standing in man's original state and 
condition; and that that is the root of the 
blessedness promised by Jehovah. 

2. The Extent of the blessedness promised. 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and their seed are 



to be blessed. That is the Israelitish part of 
the promise. All the nations of the earth are 
to be blessed. That is the non-Israelitish part 
of the promise. It is not Abraham alone, nor 
Isaac alone, nor Jacob alone who is to be 
blessed, but all three individually. Nor is it 
merely those three fathers who are to be blessed, 
but the whole of their children as well. It is 
not some particular generation or generations 
of the patriarchal seed who are to be blessed, 
but the whole of their generations. Nor is it 
some particular generation or generations of 
all the nations of the earth who are to be 
blessed, but the whole of their generations. 
This, that, or the other generation or generations 
of one nation is not the equivalent of one 
nation, nor is this, that, or the other generation 
or generations of all nations the equivalent 
of "all nations;" in each case it is only a part, 
and a part is not the equivalent of the whole. 
The one part of the promise covers every individual 
of the Israelitish nation, and the other 
part of the promise covers every individual of 
all the other nations of the earth without exception, 
past, present, or future. 

To have "The hope of the promise" in its 
integrity it is necessary to have the promise in 
its integrity, and to have the promise in its integrity 
it is necessary to have at least its two 
major parts in their integrity. To limit or 
emasculate either of these parts is suicidal. If 
the Israelite limits or emasculates the Israelitish 
part of the Abrahamic Covenant he excludes 
himself from it, and if the non-Israelite limits 
or emasculates the non-Israelitish part of it he 
does the same. Neither the one nor the other 
can then show that he is included in it. Wish, 
desire, or expectation, ill or well-founded, he 
may have, but "The hope of the promise made 
of God unto our fathers" he cannot have. 

3. The Medium of the blessedness promised. 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and their seed are 
the medium. Not the whole of Abraham's seed, 
but his seed in that particular line:— "And 
God said to Abraham, As for Sarai, thy wife, 
thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah 
shall her name be. And I will bless her, and 
give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless 
her, and she shall be a mother of nations; 
kings of people shall be of her." "Sarah, thy 
wife, shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou 
shalt call his name Isaac, and I will establish 
My covenant with him for an everlasting (age-lasting) 
covenant, and with his seed after him." 
(Gen. 17:15-19.) Referring to this election, 
the Apostle Paul wrote:— "They are not all 



Israel which are of Israel; neither because they 

are the seed of Abraham are they all children; 

but, In Isaac shall thy seed be called. That 

is, they which are the children of the flesh, 

these are not the children of God; but the 

children of the promise are counted for the 

seed." (Rom. 9:6-8.) Abraham's wife was 

"barren," and they were both "old and well-stricken 

in age." What could Abraham do 

under such circumstances? He could believe 

"God who quickeneth (maketh alive) the 

dead;" and that was exactly what he eventually 

did: "Being not weak in faith, he considered 

not his own body now dead, when he 

was about a hundred years old, neither yet the 

deadness of Sarah's womb; he staggered not 

at the promise of God through unbelief, but 

was strong in faith, giving glory to God; and 

being fully persuaded that what He hath promised 

He was able to perform. And therefore 

it was imputed to him for righteousness." 

(Rom. 4:13-22.) Thus Isaac was brought 

forth. In reference to this son of promise, 

God afterwards said to Abraham: "Take now 

thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, 

and get thee into the land of Moriah; and 

offer him there for a burnt-offering." (Gen. 22:2.) 

R1436 : page 249 

What could Abraham do now? He 
could obey God; and that was exactly what he 
did: "By faith Abraham, when he was tried, 
offered up Isaac, and he that had received the 
promises offered up his only begotten son, of 
whom it was said that In Isaac shall thy seed 
be called, accounting that God was able to raise 
him up, even from the dead; from whence also 
he received him in a figure." (Heb. 11:17-19.) 
Thus Isaac was brought forth the second time. 
The elect seed is the seed of "promise" 
throughout. The elect seed in "figure" was 
the seed of promise, and the elect seed in reality 
is also the seed of promise. The Apostle 
Paul identifies the real seed most unmistakably: 
"Now to Abraham and his seed were the 
promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, 
as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, 
which is Christ." Not the Christ in one person 
merely, but the Christ in many persons: 
"For ye are all the children of God, by faith 
in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have 
been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. 
There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither 
male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ 
Jesus. And if ye be Christ's then are ye 



Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the 
promise."— Gal. 3:16-29. 

The medium of the blessedness was incomplete 
while it was merely "according to the 
flesh:" it required to be "according to the 
Spirit" also. Hence in writing respecting its 
Root, the Apostle Paul describes Him as having 
been "made of the seed of David according 
to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of 
God with power, according to the Spirit of 
holiness, by the resurrection from the dead." 
"Whose are the fathers, and of whom concerning 
the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God 
blessed for ever. Amen." (Rom. 1:1-4; 9:5.) 
It was necessary that Christ should come according 
to the flesh in order that man might 
be redeemed; and He redeemed man from the 
curse by becoming a curse for him: "Christ 
hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, 
being made a curse for us: for it is written, 
Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree: 
that the blessing of Abraham might come on 
the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we 
might receive the promise of the Spirit through 
faith." (Gal. 3:13,14.) The death of Christ 
was necessary, but the death of Christ in itself 
is not the medium of blessedness. There is no 
blessedness in death, but the death of Christ 
prepared the way for untainted life. Untainted 
life is the cardinal element of blessedness; 
and the Root of it is the Christ— "the Resurrection 
and the Life." In resurrection, in life, in 
incorruptibility, in immortality, and having all 
authority and power in heaven and on earth, 
Christ is the Root of the medium of blessedness 
for all the nations of the earth. In the complete 
medium of blessedness there are natures 
both human and divine. In those natures there 
are many ranks, and from the lowest to the 
highest of them Christ "is over all, God blessed 
for ever. Amen." 

"THE HOPE AND RESURRECTION." 

The Apostle Paul had often to defend his 
position. Sometimes his defence was before a 
sacred and at other times before a secular tribunal, 
but the ground-work of it was always 
substantially the same. When at Jerusalem, 
Paul was accused of polluting the Temple. This 
caused a great tumult, and some of the Jews 
"went about to kill him." The captain took 
him in charge, and "carried him into the 
castle." The next day, "because he would 
have known the certainty whereof he was accused 
of the Jews, he loosed him from his 



bands, and commanded the chief priests and 
all their council to appear, and brought Paul 
down, and set him before them." In his defence, 
"when Paul perceived that the one part 
were Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, he 
cried out in the council, Men and brethren, I 
am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: of the hope 
and resurrection of the dead I am called in 
question." (Acts 21 to 23.) "The Hope," "the 
Hope of Israel," "the Hope of the promise," and 
"the Hope and resurrection" are not so many 
different Hopes, but the "One Hope" presented 
under different phases. The hope was 
given to Israel, and is phrased "the hope of 
Israel;" the hope rests upon the promise of 
Jehovah, and is phrased "the hope of the 
promise;" and the hope in realization is the 

R1436 : page 250 

resurrection of the dead, and is phrased, "The 
hope and resurrection." When the phraseology 
of inspired men is ascertained and remembered 
their ideas may be apprehended, but 
without their phraseology their ideas are impossible 
of apprehension. In connection with no 
subject is it more important to bear this in 
mind than in connection with the present one, 
it being fundamental to every Christian. In 
his day, the Apostle Paul raised the One Hope 
as his rallying cry: "Touching the resurrection 
of the dead I am called in question by you this 
day" (Acts 24:21); and from that day to this 
it has been the only adequate rallying cry for 
the Church of the living God. 

Because all men will eventually be raised 
from the first death to the second life, and that 
with all of life's original concomitants, it does 
not follow that all men will always live. They 
may, or they may not, according to each individual 
case. That was Adam's position at the 
beginning. He refused to conform to the law 
of the first life, and he incurred its penalty— the 
first death; and any man who may refuse to 
conform to the law of the second life will incur 
its penalty— "the second death." The promise 
made of God unto our fathers guarantees to 
every man the second life, but it guarantees no 
man against the second death. It is not God's 
purpose to unman any man. In voluntary obedience 
the second life is to be perpetuated, and 
in wilful disobedience it is to be terminated. 

"The grace of God has appeared, bringing 
salvation to all men, instructing us, to the intent 
that, denying ungodliness and worldly 
lusts, we should live soberly and righteously 



and godly in this present world; looking for 
the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of 
our great God and Savior Jesus Christ."— 
Tit. 2:11,12. -JOSEPH MOFFITT. 



R1437 : page 250 
UNIVERSAL SALVATION. 



"We trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all 
men, especially of those that believe."— 1 Tim. 4:10. 

It is very generally conceded among Christians 
that Universalists are the only class of 
people who have any claim upon, or use for, 
this text of Scripture; but although we are not 
Universalists, we also, with Paul, trust in the 
living God [Jehovah], who is the Savior of all 
men, especially of those that believe. Thus 
the Apostle declares that in one sense the salvation 
which God has promised is to be universal, 
while in another sense it is to be restricted 
to believers. 

A little reflection upon the general teaching 
of the Scriptures makes the Apostle's meaning 
here very evident. Nowhere in the Scriptures 
is eternal life promised to any except on conditions 
of faith in Christ the Redeemer, and repentance, 
or change of heart from sin to righteousness 
—"For there is no other name under 
heaven which has been given among men, by 
which we can be saved;" and "Now God commandeth 
all men, every where, to repent, because 
he hath appointed a day in the which he 
will judge the world in righteousness by that 
man whom he hath ordained, whereof he hath 
given assurance unto all men, in that he hath 
raised him from the dead." (Acts 4:12; 17:30,31.) 
And the numerous exhortations to 
faith and repentance, as the prerequisites on 
man's part to salvation, are too familiar to every 
Christian to need repetition here. We merely 
cite a few. See John 3:15,36; 6:47; Acts 13:39; 
Mark 6:12; Luke 13:3,5; Acts 3:19. 

In harmony with this teaching of the Scriptures, 
we therefore understand the Apostle's 
statement to signify that God is the Savior of 
all men from the Adamic death, or the death 
into which all were precipitated by Adamic 
transgression, in that he hath provided a redemption 
for all. In thus providing salvation 
and ultimately offering it to all men as a free 
gift of his grace, through Jesus Christ, who is 



"the propitiation for the sins of the whole 
world," God stands in the attitude of a savior 
toward all men. He is the Savior whether 
all men accept the proffered salvation or not. 
But, while thus the Savior of all, there is a 
particular or special sense in which God is the 
Savior of those that believe and accept this reconciliation 

R1437 : page 251 

and the opportunity offered of 
making it everlasting salvation. This salvation 
is conditional: "Believe in the Lord Jesus 
Christ and thou shalt be saved." (Acts 16:31.) 
This is an unequivocal promise of actual and 
permanent salvation to every individual who 
believes, i.e., heartily accepts. To such an one, 
God not only stands in the attitude of a savior, 
ready and willing to save, but he will go 
farther and actually accomplish his salvation; 
and this is the special sense in which he is the 
Savior of them that believe. Between the general 
sense in which he is the Savior of all men, 
and this special sense in which he is the Savior 
of them that believe, there is, therefore, all the 
difference between a possible and an actual, a 
proffered and an accepted salvation. 

The general difficulty with Christian people 
on this subject is, that they do not admit that 
God is the Savior of all men— that he stands 
ready and willing to deliver all from sin and 
death into life and liberty of righteousness. 
Some declare that he stands ready to be the 
Savior of all "the elect." Others, while claiming 
that God is willing and ready to save all, 
practically deny it by claiming that the necessary 
believing must be done in the present life — 
which practically excludes three-fourths of the 
race from any opportunity of sharing in it, 
since more than that proportion have died without 
any knowledge of the only name given 
under heaven or among men, whereby we must 
be saved. This view contradicts God's Word; 
because for even one member of the human 
race to be left unprovided for— to be left without 
the needful information and opportunity- 
would render false the statement which God 
makes, that he stands as a Savior to all men. 
The entire matter is clear, however, when viewed 
from the standpoint of the Plan of the Ages— 
which shows that through the redemptive work 
of Christ God has provided salvation for all 
from all that "was lost" in Adam; and that 
the knowledge necessary to the acceptance of 
this provided gift, while it has reached only the 
few in the present life, is to be testified to all 



in due time— in the coming age, in which Christ 
and his Church shall reign over and bless, with 
his gracious offer, all the families of the earth. 

God has appointed means of salvation, of 
which every one who is sick of sin and desirous 
of a return to his love and service will gladly 
avail himself. At great cost it was purchased— 
even at the sacrifice of the "only-begotten" 
and well-beloved Son, who freely gave himself 
for us all. (John 3:16.) Condemnation unto 
death passed upon us through our father Adam, 
while we were yet in his loins and were therefore 
represented in him; but the death of the 
Son of God, "the man Christ Jesus," as a 
ransom or substitute for Adam, taking his place 
in death, legally released, not only Adam, but 
also all his posterity, from death. Thus, legally, 
the salvation of the race was secured— made 
possible— possible for God to be "just and yet 
the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus" 
(Rom. 3:26)— when the sacrifice of Christ 
Jesus was finished on the cross: and this is what 
our Lord meant when, dying, he bowed his head 
and said, "It is finished." And of its actual 
accomplishment toward all them that believe, 
"God hath" as the Apostle states, "given full 
assurance in that he hath raised him from the 
dead;" not indeed again in the flesh [The 
body of his humiliation was taken by him 
merely for the suffering of death, because, as 
by man (Adam) came death, by man also (the 
perfect man and therefore the acceptable sacrifice, 
Christ Jesus) must come the resurrection 
or salvation from the dead.]— but to the divine 
nature, a spirit being, endued with all power 
in heaven and in earth. He is therefore abundantly 
able to accomplish the great work of restitution 
of the dead— of whosoever wills to accept 
everlasting life on the terms and conditions 
of the New Covenant. 

But before this provided salvation can become 
actual or special to any individual, such 
an one must believe the testimony of God with 
reference to the matter, as expressed in his Word. 
He must realize (1) that he is imperfect, a 
sinner, unworthy of everlasting life; (2) he 
must recognize the man Christ Jesus as his 
personal redeemer, as the one through whose 
meritorious sacrifice for human sins comes the 
privilege of reconciliation with God and the 

R1438 : page 251 

consequent return to perfection and lasting life. 
All who thus believe and who act accordingly, 



R1438 : page 252 

i.e., who accept the proffered salvation as the 
free and unmerited "gift of God our Savior," 
secured for us by him through the Atonement 
for sins provided in the sacrifice at Calvary— 
and who, in accordance with this faith, reform 
their lives, submitting themselves thereafter to 
the will of God— these shall in due time fully 
realize the special or actual salvation promised 
in the above text. 

In accepting Christ as the Redeemer, the 
believing one is reckoned as no longer a dying 
son of the dead Adam, but as a living son of 
the "last Adam" (1 Cor. 15:45), having a 
new life in Christ. "Therefore if any man be 
in Christ [i.e., represented in Christ instead of 
in Adam, as formerly], he is a new creature" 
[newly "created in Christ Jesus" (Eph. 2:10) 
— reckonedly; and in due time, if he "abide in 
him," he will be a new creature actually].— 
2 Cor. 5:17. Such have, in God's estimation 
and in their own, "passed from death unto life:" 
being justified by faith they are no longer under 
condemnation.— Rom. 8:1. 

Thus (by faith) we are transferred from the 
dead head of the race, Adam, to the living head 
of the redeemed race, Christ Jesus. And if any 
man be thus in Christ he is a new creature 
(2 Cor. 5:17): old things— the old love of sin, 
the old disposition to do evil, and the old 
worldly and selfish ambitions, strifes, etc.— no 
longer please and satisfy his new mind. Their 
power of control has passed away, and behold, 
all things have become new. He begins to 
realize a new spirit, a new disposition within 
him; and therefore he has new hopes, new joys, 
new ambitions, a new heart [will] for love and 
joy and peace, and a blessed sense of the divine 
approval; and he looks forward with joyful 
anticipation, realizing that his destiny is 
eternal life. But out of Christ there is no life, 
no hope; and those who have not come into 
him by faith still abide under the Adamic condemnation. 
However, as already shown, it is 
the purpose of God that in "due time" these 
truths shall be so clearly testified to every man 
that all will have the fullest opportunity to believe 
and thus to come into Christ and through 
him inherit eternal life. See 1 Tim. 2:4-6. 

The time for fully realizing the special, actual 
salvation is the Millennial age: the sense 
in which any possess it now is by faith; for 
"we walk by faith and not by sight" until the 
appointed time— the Millennial age. Then the 
faithful Bride class will be perfected as spirit-beings 



like their Lord; and thenceforth the 
reconciliation of the world will be accompanied 
by gradual restitution to human perfection, 
which salvation, if they are worthy, at the close 
of the Millennium will become everlasting 
salvation. 



R1437 : page 252 

ALL IN ADAM AND ALL IN CHRIST. 



"As all in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be 
made alive. But every man [of those in Christ to be 
made alive will get life] in his own order [company or 
band]: the first fruits, Christ [The head, Jesus; the 
body, the faithful "Church, which is his body"], afterward 
those who are Christ's at [during] his presence" 
[Greek, parousia.]— 1 Cor. 15:22,23. 

We thus correct the translation of a passage 
very frequently misused to prove the everlasting 
salvation of all men irrespective of their 
acceptance of Christ as their Redeemer and 
King. But as here translated this passage is 
in perfect accord with the remainder of the 
Bible, which everywhere declares that, "He that 
hath the Son hath life; he that hath not the Son of 
God hath not life."— 1 John 5:12; John 3:36. 

But, aside from the testimony of other scriptures, 
we call attention to the facts that the 
Greek text supports the above translation and 
that no other view of verse 22 could be reconciled 
with the context, verses 23,24. Note 
carefully that the expression, "But every man 
in his own company," refers to the all who are 
to be made alive. Then notice that but two 
companies are specified. The chief of these is 
mentioned first, and includes the Redeemer and 
all of the Gospel age overcomers who are now 
having fellowship in "his sufferings"— "his 
death"— and who shall be accounted worthy 
also to have share in "his resurrection," a resurrection 
to the immortal glories of the divine 

R1437 : page 253 

nature. (Compare 2 Pet. 1:4; Phil. 3:10,11.) 
The second company includes, specifically, 
"those who are Christ's in [the time of] his 
presence." And these two companies are the 
"all" of verse 22, who are to be made alive in 
Christ. Could language show more clearly 
than this does that none are to be made alive 



(in the full, complete sense in which the word 
"alive" is here used) except those who in this 
age become the Redeemer's Bride or in the 
next age become his children— begotten through 
faith and developed through obedience? 

The difficulty with many, however, is that 
they have never noticed the full sense of the 
words life and made alive in the Scriptures. 
The whole world is reckoned as already dead— 
because under sentence of death through Adam 
—and unless they eat [assimilate and appropriate 
by faith] the flesh [sacrificed humanity] of 
the Son of Man, they have no life and can have 
no life. And those who do so "eat" are said 
to pass from death unto life now, reckonedly; 
but the actual making alive of such, as stated 
in our text, will be in the Resurrection morning. 
And so it will be with the world in general 
during the Millennium: when awakened 
from the sleep of death they will still be unjustified, 
condemned, dead. But they will be 
awakened by the great Redeemer in order that 
each may have the offer of everlasting life, 
on condition of becoming Christ's, accepting 
his gracious work for them in the past and 
his regulations for their future. Thus they 
may "eat" his flesh— appropriating his merit 
and receiving thereby his strength and life. 
They will be accounted or reckoned as living 
from the time that they begin to "eat," but 
they will not be made alive, perfect, until 
the close of the Millennial age of trial or 
testing. 



page 253 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1438 : page 253 

PHILIP AND THE ETHIOPIAN. 



LESSON XL, SEPT. 11, ACTS 8:26-40. 

Golden Text— "He that believeth on the Son hath 
everlasting life."— John 3:36. 

In this lesson we have a beautiful illustration 
of God's supervision of his own work— a supervision 
which has been exercised throughout 
the entire age, and which the faithful of today, 
as well as of the past, may take comfort 
in considering. The great plan, both for the 
salvation of the world and for the selection of 
the Church as Christ's joint-heirs, is his work; 
and therefore in its minutest particulars and in 
its widest scope we see the evidences of his wisdom 
and grace. Mark in this lesson the special 
direction and leading of his servant Philip, 
and the careful providence over a sincere inquirer 
after truth, the Ethiopian eunuch. 

VERSE 26 shows that an angel was sent so to 
direct Philip's course that he might come in 
contact with one who was an earnest inquirer 
after the truth. And Philip promptly followed 
the angel's leading, though it took him away 
from a seemingly prosperous work, where the 
multitudes heard him gladly, to preach the 
gospel in the wilderness to a single individual. 
Just how the angel of the Lord conveyed his 
message to Philip is not stated, but possibly it 
was by a vision or a dream. 

VERSES 27,28 show with what care this man 
was seeking the truth. He had traveled alone 
a long distance at considerable expense in order 
to join in the worship of God at Jerusalem, and 
now, on his way homeward, he was carefully 
pondering the words of the Prophet. 

VERSES 29,30. As he journeyed through 
the desert and observed the stranger slowly riding 
in his chariot and reading, Philip was 
prompted by the spirit of God, which filled him 
with zeal in his service, to run and overtake 
him, and, when drawing near, he heard him read 
from the Prophet Isaiah, and inquired, saying, 
"Understandest thou what thou readest?" 

VERSE 31. The stranger replied, "How can 
I, except some man should guide me?" and he 
invited him to sit with him in his chariot. 

Here we have another evidence that the eunuch 
was one of "the meek," whom alone the 
Lord has taught us to make special effort to 
reach with the truth, and who alone are hungering 
and thirsting for it. The same spirit of 
meekness that led the eunuch to desire a knowledge 
of God's Word— the heavenly wisdom— 

R1438 : page 254 



prompted him also to confess his ignorance of 
the meaning when asked. Had he been proud 
he would have resented such a question, and 
answered either that he did understand it, or 
else that what he, a man of wealth and education, 
could not understand he need not expect 
to have explained by anyone of Philip's appearance 
and social standing. 

But, on the contrary, having a meek and 
teachable spirit, the bare hint of Philip's words 
was sufficient. He was anxious to learn the 
truth anywhere and from any person, and invited 
the humble looking teacher into his carriage 
to teach him. And we are safe in supposing 
that the great Shepherd is always on the 
lookout for such truth-hungry sheep— to feed 
them meat in due season— now as well as then; 
and whenever special providences are necessary 
in order to reach such they will be exercised. 

Another lesson here taught is respecting 
God's methods. Many believe and teach that 
God by impressions on the mind teaches the 
truth-seeker without the written Word— the 
Bible; others that God teaches by impressions, 
illuminating the Bible to each student individually. 
But this lesson, agreeing with all the 
teachings of the Scriptures on the subject, 
shows God's usual method: he uses his inspired 
Word as the text, and sends his specially qualified 
representatives to expound it, as it becomes 
due to be understood. 

VERSES 32,33. The hand of divine providence 
is here again manifested in the choice of 
the Scripture reading so that Philip might begin 
his teaching at the very foundation principle 
of the doctrine of Christ— how that Christ 
died for our sins according to the Scriptures. 

VERSES 34,35. "And the eunuch answered 
Philip, and said, I pray thee of whom speaketh 
the Prophet this? of himself or some other 
man? Then Philip opened his mouth and began 
at the same Scripture and preached unto 
him Jesus," showing how his sacrifice was the 
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 
and how in deep and voluntary humiliation on 
account of our sins, his judgment— his right to 
life— was taken away; how that because he 
took the sinner's place as a substitute he was 
counted as a sinner, worthy of death, although 
he had no sin. "And who," says the Prophet, 
"shall declare his generation? for his life is 
taken from the earth?" The question is a suggestive 
one, and one which Philip was probably 
able to explain. The underlying thought is 
that though in the dawn and vigor of his manhood 



he was cut off from life without any posterity 
to perpetuate his name, yet he is to have 
a numerous posterity; for God would raise him 
from the dead and he should be, as elsewhere 
stated (Isa. 9:6), "a mighty God, an everlasting 
Father, a Prince of peace." 

VERSES 36,38 show that the teaching of Philip 
must have been very comprehensive: he had 
evidently progressed from the foundation doctrine 
of justification (by faith in Christ the 
Redeemer) to the doctrines of the resurrection 
and the restitution of all things and then to 
the special privilege of the fully consecrated 
during the Gospel age, of becoming joint-heirs 
with Christ and in due time sharing his crown, 
if now they are willing to bear his cross. This 
seems evident from the fact that the man was 
anxious to be baptized at once in this faith— 
another evidence, too, of his prompt acquiescence 
in the will of God, and his desire to be 
in fullest accord and co-operation with him. 

VERSE 37, though true in sentiment, does not 
seem to be a part of the original text, as it does 
not occur in any of the three oldest and most 
reliable Greek manuscripts— the Sinaitic, the 
Vatican and the Alexandrian. See foot notes 
of the Tischendorf New Testament, which gives 
all the variations of these oldest MSS. from the 
common English version. 

VERSES 39,40. Just how the Spirit of God 
caught away Philip is not stated: it was evidently 
a miraculous transportation which Philip 
himself did not understand, and probably did 
not realize until he found himself at Azotus, 
where, and thence on his way to Caesarea, he 
made use of numerous opportunities to preach 
the Word. Doubtless Philip, as well as the 
Ethiopian, went on his way rejoicing. 

What cause for rejoicing both had— the one 
in the blessed new-found hope in the Gospel, 
the other in the additional joy of being recognized 
of God as a chosen vessel to bear his 
name to one of his beloved children. May we 
also have many such occasions for rejoicing in 
God and in his power and providences manifested 
toward and in and through us. Praise 
his dear name for many such favors in the past. 

R1439 : page 254 

III. QUAR., LESSON XII., SEPT. 18, REVIEW. 



In reviewing the lessons of this quarter, 
TOWER readers are referred to comments in 



previous numbers of this magazine. 



page 254 

CHRIST.— Once in all history we meet a being 
who never did an injury, and never resented one 
done to him, never uttered an untruth, never 
practiced a deception, and never lost an opportunity 
of doing good; generous in the midst 
of the selfish, upright in the midst of the sensual, 
and wise far above the wisest of earth's 
sages and prophets, loving and gentle, yet immovably 
resolute; and whose illimitable meekness 
and patience never once forsook him in a 
vexatious, ungrateful, and cruel world.— Sel. 



R1439 : page 255 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 

Georgia. 

DEAR BROTHER:— I have refrained from expressing 
to you the joy and gratitude that I 
have felt for the light thrown upon the Scriptures 
by your writings, through fear that I 
would appear to give glory to man rather than 
to God, from whom I am sensible that the light 
really comes. Still I realize that it is due you, 
as God's willing agent in distributing the light, 
to know something of the joy it has brought me. 

I had long been an earnest student of the 
Word, but because of the many false doctrines 
that I had been taught from infancy to believe 
were supported by the Bible, I was like one 
groping in darkness. About four and a half 
years ago, through the merest accident (as 
some would say), I saw a reference to Millennial 
Dawn in a secular paper. I at once 
ordered the book and shall always thank God 
for that accident. It "opened my eyes to behold 
wondrous things out of his law." Since then 
I have eagerly read every thing I could get 
from your pen: I subscribed at once for the 
TOWER, and could scarcely wait for volumes 
two and three to be out of press before ordering 
—in fact ordered them before they were 
out. Oh, the joy and delight they have given 
me! Words cannot express it! 

But with the sweet has also come the bitter. 
It has compelled me publicly, in the church in 
which I was a member, to renounce the false 
doctrines that I had previously held in common 



with others. This, of course, brought upon me 
much that was painful in the sundering of pleasant 
associations and in misunderstandings and 
isolation. But through it all I have been wonderfully 
supported and strengthened, and have 
verified the promise, "I will give you a mouth 
and wisdom that none of your adversaries can 
gainsay or resist." I have tried earnestly and 
faithfully to present the truth to others, and 
have distributed much of your writings among 
my friends; but have been greatly disappointed 
as to results, as few have shown any special interest, 
none have confessed a belief in the new 
(old) truths, and some of my nearest and dearest 
friends have been greatly shocked and grieved 
by my heresy. 

But I leave all in the hands of the Lord and 
accept every trial and disappointment as a part 
of my testing, and, by the grace of God, I 
will be faithful to the end. But enough of 
this. You are familiar with all the trials that 
are common to those who would, in this evil 
day, be faithful to the truth. I have not accepted 
the truth as presented by you without 
questions, but have diligently searched the Scriptures 
upon every point; and in almost every 
instance I have been able to agree heartily with 
you. And oh, the joy of believing! It has 
changed the whole tenor of my life and thoughts. 
It has made the study of the Scriptures my 
chief delight. I truly meditate upon them 
day and night. Like one of old, I feel like 
saying, "I have esteemed the words of thy 
mouth more than my necessary food." 

Hoping that you may, in the future as in the 
past, be blessed and honored of God as his 
mouthpiece, I remain, yours in the glorious 
hope, L. A. WEATHERLY. 



Indiana. 
DEAR FRIENDS IN CHRIST:-I cannot tell 
you how much benefit my mother and myself 
have derived from MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vols. 
I., II. and III. I have found that in whatever 
company I have mentioned our faith it attracts 
attention. So many have grown restless under 
the old creeds that they hail with delight any 
reasonable explanation of God's dealings with 
the race. For myself, I am thankful that I 
have a God who is both to be loved and to be 
respected. As long as I believed in a Calvinistic 
hell, there lurked in my heart a feeling that a 
more effective and a less cruel way of dealing 
with humanity would be perfectly consistent 



with the idea of a just judge. I thank you for 
showing me the way. The chapter on the 
Pyramid in Volume III. will eventually attract 
the attention of many scientists. A consistent 
explanation like yours will be appreciated in 
time. 

The fact that the doctrine of the inherent 
immortality of the soul is not true was a new 
idea to me. But I traced it back carefully and 
found that it was the foundation doctrine of 
the religions of Egypt and Babylon. Then, 
and not till then, did I realize how the Jewish 
faith differed from the esoteric religion of the 
priests, and why the Jews were prone to wander 
into idolatry. Truly, all Buddhism, Theosophy, 
etc., originated in Eden. "Thou shalt not 
surely die" has been believed, not by Eve 
alone, but by most of her descendants. Pardon 
me for taking your time, but you do not seem 
other than friends to me. 

Yours in Christ, MISS E. L. HAMILTON. 



page 255 



Washington. 

DEAR FELLOW-LABORERS of the Church at 
Allegheny, and others scattered abroad, Greeting 
in the name of our present Redeemer. 

I know that the time to reap has come, for in 
obedience to him who gave the command, I 
have lifted up mine eyes (of discernment), and 

page 256 

behold, the fields are white for harvesting. 
And I know that he that reapeth receiveth 
wages and gathereth fruit unto life eternal. I 
pray the Lord of the harvest that I may be 
among that favored number; and that I may 
have such success in this last harvest reaping 
of earth as will redound to his honor and glory. 
Fraternally yours, R. H. LIST. 



Montana. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have read all 
three volumes of DAWNS three times through, 
my interest increasing with each reading, and 
have found it a means of opening up the Scriptures 
to my understanding. I was brought up 
by Methodist parents, and was consecrated 
twenty years ago, and joined that church. 
Since I have been out in this country, I have 



labored hard for the upbuilding of Methodism 
in this place, and have watched the growth of 
the church here with pride and pleasure; and 
it was with a good deal of hesitancy on my 
part that I withdrew my name and membership 
from the church. It is causing a great 
deal of talk among my brethren with whom I 
have worshiped for the past eight years. But 
I have never enjoyed so much of the presence 
of the Master, or had such peace and joy in the 
spirit of truth, which leadeth into all truth and 
teaches me things to come, as I am now enjoying. 

Reading the Scriptures with the thought in 
mind of the Coming Kingdom seems to open 
up to the light many passages that I never could 
understand; and I cannot begin to express my 
thankfulness for the benefit I have received in 
studying the Word of God from the standpoint 
which you have pointed out in your messages. 

Now I want to ask you to send me a good 
assortment of Old Theology Tracts, and a few 
of the Wonderful Story illustrated. 

Yours in Christ and the truth, 

C. C. FIFIELD. 



Iowa. 

C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR SIR:-You will no 
doubt think me very slow in acknowledging 
the generous bundle of Tracts sent me. Sickness 
has prevented my writing before, but I 
wish to thank you very much for sending them, 
and thus giving me an opportunity to do a very 
little in the good work. I had them distributed 
quite thoroughly, although I was unable 
to superintend the distribution personally. I 
pray the Lord will bless some of the seed thus 
sown. 

For myself I would like to say that the past 
three years have been years of great trial, and 
I have been so overburdened with household 
cares and ill-health that my spiritual nature 
would have been utterly crushed were it not for 
the blessed TOWER, that always comes with 
food just suited to my needs. 

That God may bless you greatly in your 
work is the prayer of your friend in Christ, 
MRS. J. M. WHITE. 



Washington. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-To-night I do say 
with all my heart, "Praise the Lord, O my 
soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy 



name," for the grand and, I trust, saving blessing 

he has bestowed upon me through the MILLENNIAL 

DAWN series. 

I have more or less, ever since I was about 
fifteen or sixteen years of age, been trying to 
serve God and to walk uprightly, but found so 
often that I had most terribly back-slidden. 
When I tried to reason with myself as to why 
I had so fallen, I could not explain it, but felt 
that I needed some stronger meat than I had 
been to that date receiving. I never thought 
of not believing the Word of God; but the explanations 
I listened to from different ministers 
of my own church, as well as of other churches, 
never seemed to be logical or satisfactory. No 
doubt I have been very prone to wander from 
the narrow path and too weak to live before 
the increased light and knowledge of the present 
day. Thank God! however, I do believe 
that I am now in the right company to serve 
him more faithfully. It has always been a 
mystery to me how so different creeds as are 
advanced by our many nominal Christian 
churches could be recognized by our Lord. 

The theory of the Methodist church, of which 
I have been at least in name a member, the 
eternal torment of the unjustified soul and the 
utter hopelessness of those who pass out of this 
life stained with sin, seemed to destroy the 
idea of the endless love of God and the justice 
of judgment; but as I come more and more fully 
into the knowledge of the plan of the ages 
as set forth by God in his Word my heart fills 
with joy. 

I am distributing the fifteen sets of Vols. I., 
II. and III. which I received a few weeks ago. 
Hoping I have not taken too much of your 
valuable time in this expression of my thankfulness 
to you, as God's agent (through another 
believer in MILLENNIAL DAWN), for the meat 
in season, Yours in God's cause, 
W. COYNE. 



page 258 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1440 : page 258 
FAITH AND WORKS. 



Whilst some go to the extreme of saying and 
hoping that their good works will commend 
them to God's favor, regardless of what faith 
they hold, others make the serious mistake of 
supposing that if they hold a correct faith there 
can be no necessity for works. But though 
faith in the redemptive work of Christ is indispensable 
—so that no works of ours would be acceptable 
to God without it— and though clear 
knowledge and faith respecting the divine plan 
are to be desired and sought, yet the objective 
value of all faith and knowledge is to lead the 
believer into works of service for the Lord. 

Nor should we esteem works essential to the 



success of God's plan for the blessing and instruction 
of others; for, if we are unwilling, our 
God is able to use many other agencies. Rather 
we should esteem it a privilege to be co-workers 
with our God, to honor his name and 
to serve his people; and indeed it is thus that 
the worker in the Master's service is blessed— 
every effort to serve his Master adds to his 
strength and joy. The Lord is seeking for 
membership in his Bride such believers as feel 
so full of grateful joy for their own redemption 
and are so anxious to honor and serve their 
Redeemer that they esteem it a privilege to 
work in his service— a privilege to suffer as well 
as to labor for him and in co-operating with 
his plan. 

This being the case, beloved, none of us can 
afford to exercise or cultivate a spirit of idleness. 
Those who idle away their time, and 
those who absorb it all in the service of business, 
or pleasure, or family, or self, are laying 
up no treasure in heaven, however much or little 
they may be laying by on earth. Present 
opportunities for sacrificing service are therefore 
to be esteemed, not only as the greatest 
privileges of the present life, but also as the 
greatest privileges ever offered or to be offered. 

Let each one, then, ask himself— What am I 
doing for God, his plan and his people? If 
you are doing all that you can do, be glad and 
rejoice, even though that all be miserably 
small, even in your own estimation. It is the 
will and effort to DO and to BE that our Redeemer 
regards with loving favor. But if you 
are not doing all that you could do, be dissatisfied 
with yourself; and uneasy lest your 
listlessness and carelessness for his service settle 
it with the Master that you are unworthy 
to share in the work of glory as a member of his 
Church glorified. 

Let each one resolve to do something each 
day to serve our gracious King— not to merit 
salvation, but as the expression of our love for 
him through whom we have redemption, even 
the forgiveness of sins. 

Our Lord does not despise our feeblest efforts 
when prompted by warm, overflowing hearts. 
The servant who has but one talent and uses it 
faithfully will be welcomed as a good and faithful 
servant, as surely as the one who uses faithfully 
two, five or more talents. He that is 
faithful with a little can be trusted with more, 
and he that is unfaithful in the use of one talent 
would be unfaithful with more. And every 
one who uses his talents faithfully finds them 
increasing daily. He who cannot deliver an oration 



can speak a quiet, pointed word, or write 
a letter, or hand a tract, or loan or sell a DAWN. 
When so many privileges abound on every hand, 
surely all have several talents for service. 

Be assured, dearly beloved, that neglect to 
use your privilege of serving the truth will react 
to your spiritual degeneracy. As a sound faith 
is for the purpose of leading to good works, so 
the activity of service is necessary to continued 
purity of faith. It is from this cause that 
many are stumbling into the "outer darkness" 
of agnosticism— doubt, uncertainty. 



R1439 : page 259 

VOL. XIII. SEPTEMBER 1, 1892. NO. 17. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



"Behold, I stand at the door and knock!" 
says the Master, addressing himself to the present 
or Laodicean stage of the Church nominal. 
Yet she is "rich and increased in goods" (in 
supposed world-converting machinery, as well 
as temporally prosperous), self-complacent and 
feeling no need for the second coming of 
the Lord and the establishment of his Kingdom 
to put down all enemies of righteousness, 
and to cause the knowledge of the Lord to fill 
the whole earth. She is so satisfied with the 
present machinery that she believes that she 
can do all this of herself, and would rather dislike 
to have the second advent occur now, to 
spoil her plans and her "many wonderful 
works." (Rev. 3:14-20; Matt. 7:22.) Hence 
she hears not the knockings which from time 
to time declare that he has already come— that 
he is even now present, doing his work, his 
great work [overthrowing the nations], and 
bringing to pass his act, his [to them] strange 
act [of spewing "Laodicea" out of his mouth], 
rejecting the nominal Church systems and casting 
all but the faithful into the outer darkness 
of the world, relative to his plans and doings, 
letting them have a full share in the vexatious 
time of trouble already begun.— Isa. 28:21,22. 

Several loud raps have recently been given, 
so loud that even the worldly begin to inquire 
what they mean. Within the past two months, 
one loud, long knock came at Homestead and 
generally in the vicinity of Pittsburg. Another 
was heard in the Rocky Mountain mines. 



Another was heard in the coal-mining towns of 
Tennessee; another along the railroad lines in 
New York state; another in labor circles in 
France; another in the cholera plague visiting 
Europe. 

Not that the Lord directly caused or approves 
of the rioting or bloodshed; but that these 
things are related to the day of his presence, 
the "day of trouble," with which the Gospel 
age will close and the Millennial age be ushered 
in— a day of distress and perplexity upon men, 
upon nations, and upon the Laodicean church— 
a day of vengeance and righteous retribution. 

But whilst men's hearts are "failing them 
for fear and for looking after [forward to] those 
things coming upon the earth," of which present 
rumblings are but premonitions, an excellent 
opportunity is afforded, for those who 
understand the situation, to preach the Gospel 
of the Kingdom to all who have an ear for 
the message. These rumblings mean the breaking 
in pieces of the powers that be, the Gentile 
governments, which for now nearly 2500 years 
have, under Satan's blinding and by God's 
permit, ruled the world under the law of selfishness. 
The Scriptures have foretold the utter 
dissolution of society as at present organized, 
and the reconstruction of it upon principles of 
righteousness and love, under the great Prince 
Immanuel— upon whose reign all the gracious 
prophecies of peace and blessing and good 
will toward men depend; and for whose kingdom 
to come the whole creation (although 
ignorantly) is "groaning and travailing in pain 
together, waiting for the manifestation of the 

R1439 : page 260 

sons of God" [the Church— the Christ, head 

and body], in the power and glory of the Kingdom 

promised. 

Let each of us who is informed through the 
Lord's Word be on the alert to invent and to 
wisely use the many opportunities now, thus 
afforded for preaching the good tidings of great 
joy which shall be unto all people. But great 
prudence is needed, and wisdom from on high 
should be sought, else the results may be injurious 
rather than beneficial. The right words 
at the right time will surely do good; while 
ill-chosen words or an inopportune time may 
prejudice the mind so as to hinder some from 
seeing the beauty of the Lord's plan for years 
to come. Our Lord's words, "Be ye wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves," should never 
be forgotten. 



Sometimes, and with some people, the loan 
of a "Dawn" or of an Old Theology Tract, 

R1440 : page 260 

with very few words, is the wise course. At 
other times the words introducing the reading 
matter are all-important. And the true, earnest 
minister (servant) of the truth will lose 
sight of self, and all disposition to vaunt his 
knowledge of the Lord's word and plan, and 
will seek merely the glory of God and the 
blessing of his hearers. 

Tell the story as simply, as kindly and as 
truthfully as possible. Overstatements harm the 
cause they would advance. Do justice to all 
concerned. "Let your moderation be known 
unto all men"— whichever side of the question 
they may take and however partisan they 
may be. Let your counsel and influence always 
stand for peace and right and order, however 
you may seek to make apology for blinded law-breakers 
on either side of any question. A 
poor law is better than no law. Lawlessness 
has no sanction in God's book, nor in the example 
of any held up to us by it as worthy of 
emulation; but the reverse: God is a God of 
order and of law, and all who have his spirit 
will be friends of order. True, all law and 
order will be overthrown in this day of trouble, 
and that by divine permission; but so long as 
there is any law, all who are God's people 
should respect it. When the Apostle said that 
we should "be subject to the powers that be," 
he did not add so long as the laws are perfectly 
just and equal. No: he knew, as we know, 
that laws made by imperfect men cannot be 
perfect laws. Our only question about obeying 
the laws must be if they conflict with our duty 
toward the divine law of love to God and to 
our fellow men. And very few, if any, human 
laws demand of us a violation of this, our supreme 
law. 

While using present labor-troubles, etc., as 
a starting point for conversation, always remember 
that it is to be but an introduction to 
the Gospel of the Kingdom. We are not commissioned 
to teach other matters than the one 
Gospel; but we may and shall use every other 
subject to introduce the good plan of God to 
the attention of all "the meek" (Isa. 61:1) 
—especially to those who confess to be God's 
people. Remember that this is your one work, 
if you are of the consecrated body of Christ, 
the Church. To this end you eat and drink 
and sleep and labor at your earthly tasks— that 



you may have time and strength and opportunity 
to make known the gracious plan of our 
God, the foundation of which was laid in the 
ransom-sacrifice for all given eighteen centuries 
ago by the man Christ Jesus, and which is 
about to have a glorious consummation at his 
hands and at the hands of the Church, in the 
setting up of the Kingdom for which so long 
we have prayed, "Thy Kingdom Come!" 



R1440 : page 260 

"THEY SHALL BE MINE." 



"Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another: 
and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book 
of remembrance was written before him for them that 
feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. And 
they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day 
when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them as a 
man spareth his own son that serveth him."— Mai. 3:16,17. 

The Prophet Malachi, in connection with 
the above words, was foretelling, not only the 
coming of John the Baptist, the forerunner of 
Christ at his first advent, but also the coming 
of a greater, and in a fuller sense an antitype 

R1440 : page 261 

of Elias, before the great and notable day of 
the Lord's second advent. (See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter viii.) What, therefore, 
we find here addressed to nominal fleshly 
Israel, in view of the Lord's first advent and 
of the harvest work of sifting and separating 
and the final disposition of the wheat and chaff 
of that people in the close of the Jewish age, 
we find applicable now, in the harvest of this 
Gospel age, to nominal spiritual Israel— to the 
great sifting and separating work now progressing 
under the direction of the Lord of the 
harvest, who is now present. 

While, therefore, we see the fitness of this 
prophecy in its application to fleshly Israel in 
the close of the Jewish age, and while we recognize 
its rebukes, its warnings and its promises 
to that people in the past, the important 
feature for our present consideration is its application 
now, in the closing days of this 
dispensation. 

We see that the promised Elias has indeed 
come, and that the great "Messenger of the 



Covenant" in whom we delight— Jesus, our 
Lord and Savior— is now actually present. 
And truly his presence is like the refiner's fire 
and like fuller's soap. (Verse 2.) All of those 
who profess to be his people are now under 
rigid inspection. The tests are being constantly 
applied to all professions of godliness, and 
are separating, with unerring precision, the 
pure gold of actual loyalty to God from the 
dross of mere profession and outward forms of 
godliness. 

The condition of the nominal spiritual Israel 
was wonderfully mirrored in that of fleshly Israel. 
When the Lord says, "Return unto me, and I 
will return unto you" (verse 7), now, as then, 
the reply is, "Wherein shall we return." They 
will not own that they have departed from the 
right ways of the Lord: in their own estimation 
they are rich and increased in goods, 
spiritual as well as temporal, and have need of 
nothing, though actually they are poor and 
miserable and blind and naked. (Rev. 3:17.) 
In their own estimation they are whole and need 
no physician, though actually they are sick and 
full of wounds and bruises and putrefying sores. 
The Lord says to them, Ye have robbed me in 
tithes and offerings; your words have been 
stout against me; and ye have declared it a 
vain, unprofitable thing to serve the Lord and 
to keep his ordinances. But they answer, 

R1441 : page 261 

"Wherein have we robbed thee?" and "What 
have we spoken against thee?" and "What 
profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and 
that we have walked contritely before the Lord 
of hosts? And now we call the proud happy; 
yea, they that work wickedness are set up; 
yea, they that tempt God are even delivered." 
-Verses 8,13-15. 

In making profession of consecration to the 
Lord and yet living in pleasure and luxury with 
the world, conforming to worldly ideas, etc., 
the great nominal church has robbed God of 
that which they covenanted to give him— the 
loyalty and devotion of their hearts. Their 
words, too, have truly been stout against the 
Lord— their teachings have been in direct opposition 
to his Word, though they will not own 
it; and seeing no present profit in following 
the Lord closely, and observing the temporal 
prosperity of the wicked, they are content to 
follow the Lord afar off and to make whatever 
compromises with the world may be necessary 
to secure their present advantage. 



Such is the attitude of the great mass of nominal 
Christians to-day: they have a form of godliness, 
but the power has long since departed. 
They build magnificent temples of fashion, 
run in debt to the world for them, and tax even 
the poorest to pay the interest on the mortgage 
and to secure a grand organ, a paid choir and 
a pulpit orator. These they dedicate to God, 
and then open them for the festival, the fair, 
the grab game and church theatricals; and while 
all effort is made to court the favor and secure 
the patronage of the rich, the humble poor are 
shunned and slighted and elbowed first into corners 
and back seats and finally outside the gates. 

Thus increased in worldly goods and flushed 
with pride and apparent prosperity, the masses 
of the nominal church of all denominations are 
at ease. They are satisfied with their position 
and attainments, unwilling to acknowledge their 
shortcomings and backslidings, and are enjoying 
their feastings and revelry with the world. 
And their words are stout against the Lord's 

R1441 : page 262 

truth, because the truth would expose their errors 
and sins and destroy their friendly relationship 
and alliance with the world. 

But in the midst of all this confusion and 
error God's people have been developing. 
They are the mourners in nominal Zion whom 
the Lord promised in due time to comfort. 
(Matt. 5:4; Isa. 61:3.) They are the wheat 
in the midst of the tares or mere imitation 
Christians. They do not love the spirit of the 
world and cannot assimilate with it; they are 
not satisfied with the distorted creeds of human 
manufacture and deplore the fact that others 
are; they love the Word of God and make it 
their study; and they love the spirit of God 
wherever they see it exemplified. And while 
the multitudes come together in the great 
temples of fashion, ostensibly to worship God, 
but really to worship Mammon, these prefer to 
meet one with another, and on every such occasion 
rejoice in the verification of that blessed 
promise of the Master— "Wherever two or three 
are met together in my name, there am I in the 
midst of them." 

These reverence the Lord's words above the 
teachings and traditions of men, and it is their 
delight to withdraw from the great multitude 
and commune together concerning the Lord 
and concerning his promises. So these that 
reverence the Lord speak often one to another; 
they love to encourage and build one another 



up; they love to tell of the Lord's goodness 
and of his truth wherever they can find a listening 
ear; and when through them a neighbor 
or friend finds the truth they rejoice together, 
and together widen the circle for proclaiming 
the good tidings and for communing one with 
another with reference to their heaven-inspired 
hopes. Their hearts are full of love and loyalty 
to God, and though their opportunities to 
serve him and to spread abroad the honor of 
his name may be few, yet their loving zeal is not 
passed by unnoticed by the Lord; for, says the 
Prophet, "The Lord hearkened, and heard it, 
and a book of remembrance was written before 
him for them that reverenced the Lord [not 
systems and creeds and traditions of men] and 
that thought upon his name [that were zealous 
for the honor of his name, not the names of 
Wesley, or Calvin, or Knox, or Luther]. And 
they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in 
that day when I make up my jewels. And I 
will spare them, as a man spareth his own son 
that serveth him." 

Yes, the Lord is looking for loyal, loving, 
generous and noble hearts, for those who prefer 
the joy of his approval and of his promises 
to every earthly joy, and whose actions prove 
their zeal and devotion. Such, wherever we 
find them, are the Lord's jewels; and these will 
all be spared when the overwhelming trouble 
shall shortly be visited upon the wide fields of 
Christendom. These ere long will all be 
gathered out from amongst the tares and exalted 
to glory and honor and dominion with Christ 
as his Bride and joint-heir. 

"Then shall ye return, and discern between 
the righteous and the wicked, between him that 
serveth God and him that serveth him not." 
Then, after the gathering and exaltation of the 
Church, and after the great time of trouble has 
accomplished its purpose of leveling all the 
proud and all the great systems— civil, social 
and religious— which have so long blinded and 
misled the world, then the new order of things 
will be established, wherein the order of the 
present time will be reversed. Instead of the 
proud being set up then, the meek shall inherit 
the earth, and life and prosperity and happiness 
and every blessing shall be the rewards of 
righteousness; and evil doers shall be cut off 
when the discipline of that time shall fail to 
effect a transformation, though none, we are 
informed, shall be thus cut off without at least 
a hundred years' trial under the favorable conditions 
of that time. 

While we thus view our Heavenly Father's 



glorious plan and rejoice to declare it to others, 
what a comfort it is to know that he reads the 
loyalty of our hearts with reference to it; and 
though our talents may be few and weak, and 
really insignificant in our own sight, yet in the 
Lord's estimation the use of an opportunity 
even to speak to a neighbor about his truth and 
the honor of his name is not overlooked. 
"And the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a 
book of remembrance was written." Did you 
ever think of this when, perhaps with faltering 

R1441 : page 263 

speech, you tried to tell the good tidings of 
great joy to your next neighbor, or your shopmate, 
or your Christian brother or sister? or 
possibly to a larger company?— "The Lord 
hearkened, and heard it." Aye! and has not 
your heart burned within you as the heavenly 
benediction fell upon you, and sweet peace and 
joy filled your soul and fired your zeal with an 
intense yearning to herald the good news to 
earth's remotest bounds? Yes, every loyal and 
faithful child of God has had some of this 
blessed experience and may have more of it, 
and will, to the extent that he is energetic in 
serving the truth. 

And if our names be not blotted out of that 
book of remembrance through unfaithfulness, 
we shall surely be gathered among the jewels, 
though no mighty deeds have made us great in 
the eyes of our fellow-men. The tests of love 
and loyalty are not always great deeds, though, 
if we love with all our hearts, they will be as 
great and as far reaching in their influence as 
our talents and opportunities will permit; but 
the prompt and ready use of even the smallest 
talent is carefully noted by our loving Lord in his 
book of remembrance. And not the imperfect 
rendering of service, but the perfect intention 
with which it is rendered, is faithfully recorded. 



R1441 : page 263 
GOD'S BURDENS. 



I long had borne a heavy load 
Along life's rough and thorny road, 
And often-times had wondered why 
My friend walked burdenless, while I 
Was forced to carry, day by day, 



The cross which on my shoulders lay: 
When, lo, one day the Master laid 
Another cross on me. Dismayed, 
And faint, and trembling, and distressed, 
I cried, "Oh! I have longed for rest 
These many days. I cannot bear 
This other heavy load of care. 
I pray thee, Lord, behold this one- 
Shall I bear both while he has none?" 
No answer came. The cross was laid 
On my poor back, and I was weighed 
Down to the earth. And as I went 
Toiling along and almost spent, 
Again I cried, "Lord have I been 
Untrue to thee? Is it for sin 
That I have done, that I must still 
Carry this cross against my will?" 
"My child," the Master's voice returned, 
"Hast thou not yet the lesson learned? 
The burden thou hast borne so long 
Hath only made thee grow more strong, 
And fitted thee to bear for me 
This other load I lay on thee. 
Thy brother is too weak as yet 
To have a cross upon him set. 
God's burdens rest upon the strong. 
They stronger grow who bear them long, 
And each new burden is a sign 
That greater power to bear is thine." 
So now no longer I repine, 
Because a heavy cross is mine, 
But struggle onward with the prayer, 
"Make me more worthy, Lord, to bear." 
-Mrs. B. M. Bailey. 



R1442 : page 263 
UNIVERSAL SALVATION. 
(NO. II.) 



There is another sense in which some are 
said to be in Christ. While, as we have just 
shown, all believers are represented in Christ 
for justification, just as they were formerly represented 
in Adam for condemnation, some come 
into Christ as members of the Christ body, of 
which Christ Jesus is the head. The term 
"Christ" signifies the Anointed, and the ceremony 
of anointing in olden times, from which 
this term is borrowed, signified the consecrating 
or setting apart of some one for the office of 



king, etc. So the Son of God, our Lord Jesus, 
was anointed, consecrated or set apart by God 
for the offices of prophet, priest and king. He 
is, therefore, the Anointed, the Christ; and since 
it is the purpose of God to select from among 

R1442 : page 264 

men some to be joint-heirs with him in this inheritance 
—"a royal priesthood," of which 
Christ Jesus shall be the head or high priest- 
all who are of this anointed company are said 
to be in Christ. Such are said to be baptized 
into Christ: they come into this anointed company, 
into the body of Christ, by baptism; 
not by baptism in water merely, but by baptism 
into the spirit, the disposition, the mind and 
will of the head, Christ Jesus, which proves 
eventually to be a baptism even unto death. 
"Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized 
into Jesus Christ were baptized into his 
death." But those who are thus planted in 
the likeness of his death shall be also in the 
likeness of his resurrection— the first order of 
resurrection, which is to the spiritual, divine 
nature. -Rom. 6:5; Rev. 20:6; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

But this high calling is not the special salvation 
referred to in the above text. (1 Tim. 4:10.) 
True, that special salvation of justification 
must be obtained (reckonedly, by faith) by 
every one of this class, before he is even 
called with this high calling to come into Christ 
as a member of his body and a fellow-heir with 
him of the coming kingdom. This high calling 
is not salvation at all, but a gracious favor 
of God beyond the favor of salvation; or, as 
John expresses it (John 1:16.— See Emphatic 
Diaglott), it is grace upon grace, favor upon 
favor. The special salvation referred to by the 
Apostle is one which will be bestowed upon all 
who believe: not only of this age and of past 
ages, but also of the Millennial age; while the 
favor of the high calling is proffered only to 
believers during the Gospel age. 

Thus we have seen that the Lord clearly 
points out the conditions upon which his special 
or actual salvation, which is provided for 
all men, may be realized by all men. And 
none can realize it in any other way; for our 
"God is a consuming fire" to any who claim 
or demand his salvation on any other terms 
than through the redemption that is in Christ 
Jesus. (Rom. 3:24.) Any who seek to climb 
up to life in any other way he declares to be 
thieves and robbers (John 10:1,8,9); and to 
such the Apostle gives fair warning, saying, 



"It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of 

the living God" (Heb. 10:31)— a fearful thing 

to stand trial before God in our own righteousness, 

which is but "filthy rags," and without 

the covering of the robe of imputed righteousness 

secured for us by our Redeemer, who 

according to our Father's gracious plan becomes 

the representative and Mediator for all 

who accept his grace. It is the folly of some, 

nevertheless, to claim that none can lose or 

miss this salvation— notwithstanding all that 

the Scriptures say about the conditions of salvation, 

and their warning against the possible 

loss of it. In the face of the testimony of the 

Scriptures to the contrary, such a suggestion is 

a forcible reminder of the subtle tempter's 

language to our mother Eve in Eden. Said 

he, "Yea, hath God said, ye shall not eat of 

every tree of the garden? And the woman said, 

We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the 

garden; but of the fruit of the tree which is in 

the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye 

shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest 

ye die. And the serpent said unto the woman, 

Ye shall not surely die." God says to all 

men, "You may have salvation upon these 

terms," while some men say, "There are no 

conditions, there are no terms, but the everlasting 

salvation all will have." But, beloved, we 

are persuaded better things of you: let God be 

true, though it prove every man a liar. 

The theory of a universal, eternal salvation 
is not a new one: it has had some adherents 
for many centuries. Indeed, it is older than the 
doctrine of redemption; for it was announced 
by His Satanic Majesty to our mother Eve in 
Eden, when, tempting her to despise the word 
of the Lord, he boldly said, "Ye shall not 
surely die." For those who have never been 
enlightened with a clear knowledge of the plan 
of God, and who have been confronted all their 
lives with the horrible nightmare of eternal 
torment for a large majority of the race, there 
is some excuse for swinging to the extreme of 
liberalism. In such cases, it may be regarded 
more in the light of a benevolent and hopeful 
reaction from old superstitions. But the case 
is very different when one turns away from a 
clear knowledge of the divine plan of redemption 
and restitution through faith in Christ and 

R1442 : page 265 

repentance and submission of heart and life to 
God, to embrace a theory which is antagonistic 
in its nature to the whole scheme of redemption 



and restitution as set forth in the Scriptures. 
Let those who have been once enlightened 
take heed, "lest as the serpent beguiled 
Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should 
be corrupted from the simplicity that is in 
Christ"— the simplicity of Christ's doctrine. 
-2 Cor. 11:3. 

It is true that God has provided salvation for 
all men, and that the fullest opportunity for 
realizing it will be granted to each and all; but 
the terms upon which the favor may be realized 
are also distinctly stated, and that together with 
the fact that there will be no compromise as to 
terms; and, further, that those who reject the 
terms reject the proffered salvation, and hence 
die the second death, from which there will be 
no redemption and no deliverance. (Heb. 10:26-31.) 
The Scriptures also abound in warnings 
as to the danger of coming under the penalty 
of death the second time, after having been 
released from the first death, either reckonedly 
or actually. -Heb. 6:4-8. 

But some, still anxious to maintain this delusive 
hope, are willing to press every lame argument 
into its service; and they do so until 
by logical deduction, based upon this false 
premise— that the eternal salvation of every 
man is so secure that it cannot be forfeited— 
they are driven to the denial of the whole plan 
of God from its foundation in the vicarious sacrifice 
of Christ to its glorious finish at the end 
of his Millennial reign in the restitution of all 
things to the perfect condition and happy estate 
from which man fell through sin. 

Those who determine to make this theory of 
a universal, eternal salvation the rallying point 
in their theology begin by asserting that it 
must be so, because God is love; then they go 
farther and say, it must be so, because God is 
just. Thus they presume upon the love of God 
and claim his salvation upon the score of justice; 
and upon this hypothesis they do all 
manner of turning and twisting to force the 
Scriptures into harmony with their theory. 
They make light of all the Bible warnings of a 
second death, by claiming that they do not mean 
actual physical death, but that the term is figurative 
and signifies a death to sin; that it is 
the opposite of the first death, which was a 
death to righteousness; and that it was this figurative 
death to which God referred when he 
said, "In the day thou eatest thereof, dying 
thou shalt die." Thus the actual death loses 
its sting as a penalty for sin, and it is generally 
regarded by them as a necessary step in a 
process of evolution by which man is evolved 



to a higher condition or nature— the spiritual. 

To attain this spiritual nature it is therefore 
necessary, in their estimation, for every man to 
die the second death, which they regard as a 
blessing and not a curse. And since physical 
death is, presumably, merely a step in a process 
of evolution to a higher condition, and not a penalty 
for sin, therefore there is no necessity for a 
ransom from it. Hence the death of Christ is 
regarded only as an extreme measure of self-sacrifice, 
as an exhibition of the martyr spirit, 
in his zeal to show men how to live; and the idea 
of a vicarious or substitutionary sacrifice being 
required for the satisfaction of divine justice, so 
that God could still be just and yet be the justifier, 
or savior, of him that believeth in Jesus 
(Rom. 3:26), is indignantly scouted as a barbarous 
view, and the "precious blood of Christ 
wherewith we are sanctified is counted a common 
thing" and of no more value to us than 
the blood of any other martyr. 

But while these would-be philosophers make 
this preposterous claim, that the second death, 
against which the Scriptures so faithfully warn 
us, is only a death to sin and the dawn of a 
new life to righteousness, and that it is therefore 
nothing to be feared, but rather to be desired, 
they seem at times to forget this hypothesis, 
and, inconsistently enough with their own theory, 
they tell us that if a man actually experiences 
a second physical death, or even a third 
or fourth, these like the first could only be regarded 
as further necessary steps in the process 
of evolution, and out of each the persistent 
sinner will be recovered without a redemption, 
as he was presumably out of the first death. 
So they claim that the process of physical death 
and resurrection may be repeated over and over 
until the sinner is prevailed upon to submit to the 

R1442 : page 266 

will of God. And since the Scriptures declare 
that some will die at the end of Christ's Millennial 
reign, they claim that the work of reform will 
continue into the ages to follow— ignoring entirely 
the positive statement of the Apostle to 
the contrary. -1 Cor. 15:24,25; Rev. 20:6. 

This theory would be served by changing 
several passages in God's Word. Thus— 

R1443 : page 266 

THE WORD OF GOD 
READS: 



"As by one man's disobedience 
sin entered 
into the world, and 
death by sin, ...even 
so, by the righteousness 
of one, justification to 
life has passed upon 
all." 



"As all in Adam die, 
even so all in Christ 
shall be made alive." 



"As by a man [Adam] 
came death, by a man 
also [the man Christ 
Jesus, by his sacrifice 
for sin] came the resurrection 
of the dead." 



"He that hath the 
Son hath life: he that 
hath not the Son shall 
not see life." 



"He hath opened up 
for us a new way of 
life." 



"To those who seek 
for glory, honor and 
immortality, he will 
render eternal life." 



"I have set before 
you life and death: 
...Choose life that 
ye may live." 



THIS THEORY WOULD 



HAVE IT: 



As by one man's disobedience 
sin entered 
into the world, and 
death by sin, ...even 
so, by the righteousness 
of one, justification to 
the second death has 
passed upon all. 



As in Adam all die, 
even so in Christ shall 
all die the second death. 



As by man came 
death, by a man also 
came the certainty of 
the second death. 



All shall share the 
second death, and thus 
all shall see life. 



He hath pointed out 
to us the advantages 
of the second death. 



To all, whether they 
seek it or not, he will 
render the second death, 
which means a death 
to sin that will never 
end. 



You have no choice 
in this matter. I will 
cast you all into the 
second death, which 
will be eternal death 
to sin. 



The revolutionary tendency of the doctrine 
is thus very apparent; and when the mind is 
fully set on establishing this theory and perverting 
every scripture to its support, the false 
doctrines that grow out of it are legion, and the 
entire Word of God is made of no effect. 

The Bible teaching is plain and simple to 
those of simple mind, and admits of no such 
fanciful and absurd interpretation. There, 
death is declared to be "the wages of sin," and 
not merely a departure from righteousness. 
(Rom. 6:23.) Sin is the departure from righteousness; 
and death, destruction of being, is 
its just penalty. And since death was the just 
penalty of sin, and was pronounced by God, who 
cannot err, and who is unchangeable— the same 
yesterday, to-day and forever— it could not be 
revoked or set aside: no power in heaven or 
earth could set aside the immutable claims of 
justice until, by the grace of God, the man 
Christ Jesus, our Lord, paid our penalty, died 
for our sins, legally set us free, and thus made 
provision for our recovery out of death in due 
time by the process of resurrection. Thanks 
be unto God and our Lord Jesus Christ for this 
great salvation, purchased on our heavenly Father's 
part by the sacrifice of his only begotten 
and well beloved Son, and on our Lord's part 
by the sacrifice of himself, and made efficacious 
to us through faith on our part in his precious 
blood shed for many for the remission of sins. 
-Matt. 26:28. 

And as the original difficulty was not death, 
but sin, so the remedy is not second death, 
but righteousness. The two principles are Sin 
and Righteousness, and under God's arrangement 
they each have certain results. Sin results 
in DEATH, while righteousness results in LIFE. 
The entire race became sinners by heredity in 
Adam, weak and unable to fulfil all righteousness, 
and hence all shared the penalty, death— 
"death passed upon all men," because all are 
imperfect, sinners. 

But God, foreseeing that some would, after 
experience, be willing to obey all righteousness 
if provided the ability through Christ— through 
the New Covenant sealed and ratified by his 
death as our representative and substitute, bearing 
our penalty— compensated for all sins past 
and for present and future sins resulting from 
the fall, to all who accept him as their Redeemer 

R1443 : page 267 



and who become followers of his commands. 
Thus such are made the righteousness 
of God in him (Christ) and shall obtain the reward 
of righteousness— everlasting life. 

While we trust in the living God, who is the 
Savior of all men, especially of them that believe, 
let all "thieves and robbers," who are 
attempting to teach men how to climb up to 
life by some other than God's appointed way, 
take warning; for while "God is love," let 
them know that he loves that which is lovely, 
that he has decreed that all that is unworthy 
of love in his universe shall be destroyed, 
and that when the Millennial reign of his 
Anointed is complete not one blot shall remain 
to reproach his fair creation; for Christ "must 
reign till he hath put all enemies under his 
FEET." Then he will have brought forth judgment 
unto victory. (Matt. 12:20.) And his 
victory will be complete when all evil and all 
wilful evil-doers— Satan and all those who follow 
his leading (Heb. 2:14; Rev. 20:10,14,15), 
shall have been cut off. His victory will 
consist in the establishment of righteousness 
and peace, no matter how many or how few 
fall in the conflict. 

Let all the faithful— the elect— take heed 
that they be not deceived by those vain philosophers 
who, "desiring to be teachers, understand 
neither what they say, nor whereof they 
affirm" (1 Tim. 1:7); for God hath declared 
that wilful evil-doers "shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction from the presence of the 
Lord, and from the glory of his power, when 
he shall come to be glorified in his saints and 
to be admired in all those that believe in that 
day." And from the mention of the character 
of the class that shall be destroyed it is very 
manifest that the second death into which they 
are cast is not a death to sin, as Universalists 
claim. Hear the Word of the Lord— "The 
fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, 
and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, 
and idolaters, and all liars, shall have 
their part in the lake which burneth with fire 
and brimstone, which is THE SECOND DEATH. 
And the devil that deceived them was cast into 
the lake of fire:. ..this is the second 
death." (Rev. 21:8; 20:10.) That is a bad 
lot: we do not want to be in such company. 
Before their destruction comes they will have 
had fullest opportunity to repent; and the fact 
that Satan will have had the opportunities of 
seven thousand years and yet remain incorrigible 
will be ample proof to every intelligent mind 
that there is such a thing as becoming established 



—fixed and immovable— in sin as well as 
in righteousness. Let us remember the word 
of the Lord— "For evil-doers shall be cut off; 
but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall 
inherit the earth. For yet a little while and 
the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shalt diligently 
consider his place, and he shall not be 
there. But the meek shall inherit the earth, 
and shall delight themselves in the abundance 
of peace."— Psa. 37:9-11. 



R1443 : page 267 
FAITH AND FEELING. 



Feeling should never be mistaken for faith, 
yet there is as much connection between faith 
and hallowed feeling as there is between the 
root and the flower. Faith is permanent, just 
as the root is ever in the ground. Feeling is 
casual and has its season. Just as the root or 
bulb does not always shoot up the green stem 
and beautiful flowers, so faith does not always 
produce ecstasy of feeling. Our faith may be just 
as strong when we are despondent as when we 
are filled with joy. As we feel the calamities of 
war, the pangs of disease and the hardness of 
poverty, our feeling sinks down to zero, while 
our faith may be as firm as the granite that 
underlies the cloud-kissing hills. Measure not 
God's love and power by your own feeling. 
The sun shines as clearly in the darkest day as it 
does in the brightest: the difference is not in the 
sun, but in some clouds that are between you 
and the sun. So God loves as well when we 
see not the brightness of his countenance as 
when we do. 

One of the things we learn by a Christian 
experience is that low measures of feeling are 

R1443 : page 268 

better than ecstasies for ordinary life. God 

sends us his rain in gentle drops, else tender 

plants and delicate flowers would be beaten to 

pieces. If our faith is founded on the immutability 

of God, our Christian life and love will 

flow steadily on like a deep river, not easily 

affected by a cold blast nor obstructed by despondencies. 

Moses was not governed by feeling 

when he stood on the margin of the Red 

Sea, neither was Abraham when he offered up 



Isaac, nor Israel when they compassed Jericho 
seven days. Have faith in God, move forward 
all along the line, and we shall have the 
victory.— Sel. 



page 268 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULLNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 
PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1444 : page 268 

LESSON XIII., SEPT. 25, ISA. 5:11,22; 28:7; 
PROV. 20:1; 23:19-21,29-35; GAL. 5:19,21; 
HAB. 2:15; HOS. 14:9. 

Golden Text— "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is 
raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise." 
-Prov. 20:1. 

The lesson chosen by the International Committee 
as a temperance lesson for this quarter 
was 1 Cor. 11:20-24. But some, seeing no 
reference to temperance in these Scriptures, 
have made the above selection, which we will 
here treat briefly, referring the reader to our 
issue of March 1891 for an exposition of the 
lesson in 1 Cor. 11:20-34. We still have a 
few on hand which can be supplied to any requesting 
it. 

While some of the above Scriptures are well 
chosen for a temperance lesson, there is much 
more in some of them, as will be observed by 
those who will study them in connection with 
their various contexts. Let us here pursue 
such a study of them, though we must necessarily 
be brief. 

ISAIAH 5:11,22. The reference here is not 
to literal wine, but to the intoxicating spirit of 
the world, so freely imbibed by nominal Israel, 
both fleshly and spiritual. It was through 
such intoxication that fleshly Israel rejected 
the Lord at his first advent, and that nominal 
spiritual Israel is now stumbling over that same 
stumbling-stone. (Isa. 8:14.) The whole chapter, 



like chapter 28 of the same prophecy, was 
given as a warning to both fleshly and spiritual 
Israel against imbibing the intoxicating spirit 
of the world. Woe indeed came upon fleshly 
Israel in the end of their age of favor, because 
of their intoxicated and miserable condition 
of heart and mind. It came in the dreadful 
overthrow of Jerusalem and their complete 
destruction as a nation. And a similar woe 
upon nominal spiritual Israel— "Christendom" 
so-called— will, according to the sure word of 
prophecy, be visited upon them in the closing 
days of this harvest, because nominal spiritual 
Israel has partaken also of the same intoxicating 
wine. 

And while all who constitute a part of that 
great system, which because of its intoxication 
is now cast off and disowned of the Lord, and 
out of which he is now calling those who are 
still his people (Rev. 18:2,4), will share in 
the woe that is coming upon it, the prophet 
(verse 22), makes very special mention of woe 
that is to come upon those who are mighty to 
drink this wine, and men of strength to prepare 
the cup for others. In other words, the 
prophet seems here to indicate special condemnation 
to those who are the public leaders and 
promulgators of false doctrine. 

ISAIAH 28:7. This scripture refers to the 
same class as that last mentioned— the priests 
and the prophets, the leaders and teachers in 
nominal spiritual Israel now, and in nominal 
fleshly Israel at the close of the Jewish age. 
Because of their intoxication with the wine of 
this world's pleasures, etc., they are all out of 
the way: they err in vision, they stumble in 
judgment, and are unable to discern and follow 
the truth, and much less to teach the truth, 
though they occupy the position of teachers. 
For further notes on this chapter, see treatment 
of Lesson III., in our issue of January 15th. 

PROVERBS 20:1. This proverb of Solomon 
evidently has reference to literal wine and 
strong drink, and its truthfulness is so manifest 
as to require no comment here. Well would it 
be if all men would ponder and heed this wise 
warning against a foe so subtle and so destructive 
to peace and righteousness. 

PROVERBS 23:19-21 classes drunkenness and 
gluttony together. Both are unworthy of true 
manhood and bring their sure reward of poverty 
and disgrace. 

PROVERBS 23:29-35 extends the wholesome 
counsel further, picturing the miserable results 
of intemperance; for the momentary pleasure 



R1444 : page 269 

at last "biteth like a serpent and stingeth like 
an adder." 

GALATIANS 5:19-21 classes drunkenness 
among the miserable works of the flesh, which 
Paul here contrasts with the beautiful fruits of 
the spirit of God among those who have become 
the children of God. And thus the Apostle 
arrays himself, and all the saints who seek an 
inheritance in the Kingdom of God, on the 
side not only of temperance, but also of every 
good work and disposition. 

HABAKKUK 2:15 seems, from the context, to 
have special reference again to the spirit of the 
world, and declares woe unto such as endeavor 
to lead others to imbibe of this intoxicating 
wine. But the condemnation would apply 
equally to those who tempt others to the use of 
intoxicating drinks. 

HOSEA 14:9. This scripture has no reference 
whatever to the subject of temperance, 
but closes an exhortation to fallen Israel to 
return unto the Lord. 

R1444 : page 269 

SAUL OF TARSUS CONVERTED. 



FOURTH QUAR., LESSON I., OCT. 2, ACTS 9:1-20. 

Golden Text— "Except a man be born again he cannot 
see the Kingdom of God."— John 3:3. 

In this lesson we have a forcible illustration 
of the importance of a correct knowledge of 
the truth as well as a zeal for God. Paul had 
the latter, but, lacking the former, he went to 
the extreme of persecuting the Church of Christ. 
Nevertheless, God, who reads the heart, discerned 
its loyalty and zeal, and, without blaming 
him for doing that which he thought was 
right and acceptable to God, he simply pointed 
out to him the better way. Light, says the 
Prophet (Psa. 97:1 1), is sown for the righteous; 
and Saul was righteous at heart and hence the 
truth was due to him in God's appointed time. 

Before that time arrived, however, the beloved 
and faithful Stephen had sealed his testimony 
with his blood, while Saul was consenting 
unto his death. Was God negligent, then, 
of the interests of his faithful martyr? Ah! no; 
but his ways are not our ways. Stephen's life 
was fully consecrated to the Master's service, 



and evidently the only question with him as to 

when or how it might end was, which time or 

way would be most to the glory of God. It 

has been truly said that the blood of the martyrs 

has been the seed of the Church. Stephen 

thus became an example to the whole Church 

of faithfulness even unto death; and having 

thus gloriously finished his course, there was 

thenceforth laid up for him a crown of righteousness 

to be received at the Lord's second 

appearing. 

Little did Stephen think that one who stood 
by, consenting unto his death, would soon go 
forth as a zealous advocate of the very cause 
he was persecuting. That Paul's heart was 
right in the matter, even when his head and 
his hands were in the wrong, is very clear from 
his statement of the matter in Chapter 26:9-1 1, 
where he says, "I verily thought within myself 
that I ought to do many things contrary to the 
name of Jesus of Nazareth, which thing I also 
did in Jerusalem: and many of the saints did 
I shut up in prison, having received authority 
from the chief priests; and when they were put 
to death I gave my voice against them. And 
I punished them oft in every synagogue, and 
compelled them to blaspheme; and, being exceedingly 
mad against them, I persecuted them, 
even unto strange cities." 

Again, we find the Apostle referring to the 
matter in his letter to Timothy (1 Tim. 1:12-14,16), 
saying, "I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who 
hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful 
[at heart, though wrong in action], putting 
me into the ministry who was before a blasphemer 
and a persecutor and injurious: but I obtained 
mercy because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. 
And the grace of our Lord was exceedingly 
abundant with faith and love which is in 
Christ Jesus. ...Howbeit, for this cause I 
obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ 
might show forth all longsuffering for a pattern 
to them which should hereafter believe on him 
to life everlasting." 

In view of these statements, therefore, we 
are not to consider Paul's conversion as a conversion 
of the heart from a disposition of opposition 
to one of harmony with God, but as 
a conversion or turning about, through a better 
understanding of the truth, from an erroneous 
course to one in harmony with God and 
his plan of salvation. 

The Lord's mercy and love to this deluded 
though sincere servant were beautifully manifested 
in the words addressed to Saul: In the 
midst of the overwhelming glory of the heavenly 



presence a tender voice fell on his ear, 
saying, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? 
it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks." 
And Saul answered, "Who art thou, Lord?" 
And he said, "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. 
But rise, and stand upon thy feet: for I have 
appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make 
thee a minister and a witness, both of these 
things which thou hast seen, and of those 
things in the which I will appear unto thee; 
delivering thee from the people and from the 
Gentiles unto whom now I send thee, to open 
their eyes and to turn them from darkness to 
light, and from the power of Satan unto God, 

R1444 : page 270 

that they may receive forgiveness of sins and 
inheritance among them which are sanctified 
by faith that is in me." And Saul, trembling 
and astonished, said, "Lord, what wilt thou 
have me to do?" And the Lord said unto him, 
"Arise and go into the city, and it shall be 
told thee what thou must do."— Compare Acts 9:3-6 
and 26:13-17. 

Saul's prompt obedience and instantaneous 
change of conduct were indicative of a noble 
character; and his question, "What wilt thou 
have me do?" showed an earnest desire to be 
active in the service of God to the extent of 
his ability and knowledge. And no sooner had 
he learned the will of God than he was off 
about his Master's business— preaching Christ 
at Damascus and Jerusalem, and throughout all 
the coasts of Judea, to Jews and Gentiles, calling 
upon all to repent and turn to God and do 
works meet for repentance. (Acts 9:19,20; 
26: 19,20.) Nor did the zeal of this faithful 
soldier of the cross abate in the least until he 
had finished his course. After years of unmitigated 
toil and care and persecution and trouble 
on every hand, he rejoiced at the close of life 
to say— "I have fought a good fight; I have 
finished my course; I have kept the faith: 
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown, 
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give 
me at that day; and not to me only, but unto 
all them also that love his appearing." 

The instance of this lesson affords also a 
striking illustration of the Lord's personal oversight 
and supervision of the interests of his 
Church, both as a company and as individuals. 
By the loss of Judas a vacancy had occurred 
in the company of the apostles, which 
vacancy the apostles themselves endeavored to 
fill by their election of Matthias. (Acts 1:26.) 



This they had no authority to do, but, presuming 

such to be the Lord's will, they chose two 

and asked the Lord to indicate which of the 

two whom they had selected would be his 

choice; and when the lot fell upon Matthias— 

for it must of course fall on one of the two— 

the eleven accepted him as the Lord's choice 

for the place of Judas. But the sequel showed 

that the Lord merely ignored their presumption 

in the matter, and in his own time and 

way chose Saul of Tarsus, a man at heart devoted 

to the service of God and needing only 

to be enlightened by the truth when all his consecrated 

powers would be fully enlisted in the 

blessed work of bearing the name of Christ to 

the Gentiles as well as to the Jews. And this 

Saul, afterward called Paul, was the most noted, 

self-sacrificing and efficient of all the apostles. 

Then, too, in the selection and special favor 
shown to Saul, we see the Lord's appreciation 
of loyal and zealous hearts. What a comfort 
is this to all the saints in the midst of a realizing 
sense of our own infirmities and short-comings, 
that if our hearts are loyal, the Lord can 
read it there. If we lack knowledge he will 
grant it in his own good time and way; and his 
wisdom will correct our mistakes, and his love 
and mercy and grace will abound toward us 
more and more as we continue to walk in his 
ways. 

The part which Ananias was privileged to 
take in the healing of Paul's eyes and in enlightening 
his mind with the truth was one 
which must have brought great joy and blessing 
to his own heart— not only because of being 
specially chosen of the Lord for this purpose, 
but also in seeing such a one as Saul of 
Tarsus so fully convinced of the truth and enlisted 
in its service. How wonderfully wise are 
the ways of the Lord; how blessed is his truth; 
how tender are his providences; how consoling 
is his mercy; and how rich are his abounding 
love and grace! And how glorious is the hope 
set before us in the gospel of ere long seeing 
him face to face and of being transformed into 
his glorious likeness, when, being like him, we 
shall not be overpowered with the glory or 
stricken with blindness. 

The golden text of this lesson was evidently 
chosen with the idea that Saul of Tarsus was 
born again when he was converted to the service 
of the cause of Christ. But such was not 
the case. Saul was only begotten of the spirit 
when through the teaching of Ananias he was 
brought to a knowledge of the truth and to a 
full consecration of his life to its service. But 



his birth as a new spiritual being was not due 
until the resurrection. Birth presupposes both 
a begetting and a course of development ending 
at a particular time in the completeness of the 
new being. The Greek word (gennao) rendered 
born has the significance of both begetting and 
birth. Hence, except a man be both begotten 
and born again he cannot see the Kingdom of 
God. Paul's birth was not due until the dawn 
of the Millennium, at the second advent of the 
Lord. The Lord was the first born from the 
dead (Col. 1:18), and this second birth in his 
case surely did not mean conversion to God; 
nor does it ever have such significance. 



page 270 

A WORD TO COLPORTEURS. 



All Colporteurs who are giving their entire 
time to the sale of DAWN will, hereafter, please 
write at least a Postal Card at the close of each 
week, so that it will reach us each Monday. 

Let us know of your spiritual and physical 
health, the results of the week's labor, etc. 



R1445 : page 271 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



page 271 



Georgia. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write to express 
my sincere gratitude to you, as an instrument 
in the dear Lord's hands, for unfolding the 
good and precious truths that his Word teaches. 
I have read three of your books titled MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. They have been a great deal of 
help to me. They have inspired my soul with 
zeal and more love to my dear Savior. The 
truths they draw from the Word of God seem 
as refreshing and uplifting to the believers who 
are bowed down by the teachings of the nominal 
church as did the dear Savior's teachings 
to the poor, lost sheep of Israel at his first advent. 
The restoration and plan of redemption 
for all is the only thing that can be harmonized 



with the Word of God. Oh! how the nominal 
church is lacking in knowledge. Light, more 
light! Some might think this true doctrine 
has a tendency to lead one away from God. 
But thanks be to him, it is the reverse. It fills 
us with love beyond what words can express. 
It draws us up on to a plane where we can behold 
the beauty and holiness of our God more 
clearly, where we can drink of his waters more 
freely and can look up into his tender face and 
read his countenance of love in a measure as 
never before. 

May the Lord help us all to look to him 
through clearer eyes, and may our earnest prayer 
be, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on 
earth as it is done in heaven. Amen." 

Yours in Christ, C. W. BLAND. 



R1445 : page 271 

Utah. 

MY DEAR SIRS:-I enclose a check for $10. 
Please send me Young's Concordance, twenty 
copies DAWN, Vol. I., ten copies Vol. II. and 
eight Vol. III. I assume you will allow me 
the wholesale price on the above as I wish to 
circulate them, either selling or giving them 
away. 

I enclose a postal card received from a friend 
which indicates how he appreciates the truth. 
I see that others send you words of thanks and 
encouragement, so I thought perhaps you could 
find time to read this. It may be of some little 
interest to you to know how the light came to 
me. We have a union Bible class once a week; 
and, some three months ago, every time we 
met it so happened that before the lesson was 
finished we would drift into the subject of the 
Millennium. One evening one of the friends 
said, I have a book called the "Plan of the Ages," 
which a lady gave me, that may give some light 
on the subject. Have not read it, but will 
loan to you. Since then there has been a well 
of rejoicing springing up in my soul which I 
pray will be unto life everlasting. 1 Cor. 2:9,10 
comes to me very forcibly in the light of 
the Plan of the Ages. Please return the postal. 

In the interest of the truth, truly yours, 
J. T. HURST. 

The card referred to is as follows: 

Dear Friend:— Not for ten years of life 
would I have missed reading Vol. I., MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. I shall read the others as soon as 
I can spare moments. How truly wonderful is 



God's plan! Human mind cannot grasp its 
fulness. Your friend, J. A. B 



Virginia. 

DEAR SIR: -I am a constant reader of "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN," Vols. I., II. and III. My eyes 
were opened to the light of God's truth in my 
"Jubilee" year. (I turned fifty years on the 4th 
inst.) I feel that I am emancipated from the 
bondage of creed and tradition. 

I have been connected with the Baptist denomination 
for over thirty-five years. In 1874 
I was a theological student at Rochester, N.Y., 
but my health failed me and I never became a 
minister. For this I have been thankful, since 
my enlightenment, knowing that I would have 
been a messenger of error rather than truth, 
and less liable to have received "the truth now 
due." Yours in fellowship, 

DANIEL RHODES. 



Kentucky. 
TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY:-I have just 
finished reading the first volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Am delighted: it settles difficulties, 
answers questions and illuminates the way 
wonderfully. I am deeply indebted to you. 
Am seeking for light; have you more of such 
publications? If so send me circulars. 
Yours Fraternally, 

PASTOR M.E. CHURCH. 



Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Oh, 

if you could only know the joy that the DAWNS 
have brought to this poor heart of mine! I belonged 
to the Missionary Baptist sect; but in 
studying my Bible I saw there was confusion, 
and I sent to different places and got Disciplines 
and Articles of Faith, but found none in harmony 
with the Scriptures. Last fall a dear 
Brother sold me DAWNS I. and II., and after 
carefully reading them I found them in perfect 
accord. Praise the dear Lord that he has raised 
up expounders of his precious Word, after the 
counsel of his own heart. Oh, the joy there is 

R1445 : page 272 

now in studying the precious Word of God from 



his standpoint! 

I will not intrude more on your valuable time. 
God bless you abundantly in your labor of love. 
JOSEPH HUBBARD. 



page 272 



New Hampshire. 

DEAR FRIENDS:-I have just finished reading 
Vol. III. of MILLENNIAL DAWN; and the 
language of my heart is, How wonderful are 
thy works, O Lord God of Hosts: just and 
right are all thy ways. I have been greatly 
blessed in reading the books, and want to confess 
that I believe they are truth, notwithstanding 
I have had to give up my former views that 
I held dear; but with the bright light shining 
on the Word, I can hold them no longer. I do 
feel to thank the dear Lord and his servants for 
the light. How wise and beautiful are all his 
plans, and how well they correspond with the 
declaration that "God is Love." O, who 
would not love and serve him! The "Time 
of Trouble" is now just in the future, but the 
true child of God feels that he has a shelter 
under his mighty arm. 

Enclosed find $2.00 for the WATCH TOWER, 
and copies of PLAN OF THE AGES in paper covers. 
I want all to read them that will, for truly "we 
are living in a grand and awful time," and I 
want to do what little I can to help spread the 
truth. Yours truly, R.S.LEEDS. 



New York. 
TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY: -Enclosed 
please find pay for the TOWER and THE PLAN 
OF THE AGES. Permit me to add, this volume, 
which was loaned to me and which I have read, 
is wonderful in its clearness— logical throughout 
—and a most wonderful Key to the Holy 
Scriptures. Truly the author must have been 
divinely directed in his researches of the Bible. 
Be pleased to hand these lines of thanks to him 
and his helper, for their patient and loving 
work. It has drawn me nearer to God than 
ever before, and I have professed to be near 
him for fifty-two years. Please also send me a 
price list of your books. I must have more 
of them. Yours, MRS. S. J. BROWN. 



Florida. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Ever since reading 
Vol. I. of MILLENNIAL DAWN, last winter, 
I have been wanting to write to you, but feared 
your time was too much occupied to answer 
me. My whole life has been changed by the 
reading of the DAWN series, the first volume of 
which I came across accidentally, or providentially, 
and read only because I had nothing 
else to read. There are some questions, however, 
that are not yet clearly settled in my 
mind, and on which I wish to receive light. 

I have tried to do something towards giving 
light to others since I found it myself, and I 
hope that my efforts have not been in vain; for 
it is my greatest desire to do the work of my 
Father acceptably. I would like to go into the 
colporteur work, but, being in debt, I think it 
my first duty to pay up. Any advice you can 
give me will be gratefully received, for I have 
no one to consult when in doubt, and all is not 
yet clear. Thank God for the light that has 
come, and may it shine brighter and brighter. 
Truly yours in Christ, J. A. AUSTIN. 



Wisconsin. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Since reading the 
MILLENNIAL DAWNS, the Tracts and the WATCH 
TOWER, I cannot do less than write and tell 
you that my heart is so full of the love of God 
through the better knowledge of the truth advocated 
in the above expositions, that I desire to 
thank you, and wish you many a "God bless 
you." I am growing in grace and the knowledge 
of the truth daily, and verily I have songs 
in the night. Truly, "The secret of the Lord 
is with them that fear him," and he will show 
them his covenant. I see nothing in the DAWNS 
to take exceptions to: they are all built upon 
a "Thus saith the Lord," and a rightly dividing 
the Word of truth— a harmonious whole. 
The prophetic periods are very convincing to 
me, and I am glad that the thousand years are 
made so plain to be yet future; for some of the 
leading Adventists are trying to put them in 
the past. 

I thank God that I have kept aloof from man-made 
creeds, and I can accept truths, hitherto 
not made known, but now in the due time revealed 
to the little flock. May the dear Lord 
still bless us, and keep us humble at the cross, 
"trusting in the precious blood," is the prayer 
of your brother in the faith, 

T.W.RICHARDS. 



Kansas. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have learned 
that you have another volume of DAWN now 
out, and I would like to read it. 

It would now be impossible for me to preach 
my old sermons over again. Even the ordinary 
language of "Orthodox" prayer is distasteful 
to me, and some of the usual forms of expression 
absolutely shocking to my new feelings. 
God is blessing your work and many are 
coming out of the darkness. Yours in the bonds 
of the "Glad Tidings," J. D. GEHRING. 

[God is blessing us, dear Brother, and we rejoice 
in every evidence of the spread of his 
truth. No; DAWN Vol. IV. is not out, and will 
not be ready for some time.— EDITOR.] 



page 274 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You expressed a 
desire to be informed of the progress of my 
work in the Hudson river towns. It is quite 
encouraging to me and the friends of the truth, 
though as yet not very far advanced. At W 



where nearly every one knew of the DAWN, 
and many had the first volume, I sold 200 in 

about five days. At P , in a week and a 

half, I sold 330 books, besides spending one 
day delivering— 98 degrees in the shade. All praise 
to the Lord for this measure of success. I am 
not feeling very strong physically, but his 
spirit is sufficient to quicken my body. 

Brother B and others are quite anxious 

that I should hold some meetings, and while I 
may consent to it, it will be with some questioning 
as to whether it is wise to use much of 
my strength and time in that direction— especially 
in towns like this where I expect to remain 
only a few weeks. I am quite satisfied 
that those who will not read and understand 
the DAWN are not very near ripe— if they have 
any of the wheat quality at all. And I believe 
the "winds" are being held that the saints 
may be sealed, not that the world is to become 
greatly interested now. Hence it seems necessary 
that we should hasten over the field— 
"flying in the midst of heaven." 

With kind greetings to the Church at Allegheny, 
Yours in our Redeemer, 

S. D. ROGERS. 



R1445 : page 274 

Massachusetts. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write to let you 
know that my interest and zeal in the Lord's 
service are not abated. Perhaps, dear Brother, 
you have wondered why I, unlike others of the 
dear workers, do not turn in any money to the 
Society, but I would say that all I get is not 
spent selfishly upon myself. I find abundant 
opportunity to help some of the dear saints 
around here. There is one sister who at times 
is very destitute, and who has become very much 
interested in the truth. She is a widow with 
two children. 



If you could only see how some of the dear ones 

(this sister included) in S are feasting upon 

the glorious truth, it would cheer your heart 
very greatly; and as for myself, I could not express 
upon paper, nor in language, the joy that 
fills my heart in perusing the precious things 
brought out in the TOWER of late. Often my 
thoughts revert to yourself and dear sister R., 
and prayers on your behalf, as well as for all 
saints, ascend to the throne of grace. It often 
comforts me to think that the Lord knoweth 
the heart of each one of his children, and 
whether they are fully in harmony with him 
and his wonderful plan; and though we may 
sometimes misunderstand each other, yet the 
Lord understands us at all times. 

With warm Christian love, Your brother in 
Christ, W. J. THORN. 



R1446 : page 274 

Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The TOWER came 
to hand to-day, and your article on "Enoch, Elijah 
and the Sentence" has lifted from my mind a 
load that has been troubling me for some time and 
I want to thank you. Words fail to express my 
gratitude to such a kind, loving Heavenly Father, 
and to you who have been serving him and us so 
faithfully. God's justice, love and power are 
made clearer than ever, and I can exclaim with 
the apostle, "Oh, the depth of the riches, both 
of the wisdom and knowledge, of God! How 
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways 
past finding out." Praying that he will guide 
and direct you into all truth, and with love to 
all the saints, I remain, 

Yours in the service, C. C. WRIGHT. 



R1446 : page 275 

VOL. XIII. SEPTEMBER 15, 1892. NO. U 
VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 
SEVENTH-DAY ADVENTISTS' FEARS. 



Amongst those whom we recognize as God's 
children, but from whom we differ as to many 
of the teachings of our Father's Word, is a 



considerable number of Seventh-Day Adventists. 
Indeed, not a few from this people have received 
the present truth, brought to their attention 
through Millennial Dawn and the 
WATCH TOWER and for the sake of these and 
others we have on two occasions treated the 
Sabbath and the Law questions in these columns. 

However, their leaders and teachers have 
woven together so close a net of ingeniously 
applied but quite mistaken theory based upon 
the "cleansing of the Sanctuary" (Dan. 8:14) 
and "the mark of the beast" (Rev. 13), that 
the majority of their followers, as well as themselves, 
seem to be hopelessly entangled. Believing 
that many of them are honest, we feel 
less disposed to chide them, and more inclined 
to say to them mildly and kindly, in the Master's 
words, "Ye do err, not knowing [understanding] 
the Scriptures." 

Believing that the Law given to Israel as the 
basis of their covenant (See Deut. 5:2-7-21) 
was not given to them alone, but to all the 
world, they would enforce upon all the Jewish, 
seventh-day Sabbath— now usually called Saturday. 
When we point out to them that the 
Law which is the basis of the New Covenant 
is briefly comprehended in one word, Love 
(—instead of the ten commands, as was the 
Jewish Covenant), they ask, Well, then, if the 
newer and fuller expression of the Law be Love, 
and if love implies that we do not steal, kill, 
etc., does not this New Covenant have a Sabbath 
also? 

Without waiting for an answer, they proceed 
to say— we, therefore, should keep the Seventh 
Day, as did the Jews. No one had a right to 
change it to Sunday, the first day of the week, 
when God had specified the seventh. Papacy 
changed the day; and it is, therefore, "the 
mark of the beast," etc.; and all who observe 
Sunday are thus branded or marked, and can 
have no part among the "overcomers" in the 
first resurrection. 

Few of them are patient enough to hear the 
answer:— That the seventh-day rest (for the 
word Sabbath merely means rest) of the ten 
commandments is contained in our Law of the 
New Covenant, just as truly as are the other 
commands included in that Law of one word- 
Love. Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not 
kill, Thou shalt not violate the seventh-day 
rest, and all the other commands of the Decalogue, 
meet with much grander and fuller expression 
in our New Covenant and its Law. 
Thus, if we love God and men, we will not 
blaspheme, nor kill, nor steal, nor bear false 



witness; and those who have entered into this 
New Covenant, and found the heart-rest (Sabbath) 
by faith in Christ and his finished work, 
so long as they appreciate this rest, can have no 
desire to break it or even to disturb it by violating 
any part of their covenant. 
This is the real and only Sabbath (rest) commanded 

R1446 : page 276 

or provided for under our New Covenant. 
It was typified in the Jewish Law 
(which was a shadow of the New Covenant 
Law) by the Seventh Day— because this rest 
from sin is to be actually observed in the 
seventh thousand-year day— in the Millennium. 
The present REST of believers, trusting in Christ, 
is not the complete rest, but merely a rest of heart 
by faith, hoping and waiting for the actual. 
This the Apostle clearly shows in Heb. 4:2-11 
—that although the Jews had observed the 
Seventh Day, it did not profit them, and they 
did not really enter into the rest which it typified, 
because they merely held the outward 
form or shadow, and did not mix it with FAITH 
so as to discern its antitype— the rest of heart. 
He concludes his argument by urging— "Let 
us labor, therefore, to enter into that rest 
(Greek— Sabbath-keeping), lest any man fall 
after the same example of unbelief"— set by 
the Jews who kept the Seventh Day, but never 
knew what it meant. The time for entering by 
faith into the real rest came to the Church at 
Pentecost, when the spirit dispensation began. 
The time for entering actually into the real 
rest is just at hand, at the ushering in of the 
New Dispensation. 

As for the claim that no one had a right to 
change or substitute the First Day for the Seventh 
Day, that is true. Our Lord and the 
apostles never authorized any such change: 
they declared the Jewish Law (which included 
the Seventh Day) ended at the Cross, and the 
new and more comprehensive law of the New 
Covenant thereafter in operation toward all 
who accepted Christ. The apostles used the 
Seventh Day as a time for preaching Christ, as 
they used every day in the week, and especially 
because on that day the Jews, their most hopeful 
hearers, met for worship and study. But 
the apostles nowhere recognized the seventh-day 
Sabbath as a day of rest, as the Jewish 
Law Covenant enforced it. On the contrary, 
they taught (Rom. 14:5-8) that any and all 
days are acceptable for good works done in the 
service of God and for the benefit of fellow men. 



It is a mistake, too, to claim that the Christian 
Sabbath was started by an edict of one of 
the popes. It had its start in the fact that it 
was on the First Day of the week that our Lord 
arose from the dead; and that upon that day 
and evening he met with his disciples, and expounded 
unto them the Scriptures, until their 
hearts burned within them. What wonder that, 
without any command to do so, they thereafter 
loved so to meet together frequently, and to 
repeat the simple meal, the giving of thanks 
and the breaking of bread; recounting one to 
the other the gracious promises of God through 
the prophets, and the explanations of some of 
these which the Lord had given in person, and 
seeking yet fuller understanding of the same 
under the leading of the holy Spirit (Christ's 
representative), operating to guide them into 
all truth as it became due. 

It was some little time, evidently, from the 
account, before they realized that the Law 
Covenant which had so long ruled them was 
dead (Rom. 7:2-6), and that thus they were 
free from any obligation to any formal observance 
of the Seventh Day— that thenceforth all 
days were alike to them: all to be used in 
God's service in doing good, and none to be 
used for any other purpose. 

For a time the two days were observed by 
Christians, the Seventh-Day from Jewish custom 
(and because it furnished the best opportunity 
for devout people likely to be interested 
in the Gospel) and the First-Day in commemoration 
of our Lord's resurrection. Ignatius, 
A.D. 75, in his writings mentions some approvingly 
as "no longer Sabbatizing, but living 
in observance of the Lord's-Day, on which 
also our life sprang up again." 

The earliest record of the use of the name 
Lord's-Day for the first day of the week found 
in Scripture is in Rev. 1:10 (A.D. 96). And says 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (first-class authority) 
"by that name it is almost invariably referred to 
by all writers of the century immediately succeeding 
apostolic times. ...The first writer who 
mentions the name of Sunday is Justin Martyr: 
this designation of the first day of the week, which 
is of heathen origin, had come into general use 
in the Roman world shortly before Justin wrote. 
(Second century A.D.).. .As long as the 
Jewish-Christian element continued to have 
any prominence or influence in the Church a 

R1446 : page 277 

tendency more or less strong to observe Sabbath 



as well as Sunday would of course prevail. 
...The earliest recognition of the observance 
of Sunday as a legal duty is a Constitution of 
(the Emperor) Constantine, 321 A.D., enacting 
that all courts of justice, inhabitants of towns 
and workshops were to be at rest on Sunday, 
with an exception in favor of those engaged in 
agricultural labor." 

So, then, it is a misstatement of fact for our 
Seventh-Day friends to say that Pope Gregory 
or any other Pope first by decree instituted 
Sunday or the Lord's-Day as taking the place 
of the Jewish seventh-day Sabbath. Consequently, 
Sunday-keeping could not be "the 
mark of the beast," as they claim. The Decretals 
of Gregory do enjoin Sunday-keeping, saying, 
"We decree that all Sundays be observed, 
from vespers to vespers, and that all unlawful 
work be abstained from, so that in them trading 
or legal proceedings be not carried on." 
But it will be noted that the Emperor Constantine's 

R1447 : page 277 

decree was in 321 A.D., while Gregory 

did not become a pope until 590 A.D. And 

Gregory refers to the fact that the work prohibited 

was already unlawful: hence his decree 

is merely confirmatory of the laws of Constantine 

and other civil rulers preceding him. 

The Roman Catholic church does not now and 
so far as we know never did insist upon a strict 
observance of Sunday. In Catholic countries 
to-day priests and people attend service in the 
forenoon, and give up the afternoon to various 
forms of pleasure— in beer gardens, parks, etc. 

As for ourselves, we delight in the Lord's 
work any and every day; and could and would 
cheerfully accommodate ourselves to any day of 
the week appointed by any government under 
which we might be living, to meet specially 
to study God's Word and to render him worship; 
because under the New Covenant no 
single day is specified, but every day is alike. 
As it is, we rejoice that one day in the week is so 
generally observed (no matter what may be the 
world's object or thought in its observance), 
because it affords the world a day of recreative 
rest and the true believers an opportunity for 
union and communion of heart and voice. 
And we are specially pleased that the day set 
apart by the government under which we live 
is the First Day of the week, because of the 
same blessed memories and associations which 
gave it a special sacredness to the Church in 
the days of the apostles. 



But our friends, the Seventh-Day Adventists, 
are scaring themselves with the ghosts of certain 
misapplied symbols of Revelation relative 
to the Mark of the Beast, etc. They have the 
Seventh Day "on the brain" to such an extent 
that they can see nothing else clearly because 
of the false-importance they give to that 
subject. Noting the fact that religious people, 
seeing the growing tendency here toward a 
European Sunday (which means a Roman Catholic 
Sunday, spent in part at least in concert 
and beer gardens), are moving together for 
uniform laws enforcing present and past prevailing 
customs for the suspension of business 
on that day, our Seventh Day friends jump 
at the conclusion that soon their adherence to 
the Seventh Day will lead them to the stake, 
etc. They are getting greatly agitated and attempting 
to point to these things as fulfilments 
of their misapplications of Revelation, 12th 
and 13th chapters. We quote from one of their 
journals as follows:— 

"IT HAS SPOKEN." 

"And I beheld another beast coming up out of the 
earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake 
as a dragon."— Rev. 13:11. 

"For many years Seventh-day Adventists 
have been keeping their eyes upon this prophecy, 
predicting on the strength of their view 
that the United States Government would oppress 
and persecute those who were striving to 
walk conscientiously before God, as did the 
"dragon"-spirited powers of earth in by-gone 
days. Recently it has become manifest that a 
spirit of intolerance and oppression existed and 
was growing in this Government, but within 
the last week an event has taken place which is 
of the utmost significance in connection with 
the fulfilment of the words of this text. The 
Senate and the House of Representatives of the 
United States have united in saying to this 
country, and to the world, that the World's 
Columbian Exposition shall have joined to it 
the institution of the Sunday Sabbath. They 
have declared, speaking with the voice of the 
Nation, that here in this hitherto free land a 
religious institution shall be enforced by law; 
for legislation always means compulsion. 

R1447 : page 278 

"We are no longer waiting to hear the sound 
which shall herald the fulfilment of this prophecy. 
THE DRAGON VOICE HAS SPOKEN! And 



how long will it be ere it will speak again?" 

This is very absurd. The action of Congress 
in deciding, when appropriating money for the 
World's Fair, that the money should be given 
subject to the restriction, that the Fair be closed 
to the public on Sunday, does not mean "that 
here, in this hitherto free land, a religious 
institution shall be enforced by law." Only a 
mind distorted on this subject could so imagine. 
It is not an interference with personal liberty. 
At very most it was a refusal of the government 
to spend the money collected from the people 
to forward certain opportunities for pleasure, 
of which the majority of tax payers did not approve. 
No fair mind has a right to object to this 
course. As for the writer's own opinion, it is 
that it would have been better to open on Sundays 
certain departments of the Fair— the flower 
and art displays at least— leaving closed those 
portions which would have necessitated human 
labor, that all might have like opportunities 
for rest. And no doubt Congressmen generally 
would have taken as liberal a view of the 
case had they expressed their own sentiments; 
but in spending the money did they err seriously 
in deciding that it should not be used 
contrary to the consciences of the majority 
whose tax the money chiefly represented? 

Those who ask for Sunday observance are not 
persecuting the minority. The minority, be it 
a denomination or an individual, is left perfectly 
free to observe any day in worshiping 
God. So far as the writer is concerned he 
could not conscientiously make any law regarding 
Sunday observance for the worldly, believing 
as he does that God made no such law, and 
that its observance is acceptable to God merely 
as a volunteer exercise of Christian liberty. 
But we see no reason why it should be considered 
persecution for a majority of three-fourths 
of the people of the land (who believe Sunday 
to be of divine ordination) to make laws prohibiting 
labor on that one day of the week 
which they consider to have the divine approval 
and command. 

The fact of the matter is that our Seventh-Day 
friends are fanatically anxious for persecution, 
believing that it is to be the portion of 
all the faithful. We also believe that whosoever 
will live Godly (i.e., according to the 
divine will) shall suffer persecution. But we 
find plenty of persecution without hunting it; 
and we remember also the holy words, "Let 
none of you suffer as. ..an evil-doer, or as a 
busy-body in other men's matters."— 1 Pet. 4:15. 

If we say to them, How are you persecuted? 



How are your consciences interfered with, 

when you attempt to observe Saturday as a Sabbath 

or rest-day? They reply, Oh! it is not 

in that way that we are persecuted: we have 

full liberty to meet and worship, sing and pray 

and rest, all day Saturday. It is when Sunday 

comes and we begin to do our work as upon 

other days. Then the officers of the law pounce 

upon us as law-breakers and persecute us. 

Well, we answer: If you have the liberty 
to worship how you please on the Seventh Day, 
you cannot claim that your consciences are 
interfered with. You should obey the law- 
be "subject to the powers that be"— whenever 
it does not require you to violate God's law— 
as in this case. To refrain from work on the 
First Day of the week surely violates no command 
of God; and hence you should obey the 
law; otherwise you are a law-breaker, and instead 
of suffering persecution for righteousness' 
sake you are violating the Apostle's command, 
But let none of you suffer as an evil-doer or 
a busy-body. 

But so anxious are they for some suffering, 
and so fanatical is their method of reasoning, 
that many of them will reply— Oh, yes! To be 
idle on Sunday would violate our consciences, 
because the Scriptures say: "Six days shalt 
thou labor and do all thy work." How can 
we labor six days, if we must rest two days in 
the week, one on the command of the laws 
of the land, the other on what we believe to 
be the command of God. 

Thus they pervert language to get persecution. 
If each of the six days contains twenty-four 
hours (thus they reckon the Seventh Day— from 
6 P.M. of Friday until 6 P.M. of Saturday), 
then, to take the command literally, as they 
rest twenty-four hours for the Seventh Day, they 
should labor twenty-four hours a day during 

R1447 : page 279 

the other six days. ("Ye that desire to be 
under the Law, do ye not hear the Law?"— 
Gal. 4:21.) But every one of unprejudiced 
mind knows that the command never meant 
that more than one day might not be spent in 
rest, but merely that the Jews must rest during 
the Seventh Day, while during the other 
six they might labor for their own interests. 
Thus seen, the cry of persecution for keeping 
the Seventh Day as a Sabbath is nonsense. 

As for the true interpretation of Revelation, 
12th and 13th chapters: we gave what we considered 
to be such in the TOWER issues of January 



and February, 1883. But as the supply 

of these is long since exhausted, we purpose soon 

republishing those explanations in the TOWER. 



R1447 : page 279 

THE DANGER A DIFFERENT ONE. 



But while we find no fault with any laws yet 
made or attempted to be passed for the prohibition 
of labor on Sunday, or for the curtailment 
of intemperance and gambling, and other 
immoralities, we see a tendency toward a blending 
of civil and religious matters in such degree 
as will become burdensome to minorities. A 
blending of civil and religious authorities would 
be very desirable indeed were the laws and 
officers infallible. Indeed such is the very 
institution which, during the Millennial age, 
is to bless the world— Christ's Kingdom. But 
so long as those in control are fallible and their 
views on politics and religion are various and 
imperfect, so long it will be unsafe and unjust 
toward the liberties and consciences of the minorities 
to enforce upon them the religious convictions 
of the majorities. 

The Seventh-Day people see this phase of the 
subject, too, and would be prepared to look for 
the right things, were it not for their Sabbath 
bugaboo. This is evident from the following, 
clipped from one of their Journals:— 

"United States senators have declared it to 
be 'not wise statesmanship' to disregard the 
demands of the churches for legislation deciding 
a religious controversy as to whether Sunday 
is the Sabbath or not. Now why shall not this 
principle apply to other cases? Why shall not 
the Spiritualists now work up some issue by 
which they can demand legislation which will 
decide the question as to whether or not people 
are alive when they are dead? There are as 
many Spiritualists as there are church members; 
and, of course, it would not be 'wise statesmanship' 
to disregard their demands. Besides 
this, they would have the unanimous and hearty 
support of all 'the evangelical churches' in 
the country. And as Congress has granted the 
demands of the churches alone on this Sunday-Sabbath 
question, how much more would the 
same body grant the demands of the same ones 
over again with largely increased numbers with 
them. For such would only be 'wise statesmanship,' 



according to the latest definition of 

the term. What queer ideas these gentlemen 

have of what statesmanship is ! The truth is that 

it is not statesmanship at all. It is sheer demagogism; 

and that of the worst sort. These 

gentlemen should be told that statesmanship 

does not pander to the selfish and arbitrary 

demands of classes; it creates sound and healthy 

public opinion." 

As we have heretofore stated, the Scriptures 
indicate the formation of a great religious combination, 
which will exercise a measure of political 
power throughout the world, and especially in 
these United States, and which will forcibly restrain 
public expression on religious subjects 
when contrary to its standards. At that time we 
expect that the WATCH TOWER publications will 
be suppressed— the very thing its many enemies 
would now like to accomplish but cannot; 
because now, and for some time yet, the "four 
angels" will hold back the storm— until all the 
servants of God have been sealed in their foreheads 
—given an intellectual appreciation of 
God's plan. (Rev. 7:1-3.) When the suppression 
comes we shall be fully resigned to it, and accept 
it as a sign that the membership of the elect 
Church, the bride or body of Christ, has been 
completed. When this occurs we shall understand 
it to be the shutting of the door of opportunity 
to membership in the elect Church, 
mentioned by our Lord in Matt. 25: 10. This 
will probably be some twelve or fifteen years 
hence. Soon after, the intensity of the great 
trouble and anarchy may be expected. 

If we know these things, happy are we if we 
act accordingly, and engage in the harvest work 
during harvest-time. "The time is short." 



R1449 : page 280 
MOSES AND ELIAS. 



The transfiguration of Jesus in the presence 
of three of his disciples is a point of interest 
to many, not because they see its lesson and 
significance, but because they do not see them. 
We read that there "appeared" to the disciples 
Moses and Elias, talking with Jesus. (Matt. 17:1-9.) 
Our Lord was transfigured (changed in 
appearance). His face did shine as the sun 
and his raiment was white as the light. A 
bright cloud overshadowed and surrounded 



them, and a voice out of the cloud said, "This 
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; 
hear ye him." "And when the disciples heard 
it they fell on their faces and were sore afraid. 
And Jesus came and touched them, and said, 
Arise, be not afraid. And when they had 
lifted up their eyes they saw Jesus only." 

We might wonder and speculate about how 
Moses and Elijah came to be on the mountain, 
how the disciples, who never saw either of 
them, could know them, etc., etc.; but all such 
speculation is set at rest by Jesus telling the 
disciples that they had seen a vision. As they 
came down from the mountain, Jesus charged 
them, saying: "Tell the vision to no man, until 
the Son of man be risen again from the dead." 
(Matt. 17:9.) To the disciples the vision 
seemed a reality, just as to John at Patmos the 
various visions recorded in Revelation were 
clear and distinct; but our Lord certainly knew 
all about it, and we will rest on his testimony 
that it was a vision. 

To think otherwise would involve the contradiction 
of sundry plain Bible statements; 
for instance, Jesus was not yet crucified, hence 
had not risen from the dead, and we know that 
he is the "first-born from the dead." But if 
Moses had already been resurrected, our Lord 
Jesus was not the first-fruits of them that slept. 
(1 Cor. 15:20.) The bringing back to life of 
Lazarus and others, we have heretofore shown, 
is not called resurrection, because they were not 
entirely delivered from the power 
of death— but died again. 

But let us see, if we can, what lesson was 
taught or what important truth was illustrated 
by this transfiguration scene or vision. Doubtless 
in that way we shall see a reason for the 
presenting of Moses and Elijah in the vision. 

Peter, who was one of those present on the 
occasion, mentions it in his letter long afterward. 
He says: "We have not followed cunningly 
devised fables, when we made known 
unto you the power and coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses of his 
majesty. For he received from God the Father 
honor and glory, when there came such a voice 
to him from the excellent glory: 'This is my 
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.' 
And this voice we heard, when we were with 
him in the holy mount."— 2 Pet. 1:16-18. 

We understand Peter to tell us, then, that the 
transfiguration vision was an illustration or presentation 
in vision of the "majesty" and 
"power" of his presence (parousia— here translated 
coming). It is, then, to be understood 



as representing the establishment of the Kingdom 
at our Lord's second presence. Therefore, 
from our standpoint, it is an illustration of the 
present time, in which the King is present 
and the Kingdom being established. Moses, 
we have seen, represents the human element 
of the Kingdom ("Moses, verily, was faithful in 
all his house as a servant"— Heb. 3:5); while 
Elijah represents the entire Gospel Church— 
the spiritual house of sons. Elsewhere we have 
seen that there will be these two classes in the 
Kingdom— an earthly and a heavenly— over 
all of which, the orderer of both phases, will 
be Christ Jesus; and this fits perfectly with the 
vision— Moses and Elijah, with our Redeemer 
in the midst, transfigured and shining. 

So now, in his presence, we see not only the 
evidences of the spiritual Kingdom in the 
harvesting and sifting of the wheat, but also 
preparation being made for the establishment 
of the earthly or perfect human phase of the 
Kingdom. This is no cunningly devised fable, 
and was not only shown to Peter and others in 
vision, but "we have also a more sure word of 
prophecy," which bears the same testimony, 
"whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as 
unto a light that shineth in a dark place."— 
2 Pet. 1:19. 



R1448 : page 281 

WHO IS WISE AMONG YOU? 



"Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge 
among you?" inquires the Apostle James 
(Jas. 3:13); and the question is one which all 
may consider with profit. Many indeed are 
endued with considerable knowledge, who display 
but little wisdom. Knowledge truly is 
of great importance, but it is only as it develops 
wisdom— sound judgment and pure and 
high-toned sentiment. This is the main object 
of God's revelation of himself to us. And the 
wisdom that comes thus, through the channel 
of divine truth, the Apostle describes as, "first 
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, 
full of mercy and good fruits, without 
partiality and without hypocrisy."— Verse 17. 

Such a character is the result of the transforming 
influence of divine truth. God's revelation 
is a mirror of his character, in which we 
see reflected his purity and love and goodness; 



and as we therein trace the lines of his glorious 

character the desire grows and strengthens to 

be more like him whom we thus learn to admire 

and love. The sincere heart, accepting 

the divine plan and its gracious provisions of 

salvation and blessing through Christ, at once 

begins to fashion itself in conformity with God's 

character by first putting away sin and then by 

striving daily to live a life of purity and holiness. 

With this effort come in the peace of 

God and the love of God, to rule and take possession 

of the whole man. And when the 

heart is thus cleansed and filled with God, the 

fruits of such an indwelling life-principle become 

very manifest to all beholders, in gentleness, 

mercy, goodness, and pure and holy 

friendship with all who are like-minded. 

In contrast with this wisdom which cometh 
down from above the Apostle mentions another 
kind, which he describes as earthly, sensual, 
devilish. It is a wisdom or low cunning which 
is prompted by a spirit of envy and strife, and 
is always productive of "confusion and every 
evil work." Pride and selfishness are the inspiration 
of this kind of wisdom, just as in the 
case of Satan; and therefore let every one who 
names the name of Christ keep very humble. 
To harbor such a spirit of malice, of bitter envy 
and strife, while still professing to have the 
spirit of truth, the Apostle describes as "lying 
against the truth." God forbid that it should 
find place in the hearts of any who have thus 
far been faithful and have run well. 

How carefully we need to guard our hearts 
against the slightest rising of pride and worldly 
ambition, and against every root of bitterness 
which, springing up, might trouble us. 
There are thousands of occurrences and circumstances 
in life which are calculated to bring us 
into bondage to the spirit of the world, and 
only those who keep a vigilant watch and an 
ever-prayerful attitude can hope to be kept in 
this evil day. Temptations and trials seldom 
give us warning of their approach, and therefore 
our armor of righteousness must ever be 
adjusted and securely buckled on. 
"Leave no unguarded place, 
No weakness of the soul; 
Take every virtue, every grace, 
And fortify the whole." 

Heed carefully the Apostle's instruction— 
"Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge 
among you? let him show by honorable 
conduct his works with meekness of wisdom." 
It is by our conduct and not by our professions 
that we are to be judged; and if any man have 



the true heavenly wisdom which is always coupled 
with meekness— humility— it will surely 
manifest itself in a straightforward, manly, 
honorable course of conduct, dictated by the 
wisdom which cometh down from above, which 
is always pure [unselfish], peaceable, gentle, 
compassionate and sincere. 

May the Lord grant to all his loyal sons an 
abundance of this heavenly wisdom and the 
rich rewards of grace and peace that always accompany 
it. Put away all these— Malice, Envy, 
Hatred, Selfish-ambitions— and put on those 
adornments of Christ's spirit— Humility, Gentleness, 
Generosity, Meekness, Love. "If any 
man have not the spirit of Christ [in some degree] 
he is none of his." And he in whom 
these graces are not being cultivated and increased 

R1448 : page 282 

will soon lose them and be choked with 
the selfish and ignoble spirit of the world. 

There are some of the children of the world 
who have cultivated outward gentleness and 
benevolence for policy's sake, whose hearts, as 
privately expressed, are full of bitterness, envy 
and selfishness; and there are some of God's 
children who naturally are very selfish and mean, 
but whose changed hearts are fighting against 
the weaknesses of the flesh, and who afterward 
repent of selfishness and meanness. But let 
such press along the line and seek for grace to 
help in every time of need. Their progress toward 
the likeness of Christ will gradually manifest 
itself to them and to others. "If the 
spirit of Christ dwell in you, he [God] that 
raised up Christ from the dead [has also the 
power and] will also quicken [to activity in his 
service and to his praise, in the present life] 
your mortal bodies." 

Here, then, we have the earthly wisdom 
which is based upon selfishness contrasted with 
the heavenly wisdom based upon love and service 
to others. Whoever is really wise will choose 
the heavenly— the end of which, in Christ, is 
everlasting life. 



R1449 : page 282 

FUTURE PROBATION FOR THE DEAD. 



"This is the Second Death, the Lake of Fire. 



(Rev. 20:14.) To these words the sentence is 
added, "Whosoever was not found written in 
the Book of Life was cast into the Lake of Fire." 

Though the prospect here looks sad indeed, 
must Hope be altogether relinquished? "The 
miserable have no other medicine, but only 
Hope." True those words may be of this life 
and death, but will hope animate the breasts 
of those upon whom this awful sentence of the 
second death is passed, as it did the breasts of 
our first parents, when incurring the sentence 
of the first death they rested on the word that 
"the serpent's head should be bruised?" 

That such a sentence may not or will not be 
the lot of any who have had the opportunity 
"in due time" of fully knowing the truth by 
realizing the effect of the Ransom that Love 
gave in their liberation from death's captivity, 
I do not undertake to say; I can and do most 
heartily hope it will not be, yet I feel that such 
prophetic threatenings as abound in the Scriptures, 
though known at one time only to Jews, 
and in subsequent times, though very partially, 
to the nations, yet in a coming period to be 
clearly and fully known, cannot be meaningless 
ones. 

That character hereafter may be largely affected 
by the character displayed here on the 
part of the unconverted is a most likely thing, 
thus making it a solemn thing to live; because 
whatever may be the environments of the man 
in resurrection, however really he may be physically 
and mentally "made whole or saved," 
the same man morally, and knowing himself to 
be such man, is raised from the dead; and false 
appearances will stand us in no stead hereafter. 
All deceptions will be removed from man then, 
and "the mask fall from him." Nero will not 
rise a John, nor Cleopatra a Mary, nor the 
Caesar Borgia a Peter, even though he wore the 
Fisherman's ring. A man, dying out of Christ 
a wicked man, will not rise "in Christ," as 
some fancy from a misinterpretation of those 
words in 1 Cor. 15:22. Sodom rises, not a 
people whose "sin was destroyed" by their 
destruction, even in type, but the same persons 
who died, and who, though restored to Adamic 
life, could not and will not be ipso facto restored 
to innocence and holiness. But as a tree renewed 
in springtime would be the same tree, 
yet would require not a cutting off of its old 
branches, but a grafting of another or a new 
kind of life into it, in order to bring forth another 
and a different kind of fruit from that 
which it had formerly borne, so with Sodom 
and Samaria and Israel, as Ezekiel shows, 36:23-27, 



etc. The man "made whole" at Bethesda's 
Pool received with his healing the solemn 
warning, "Go and sin no more, lest a worse 
thing befall thee." 

It is this "worse thing," then, that we are 
now to consider: for as that whole transaction 
was a "sign," the words carry some deep import. 
To me they have the import, or are a 
sign, of the future death; for to him the present 

R1449 : page 283 

life was dear when possessing it even in its 
misery; and the first death would inevitably 
overtake him, however reformed he became; 
which would not be the "worse thing" set before 
him, save in type in the sign. It is this 
subject that the student of the future of man 
must not leave out of his careful reflections 
when dealing with the subject of coming judgment, 
for it occupies much space in the word 
of Prophecy. 

Here again the caution in interpretation is 
needed, "Distinguish the periods and the Scriptures 
will agree;" for as in other matters confusion 
has arisen from want of attention to that 
sound axiom, so the first and second deaths 
have also been confounded. 

The strength of Calvinism lies in its grasp 
of the Sovereign Power and Grace of God; that 
of Arminianism in the use God makes of instrumentalities; 
and the strength of Universalism 
in the prominence it gives to the fatherly 
love of God. But each has its weak points (as 
what has not that man formulates?)— Calvinism, 
from not taking into full consideration the 
points of Arminianism and Universalism; and 
Arminianism, from not understanding how to 
arrange rightly the truth that the former so 
sternly and unlovingly upheld. Universalism, 
by far more true than either to the fatherly 
conception of Almighty God, has never, to my 
mind, squared itself fairly with the oft-repeated 
threatenings of the personal destruction of the 
wilfully disobedient sinner; nor with the stern 
decree of the sentence, "the soul that sins shall 
die."-Ezek. 18:20. 

Now whilst allowing all due force to the suggestive 
thought which Universalists maintain 
to-day (some in so many words, and, I think, 
all mainly so in spirit), that "the destruction of 
the sinner" means the destruction of sin in 
him, I would ask: Can the thought be honestly 
maintained according to the natural laws of 
language, the harmonious interpretation of figures, 
and the character of judicial threatenings 



to evil-doers? 

As Locke says, in his "Reasonableness of 
Christianity," with regard to the figurative 
practices of theologians concerning God's warnings 
to Adam: "It seems a strange way of 
understanding a law, which requires the plainest 
words, that by death should be meant everlasting 
life in misery;" so one may say of such 
modes of interpreting subsequent threats. It is 
a strange way of understanding God's judicial 
code of penalties for wilful sin in the future, 
that such words as "the soul that sinneth, it 
shall die"— shall incur the indignation of the 
devouring fire, shall be destroyed— mean destroying 
the sin, not the person himself. 

This is not a matter of our hopes and desires, 
it is a matter of interpretation, or of understanding 
what is the judicial penalty for sin 
threatened in the Word of God when man has 
arrived at "the full knowledge of the truth," 
and when sin, being "full grown, bringeth forth 
death. "-Heb. 10:26; James 1:15. 

When Paul says, "The end of those [sinful] 
things is death," as "the end of holiness is 
eternal life; for the wages of sin is death; but 
the gift of God eternal life in Christ Jesus" 
(Rom. 6), does the death clause here refer to 
the first death? seeing that the holy and the 
sinful alike die that death. That it includes 
the former, it may be; but seeing that the true 
antithesis to eternal life is eternal death, it 
would appear that Paul's language extends farther 
than at first sight it may seem to do. In 
this respect, to let language have a fair range 
and potency, it may be well to note a few of 
the plain words of Scripture, and the figurative 
ones also, expressing the same thing. 

That man is not annihilated at the first death 
is clear from our Lord's words in Matt. 10:28; 
but that man can be destroyed should he sin 
after resurrection is as plainly affirmed in that 
same sentence. Gehenna was the place of burning 
outside Jerusalem for corrupt things, offerings, 
or sacrifices of persons in idolatrous worship 
(Jer. 7:31; 19:6, etc., also Isa. 30:33); 
and appears to be used as a type of the real 
Gehenna, or Lake of Fire, unquenchable till its 
work is done. 

These statements, when connected with evil-doers, 
are indicative, not of purifying the persons 
by the destruction of the evil in them, but 
rather of purifying the world by their own 
actual destruction, or removal by "the second 
death." 

R1449 : page 284 



I have heard great stress laid on the view 
that "God wills not the death of a sinner;" 
and, misplacing the somewhat inaccurate quotation, 
they attach it to the statements made in 
Ezek. 18 and 33. Now, God does not say He 
wills it not, but "I have no pleasure in the 
death of him that dies." The quotation alluded 
to occurs thus in 2 Pet. 3:9: "The Lord 
is not slack concerning His promise, but is 
long suffering to us-ward, not willing that any 
should perish, but that all should come to 
repentance." 

This statement is in harmony with the one 
given by Paul, that "He wills all men to be 
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the 
truth;" and His will undoubtedly will be accomplished, 
otherwise one can be sure of nothing, 
and could repose no confidence in His 
Word; but I do not know that anywhere He 
implies that He wills not the death of him who 
dies, i.e., in the coming age, for his own sin, 
but that He "has no pleasure or delight" in it, 
which is a very different sentiment; for it is 
evidently His will that "the soul [or person, 
so restored in the resurrection time] that sinneth 
[wilfully] shall die." 

Some say the only way that death can be 
known to have been destroyed or rendered null 
is by the release or resurrection of every captive. 
At first sight this appears to be of considerable 
weight, because as darkness can be 
destroyed or rendered null only by light, so 
death must be by life; and in one sense such 
view is fundamentally correct; because all that 
have been its captives will, ere the destruction 
of Death itself, have been released from its 
grasp. Yet upon looking into it more closely, 
it does not appear to be a sound argument; 
for the Power which destroys Death in the Lake 
of Fire is that which is afterward exercised upon 
those not written in the Book of Life: thus 
making the position false which assumes that 
because destroyed they are therefore still under 
the dominion of Death rather than the dominion 
of Death's Destroyer. Such a view therefore 

R1450 : page 284 

demands too much when it maintains that its 
solution of the question is the only true one. 
The warning voice of Jude is not without 
great significance in regard to this matter. He 
writes: "I will therefore put you in remembrance, 
though you once knew this, how that the Lord, 
having saved the people out of Egypt, afterwards 



(literally, the second time, or secondly) 

destroyed them that believed not." It would 

seem, therefore, that Israel as a type (see 1 Cor. 10:11) 

is here presented to view, particularly 

in that part of their history. In this light they 

had passed through death and resurrection in 

the Red Sea when "baptized into Moses" (as 

that ordinance denotes, according to Paul, 

death and resurrection— Rom. 6), and were on 

their way to the Rest of God; and it was not 

in their first sad condition of bondage and 

misery in Egypt that the anger of the Lord was 

thus manifested, but in their delivered and 

saved condition out of it. 

In summing up, I may say it is clear that the 
first death terminates the first life [and would, 
were there no redemption and resurrection, be 
death in its real import]. Does not all reasoning 
by analogy therefore require us to believe 
that the second death ends the second life; 
and that, if no resurrection therefrom follows, 
it becomes as absolute a termination to life as 
the first death would have been under similar 
circumstances? 

We can see how perfectly equitable is the arrangement, 
that as the first death entered and 
spread throughout all the race entirely independent 
of human will or personal act [except 
Adam's], the recovery by redemption and 
resurrection extends as far. (Rom. 5:18.) But 
the second death enters under totally different 
conditions, and is not independent of each 
man's will or personal act. (Jer. 31:29,30.) 
So that a radical difference exists between the 
two conditions: experience of good and evil, 
and knowledge of the truth, will take the place 
of ignorance; and every facility and inducement 
to resist evil and follow that which is good will 
be given. 

To say the sacrifice of Christ covers also the 
second death goes beyond Scripture (Heb. 10:26); 
and not only so, but such a statement 
does not appear to be in harmony with reason, 
in the face of all the advantages accruing 
under the new order of things following. 

As the Lord said by Isaiah concerning Israel: 

R1450 : page 285 

"What could have been done more to My vineyard 
that I have not done in it?" so likewise 
concerning that period of "restitution of all 
things," we may say of man so restored, "What 
more could have been done?" A full ransom 
freely given for all; a recovery from death extending 
as far as the sin; a full knowledge of 



the truth acquired; the whole environment of 
restored man, without and within, in his favor; 
and in such a condition a full trial or probation 
for life evermore! 

Should such incur the second death by wilful 
sin, would not the echo of God's solemn appeal 
be heard, "What more could have been done?" 
Have those solemn words, regarding such as 
have partaken of "the powers of the age to 
come" and apostatized, no force? "It is impossible 
to renew them again unto repentance, 
seeing they crucified unto themselves the Son 
of God afresh and put Him to an open shame." 

It is a sad picture! this closing scene portrayed 
in Rev. 20: 15— the second death. Our 
first parents had the cheering word from Love 
upon which Faith could fasten and Hope subsist; 
but in vain we search everywhere for 
words from God, for Faith and Hope. Adam 
and Eve went out of Eden, and in due time 
reached the Valley of the Shadow of Death, 
with the blessed words of resurrection life still 
sounding in their ears, "The woman's seed 
shall bruise the serpent's head." I can hear 
no sound from the depths of the second death; 
but I hear, as it were, God's appeal to the universe, 
"What more could have been done?" 
"Just and true are Thy ways, O King of 
Ages!" — W. Brookman. 



page 285 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULLNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 
PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1450 : page 285 

DORCAS RAISED TO LIFE. 



FOURTH QUAR., LESSON II., OCT. 9, ACTS 9:32-43. 

Golden Text— "This woman was full of good works and 
almsdeeds which she did."— Acts 9:36. 



This lesson presents two instances of the exercise 
of the gift of healing on the part of the 
Apostle Peter. In the one case there was the 
restoration to health from a long and severe 
illness, and in the other case the restoration to 
life of one who had succumbed to the power of 
disease and was dead. The result of the miracles 
in both cases was faith on the part of the 
people who saw in them the Lord Jesus Christ, 
in whose name they had been accomplished; 
and faith in Peter as a servant of the Lord, and 
in his teachings concerning Christ and his coming 
kingdom, and the blessings promised to all 
them that believe in him. 

And this was the object in the performance 
of these miracles— viz., to establish the authority 
of the apostles' teachings by thus showing 
to all men that the Lord was working with them 
and thus endorsing them. 

It is also noteworthy that in every such instance 
of the manifestation of divine power the 
effect was the same: there was a large increase 
in the number of believers. And yet we find 
that this potent agency for the conversion of 
the world did not survive the days of the apostles; 
and consequently the world is full of doubting 
Thomases who would believe if they had 
some more tangible evidences of the divine 
purpose and power. How shall we account for 
this seeming indifference on the Lord's part in 
the matter of the world's conversion? 

The Scriptures answer that it is because "the 
Lord hath appointed a day"— a set time— in 
which he purposes to give to all men just the 
kind of evidence which their doubting and unbelieving 
condition of mind requires. Then— 
in the Millennial age or Times of Restitution 
—he will say to all, Open thine eyes, and reach 
hither thy hand, and behold the manifestations 
of my power, and be not faithless but believing. 
And then will follow the speedy conversion of 
the world to God. These manifestations of 
divine power will come first in a great time of 
trouble (Dan. 12:1) which will completely revolutionize 
the whole present social order of 
the world and bring in a new and better order, 
based upon sounder principles of justice and 
truth. Then will follow manifestations of power 
in the healing of the morally and physically 
sick and infirm, the lame, the halt, the blind 
and the deaf, and the awaking of all the generations 
of the dead to life. When these mighty 
works are done in the earth there will not be 

R1450 : page 286 



room for a single doubt as to God's purpose and 
plan and power, and of his glorious and righteous 
character; for then "all shall know the 
Lord from the least to the greatest," and the 
way of life will be made so plain that "the 
wayfaring men though unlearned shall not err 
therein. "--Jer. 31:34; Isa. 35:8. 

But we call to mind the words of the Lord 
to Thomas after giving him the tangible 
evidence that his weak faith demanded, saying, 
"Blessed are they that have not seen and yet 
have believed"— whose confidence in God is 
simple enough to take him at his word without 
the evidence of their senses. It has been 
for the purpose of selecting out from among men 
such strong and fearless characters, and granting 
to them the special blessedness of joint-heirship 
with Christ, that the appointed time 
for manifesting the divine power to the world 
is delayed. The Gospel age now closing has 
been the appointed time for the selection of 
this "blessed" class; and when this work is 
fully accomplished, the enlightenment, conversion 
and blessing of the world will follow. 

There is another fact noticeable in connection 
with this narrative; and that is, that when 
Dorcas came to life again, although she was a 
good woman and a child of the Lord, and therefore 
one whom all the creeds of "Christendom" 
would send to heaven as soon as she died, yet 
when she was awakened to life she had no wonderful 
experiences or mysterious visions to relate, 
nor any disappointment to express at being 
recalled to this mundane sphere. She 
simply opened her eyes and recognized Peter, 
and, accepting his helping hand, sat up and received 
the congratulations of her friends. And 
the same may be observed in every case of 
awakening from death. See the accounts of 
the awakening of Lazarus, of the son of the 
widow of Nain, of Jairus' daughter and others. 
And then let the student remember the clear 
statements of the Scriptures— "The dead know 
not any thing;" "His sons come to honor, and 
he knoweth it not; and they are brought low, 
but he perceiveth it not of them;" and "No 
man hath ascended up to heaven but he that 
came down from heaven, even the Son of 
man;" "There is no work, nor device, nor 
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither 
thou goest."-Eccl. 9:5; Job 14:21; John 3:13; 
Eccl. 9:10. 

With these statements and observations before 
us, call to mind also the prominence given in the 
Scriptures to the doctrine of the resurrection— 



how Paul said that except for the promise of a 
resurrection our hope and faith would be vain; 
and how when he had finished his course he did 
not expect to go to heaven, but to await the 
Lord's return to earth, when he and all the 
faithful would be rewarded by having part in 
the "first resurrection."— 1 Cor. 15:13,14; 
2 Tim. 4:7,8. 

Thus in the light of the Scriptures death is 
seen to be just what God intended it should be 
—an "enemy," an undesirable thing, a penalty 

R1451 : page 286 

for sin. And we are then able to thank God 

for the victory over this enemy, through our Lord 

Jesus Christ, by a resurrection from the dead; 

and with the early Church to appreciate and 

look forward with joy to his second appearing, 

when the resurrection of the dead will be accomplished. 

The few instances of awakening to life 

recorded in the Scriptures, but never repeated 

since the days of the apostles, were not resurrections 

in the full sense of the term anastasis, 

which signifies a full raising up to perfection of 

life and health, never again to relapse into 

death, as all of these died, because the appointed 

time for full restitution had not yet 

come. These instances were given to aid our 

faith in looking forward to the full restitution 

or resurrection promised at the time appointed, 

as well as to divinely endorse the teaching of 

the Lord and the Apostles and some of the 

Prophets. 

In the life of Dorcas, of which this brief 
narrative gives us a glimpse, we see an example 
of Christian benevolence and zeal well worthy of 
imitation in spirit if not in exact detail. There 
often are temporary necessities now among 
poor neighbors and friends for the use of the 
needle in works of charity; but such necessities 
are far less common now than they were in the 
days here referred to, being superseded by 
public benevolence on a much larger and 
more effective scale. But there is always the 
still more important work on hand of feeding 
the hungry soul with the bread of life and 
clothing the naked with the robe of Christ's 
righteousness— a work in which this good 
woman doubtless engaged also, at the same 
time that she sought to relieve the temporal 
necessities of the needy poor. 

When Dorcas was dying she was surrounded 
and ministered to by the loving hands of 
the Lord's people, the saints, and many poor 
widows whom she had lovingly sought out and 



ministered to previously. And when she was 
restored to life these were there to bid her 
welcome. How suggestive the thought— If we 
live the life of self-sacrificing love and devotion 
to God and his cause, sweet will be the awakening 
and the blessed re-unions beyond these 
scenes of sorrow and suffering. Blessed are the 
dead who die in the Lord; and blessed and 
holy are all they that shall have part in the first 
resurrection. 

R1451 : page 287 

SALVATION REACHES THE GENTILES. 



LESSONS III. & IV., OCT. 16 AND 23, ACTS 10. 

Golden Text— "Of a truth I perceive that God is no 
respecter of persons."— Acts 10:34. 

In this lesson we have an account of the first 
presentation of the gospel to the Gentiles. It 
will be remembered that all the teaching of the 
Lord and of the apostles had been, up to this 
time, confined to Israel; that when Jesus sent 
out his twelve disciples to preach the gospel of 
the kingdom, he strictly charged them, saying, 
"Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into 
any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; 
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel" (Matt. 10:5,6); that when a Gentile 
woman besought the Lord to heal her 
daughter he replied, "I am not sent but unto 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. ...It 
is not meet to take the children's [Israel's] 
bread [favor] and to cast it to dogs" [Gentiles 
—for such the Jews termed their Gentile neighbors], 
though when the poor woman was willing 
to accept a morsel of favor merely as a 
crumb from the children's table, she received 
her request. -Matt. 15:24-28. 

This was because the appointed time had not 
yet come, according to God's plan, for favor 
to be shown to any people but Israel. God 
had abundant favor in store for "all the families 
of the earth," but his plan of salvation and 
blessing is a systematic, orderly arrangement, 
all the times and seasons and circumstances and 
details of which were planned and fixed by 
unerring wisdom for the accomplishment of a 
glorious purpose. According to that plan, seventy 
weeks of years (490 years) from a certain 
definite period were marked off as a special divine 
favor to Israel (Dan. 9:24); and those 



seventy weeks ended three and a half years after 

the death of Christ, from which time the gospel 

message was no longer to be confined to Israel, 

but might go to the Gentiles also, as it did, 

beginning with Cornelius, who was the first 

Gentile who received divine favor as a Gentile, 

without becoming a Jewish proselyte. Previous 

to this time even the Lord Jesus, whose 

work was strictly in accordance with Jehovah's 

plan with reference to both time and method, 

could not show favor to the Gentiles, and would 

not therefore have granted the Gentile woman's 

request for the healing of her daughter 

had she not been willing to receive it humbly 

as a crumb from the children's table, thus acknowledging 

that she was not a recognized child 

of God or heir of his favor, but willing, as an 

alien and an outcast from the commonwealth 

of Israel, to accept her portion as an unworthy 

"dog." 

But, thank God, though both Jews and Gentiles 
have been unworthy of his favor, his love 
and grace abounds through Christ toward us all. 
And in the clearer light of a fuller development 
of his plan we now see that even the exclusiveness 
of his favor to unworthy Israel for an appointed 
time was a measure of his wisdom— a 
necessary feature in the glorious plan for the blessing 
of all the families of the earth in due time. 
-See Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., Chapter III. 

God chose a very striking method of calling 
the attention of the Apostle, as well as of Cornelius, 
to the fact that God's due time for extending 
his favor beyond the Jews to the Gentiles 
had come. 

It will be observed from this lesson that God 
puts a very different value to the words "saved 
man" from that generally given to those words 
by Christians to-day, who by reason of an erroneous 
view of the divine plan misuse the 
words. Cornelius was a good, devout man, one 
who believed in God and prayed to him, and 
who gave much alms to the poor, and who had 
built a synagogue or chapel for some poor Jews. 
Many to-day would say to Peter, Why go to that 
man? He is a saved man already. Go, spend 
your time more profitably laboring with publicans, 
harlots, vagabonds and prodigals; for this 
man already is good and devout and a believer. 
So, too, they often say to us to-day— marvelling 
that we teach the way of the Lord more 
perfectly to some who already have some knowledge 
of God. 

From God's standpoint, which must be the 
true one, Cornelius was not a saved man, although 
a well-meaning, benevolent and praying 



man. God puts great stress upon faith— 
not only upon a faith, but upon the faith. He 
sent word by an angel to Cornelius, saying, 
Send for Peter and he shall "speak unto thee" 
and "tell thee words WHEREBY thou and all thy 
house shall be saved. "-Acts 10:32; 11:14. 

A false idea of "lost" has gotten possession 
of men's minds since the great falling away 
from the simplicity of the primitive Church; 
and hence "saved" also has a distorted meaning. 
Under the false but common view, "lost" 
means condemned to eternal torment, and 
"saved" means released from such an awful 
calamity. No wonder, then, that with such 
wrong ideas people in general should to-day 
conclude that "a devout man, who prayed 
to God and gave much alms to the poor" 
ought to be a "saved" man. Such a man certainly 
ought to be saved from eternal torment, 
according to every one's concept of fair-dealing. 

The fact is that "lost" does not mean sentenced 
to eternal torment; and hence "saved" 
cannot mean recovered from such a fate. The 

R1451 : page 288 

loss or penalty of sin is to be "lost" or cut off 
from divine favor and blessings, as strangers 
and aliens; and hence to be under the penalty 
of death— loss of life. And "saved" means 
to be removed from that alienated condition- 
to be brought nigh to God and recognized no 
longer as sinners but as sons; and as such to 
have his blessing, which includes the favor of 
lasting life. 

All Gentiles were in this "lost" or alien 
and condemned to death state from the time of 
Adam's sin. Only the one nation, Israel, had 
been restored to divine favor and fellowship 
(and that as a type), accepted through a typical 
covenant, based upon a typical cleansing, by 
typical sacrifices. When the true sacrifice had 
been offered, three years and a half of exclusive 
favor remained to Israel under God's promise, 
although the great Sin-offering or ransom price 
given was not for Jews only, but for "all"— 
"every man." Cornelius was the first Gentile 
received back into the divine favor as a son: the 
first "saved" or delivered from separation from 
God and the sentence of death, to fellowship, 
and heirship in the promises of God of eternal 
life through Christ. 

Next notice what were those important 
"words," the believing of which "saved" or 
delivered Cornelius from condemnation and 
alienation. They were the simple statement 



(briefly recounted in Acts 10:34-43) of the 
facts: How God had anointed Jesus with the 
holy Spirit and power at his baptism; how 
after using this power for the good of others he 
had been crucified; how God raised him from 
the dead and appointed him to be the Judge of 
the living and the dead (—which implies a new 
trial for all who had been sentenced when judged 
and tried as a race in the loins of Adam). 
Peter explained these facts in harmony with 
what the prophets had witnessed to on the subject 
(See Isaiah 55), no doubt quoting: "He 
poured out his soul [being] into death." "For 
the iniquity of my people was he smitten." 
"He made his soul an offering for sin." "The 
Lord let fall upon him the iniquity of us all." 

R1452 : page 288 

"He was bruised for our iniquities, and by his 
stripes we are healed." Then, applying all 
this (verses 36 and 43), Peter showed that this 
is a preaching of "peace" and "remission of 
sins" to all who believe these facts and accept 
by faith this grace of God in Christ. 

A simple message, truly; yet very necessary 
to be told to and to be believed by Cornelius and 
his household before they could be Christians 
or brethren, or "saved" in God's sense of that 
word. 

So, too, it must be with all, whether in this 
age or in the next age: in order to be "saved" 
they must believe; and in order to believe they 
must hear, in some way, this same gospel declared 
to Cornelius. And it must "be testified 
to ALL in due time," that "there is one Mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ 
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all."— 
1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

What a rebuttal this lesson is to the theory 
of some, that the heathen may be "saved" 
without having heard of Christ. Let us hold 
close to the Lord's way and the Lord's time 
for giving to all this gracious testimony of the 
peace and forgiveness effected by the blood of 
the cross for every one that believeth. To the 
Jew first it was given, and since to many Gentiles; 
but ultimately, "in due time," it is to be 
made known fully and clearly to every man. 



R1448 : page 288 

PERFECT THROUGH SUFFERING. 



God never would send you the darkness, 
If he felt you could bear the light; 

But you would not cling to his guiding hand 
If the way were always bright; 

And you would not care to walk by faith, 
Could you always walk by sight. 

Tis true he has many an anguish 
For your sorrowful heart to bear, 

And many a cruel thorn-crown 
For your tired head to wear; 

He knows how few would reach heaven at all 
If pain did not guide them there. 

So he sends you the blinding darkness, 
And the furnace of seven-fold heat: 

'Tis the only way, believe me, 
To keep you close to his feet— 

For 'tis always so easy to wander 
When our lives are glad and sweet. 

Then nestle your hand in your Father's 
And sing, if you can, as you go; 

Your song may cheer some one behind you 
Whose courage is sinking low; 

And, well, if your lips do quiver- 
God will love you better so. 



page 288 

WHILE A SAMPLE COPY OF "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER" OR ONE OF OUR FREE "OLD THEOLOGY 
TRACTS" MAY START A HUNGRY SOUL TO INVESTIGATING, 
IT CAN DO LITTLE MORE. TELL SUCH THAT 
THE HELP THEY NEED FOR UNDERSTANDING THE BIBLE 
IN THE LIGHT OF PRESENT TRUTH IS "THE PLAN 
OF THE AGES"-OVER 300,000 ALREADY PUBLISHED 
-350 PAGES. TELL THEM OF THE BENEFIT IT HAS 
BEEN TO YOUR OWN HEART AND HEAD, AND HOW YOU 
VALUE IT, AND THAT IT IS ONLY 25 CENTS POST-PAID 
-OR LOANED TO THOSE TOO POOR TO BUY-AND 
URGE THEM TO SEND FOR IT AT ONCE. 



page 290 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1452 : page 290 
IMMIGRATION OF JEWS. 



Our quarantine laws, as enforced at this time, 
interfere with the execution of Baron Hirsch's 
remarkable project for the transfer of the main 
body of the Jewish population of Russia to the 
United States. 

About two months ago, according to the 
news we have printed from St. Petersburg, the 
Czar authorized the Jewish millionaire to carry 
out his project, and several ship loads of the 
people were sent from Hamburg last month 
under the baron's responsibility. We have 
reason to believe that about 10,000 of them 
were on their way to Hamburg, and that 15,000 
more were ready to leave Russia, when the 



cholera became epidemic both in St. Petersburg 

and Hamburg. As many as 3000 have 

been shipped to this country since the beginning 

of last month, while all the others are in 

a bad plight. 

Some are in various European ports, British 
as well as German, Belgian and French, hoping 
that they will yet be able to take passage; 
some have been driven back to the Russian 
pale which they had left; and those who were 
about to leave the pale had been compelled to 
stay there, being forbidden to cross the countries 
that lie between Russia and the western 
seaports. About 40,000 of the Jewish people 
of Russia, 25,000 of them under Baron Hirsch's 
auspices, would have reached the United States 
in the last four months of this year, if the new 
quarantine regulations had not been set up along 
our whole seaboard from Canada to Mexico. 

Now that they are barred out of Germany 
and troubled with the American quarantine, it 
is unlikely that more than two or three thousand 
will arrive here between this time and the 
end of December. 

According to our advices from St. Petersburg, 
Baron Hirsch made arrangements with the 
Czar for the exodus of 3,500,000 of the Jewish 
people of Russia. As this is the only country 
in the world which has been freely open to 
them, and the only country in which they have 
shown any desire to settle, it does not seem 
possible that the remarkable Hirsch project can 
now be carried out. —New York Sun. 



R1454 : page 290 

OTHER LABORERS WANTED. 



Very shortly we will have ready a 48-page 
booklet in leatherette binding, entitled, "THY 
WORD IS TRUTH- AN ANSWER TO ROBERT 
INGERSOLL'S CHARGES AGAINST CHRISTIANITY. 
It is our desire to start out a number of canvassers 
for this and the other leatherette booklets 
-"THE WONDERFUL STORY" and 
"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER 
SACRIFICES." The three will sell together 
for fifty cents. They will tell the gospel in a 
way that may reach some who might not at 
first be attracted to "Dawn." 

We purpose that this work will not interfere 
with the Dawn work, and would suggest that 



those even but slightly interested in the Truth 
can be brought into this service. Friends or 
neighbors or grown daughters of TOWER subscribers 
are invited to send in their names as 
applicants for territory, instructions, etc. These 
booklets will be supplied to canvassers at seventy-five 
cents per dozen, thus leaving them a 
liberal margin in selling a set, three for fifty 
cents. 



R1452: page 291 

VOL. XIII. OCTOBER 1, 1892. NO. 19. 

ZEAL ACCORDING TO KNOWLEDGE. 



"The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up."— John 2: 17. 

The correctness of our interpretation of Scripture, 
set forth in these columns thirteen years 
ago, relative to what would be the ground of 
the testing of God's people during this harvest 
time, is year by year more fully demonstrated. 

We then showed that the prophecy which 
declares, "He shall be for a stone of stumbling 
and a rock of offence to both the houses of 
Israel" (Isa. 8:14), refers to Israel after the 
Flesh and Israel after the Spirit; and that as 
the testing and sifting of the fleshly house came 
in the end or "harvest" of their age (the Jewish 
age), so the testing and sifting of the spiritual 
house is due now, in the end or harvest 
of this age (the Gospel age). 

And we showed, to the satisfaction of ourselves 
and the majority of the TOWER readers, 
that the testing of the spiritual house (strange 
though it seems) will be upon the same question 
of faith with which the fleshly house was 
tested— namely, the cross of Christ. Not that 
any now doubt, nor that any in the Jewish harvest 
doubted, the fact that our Lord died, or that 
he died upon a cross; for that fact cannot be 
questioned. The test with the Jews was whether 
or not they would accept the sacrifice there finished 
as the ransom-sacrifice which paid the 
penalty of their sins and justified the believer. 
This they refused to believe; and thus they 
made the cross of Christ of none effect, of no 
value. The Apostle states this pointedly of 
them, saying: "We preach Christ crucified, 
unto the Jews a stumbling-block."— See 
ICor. 1:17-24. 



Similarly the nominal Gospel Church is now 
to undergo a test upon this same subject— 
whether each accepts the work of Christ as the 
full ransom (corresponding-price), the complete 
"propitiation [satisfaction] for our [the 
Church's] sins, and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world." And, the 
Lord's Word for it, the vast majority will 
stumble, and only a faithful remnant will stand 
the test. The Lord's tests are very simple, 
but very thorough. 

It may be said, This is the last issue upon 
which a testing might be expected, since all 
"orthodox" Christians have held it tenaciously, 
even during the dark ages. Yes, we answer, 
this is one item of truth which has been 
constantly held, even though surrounded in 
every case with various contradictory errors: 
it has thus been held unreasonably, held in unrighteousness, 
held without being fully appreciated, 
but nevertheless held. And it is because 
this doctrine of the ransom has been 
held, and that as the foundation of faith, that 
even in the dark ages, and in the midst of great 
corruption, the nominal church has been recognized 
of God at all, or been worthy at all 
of the name "Christian." 

Had the doctrine of the ransom been held 
intelligently and reasonably, it would have 
hindered its holders from falling into any of 
the great errors with which the doctrines of 
Christendom abound. With a correct view of 
the ransom (a corresponding price), where could 
the doctrine come in which claims that the 
wages of sin is everlasting torment? Was the 

R1452 : page 292 

suffering of eternal torment the ransom-price 

which our Lord gave for all? or was his death 

our ransom? What saith the Scriptures? It 

would have settled the question of natural immortality 

of man beyond dispute. It would 

speedily have settled the question of the Trinity. 

The holding of the ransom is the key to 

every truth. It is the center or "hub" from 

which all other truths must radiate to the circumference 

of the divine plan for salvation. 

Because this truth is generally held unintelligently, 
and in the midst of various contradictory 
errors (in unrighteousness), therefore, 
now that the testing time has come, and God 
is bringing it as an issue or "stone of stumbling" 
before Christendom, the large majority 
are willing to cling to the errors and let go the 
ransom. 



And those who reject the errors of eternal 
torment, and who are inclined to go to the opposite 
extreme, and to hope for the everlasting 
salvation of all men, would be saved from that 
error, too, if they would but hold to the ransom, 
giving it its full signification. For, if the 
Scriptural account be admitted, that condemnation 
of death resulted from Adam's wilful 
sin (Rom. 5:12), and that the death of our 
Lord Jesus, finished at Calvary, was the ransom 
(corresponding price— See the definition of "ransom, 
Greek, antilutron, in Young's Analytical 
Concordance), then it must also be admitted 
that whoever will fail in the new trial, and 
hence be condemned in that judgment, will be 
subject to the same penalty that was originally 
inflicted upon all in Adam. This second trial 
results directly, under God's grace, from the 
ransom-sacrifice; and God has appointed that 
the world's Redeemer shall be the Judge, in 
that Millennial judgment-day. (Rom. 14:9; 
Acts 17:31.) Because it is the penalty of the 
second trial, this sentence is Scripturally called 
"Second Death." And it is not difficult to 
see that if God's law was such that he could 
not clear the sinner without giving a ransom 
for the first transgression, so also if any were 
ever to be released from Second Death (which 
God has not even hinted at), it would require 
a ransom for each one tried, found guilty and 
sentenced. 

R1453 : page 292 

But as some are so anxious to hold to eternal 
torment that they will let go of the ransom, 
when they see the two doctrines to be in conflict, 
so others, when they decide that they 
want to believe in the everlasting salvation 
of all men, and find the doctrine of the 
ransom contradicting them, they feel that 
the doctrine of the ransom must be gotten rid 
of, and they drop it. The Scriptures show that 
only such can have everlasting life as come 
willingly into oneness with Christ and his laws, 
when the full knowledge and opportunity are 
offered; and that this opportunity will end 
with the Millennial age, beyond which sin and 
sinners cannot go to mar, or even to endanger, 
the felicity of eternity. 

But since they are very anxious to propagate 
their views, it becomes necessary for us as true 
under-shepherds to point out the fallacy of their 
position, to those sheep who have an ear to 
hear the voice of the Chief Shepherd, and to 
follow him. They perceive that the issue is well 



taken, and hence make every effort to "get 
around" the difficulty. To do this they are 
all agreed; and hence they are in this respect 
in sympathy and fellowship, no matter how 
different their theories may otherwise be, and 
make common cause against the WATCH TOWER 
publications, which defend the doctrine of the 
ransom. 

As a matter of fact, each party (represented 
by a journal) tries to dodge the ransom in a 
different manner. One, totally ignoring the 
meaning of the word ransom, claims that it refers 
to the forcible deliverance of men from 
death; another says the ransom was given by 
our Lord when he left the heavenly glory to become 
the man Christ Jesus; another says that the 
living example of our Lord while among men 
was the ransom; and another now comes forward 
claiming that our Lord is now making 
the ransom, that even since his ascension he 
has been expiating the sins of the world in 
heaven, and that this work of ransoming will 
not be finished until the end of the Millennial 
age.— This last twist becomes the wretchedly 
thin foundation for another "no-ransom" 
journal, just started, called "The Herald of 
Glad Tidings." It is no better and no worse 

R1453 : page 293 

than the others— "The World's Hope," "Spirit 
of the Word" and "Herald of the Morning." 

What wresting and twisting and dodging ! 
one way and another, to avoid the real issue, 
and to get around the many plain statements 
of Scripture to the effect that "Christ died 
FOR OUR SINS;" that it was "the man Christ 
Jesus who GAVE HIMSELF a ransom [a corresponding 
price] for all." The thought of these 
people seems to be, any argument or theory is 
good that sets aside or gets around the Bible 
statements that the ransom for sinners was 
"finished" (John 19:30) when our Redeemer 
died on the cross at Calvary. 

We denominate all of these as "no-ransom" 
views; for although they all use the word 
ransom, it is only to blind, to confuse, and to 
lead the minds of their readers away from the 
real and only ransom-sacrifice, and from the 
real and only meaning of the word ransom 
(antilutron— a corresponding price). 

Let those who seek to serve the Lord know 
that his truth is his representative, and let them 
cast their influence, all of it, on the right side 
of this momentous question which is now the 
testing, the stumbling question, to all those 



who are not loyal soldiers of the cross and 
followers of the Lamb. Show your loyalty to 
him who gave himself a ransom for all. (Tit. 1:13; 
2: 15.) Leave no doubt with any as to 
just where you stand. However much others 
may seek to dodge and evade the truth on this 
subject, let us be true to God and his Word. 
(1 Pet. 2:19; Matt. 5:16; Rom. 3:4.) As 
soon as we see that any teacher (or would-be 
teacher), whether a human being, or a paper 
published by a human being, is wrong on this 
one, central and vital point— the ransom- 
evading, misrepresenting and misapplying the 
word and doctrine to some other sense than 
the true one— "a corresponding price" for 
all— we should have nothing further to do 
with such person or journal until it fully and 
openly acknowledges the error and retracts it 
heartily. 

The Lord's instructions to us are very pointed 
on this matter, and leave no doubt as to the 
course of duty and loyalty. The Apostle Paul 
says (Rom. 16:17), "Brethren, mark them 
which cause divisions and offenses contrary to 
the doctrine which ye have learned [from inspired 
sources]; and avoid them." Surely, 
among all the doctrines taught us by Christ 
and the apostles and prophets, no other is of so 
vital importance as the doctrine of the ransom. 
Hence those who reject the Scriptural statement 
that our Lord Jesus gave himself a corresponding 
price, a substitute, a ransom for all, are 
to be rejected from recognition as Brethren, 
and even to be avoided. 

The Apostle John says: "Whosoever transgresseth, 
and abideth not in the doctrine of 
Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the 
doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father 
and the Son. If there come any unto you 
[man or paper, professing to be a teacher], and 
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into 
your house, neither bid him God speed: For 
he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of 
his evil deeds." (Compare 2 John 9-11; Gal. 1:8,9; 
2 Tim. 3:5; Titus 3:10.) Thus it is 
evident that we who would follow closely the 
way marked out for us have not much liberty 
or choice in our attitude toward those who deny 
the very foundation of our faith— however 
much they may desire to company with us. 
Compare also the rules respecting immoral 
persons who desire fellowship (1 Cor. 5:11; 
Eph. 5:11; 2 Thes. 3:6-14), although there is 
generally less danger from such than from those 
who become doctrinally corrupted. 

The present King commands his faithful 



servants who have not cast off the "wedding 
garment" of his imputed righteousness (faith in 
his blood [sacrifice] for the forgiveness of sins), 
concerning those who reject it, saying, "Bind 
him hand and foot [i.e., restrain his influence 
by thoroughly answering his arguments], and 
cast him into outer darkness." (Matt. 22:13.) 
Reject such a one from any fellowship which 
would mark him or her as a Brother or Sister 
in Christ. Soon such will be in the outer 
darkness of worldly confusion and uncertainty, 
called Agnosticism, saying, "I don't know 
surely what is truth." 

It is not the question whether this course is 
worldly-wise, but whether or not it is in conformity 
with God's Word. The wisdom of 

R1453 : page 294 

men and the policy of men and the theories of 
men are all foolishness with God. It is the 
essence of wisdom to obey God. Let us do it. 

In all this we advocate no harshness, no bitterness, 
no unkindness; but firmness for God 
and for the truth. Let the spirit of love rule 
in our hearts— love which is first of all true 
and loyal to God, his truth and his Church. 
"The zeal of thine house [Church] hath eaten 
me up." 



R1453 : page 294 

PAY THY VOWS UNTO THE MOST HIGH. 



The Fiftieth Psalm furnishes food for most 
profitable meditation to the consecrated. It 
starts with a precious reminder of the glory that 
is shortly to be revealed in and through the 
faithful. Taking the standpoint of the Church's 
future completeness and glory, it says (verse 1): 
"The mighty God, even Jehovah, speaketh 
[through the glorified Church, the Christ, 
Head and body], and calleth the earth from 
the rising of the Sun ["the Sun of Righteousness, 
with healing in his wings"— Mai. 4:2] 
unto the going down thereof" [i.e., from the 
beginning to the close of the Millennial day, 
Jehovah, through his Anointed, will be calling 
the earth to repentance and to righteousness 
and eternal life]. Verse 2: "Out of Zion, the 
perfection of beauty [out of the Church exalted 
and glorified], God shineth forth" [his glorious 



character and plan are made known]. 

But verse 3 reminds us that that time is yet 
future, and begins to describe the coming of 
the Lord, while the following verses discourse 
as to the first work of his presence. 

Verse 3. "Our God shall come, and shall 
not keep silence: a fire ['the fire of his jealousy'] 
shall devour before him, and it shall be 
very tempestuous round about him." It will 
be the tempest of the great time of trouble so 
often and so variously and vividly described 
elsewhere. 

Verse 4. "He shall call to the heavens above, 
and to the earth, to judge his people." In this 
time of the Lord's presence and the harvest of 
the Gospel age, all who claim to be his people 
—i.e., all "Christendom," Christ's kingdom, 
falsely so-called, or "Babylon" as named in 
the Scriptures (Rev. 16:19)— are brought into 
judgment before the assembled hosts of heaven 
and earth— angels and men. Already this judgment 
of "Christendom," "Babylon," is in 
progress: hence the late overhauling and demanded 
revision of the hitherto accepted and 
unquestioned creeds of its various sects. And 
hence, too, the unsparing criticisms of nominal 
Christianity by the world at large, in the 
secular press, etc., calling attention to its traditional 
errors, and to its untenable positions. 
It is now recognized as a self-contradictory 
mouthpiece of God. 

Verse 5 is the command of the now present 
Lord of the harvest, to the reapers, to separate 
the true wheat from the great bundles of tares 
in Babylon— "Gather my saints together unto 
me: those that have made a covenant with me 
[not merely by the lips, but] by [actual] sacrifice" 
—those who have faithfully carried out 
the solemn covenant of entire devotedness to 
the Lord. 

Verse 6. "And the heavens shall declare 
his righteousness; for God himself is judge." 
In that judgment which heaven and earth are 
called upon to witness, and which shall closely 
discriminate between the wheat and the tares, 
and effectually separate them, "the heavens 
[the kingdom of God which will be established 
as the outcome of this judgment] shall declare 
his [God's] righteousness; for God himself 
[who cannot err] is [the] judge." 

The following verses of the chapter sum up 
charges brought against God's nominal people, 
while verses 14,15,22 and 23 interpose a word 
of wise counsel for those who will receive it. 

Verse 7. "Hear, O my people [ye who 
claim to be my people by a solemn covenant], 



and I will speak: O Israel [nominal spiritual 
Israel], and I will testify against thee: I am 
God, even thy God. Not because of thy sacrifices 
will I reprove thee; and thy burnt offerings 
[free-will offerings, such as benevolent 
works, etc.] are continually before me." But 

R1453 : page 295 

such works cannot commend them to God in 
that day of judgment; for, said Jesus, "Many 
will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have 
we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy 
name cast out devils? and in thy name done 
many wonderful works? and then will I say 
unto them, I never approved of you: depart 
from me, ye that work iniquity." (Matt. 7:22,23.) 
These have been "false prophets" (Matt. 7:15), 
"teaching for doctrines the commandments 
of men." (Matt. 15:9.) For their own 
erroneous theories they have claimed divine 
authority; and though in going about to establish 
their own righteousness they have done 
"many wonderful works," those works are not 
acceptable to God, because they have not submitted 
themselves to his plans and methods. 

Verses 9-13 declare God's independence of 
their works, and intimate his perfect ability to 
accomplish the blessing of the world according 
to his own plan without their assistance. "I 
will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he 
goats out of thy folds; for every beast of the 
forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand 
hills. I know all the fowls of the mountains: 
and the wild beasts of the field are mine. If I 
were hungry I would not tell thee; for the 
world is mine and the fulness thereof. Will I 
eat flesh of bulls or drink the blood of goats?" 
—Am I in need of your wisdom or works, or 
in any way dependent upon your gifts? No— 
"Offer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy 
vows unto the Most High." (Verse 14.) What 
have any of us to offer unto the Lord that we 
did not first receive from him, and that should 
not therefore be thankfully received and used 
according to the directions of his plan? And 
this is what all who have consecrated themselves 
to God have covenanted to do. It is therefore 
obligatory upon all such that they pay their 
vows, fulfil their covenant unto the Most High. 

True, in the faithful fulfilling of a covenant 
of entire consecration to God there is much to 
endure in the way of reproach and persecution 
from the world (2 Tim. 3:12), but to such the 
Lord through the Prophet (verse 15) says, "Call 
upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver 



thee, and thou [by thy testimony and faithfulness] 
shalt glorify me." 

Verses 16,17. "But unto the wicked God 
saith" [But bear in mind that the wicked here 
referred to are not unrighteous people of the 
world; for, according to verse 7, this testimony 
is borne against those who claim to be the 
Lord's people, and members of the spiritual 
house of Israel. These "wicked" are the covenant 
breakers among those who still claim to 
be faithful people of God.]— unto these God 
saith, "What hast thou to do to declare my 
statutes [decrees, doctrines] or that thou shouldest 
take my covenant into thy mouth? seeing 
thou hatest instruction and castest my words 
behind thee." The Lord will not hold them 
guiltless who, professing entire consecration to 
him, nevertheless despise instruction and cast 
his words behind them while they cling to their 
own traditions and theories; "For," says the 
Apostle, "the wrath of God is revealed from 
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness 
of men who hold down [Greek katecho— 
hold down or suppress] the truth in unrighteousness." 
(Rom. 1:18.) This is what the various 
ecclesiastical systems of Great Babylon 
have been guilty of for centuries past: they 
have taught their own false doctrines and have 
claimed for them the divine authority of the 
Word of God. In doing so, they have unjustly 
suppressed the truth: they have hated instruction 
and have cast the words of the Lord 
behind them whenever they were brought forward 
to testify against them or their plans. 

What right, the Prophet inquires, have such 
covenant breakers to declare the plan of God? 
None whatever. Such unfaithful and "wicked 
and slothful" servants are hindered by their 
errors from seeing truths now due. Having been 
unfaithful to the measure of truth received, they 
are not permitted to know, and hence cannot 
declare, the deeper things of God— the breadth 
and scope of his wonderful plan. "Light is 
sown for the righteous" who faithfully and 
thankfully receive and disseminate it, "and 
gladness [the gladness which comes from a realization 
of the truth] for the upright in heart." 
-Psa. 97:11. 

But the testimony against this class proceeds 
—Verse 18— "When thou sawest a thief [one 
desirous of robbing God's children of the truth], 

R1453 : page 296 

then thou consentedst with him." All who do 
not guard the truth and the flock of God 



against the encroachment of error, who bid 
false teachers God-speed, or who commend 
wolves in sheep's clothing to the Lord's little 
ones, are, according to the Prophets language, 
wickedly consenting with thieves and robbers. 
And not only so, but he continues— "and hast 
been partakers with adulterers." Such a compromise 
with the spirit of the world is, in the 
language of the Scriptures, defined as adultery. 
For this reason Babylon the Great [Papacy] is 
termed a harlot, and the mother of harlots [of 
the various similar systems that sprang from 
her]; and the principle holds good in every 
case where unfaithful covenant-breakers consent 
to any degree with the thieves and robbers 
who plot and scheme against the truth. 

Verse 19. "Thou givest thy mouth to evil, 
and thy tongue frameth deceit." Such is the 
course of all who in unrighteousness suppress 
the truth and go about to establish their own 
righteousness and their own plans. 

Verse 20. "Thou sittest and speakest against 
thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's 
son." The unfaithful always take the attitude 
of persecutors to some degree of the 
faithful. Such is the attitude of the whole 
nominal church against those faithful servants 
who receive and advocate the truth. 

Verse 21. "These things hast thou done 
["Babylon," "Christendom," the great nominal 
church], and I kept silence: [up to the 
present time, the harvest; and because I kept 
silence and permitted this evil to run and prosper] 
thou thoughtest that I was altogether 
such a one as thyself [that I was consenting 
with thee to thy evil ways]; but [not so; for 
a purpose I permitted you to run your course 
and to make your real character manifest; but 
now, in this harvest and judgment time] I will 
reprove thee, and set them in order before 
thine eyes." Hence the present investigations 
and exposures of creeds, and the growing unrest 
in the various sects of "Christendom." 

Verses 22,23. "Now consider this [reproof], 
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces [destroy 
you], and there be none to deliver." 

"Whoso offereth thanksgiving [thankfully 
receives the reproof and applies his heart unto 
instruction] glorifieth me [or honors me, as a 
faithful and consistent believer and representative 
of the truth]; and to him that ordereth his 
course aright [that conforms his life and teaching 
to the light received] will I show the salvation 
of God." 

How solemn and weighty the admonition, 
and how worthy of the most thoughtful and 



prayerful consideration of all who name the 
name of Christ. The day of reckoning is upon 
the Church— upon all who profess to be members 
of it: "The hour of his judgment is 
come." Who is worthy to stand? Only those 
who gratefully receive the message of divine 
truth, and who faithfully pay their vows to the 
Most High. 



R1453 : page 296 
UNIVERSAL SALVATION. 
(NO. III.) 



One writes us who has been for some time a 
TOWER reader, and who seems to have determined 
that he wants the Scriptures to teach the 
everlasting salvation of all men. We fear he 
has not been much helped by the articles on 
this subject in recent TOWERS. We will answer 
his questions publicly for the good of 
others; hoping also that the objector may see 
the weakness of his position, and come over 
again to the firm foundation of the explicit 
statements of God's Word. He says:— 

(1) There is no Scripture which states that there 
will be no resurrection from the Second Death. 

We answer, The Bible is God's revelation 
of what he has done and purposes to do for 
human salvation. If, therefore, it reveals no 
resurrection from the Second Death, no one 
has a right to believe or teach so— no, nor even 
so to hope. Those who do so are adding to 
God's Word. It is a bold, bad heart which, 
after receiving all the mercies revealed, would 
attempt to set aside those just features of the 
divine plan which an unsanctified will rebels 
against. 

R1453 : page 297 

(2) His mercy endureth forever; and is 
the same yesterday, to-day, and forever. 

Yes, those gracious expressions mean much 
of joy and comfort; but, in the original, the 
word of which our English word forever is a 
translation does not mean exactly the same as 
forever or without an end. It means, rather, 
continuously as long as proper or necessary, 
until a proper end has been reached. To illustrate: 
In Lev. 16:34 we read, "This shall be 



an everlasting (Hebrew, olam) statute unto you, 

to make an atonement for the children of Israel 

for all their sins, once a year." And in 

verse 29 we read, "And this shall be a statute 

FOREVER unto you: That in the seventh month 

and tenth day of the month ye shall... do 

no work at all." (Compare Exod. 21:6.) How 

long did "forever" or "everlasting" mean in 

those cases? Are those statutes still in force? 

No. When did that "forever" and that "everlasting" 

cease? At the cross. These, with 

all the other features of the Mosaic Law, ceased 

R1454 : page 297 

when Christ made an end of the Law, nailing 
it to his cross. 

Just so in the texts quoted by Objector. 
God's mercy toward human sinners will endure 
until Christ makes an end of it in the close of 
the Millennial age. Mercy by that time will 
have exhausted every legitimate means for showing 
to sinners the path of life. More than 
that could not be called mercy. When all will 
have been done that can be done for sinners 
(and God's promises concerning the great work 
of Christ for the world during the Millennium 
are nothing short of this), then, the true, 
proper end of the mercy having come, divine 
Love and Justice will step forward and declare 
that those who have rejected this fulness of 
mercy shall be "cut off [not from their sins, 
but] from among the people."— Acts 3:23. 

(3) "Once for all" Christ died to release 
Adam (and all in him), whether it be from 
First Death, Second Death or any other death. 
His blood can never lose its power until all are 
saved, to sin no more; because the man Christ 
Jesus gave himself a ransom FOR ALL. 

We are glad that this Brother holds fast to 
the ransom, and bases all his hopes upon that 
sure foundation. (For this reason we can call 
him Brother.) If he will hold fast to that 
foundation, and test every part of his theory by 
that, he will come out all right. But to do this 
he will need that humility which will say, "Let 
God be true, though it show my theories to be 
nonsense." The words, "once for all," and 
"a ransom for all," while they do teach a salvation 
for all (and not a limited atonement 
and a limited offer of salvation, as most Christians 
believe), do not teach that the salvation 
secured can never have an end. 

Let us keep in memory the Scriptural statements 
that the penalty under which all the race 
fell from divine favor and into death was for 



Adam's transgression (Rom. 5:12), and that 
the recovery from sin and death secured by 
our Lord Jesus' ransom-sacrifice affected THAT 
death and THOSE sins and weaknesses which we 
inherited from our father Adam, and none 
other. Is it not, therefore, logical as well as 
Scriptural to say that wilful sins (intentionally 
committed, under full light and ability to the 
contrary) are not Adam's sins in any sense of 
the word, and that the ransom from Adam's 
sin and penalty would therefore not at all affect 
a release from these sins and their penalty? 
So say the Scriptures concerning all whose 
share in the Adamic sin and penalty has been 
canceled (—through faith in Christ's sin-sacrifice), 
and who are therefore reckoned as no 
longer dead in Adam, but as "alive in Christ" 
—"risen with him." After they have been 
once enlightened— been brought to a knowledge 
of the truth, tasted of the good Word of 
God and the powers of the world to come [the 
Millennial powers— resurrection, etc., tasted 
by faith], and been made partakers of the holy 
spirit— if such shall fall away, it is impossible 
to renew them again— because their course does 
despite to the favor God offers, and counts 
as common and valueless the blood of the New 
Covenant wherewith they had been sanctified. 
-Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31. 

Since God's plan is to save all men from all 
that was lost in Adam— through the Second 
Adam, Christ— it follows that when every child 
of Adam has been brought to a full knowledge 
of God's plan, and a full opportunity for forgiveness 
and restitution to divine favor, all 
have been SAVED from that calamity. Then, 

R1454 : page 298 

however, their individual trial begins; and 

the length or brevity of their salvation depends 

upon their own (not Adam's) course. 

If they after all that sin wilfully, the penalty 

they will get will be their own and not Adam's 

—for which Christ died. And there is no authority 

in Scripture for your statement that our 

Lord's death was for, or that it will have any 

effect upon, those who will suffer Second Death, 

the penalty of wilful sin against full light and 

opportunity. 

(4) Did not Lazarus of Bethany die twice? 
(Although it is not mentioned in the Bible, we 
of course suppose that he died again sometime 
after his miraculous restoration by our Lord; 
for he is not now living.) Surely Lazarus will 
share in the future resurrection; and hence it 



is evident that dying a second or even a third 
or a fourth time is no bar to the power of God. 

Ah! now we see, by this, that you do not 
grasp the subject of the Second Death. Lazarus 
did not die the Second Death. He had 
not yet gotten free from the Adamic or First 
Death when our Lord awaked him. The great 
ransom-sacrifice had not yet been finished, and 
when awakened he was, with the others of the 
human family, still under the original death-sentence 
incurred through Adam's disobedience. 
The only way to get Lazarus out of the 
Adamic death was, first, for our Lord to die as 
the substitute or corresponding price for condemned 
Adam and all his posterity; and afterward, 
for Lazarus to be justified from Adamic 
sin and its penalty— First Death— by faith in 
that sin-offering, based upon a clear knowledge 
of God's goodness and a full consecration to 
him. 

Since these were not the conditions in Lazarus' 
case, his was merely a re-awakening to the 
measure of Adamic life (yet under sentence of 
Adamic death) which he had enjoyed before 
he became sick and fell asleep. Consequently, 
the awakening of Lazarus and others by our 
Lord at his first advent is never spoken of as 
their resurrection; for "resurrection" signifies 
lifting up, out of the Adamic death entirely, 
to full life and perfection. Only those thus 
actually released from Adamic death by such 
an actual resurrection, or such as by knowledge 
and faith come to the justified state (a reckoned 
resurrection condition) are or will be in danger 
of the Second Death— the penalty of wilful, individual 
sin against clear light and knowledge. 
Sanctified believers of this Gospel age (reckonedly 
passed out of Adam into Christ— from 
Adamic death to life) when they die are not 
counted as dying in Adam; for reckonedly 
they are out of Adam. They are reckoned as 
dying with Christ their Redeemer. (See 2 Tim. 2:1 1; 
IThes. 4:16; Rev. 14:13.) But if such 
abide not in Christ (after getting into him as 
members of his body, as branches of the Vine), 
it will be because of wilful sin and rejection of 
his sacrifice and favor. Their death will be 
Second Death— the penalty of second failure 
during second trial. 

As for believers in the next or Restitution 
age, they will likewise be justified by knowledge 
and faith and obedience— reckoned as resurrected 
out of Adam and his death penalty into 
Christ and his life gift. But instead of suffering 
and dying with Christ, as do the faithful 
in this age, they will be gradually restored to 



the perfection and life reckoned to them from 
the moment of justification. Only the disobedient 
will die after the new dispensation opens. 
Their death will not be because of any weakness 
inherited from Adam (all of which will 
have been reckoned paid and canceled in 
Christ's sacrifice), but because of their own wilful 
opposition to the Lord's righteous requirements. 
Hence their death will not be the 
Adamic but the Second Death— the wages of 
their own deserving, for which no ransom was 
given and none is promised— an "everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord and 
from the glory of his power"— "cut off from 
among the people." 

(5) Let us try to do a good work for Christ 
in spreading this good news. I hope that you 
will yet spread the glad tidings of a resurrection 
from the Second Death. 

Our reply to this, in conclusion, is, If this 
were good tidings, we could not preach it; because 
we have no authority to declare, in God's 
name and as a part of his plan, what he has 
nowhere revealed. But we fail to see how it 
would be good tidings to any but the wicked. 
To all who love righteousness it would be very 

R1454 : page 299 

bad tidings; just as to-day it would be bad 
tidings to any good community to learn that 
the jails and penitentiaries and work-houses 
and pest-houses were all to be thrown open; for 
no other pest has proved so baneful as the leprosy 
of sin. The righteous might dread such 
a release from the Second Death of those evil-doers 
described in Rev. 22:15— evil-doers for 
whose permanent reform there would be no 
hope; because, before sentencing them to the 
Second Death, their righteous Judge had given 
them every opportunity possible to repent and 
come into harmony with his righteous law, that 
they might live forever. 

Furthermore, let us remember that the Second 
Death will receive the incorrigible at the close 
of the Millennium (Rev. 21:8); and that at that 
time Christ's Kingdom, the thousand-year day 
of judgment, comes to an end. Hence, if it were 
true that there is to be a release from the Second 
Death, it must come after the Millennium. 
This would involve the thought of a continuance 
of sin, and a continued trial or judging 
of sinners, whereas God's gracious promise is 
that the Millennial day of judgment will make 
a full end of sin and sinners, and that beyond 
it, in the everlasting ages, there shall be no 



more sin, sorrow, pain, dying or crying; for 
all those former things will have passed away. 
-Rev. 21:4. 



R1455 : page 299 

THE THIEF IN PARADISE. 



"He said to Jesus, Remember me when thou comest 
in thy kingdom. And he [Jesus] said to him, Indeed I 
say to thee this day, thou shalt be with me in Paradise.' 
-Luke 23:42,43. 

Those who consider salvation to be an escape 
from everlasting torture to a paradise of pleasure, 
and dependent only on accidental circumstances 
of favor, see in this narration the doctrine 
of election exemplified— our Lord Jesus, 
being pleased by the consoling words of the 
one thief, elected him to heaven, and equally 
elected that the other should roast to all eternity, 
unpitied and unrelieved. Truly, if God 
has made salvation such a lottery, such a chance 
thing, those who believe it to be such should 
have little to say against church lotteries, and 
less against worldly ones. 

But this is not the case. This Scripture has 
evidently been much misunderstood. To get 
its true import, let us take in the surroundings 
and connections. 

The Lord had just been condemned, and was 
now being executed on the charge of treason 
against Caesar's government, in saying that he 
was a king: though he had told them that his 
kingdom was "not of this world." There, 
upon the cross above his head, was the inscription 
of his charged crime, written in three 
languages: "THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS." 
All knew of his claims and derided him, except 
one of the thieves crucified with him. Doubtless 
he had heard of Jesus and of his wonderful 
character, and said in his heart: This is truly 
a strange and wonderful man. Who can know 
that there is no foundation to his claims? He 
certainly lives close to God. I will speak to 
him in sympathy: it can do no harm. Then 
he rebuked his companion, mentioning the 
Lord's innocence; and then the conversation 
above noted took place. 

We cannot suppose that this thief had any 
correct or definite idea of Jesus— nothing more 
than a mere feeling that he was about to die, 



and a straw of hope was better than nothing. 
To give him credit for more would be to place 
him in faith ahead of all the Lord's apostles 
and followers, who at this time had fled, and 
who, three days after, said: "We [had] trusted 
that it had been he which should have redeemed 
Israel."— Luke 24:21. 

We can have no doubt as to the import of 
his petition: he meant that whenever Jesus 
reached his kingdom power, he desired favor. 
Now note our Lord's answer. He does not 
say that he has no kingdom; but, on the contrary, 
he indicates by his response that the 
thief's request was a proper one. The word 
translated "verily" or "indeed" is the Greek 
word "amen," and signifies so be it, as you 
have asked: "I say to thee this day [this dark 
day, when it seems as though I am an impostor, 

R1455 : page 300 

and I am about to die as a felon], thou shalt 
be with me in Paradise." 

Now the substance of this is that, when the 
Lord has established his kingdom, it will be in 
Paradise, and the thief will be remembered and 
be in it. Notice that we have changed the 
comma from before to after "to-day." This 
makes our Lord's words perfectly clear and 
reasonable. He might have told the thief more 
if he had chosen. He might have told him that 
the reason he would be privileged to be in 
Paradise was because his ransom was then and 
there being paid. He might have told him 
further that he was dying for and ransoming 
the other thief also, as well as the whole gaping 
and deriding multitude before him, and as well 
as the millions then entombed, and the millions 
yet unborn. We know this because we know 
that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted 
death for every man," and that as all in Adam 
die, even so all in Christ shall be made alive, 
and be privileged to come back to that Edenic 
condition forfeited by the first man's sin, and 
redeemed for men by Christ's righteous sacrifice. 

As already shown, the garden of Eden was 
but an illustration of what the earth will be 
when fully released from the curse— perfected 
and beautified. The word "Paradise" is of 
Arabic origin, and signifies a garden. The 
Septuagint renders Gen. 2:8 thus: "God 
planted a paradise in Eden." When Christ 
has established his kingdom, and bound evil, 
etc., this earth will become a paradise, and the 
two thieves and all others that are in their 
graves shall come into it; and by becoming 



obedient to its laws they may live forever. 
We doubt not, however, that the kind words 
spoken in that dark hour to the Lord of glory 
will no more lose a suitable reward than the 
gift of a cup of water, or other small kindnesses, 
done to those whom this King is "not 
ashamed to call his brethren." 

But have we a right to change the comma? 
Certainly: the punctuation of the Bible is not 
inspired. The writers of the Bible used no 
punctuation. It was invented about four hundred 
years ago. It is merely a modern convenience, 
and should be so used as to bring out 
sense and harmony with all other Scriptures. 
This harmony and sense are obtained only by 
the punctuation we have given above. As usually 
punctuated, the passage would teach that 
the Lord and the thief went away somewhere 
that day, a statement contrary to the following 
Scriptures, which read carefully: Luke 24:46; 
John 20: 17; 3: 13. In the latter text note that 
the words, "which is in heaven," are an interpolation, 
as shown by the oldest MS. 



page 300 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULLNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 
PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1455 : page 300 

THE GOSPEL AT ANTIOCH. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON V., OCT. 30, ACTS 11:19-30. 

Golden Text— "A great number believed, and turned 
unto the Lord."— Acts 11:21. 

This lesson takes us back several years, and 
reveals the persecution against the Church at 
the time of the stoning of Stephen— Saul of 
Tarsus being one of the chief persecutors. It 
shows us some of the results of that persecution, 



and illustrates well the fact that the 
Lord's work is sometimes prospered by those 
very circumstances which to human judgment 
might seem unfavorable, if not disastrous. 
The persecution scattered the light instead of 
extinguishing it. Accordingly, years afterward 
news came to the Church at Jerusalem that the 
knowledge of salvation through Christ had 
spread to the third city of importance in the 
world— for Antioch was such at that time. 

VERSES 20,21. Here we see a difference in 
the Lord's dealings, as compared with our last 
lesson, on the opening of the Gospel Door to 
the Gentiles at the hand of Peter, Cornelius 
being the first received. That event had been 
God's method of drawing the attention of Peter 
and the other believers to the changed and 
widened character of the new dispensation. 
But in this lesson we see how the Lord led 
others to preach the gospel to the Gentiles, 
when the due time had come, without visions, 
etc., such as were proper, and indeed necessary, 

R1455 : page 301 

for Peter and others. These Christians 
had been Jews, born and living in Cyprus 
and Cyrene, and hence intimately acquainted 
with Gentiles; and when God's due time had 
come to remove all differences between Jews 
and Gentiles these were easily led into telling 
the good tidings to their Gentile friends— many 
of whom promptly accepted it. 

VERSES 22,24. The Church, whose chief 
representatives still resided at Jerusalem, having 
already learned, through Peter (Acts 11:1-18), 
of God's favor having been extended 
to the Gentiles, were glad to learn of the good 
work that had been done, and promptly took 
steps to help the new believers by sending 
Barnabas, "a good man full of faith and of the 
holy spirit," to teach them the way of the 
Lord more perfectly. And Barnabas, after doing 
a good work among them, bethought him 
of Saul of Tarsus, converted some years before, 
and who probably had meantime been under 
divine instruction and discipline preparatory 
to his introduction as the great "Apostle to the 
Gentiles," to take the place of Judas as one of 
the twelve (Rev. 21:14); which place the eleven 
had unauthorizedly conferred upon Matthias 
before their anointing with the holy spirit at 
Pentecost. 

VERSES 25,26. Saul— or Paul— was seemingly 
ready for the opening of this door of service 
and entered it with his peculiar fervor— yet 



humbly, remembering his own unworthiness to 

preach Christ, whom he had persecuted and 

slain, representatively, in his disciples. Barnabas 

and Paul, instead of saying to the intelligent 

people of Antioch, "We must leave you 

to go and look up some uncivilized peoples, barbarians, 

cannibals, etc.," took a different view 

of the matter, and, seeking the most intelligent 

auditors they could interest, staid with them a 

year after they were converted— teaching them. 

Alas, that so many now feel that teaching is unnecessary. 

How the actions of the Apostle Paul 

agree with his teachings.— See Eph. 4:11-13. 

"And the disciples were called Christians 
first in Antioch." Whoever may have started 
this name it matters not: it is the most fitting 
title that could be conceived of— followers of 
Christ. What a pity it is that in modern times 
it is considered a valuable addition to prefix 
Methodist, Presbyterian, Baptist, Lutheran, etc. 
Surely, to all who rightly view the matter, our 
Master's name is a sufficient one for all who are 
his. Let us not only adopt the Apostolic simplicity 
in practice and in doctrine, but also in 
name. We do not belong to Wesley, Luther, 
Calvin or any other man; and we should show 
that we are Christ's, and his alone, by refusing 
the names of others than the Heavenly Bridegroom. 
Thus, too, we stand where we can have 
fullest fellowship with all the Lord's true 
followers. 

VERSES 27-30. The fruits of the spirit are 
here shown by the willingness of the Christians 
at Antioch to contribute to the famine-stricken 
and persecution-spoiled brethren at Jerusalem. 
It was a noble return in temporal matters for 
the spiritual favors they had received from the 
believers at Jerusalem, through Barnabas, and 
Paul, whom he had brought. And this seems 
always to be true where the spirit of Christ has 
operated and dwells richly: each is anxious to 
serve the other, first with the spiritual and 
priceless favors, and second with temporal favors 
as opportunity offers.— See 1 Cor. 9:11. 

R1455 : page 301 

PETER'S DELIVERANCE. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VI., NOV. 6, ACTS 12:1-17. 

This lesson enforces the thought of God's 
power to help his servants when his wise purposes 
can best be served by so doing. 



It does not teach us, however, that all of 
God's servants will be miraculously delivered, 
nor that the same servant will be so dealt with 
on every occasion: For was not James, whom 
Herod killed, also a servant of God? See 
verses 1 and 2. 

The lesson to be learned is concerning God's 
ability to do whatever may please him. Then, 
if confident of his love, as all should be who 
have intelligently accepted God's gift to men 
in Christ our Lord, we have only to rely upon 
divine wisdom to feel perfectly content, whatever 
may come upon us,— realizing that all 
things are working together for good to them 
that love God— to those who are called according 
to his purpose.— Rom. 8:28. 



R1455 : page 301 

COLPORTEURS' WEEKLY REPORTS. 

Our request, that we hear weekly from all 
Colporteurs who are giving all their time in the 
work, has been well responded to. But please 
remember both parts: State the spiritual prosperity 
and health, as well as the number of 
orders taken and the physical health. If more 
convenient, a postal card will do; and those 
working together may send their reports in the 
same envelope, if preferred. It will do you all 
good to write to the "home" (office) at least 
weekly, and it will do us good also. You are 
continually remembered in our prayers. 



page 301 



Do not forget the Missionary Envelopes. We 
have a new lot and supply them now at the reduced 
price of 25 cents per hundred, and $2.00 
per thousand. This includes free delivery to you 
at your Postoffice. 



R1455 : page 302 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 

page 302 



The following letter, from his brother in the 
flesh, was recently received by Brother J. A. 
West. What joy it must cause him to receive 
such a testimony to his faithfulness to the truth! 
How much he would have lost, both for time 
and for eternity, had he put the Light under a 
bushel from fear or shame or policy or other 
selfish motive. 

Brother James is still in the harvest work, 
and although with him, as with all, much of the 
effort shows no fruit immediately, he and all of 
us must go on our way rejoicing, leaving the 
results to our Lord. 

The letter (which follows) was sent us for our 
joy, and we lay it before you all for a similar 
object. It becomes a report from three of the 
harvest laborers.— EDITOR. 

Dear Brother:— We daily invoke our Heavenly 
Father's blessing upon you, you who have 
been used by him in our blessing. We are 
feasting, rejoicing, drinking at the fountain of 
truth, and yet we each now have even a higher 
privilege than this. It is the joy of taking the 
glad tidings to others, and seeing them blest 
as we have been. We meet some of them everywhere. 

At E , Brother P , who was 

considered the best Bible scholar in the city, 
and the most consecrated and spiritual-minded 
man, received us kindly. We had just what he 
needed; and though restitution, the plan of the 
ages, etc., were new to him, he readily accepted 
them; and we left him rejoicing in present truth. 
Another brother and sister also gave us a 
hearty welcome, and happier souls you never saw 
than they were. This book we sell, dear James, 
is certainly a child of Providence— a bearer of 
"meat in due season," simply and truly. 
Praise the Lord! 

Our problem is solved: We have demonstrated 
the fact that we can sell DAWNS, and make 
a living. We economize and work hard; 
and with God's blessing we can and do succeed. 
Accept our united love, and remember 
we think of you every day— especially when 
with the blessed Lord in prayer. 

Your brother and sister in the precious hope, 
rejoicing in our present Lord and busy in the 
Harvest, E. R. WEST AND WIFE. 



R1455 : page 302 

Canada. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-! wish you to send 



me forty-five volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. I. These I shall distribute in Canada, 
enclosing a printed slip, a copy of which I send 
you herewith. The circular reads as follows:— 

DEAR FRIEND:— I commend this volume, 
The Plan of the Ages, to your careful reading. 
It is the best commentary on the Scriptures I 
have read. I value it next to the Bible. It 
develops love for the truth, an eagerness to 
"search the Scriptures," an independence in 
Bible study, a reverence for God's Word and a 
refreshing liberty of mind. It is not written 
in the interest of any religious organization: 
its author is not a member of any sectarian 
body, but simply a Christian. Because of its 
rich helpfulness to me in the unfolding of the 
wondrous truths of the Bible, in the clear presentation 
of God's own gracious plan for the 
blessing of "all the families of the earth," in the 
brightening of my own life by dispelling the 
conflicting doctrines of denominationalism and 
giving the sweet hope of a better and everlasting 
life, possible to every one of my fellow 
creatures, and in heralding the dawn of a glorious 
and lasting day for the whole creation, I 
present it to you with the request that you 
read it twice and examine all the references. 
If, when you are through with it, you will send 
it to other truth-seekers, I shall be grateful. 

In "the good hope through favor," 
E. R. BLACK. 



Indiana. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-We 
think it very kind of Sister R. to take the time 
from what we have known must be her very 
arduous duties, to write us so fully concerning 
the matter of which we inquired, especially 
when we remember how many others are seeking 
information at your hands. 

R1456 : page 302 

Loss of sleep is a part of the price I have 
to pay for the truth. It is so precious, and 
sometimes so all-absorbing, that I cannot quit 
thinking about it long enough to go to sleep. 
My present sleepless condition was brought 
about through my efforts to do some missionary 
work among the members of a religious gathering 
in our city. 

They have no organization, and in many respects 
are like us. I have enjoyed their meetings 
and Bible readings very much, and I think 



that they are the Lord's own children; but 
they are handicapped in their search for truth 
by the horrible, blasphemous doctrine of eternal 
torment. I cannot tell you how I longed 
to lead their minds out into the clear sunlight 
of God's truth, and I have done what I could to 
this end. But oh, how Satan uses this horrible 
impeachment of God's character to blind 
the eyes, even of those who love him. How 
subtle the arch-enemy is— whispering as he does 

R1456 : page 303 

to them, This is no concern of yours. You are 
not going to Hell. Why bother your brain 
about the matter at all? Ah, well does he 
know that so long as he keeps this veil over 
their faces they cannot apprehend the truth. 
If there is any thing for which I entertain an 
able-bodied hatred, it is this hydra-headed relic 
of the dark past; and my experience with it 
in the past week has been anything else than 
pleasant. 

Although I have been painfully conscious of 
the fact that the outward man is perishing, yet 
during the past week I have been most blessedly 
conscious of that other fact, that the inner 
man is renewed day by day. It seems to me I 
have never before so fully realized the simplicity 
and security of our refuge in Christ as I do 
now. I am sure I have never before fully comprehended 
Paul's description of it, as we have 
it in Romans 8. 

In comparing the various translations of verses 33 and 34, 
I discovered a marginal note in the 
Revised Version which says that some ancient 
versions read, "Shall God that justifieth," 
"Shall Christ that died," etc. Notice that the 
words "it is" are in italics. This is the same 
sense given to the verses in the Diaglott and 
Rotherham translations. "Who shall lay anything 
to the charge of God's elect? Shall God 
that justifieth? Who is he that condemneth? 
Shall Christ that died? yea, rather, that is 
risen again— who is even at the right hand of 
God, who also maketh intercession for us?" 
No, blessed be his precious name, we know 
that our Advocate is too true to our interests 
to condemn or accuse us in the presence of the 
Father. Oh, no: he constantly says to the 
Father, They have been judged in me. I have 
borne their sins; by my stripes are they healed. 
Lay nothing to their charge. I have met all 
the demands of justice against them, and they 
are free. 

Oh, how blessed to know that "the past is 



under the blood," as well as the present, if we 

abide in him; and thus John says, "In this 

was manifested the love of God toward us, because 

that God sent his only begotten Son into 

the world, that we might live through him;" 

and then he adds, "Perfect love casteth out 

fear." Ah, yes: when we begin to comprehend 

the perfection and measureless depths of 

God's love to us, as manifested in the gift of 

his dear Son as our ransom from death, we are 

lost in amazement; and the testimony of his 

spirit with ours, that we are his children, clears 

all our doubts and fears away, and there is no 

torment. 

"God is love; and he that dwelleth in love 
dwelleth in God, and God in him. Herein is 
our love made perfect, that we may have boldness 
in the day of judgment." This wonderful 
manifestation of God's love to us, through 
its reflex action upon the heart, will deepen 
and broaden our own love, until at last, when 
we partake of his nature, we shall also possess 
the perfection and fulness of his love, and become 
the instruments through whom he will 
manifest this love to the world, as he is now 
manifesting it to us, that they may know and 
believe the love that God has for us, and for 
them also. Sharing with Jesus the "all power 
in heaven and in earth," we shall go forth upon 
our mission of love, lifting up, tenderly nursing 
the groaning creation back to the moral 
likeness of God the Father— which, if willing, 
they may possess and enjoy forever. 

Beloved friends, let us hold fast the profession 
of our faith without wavering; for he is 
faithful that promised. 

May our Heavenly Father kindly lead and 
bless you both. Yours in the service of the 
Master, C. A. OWEN. 



Nebraska. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wish I could 
see you and talk to you as my soul desires. I 
am so anxious for a pure heart— one from which 
emanates nothing but purity. As Peter said, 
not only my feet, Lord, but every thought, word, 
act and motive of the heart I desire made 
pure and right. Oh, how I long for this, to be 
able to resist every form of evil. Is it not possible 
for me to live without any evil in my 
heart? I want my environment to be clean; 
or rather, I want to be clean in my environment. 
Any help you may be able to give me 
will be gladly received. Pray mightily to God 



for me, Brother, that I may be in the procession 
with the crown and uniform at the great meeting 
of the elect of God. May God bless and 
keep you! Yours in Christ, 

J. O. DAWSON. 
[Am glad to know that you are desirous of 
living a pure life; for that is an indication 
that you already possess to a considerable degree 
a pure heart. Purity of thought, word 
and act can result only from purity of motive; 
and the best way to cultivate purity of motive 
is to make a friend and companion of the 
Lord, our Redeemer, who is not only pure 
himself, but able to give wisdom and grace to 
all who seek his aid. Then all his desires will 
become yours, his will and work will be your 
delight, and you will become more and more 
impervious to temptation, and able to think 
and live worthy of his friendship. It will be 
no longer you that lives, but "Christ in you." 
-Gal. 2:20.-EDITOR.] 

R1456 : page 304 

Texas. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It has been 
some time since I wrote you, not because I am 
not interested, but I am so busy that I cannot do 
as I would. However, I meet some interested 
ones occasionally, and talk with them about 
the grand things that encourage us so much. 
Thank God for this privilege, that we can 
(though in trouble) look to him who is our 
life; and we are encouraged with the blessed 
assurance that we (in due time) shall be like him. 

I have been traveling a little in the great 
cause, and I do not think that my humble 
effort is in vain. Had a good meeting here 
this summer. It was a time of feast and rejoicing. 
When I left the Methodists, I had a 
large acquaintance, for I had been preaching 
for forty miles around. I have kept up appointments 
in several places, and have some 
who love the truth. I can go to these places, 
preach to them day and night, and not be 
away from home long; and this is the way I 
have to do. I love the truth; I am made free by 
it; and I love to tell it to others; and oh, when 
I can find a hearing ear it does me so much good. 

I have all the reading matter from the TOWER 
office since 1883, and am still feasting on the 
precious Word of God. I love the "TOWER" 
dearly. I love the spirit in which it is written, 
for I believe it to be the spirit of my blessed 
Lord. I love to read the few words from interested 
ones in different places. Surely we 



are drawn nearer together; and though we are 
so far apart, yet we are realizing that we are 
one in Christ Jesus our Lord; and though we 
are strangers and pilgrims, yet we are made 
nigh unto each other by the blood of Christ. 
Oh, the blood, the precious blood, that cleanseth 
from all sin. Praise the Lord! 

I will go on in the good way, trusting that 
I may fill some humble place in which the 
name of our Master will be glorified. 

In the blessed hope, yours, S. WILLIAMS. 



Louisiana. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In a little conversation 
last evening at the home of two 
staunch Presbyterians, I was not a little enthused, 
and was made to see clearer than ever before 
our position regarding the doctrine of the 
holy Spirit. They, of course, maintained that 
the holy Spirit is a person, denying the possibility 
that the mind of God could be infused 
into our minds. 

I drew their attention to the following, which 
nearly all must have experienced, namely: 
When one gets interested in some book, a 
novel, for instance, and gets wrapped up in the 
subject, does not the mind of the writer become 
our mind, until we think the same 
thoughts, love what he loves, hate what he 
hates, etc.? Well, then, the same effect follows 
when one gets thoroughly interested in the 
Book of books. The mind of God is then infused 
into our minds and hearts, and it is thus 
that we are sanctified by the truth— separated 
from the world and the worldly spirit. 

To prove that the apostles named the expression 
of the mind of God through his Word 
"holy Spirit," I referred to Heb. 10:15,16, 
in connection with chapter 8:10-12. The 
Apostle calls this quotation "a witness" of the 
holy Spirit, while verse 16 plainly states that 
"the Lord" is the speaker, as does also 
Chapter 8, verse 10. 

Truly the words that he has spoken are spirit 
and life. I relish this more fully now than 
ever before, and am greatly blessed by the 
Spirit's leading. So you see our controversy 
was profitable to myself, even if I did not succeed 
in convincing my opponents. Yours in 
the Redeemer, CHARLES STRAND. 



page 304 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The package arrived 
safely a fortnight ago. I have been 
waiting to write a letter, but find I cannot work 
it in just now, so please accept this as acknowledgment 
of my great indebtedness and gratitude. 
It is very good of you to so abundantly supply 
us, and we hope to remit for same shortly. 
Do not deduct from previous amount sent. 
The Lord has blessed me very especially, and 
I shall be well able to cover extra cost in a 
month or so. I have sent a goodly number of 
DAWNS and Tracts by a brother going to 
Australia, who will distribute half of them on 
board of ship and the rest on landing. He 
will write you when he has settled down. 

Our little band is making its influence felt, 
though we have never been heard in the streets 
and squares; but a steady and quiet manner 
coupled with a consistent life— being led of the 
holy Spirit— is mighty in reproving the worldliness 
and political spirit of our time. The 
churches are now mostly shows, and political 
agencies. Things are rapidly shaping themselves 
for the battle of the great day. Thank God, 
he has enabled us to see it. Accept our united 
love and a hearty greeting to all our dear 
brethren and sisters, especially Sister Russell. 

Yours ever affectionately in Christ, 
A. P. RILEY. 



page 306 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



We have made arrangements by which we 
can supply our readers with this work, post free, 
at 17 shillings in cloth binding, 20 shillings in 
half leather binding. The usual prices for the 
same are 24 and 28 shillings respectively, postage 
extra. A number of our friends in Great 
Britain have been desirous of securing this volume, 
but we have heretofore been unable to 
offer it at prices corresponding to that of the 
American edition. 

Our friends will please not ask for credit on 
this book, nor on any of those we offer for sale 
(--except the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, to colporteurs 
on special terms). We are enabled to 
procure them at so low prices only by cash in 
advance payments. 



"NEWBERRY BIBLES. "-ERROR CORRECTED. 



This valuable work was recently quoted in these 
columns at lower prices than those at which we 
find it possible to procure them. The corrected 
prices are: In beveled boards, Persian morocco, 
$5.75; in divinity circuit, $7.00. The general 
prices are $7.50 and $9.00. 

This very valuable work is for those who have 
a thorough, grammatical English education. 
It will enable such to form correct, grammatical 
ideas of the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures; and 
thus gives to such an advantage above that enjoyed 



by the ordinary Greek and Hebrew scholar 
—for only a few of the latter have a grammatical 
appreciation of the Bible in its originals. 
We describe the Bible in the words of another: 
"Mr. Newberry annotated the Bible throughout, 
with immense care and patience, on a new 
system. By an arrangement of signs attached 
to the words of the text, he conveys to the English 
reader the precise nature of the article, 
moods, tenses and particles. Foot-notes supply 
succinct apparatus for textual criticism. 
Side-notes provide the originals of many of the 
most important words, as well as copious references. 
A work so complete, so ingenious and 
so helpful to the Bible student ought in this 
new form to enjoy extended popularity." 

The late Horatius Bonar said of it: "It is beyond 
all price. Its minuteness of detail, its accuracy, 
its perspicuity, its scholar-like finish, are 
such as to make one of the most trustworthy 
and precious volumes in connection with critical 
study that have ever issued from the press." 



AN INDEX TO YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE. 



This, too, is a very valuable work, but only to 
those who can appreciate it. Indeed, we fear 
that to some, who do not understand something 
about translating, it might be injurious. 
It shows all the various ways in which the Hebrew 
and Greek words have been translated in 
our Common Version Bible; and the unsophisticated 
might get the impression that a 
Greek or Hebrew word may be translated by 
any English word at the caprice of the translator; 
—not knowing the difference in the arrangement 
of English sentences. It is the entire 
phrase of the Greek and Hebrew that must 
be compared with the English phrase which 
translates it and not always word for word. 
Price, postpaid, 50 cents. 



THE SYRIAC NEW TESTAMENT. 



Murdoch's Translation of the Syriac-Peshito 
manuscript is sometimes inquired for. 

We can supply it in substantial half-leather 
binding, post paid for $2. 



R1457 : page 307 

VOL. XIII. OCTOBER 15, 1892. NO. 20. 

THE NATURE AND METHODS OF GOD'S ELECTIONS. 



We have heretofore shown that election as 
taught in the Scriptures is not in opposition to, 
but in harmony with, the free moral agency of 
the elected classes. We have endeavored to 
show that, while during the Jewish age there 
was an election or selection of a "house of 
servants," as, during the present Christian age, 
an election or selection of a "house of sons" 
(Heb. 3:5,6) is in progress, yet neither of these 
selections was or is arbitrary so far as individuals 
are concerned. God did arbitrarily fore-ordain 
and determine that these two classes 
should be selected, and arbitrarily set apart a 
limited period of time for the selection of each; 
and for aught we know to the contrary, he arbitrarily 
and unalterably fixed the number of 
each of these classes, so that not one more, nor 
one less, shall complete each of these elect 
classes, fore-ordained in this plan. But he did 
not, and in harmony with his own justice he 
could not, arbitrarily fore-ordain and elect that 
certain individuals must be of these classes regardless 
of their wishes and endeavors, and 
regardless of the operations of his own arrangements 
and regulations governing these 
elections. 

But before any are able to look at the subjects 
of Election and Reprobation intelligently, 
they must first of all get rid of the false and 
blinding idea that election implies "selected 
to go to heaven," and reprobation, "selected 
to go to eternal torture." No such significance 
attaches in any way to the words. God not 
only applies justice to his creatures in the laws 
governing them, but he applies the same to 
himself; hence it would be as unjust and impossible 
for God to choose, select or elect an 
unworthy person to heaven as it would be for 
him to torture a righteous person. Furthermore, 
to be unchosen to a particular office or 
position does not imply that the unchosen one 
is wholly undesirable, but merely that he is not 
chosen to the particular office or position for 
which choice is being made. 

Since God is good and all his plans are wise 



and beneficent, it follows that to be selected by 

him to perform any part of his plan is an 

honor and a favor. Thus God, having purposed 

in himself the redemption of mankind 

from the curse, and the consequent lifting up 

or restoration of all things (Acts 3:19,21), not 

only foretold it, but began preparations for 

that restitution. Accordingly, having also determined 

that this restitution should be accomplished 

by means of a "Kingdom of God" or 

a government of earth in harmony with his 

laws, and having predetermined that this Kingdom 

should be of two parts, a human and a 

spiritual, he began his preparation by selecting 

first the natural or human portion of the proposed, 

and as yet future, Kingdom. 

Mark well that God fore-ordained these two 
classes, and the work for which he intended 
them, long before the individuals composing 
them had any existence. But how has this 
predetermined will of God operated in selecting 
the predetermined classes for the predetermined 
service of honor? Infinite wisdom 

R1457 : page 308 

made choice among the families of earth and 
chose Abraham and his family. Arbitrarily, 
and without reason for such a choice? Probably 
not: in all probability Abraham's family 
was best suited to the divine purpose, the best 
adapted to the execution of the plan God had 
in view. 

It was part of Israel's difficulty that they 
supposed God's election of their nation an arbitrary 
one, and thought it a sufficient guarantee 
of God's exclusive favor to be able to say, Abraham 
is our father— we are, through him, the elect 
people of God. (Luke 3:8.) But this was a 
mistake; for though God had chosen Abraham's 
family for a special service, and separated them 
by his law and favors from other nations, this 
was the extent of the favor they enjoyed— 
"To them were committed the oracles of God." 

But by reason of this national favor each individual 
of that nation had special knowledge 
and opportunities beyond those of other nations; 
and their faithfulness or unfaithfulness, obedience 
or disobedience, to this knowledge and 
favor decided which individuals of that called and 
chosen and favored nation were worthy of the 
position of future honor and service as members 
of the human or earthly phase of the Kingdom 
of God, which is to be established in ruling 
and blessing power "under the whole heavens." 

Which individuals, because of faith and obedience, 



were accepted as making their election 

sure to that future honor and service, we know 

only in part. The names of some of the most 

notable only are given by the Apostle. (Heb. 11:17-39.) 

These evidenced their worthiness 

of the favors of God held before them, by the 

sacrifices which they made of present honors 

and comforts, to obtain the future and lasting 

honors of heavenly promise. Therefore God 

will in due time honor them by manifesting 

them as his elect to the position and service to 

which he called them, and will give them a 

portion or share in the "heavenly city;" i.e., 

in the heavenly government or kingdom which 

he will establish— the portion promised them 

and to which they and all Israel were called or 

invited, but for which the great majority were 

unworthy. Yet the rejected Israelites are not 

to be cast off from all favor of God; rather, 

they will be blessed by and under the righteous 

dominion which Christ will establish, and 

in which their fellows are granted the earthly 

portion. They shall see Abraham, Isaac and 

Jacob and all the prophets in the Kingdom of 

God, and they themselves unworthy of that 

honor.*-Heb. 11:16; Luke 13:28. 

The election of the full number for the human 
portion of the Kingdom ended about the 
time of Jesus' baptism and anointing, when he 
began to bring life and immortality to light. 
Then began the selection of the class which 
God had predetermined he would select from 
among men for exaltation to the "divine nature," 
and to constitute the spiritual phase of 
the Kingdom which will restore and bless the 
world. Of these Jesus was the first, the "forerunner," 
the chief or captain. In the selection 
of this spiritual class, Abraham's literal 
descendants, the Hebrews, have not been so 
exclusively favored as they were in the previous 
election; for instead of the light of truth (the 
"oracles of God"), through which the call is 
made, being confined to Israel, it has by God's 
design and arrangement gone out into all the 
earth— calling all who have "an ear to hear" 
to justification, through faith in the blood of 
Christ as their redemption price, and, further, 
to sacrifice and glory— the "high calling." 
The only pre-eminence given to Hebrews under 
this last call is that it commenced with them. 
(Luke 24:47.) The previous call was confined 
to them. 

Nor should we overlook the fact that, though 
in the process of selecting these two classes 
certain individuals were elected or chosen to do 
a service in connection with the calling of these 



classes, this in no way implied their election to 
one of those classes. Thus Jacob, like Abraham, 
was chosen to be a father of the favored nation, 
and Moses, Samuel and others were chosen to 
a service in the first selection, as Paul and the 



*Our Lord does not mention himself and the apostles as 
seen with Abraham and the prophets; because, though he 
and the apostles and all the overcomers of the Christian 
age will be in and of the same Kingdom, they will not 
be of the human phase or portion of it, but of the spiritual; 
and, like angels, invisible to mankind. Men will 
see only the earthly or human department of that glorious 
dominion. 

R1457 : page 309 

other apostles, and others since, have been 
chosen and selected for special service as God's 
agents in the selection of the spiritual class; 
yet their being elected to this service was in 
no way an infringement upon their free moral 
agency, and in no way decided for them the 
question of their final election to the class to 
which each was called. 

Thus Paul, after telling us that God chose 
him and prepared him for this service in early 
life (Gal. 1:15), also assures us that he knew 
full well that the call to this service, and the 
fact that he was used as a servant in announcing 
the "heavenly calling" to others, by no 
means proved that he would attain the prize of 
his high calling. 

To be called to such special service as Paul 
and the other apostles were called to was a 
special honor which they must appreciate to 
use; to have a call to the heavenly and the 
future service is a still greater honor; and the 
worthiness of the apostles, and of all who will 
attain it, is, during this age, being tested by 
the measure of their love and gratitude to God, 
as shown in their obedience, and proved by 
their self-denials. 

That Paul understood that obedience or unfaithfulness 
to the present opportunities was to 
prove whether he was worthy or unworthy to 
be a member of the already elect or predetermined 
spiritual class— the "body of Christ" 
—is clearly evident from his many statements 
to this effect. For instance, he says, "I keep 
my body under, and bring it into subjection [I 
do not allow my human appetites, or ambitions, 
or hopes, to govern my course, but I permit 
the new mind, begotten of God's promises, to 



rale], lest that by any means, when I have 
preached to others [of the great prize for which 
we ran and sacrifice], I myself should be a 
castaway"* [rejected as unworthy a place in 
that choice company which God has predetermined 
shall be composed of "overcomers"]. 
(1 Cor. 9:27.) "Brethren, I count not myself 
to have apprehended [or grasped the prize to 
which God called me, and for which I, with 
you, am running]; but.. ..I press along the 
line towards the prize of the high calling." 
(Phil. 3:11-15.) And in the preceding verses 



*"Castaway," here, is from the same Greek word elsewhere 
translated "reprobate," and signifies rejected— not 
accepted. 

R1458 : page 309 

he tells us in what way he was running or pressing 
along the line to win this great prize which 
God has already predetermined to give to the 
class whom he would select for it. He tells us 
that he was casting away former hopes, and 
ambitions, and honors, as though they were 
worthless and vile, and spending every effort 
to win a place in the body of Christ, and to 
secure a share in the chief resurrection (to spiritual 
being). 

He well knew that, because redeemed, "all 
in their graves" would in due time "come 
forth:" but he knew, too, that only the elect 
"little flock" would be raised spiritual beings 
like their Captain and Forerunner; and he was 
willing to sacrifice everything (as Christ also 
did) to obtain a place in that elect class. The 
Apostle knew also that from the moment of 
consecration he was reckoned a member of that 
chosen "body" or "bride" of Christ, and 
that his name was "written in heaven" (Heb. 12:23); 
and though he had full assurance of 
faith each moment, because of full knowledge 
that he was daily a living sacrifice, yet he also 
knew that for him to turn back, or even to 
"look back" (or desire to recover that which 
he had sacrificed), would prove him unworthy 
of the kingdom position. He well knew that 
he who wrote his name in heaven, when he consecrated 
and started to run, could blot it out; 
and that the condition upon which it would 
not be blotted out was, faithfulness to the end 
of the race. (Rev. 3:5.) And not until his 
faithful course was closing with martyrdom 
did he write, "I have fought a good fight; I 



have finished my course; I have kept the faith; 
henceforth there is laid up [reserved securely] 
for me a crown of righteousness, which the 
Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that 
day; and not to me only, but unto all them 
also that love his appearing."— 2 Tim. 4:7,8. 

Yet, while remembering that God has made 
the deciding of the matter, whether or not we 
shall be members of the elect company to 
which he called us, to depend upon our faithfulness 
to the end— "unto death"— we should 

R1458 : page 310 

ever bear in mind, as Paul did, that the prize 
is not offered to us because of our worthiness 
of it, but of God's grace or favor; and that 
our running is acceptable only because of God's 
"mercy" in imputing to us the merits of Christ, 
our Redeemer, as the covering of our inherited 
weaknesses and imperfections.— Rom. 9:16. 

R1458 : page 310 

SOME TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE 

SHOWN IN THE LIGHT OF THE FOREGOING. 



(1) "Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed 
lest he fall. "-1 Cor. 10:12. 

(2) "Give diligence to make your calling and election 
sure; for if ye do these things ye shall never fall." — 

2 Peter 1:10. 

(3) "Whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye 
are fallen from favor." "Christ shall profit you nothing." 
-Gal. 5:2,4. 

(4) "For it is impossible for those who were once 
enlightened,... if they shall fall away, to renew them 
again unto repentance."— Heb. 6:4-6. 

(a) "Him that is able to keep you from falling 
[stumbling], and to present you faultless."— Jude 24. 

(b) "I am persuaded that neither death, nor life,... 
nor things present, nor things to come,. ..shall be able 
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ 
Jesus our Lord."— Rom. 8:38,39. 

(c) "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and 
they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life. And 
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out 
of my hand. My father which gave them me is greater 
than all; and no one is able to pluck them out of my 
Father's hand. "-John 10:27-29. 

In the light of the foregoing statement of the 
doctrine of election as deduced from Scripture, 
the above and similar texts cease to seem 



contradictory, and become clear, harmonious 

and reasonable. To show the harmony we have 

selected some of those apparently most contradictory 

and positive, which will serve to illustrate 

how all similar statements are in harmony. 

The first four show the possibility of 

falling from grace or favor; the last three seem 

to many to teach that to fall from God's favor 

is an impossibility. 

It is a mistake to suppose that favor and love 
are synonymous, for though the favor of God 
always implies his love, yet the withdrawal of 
favor does not imply hatred. To illustrate: 
When God created our race representatively in 
Adam, he placed it in a position of favor, and 
when it afterward fell from that favor by disobedience 
to the conditions, God so loved the 
race (fallen from his favor), while yet sinners, 
as to provide a ransom for all, that thereby he 
might in due time restore all to the original 
favor, thus giving another or second opportunity 
to enjoy life as his favor, everlastingly. 

Every act must be in harmony with his justice, 
love and wisdom: not with one alone, 
but with all of these divine attributes must 
every act of God conform. Hence in dealing 
with us, should we fall from his favor, whatever 
happens to us will be in full harmony with 
God's character— whatever his justice, wisdom 
and love indicate to be best. Let us keep this 
well in mind. 

To fall from favor implies that those who fall 
had first been lifted up, given a vantage ground 
for present or future possibility and advantage. 
The seriousness of the loss by a fall from favor 
depends upon the greatness or amount of the 
favor spurned or left. 

Two of the three above-mentioned texts (a,b,c) 
assure us that God will not withdraw from us 
any favor he ever bestows; he will never cast 
us off or cause us to fall. And, more than this, 
his love is so great that he will not permit 
others to separate us from his favor contrary to 
our own will. And since his love is so great 
and his power all-mighty, we have full confidence 
that no power in earth or heaven can 
forcibly separate us from his love and the favors 
granted us in and through our Redeemer. 
Here rests our full assurance of faith— none can 
pluck us from our Father's favor and protection: 

"In God I have found a retreat, 

Where I can securely abide; 
No refuge nor rest so complete, 

And here I intend to reside. 



"Oh! what comfort it brings, 

My soul sweetly sings, 
I am safe from all danger 

While under his wings." 

But is there then no danger? There is no 
danger of others plucking or forcibly separating 
us from God's favor, or turning his love 
away from us: the only danger is in our own 
doings. We can despise or lightly esteem the 
favors of God, and thus forfeit our privileges 
under those favors, and fall from them; but 

R1458 : page 311 

we cannot forfeit all favor, except by direct 
and open apostasy. God will not force his 
favors upon any, but decides that those who 
do not appreciate the favors, when made fully 
aware of them, are not worthy of them. 

Text number 1 guards us on this very point. 
Our safety is in a vivid realization of our own 
helplessness and dependence upon God's favor. 
To realize our own imperfection and inability 
to justify ourselves is the safeguard against that 
self-righteousness which spurns justification as 
the favor of God, through the ransom given 
by our Lord Jesus. True humility and dependence 
upon God accepts his favor of justification 
in the way he provides it— through Christ's 
ransom— and thus prevents its possessors from 
spurning, and counting a common or ordinary 
thing, the sacrifice of Christ— "the blood of the 
covenant." (Heb. 10:26-29.) In harmony with 
this is the text marked a. God is able to keep 
us from falling or even stumbling over his favors; 
and he is so willing to aid us and keep us, that 
he has in his Word made every provision for 
our assistance, and assures us that the Scriptures 
are able to make us wise regarding his 
favors, so that we shall be able to avoid falling 
from them, and to obtain them. 

Here text number 2 applies, and shows that 
while God has supplied every necessary aid to 
keep us from falling, he has left the matter in 
such a way as to make our earnest desire for 
the promised blessings a condition of our not 
falling from or failing to secure the favors offered 
us. We must give diligence and attention to 
the assistance and directions he has provided. 

A difference in the extent of the fall and the 
seriousness of the consequences is shown in 
texts 3 and 4. The former shows a Jew who 
had trusted in his ability to keep the Law, who 
afterward came to see in Jesus his Redeemer, 
and became his follower, and thus reached and 



laid hold of justification, God's favor granted 
through the ransom. Under false teaching he 
had been led to the erroneous conclusion that 
though Jesus was a good example of holy living, 
yet all must still be justified, if at all, by 
perfect obedience to the Law. Paul addresses 
this one and all such in this text (3), and assures 
them that by such conclusions they renounce 
and reject God's favor, and place 
themselves again just where they were before 
they heard of Christ— under the Law, which 
could never justify them.— Rom. 8:3— margin. 

Their conclusion that Jesus was merely an 
example and teacher was fallacious. There 
were, and had been, many noble exemplars and 
good teachers, and in thus regarding Jesus they 
were rejecting all that was specially valuable 
in him. Our Lord's example and teachings 

R1459 : page 311 

could never give us everlasting life, unless his 
Ransom-sacrifice had first justified believers. 
Regarding Christ as an "example" would be 
of no everlasting profit or advantage: nothing 
could thus advantage them until past sins were 
canceled, and they reckoned justified through the 
shed blood (the death) of Christ— Rom. 5:9. 

This fall from grace, though serious, in that 
it would hinder their progress and keep them 
on the level of the Jew and the unjustified 
world, would not necessarily be an everlasting 
loss or fall, because, if they perceive not their 
error sooner, the time will come when "every 
hidden thing shall be made manifest." Then 
a correct knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth, and "none shall need to say unto 
his neighbor, Know thou the Lord! [or understand 
thou of the ransom for sin] for all shall 
know him from the least to the greatest;" and 
then, if not sooner, these and the prejudice-blinded 
Jews and all others shall see clearly and 
enter gladly upon the favor from which the 
Apostle tells us these were falling. 

But the other text (4) tells of a fall from 
favor that is a far greater loss, and one which 
can never be regained in this or any other age. 
The Apostle assures us of those who thus fall 
away, that "it is impossible to renew [or restore] 
them again." Why is it thus— why the 
difference in these fallings? We answer: Because 
those of the class here referred to (Heb. 6:4-6) 
have had fuller knowledge; and by having 
gone along from favor to favor, their fall is 
without excuse and indicates deliberation, a 
wilfulness, wholly inconsistent with their knowledge. 



While the others (text 3) were but deceived 
"babes," these (text 4) were matured 
and advanced in knowledge beyond first principles. 
And any who have not advanced to 

R1459 : page 312 

the point of favor here indicated could not fall 
from it; and from such state of favor only is 
it possible to fall so utterly as to be beyond 
hope— in the second death. 

But notice carefully the conditions of such a 
fall— the height of the multiplied favors, from 
which if any fall it is impossible to restore or 
renew them. They must have been "once enlightened,' 
brought to discern sin clearly, its 
penalty, and the ransom price given for the 
sinner. They must have "tasted of the heavenly 
gift:" not merely heard of Christ's sacrifice, 
etc., but tasted in blessed experience the results 
of that ransom in realizing sins forgiven, 
and communion and fellowship with God restored, 
through "the blood of the Lamb." 
They must have been "made partakers of the 
holy Spirit," coming into heart fellowship 
with God's plans, and for a time at least being 
co-workers with him— begotten by the Spirit 
to fuller appreciation of the truth and to new 
hopes and aims. They must "have tasted of 
the good Word of God," by experiencing the 
pleasures of the appreciated fulfilment of some 
of the statements and promises thereof, and by 
recognizing a grandeur and beauty in the as 
yet unfulfilled portions. These must also have 
tasted, experienced or come to appreciate "the 
powers of the coming age," realizing from the 
good Word of God the blessings and powers 
that will then be brought into exercise for the 
blessing and restoring of mankind, all as the 
fruit and result of the ransom. 

Should such as have seen, tasted, experienced 
and enjoyed all these favors then fall away to 
the extent of "denying the Lord having bought 
them" (2 Pet. 2:1— Diaglott), denying the 
ransom— the very foundation of all those hopes 
and blessings seen and experienced— they would 
be treading under foot the Son of God, in rejecting 
the blood of the covenant, wherewith they were 
sanctified (and in which they had trusted, and 
on account of which they had been privileged 
to grow in grace and knowledge). If they thus 
count that blood an unholy (ordinary) thing, 
and despise the favor of God in providing the 
sacrifice for our sins (Heb. 10:25-29), there is 
no forgiveness for them further; no restoring 
from such a miserable fall from such heights of 



favor and knowledge. And who, except those 
who thus "fall away," would dispute the righteousness 
of this, our Father's decision? The 
expression of his justice and wisdom, in full 
harmony with his character of love, is that such 
shall "be as though they had not been" born. 
The prolongation of such lives could not be a 
profit or a pleasure to God, to themselves or 
to their fellows. 

The sentence is manifestly just. It is wise, 
because if these have thus seen the grand outline 
of God's plans, and despise and repudiate 
the divinely-appointed foundation of it all, then 
moral force, the force of truth, is seen to be 
unavailing upon them, and God sees that thereafter 
it would be impossible to renew them or 
to make them recognize the beauty of his way. 
Therefore divine wisdom has decided that all 
thus out of harmony, without possibility of 
reformation, shall be utterly destroyed as thorns 
and briers are destroyed, and for the same 
reason.— Heb. 6:7,8. 

And this same principle will obtain in the 
next age as well, when the full opportunities 
of that age of favors are enjoyed by all the 
world. Those who wilfully reject and despise 
the precious blood, spurn forgiveness through 
it, and thus crucify Christ afresh, will thereby 
fall hopelessly; because, after having enjoyed 
the blessings secured by the ransom, they spurn 
and reject it. Christ dieth no more. The 
one sacrifice once fully appreciated and wilfully 
rejected leaves the rejectors in the same 
state as though no ransom had ever been given. 
It remands them again under the original penalty, 
death, extinction. And, because they had 
once been redeemed from it as the Adamic penalty, 
and had thus again come under it of their 
own will and act, it is called the second death. 

Thus may not all see clearly God's election 
of classes for future service, and of nations and 
individuals for present service, and yet recognize 
that God leaves his creatures free to exercise 
their own wills in accepting or rejecting 
his arrangements and favors? He seeks such to 
worship and serve him as serve from the heart- 
in spirit and in truth; and such preeminently 
are the classes selected in this and in the preceding 
age for the Kingdom's positions and honors. 



R1459 : page 313 

THE PRODIGAL'S RETURN. 



[LUKE 15:ll-32.-EXAMINED BY REQUEST.] 



Many have applied this parable to Jews and 
Gentiles, assuming that the Gentiles are illustrated 
in the prodigal son. To us, this interpretation 
is not consistent with facts and 
Scripture; for up to the time of the giving of 
the parable, and for years afterward (three years 
and a half after Pentecost), the Gentiles were 
not recognized as sons of God, but as "strangers," 
"aliens," "foreigners," "having no 
hope, and without God in the world." (Eph. 2:11,12.) 
From the time of the fall none but 
the one line of Adam's children had divine 
favor— the line of which Noah and Abraham 
and Israel and Christ came— the line of 
Seth. (Amos 3:2.) All of this line, as the 
record shows, were accepted through the mediation 
of typical sacrifices of atonement for 
their sins— except Christ, whose life was from 
another father than Adam, and who himself 
became the true antitypical sacrifice of atonement 
for Adam and all who lost life in him. 

Gentiles, consequently, cannot have been 
meant or illustrated by the prodigal son of the 
parable, for they had never been sons, and 
could not have left the father's house when 
they never were in it. We must look elsewhere 
for the class represented. 

Others have suggested that the two sons represent, 
the elder the "overcomers" and the 
younger the "great company" of the Gospel 
Church: that those who fail to live up to their 
covenant are represented in the prodigal and 
may be said to be wasting their spiritual privileges, 
with figurative publicans and harlots, 
in the enjoyments of worldly favor, and in 
immunity from the reproaches which fall upon 
the faithful covenant-keepers who are "dying 
daily" in the service of the Master according 
to their covenant. But it should be noticed 
that this exposition reverses the order of the 
parable, makes of the prodigal the one free from 
the reproaches and opposition of the world, 
and represents those who suffer with Christ for 
righteousness' sake as the elder son who suffered 
nothing. In the parable it was the elder son 
that had the good things, the plenty of food 
and clothing and every comfort; and it was 
the prodigal son who was ragged and hungry 
and barefoot and suffering and outcast with 
the swine. 

The application of the parable most reasonable 
and most fitting, all phases of the parable 



and the facts considered, is as follows: 

In the parable the elder brother represented 
the Pharisees, and the younger brother the 
publicans and sinners. The context shows 
that our Lord's willingness to receive the 
"lower classes" of the Jews, those who were 
living sinful lives regardless of God's laws and 
of their covenant, had excited the anger of the 
Pharisees. The latter were strict observers of 
God's Law, and in this respect commendable; 
but they were blameworthy in that they were 
proud of their religion, and boasted of their 
goodness; and because they despised and 
spurned and would not recognize, nor speak 
to, nor eat with, the irreligious class; and the 
more so because in their pride they failed to 
acknowledge the fact that, when doing their 
best to fulfil God's law, they came far short of 
perfect obedience. 

Our Lord's strict observance of the Law [for, 
being born a Jew, born under the Law, he was 
bound to and did respect every legal requirement 
up to the day of his death— which ended 
that Law covenant] no doubt made him at first 
a favorite with the Pharisees: accordingly we 
find him occasionally the guest of some of them. 

R1460 : page 313 

(Luke 7:36; 5:17; John 3:1,2.) But when 

they found that he received sinners and ate 

with them, they began to realize that his righteousness 

was of a different sort from theirs, and, 

as darkness is opposed to light, they hated him. 

Moreover, soon they began to see that his 

teachings reflected against them, severely reproving 

their claimed and yet very imperfect 

sanctity. So it was in this parable and the 

others of the same discourse: they were spoken 

to the Pharisees as a reproof, because they had 

murmured at him for teaching or having anything 

to do with the disreputable backsliders.— 

See Luke 15:1-3. 

R1460 : page 314 

Originally all the Jews entered into covenant 
relationship with God, and thus became, 
typically, his sons. Although they were a 
"house" of servants as contrasted with the 
Christian Church, called the "house" of sons, 
yet we must remember that they typified the 
house of spiritual sons, and that as Adam was 
a human son of God before he sinned, so all 
who obtain forgiveness and return to harmony 
with God are again sons, either of the earthly 



or the spiritual family. So, then, as in this 
parable, all Israelites under the Jewish covenant 
were treated as (human) sons of God. 
The beginning of this relationship dated from 
the Covenant at Sinai. 

At first all sought to abide in God's favor at 
"home," fulfilling the relationship of obedient 
sons— the original or eldest son of the parable, 
represented most prominently in our Lord's 
day by the Pharisees. But another class developed, 
who, after having received God's favors, 
wandered off into the ways of sin and forgetfulness 
of God, and his love and care, and into 
dissipation— the younger son of the parable, 
represented in our Lord's day by the publicans 
and sinners. 

Sin always brings misery in some form, and 
often in many forms: and one can fancy that 
the publicans and sinners, as they heard the 
story of the young prodigal beginning to feel 
his lack, would realize their own miserable 
condition therein pictured. Before the Master 
had finished telling how the prodigal "came 
to himself," and how the father "saw him a 
long way off" and ran to meet and greet him, 
no doubt many of the hearers' eyes were wet 
with tears, and many of their hearts swelling 
with emotion and sympathy and the desire 
similarly to get back from the service of the 
devil to God's favor and love. 

And how true to facts was the picture of the 
Pharisees standing around and objecting to his 
telling those poor prodigals anything about the 
love of God and his willingness to forgive 
them, and to welcome them back home again. 
The elder son of the parable was "angry, and 
would not go in:" the self-righteous Pharisees 
were angry, too, and refused to enter the Kingdom, 
then nigh at hand, and first offered to 
their nation according to divine promise. Our 
Lord said to them upon another occasion, 
"Woe, unto you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, 
for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven 
against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, 
neither suffer ye them that are entering to go 
in" (Matt. 23:13); and again he said, "Verily, 
I say unto you that publicans and sinners 
shall go into the kingdom before you." (Matt. 21:31.) 
Poor, self-righteous Pharisees! To 
this day they are jealous and will "not go in." 
As a class they refused the Kingdom on the conditions 
offered, until the offer and opportunity 
were taken from them entirely (Matt. 21:43), 
and given to a class whom they esteemed still 
less than the publicans and sinners— even to the 
Gentiles whom they esteemed as "dogs," from 



among whom, strangers and aliens and not 
then sons, members for the Bride and Kingdom 
of Christ are being selected. 

We who have been accepted by God from 
among the Gentiles to be his sons— joint-heirs 
with Christ— can perhaps enter as fully into 
the spirit of this parable as did the publicans 
and sinners who heard the gracious words from 
the Redeemer's lips. We, who were strangers 
and aliens, learned that the Father prepared a 
great sacrifice for the sins of all condemned in 
Adam. We have heard and tasted of his loving 
welcome into his family— we who were 
dead in trespasses and sins, but who are now 
alive toward God through Jesus Christ, our 
Lord. We received the "best robe," the robe 
of Christ's righteousness, replacing the filthy 
rags of our unrighteousness; we received the 
ring, representing the witness of the spirit 
that we are sons and heirs; we received the 
sandals, preparing us for the sharp contact 
often to be experienced from the beggarly elements 
of the present evil world; and above all 
we received the kiss, the seal of our reconciliation, 
the mark of our adoption into the divine 
family. Nothing in this parable shows the 
necessity for the ransom as other Scriptures 
show it. This, however, is not out of harmony 
but consistent with our interpretation of the 
parable; for Israel as a whole had been typically 
atoned for in the typical sacrifices by which 
their covenant was introduced and renewed 

R1460 : page 315 

yearly. It is therefore evidently a picture of the 
return of a backslidden son, and not that of the 
redemption of a condemned stranger and alien. 

The lesson of this parable to the Pharisees 
is one widely applicable in its principles— viz.: 
that all who are in harmony with God should, 
nay, all who have the spirit of holiness will, 
rejoice to see sinners returning to divine favor. 
Any other spirit will surely work injury, as it 
did to the Pharisees, who, as a class, were unfit 
in their selfishness to share the blessings 
God had or ever will have to offer. Thank 
God, the time for removing blindness will soon 
be here. (Isa. 35:5.) Let us trust that under 
the new conditions many more will learn and 
practice the spirit of love, who now are ruled 
by selfishness. How hardly shall a selfish man 
enter the Kingdom ! Let us beware of selfishness, 
and embroider our wedding-robe with 
flowers of humility and love. 



PRODIGAL RETURN! 



"Return, return!" thy Father's voice is pleading, 

"Tho' far astray, I bid thee turn again! 
Thy robe is rent, thy tender feet are bleeding, 

Thy heart is faint and sick with famine pain: 
Return, my child: a welcome here awaits thee; 

No longer in the distant country rove; 
Resist the cruel tempter that belates thee, 

And keeps thee from my dwelling and my love." 

Return, return! Thy Father's loving-kindness 

Thou long hast scorned, and done his grace despite; 
Yet in his touch is healing for thy blindness, 

And he can turn thy darkness into light. 
Return in all thy rags of sin's defilement; 

Return with all thy want and sore distress; 
Thy Father's voice bespeaks his reconcilement: 

Flee to his breast, and there thy guilt confess. 

Return, return! Thy substance hath been wasted— 

Thou hast not aught to bring but thy poor heart; 
Yet art thou longing for the bread once tasted, 

And for his paths of peace, and faith's good part? 
Return, for why shouldst thou delay the pardon 

Thy Father's great compassion waits to grant! 
Arise and go, before thy doubts shall harden 

The homesick yearnings of the penitent. 

Return, return! Leave thou the swine and famine 

And seek again the plenty of thy home! 
Why dost thou toil among the husks of mammon, 

When to his rest the Father bids thee come? 
Return thou to his arms, his kiss, his blessing; 

Accept the robe, the sandals, and the ring; 
And there, thy sinfulness and guilt confessing, 

Thou shalt be found, lost treasure of the King! 

Return, return! The angel-hosts bend o'er thee— 

They wait to bear the tidings' joyful sound. 
They have beheld the Savior dying for thee, 

And will rejoice to sing, The lost is found! 
Return, for he will heal all thy backsliding— 

Will love thee freely, and will thus forgive; 
Come, weary soul, rest in his love abiding. 

Thou hast been dead— arise to-day and live! 
F. G. BURROUGHS. 



R1461 : page 315 



GROW IN GRACE. 



"Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things 
before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error 
of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness. But 
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and forever. 
Amen."-2 Pet. 3:17,18. 

There is a touching tenderness in the Epistles 
of the aged Apostle Peter to the household 
of faith, showing that, while he realized that 
the time of his departure was drawing nigh 
(2 Pet. 1:14; John 21:18,19), his solicitude 
for the growth and development of the Church 
was increasing. Accordingly, he writes two 
general epistles, not so much to advance new 
truth, as to call to remembrance truths already 
learned and fully received (2 Pet. 1:12-15), 
and to counsel all to faithfulness and to growth 
in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ. 

In the preceding verses he has been calling 
to mind some of these truths, and he recognizes 
the fact that those addressed are already 
established in them; but, in view of his knowledge 
that false teachers would arise to pervert 
the truth, he counsels special watchfulness 
against being led away from their present 
steadfastness by the error of the wicked. That 
this counsel of the Apostle has a special fitness 
to the Church in the last days, our days, and 

R1461 : page 316 

was evidently so designed by the Spirit of God, 
is clear from verse 3— "There shall come in 
the last days scoffers," etc. 

Let us observe the manner in which the 
Apostle would have us guard against being led 
away by the error of the wicked. Is it by a 
careful investigation of all the claims which 
every new false prophet that arises may intrude 
upon our attention, thus giving heed to every 
seducing spirit (1 Tim. 4:1)? No: that would 
be quite contrary to the teaching of "our beloved 
brother Paul," to whom Peter so affectionately 
refers, and whom he so fully endorses; 
for Paul had given no uncertain counsel on 
this subject, saying, "Shun profane and vain 
babblings; for they will increase unto more 
ungodliness, and their word will eat as doth a 
canker;" and "I entreat you, brethren, to 
mark those who are making factions and laying 



snares contrary to the teaching which you 
have learned, and turn away from them; for 
they that are such are not in subjection to our 
Anointed Lord, but to their own appetite [for 
honor and praise among men, as great teachers 
— 1 Tim. 1:6,7]; and by kind and complimentary 
words they deceive the hearts of the 
unsuspecting. ...I wish you to be wise with 
respect to that which is good, and harmless 
with respect to that which is evil."— 2 Tim. 2:16,17; 
Rom. 16:17-19. 

Peter felt the force of Paul's wise and earnest 
counsel, and with emphasis re-echoed the 
same sentiments. To give heed to such seducing 
doctrines, contrary to the doctrine which 
we have already received from the Lord and 
the apostles, argues a lack of faith in those 
doctrines. Such a one is not established in the 
faith. And indeed there are those— and such 
is the general sentiments among the teachers 
of false doctrine— who think that it is not 
either necessary or advisable to be established 
in the faith. To be established is to be a bigot, 
is the idea they advance. And so it is, if 
one is so unfair in mind as to accept and tenaciously 
hold that which he has never proved 
either by sound logic or Bible authority. But 
he is not an unreasoning bigot who, in simple 
faith, on the authority of God, accepts the 
Word of God. And such, and only such, as 
do so are established in the truth. The difference 
between the strong and steadfast Christian 
and a bigot is that the one is established in the 
truth, while the other is established in error. 
The former knows the truth, and the truth has 
made him free from all doubts and misgivings, 
and from all desires to delve into the muddy 
pool of human speculations. To all such Paul 
says, "As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus 
the Lord, so walk ye in him: rooted and built 
up in him, and established in the faith, as ye 
have been taught [by us, the apostles], abounding 
therein with thanksgiving."— But, "Beware 
lest any man spoil you through philosophy 
and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, 
after the rudiments of the world, and not after 
Christ."-Col. 2:6-8. 

With these sentiments of "our beloved brother 
Paul," Peter's counsel is in fullest harmony, 
his advice being, not to waste valuable time in 
investigating "the errors of the wicked," but, 
on the contrary, to endeavor the more earnestly 
to "grow in grace and in the knowledge of 
our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ," who is the 
way, the truth and the life. The more thorough 
our knowledge of the Lord, and the more 



intimate our acquaintance with him, the more 
secure we are in our own steadfastness. 

But what is it to grow in grace? It is to 
grow in favor with the Lord through an intimate 
personal acquaintance and fellowship of 
spirit with him. It implies, first, a knowledge 
and recognition on our part of our redemption 
through his precious blood and a personal faith 
in and dependence upon all the promises of the 
Father made to us through him, and then an 
intimate communion with him in our daily life 
of prayer, and of observation of his will and 
obedience to it. If such be our constant attitude 
of mind and heart, there must be a constant 
ripening of the fruits of the Spirit, rendering 
us more and more pleasing and acceptable 
to our Lord. A sense of the divine 
acceptance and favor is given to us from day 
to day in increasing measure, in fulfilment of 
that blessed promise of our Lord, "If a man 
love me, he will keep my words; and my Father 
will love him, and we will come unto him, 
and make our abode with him."— John 14:23. 

R1461 : page 317 

This, as nearly as words can express it, is 
what it is to grow in grace; but the full and 
blessed understanding of it is best appreciated 
by those who from day to day walk with God 
in faith and obedience and love. 

To grow thus in grace and not grow in knowledge 
is impossible; for the very object of such 
communion is to build us up in a more perfect 
knowledge and acquaintance with the Lord- 
to bring us into closer fellowship with the divine 
plan, and to give us the privilege of being 
co-workers together with him in executing 
that plan. If, therefore, we love and obey the 
Lord and desire to grow in his favor, his written 
Word is our daily meditation and study, 
and thus we grow in knowledge: not, however, 
by finding out each year that what we learned 
last year was false, but by adding to what we 
learned last year, by putting on more and more 
of the armor of God until we realize its glorious 
completeness in the full discernment of the 
divine plan of the ages. We are then ready 
to do valiant service for the cause of truth 
in withstanding the encroachment of error 
(Eph. 6:10-13), being established, strengthened 
and settled in the faith. (1 Pet. 5:10.) But 
even to those thus established in the faith there 
is abundant opportunity to grow in knowledge; 
for while they will see nothing new or different 
in outline or design, they will be continually 



charmed and cheered with newly discovered 

lines of harmony and beauty in the divine 

drawings of the wonderful plan of the ages. 

As pupils we may ever study the master workmanship 

of the Divine Architect. 

"And still new beauties shall we see, 
And still increasing light." 

Our beloved brother Peter, zealous for our 
growth in knowledge, endeavors to inspire us 
thereto, by calling our attention to the wonderful 
events and the close proximity of the day 
of the Lord, saying— 

"The day of the Lord will come as a thief 
[unobserved by the world], in the which the 
heavens [present ecclesiastical powers] shall 
pass away with a great noise [tumult and confusion], 
and the elements [the various parties 
and sects composing it, split and torn by discordant 
views] shall melt with fervent heat [the 
heat of public discussion and investigation]: 
the earth also [society as at present organized 
under civil and ecclesiastical authority] and the 
works that are therein shall be burned up" 
[destroyed, in the strife and friction caused by 
increasing knowledge combined with selfishness. 
This will not be a literal fire, but, as 
described by the prophets, the fire of divine 
jealousy-Zeph. 1:18; 3:8]. (2 Pet. 3:10.) 
Already the noise and tumult, which shall thus 
eventuate in world-wide anarchy, are distinctly 
heard in every nation; for the day of the Lord 
has indeed begun, and the heat of human passion 
is growing more and more intense daily, 
and the great time of trouble is very near. 

"Seeing then that all these things shall be 
dissolved [seeing that present arrangements 
and institutions shall all go down], what manner 
of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation 
and godliness, looking for the coming 
of the day of God, wherein the heavens 
[the present ruling powers] shall be dissolved, 
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat?" 
Let us indeed lay to heart this solemn question, 
for we stand in the very presence of the 
Judge of all the earth. These words, while addressed 
to God's people eighteen centuries ago, 
and serving a purpose for good all along down 
this Gospel age, are specially meant by the Spirit 
for us, who are living in this very Day of God. 

"Nevertheless we [we who have come into 
covenant relationship with the Lord— we, unlike 
the rest of the world, know of the divine 
plan and], according to his promise, look for 
new heavens [the Kingdom of God— to be 
established in power and great glory] and a 
new earth [a new organization of society under 



the rulership of Christ and his glorified bride, 
the Church] wherein dwelleth righteousness." 
Blessed assurance! how favored are we above the 
people of the world who have not this knowledge! 

"Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for 
such things, be diligent that ye may be found 
of him in peace, without spot, and blameless." 
And Jude (24) reminds us that the Lord, in 
whose grace and knowledge Peter desires us to 
grow, "is able to keep you from falling, and to 
present you faultless before the presence of his 
glory with exceeding joy." Amen. 



page 318 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULLNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 
PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1461 : page 318 

THE FIRST CHRISTIAN MISSIONARIES. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VII., NOV. 13, ACTS 13:1-13. 

Golden Text— "That repentance and remission of sins 
should be preached in his name among all nations."— 
Luke 24:47. 

VERSE 1. The Church at Antioch had grown 
and prospered under the instructions of Barnabas 
and Saul, who, after spending a year with 
them, went to Jerusalem at the time of the 
famine and must have returned again to Antioch 
and resumed their work of teaching and 
strengthening them in the faith and hope of the 
gospel. The occasion of this lesson was probably 
about a year after the famine. Not only 
had the Church there increased largely in 
numbers, but in their midst had developed both 
prophets and teachers. The view of this band 
of Christians is truly a refreshing one. Here 
Jews and Gentiles were made one in Christ 
Jesus, and mingled together in ardent devotion 



to the recognized Messiah. They were full of 
love and zeal; they were earnest students of the 
Word of the Lord as expounded by Barnabas 
and Saul; they were prompt in sending relief 
to other Christians in time of famine. And 
now, having themselves grown strong spiritually 
through the knowledge of the truth and 
humble submission to its teaching, the missionary 
spirit began to develop. 

VERSE 2. As the prophets and teachers 
continued in the good work with fasting and 
prayer, the holy Spirit indicated in some way 
that Barnabas and Saul should be released from 
the work in Antioch and sent elsewhere, to 
the work whereunto God had called them— the 
work among the Gentiles— to which Saul had 
been appointed by a voice from heaven, and 
Barnabas by the circumstances which had drawn 
him into this work and by the ability he manifested 
in carrying it forward. We are not informed 
as to the manner in which the holy 
Spirit indicated this, whether by some miraculous 
means, or whether by a simple consensus of 
opinion regarding the matter, in view of the 
ability of the Church at Antioch now to dispense 
with their services. 

VERSE 3. In a most solemn manner— with 
prayer and fasting and the laying on of hands 
—the dear brethren at Antioch bade Barnabas 
and Saul God-speed on their mission. The 
laying on of hands cannot be understood as 
conveying authority to these brethren to preach 
the gospel; for they had been preaching the gospel 
for several years: and, besides, these brethren 
who laid their hands on them were not bishops 
or great ones in the Church; but, like all the 
others, they were simply brethren in Christ. 
The laying on of their hands we understand, 
therefore, to signify that they wished the new 
converts abroad to recognize these two as representatives, 
not only of the Lord, but also of the 
Church at Antioch, who, in parting with them 
and foregoing the advantage of their services, 
thus manifested their disposition to bless others 
with the same good tidings which had so refreshed 
them. And doubtless they paid their 
expenses and pledged them the support of their 
sympathy and prayers, and their means, if need 
be. Thus Barnabas and Saul went forth in the 
name of the Lord, and of the Church at Antioch, 
who thereby shared in the enterprise. In 
the symbolic services of the Tabernacle, this 
same significance attached to the laying on of 
hands. Thus Aaron, the high-priest, in laying 
his hands upon the head of the bullock to be 
sacrificed, declared that the animal represented 



him (Lev. 8:14) and thus typified Christ Jesus, 
our great high-priest who gave himself a sacrifice 
for our sins. 

Thus we see that there was no apostolic succession 
indicated in this simple ceremony; for, 
as a matter of fact, it was brethren who were 
not apostles who laid their hands on one (Saul) 
who was already an apostle chosen and ordained 
of God.— 1 Tim. 2:7. 

VERSES 4,5. Being thus sent forth by the 
holy Spirit, they began their work in the synagogues 
of the Jews, because the Jews, having a 
knowledge of the prophecies and of the events, 
etc., connected with the life and tragic death 
of Jesus of Nazareth, were best fitted to receive 
the truth. Just so now the truths of the new, 
Millennial dispensation belong to Christians 
first, and the testimony should be borne to them 
before going to the world in general. This being 
our custom, we are often confronted with the 
query, Why not go rather to wicked people 
who never go to church? We reply, Because 
this gospel is sent to the meek (Isa. 61:1), and 
because "Light is sown for the righteous, and 
joy for the upright in heart." 

But the temples of the nominal church today 
do not offer the same advantages for the 

R1461 : page 319 

presentation of the truth as did the synagogues 
of the Jews. The former are so hedged 
about with restrictions and formalities that 
there is almost no opportunity to present the 
truth there, while the Jewish synagogues, on 
the contrary, were open to any one who would 
read or expound the Scriptures. So also were 
the assemblies of Christians in those days of 
primitive simplicity, which have been so widely 
departed from by the nominal church of 
these later days. 

VERSES 6-12 show how God worked with 
Barnabas and Saul and manifested his power 
through them. As they sought to make plain 
the way of truth to an earnest inquirer an enemy 
appeared who endeavored to withstand their 
teaching; but the power of God exercised 
through Saul promptly silenced the opposer, 
and the truth had free course. 

Here the question naturally arises, Why does 
such power not exist in the Church to-day? 
On every hand the foes of truth and righteousness 
arise and flourish, and there is no power to 
withstand them save the power of the truth. 
We answer, it was not God's purpose thus to 
defend the Church from her foes all through 



the age. It was his purpose, on the contrary, 
to let "the mystery of iniquity" work and 
prosper, and to let the Church develop under 
the trial; but in those early days, in order to 
let truth have a start on a fair footing it was 
necessary for a time to restrain the power of 
the adversary, as in the case of Elymas the 
sorcerer. The difference between that time and 
this is that that was the seed-sowing time while 
this is the harvest. And therefore God now 
permits false teachers to increase and multiply 
more and more, and to have such liberty that, 
if it were possible, they would deceive the very 
elect. Even these enemies serve a purpose in 
testing and in sifting the true children of God 
from the false. 



R1461 : page 319 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT. 



page 319 

Kansas. 

DEAR FRIEND IN CHRIST:-I received your 
card, the Tracts and two numbers of "Zions 
Watch Tower," for which favors please accept 
thanks. I did not know that there was any 
such line of thought in publication, until I 
acted as scribe for a friend in ordering "Millennial 
Dawn;" but I have been reading the 
Word very studiously for some years, with the 
heart and will surrendered to God, and the 
body presented a living sacrifice. I sought to 
know God only in this search after truth; for 
Jesus, in his beautiful prayer, said, "And this 
is life eternal, that they might know thee, the 
only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou 
hast sent." 

I have read many publications, getting some 
food from each and all; but I have never found 
the liberty which you advocate, and which undoubtedly 
is of God, made practical; and I 
can accept nothing less than the liberty wherewith 
Christ has set me free. What need have 
we of man's sanction or ordination, since to 
come under man's dictation is to cut off spiritual 
communication with God. My continual 
aspiration to God is, Fashion me as the potter 
fashions the clay. Fill me with the knowledge 
of thy will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. 
I am glad that I may be his child 



without subscribing to any rules according to 
the wisdom of man, which is foolishness with 
God. I am sure we may have Jesus dwelling 
in us, we may be baptized into his death (and 
so put on Christ), and his life may be sustained 
in us, as we eat of his broken body and drink 
of his shed blood. 

Praise the Lord, O my soul; be glad in the 
Lord, and rejoice! Oh, how unkind not to 
believe him and live; for he delighteth not in 
the death of him that dieth. Yes, he died to 
deliver us from death. He took the flesh, that 
through his death he might destroy him that 
has the power of death, that is the devil, and 
deliver us. 

Enclosed please find five dollars for the 
TOWER, Tracts and "Dawns." I would rejoice 
to do all that I can in disseminating the truth. 

Yours very truly in the love of the truth, 
H. M. WHITE. 



R1461 : page 319 

Tennessee. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-I received the three 
volumes of "Dawn" and several numbers of the 
Tower. They are indeed a helping hand to 
one who has been struggling to get into the 
light but dimly seen, standing outside of the 
Babel of confused tongues for nearly twenty-five 
years, and waiting for the Lord's coming 
since 1844. I now stand on the verge of three 
score years and ten, and pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come;" and with the ardent desire of the souls 
under the altar I inquire, How long, O Master, 
how long? 

How almost overwhelming is such a flood of 
light as the Lord is now giving through you 
and others of his chosen messengers! How 
inexpressible and exultant the joy of such light! 

R1461 : page 320 

I have often remarked that wherever there is 
an earnest, persistent seeker of the truth, it will 
finally come to such an one; and that if there 
should be no other way, a special messenger 
would be sent. 

I am thankful for the opportunity now offered 
to do some little service for the Master, by circulating 
your publications wherever I find a 
hearing ear or a waiting soul. Our Lord said, 
"Ye are my witnesses;" and I fear that I have 
not been a faithful witness, although I taught 



many of these truths privately for some years. 
Standing outside of all human organizations, 
and in a very dark corner of the earth, and 
knowing nothing of the TOWER movement (or 
work), I felt alone and fearful. But my moral 
courage is now greatly strengthened by the 
knowledge of the fact that there are so many 
and such strong laborers in the field. May the 
Lord ever guide us, and teach us when and 
what to speak, and when to be silent. 
Yours in him, S. G. KERR. 



page 320 

Iowa. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-I received the 
third volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and I was 
well pleased with it, as with the first and second 
volumes. They have given me great light on 
what seemed dark and mysterious passages of 
the Bible; and they have created in me a new 
interest in the study of the Old as well as the 
New Testament— not for mere curiosity, but 
because I see a new beauty in all their teachings, 
in all God's plans and purposes. We are 
made willing or unwilling instruments to accomplish 
his will. What a blessed thought, to 
be willing workers in his vineyard, and to be 
waiting with glad hearts for the Master's return 
to secure his own. 

I have loaned the books with the hope of 
enlisting others in the spread of the truth in 
this community. 

Fraternally, yours, W. D. HONENS. 



New York. 

DEAR FRIENDS:-I am sincerely grateful for 
the generous gift of the WATCH TOWER. I enjoy 
it beyond my power to express, and I 
read it, as I do the DAWN, with the Scriptures 
open beside me. The beauty and value 
of your publications lie in the fact that every 
statement is so completely fortified by Scripture 
references. I sometimes read the whole 
chapter, where one verse or more is referred to, 
and I am conscious of a much clearer comprehension 
of Bible teachings than I ever had before; 
for I was much troubled by skepticism. 
I did not then know how to study the Scriptures, 
as many of my teachers were also partially 
blind. 

I am very thankful that our blessed Savior 



so ordered the late events of my life that I was 

permitted to obtain some of the true light, and 

I trust some of that wisdom that maketh wise 

unto salvation. I believe it was his grace that 

caused some Tracts to be sent to me, and that 

led me to obtain Volume I. of DAWN. By the 

time that I had carefully read Chapter vi. of 

that work, all my skepticism and doubts disappeared. 

To me the Scriptures are not contradictory, 

nor is our loving Creator unjust, unwise, 

or lacking in power. Yea, he is infinite 

in all his attributes. 

I intend to use all means and opportunities 
in my power to aid in spreading the light that 
has so mercifully been extended to me. I desire 
to consecrate all my abilities, and the 
remainder of my life, to the circulation of 
literature that tends to a knowledge of righteousness, 
the truths of Scripture, the wonderful 
plans of our Creator, our Father, and his infinite 
love, wisdom and justice. May the Lord 
grant abundant success to our labors for the 
spiritual help of mankind. Gratefully yours 
in the Lord, B. G. BARTO. 



R1461 : page 320 

The following letter, just at hand, indicates 
that there are some truth-seekers in the pulpits 
too: a fact that one might be inclined to 
doubt, from the number of ministers who seem 
determinedly opposed even to investigating 
anything approximating "good tidings of great 
joy for all people"— hating the light, neither 
coming to it; but, like their prototypes in the 
Jewish "harvest," stopping and in every way 
hindering all who are longing for the dawn of 
the Millennial morning. Let us not despair 
of the ministers: there are some honest ones 
among them. Let us remember that it costs 
them more than others to embrace present truths. 
One of them (a Presbyterian minister in Pittsburg), 
after admitting privately that he believed 
much taught in the Dawns, was asked, Why 

R1462 : page 320 

then do you not preach it? His candid reply 
was: "My bread is not buttered on that side." 

Kansas. 
BRETHREN:-If you have anything Biblical 
in "The Plan of the Ages" which will lift 
the awful load of depression from mind and 



heart, and harmonize natural and "revealed" 
religion, in the name of mercy send it to me 
by return mail. Find thirty cents inclosed. 

Respectfully, . 

Pastor First Congregational Church. 



page 322 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1462 : page 322 

Probably no book ever had a greater number 
of free circulars sent out in its interest than 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. East and West, 
North and South, dear friends of the truth are 
continually seeking to put the "meat in due 
season" before the truth-hungry. Our latest 
surprise in this direction was the receipt of an 
order for a copy of the MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
from a western town, enclosing a circular of 
which we had not heard until then, a copy of 
which follows. God bless the dear co-laborers 
who far and near are seeking in one way and 
another to feed his "sheep"— to proclaim the 
good tidings of great joy. Your efforts have 
much to do with the large circulation of the 
Truth. Over 300,000 copies, of Vol. I., The 
Plan of the Ages, are already in the hands of 
readers, and the work is still progressing. God 



be praised! 

New York. 

DEAR FRIEND: --Lest you should wonder 
how I came in possession of your name, I will 
state that I first saw it in the correspondence 
column of , of which I am a reader. 

Feeling that you must be one who is interested 
in searching after a knowledge of the 
wonderful things of our Great Father's creation, 
and desiring that your steps may be still 
further directed in the knowledge of things 
past, present and future, I have taken the liberty 
of addressing this communication to you, 
with the special object in view of calling your 
attention to a wonderful book— one which, perchance, 
you already have; but if not, one which 
I, a disinterested and humble servant of the 
Lord, would counsel you to obtain without delay. 

"MILLENNIAL DAWN" is a book which has 
been to me, and I know to many others, a 
great source of gladness and inspiration: a "helping 
hand" indeed to every earnest student of 
the Word, producing an inward joy which has 
caused many an one to cry out time and again 
from an overflowing heart, "Praise the Lord!" 
If you want to see things "new and old" in 
God's Word, brought out as you have never 
before seen them, and to have, as a humble, 
hungering seeker after truth, "meat in due 
season," obtain this deeply interesting book and 
prayerfully read it, comparing it with the Word. 
It can be obtained from the publisher by remitting 
the very low price named. Think not, 
dear friend, that I am in anyway interested in 
the publication and sale of this book other than 
from a desire to spread the truth; for such is 
not the case. 

I am sending out this circular (without the 
knowledge of the author and publishers) as a 
free-will missionary work of my own— a feeble 
effort on my part to spread the "glad tidings 
of great joy," and an effort which, please God, 
may he mightily bless to the praise of his great 
name, to whom be all the glory, Amen. 

Should you desire further information on this 
subject, I will be pleased to hear from you. 

Yours in the hope of the Gospel, 

JOHN A. MITCHELL. 



page 322 

THE SYRIAC NEW TESTAMENT. 



Murdoch's Translation of the Syriac-Peshito 
manuscript is sometimes inquired for. 

We can supply it in substantial half-leather 
binding, post paid for $2.00. 



Do not forget the Missionary Envelopes. We 
have a new lot and supply them now at the reduced 
price of 25 cents per hundred, and $2.00 
per thousand. This includes free delivery to you 
at your Postoffice. 



R1462 : page 323 

VOL. XIII. NOVEMBER 1, 1892. NO. 21. 

THE LAW OF GOD. 



"The law is holy, and the commandment holy, and 
just, and good."— Rom. 7:12. 

So says the Apostle Paul; and the Psalmist 
adds, "The law of the Lord is perfect;" and 
the Apostle James calls it "The perfect law of 
liberty." And again, the Psalmist breaks forth 
in an ecstasy of admiration, saying, "O how 
love I thy law! It is my meditation all the day." 

Were these men mere religious enthusiasts 
when they thus praised the law of God? Let us 
look into it and see if it has the same inspiration 
for us. It says, Thou shalt have no other 
gods before me, nor make nor worship graven 
images; thou shalt honor thy father and mother, 
and shalt not kill, nor steal, nor bear false 
witness against thy neighbor, etc. Is there 
anything so very delightful and inspiring about 
these commands and prohibitions as to call 
forth such ejaculations of praise? To the casual 
reader it would seem not. Certainly no 
man feels specially flattered or edified either, on 
being told not to steal or kill or lie or cheat or 
bow down to worship senseless idols. And if 
we turn from the ten commandments to the 
ceremonial and provisional features of the law 
given to Israel, are the themes for meditation 
all the day any more inspiring? There we 
read articles for the regulation of slavery in 
Israel, and prohibitions against the enslavement 
of any Israelite (See Lev. 25:44-46; Exod. 21:20,21; 



Deut. 23:15,16); and of special provisions 

for the government of those who desired 

to take more than one wife, as to how they 

should still perform their obligations toward 

the wives they had already taken. (See Exod. 21:10; 

Deut. 21:15-17.) And again, there 

were commands that in cases of certain sins all 

Israel should take part in the execution of the 

criminal by stoning. Then there were all those 

features relating to the service of the Tabernacle, 

and the offering of sacrifices, and the observance 

of sabbaths, and jubilees, and feast 

days, etc. Is there any thing so inspiring in 

all these things? Infidels say, No, and hold it 

all up to ridicule; but let us with the apostles 

and prophets look deeper, and doubtless we 

also shall find God's law a theme worthy of 

our meditation all the day, and one in which 

we may truly delight ourselves. 

It was foretold by the Prophet Isaiah (42:21) 
that Christ would "magnify the law and 
make it honorable." And this is an intimation 
that in some way the divine law had 
been made to appear beneath its true dignity 
and grandeur,— which is true. In bringing it 
down to the comprehension of sinful men, God 
was obliged to state it in such a way as to meet 
the exigencies of their case; and so it abounds 
in commands and prohibitions— "thou shalt," 
and "thou shalt not." But hear the law as 
our Lord Jesus expressed it, when he said, On 
these two commandments hangs all the law, 
viz., "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with 
all thy mind;" and "Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself." (Matt. 22:37-40.) And 
the Apostle Paul briefly sums it up in one word, 
saying, "Love is the fulfilling of the law." 

R1462 : page 324 

It was thus also that the law of God was expressed 
to Adam and Eve in Eden. Love was 
the only law given there— love supreme, to 
God; and then love to each other as measured 
only by the love of self. Each was to love the 
other as much as self, and to love God even 
more. In this law every right-minded person 
can truly take delight. And those who thus 
delight themselves in the very central idea and 
spirit of God's law need no negative commands; 
for love's quick intuitions readily discover 
how to express its tenderest emotions 
toward God, and what would work good or ill 
to a neighbor. 

To meditate on God's law is not, therefore, 



merely to ponder over the ten commandments 
—Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal, 
etc.— but rather to ponder over the spirit of 
that law of love and to study its outworkings 
in all the minutiae of life's affairs. And if this 
is the daily theme of our meditations, how 
truly may we delight ourselves therein. Happy 
indeed is that soul who can say, I delight 
to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law of love 
is within my heart. 

No parchment or tablet of stone can fairly represent 
the law of God. To be seen in its beauty 
and perfection, it must be viewed as engraven 
on the hearts of his intelligent creatures. The 
only clear and full illustrations we have yet 
had of it were Adam and Eve and our Lord 
Jesus. That written on the tablets of stone 
and given to Israel was a cruder manifestation 
of it to bring it down to the comprehension 
of fallen men. 

This law of love works no ill to a neighbor 
and no ingratitude or irreverence to God, but 
is holy and just and good. Let us study it as 
it is written in the character and in the teachings 
of our Lord, as expressed by his own mouth 
and by the mouth of his holy apostles and 
prophets. In it we may profitably meditate all 
the day; and the more we meditate upon it the 
more we will realize its perfection and grandeur 
and see that it is indeed what James declares 
it to be— "the perfect law of liberty." 

It is the only law of liberty that could be 
made; for nothing else than Love can secure 
the fullest liberty for every individual without 
in the least infringing upon the liberties of any 

R1463 : page 324 

other individual. Love, founded on justice, is 
therefore the only principle that has any right to 
authority or rulership anywhere. Justice is generally 
understood to be the object of all rulership; 
but Justice can never be fully secured where Love 
does not reign. Only love to the neighbor as to 
one's self can rightly adjust the affairs of men, 
either now or in the future. If it were possible 
now for love to fully control all the marts of trade 
and the busy hives of manufacturing industry, 
what a renovation it would make: How employers 
and employees would work together for the 
common welfare, and strikes and lockouts and 
boycotts would be things unknown; and both the 
brains of the employers and the hands of the 
employed would find restful relaxation when the 
day closes. How would all the inventions and 
discoveries, the improved machinery and the 



increased skill of hand and brain begin to bless 
the whole world. How soon would the toiling 
hands and brains find labor lightened, and 
hours shortened, and leisure gained for mental 
and spiritual culture and social enjoyment of 
all the good things which God has provided 
for the world's comfort and happiness. Could 
it so enter and control all legislative halls and 
executive departments and courts of justice, 
how quickly would the world's wrongs be righted 
and the cry of the oppressed cease. And 
in the Church, if fully exercised, what beauty 
and grace would be hers, and how brightly her 
light would shine out upon the world. And if 
in full control of the domestic circle, what a 
heavenly peace would pervade its precincts and 
send its hallowed influence abroad. 

Think upon it: study it out in all its intricate 
and important bearings, and see what a 
paradise of beauty and joy will stand out before 
our mental vision— a paradise in the home, a 
paradise in the Church and a paradise in the 
world. O! what an inspiring and what a profitable 
theme for meditation all the day. As we 
thus consider this perfect law of God we find 
that it has indeed, as the Prophet affirms (Psa. 19:7), 
power to convert the soul; for we become 
so inspired with the glorious picture that 
we find ourselves, even here, under the present 
disadvantages, striving to approximate these 

R1463 : page 325 

happy conditions, which we confidently hope 

to realize in the future through Christ our Redeemer 

and Lord, who undertakes to establish 

this law of God in our hearts now, and who 

will by and by establish it in all the world. 

Thus viewed, who will deny the Apostle's 
declaration that the law is holy and just and 
good; for it consists not in a merely passive refraining 
from evil, but goes further, in activity 
for good. 

When we carefully consider the law of God, 
viewing it through the magnifying glasses of 
Christ's life and teaching, and see how honorable 
and good and glorious it appears— for he 
truly magnified it, brought out its fine points, 
and made it honorable— we see that in what is 
commonly called the law of Moses, or the law 
of God, there are two distinct parts, which some 
have distinguished as the moral and the ceremonial 
laws; but which we would distinguish as the 
moral and the provisional laws. The former consisted 
of the ten commandments written upon 
the two tables of stone, and the latter of all the 



remainder of the law, which was peculiarly 
adapted to the purposes of that dispensation 
and the circumstances of that age. 

In considering the provisional law given to 
Israel, some features of which, as above noted, 
are pointed out by Infidels as below the moral 
status of to-day (as they are), we must bear in 
mind that God's purpose with Israel at that 
time was not restitution, but merely the regulation 
of that people to such an extent as to be 
able to use them to represent typically the various 
features of his plan; and, while so doing, to 
guard them as a nation against such moral deflections 
as would make them and him as their 
God a reproach among the other nations. 
Consequently, God did not set about rooting 
out all the evils that were in their midst, but, 
as it is written, "The times of this ignorance 
God winked at [tolerated, or avoided taking 
notice of], because he hath appointed a day" 
—a set time, the Millennial age, for that work. 
(Acts 17:30,31.) As to how Israel accomplished 
his purpose as types, see "Tabernacle 
Shadows of Better Sacrifices." 

Many in Israel, as well as in the world at 
large, had fallen into the evil of taking many 
wives and also of enslaving their fellow men. 
These evils God was not attempting to correct, 
because the "appointed time" for the deliverance 
from sin and the restoration to purity and 
holiness had not yet come. He was leaving 
that work for the Millennial age. Yet, without 
fully undertaking the work of eradicating all 
evil and bringing about complete reformation 
then, God did give some directions for the 
regulation of Israel in these matters, as well as 
many wise and wholesome laws admirably suited 
to the conditions of that time and the purposes 
of that dispensation. 

It is clearly manifest that God's original purpose 
was not a multiplicity of wives, nor the 
enslavement of any member of that race which 
he had created free and in his own image, and 
that he will not permit such things when his 
time has come for restoring all things according 
to his original purpose. Thus we see that 
the claim of Infidels against some features of 
the Mosaic law, as not being up to the ethical 
standard of to-day, does not hold good against 
the divine law, which Paul says is holy and 
just and good, which the Psalmist says is perfect, 
and which James calls "the perfect law 
of liberty;" for Love, which is the central 
idea of the ten commandments, is the very essence 
of the law of God, and is indeed the law 
of liberty; and, as we have seen, it is the only 



law which can give liberty. It is the law with 
which God's own nature is inscribed; for 
"God is love:" and it is the law which he inscribes 
upon the heart of every one of his intelligent 
creatures created in his own likeness, 
both angelic and human, and to the glorious 
liberty of which it is his purpose to restore our 
fallen race. 

It is the law which shone out so beautifully 
in the character and teaching of our Lord Jesus, 
and which he thus magnified and made honorable. 
It is the law which produced the bliss 
of Paradise before sin entered, and which will 
restore it again in the sweet by and by. Glorious 
law! Well may we exclaim with the Psalmist, 
"O how love I thy law! It is my meditation 
all the day." 

But this law will not be fully established in 
the world until the end of the Millennial reign 

R1463 : page 326 

of Christ; and since the object of that reign is 

to bring men gradually up to the conditions 

and requirements of that law, there must of 

necessity be provisional laws during the Millennium 

adapted to the conditions and purposes 

of that age, just as there were provisional laws 

adapted to the conditions and purposes of the 

Jewish age, while the perfect law of Love will 

be held up before all as the goal of their aspirations. 

And when the end of the Millennium 

is reached, these provisional laws, which will 

make allowance for imperfections and shortcomings 

during the appointed times of restitution 

or reconstruction, will be removed; and 

then, every man must come up to the full standard 

of the perfect law of Love. Any who 

then, with the ability acquired under, the special 

arrangements of the provisional laws, show 

themselves unwilling to be actuated by the high-toned 

principles of the eternal law of Love, 

will be counted unworthy of life, and will die 

the second death. 

During the Gospel age this same law of Love 
is held up as the ultimatum of the Church's 
aspirations for holiness and purity. And yet, 
as there will be during the Millennial age, so 
there is now, a provisional law of life under 
which the Church is placed, whose conditions 
take cognizance both of our infirmities (and 
make due allowance for them) and also of God's 
purposes for our discipline and development. 
This law the Apostle Paul (Rom. 8:2) calls 
"the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus," 
whereby all who submit themselves fully to it 



are "made free [reckonedly] from the law of 
sin and death." Under the blessed provisions 
of this law, so admirably adapted to our present 
conditions, all in Christ are now permitted 
to work out their eternal salvation, while God 
works in them to will and to do his good pleasure. 

THE PROPER ATTITUDE TOWARD GOD'S LAW. 



Complete happiness and unalloyed bliss can 
never be secured to any one except by entire 
harmony with the perfect law of love— supreme 
love to God and love to the neighbor as to 
one's self. This law is the full expression of 
God's will and purpose concerning his creatures. 
His will is our happiness and peace and 
joy, and is essential to our fitness to live forever 
in the possession of his favors. The proper 
attitude, therefore, of every loyal child of God 
is not only that of submission to this law to 
the fullest extent of ability, but also of grateful 
and joyful harmony with it, and delight in 
obedience to it and in contemplation of it. 

This law of love, whose foundation is justice, 
is the only law which seeks the highest good 
of its subjects, and it is the only law which will 
ultimately be permitted to rule anywhere in 
God's clean and sinless universe. Now, however, 
the case is different: Satan is permitted 
to interfere largely in the affairs of men, and 
for a time men are permitted to take their own 
course subject to Satan's interference and unhindered 
by divine interposition. And in the 
midst of this state of affairs the Lord's children, 
who constitute the embryo Kingdom of God, 
grow up and develop. They find themselves 
under human laws sometimes approximating 
the perfect law of God, and sometimes far from 
doing so. What should we do about these laws 

R1464 : page 326 

wherein they fall short of the perfect law of 
God?— resist them? or submit to them? 

To resist all such laws would be to array 
one's self in violent and fruitless opposition to 
the whole present order of things, and we must 
remember that even this present order of things 
is ordained of God (Rom. 13:1); for he decreed 
that the time of Gentile rule should continue 
until the appointed time for Christ to 
reign in righteousness. Consequently the children 
of God are counseled to be subject to the 
powers that be, because the powers that be, although 



imperfect, are ordained of God to continue 
for a time. It is therefore his will rather 
that we should suffer injustice than that we 
should spend our strength in fruitless efforts to 
interrupt the present order of things. And so 
the kingdom of heaven suffers violence now, 
but such will not always be the case; for the 
time of her deliverance is at hand. 

While such necessity is laid upon the Church 
in its relationship to the world, however, there 
should be no such state of things among themselves. 
In the Church every member should 
be a careful student of the perfect law of love, 
and her society should be, so far as possible, a 

R1464 : page 327 

model exemplification of this glorious law. 
There should be no tyranny of one member of 
the body of Christ over another; for, says the 
Apostle, "All ye are brethren, and one is your 
master, even Christ." 

Of necessity the present order of things often 
places one member of the body of Christ in a 
measure of temporary subjection to another 
member of the same body, as, for instance, in 
the relationship of master or mistress and servant, 
of parent and child, or of husband and 
wife; and in all these relationships there is an 
opportunity to let the graces of the spirit adorn 
and beautify the character and exemplify before 
the world the outworking of the perfect 
law of love. And it is thus, by our daily walk 
and conversation in all the little things of life, 
that we are to let our light shine before men, 
as the Lord commanded.— Matt. 5:16. 

The Apostle Paul calls our attention to this, 
and lest we should be slow to gather from our 
meditations on the perfect law of God the exact 
line of conduct to be followed in these 
various relationships, he clearly points it out 
for us. He counsels those in authority to remember 
that they have a Master in heaven, 
and that there is no respect of person with 
him; that he regards no distinctions of Jew or 
Greek, bond or free, male or female, because 
we are all one in Christ. And therefore he 
counsels magnanimous and generous conduct, 
saying, Give unto your servants that which is 
just and equal, forbear threatening, and "do 
the same things unto them that they are counseled 
to do unto you"— i.e., serve them with 
kindness and compensation, and do it with 
good will as unto the Lord.— Eph. 6:9; Gal. 3:28; 
Col. 4:1. 

Then to those who serve he says, "Let as 



many as are under the yoke count their own 
masters worthy of all honor [treat them with 
respect and Christian courtesy], that the name 
of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. 
And they that have believing masters, let them 
not despise them, but rather do them service, 
because they are faithful and beloved, partakers 
of the benefit." With singleness of heart they 
should render service as unto the Lord, not as 
men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ doing 
the will of God from the heart, knowing 
that it will be accepted of the Lord and rewarded. 
(1 Tim. 6:1,2; Eph. 6:5-8.) There 
is no servility in such service, however humble 
the task may be. Service rendered in such a 
spirit is always dignified and ennobling; and a 
recognition of such nobility on the part of the 
master or mistress is also a beautiful exemplification 
of the spirit of Christ. 

Children are taught to obey their parents 
(Eph. 6:1), because their youth and inexperience 
stands in need of parental guidance and 
control. There comes a time, however, when 
parental authority must cease to control— when 
the child has come to maturity and is able to 
guide himself or herself. Otherwise the wheels 
of progress could never roll on in the world, 
but would be continually dragged back by the 
withering hand of infirmity. The rule applies 
to children during their minority only, though 
the duty of honor and reverence to parents 
may never be relinquished, but should the rather 
increase as age advances. 

Wives are counseled to submit themselves unto 
their own husbands as unto the Lord. Aye, 
respond many voices, there is at least one blot 
of injustice upon the sacred page. Yes, chime 
in many Infidel voices, the Bible institutes domestic 
slavery and therefore it is a bad book. 
And there is a strong undertone of similar 
sentiment even among Christians. At least 
there is considerable perplexity on the part of 
many as to the exact line of duty in emergencies 
arising out of this relationship, and therefore 
the subject requires here something more 
than a passing notice. 

While the Scriptures represent the husband 
as the head of the wife, and counsel a deferential 
attitude on her part toward him, the instruction 
to the husband is such that, if it is carried 
out, such an attitude on the part of the wife is 
the most natural and agreeable thing. A true 
woman, however marked her intellectual and 
spiritual attainments, is naturally worshipful. 
She looks up to God and Christ with supreme 
reverence, and to the earthly image of God— 



if such her husband be— (See Eph. 5:33— Diaglott) 
with something akin to the same feeling; 
especially when she considers that such a 

R1464 : page 328 

one, so worthy of esteem and reverence and 
love, has indicated his preference for her above 
all others of womankind to be his life-companion 
and an heir together with himself of the 
grace of life. If he is truly noble and good 
and pure and of sound judgment, and yet modest 
in asserting his prerogatives, as well as 
humbly mindful that he is short of perfection, 
and therefore reasonable and considerate when 
judgments differ, it is so natural for a true wife 
to defer to such a one that she is rather in 
danger of exercising her own thought and judgment 
too little, and needs to guard against such 
lethargy. -1 Pet. 3:7. 

Such husbands are those who love their wives 
as their own bodies, and "as Christ also loved 
the Church and gave himself for it" (Eph. 5:25-29); 
and who, forsaking all others, cleave 
only unto her as the beloved and cherished companion. 
And no woman, however cultured or 
refined or possessed of true dignity and worth 
of character, is in the least degree humiliated 
by her deferential attitude toward such a husband. 
Her love and respect will dictate such 
an attitude, while his love and true nobility will 
call it forth. 

The law of love, whose foundation is justice, 
is the only law that ought to rule in the 
home; and that law should be written in the 
heart of each member of it. If it is not written 
there, the walls of the home may be covered 
with rules and regulations, it may be thundered 
forth from angry voices, and emphasized with 
frowns and hard sayings, and yet, notwithstanding 
all this, anarchy will reign supreme— there 
will be no "home." 

Thus viewed, the Bible does not institute 
domestic slavery; but, on the contrary, it points 
the way to the most perfect bliss that earth can 
know. MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1464 : page 328 
PALESTINE AND THE JEWS. 



We really cannot see why these unhappy and 



unfortunate Jews who have been flying from 
Russia to this country, who are now excluded 
from our ports by the bars raised against immigration, 
who cannot find a country in Europe 
that will let them live in it, who have failed in 
their attempts to form colonies in South America, 
who have searched vainly all over the 
world for a part of it in which they will be 
welcomed, should not look to the land of their 
forefathers, Palestine, and should not seek to 
repeople that land, in the hope that the power 
of their race will be revived as it existed in 
ancient times when Jerusalem was in its glory. 

The idea that this restoration might be accomplished 
was entertained by the late Mr. 
Laurence Oliphant, a diplomatist, publicist, 
traveler and author, a true friend of the Jewish 
people, a scholar who knew Palestine and 
its resources, and the race that once inhabited 
it, and its rulers, and the governmental system 
under which it exists. Mr. Oliphant was never 
able to carry out the Palestinian project which 
he devised, but even after he gave it up and 
came to this country he brooded over it, and 
maintained that it was practicable. 

We are familiar with the arguments that disfavor 
the Jewish colonization of Palestine in 
this age of the world. We know that many 
attempts to establish Jewish colonies there have 
failed. We are aware that the Turkish Government 
has been averse to all the colonizing projects 
for which its grace has been invoked. 
We are fully conscious of the facts that Palestine 
has lost many of the attractions which it 
formerly possessed; that much of its once fertile 
soil has been reduced to sterility; that the 
few petty old cities in it are shriveled and 
poverty stricken; that the people by which it 
is inhabited are opposed to the incoming of a 
multitude of Jews; and that the administration 
of its affairs by the functionaries of the Turkish 
Government is not in accord with the desires 
of the pious and able Sultan of Turkey. 

These things are true, yet they need not dishearten 
Baron de Hirsch, who, on account of 
the suspension of immigration to this country, 
is again looking toward Palestine as a possible 
home for the millions of Jews of the Russian 
exodus. 

R1465 : page 328 

Palestine itself yet stands, and it still has its 
old-time hills, valleys and plains, its brooks, 

R1465 : page 329 



rivers and lakes. The country is redeemable, 
and it has in some respects better prospects in 
these times than it has had at any other time 
since the fall of Jerusalem. Its climate is the 
same as it was when Moses started out from 
Egypt to occupy it. Its soil, though impoverished 
by centuries of neglect, can be improved 
by modern scientific appliances. Grain and 
fruit can yet be grown in its fields; sheep and 
hoofed beasts can yet find grass in its pasture 
lands; fish can yet be bred in its waters; its 
cities can be rebuilt and made fit for merchants 
and all manner of workers; its trade with the 
sea-coast and with distant countries can be revived 
and made more extensive and advantageous 
than it was in ancient times. 

Capital can work wonders in Palestine, capital 
that is now in Jewish hands. Were a tithe 
of the enormous amount of money owned by 
the Jews of Europe invested in Palestine, and 
used there with Jewish shrewdness and energy, 
the country might be transformed within a 
brief generation. A short time ago, the Jewish 
millionaire, Baron de Hirsch, announced his 
readiness to expend $100,000,000 in the execution 
of his project for the removal of the four 
million Jews of Russia to some other country; 
and he had begun to carry out that project this 
year by transporting 25,000 of them to the 
United States, when we were compelled by the 
approach of the cholera to put a stop to immigration. 
It is under these circumstances that 
he has once more taken up the thought of Palestine, 
upon which, some years ago, his mind was 
set. Other Jewish millionaires, among whom 
we may name Baron Edmond de Rothschild, 
Sir S. Montefiore and M. Lazar Brodski, have 
expressed their desire to co-operate with him, 
and they have it in their power to furnish 
all the capital required for the development of 
the manifold resources of Palestine. At this 
very time capitalists are making investments 
there far greater than any that have ever before 
been made. The railroad line from Jaffa to 
Jerusalem, which has been built by a French 
company, and which will this week be open 
for business, is but one of several railroad 
enterprises in Palestine, the most important of 
which is perhaps the line already begun between 
Haifa and Damascus. The influence of 
the new Jaffa- Jerusalem line upon the region 
which it traverses, and the cities which it 
unites, has already been marked. Population is 
increasing there, and many hundreds of new 
houses are now building. We learn through a 



letter from Jerusalem that about 600 residences 
and shops are in course of construction 
outside the city walls, and that the city itself, 
which had but 30,000 inhabitants six years ago, 
has now nearly 80,000, or more than it has had 
at any past period since the times of Titus. 

The Turkish Government has recently adopted 
measures favorable to the repeopling of 
Palestine by the Jewish race. Jewish colonists 
can now obtain, upon easy terms, proprietary 
rights in those agricultural settlements that have 
been turned over to them, and they are at 
liberty to build houses upon the lots which they 
may be able to procure. The price of good 
farming lands in Galilee, which will soon be 
traversed by the Haifa-Damascus Railroad, is 
from $10 to $15 per acre, and a farmhouse can 
be built for $600 or $800, while laborers who 
will not work very hard can be hired for low 
wages. 

The greater number of Jews now taking up 
their abode in Palestine are from Russia; and 
several millions of Russian Jews are ready to go 
there, in case Baron de Hirsch and his compatriots 
can find no more desirable place for 
them. 

A writer in the Hebrew Journal of this city 
gives some account of the new Palestinian 
movement. He says that the Jews who have 
been praying through the centuries for the "restoration" 
are now trying to bring it about by 
natural means; that the desire of the Russian 
Jews for it is overwhelming; that they are raising 
funds for the establishment of colonies; and 
that the "Palestinian propaganda" is sustained 
by the great body of the orthodox rabbis, including 
Chief Rabbi Joseph of this city. 

There are now in the world more than ten 
million Jews, about three-quarters of whom are 
in Russia, Poland, the Balkan States, and Turkey. 
If the movement toward Palestine should 
get the impulse that the Hirsch committee is 
able to give it, an imaginative person can conceive 

R1465 : page 330 

of the country's doubling or trebling its 

Jewish population before the close of our century, 

and of its having a larger Jewish population 

fifty years hence than it had in ancient 

times, when its census ran up to three millions. 

Should the restoration be accomplished, all 
hail to the New Jerusalem! 

-New York Sun. Sept. 27 ,'92. 



R1467 : page 330 

"FATHER, GLORIFY THY NAME!" 



"Father, glorify Thy name!" 

Is my humble prayer, 
Not because in all Thy joys 

I may have a share; 
But because my love for Thee 

Has grown deeper, Lord, 
I would have Thy blessed name 

By all hearts adored. 

"Father, glorify Thy name!" 
Is my earnest prayer. 

It may cost me keenest pain- 
Yet, O Lord, I dare 

To uplift this fervent plea, 
And the answer claim: 

Though it mean the cross for me, 
Glorify Thy name! 

"Father, glorify Thy name!" 

Is my daily prayer. 
All the loss my life may know 

Thou wilt help me bear; 
To Thy will I say, Amen! 

In Thy love I trust: 
Father, glorify Thy name 

Through unworthy dust! 

"Father, glorify Thy name!" 

Is my constant prayer; 
I have nought to dread or fear— 

Thou hast all my care. 
Death can be but gain to me, 

E'en a death of shame: 
Father, grant my humble prayer, 

Glorify Thy name! 

-F. G. BURROUGHS. 



R1465 : page 330 
CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP. 



There is a tendency among God's people to 
cement fellowships as well as to make divisions 
upon various unscriptural lines. 

As illustrations: The various branches of the 



Presbyterian family have each its own system 

of theology and its own methods of worship. 

They are one family and have a special sympathy 

or fellowship upon the doctrine of Calvin 

—that everything that comes to pass was foreordained. 

Among Baptists, although there are 

many subdivisions of them, there is a common 

bond of fellowship in water-immersion. No 

matter what else a man holds or does not hold, 

if he practice immersion there is at once a 

sympathetic fellowship. So also it is among 

Premillennialists: They feel that any other 

differences, almost, should be overlooked if 

their point of special interest is acknowledged. 

We protest that none of these are true 
grounds for the fellowship taught in the Scriptures; 
and that the rejection of any or all of 
these is not the Scriptural ground for refusing 
fellowship in Christ. 

The Scriptural basis of fellowship and disfellowship 
is both a much broader and a much 
more simple one. It is simply of two parts: 
(1) an acceptance of Christ as the Redeemer, 
and (2) a full consecration to him. Whoever 
complies with this scriptural formula is entitled 
to the love, respect, sympathy and care of every 
other such one; for such, and such only, constitute 
the Church which God recognizes— the 
Church "whose names are written in heaven." 

And if the above proposition be true as indicating 
who are worthy of our fellowship, it 
must be true also that any one who cannot 
claim fellowship upon this basis has no claim 
to it at all. 

All Christians should see that this rule is 
broad enough to unite all of God's people, and 
narrow enough to exclude all others, including 
those who would seek to "climb up some other 
way." (John 10:1.) And if this simple test— 
the only one recognized by the early Church 
—is sufficient, let us recognize it and none other. 

But, says an objector, such a simple basis of 

R1465 : page 331 

faith would let in all sorts of false doctrines and 
would divide the Church of Christ. No, we 
answer, the Church is already divided: it would 
tend to re-unite the true ones and to separate 
the worldly and the false. Upon so broad a 
platform all true Christians could come together 
for the study of God's Word. Methodists 
would find themselves studying the principles 
of election, baptism, etc., while Presbyterians 
and Baptists would find themselves studying free 
grace and free agency. The result to all (after 



sectarian considerations were gone) would soon 
be harmony— Bible harmony. 

But, says one, so broad a platform would 
compel us to fellowship Unitarians and Christian 
Scientists and Spiritualists. Not at all, 
we answer. None of these believe in Jesus as 
their Redeemer. It would exclude all such and 
all others who deny that man is a sinner under 
divine condemnation, and that "Christ died 
for OUR SINS," "the just for the unjust, that he 
might bring us to God." It would and should 
exclude all who do not recognize this essential 
base of Christianity. (Possibly a few believers 
in the ransom may call themselves by the above 
names, ignorantly— not appreciating the doctrines 
upon which they are built. We refer 
to the views of the leaders and the masses of 
these denominations.) 

A man may be honest and sober and in every 
way moral and be a Buddhist or a Mohammedan 
or an Infidel (an unbeliever as to the 
claims of Christ) of any other shade. Morality 
and general decency may be proper enough 
grounds for their recognition socially, as friends 
and acquaintances; but these constitute no 
claim whatever upon the sacred name of Christian, 
nor upon the close heart-sympathy which 
should make truly one all who are trusting in 
the precious blood of Christ— our ransom-price 
from sin and death— and who are fully consecrated 
to him. 

We are living in the time when past and 
present combinations and doctrines of men will 
be breaking to pieces; when many are, and 
many more will be, seeking fresh grounds for 
fellowship; when it is important that all true 
Christians should stand fast, and shoulder to 
shoulder defend the foundation principles upon 
which we stand— the rock foundation;— for 
"other [proper] foundation can no man lay." 

How our great Adversary would like to get 
the soldiers of the cross confused and separated, 
following different affinities, rallying around 
different standards, and hence leaving the true 
standard— "the cross of Christ," the "Ransom" 
—undefended. Let all who see the true 
standard assemble to it, and separate themselves 
in heart and Christian fellowship from all the 
unclean [those unjustified by faith in the redeeming 
blood, and clothed still, therefore, in 
the filthy garments of their own unrighteousness, 
instead of the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness]. Let their efforts be for 
and with each other; to present each other 
blameless and unreprovable, without spot or 
wrinkle, before the Heavenly Bridegroom. 



Hear the Word of the Lord:— 

"Go through, go through the gates; prepare 
ye the way of the people: cast up, cast up the 
highway, gather out the [stumbling] stones; 
LIFT UP A STANDARD for the people." Isa. 62:10. 

Let us assure ourselves, from a study of God's 
Word, that it is as much a part of our duty to 
disfellowship (as Christians) those who, either 
directly or indirectly, deny that Christ gave 
himself a ransom [a corresponding price] for all, 
and who, hence, are the worst enemies of the 
cross of Christ, as it is our duty to fellowship 
any who confess him thus as their Savior; and 
who, hence, are our "Brethren" in him. We are 
to "have no fellowship with the unfruitful works 
of darkness, but should rather reprove them." 

SECTARIAN UNION VS. CHRISTIAN UNION. 



The clamor for closer sectarian union progresses; 
and the rapid growth of the Young 
People's Society of Christian Endeavor not only 
furnishes an illustration of the popularity of such 
a union as is being called for, but suggests a 
way by which it might be attained— by a league 
as Christians which, while guaranteeing fellowship 
to its members, will make fealty and fidelity 
to the various sects an obligatory condition. 
Such a union will bind men and women, more 
than ever, to the creeds of the dark ages, and 
help sustain a little longer the tottering walls 
of Babylon. Resolutions favoring such a union 
were recently passed by the Protestant Episcopal 
Conference at Baltimore and by the Congregational 
Conference at Minneapolis. In our next 
issue we hope to present evidences showing that 
the giving of life and authority to the Image of 
the Beast (Rev. 13:15-17) is not far distant. 



page 332 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1465 : page 332 

PAUL'S FIRST MISSIONARY SERMON. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VIIL, NOV. 20, ACTS 13:26-43. 

Golden Text— "To you is the word of this salvation 
sent."— Acts 13:26. 

VERSES 14-26. When Barnabas and Saul 
came to Antioch in Pisidia they spent the first 
Sabbath day in a synagogue of the Jews. They 
went in and sat down, trusting that the Lord 
would open some door for them to speak to the 
people. They did not force themselves forward 
or in any way seek to violate the customs 
of the synagogue, but, looking to the Lord for 
direction, they simply placed themselves, as 
best they knew how, in the way of opportunity to 
serve the Truth. In this alone there is an important 
lesson for us all. By their very attitude 
Barnabas and Saul were each saying, "Lord, 
here am I, use me!" And very soon the 
Lord did make use of his ready instruments, 
and used them effectively to his praise. If 
these brethren had gone about some other business, 
or listlessly wandered about or waited at 
home and said they would like to do something 
for the Master, but would wait for him to hunt 
them up and to disentangle them from other 
engagements, they might have waited a long 
time, and no doubt other instruments would 
have been used instead. And so may we wait 
long and unsuccessfully unless we place ourselves 
in the way of probable opportunity, and 
thus declare our actual readiness and our waiting 
attitude. 

VERSE 15. "And after the reading of the 
law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue 
sent unto them, saying, 'Men and brethren, 
if ye have any word of exhortation for 
the people, say on.'" 

One cannot but admire the spirit of liberality 
which prevailed among the Jews, and wish 
that the Truth had a similarly free course today. 
In how few congregations of God's professed 
Christian children is there any opportunity 
offered at any meeting for any one to speak 
a word to the people or to call attention to the 
Lord— except the pastor, and he is gagged by 
an elaborate and very restrictive "Confession 
of Faith" before he is allowed to say a word, 
and is liable to be deposed if he violates that 



Confession. How evident it is that the great 
Adversary has gotten the various Creeds so 
expressed that they suit his purposes, and has 
hedged the way so that they cannot be displaced 
even fragmentarily by truths. 

VERSES 16,26. Then Saul, who was called 
Paul, stood up to bear his testimony for the 
Lord. With what eagerness he embraced the 
opportunity is manifest from the stirring discourse 
which followed, in which, with characteristic 
skill, he drew the attention of the people 
to prominent points in their national history, 
leading up to the reign of David as king; and then, 
referring to the promise of blessing to Israel 
through a son of David, he declared (verse 23) 
that of this man's seed God had, according to 
his promise, raised unto Israel a Savior, even 
Jesus, whom they had ignorantly crucified; 
and that this same Jesus was he of whom John 
the Baptist had said, "There cometh one after 
me whose shoes of his feet I am not worthy to 
loose." 

VERSE 26. Then we almost catch the tones 
of his voice floating down the centuries, as with 
kindling eloquence he declares— "Men and 
brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, 
and whosoever among you feareth God, to you 
is the word of this salvation sent." Yes, it was 
sent to Israel first— to the people whom God had 
chosen and to whom belonged the promises— 
to all such as were "Israelites indeed," worthy 
sons of faithful Abraham who trusted in the 
promises and were anxiously waiting for their 
fulfilment; and not only to these, but also to 
all the worthy Gentiles among them who 
feared (or reverenced) God. Or, in the words 
of the Prophet Isaiah, it was now sent to all the 
meek. (Isa. 61:1.) This gospel is not for the 
proud and high-minded. The proud Pharisee 
and the dignified Rabbi could not receive it; 
and those who looked only for Israel's national 
predominance over the nations of the world, 
and who figured only this out of the numerous 
prophecies of Messiah's glorious reign, could 
not receive it. Nor could the proud or wicked 
Gentile who had dismissed God from all his 
thoughts, and given himself over to a life of 
present ease or pleasure or self-gratification, 
receive it. It is "good tidings" only to the 

R1466 : page 332 

meek, who reverence God and who have respect 
unto his promises. But God assures us 
that not only the Day of Vengeance, but also 
the entire Millennial age which will follow it, 



will have the effect of breaking many stony 
and proud hearts and bringing all mankind to 

R1466 : page 333 

so humble a condition that they will be able 
and willing to appreciate the grace of God 
which offers salvation (Rom. 14:11; Phil. 2:10) 
—whether they, after the humbling chastisement 
and greater knowledge of the Lord, submit 
themselves fully to his gracious arrangements 
and gain the reward of Life, or whether, when 
permitted, pride and self-will will again be their 
choice, and they thus be accounted unfit for 
Life— deserving the Second Death. 

VERSES 27-31. Then, in reminding them 
of their national sin in crucifying Jehovah's 
Anointed, he shows that it was because their 
rulers did not honor him or recognize him as the 
one of whom spake Moses and all the prophets; 
and yet he tells them that even in this sinful 
act of crucifying the Lord they were unwittingly 
fulfilling what the prophets had foretold; 
for Isaiah had declared that he should be 
brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a 
sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he would 
not open his mouth to defend himself, for he 
knew that his hour was come and that his life 
was to be given a ransom for many. Probably 
here the Apostle enlarged on the prophetic 
proofs of Jesus as the Messiah; for we must regard 
this account by Luke as a mere synopsis 
of his discourse, showing its general drift. 
Then he drew attention to the fact of his resurrection, 
and declared himself one of a number 
of witnesses of that fact; for "he was seen 
many days of them which came up with him 
from Galilee to Jerusalem." 

VERSES 32-37. Having thus introduced 
Jesus, the promised Messiah and Savior, the 
hope of Israel and the world, he then added, 
"And we declare unto you glad tidings"— glad 
tidings of the fulfilment of prophecy in the resurrection 
of Jesus, which was in itself, according 
to the divine plan, an evidence that his 
sacrifice had been acceptable as our sin-offering 
and a pledge of the resurrection of all who 
believe in him as their Lord and Redeemer. 
Then the Apostle referred to the statement in the 
Second Psalm— "Thou art my son; this day 
have I begotten thee"— as applicable to his 
new resurrection life, which should never again 
return to corruption— death— and showed that 
the promise in Isa. 55:3,4, of "the sure mercies 
of [or holy things promised to] David"* 
—the dominion and power and glory of the 



kingdom of God on earth, etc.— belonged not 
to David literally, but to the Messiah, Jesus, 
whom David in some instances typified; "for," 
said he, "David, after he had served his own 
generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, 
and was laid unto his fathers and saw corruption." 
Consequently he argues that the prophecy 
has not reference to David, but to Christ, 
whom David here typified. 

VERSES 38,39. Having thus securely planted 
the claims of Jesus of Nazareth upon the 
testimony of the prophets and of the eye-witnesses 
of his life and death and resurrection, 
and having called their attention to the glorious 
promises for the blessing of Israel and all 
the world through the expected Messiah, he 
made to that attentive congregation the startling 
announcement: "Be it known unto therefore, 
men and brethren, that through this man is 
preached unto you [even you, who in your ignorance 
and folly despised and slew him] the 
forgiveness of sins. And by him all that BELIEVE 
are justified from all things, from which 
ye could not be justified by the law of Moses." 

VERSES 40,41 are words of solemn warning 
in view of the responsibility which the hearing 
of this truth brings with it. When the truth 
is presented to us by any of God's messengers, 
however humble, it is to the end that we may 
either receive or reject it as we choose. The 
meek, those who reverence God and desire to 
know and to do his will, will receive it and be 
blessed by it; but all the proud and worldly-minded 
and all those who are wise in their own 
conceits will reject it. And to such says the 
Prophet, as quoted by the Apostle, "Behold, 
ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I 
work a work in your days, a work which ye 
shall in no wise believe, though a man declare 
it unto you." 

A great work was going on in those days; 
for God was there beginning, by the preaching 
of the truth, to select from among men and to 
train and prepare "a people for his name"— 
to be joint-heirs with Christ of his Millennial 
Kingdom. The despisers indeed wondered at 
the progress and power of the truth, but they 
were left in their lost, perishing, unjustified 
condition, because they would not believe and 
repent. 

The same is true to-day also, the only difference 
being that we are living in the harvest or 
end of the age, when the work of selecting the 
bride or body of Christ, which was there begun, 
is now being finished. And here as there 
the truth is manifesting the meek and worthy 



ones as well as the despisers. Let all heed the 
Apostle's warning and beware lest that come 
upon them which is spoken of in the prophets. 
What is that?— A hardness of heart which despises 
instruction and which will not walk in 
the right ways of the Lord, but which walks 
according to its own wilfulness in the way which 
leads to destruction; for out of Christ there 
is no salvation. "Behold, ye despisers, and 



*See Lesson vi., First Quarter, in our issue of February 
1st. 

R1466 : page 334 

wonder, and perish." Beloved, let us mark well 
the responsibility which the testimony of God's 
truth brings, and be not like those who, denying 
the possibility of any perishing, proceed 
further and reject the great salvation proffered 
only on condition of faith in Christ as our Redeemer, 
and consequent repentance of sin and 
reformation of life in harmony with the will of 
God. 

VERSES 42,43 show that many, of both Jews 
and Gentiles, received the truth with gladness 
and desired to hear more of these things. 

R1466 : page 334 

THE APOSTLES TURNING TO THE GENTILES. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON IX., NOV. 27, ACTS 13:44-14:7. 

Golden Text— "I have set thee to be a light of the 
Gentiles. "-Acts 13:47. 

VERSES 44,45. As a result of Paul's discourse 
of the preceding lesson, on the next 
Sabbath day almost the whole city came together 
to hear more of this gospel. And when 
the unbelieving Jews observed this evidence of 
the growing popularity of the doctrines of the 
crucified Jesus, they were moved with envy and 
bestirred themselves in opposition to the truth, 
because they saw that this new religion was calculated 
to supersede Judaism, around which 
clustered all their national pride and their 
selfish sectarian hopes. As a people, they had, 
because of this very pride, failed to comprehend 
the true import of their own God-given religion, 
and to see its transient an typical character; 



and so its precious promises, misunderstood 
and perverted, served only to minister 
to their further pride, while they boasted of being 
the children of Abraham, the special favorites 
of God, to whom belonged the promises. 

All filled with this spirit of pride were thereby 
incapacitated to receive the doctrines of Christianity; 
for there is no room for these in a proud 
heart: this gospel is pre-eminently the gospel 
for the meek, and none but the meek ever have 
continued or ever will continue long to rejoice 
in it. And as the truths of the dawning Gospel 
dispensation separated the meek from the proud, 
and thus gathered out a worthy remnant from 
the Jewish nation to be joint-heirs with Christ 
in his kingdom, so the truths due now in the 
dawn of the Millennium and harvest of the 
Gospel age are accomplishing a similar selection, 
and thus completing the elect number from 
among the Gentiles. And now, as then, the 
worthy ones are being gathered out of a great 
organization. Here it is out of the nominal 
Gospel Church: there it was out of the nominal 
Jewish Church. In both cases the few are 
gathered out and the great mass prove themselves 
unworthy through pride and unbelief. 

VERSES 46,47. Seeing the unreasonable 
prejudice and opposition to the truth on the 
part of the Jews, Paul and Barnabas boldly 
withstood them, saying, "It was necessary that 
the word of God should first have been spoken 
to you [It was necessary because they were the 
natural children of Abraham and natural heirs of 
the covenant made with Abraham]; but seeing 
ye put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy 
of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the 
Gentiles: For so hath the Lord commanded, 
saying, I have set thee [Christ] to be a light 
of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation 
unto the ends of the earth." 

These Jews did not directly judge and pronounce 
themselves unworthy of life; but in rejecting 
the only conditions upon which everlasting 
life is promised, they in effect rejected 
life, for it is promised only on the condition 
of faith in Christ as Lord and Redeemer. 
However, we do not understand that their rejection 
of Christ then, blinded and hindered 
as they were by prejudice and hardness of heart, 
was a final rejection of life; for the Lord's 
gracious provision for them is yet to open their 
blind eyes and to give them a heart of flesh so 
that they may yet see and believe the truth— 
and that notwithstanding the fact that they 
died in their sins without faith in Christ; for 
it is written, "Thus saith the Lord God: Behold, 



R1467 : page 334 

O my people, I will open your graves, and 
cause you to come up out of your graves, and 
bring you into the land of Israel. And ye 
shall know that I am the Lord when I have 
opened your graves, O my people, and brought 
you up out of your graves, and shall put my 
spirit in you, and ye shall live." (Compare 
Ezek. 37:12-14; Rom. 11:25-32.) None will 
ever be finally judged unworthy of life (worthy 
of the Second Death) until they have enjoyed 
every advantage of a full, fair trial with a clear 
knowledge of the truth. See Heb. 6:4-6. 

"Lo, we turn to the Gentiles; for so hath the 
Lord commanded," etc. Ah, these words were 
a joyful message, "good tidings of great joy," 
to some of the humble Gentiles who heard, 
and who, Lazarus-like, had long desired to be 
fed with even the crumbs of divine favor falling 
from the table of bounties provided for the 
Jewish Dives. 

VERSE 48. "And when the Gentiles heard 
this, they were glad, and glorified the word of 
the Lord, and as many as were ordained to 
eternal life [i.e., as many as had that disposition 
of meekness and trust in God, and a desire 
to be in harmony with him and to do his will, 
which disposition God has ordained shall receive 
the reward of eternal life] believed." 
And here, too, we may learn a lesson and recognize 

R1467 : page 335 

God's direction of his own work as the 
apostles recognized it. While it is as true now 
as in the days of the apostles that "Not many 
great," or wise, or learned according to the 
course and estimation of this world, but only 
a few (and they often the poor of this world, 
rich in faith) receive the "good tidings" 
joyfully, we should never lose sight of the 
fact that those drawn to and held by the truth 
are always those of humble hearts, seekers after 
God and his ways, the very class for whom 
God has provided and ordained the blessing of 
everlasting life. But neither should we forget 
that God has other sheep, not of this flock; and 
that he has provided that the fullest degree of 
natural evidence shall be given to those other 
sheep, the faithful of whom shall have everlasting 
life also, though on a lower plane or nature 
than the little flock now being selected, who 
are required to walk, if at all, by faith and not 
by sight. 



VERSE 49. "And the word of the Lord was 
published throughout all the region"— doubtless 
not only by the preaching of Paul and Barnabas, 
but by all who then received the truth. 

VERSES 50-52. Persecution was the immediate 
reward of the Lord's faithful witnesses, as 
it always has been and will be until the reign 
of Christ brings in everlasting righteousness. 

Persecution serves to separate those whose 
interest is only lukewarm, and who, being unworthy 
of a place in the "little flock" to which 
it is the Father's good pleasure to give the 
Kingdom, the Lord desires to separate. Besides, 
it serves to strengthen and develop the 
true ones, thus fitting these "overcomers" more 
fully for the work of God, now and hereafter. 

But they rejoiced in the midst of suffering and 
were filled with the holy Spirit— with a holy 
zeal and enthusiasm which, while it led them to 
shake off the dust of their feet for a testimony 
against that city, turned them to another, to 
declare the glad tidings to others who still sat 
in darkness. 

CHAPTER 14:1,2. The experiences in Iconium 
seem to have been very similar to those 
in Antioch— a large congregation of interested 
hearers, many conversions to Christianity, of 
both Jews and Greeks, then persecution from the 
unbelievers and efforts to turn away from the 
faith those who had believed. Such experiences 
are not common amongst Christian professors 
now, because they are drowsy with the 
wine of Babylon's false doctrine (Rev. 18:3) 
and are not sufficiently interested and active in 
the service of Truth; and the devil does not 
think it wise to persecute for error's sake. 
But each child of God learns by experience 
the force of the Master's words, "Whosoever 
will live Godly [to please God] in this present 
time [when evil reigns] shall suffer persecution;" 
and this in proportion as he receives 
the truth and faithfully declares it. 

VERSE 3. On account of the opposition it 
seemed necessary for the two brethren to remain 
a long time in Iconium in order to establish 
the faith of them that believed. And the 
Lord worked with them, endorsing their testimony 
by special miraculous gifts— probably of 
healing, mainly. 

VERSES 4-7. By and by the persecutions 
waxed more severe, so that the whole city began 
to take sides for and against these witnesses 
of the Lord, and the excitement grew until it 
would have resulted in a mob. When they 
became aware of this, they fled from the city, 
doubtless recalling the Lord's counsel— "When 



they persecute you in one city, flee ye to another." 
They fled to Lystra and Derbe, and 
there also they preached the gospel. 



R1467 : page 335 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



Arkansas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is with much 
pleasure that I inform you that the truth is 
spreading in our neighborhood. I feel that the 
Lord is leading me: that I have more patience 
now than hitherto— which I greatly needed, 
and for which I often prayed. Of five first 
Volumes of DAWN, given to such as I thought 
truth hungry, I have as yet heard from only 
one. It has opened the light and truth to two 
Presbyterians, and I am daily expecting to 
hear the same good news from the others. 

But notwithstanding these encouragements, 
I often fear that our knowledge has outgrown 
our love and piety, that some of us have imbibed 
a spirit of debate, and are not wise 
enough to know just how to speak the truth in 
its season. 

Should we reason upon the Scriptures with 
those who appear to be insincere, and yet have 
a zeal to contend for their theory? I have 
seen on our streets Bible students arguing 
Scripture from different views, the bystanders 
hallooing for the side which suited them best, 
and neither party seeming to have the proper 

R1468 : page 335 

reverence for the Word of God. The truth 
would seem to suffer by this conduct, because 
I saw none who seemed to be truth hungry; 
and I thought it best to keep silent, and to try 
only to heal the sick. And yet I am afraid to 

R1468 : page 336 

settle down on this opinion, for I know that I 
am not a discerner of the thoughts and intents 
of the heart, and am sometimes surprised to 
see some, for whom I did not hope, receive the 
truth, while others, apparently more hopeful, 
reject it. 

The opinion I have of the success of Colporteurs 
is this: It depends upon the spirit in 



which the book is presented. I believe that, 
when one is clothed in the imputed righteousness 
of Christ, and made pure and clean, 
whiter than snow, it modifies his manners, 
making them so loving and kind, that it is 
hard for any to refuse to purchase so cheap a 
book on such an important subject. Those 
who would serve the Lord acceptably must have 
clean hands; and could I always feel myself 
thus qualified, I would be still more eager to 
go out into the field. 

It seems to me that all believers need to be 
forcibly reminded that all knowledge and faith, 
and many great victories in our warfare, will 
amount to nothing, if we fail to have the spirit 
of love, meekness and child-like simplicity. 
Oh! that my longings for these necessary qualifications 
were satisfied. The Lord grant that 

1 may be able to put them on; and will you 
pray that I may be thus endowed. 

Yours in the Gospel hope, J. K. CONNER. 

[REPLY:— I am glad, dear Brother, that you 
see so clearly what sort of persons in holy 
conversation and godliness all the colporteurs, 
and all who have obtained the hope of the 
gospel, should be. But you should not wait 
until you are perfect before giving your time 
and strength to the Lord's service. You have 
the proper conception of what the ideal colporteur 
should be. Now start, and in the 
strength of the Redeemer work, as nearly as 
you can, up to that standard. Those who so 
run shall never fall, but shall have an abundant 
entrance into the Kingdom of our Lord.— 

2 Pet. 1:11. 

You are right in not bandying the gospel on 
the streets. We are instructed to be ready at 
all times to give a reason for our hope to him 
that asketh; but neither the Bible nor sound 
judgment dictates street quarreling for the 
Truth's sake. 

Our great Master did "not cry aloud nor 
lift up his voice in the streets;" nor did he 
seek the boisterous and profane for his followers. 
The spirit of God led him to "preach the 
gospel to the meek"— to the truth-hungry 
wherever found— to those who have "an ear to 
hear." (Isa. 42:2; Matt. 12:19; Matt. 11:15; 
Isa. 61:1.) We cannot do better than follow 
the great Teacher's example.— EDITOR]. 

page 336 

Illinois. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The great cause 
is advancing, and I preach at my DAWN-selling 



with great freedom and power. Think of busy 
infidels letting the shop go, to hear the gospel 
for a half hour, and then urgently requesting 
further talks! Many of this class, formerly 
God and Bible rejectors, listen to the plan of 
redemption and restoration, and say promptly 
that it is both reasonable and just; and that 
they are willing to love and obey God, and to 
receive the rewards of righteousness, under conditions 
so just and wise. 

I would feel much tempted to preach on the 
streets, but my rheumatism gets worse in my 
left shoulder, so I rest poorly at night and need 
all my strength for the canvass. 

I must visit some of the interested, not before 
seen, this afternoon. I am much gratified 
to see the advance of truth among "just and 
unjust" here. The Lord be praised! Mrs. A. 
joins in greetings to you and Sister Russell. 

Loving regards in Christ, J. B. ADAMSON. 



Delaware. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Believing that 
you love to hear occasionally from those who 
have been awakened to a livelier hope (than 
they had in the nominal systems of Christianity), 
both for themselves and for mankind at 
large, I will say, as I have often heard it said by 
brothers and sisters in class-meeting, that I am 
"not tired of the way" in which I have been 
led through your ministry. No! I have a joy, 
peace, confidence, love and knowledge that I 
did not have when I followed those who are 
supposed to be religious guides, but are really 
themselves blind. Oh, I am so glad that we 
are now in the dawn of the Great Day; and, 
such are the signs, that we can lift up our heads 
for our redemption draweth nigh! We are 
truly, as I have just read in a secular paper, 
living in an age distinctively one of research 
and advancement, and men are no longer content 
to accept blindly the theories and conclusions 
of others on important subjects; but are 
becoming students for themselves on the high 
seas of religious principles and beliefs! It says 
further: "No little sadness attaches to the piteous 
state of those who want to believe the Bible 
just as it stands, but are tormented with doubts 
believed to be honest ones. May a ray from 
the throne of God send convincing light to all 
so harassed and troubled!" And I would add: 
May we, who have been blessed of God with 
greater light than others, humbly and meekly 
offer it to those who have eyes to see and ears 



to hear, that they may rejoice with us. 
Your brother in Christ, OSCAR JONES . 



page 338 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1460 : page 338 

SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



MEETINGS IN NEW YORK CITY. 



The Editor, in response to the urgent solicitations 
of the friends in and adjacent to New 
York City, will (D.V.) preach there Sunday, 
Nov. 27th, as follows:— 

At 10:30 A.M. in Cooper Union Meeting 



Room No. 24. Subject, "In Our Days." 

At 3 P.M. in Hardman Hall (Fifth Avenue 
and Nineteenth Street). Subject, "The Restitution 
of All Things."~Acts 3:21. 

At 7:30 P.M. in Hardman Hall. Subject, 
"The Millennium and Its Day of Preparation." 

Private meetings will be held elsewhere on 
Monday. Sister Russell, also, is expected to 
be present. 

The notice is given thus publicly and in 
season, that readers from surrounding places 
may attend, if they can make it convenient. 

R1468 : page 338 

PROTESTANTS NO LONGER. 



Protestants lately seem to be sadly at a loss 
to account for their name— Protestant. They 
know from history that there was once a wide 
difference of religious views between the founders 
of their sects and the Church of Rome. 
They know of the rack, the prison and the 
stake; but they wonder why it all was, and 
think there must have been some great mistake. 

Papacy declares that she never changes; and 
so Protestants fancy that they have been misinformed, 
and are seeking union with the very 
one whose conduct and doctrines their forefathers 
protested against— even unto death. 
The Congregational National Convention at 
Minneapolis adopted the following in a resolution 
on the subject:— 

"The Roman Catholic body is recognized as 
a branch of the church of Christ, and the report 
welcomes the opportunity to co-operate with 
its members, clergy or laity in the advancement 
of the cause of Christian truth and Christian 
morals. The attitude of the Episcopal church 
coming forward in England and America bearing 
an olive branch is heartily commended." 

We are glad indeed to believe that the membership 
of the Church of Rome contains some 
noble souls, and that as a whole her multitudes 
are more enlightened than once they were; but 
we believe the system to be Satan's handiwork, 
and as really Antichrist as it was when, with 
greater power, it "wore out the saints of the 
Most High," and practiced outward evil, and 
prospered in it. The same false doctrines still 
underlie her system; and only opportunity is 
lacking for the same display of devilish intolerance 
that during the dark ages marked her 
pathway with blood. 



We respect all decent, honest men as men; 
and whenever we can we shall be glad to do 
them good, physically and spiritually. But 
we reserve the titles of fellowship, "Christian" 
and "Brother," for those who trust in the Savior 
and his one sacrifice for all. This as much ignores 
Roman Catholics, who hold to many, repeated 
sacrifices for sins (sacrifices of the Mass), 
as it does to those who deny any sacrifice. 



We mentioned in our last our intention of 
presenting in this issue some evidences that 
the giving of life and authority to the "Image 
of the Beast" is not far distant. We did not 
mean by this that you should expect a review 
of Rev. 13. The evidences referred to, crowded 
out of this issue, may appear in our next. 



R1468 : page 339 

VOL. XIII. NOVEMBER 15, 1892. NO. 22. 

PURGATORY:- 

IS IT A ROMISH, A PROTESTANT OR A BIBLE DOCTRINE? 



Protestants generally have ignored the Bible 
doctrine on the subject of a future Purgatory, 
while Romanists have shamefully perverted and 
counterfeited it, as they have every other 
truth, to the unholy ends of human ambition 
and avarice. Indeed, the whole Papal system 
is a counterfeit of the truth, and herein has 
been its great power to deceive and lead astray 
from the truth. And the Papal system, because 
of its resemblance to the truth, in its completeness 
and its general outline, notwithstanding its 
outrageous perversions and its shameful abuses 
of the truth, has well been described as "A 
masterpiece of Satanic ingenuity." Yet, like a 
counterfeit coin, it may require an expert to detect 
and expose it. 

While we have no sympathy with the doctrine 
of purgatory as taught by Romanists, nor 
yet as hinted at by some Protestants in what 
they term the Intermediate State— between 
death and the resurrection, when the soul, they 
claim, is purged from sin and made fit for 
heaven— we do see that the perverted doctrine 
of purgatory had a start in the truth; that the 



Scriptures teach the doctrine of purgatory; and 
that it is one of the most glorious features of the 
divine plan for the salvation of our race. 

The term purgatory signifies a place or condition 
of purging or cleansing; and it is freely 
admitted that all mankind must of necessity be 
purged from sin and uncleanness (as well as 
redeemed and justified), before they are fit to 
enjoy the blessings of eternal life. The common 
sense of mankind acknowledges this necessity 
for purgation, and the Scriptures clearly 
teach the doctrine. The way of salvation lies 
through redemption through the precious blood 
of Christ (justification through faith in the redemption 
thus accomplished) and purgation, or 
the actual cleansing from sin and uncleanness, 
and perfecting in holiness. 

Protestants (claiming that all mankind are 
now on trial, and that as a result of the present 
presumed trial they must, at death, be ushered 
at once into either an everlasting heaven of 
bliss or a hell of eternal torture) have no alternative 
from either one or the other of the following 
conclusions: First, that only the justified, 
sanctified and faithful saints developed in 
the present life will ever be saved, and that all 
others— medium good, and bad— will be hopelessly 
and forever lost; or, Secondly, that all 
mankind, except the vilest of wilful sinners, will 
be taken to heaven and will constitute it a very 
bedlam of confusion as the various classes attempt 
to associate and affiliate with each other 
—the matured saints (a "little flock"), the inexperienced 
babes, the ignorant and degraded 
savages, the idiotic, the insane— all persons of 
all classes for whom hope is entertained by 
kindly human hearts, all who it is felt sure are 
at least too good or too innocent to deserve 
eternal torture of any description. 

Some Protestants take one of these views and 
some the other; but whichever horn of the dilemma 
is accepted, insurmountable difficulties 

R1468 : page 340 

are encountered, as every thinking Christian 
knows. The first view, if really believed, would 
fill the world with an indescribable gloom. 
Death-bed scenes already sad would be still 
sadder, if such a view were really entertained. 

R1469 : page 340 

And it is the professed view. But if the second 
view be accepted, as it generally is by people 
of heart and breadth of mind, the difficulty is 



but slightly lessened; for with the idea that at 
death we must go to either heaven or hell, the 
only reasonable conclusion is that all who escape 
hell must go to heaven. The difficulty 
with this view is that it would fill heaven with 
a heterogeneous mass of beings, and so mar its 
peace and harmony that it would be only another 
babel of confusion such as earth has been. 
And some, at least, would still feel like praying 
that they might go "Where the wicked 
cease from troubling and the weary are at rest." 
Such a condition would be only a continuation 
of the present imperfect and unsatisfactory state. 
What fellowship hath light with darkness, or 
what common joy could these share whose 
states and experiences differ so widely? None 
whatever. 

But, says one who never before thought of it 
so, May we not suppose that those lower classes 
will be gradually disciplined and corrected, 
and so brought into harmony with God and 
each other, and that peace and joy will result 
in the end? Ah! then instead of doing without 
a Purgatory, you are supposing heaven is 
Purgatory— a great hospital and reform school 
for the treatment of moral diseases and deformities. 
No, that cannot be. Well, suggests another, 
may it not be that in the instant of dying, 
all those who are not notoriously bad (and 
hence too good to be eternally tormented) are 
perfected and fitted for heaven? No; for in 
that case present experience would be wholly 
useless; for beings so changed would not know 
themselves— in fact would not be themselves, 
but new beings, wholly different in every particular. 
If such were the program it would 
have been wiser to have made them so at first. 
Besides, that is not God's method of working. 
We should observe that his operations are always 
on philosophical principles; and the principles 
of moral philosophy are just as fixed and 
firmly established as are the principles of natural 
philosophy. Observe how steadily God 
adheres to the principles of natural philosophy, 
as he saw fit to establish them. Does water 
ever flow up hill? did an acorn ever spring into 
an oak in an instant? or was ever a human 
being born fully developed either mentally or 
physically? do grapes grow on thorns, or figs 
on thistles? We smile at such preposterous 
suggestions as these; but why? Because we 
recognize the fixed principles of natural philosophy, 
which never can and never will change. 
And we see that if they were not thus fixed, 
the results would be confusion throughout the 
realm of nature. 



Our God is a God of order; and in moral 
law as in natural law his principles are fixed. 
Character is a growth, a development. It may 
grow rapidly or grow slowly, but grow it must. 
It never arrives at maturity without the preliminary 
processes of growth, or development by 
degrees. And along whatever lines— of virtue 
or of vice— the discipline, experience and consequent 
growth have been, of such kind will be 
the matured character— whether bad or good. 

It is preposterous, therefore, to presume that 
a perfect moral character can be instantaneously 
bestowed upon the morally polluted or upon 
the morally blank in the instant of death. 
But here we should distinguish between perfect 
and imperfect beings without character and 
perfect and imperfect beings with character. 
Adam was a perfect being without character. 
He was put on trial to give him an opportunity 
to develop a character. His inexperience 
soon stamped his effort— Failure. But God 
has provided a ransom for Adam and all whom 
he represented in his trial; and this implies another 
opportunity to develop a character such as 
God can approve— fit for an eternity of companionship 
with him. Either a good character 
or a bad one can be demonstrated by imperfect 
beings, and it is determined by the conduct of 
each person after he comes to a knowledge of the 
truth on moral questions. God makes no promises 
of heavenly bliss except to such as develop 
character— "overcomers"— and yet it is evident 
that infants who have formed no character, and 
many of the ignorant who have never come to 

R1469 : page 341 

such a knowledge of the truth as would constitute 

a full trial, or as should condemn them 

as fit for torment or second death, constitute 

the great majority and are as unfit for heaven 

as eternal torment would be unfit for them. 

For all such God has prepared a Purgatory, a 

school of discipline which will favor the development 

of good characters, after which they 

will be tested; and this we will show from the 

Scriptures, shortly. 

We know ourselves now, and our friends 
know us, both by our physical features and by 
our mental and moral developments. But when 
death has destroyed the physical man, and only 
character remains for identification (and this 
is the general claim), if the character, or mental 
or moral developments, should undergo instantly 
such a marvelous change as perfect 
character would imply, all the surrounding conditions 



and circumstances being new also, how 
could the man know himself? And if such be 
God's plan, why has he permitted sin and 
death and all our present painful experiences 
at all? and why need any strive against sin? 
The idea is absurd. 

If such were God's plan, the present time of 
the permission of sin, evil and death might as 
well be dispensed with as useless, to say the 
least. And if all were to be thus changed instantly 
to perfection, why not miraculously 
change all— even the worst? and why are any 
exhorted now to "holiness," without which no 
man shall see the Lord"? and where would 
come in the many and the few stripes for deeds 
done in the present time? 

THE PURGATORY OF SCRIPTURE. 



Seeing that all of the above theories are 
lame, unreasonable and unscriptural, we come 
now to the Purgatory of the Bible. 

First. It will be established on Earth— not 
elsewhere.— Prov. 11:31. 

Second. It is not now in operation, but is to 
begin when this Gospel age ends, when the little 
flock of saints has been selected.— 2 Pet. 2:9. 

Third. The overcoming "little flock" of 
saints, who will have part in the first resurrection 
and be like their Lord, spirit beings, will 
then be associated with him in the work of 
judging, correcting and teaching those in process 
of purgation during the Millennium, when 
the world and the "castaways" of the Church 
are being disciplined and corrected in righteousness. 
And that will be the only really holy, 
righteous Inquisition (i.e., court of judicial inquiry 
or examination on matters moral and 
spiritual), of which Papacy made so terrible, 
blasphemous and cruel a counterfeit during the 
dark ages.— John 5:22; 1 Cor. 6:2. 

In a word, the long-promised reign of the 
Christ, the glorified Church, during the world's 
thousand-year judgment day, or period of correction 
in righteousness, is the Purgatory of the 
Bible. The saints shall not come into purgatorial 
judgment at all (1 Cor. 11:32); because, in this 
life, hating sin, they became reckonedly dead to 
it and alive to righteousness in Christ. Neither 
will the faithful overcomers of the past, noted 
in Hebrews 11, have part in that Millennial age 
Purgatory; but all others of the human family 
will there be dealt with— corrected and disciplined 
in righteousness— to bring about true 



reformation and finally perfection of character. 
(1 Pet. 4:5; Matt. 12:36.) All will thus be 
purged except such as in the present age, having 
enjoyed extraordinary light and privilege, 
nevertheless sin wilfully against it. For such 
only there is no further hope (Heb. 10:26,27), 
through the discipline and purgation of that 
judgment period; for, says the Apostle, "it is 
impossible to renew them again unto repentance." 
-Heb. 6:4-6. 

That time will be one not only for rewarding 
the evil and good then done, but also for 
rewarding the evil and good deeds of the present 
time. Whoever now gives even a cup of 
cold water to one of the Lord's disciples, because 
he is such, shall have a reward in that 
Purgatory; and whoever has wronged one of 
the least of them shall receive a just recompense 
for the evil deed. And the scourgings 
of that time shall be justly in accordance with 
the knowledge that was sinned against.— Luke 12:47,48; 
Matt. 10:41,42; 16:27; 2 Tim. 4:14. 

The Purgatorial period will be specially severe 
at its beginning, particularly upon the 
people of civilized nations of so-called Christendom. 
They have enjoyed many advantages 

R1469 : page 342 

and opportunities above those of heathen lands 

and are correspondingly responsible. For the 

purpose of quickly bringing mankind to a realization 

of the new conditions in force under 

the new Millennial dispensation then introduced, 

the Lord, the righteous Judge, "will 

come with fire, and with his chariots like a 

whirlwind, to render his anger with fury and 

his rebuke with flames of fire [judgments, destructive 

to evil systems and schemes]. For 

by fire [destructive judgments upon evil things] 

and by his sword [the truth] will the Lord plead 

with all flesh: and [Praise God!] the slain of 

the Lord [conquered by the sword of truth] shall 

be many." (Isa. 66:15,16; Rev. 19:15.) "He 

shall judge among the nations and rebuke [by 

his judgments] many people: and they shall beat 

their swords into plowshares and their spears 

into pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up 

sword against nation, neither shall they learn 

war any more." (Isa. 2:4.) The judgments 

of that day of the Lord are symbolically represented, 

in all the prophetic delineations of that 

time, by fire; because fire not only destroys, 

but causes pain in connection with the destruction. 

R1470 : page 342 



These purgatorial flames of righteous 

judgment will consume the evil systems and 

false principles and theories of the world— political, 

religious and financial; and while individuals 

will suffer and weep bitterly, it will be, 

to the many, reformatory or purgatorial suffering; 

and only such as willingly cling to the 

evil will be destroyed with the evil and as a 

part of it. 

This Purgatory will begin in the close or 
"harvest" of the Gospel age— the Millennial 
or purgatorial age lapping over upon it. Indeed, 
the first to enter it will be those Christians 
who are "double minded"— who seek to 
serve both God and mammon, and who, to be 
saved at all, must come up out of great tribulation, 
washing their robes in the blood of the 
Lamb. (Rev. 7:14.) In fact, it might be said 
that the purgatorial work has to some extent 
progressed upon this same class throughout the 
Gospel age (See 1 Cor. 5:5); but the class has 
been so small in comparison with the world that 
the term "Purgatory" may properly be applied 
only to the Millennial age of the world's purgation; 
for such is the Scriptural method of referring 
to it. Referring to the beginning of this 
Purgatory and its first effect upon the two classes 
of the Church, the Prophet says (Mai. 3:2,3): 
"But who may abide the day of his [Messiah's] 
coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? 
for he is like a refiner's fire and like 
fuller's soap. And he shall sit as a refiner and 
purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons 
of Levi, and purge them [in that Purgatory] as 
gold and silver, that they may offer [themselves] 
unto Jehovah an offering in righteousness." 

The trouble which will purge the great company 
of the nominal church, who are unworthy 
of a place in the real Church, is a part of that 
which is coming upon the world in general. 
They are the unfaithful servants who, though 
not hypocrites, receive a portion of trouble, as 
chastisement, with the hypocrites and unbelievers. 
(Matt. 24:51.) While they will be 
coming through great tribulation it will be because 
they have the spirit of the world. The 
spirit of the world is a selfish spirit: it includes 
love of the praise of men, love of wealth, love 
of power, love of ease, love of pleasure— love 
of everything pertaining to self, and neglect 
and lack of interest in the welfare of others. 
This class, and in fact the whole civilized world 
—"Christendom," as it is called— have had the 
law of Christ presented to them— Love to God 
and love toward each other; yet they have 



neglected it and allowed selfishness to rule them 

instead. The trouble coming will be the outgrowth 

of this very selfishness. Kings and 

princes selfishly seek their own continued advantage 

and power, and the masses selfishly 

seek liberty and equality; rich men and corporations 

seeking selfishly to perpetuate monopolistic 

methods, customs and privileges which 

give them a decided advantage over others and 

secure them and theirs the cream of life's comforts 

and blessings; and in opposition to these 

their mechanics band together, not on general 

principles for the good of all, but on selfish 

principles, to get for themselves as large a 

share of the spoils and to give as small a return 

of labor as possible. 

This crop of selfishness is fast ripening in 
the brighter light of this nineteenth century. 

R1470 : page 343 

As the light increases, both sides become more 
cunning as to how to advance their respective 
selfish ends, and how to detect and meet each 
other's moves. The breach is rapidly widening 
and preparing for what God has predicted from 
of old— "A time of trouble such as never was 
since there was a nation," "no, nor ever shall be." 
(Dan. 12:1.) This trouble is the beginning 
of the purgatorial fire of the day of the Lord. 
In it the mountains [kingdoms of earth] shall 
melt and flow down like wax [to the level of 
the people— equality], and those which do not 
melt shall be removed and carried into the 
sea [swallowed up in anarchy], while the earth 
[society and general order] shall be removed. 
See Psalm 46 for a symbolic presentation of 
these retributive and purgatorial troubles coming 
upon the world, remembering that in the 
symbolism of Scripture mountains signify kingdoms; 
earth, the social fabric supporting kingdoms; 
sea, the lawless or anarchistic elements; 
and heavens, the religious influences. 

This same trouble is also graphically portrayed 
in the symbolic "fire" in 2 Pet. 3:10-13. 
Here the earth (society) is shown as melting or 
disintegrating into its various elements, which, 
in the heat of bitterness of that time of selfish 
strife, will no longer blend and coalesce as before. 
Here the burning of the heavens— the 
destruction of the religious systems and principles 
which at present govern and control mankind 
—is shown, their passing away with great 
commotion. Then Peter tells of how this confusion 
and trouble shall be followed by a new 
organization of society, under new religious 



principles and government— new heavens and 

a new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness— 

wherein right and truth and love will have supplanted 

error, superstition and selfishness. 

David also (Psa. 46:8-11) portrays the introduction 

of the same blessed Millennium of peace 

and righteousness. 

During that Purgatorial trial the glorified 
Christ, the righteous judge, shall lay judgment 
to the line and righteousness to the plummet, 
and shall sweep away every refuge of error. 
(Isa. 28:17.) "He shall judge the people with 
righteousness and the poor with judgment... 
and shall break in pieces the oppressor." (Psa. 72:2,4.) 
This will be the beginning of the 
purgatorial judgments— in favor of the poor, the 
ignorant and the oppressed, and hence against 
the wealthy and great and learned who have 
been willing to use their superior advantages 
of birth, of wealth, of education and of mental 
balance simply for themselves, selfishly— instead 
of having that sympathy and love for mankind 
that would lead them to desire and to labor for 
the elevation of their less favored brothers. 
Inasmuch as any have permitted selfishness to 
rule them, so that they are willing to take advantage 
of the weaknesses and circumstances 
of others to amass to themselves great wealth 
and power, and to use that power and wealth 
selfishly, to that extent they will suffer most in 
the beginning of this Purgatorial age. Upon 
this class its hottest fires will come first. See 
James 5:1-7. 

The judgments of this day of the Lord are 
represented repeatedly in the Scriptures. Isaiah 
(Chapter 33:2,3,5-16) points out God's succor 
of the saints from the coming trouble, saying: 
"O Lord, be gracious unto us; we have waited 
on thee: be thou their arm [the helper of all truth-seekers, 
even though not overcomers],... 
also our salvation in the time of trouble." Then 
the effect of the trouble upon the nations is 
briefly summed up: "At the noise of thy 
thunder the people fled; when thou stoodest up 
nations were scattered." Next, the effect of the 
Lord's standing forth to judge the world is 
shown upon the Church: "The Lord is exalted; 
for he dwelleth on high. He hath filled 
Zion with justice and righteousness. Wisdom 
and knowledge shall be the stability of thy 
times and the strength of thy happiness; the 
fear [reverence] of the Lord is his treasure." 
That is to say, the Zion class will be distinct 
and separate from others, and their advantage 
will consist largely in the divine wisdom and 
knowledge granted them, because of their obedience 



to their consecration. These are to be 
sealed "in their foreheads," intellectually (Rev. 7:3; 
14:1; 22:4), that they may not be in 
darkness with the world (1 Thes. 5:4), and so 
may pass through much of the trouble with a 
happiness based upon this knowledge. 
The prophet proceeds to picture the remainder 

R1470 : page 344 

of the world, aside from the saints, in 

that trouble. (See Isa. 33:7,8.) Their valiant 

ones are discouraged and weep, powerless to 

stem the tide of anarchy: all lovers of peace 

weep bitterly, greatly disappointed that when 

they were crying Peace! Peace! and predicting 

a Millennium of peace by arbitration, all 

their predictions fail and a time of trouble is 

precipitated such as was not since there was a 

nation. They expected it not so, because, 

neglecting God's revelation, they were not 

sealed by his truth in their foreheads. The 

highways [of commerce] lie waste, the travelers 

cease, contracts cease to be of force or value; 

and cities [because dependent upon commerce] 

will become very undesirable places, while principles 

of honor and manhood will no longer be 

regarded or trusted; and the earth [society in 

general] will languish and mourn. 

This is the time when I will stand up to give 
judgment and justice, and to exalt myself, saith 
the Lord. The nominal church, which has conceived 
chaff instead of true wheat, shall bring 
forth only stubble; and her own breath (or doctrines) 
shall set her on fire and cause her consumption. 
(Isa. 33:11.) See also the burning 
of the tares, with which this is in harmony, 
and but another picture. Matt. 13:30,40.) As 
for the people in general (verse 12), they will 
be of two classes. Some, as thorns, evil-doers, 
will become furious in the fire, because cut off 
and hindered from their opportunities of doing 
evil secretly, and will be consumed. Others 
will be like slaking lime: the heat will be intensified 
as the water of truth is cast on, until 
their stoniness, their hardness of heart, shall be 
dissolved completely, bringing them into complete 
harmony with the Millennial Kingdom 
and its just and loving laws. 

Going back, the Prophet takes another view 
of the trouble seen to be approaching; and he 
pictures the different classes and shows the class 
which all must join who would pass through 
that Purgatory successfully. (Isa. 33:14-16.) 
Transgressors in [nominal] Zion will be afraid, 
the hypocrites will be in terror as they witness 



R1471 : page 344 

the troubles of this day draw near. Which can 

abide [i.e., not be consumed] with this devouring 

fire? Which can abide with lasting burnings? 

The answer is clear:— not the selfish, but— 

"He that walketh in justice and speaketh truth, 

that despiseth the gain of oppression or deceit, 

that shaketh his hands from the holding of 

bribes, that stoppeth his ears from the hearing 

of blood [of plans which might cost life, 

or wreck another morally, physically and financially], 

and shutteth his eyes against looking 

on evil. He shall dwell on high." {Such 

shall pass through the purgatorial fire, and be 

exalted.] This class shall be preserved from 

the intensity of trouble and fire, and such as 

were otherwise at first, but who become of this 

class, shall be delivered from the burnings of 

this Purgatory as they develop this character 

which is a return to the likeness of God and to 

harmony with his law of love. 

The Apostle Paul speaks of this coming Purgatory 
when he declares, "Some men's sins go 
before to judgment [being punished in the 
present life] and some they follow after." 
(1 Tim. 5:24.) Those who receive punishment 
for sins in the present life are oftenest the consecrated 
saints. Hence he declares: "If we 
would judge [criticize, discipline] ourselves, 
we should not be judged of the Lord. But 
when we are judged of the Lord, we are chastened 
[punished] that we should not be judged 
[tried and punished in the Millennial Purgatory] 
with the world."- 1 Cor. 11:31,32. 

The same Apostle (Rom. 2:3-11) speaks of 
this Millennial Purgatory as the day of wrath 
and revelation of the righteous judgment of 
God against all who are in opposition to righteousness 
and truth, and who obey unrighteousness. 
Upon such, he declares, shall then be 
rendered indignation and wrath, tribulation 
and anguish upon every being doing evil, but 
glory, honor and peace upon all that work good. 

The same Apostle refers again (2 Thes. 1:6-9) 
to the tribulation to come at the second 
coming of the Lord Jesus, and declares that it 
will be but a just thing for the Lord, who declares, 
"Vengeance is mine: I will repay," to 
render a recompense of tribulation [Purgatorial 
punishment] upon those who have been opposers 
of the truth and of the saints. This, of 
course, includes the individual punishment of 
those evil doers of the Apostle's day, and indicates 



R1471 : page 345 

that the tribulation promised was not 

inflicted at their death, nor yet, but will be inflicted 

at or during the thousand years of the 

Lord's second presence— when he shall be revealed 

in flaming fire, etc. 

That their punishment or tribulation will be 
just, and not an unjust one, we are fully assured 
from the character of their judge, as well as by 
the Apostle's words. Those who have sinned 
against little light shall have the fewer stripes 
(of punishment), and those who have transgressed 
with more light shall have the greater 
punishment.— Luke 12:47,48. 

Our Lord's coming is not only for his saints, 
to be glorified in them, but also on behalf of 
all who will believe in that Millennial day of his 
presence, that his character and laws may be 
admired and obeyed by all such. But the 
same flaming fire [of righteous Purgatorial judgment] 
in which his presence will first be revealed 
to the world, in the great day of trouble 
which will introduce the new dispensation 
(new heavens and new earth), will continue to 
burn throughout that thousand-year day against 
all evil doers, revealing clearly right and wrong, 
good and evil; finally consuming all who, after 
clear knowledge and full opportunity, continue 
to reject God's goodness. Those who thus refuse 
to obey the glad tidings or to acknowledge 
God will be consumed by that fire as being themselves 
evil; thus they shall be punished with 
lasting destruction from the presence of the 
Lord and from the glory of his power.— 2 Thes. 1:6-9. 
See Diaglott translation. 

Thus, in a word, the symbolic fires of Purgatory 
shall, under Christ's direction, consume 
evil, and leave the world cleansed, free from 
sin and every evil. It will first burn against evil 
things, against evil principles and practices in 
men, and not against men as evil men. But 
as knowledge is increased and the weaknesses 
of the fallen ones are removed, all who still 
love evil ways and practices and principles will 
be elements of evil themselves, and will be destroyed 
as such. 

And not only shall evil doers be punished in 
this Purgatory, but in it also every good deed of 
theirs shall be rewarded— even a cup of cold water 
given to a disciple shall surely have its reward. 

Thank God for his gracious provision in 
Christ, not only for the forgiveness of the sins 
of the world, but also for the Purgatorial provisions: 
whereby the sin-sick may be fully cured 
and restored to divine favor and likeness. 



Thanks be to God for his Purgatory! for the 
great and perfect Inquisition of his plan and 
for the well-fitted Inquisitors— the Christ of 
God, perfected, head and body. 



R1471 : page 345 

BEAR YE ONE ANOTHER'S BURDENS. 



"Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law 
ofChrist."-Gal. 6:2. 

Those who look upon the Bible as a collection 
of moral precepts designed for the regulation 
of the world in general are very far from 
the proper estimate of its object and scope; 
for the Bible is not addressed to the world at 
all. The whole book, from beginning to end, 
is the inheritance of the saints— "the sanctified 
in Christ Jesus." To them all the Apostolic 
epistles, with a single exception (the epistle 
of James) are addressed. 

The book of Revelation is also similarly addressed. 
And the Apostle Peter, in referring 
to the prophecies of the Old Testament, says 
even of the prophets that "not unto themselves, 
but unto us they did minister." (1 Pet. 1:12. 
See also Dan. 12:4,8,9.) And the 
Apostle Paul says that "whatsoever things were 
written aforetime were written for our learning, 
that we [the sanctified in Christ Jesus] through 
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might 
have hope." (Rom. 15:4.) Consequently all 
that was written aforetime by Moses and the 
prophets— whether of history or law or prophecy 
or type or precept— was designed specially 
for us who are in Christ, for the instruction 
and comfort of the children of God. And not 
one iota of it belongs to the unregenerate world. 
It is a "light which shineth in a dark place" 
to Christians: it is "a lamp to our feet, and a 
light to our path." And whatever light the 

R1471 : page 346 

worldly get from it, reaches them indirectly— 
as reflected from the children of God, who "shine 
as lights in the world." "Ye," said our Lord, 
"are the light of the world."— Phil. 2:15; 
Matt. 5:14. 

The plan of God, once discerned, indirectly 
inculcates every principle of morality and virtue 



by showing just what God designs to have 
us to do: by showing, first, how he created us 
perfect and glorious in his own image and designed 
us for everlasting life in the enjoyment 
of his favors; next, that everything in us which 
is short of that original perfection is due to sin 
and renders us unworthy of life. Then there 
is the recognition of sin; and thus the glorious 
plan for both our legal and our actual deliverance 
from sin and death is opened up, and the 
final restitution of all things is assured to the 
loyal and obedient sons of God; and all the 
necessary provisions thereto are made manifest. 

As the plan is now clearly outlined we see 
how history and prophecy and type and law 
all minister to the one grand design of the 
Book of books, in which the reverent and careful 
student finds the highest incentives to purity 
and holiness and the most perfect delineation 
of that praiseworthy character which he should 
seek to build up, and in contrast with which 
the deformity of every evil is manifest. 

Among the instructions to the children of 
God is the one above cited— "Bear ye one another's 
burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ." 
The law of Christ we have seen to be the law 
of love: and love says, Bear ye one another's 
burdens. There are times in the experience of 
almost every one when the surges of trouble roll 
high, and the timid, shrinking soul is almost 
overwhelmed by them. And then how soothing 
is the sympathy and counsel of a fellow-member 
of the body of Christ. Worldly minded 
friends may sympathize, but their counsel 
is almost sure to be wrong. Hence the necessity 
of fellowship in the body of Christ and of 
disfellowship with the world. 

It is not always necessary to tell one's sorrows 
and perplexities to another, and to have 
their sympathy and aid: in most cases they are 
better untold, except to the Lord. But love's 
quick discernment is always watchful and ready 
with the word in season, the cordial friendliness 
and the helpful hand if need be, to help 
bear the burden. 

There are various kinds of burdens to be 
borne: there are burdens of bereavement, of 
financial embarrassment, of business and family 
cares, of physical and mental suffering, of sudden 
disasters and great perplexities and anxieties; 
and there are burdens also of conscious 
sins. In all these, if we are diligently seeking 
to fulfil the law of Christ, we may be able to 
cheer and strengthen fellow-members of the 
body of Christ with sympathy and counsel, and 
such aid as may be most needful and timely. 



But the Apostle calls particular attention to 
this last kind of burdens— burdens of sins— 
and counsels the exercise of this disposition 
specially in cases of acknowledged sin. We are 
all to remember our own liability to sin, and 
therefore to be patient and considerate with 
others when they are overtaken in a fault. 
Such patient, forbearing love is one of the most 
beautiful adornments of the Christian character. 

In the body of Christ the various members 
have their various inherited weaknesses, against 
which they must wage a lifelong warfare; and 
these weaknesses are sometimes of such a nature 
as to interfere to some extent with the rights 
and comforts of others as well as of themselves. 
And just here the Apostle offers a word of 
counsel, saying, "We then that are strong 
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and 
not to please ourselves." (Rom. 15:1,2.) This 
does not imply that we should not expostulate 
with such a one and endeavor to help him get 
rid of his infirmity. This we should do, in 
the spirit of meekness and kindness, while we 
patiently endure the trial of our patience, not 
seeking to please ourselves, but rather to help 
a weaker brother or sister. "Let every one of 
us," as the Apostle counsels, "please his neighbor 
[brother] for his good, to edification"— i.e., 
not by simply ignoring his fault as though you 
considered it all right, but, while kindly urging 
him to strive against it, still humbly and patiently 
submitting to the discomfort it brings 
to you. 

If this spirit prevails, the Apostle further 
shows (1 Cor. 12:24-26), there need be no 

R1471 : page 347 

schism in the body; because the members all 
have a mutual care and a mutual love one for 
another— a care which seeks to encourage and 
strengthen all that is good and to discourage 
all that is unbecoming, and a love which throws 
its mantle over the deformity and endeavors to 
conceal a fault, rather than to expose the weaker 
brother to the reproach of others. Thus in 
the true body of Christ, which is knit together 
in love, if one member suffer, all the members 
suffer with him, in proportion as they are more 
or less directly associated with him; or, if one 
member be honored, all the members rejoice 
with him, and to some degree share the honor: 
just as when in an earthly family one member 
rises to honorable distinction all the members 
partake of the honor and the joy. 
For such self-sacrificing love how necessary 



is the spirit of humility and gentleness and patience 

and faith. How forceful are the Master's 

words, "Except ye be converted [from 

the spirit of the world to the spirit of Christ] 

and become as little children [in meekness and 

teachableness], ye shall not enter into the kingdom 

of heaven. "--Matt. 18:1-6. 

And again says the Master, "Whoso shall 
receive one such little child [one such humble, 
teachable child of God] in my name receiveth 
me." Let us, therefore, be in haste to receive 
and to heartily fellowship every such one. 

And here he adds a caution which all would 
do well to heed, saying, "But whosoever shall 
insnare one of the least of these who believe 
in me, it would be better for him that a millstone 
were hanged about his neck, and that he 
were sunk in the depth of the sea." With what 
carefulness, then, should we regard one another. 

Dearly beloved, bear ye one another's burdens, 
and so fulfil the law of Christ— the law 
of love; and so bind up the body of Christ 
that there be no schism in the body, but that 
it be more and more knit together in love. 
Let this blessed law of Christ rule more fully 
in all who have taken, by consecration, the 
name of Christ: and let its hallowed influence 
shine out upon the world, showing them how 
it brings peace and harmony and happiness- 
how it makes more tender and devoted wives, 
more noble and good and kind husbands, more 
loyal and loving children, more kind and good 
neighbors, and how it puts oil upon all the 
troubled waters of present experience and prepares 
the heart for the enjoyment of all the 
fruits of righteousness. 



R1471 : page 347 
A MIGHTY FORCE. 



It has been well said that the greatest problem 
of mankind is how to utilize the forces of 
nature; but to make this wholly true the double-sidedness 
of nature must be regarded. It is 
not sufficient to utilize the material forces, 
which facilitate locomotion or the production 
of articles of utility or luxury. The greater 
forces, those which have to do with the intellectual 
side of our life, must be understood and 
rightly used, otherwise the best material progress 
will fail to elevate the race to those heights 



to which it is capable of attaining. Happily 
for mankind the indications are many that the 
real nature of the latter forces is being understood. 
The other day a man was overheard to 
say to another in a business conversation: "We 
will have to act on that new rule we hear so 
much of in the papers nowadays." "What's 
that?" said the other. "The golden rule," 
was the reply; and the other assented. Now 
the point in this conversation, which was a real 
one, lies in the words, "we hear so much of 
in the papers nowadays." It is a fact that 
never in the history of journalism has there 
been such a turning towards this old yet ever 
new rule as a solution of the difficult problems 
of the hour. There is a mighty force in it, 
which is being recognized as never before 
[and applied to others by many who are unwilling 
to put into practice themselves]. When 
it is fully recognized it will energize society 
with a new life, and so great will be the 
onward strides which humanity will make that 
it will look back to these troubled and almost 
hopeless times as we look back upon the darkest 
eras in all past history. —Selected. 



R1475 : page 348 

"AS THE FATHER LOVETH ME.' 



My Savior, is it thus that thou 

In truth so lovest me, 
E'en as the heavenly Father doth 

In verity love thee? 

Into the depth of that great love 

Can mortal vision see? 
Oh, no: such love is fathomless, 

And such will ever be. 

Still as I think of that great love, 
I wonder more and more. 

Oh, may I love thee in return, 
And, wondering, adore. 

O thou all glorious Savior-King, 
Cleanse this poor heart of mine, 

And fill it from thy fountain, pure, 
Fountain of love divine. 

Then while I hear thee in thy Word 
Telling thy love for me, 



I can reply— Thou knowest all— 
Thou knowest I love thee. 

T. R. SIMPSON. 



page 348 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO LEAD 
OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 
PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1471 : page 348 

WORK AMONG THE GENTILES. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON X., DEC. 4, ACTS 14:8-22. 
Golden Text— "In his name shall the Gentiles trust." 

VERSES 8-10. Here again the Lord witnessed 
to the teaching of Paul and Barnabas by 
a miracle, thus confirming their testimony, that 
the people might know they were his messengers. 
The statement that the lame man had 
faith to be healed is also worthy of notice. 
This miracle corresponded closely to the one 
wrought through Peter and John.— Acts 3:7,8. 

VERSES 1 1-13 show that the effect of the 
miracle upon the people was in harmony with 
God's design, in that they were impressed with 
awe and reverence for his chosen witnesses and 
thus were prepared to hear their testimony concerning 
the truth. Yet in their ignorance this 
reverence led them to the foolish extreme of 
worshiping the messengers of the truth instead 
of its divine author. 

VERSES 14,15 show how the Lord's true 
messengers regarded such homage. They were 
prompt and emphatic in discouraging it. 
They went out quickly to the multitude which 
had come (probably to their dwelling) with 
garlands and oxen for sacrifice, and, rending 
their garments in token of extreme disapproval, 
cried out, "Sirs, why do ye these things? 
We also are men of like passions with you, and 



bring you good tidings, that ye should turn 
from these vain things unto the living God, 
who made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and 
all that in them is." 

Had Paul and Barnabas been of a different 
spirit they might have been overcome by the 
temptation to accept the praise and homage of 
men. But they were humble and faithful, and 
sought only the glory of God and the enlightenment 
and consequent blessing of their fellow 
men. Such temptations are common to all 
public teachers, and therefore they specially 
need to cultivate the grace of humility. They 
must humble themselves under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may exalt them in due 
time, and, like the Apostle, declare themselves 
only fallible men, who, by the grace of God, 
have been permitted to declare the good tidings 
of salvation; that the glorious message is 
not theirs, but God's; and that it is now made 
manifest through his servants, because the due 

R1472 : page 348 

time for its revealing has come.— 
Dan. 12:4,9,10. 

VERSES 16-18. Paul here emphasizes the fact 
of a great dispensational change having occurred 
—the closing of the Jewish age and the 
opening of the Gospel age. In the former, the 
favor of God was extended to Israel only- 
consisting in a typical justification from sin, 
reconciliation to God and promises of everlasting 
life. In the latter, the door of access 
to God [through Christ] had been opened to 
all nations, and the dividing wall of the Jewish 
(typical) covenant had been removed. (Eph. 2:14-22.) 
"Now [having appointed through 
Christ a day of trial for all] he commandeth 
all men everywhere to repent." (Acts 17:30.) 
The account here is probably only a brief extract 
of the Apostle's discourse to the people, 
whereby he restrained their idolatrous worship 
and drew their attention to the truth. 

R1472 : page 349 

VERSES 19,20 give another illustration of 
the incessant opposition of error under Satan's 
supervision in the name of religion. And the 
prince of this world in this, as in the majority 
of cases now, was permitted a large measure of 
success. Probably most of the Apostle's congregation 
were either effectually turned from 
the truth, or else were considerably confused 
or biased in favor of the error; but the few that 



did hear and believe were precious. Sometimes 
the evil-doers are permitted to persecute the 
Lord's messengers even unto death, as in the 
case of Stephen; but although Paul was almost 
killed, the Lord raised him up, that he might yet 
further bear witness to the truth, in which privilege 
these faithful soldiers of the cross greatly 
rejoiced. But observe that they did not remain 
in the same city to invite further persecution 
for vain-glorious reasons, neither were they 
discouraged against further efforts; but with 
good courage, remembering the Lord's words— 
"When they persecute you in one city, flee ye 
into another" (Matt. 10:23)-they leftLystra 
the next day for Derbe. Seemingly, they 
used as much prudence as was consistent with 
their mission of preaching the gospel: and in 
this we should emulate their example. They 
did not stay to tantalize their persecutors and 
to invite a second stoning: another door for 
preaching stood open and they went to Derbe. 

VERSES 21,22. Nevertheless, when it became 
expedient to return to Lystra to confirm 
the household of faith, the courage to serve the 
Lord's sheep was not lacking. The entire 
course of the apostles shows us that their mission 
work was very different in object, as well 
as in method, from that of missions to-day. 
They went to the principal cities, and to the 
most religious persons in each. They had no 
expectation of converting all, but merely of interesting 
a few— a "little flock." They knew 
what the majority of missionaries to-day do not 
know, that the work of this age is the selection 
and perfecting, in patience, experience and 
character, of the "Bride of the Lamb," the 
Church— to be joint-heirs with Christ during 
the Millennium in the work of breaking the 
power of Satan over the masses, and of opening 
the blind eyes and unstopping the deaf ears, and 
leading all who then will be led, to perfection 
and lasting life and joy. 

The Apostle's care for the souls of his converts 
is also noteworthy. He was not only 
anxious to make converts, but he was even more 
anxious to confirm them in the faith and hope 
of the gospel, to establish them in the doctrine 
of Christ, to warn them against error and to 
encourage them to steadfastness in the midst 
of persecutions which would surely follow. 

R1472: page 349 

THE APOSTOLIC COUNCIL. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XL, DEC. 11, ACTS 15:12-29. 

Golden Text— "Through the grace of the Lord Jesus 
Christ we shall be saved, even as they."— Acts 15:11. 

As we saw in the two previous lessons that 
the envy of the Jews on account of the progress 
of the doctrines of Christ hindered them as a 
class from receiving the truth, so in this lesson 
we see that a measure of that same spirit among 
some who had accepted the truth was bringing 
them again into bondage to the Law, and depriving 
them of their liberty in Christ. And 
not only so, but some of these were determined 
to put this yoke upon the whole Church 
by insisting that all Gentile converts must be 
circumcised and thus become Jewish proselytes 
before becoming Christians; and that otherwise 
they could not be saved. 

These Judaizing teachers interfered with the 
work of Paul and Barnabas at Antioch, and a 
great controversy ensued. The question was a 
vital one, and one which involved the whole 
structure of Christianity; for the error struck 
right at the foundation doctrine— the efficacy 
of the precious blood of Christ for salvation 
to all them that believe, whether Jews or Gentiles. 
These false teachers were claiming that 
faith in Christ as the Redeemer was not sufficient 
for salvation, but that this was only an 
appendage to the Law, which still held dominion 
over the Jewish converts, and to which the 
Gentile converts must also submit. 

The Church at Antioch was greatly exercised 
on this question, and Paul and Barnabas were 
zealous in proclaiming the full value of the 
precious blood of Christ, as completely abrogating 
the former covenant of works, which 
had been proven powerless to save. But the 
Gentile converts were anxious to know what 
would be the consensus of opinion on this important 
subject among the other apostles in 
Jerusalem. Consequently they determined that 
Paul and Barnabas and certain others of them 
should go up to Jerusalem, a distance of about 
three hundred miles, and have a conference 
with the apostles and elders there about this 
question, which they did, probably at the expense 
of the Church at Antioch. This was the 
visit mentioned by the Apostle in Gal. 2:1,2, 
about fourteen years after his conversion. The 
course of the Church at Antioch in this matter, 
as well as its former course in sending them 
out as missionaries to other cities, whence they 
had returned to minister to it again (Acts 14:28), 



gives evidence of its zeal and faithfulness, 
not only to serve the Lord, but also to 
come to an exact knowledge of the truth. 
The early Church, composed first of Jewish 

R1472: page 350 

converts, was not in opposition to the salvation 
of the Gentiles, but having been so long under 
the Law, it is not at all surprising that even the 
apostles were slow to follow the leading of the 
Spirit in turning to the Gentiles, and that all 
were naturally inclined to trust in some measure 
to the old Law covenant of works, not 
realizing that in so doing they were nullifying 
the covenant of grace in Christ. Paul seems 
to have been the first to grasp the situation, and 
his clear declaration in his letter to the Galatians 
(Chap. 5:2-6) of the all-sufficiency of the 
atonement leaves no room for doubt as to his 
position on this subject. He says: "Behold 
I, Paul, say unto you, that if ye be circumcised 
Christ shall profit you nothing; for I testify 
again to every man that is circumcised that he 
is a debtor to do the whole Law. Christ is become 
of no effect unto you, whosoever of you 
are justified by the law; ye are fallen from 
grace. ...For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision 
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, 
but faith which worketh by love." 

While God could have quickly made the 
truth plain to all the Church in various ways, 
he chose to do it gradually and through agencies. 
Hence through a vision to Peter he first 
gave indication of his purpose to begin the 
blessing of the Gentiles with the gospel. But 
to Paul God made known the particulars of his 
plan, and through him comes the clearer understanding 
to the whole Church, including the 
other apostles. To him came visions and revelations 
more than to others.— 2 Cor. 12:1-7. 

VERSES 7-11. When the apostles and elders 
were assembled together at Jerusalem, there 
was first a difference of opinion on this subject 
and much apparently informal disputing, some 
urging one way and some the other. Then 
Peter rose up and called the attention of all to 
the fact of how God had taught him through 
the vision of clean and unclean beasts that he 
was not henceforth to call the Gentiles common 
or unclean, and that he had put no difference 
between them and the Jews. And so he 
urged that no yoke of the law be put upon the 
neck of these disciples, which neither they nor 
their fathers were able to bear; for, said he, 
"We believe that through the grace of the Lord 



Jesus Christ we [Jews] shall be saved, even as 
they" [the Gentiles]. 

VERSE 12. Then Barnabas and Paul were 
heard; and they declared what great things 
the Lord had been doing among the Gentiles, 
and how he had been working with them by 
miracles and signs. (See previous lessons.) 

VERSES 13-18. When these brethren had 
related their experiences among the Gentiles, 
and after Peter had called attention to his vision 
and his subsequent experiences, all of which 
is only briefly stated here, then James, who 
seems to have been the moderator of the meeting, 
gave the decision which had been forming 
in his mind and the Scriptural reasons upon 
which he based it. He said, "Men and brethren, 
hearken unto me: Simon [Simon Peter 
—verse 7] has declared how God at first did 
visit the Gentiles to take out of them a people 
for his name." Then he shows how this blessing 
of the Gentiles agrees with the teaching of 
the prophets, to the effect that the blessing of 
Israel first is only that through them as a channel 

R1473 : page 350 

it may flow to the Gentiles also. And so 
they as Jewish converts to Christ were merely 
the channels through whom God would send 
his blessed gospel to the Gentiles also. Yes, 
he said, this was evidently God's plan from the 
beginning.— Verse 18. 

VERSES 19,20. "Wherefore," said he, "my 
judgment is that we should not trouble them 
which from among the Gentiles are turned to 
God"— they are justified by faith in Christ, 
and have already received the spirit of adoption, 
in uncircumcision, thus showing that faith in 
Christ the Redeemer is the only requisite to 
salvation. He further suggested writing to 
them merely that they abstain from pollutions 
of idols, i.e., from meats offered to idols 
(verse 29), and from things strangled and from 
blood— as by eating such things they might become 
stumbling blocks to their Jewish brethren 
(See 1 Cor. 8:4-13)— and from fornication. 
The eating of blood was forbidden, not only 
by the Jewish Law, but also before the Law. 
The same command was given to Noah. (See 
Deut. 12:23; Gen. 9:4.) 

VERSE 21. The Apostle's intimation is that 
Judaism and the Law Covenant were very generally 
known throughout the world at that time. 
And this harmonizes with our Lord's words— 
"Ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte." 
Nevertheless these means had not done 



much to convert the world to God; while the 
preaching of the gospel by Paul and Barnabas 
had been signally blessed to the Gentiles— the 
chief opponents being the Jews. These facts, 
taken in connection with the words of the 
prophets which the Lord had just brought to 
their attention, convinced James that a new 
dispensation had dawned, of which not the Law 
Covenant but the New Covenant was the basis. 
VERSES 22-29. This advice of James found 
favor among all the apostles and elders, and 
they decided to act upon it. So Paul and 
Barnabas were returned to Antioch with a letter 
of affectionate commendation, and accompanied 

R1473 : page 351 

by two of the brethren from Jerusalem- 
Judas and Silas— who bore the same testimony 
to the Church at Antioch. 

The opening and closing words of this letter 
are noteworthy— verses 23,28,29. The apostles 
are represented as a class apart from others 
of the Church, indicating the distinctness of 
their office. The elder brethren or elders signify 
those of largest experience and development. 
Note also that those addressed— viz., 
Gentiles— are called brethren, thus indicating 
Christian fellowship. The statement: "It 
seemed good to the holy Spirit and to us," etc., 
indicates that they judged the mind of the 
Spirit by the special providences manifested in 
the cases of Peter, Paul and Barnabas, as well 
as by the expressions of the prophets. 

It will be noticed that nothing is said about 
keeping the ten commandments, nor any part 
of the Jewish law. It was evidently taken for 
granted that having received the spirit of Christ 
the new law of love would be a general regulation 
for them. The things mentioned were 
merely to guard against stumbling themselves 
or becoming stumbling blocks to others. 

IV. QUAR., LESSON XII., DEC. 18. -REVIEW. 



R1473 : page 351 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT. 



page 351 

Missouri. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-About two years 
ago two Old Theology Tracts were cast by you 
as bread upon the water, which, thank God, 
were found by me. They led me to read 
The Plan of the Ages, and the other two volumes, 
with my Bible in hand, to see if these 
things be so. I was aroused, I was awakened 
from a lethargic sleep of fancied security. I 
had indeed been almost blind, but I knew it 
not. I was nearly deaf to the voice of truth 
and reason and to my best interest. But, thank 
God, I can now both see and hear. 

For many years I had been a member of the 
Christian church, because there, I was led to 
believe, I would be a freedman, bound by 
no creed or confession of faith, but the Bible 
and it alone. I rejoiced in my liberty, and, 
Pharisee-like, I thanked God that I was not as 
other men; but I now see that I was nearly as 
much bound as others, and that I also had the 
rules and usages of the church, and the teachings 
of her schools, to profess and to defend, or expose 
myself to charges, and loss of membership. 

I may indeed yet see dimly as through a glass, 
but I am not discouraged or cast down, for my 
eye is onward and upward, and I have a hope 
that maketh not ashamed. 

Yours in hope, A. DELONG. 



R1473 : page 351 

Illinois. 
DEAR BRETHREN: I have just read with astonishment 
the second and third volumes of 
DAWN, and I thank God that he directed me 
to them; for I have always been seeking truth 
since I left the Roman church. I concur with 
nearly all that is taught, and desire to do what 
I can toward spreading the light. Three years 
ago I left the Roman church to seek salvation 
in Christ alone, and I have been greatly blessed 
in experience since that time. About a year 
afterward I felt the necessity of being baptized 
according to the Bible teaching, and consequently 
was immersed. I have many times 

thought about the vast number of different denominations 
in Protestantism, all disagreeing, 
yet all taking their doctrines from the one 
Bible. I often thought something must be 
wrong, and praise God for this, that I did not 
altogether become a Protestant; but I have 
been and am seeking truth, and I believe the 
Lord is leading me. I have come out for the 
glory of the eternal Father, who so loved us as 



to redeem us through the precious blood of 
Jesus Christ; and I mean to follow Jesus at 
whatever cost, and as near as I can in the manner 
described in 2 Cor. 6:4-10. Such is my 
determination, God helping me. 
Your brother in Christ, 

PHILEMON PEMENT. 



India. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You will, I dare 
say, be surprised to receive this from one who 
is situated in such a remote part of India, where 
no other subscribers to your journal reside but 
myself and family; and it will be a great pleasure 
to you to know that your MILLENNIAL DAWN 
has made its way down here, and that many 
are rejoicing in reading them. I must say the 
three volumes have given me much rich food, 
at a time when I was very hungry for the truth 
of God's Word; and though I cannot understand 
certain parts of your writings, still I am 
confident that the Lord will, in his due time, 
lead me into all truth, and enlighten my present 
dark understanding. I am enjoying the 
"liberty wherewith Christ hath made me free," 
in which liberty my dear wife has joined, and 
we are both, as one, in the unity of the Spirit 
of "Life only in Christ." Though we are 
deprived of human fellowship, we have as our 

R1473 : page 352 

companion Him who is the best of friends. 

I have received one or two copies of ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER, and it quite supplies me with 
the kind of food I would like to feast upon, 
and I wish to subscribe to it. My only guide 
is "Thus saith the Lord," and I will gladly accept 
all explanations on this ground. I close 
with the hope that the Lord will draw us closer 
together in His love. 

Yours in the Lord, CHAS. ERSKINE. 



California. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I pen you these 
lines in grateful remembrance that I was 
brought out into the light of God's Word, as 
it continues to shine unto the perfect day. I 
have given much time investigating the DAWNS, 
comparing them with the Bible, and I find a 
beautiful harmony, leading me to consecrate 
all my ransomed powers to his blessed will. I 



have been running for the prize for some years, 
and feeling my way. As the dear Lord 
gave it to me, I have been giving truth to the 
people to which I belonged, and have had to 
step out of my church. In all sects I met the 
same opposition on the part of my congregations, 
and I finally saw clearly that I must come 
out of all organized bodies. I find one here, 
another there, that welcomes the truth. It has 
taken me quite a while to reach this point. 
Now it has been reached, and I am free to follow 
as the dear Lord leads. 

I have had to go through trials, and to suffer 
the loss of my professed Christian friends, but 
I am praising the Lord— yea, his praise is in 
my mouth. Jesus was never more precious 
than now. I can sing, 

"Jesus, I my cross have taken, 
All to leave and follow Thee." 

I want to get a few copies of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, to put into hands that will be benefited, 
as I have been. Pray for me that I may be 
instrumental in bringing many from darkness 
into light. In Christian love and fellowship, 
H. F. HODGES. 



Georgia. 

DEAR BROTHER:-About two months ago I 
had occasion to visit Florida, and while there 
had frequent conversations with a lady on the 
subject of religion. Finally she asked me to 
read your work, MILLENNIAL DAWN. I began 
the first volume, and became so much absorbed 
that I almost lost sight of everything else. 
After reading it several times, I read the second 
volume with even greater interest, and 
now continue to read them both with unabated 
zeal and pleasure. Surely this knowledge has 
come to you from the source of all wisdom; 
and the Spirit of truth, which was promised to 
us by the Holy One of Israel just before his ascension, 
must be abiding with you, and directing 
you in this great and good work. 

This knowledge came to my hungering soul 
like good, wholesome food to a starving man; 
and I will never cease to be grateful for the 
sweet comfort and consolation I have received. 
For many years I had been striving to understand 
and harmonize the plans and purposes of 
the Almighty God, but had never succeeded, 
except in part, until I found these books. When 
I left the Sister's house, I bought two copies, 
one for a friend, who, I felt confident, would 
be as much interested in them as myself. I 



was not disappointed, and we write now to ask 
that you will send us five dollars' worth. We 
want these for distribution among our friends, 
and hope that this step will lead to the sale of 
many others. 

God speed you in your noble work, and give 
you great reward, both in this life and in the 
beautiful and happy life to come. 
Yours in Christian love, 
W. J. WOOD. 



New Jersey. 

DEAR SIR:— Will you please send me ten 
copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., as I feel 
I must do something for God, who has done 
so much for me. When I first read Vol. I., I wondered 
if its teachings were true. I then searched 
and studied the proofs, and was amazed at the 
wonderful height, depth, length and breadth 
of the love of God, that passeth knowledge. I 
am surprised at my past ignorance, and wonder 
how I could have been so blind. 

Your work has brought light to my mind on 
many texts heretofore all darkness; and I cannot 
think over it without being inspired by the 
wonderful love revealed therein. All to whom 
I have lent it have expressed their approval of 
the reasonableness and justice of the Plan of 
the Ages. Yours in Christ, 

JOHN CLOUGH. 



page 352 

New York. 

TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY:-The Plan 
of the Ages and sample copies of WATCH TOWER 
came duly to hand. Am reading the book in 
leisure moments, and must say that it opens up 
like a gold mine: it is full of rich treasures. 
I have found what I have been seeking for the 
past decade, and can find place now for whole 
chapters of the Bible, that I could not use before. 
It is irresistible. Please send Vol. II. 
for enclosed Postal Note. You will hear from 
me again in a few days. 

Yours truly, T. L. BEEBE. 



page 354 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



BINDERS FOR 1893-1894. 



Patent Binders of a size suitable for the 
TOWER for two years' issues, and with the name 
of our journal and the dates 1893-1894 stamped 
in gilt on the side, are now ready. Those 
therefore who hereafter order Binders should 
specify whether they want these for coming 
years or those for 1891-1892 which have no 
dates stamped on them. These are extremely 
desirable for preserving your TOWERS in a convenient 
form for future reference. Price fifty 
cents each. 



THE WATCH TOWER FOR 1893. 



So far as possible we prefer to have subscriptions 
date from January each year; but where 
this is not convenient we are pleased to have 
it otherwise. Those who cannot pay now, but 
who expect to do so later, and who desire that 
their papers continue uninterruptedly, will 
please drop a card saying so. Each can see just 
how his account stands by examining the date 
on the address label of his last paper. These 
we will correct every month hereafter. 

Those who from age, accident or other misfortune 
are unable to afford to subscribe are 
still welcome to receive the WATCH TOWER free 
as "The Lord's Poor," if they describe themselves 
and make the request yearly. (Such are 
marked with a sign— thus: +— on the address 
label.) This offer is not meant for those whose 
inability to pay arises from the spending of a 
larger sum for tobacco, etc.; but all who are 
really of the class described are as welcome to 
the TOWER regularly as though they paid for it. 

But it is not too much to ask such to renew 
their request each year on a postal card. If 
you have once described your case and are 
marked (thus: +) on your label you need not 
explain again; for we understand that your circumstances 
are still the same. Such may simply 
say, "Please renew my subscription as 
heretofore," and we shall understand them. 
But others not so marked (+) should explain, for 
we have not understood them heretofore. 

Again, let us request that all the "Lord's 
Poor" renewals come in promptly before January 
'93. Those who asked the TOWER free 
during other months get it only until December 
'92 unless they now, in December, ask its 
renewal. "Ask and ye shall receive" is God's 
method— which we adopt. 

GOOD HOPES FOR 1892 SUCCESSFUL. 



In our next issue we hope to present a report 
showing that the "Good Hope" plan adopted 
a year ago was a decided success— increasing 
the Tract Society's Funds and its usefulness in 
the work of truth-spreading. We will then 
also furnish blanks for 1893 for such as appreciate 
this method and opportunity for serving 
our Redeemer and King. 



MOTTO CARDS, ETC. 



In our next issue we will mention some new 
Motto Cards just imported as helps toward 
home embellishment. 

We remark now that we still have some of 
the Flower Cards brought from Palestine (Cards 
upon which pressed flowers are pasted in neat 
designs), brought as mementoes of the Holy 
land. These are donated to the Tract Fund 
and sell as follows: 

Small Cards, 4 for 25 cents. 

Larger " ,2 " 25 cents. 



R1474 : page 355 

VOL. XIII. DECEMBER 1, 1892. NO. 23. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

PREPARING TO GIVE LIFE TO THE IMAGE. 



"The heavens shall be rolled together as a 
scroll" is a symbolical prophecy now nearing 
fulfilment. As has already been shown, the 
"heavens" in the symbolism of the Bible 
represent ecclesiastical powers— the nominal 
church— and the rolling together of these represents 
the concentration, federation or union 
now being so prominently discussed. 

"Rolled together as a scroll" is also a suggestive 
symbol. All who are familiar with a 
scroll of parchment, and its way of rolling together, 
know that it rolls from its two ends 
toward a common centre, yet that each side of 
the scroll has its own centre— two rolls, one 
scroll— a concentration to one centre but in 
two grand divisions. 

The preparation for just this sort of a union 
and concentration of nominal "Christendom" 
is very apparent, and the evidences that it is 
imminent are everywhere and are multiplying. 
The Protestants are preparing to form one side 
or roll, and the Roman Catholics to constitute 
the other. The various denominations of Protestants, 
although uniting in the call for union, 
are doctrinally as radically opposed to each 
other as ever— Presbyterians holding that only 
the elect will be saved from eternal torment; 
Baptists claiming that only such as have been 



immersed are members of the true Church which 
alone will be saved; Episcopalians claiming 
that they only constitute the true Church; and 
other Protestant denominations making more 
or less similar claims. 

The secular press abounds with intimations 
which clearly show the general drift in the direction 
named: Conferences and Councils endorse 
it; individuals talk it in and out of the 
pulpits; and the secular as well as the religious 
press commends it. Few but ourselves see that 
what outwardly has an appearance of good will 
prove to be antagonistic to the truth— as a 
similar centralization of religious power proved 
to be injurious to the truth and its servants 
during "the dark ages"— and our judgment 
is what it is, not from greater human wisdom 
than others, but because of wisdom from above 
—through God's Word. 

In MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., Chapter iv., 
we show that the beginning of Protestant centralization 
took shape in 1846, in the formation 
of the Evangelical Alliance, a fact that is noted 
in the Book of Revelation as the making of an 
image of the (Papal) Beast. This Image is a 
partial federation of Protestants, but as yet it 
lacks all vitality; and the present agitation for 
vital union, when accomplished, will correspond 
to the vivifying or giving of life to the Image. 
(Rev. 13:15.) So soon as the vitalizing takes 
place, that Protestant system, a veritable likeness 
to the Papal, will similarly to it command 
the people in the name of God to obey its behests, 
and threaten them with both temporal 
and spiritual punishments for any resistance. 
An agreement between the original Papal Beast 
(system) and the Protestant Image (system) is 
clearly indicated by the statement that all must 

R1474 : page 356 

worship [reverence and obey] either the Beast 
or the Image. (Rev. 13:15-17.) This harmony 
and yet distinctness between the Beast and the 
Image is likewise indicated in the scroll with 
its two parts— yet joined and of one material. 

The Protestant movement for union or rather 
federation has already received quite an impetus 
from the formation of the "Young People's 
Society of Christian Endeavor." This unites 
under one name young Protestants of every denomination; 
but so far from opposing or even 
ignoring sectarianism, it fosters it by obligating 
each Christian Endeavorer, to belong to some human 
institution, and exacting of him the promise 
to attend preaching at his own church every 



Sunday, so far as practicable, and to co-operate 
with its pastor and its rules. 

The success of the young folks' movement 
has naturally led to the starting of similar 
union movements amongst senior Christians. 
One of these, recently started, and which thus 
far is making rapid progress, is styled the 
"Brotherhood of Christian Unity." As an 
evidence of this drift of public sentiment we 
note the fact that The Review of Reviews, in its 
issue of last February, published four distinct 
papers on this subject under the general head, 
"The Laymen's Movement." (1) "The Brotherhood 
of Christian Unity:" An explanation 
of the movement by its founder, T.F. Seward. 
(2) "Denominationalism on the Frontier:" An 
effort to show that denominationalism on the 
frontier is a serious drawback. (3) "Religious 
Co-operation in Maine:" An article by 
the President of Bowdoin College, to show that 
denominationalism is wholly unsuited to small 
towns and villages, and should be regarded as 
a city luxury. (4) "The Next Step Toward a 
Civic Church:" A report of an English movement 
and an address by W. T. Steed. The 
address urges the necessity of a Civil-Church 
organization to deal with all questions of morality. 
In it, under the caption "A Christianity 
that includes the Jews," we read: "I am glad 
to see on the platform the Rabbi of the Jews. 
I sincerely hope that he will not consider, 
when I use the word Christian, that I use it in 
such a sectarian sense as to exclude him [a Jew] 
from the field." 

The same magazine in its issue for October 
has no less than eight articles on the same general 
line, headed, "Religious Co-operation- 
Local, National and International," as follows: 
(1) "Practical Co-operation in Church work:" 
A review of the good prospects of lay co-operation 
in Christian work. (2) "New Methods 
Wanted in Home Missions:" A plea for the 
abandonment of denominationalism in frontier 
mission work. (3) "A Christian Brotherhood 
Sunday:" A request that on October 30th Christian 
ministers, everywhere, would preach a discourse 
setting forth the advisability of a Christian 
Unity Brotherhood. (4) "The Municipal 
Idea of the Church:" Urging Christian Unity. 
(5) "Progress of the Civic Centre Movement 
in England:" Showing that the movement 
begun in New Castle has spread to ten other 
cities and towns. (6) "The Reunion Conference 
at Gindelwald" (Switzerland). The report 
declares, "The whole tone of the discussions 
was most encouraging to those who hope 



that it may yet be possible for the Established 

[English] Church and the Presbyterians, Congregationalists, 

Methodists and Baptists to find 

a basis for fusion into a truly National Church." 

(7) "The Meaning of National Christianity:" 

In this paper the point is well made that 

none of the governments of the world are Christian 

governments. Then the question comes 

"How then does the State become Christian?" 

and the answer given is that it is by the passing 

and enforcing of Christian laws. (8) "The 

First Parliament of Religions:" An account 

of the Conference of all the religions of the 

world to be held at Chicago, in connection with 

the Columbian Exposition. 

This general movement for union is an encouraging 
sign of progress to many— all glad 
to get away from the narrowness of their own 
creeds, without openly repudiating them. If 
it were a desire for union upon a Bible basis— an 
effort to lay aside prejudices and names and to 
seek the one interpretation with which every 
portion of Scripture would harmonize, we too 
would hail it as the peaceful ushering in of the 
Millennial Day. But, alas! it is the cry of 
Peace! peace! when there is no peace. It is 
the cry of Union! union! when the only true 

R1474: page 357 

basis of Christian Union is omitted— Jesus! 

But this is not the case, says one. This proposal 
is for a Brotherhood of Christian unity. 
Oh, yes ! we know it is to be called Christian; 
but it is to include Antichrist's followers of 
every shade. As one writer cited above declares, 
such a use of the name Christian includes 
the Jews who crucified Christ as a blasphemer 
and impostor, and who still so regard 
him. It is to embrace Romanists whose false 
doctrines, yet unchanged, led their progenitors 
to persecute and "wear out the saints of the 
Most High." Yes! it prostitutes a most sacred 
name to uses of human ambition for such a 
colossal union as God's Word never authorized 
—a union of the works of the devil under the 
name of him who was manifested that he might 
destroy the devil. Surely the proposed union 
—vitalizing the Protestant image and bringing 
it into accord with the Papal (beast) system— is 
a master-stroke of Satan and one of the "strong 
delusions" of this time foretold by the Apostle. 
-2Thes. 2:11. 

But, as we said, all of these proposed unions 
ignore Christ's work as our Savior. Not one of 
them recognizes any need of a Savior. They 



are propositions of unions in disregard of the 
facts that all men are sinners and that the great 
sacrifice for sins was necessary. And the declaration 
of these facts is the gospel; and only 
such as accept of these declared facts by faith 
receive the forgiveness of sins or have a share 
in the benefits secured by the precious blood, or 
have a right to wear the holy name "Christian." 

Let us see: here is the pledge of the Brotherhood 
of Christian Unity. It reads as follows, 
the italicizing being ours:— 

"I hereby agree to accept the creed promulgated 
by the Founder of Christianity— love to 
God and love to man— as the rule of my life. 
I also agree to recognize as fellow-Christians, 
and members of the Brotherhood of Christian 
Unity, all who accept this creed and Jesus 
Christ as their leader. 

R1475 : page 357 

"I join the Brotherhood with the hope that 
such a voluntary association and fellowship 
with Christians of every faith will deepen my 
spiritual life and bring me into more helpful 
relations with my fellow-men. 

"Promising to accept Jesus Christ as my 
leader means that I intend to study his character 
with a desire to be imbued with his 
spirit, to imitate his example, and to be guided 
by his precepts." 

Surely this pledge binds all who take it to 
ignore faith in the cross, the real Scriptural 
condition of union, when it binds them to recognize 
those who ignore the atonement. It is 
made thus broad purposely to take into this 
fellowship those who deny our Lord's pre-human 
life and glory and those who deny justification 
by his blood. It is a union which ignores 
the foundation of Christian faith— the 
ransom; that ignores the fact that Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures. 

The projected and now assured World's Congress 
of Religions at Chicago next year might 
also be regarded as a favorable sign for our 
times, but for the same reasons above mentioned. 
Its leading spirits are working up a 
union and fraternity at the expense of the keystone 
of God's plan of salvation, Christ the 
Redeemer. Among numerous quotations from 
ministers, college presidents and prominent 
people generally, we did not notice one reference 
to the Savior of sinners. On the contrary:— 
One thinks that the Congress will lead 
to a "mutually good understanding among 
those of every name who believe in the Fatherhood 



of God and the brotherhood of man." 
[Nothing is said of those who are afar off from 
God, strangers and aliens through wicked works 
—nor of those to whom our Lord said, Ye are 
in no sense even Abraham's seed: "Ye are of 
your father the devil."] Another said: "Such 
a reunion would never have been possible until 
the present day; and it now marks a distinct 
epoch in the evolution of the race." Of course; 
—when man's fall, and the redemption and restitution 
from it, are ignored or lost sight of, 
the other extreme is grasped;— man's ape origin 
is implied, and present progress is considered to 
be a natural evolution. 

Another, commenting on the Congress, sums 
up the movement in words which confirm our 
criticisms above, saying:— 

"A religion which can claim at once the 
faith of Christians, Jews, Mohammedans and 
Confucians— granting the existence of such a 
faith— should be considered as doing away with 
doctrines in virtue of which these various religious 

R1475 : page 358 

groups not only contradict each other, 

but too often outlaw one another. I will add 

that this common religion, the only universal 

religion, is, by this very reason of its universality, 

the most conformed to the exigencies of 

human brotherhood; and it would not be difficult 

to show that it is also the least opposed 

to the pretensions of science, which tends to 

assure it an immense advantage in our epoch 

and social environment." 



R1475 : page 358 

"THOU PREPAREST A TABLE BEFORE ME. 

-PSALM 23:5.- 



When the Lord prepares a table we may be 
sure of several things: first, that it will be clean; 
secondly, that it will be good; thirdly, that it 
will be orderly, bountiful and beautiful. And 
wherever we find the truth thus carefully set 
before the household of faith— whether by the 
press, the pen or the pulpit— there we may be 
sure the spirit of the Lord has been at work, 
directing and superintending the matter. The 
Prophet Isaiah (Chapter 28:8), referring to the 



tables of popular theology now spread before 
the masses of nominal Christians, graphically 
described their present condition when he said, 
"For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, 
so that there is no place clean." For centuries 
past they have been feeding on the miserable 
husks of human tradition, until now a reaction 
has set in and they are vomiting forth the 
abominable stuff, and their tables are full of 
filthiness. 

Then again there are many more tables being 
spread with new traditions and human 
speculations, to which those are promptly invited 
who turn away in disgust from the old, 
polluted tables. In all of this the great adversary 
of the Church is diligently and faithfully at 
work with all his accustomed craft and cunning, 
using with great effect both the press and the 
platform, the two most potent agencies for 
reaching the people. 

It is an increasingly popular idea among religious 
journalists that such a journal should be 
a medium merely for the expression of all shades 
of human opinion upon all matters of divine 
revelation, and that each individual should abstract 
from them all what he conceives to be 
true, and reject the rest. But this is precisely 
what the readers, and often the editors, too, of 
such journals are unable to do, and the general 
confusion is only increased unto greater blindness 
and denser darkness, and thus the purpose 
of the adversary is accomplished. 

There is a deep responsibility to God which 
every man assumes, whether he realizes it or 
not, when he becomes a public teacher. "Whosoever 
shall break one of these least commandments, 
and shall teach men so, he shall be called 
the least in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever 
shall do and teach them, the same shall 
be called great in the kingdom of heaven."— 
Matt. 5:19. 

No table is fit for the household of faith to be 
summoned to that has not been spread by careful 
hands, fully submitted and obedient to the 
great Head of the house, whose directions are 
found in his Word. God says (Hab. 2:2) to 
some to whom he has granted a measure of ability 
to serve the household, and who (verse 1) are 
watching (studying his Word) to know what 
he would have them communicate— "Write the 
vision [what you have seen of divine truth] and 
make it plain upon tablets." That is, set it out 
in an orderly, systematic manner, "that he may 
run that readeth it"— that he may run for the 
prize. Observe that it is not every man that 
is called to make the truth plain, but that 



some of the class specified are called to do 

so for the benefit of all the rest. In the Scriptures 

there are many surface truths which all 

may see and appreciate, but the systematic 

ordering of the divine plan, much of which was 

purposely hidden and obscurely expressed, and 

the bringing out of its wonderful details, was 

left for an appointed time. And when the appointed 

time has come and the faithful watcher 

is led to see the systematic harmony of divine 

truth— not to guess at it, or to surmise about it, 

but to see it, so plainly that he can clearly, 

logically and Scripturally demonstrate it to 

others— then it becomes the privilege of such a 

R1475 : page 359 

one to make plain to others what the Lord has 
made plain to him. And such a one may consider 
his ability in this direction (together with 
a possible opportunity and a strong love for the 
saints, which longs to bless them with a fuller 
knowledge of God and to exhort and stimulate 
them to greater faithfulness) as the Lord's call 
to him to make it plain. 

But such should remember that the commission 
is to "make it plain," not to make it obscure. 
And if a man has no truth to make 
plain, but is only seeking for truth, he makes 
a great mistake in launching out his crude and 
inharmonious ideas for the confusion of other 
minds. Such a one should maintain the proper 
attitude of a disciple, a learner, until he does 
see clearly and is thus fitted to become a 
teacher of others. And if he is a faithful 
student, studying to show himself a workman 
approved unto God, ere long he may enjoy the 
privilege of declaring the truth to others 
through some medium, and be greatly blessed 
in so doing. 

Let none of the consecrated be in haste to 
rush into print with crude, undefined ideas, 
and thus become stumbling-blocks in the way 
of many others. Be content to spread the truth 
you have received, and proved to your thorough 
satisfaction, before some other hungry saints; 
but keep the table clean: don't make up for 
your deficiency of knowledge by spreading out 
a host of idle speculations. Better is a pure 
morsel from a clean table than great abundance 
under other conditions. By and by to this 
morsel another morsel will be added, and in due 
time the wealth of divine bounty will be realized. 



R1476 : page 359 

WHAT A DISTURBANCE MAY DO. 



"A disturbance or alarm in a hospital or asylum 
might prove fatal to some of the inmates. 
An elderly gentleman in a benevolent institution 
amused himself awhile by beating a drum 
before sunrise. The authorities finally requested 
this "lovely brother" to remove his instrument 
to a respectful distance. This illustrates 
the reason why earnest pastors grow serious 
when a disturbance arises in the church. The 
church is like a hospital where are gathered sin-sick 
persons who in a spiritual sense are fevered, 
leprous, paralytic, wounded and half dead. A 
disturbance, like the present cruel distraction 
which emanates from some of our Theological 
Seminaries, may destroy some souls who are 
now passing through a crisis. Will Prof. Briggs 
please walk softly and remove his drum?" 

—Rev. C. E. Edwards, 

in Presbyterian Banner. 

The above is a remarkable statement, whose 
force consists chiefly in the fact that the writer is a 
Presbyterian minister who ought to know of its 
truth; and its publication by the Presbyterian 
Banner shows that the editor of that journal, 
feeling the pulse of the patients, agrees with the 
diagnosis. 

Let us examine the patient (Presbyterianism) 
carefully, and no doubt we shall find that its 
ailment more or less affects other systems called 
by men churches, and let us then thank God 
that the Church, the one Church, which is the 
body of Christ, has no such symptoms. 

"The [Presbyterian] church is like a hospital 
where are gathered sin-sick persons who in 
a spiritual sense are fevered, leprous, paralytic, 
wounded and half dead." In what a dreadful 
condition it is! We knew it was bad enough, 
but did not suppose that its own Doctors of 
Divinity appreciated the case so fully as this 
diagnosis would indicate. We are not even 
yet prepared to conclude that the diagnosis fits 
every individual member of Presbyterianism, 
though, alas ! it undoubtedly well describes the 
spiritual state of the vast majority. 

In view of the facts, can we wonder that 
Presbyterians fear any commotion or discussion 
of Biblical, scientific or other questions? Is 
it not their sympathy for the afflicted and weak 
among them that causes this alarm? And what 
are the Presbyterian Doctors doing for the sin-sick 



denomination which places itself under 

their care? Are they busily engaged in preparing 

and administering remedies to cure 

these dreadful troubles? No! the only prescriptions 

compounded are anaesthetics to produce 

slumber! The cry is Peace, Peace! Let 

us have quiet! Stop beating any drum which 

R1476 : page 360 

might arouse the people to thought! Suggest 
and answer as few questions as possible. If 
any one blows a trumpet in Zion or cries aloud 
that the patients are being drugged and stupefied 
to death instead of being cured with the 
balm of Gilead— the truth— hound him down; 
crush him; destroy his voice and influence if 
he does not understand that the Presbyterian 
church is a hospital. Under present methods 
it will always be a hospital; or perhaps more 
properly it may be termed a "Home for Incurable;" 
for none are encouraged to hope for a 
realization of full forgiveness of sins, and some 
of the oldest of its Doctors disclaim a cure for 
even themselves, and still cry out, "Lord, have 
mercy upon us miserable sinners!" 

But how different is the condition of the true 
Church of Christ, whose names are written in 
heaven! It is not a hospital full of wounded, 
sin-sick, leprous and half-dead people. On 
the contrary, it is a band of cured ones, healed 
ones, dead indeed to the world, but alive toward 
God. They were indeed as others, sin-bitten 
and dying, but, having looked unto the 
crucified one, they were healed, justified freely 
from all things, "made whiter than snow;" 
and thus made ready, they were invited to become 
the companions and representatives of 
the Great Physician, and to be co-workers with 
him in curing the sin-sick world. 

We are glad to believe that the Presbyterian 
church contains some few of the members of 
the one true Church; but the sin-sick, palsied, 
leprous and half-dead are only so many yet in 
their sins, who, instead of finding the Great 
Physician and receiving the balm of Gilead, 
and obtaining a cure, have been the subjects 
of professional malpractice. They were put 
to bed (Isa. 28:20) and to sleep in the Presbyterian 
church after the manner usual in all 
other denominations. 

If Dr. Briggs and some others in the great 
Hospital Presbyterian will blow their trumpets 
and beat their drums effectually, they will certainly 
do somebody good; for even though 
they give very discordant and uncertain sounds, 



they may at least awake the sleepers. And 
though the confusion may annoy the patients, 
and especially the Doctors, the results cannot 
fail to benefit the truth-hungry among them. 

Let us who have it hold up the light! Sound 
the trumpet of truth! "Cry aloud; spare not: 
lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my 
people their transgressions."— Isa. 58:1. 



R1476 : page 360 

CONSEQUENTS OF DIVINE JUDGMENTS. 



As it is with the antecedents of Divine Judgment 
so it is with the process, and as it is with 
the process so it is with the consequents. If 
the antecedents of divine judgment are kept 
in view an adequate idea of the process may 
be obtained; but it is impossible to obtain an 
adequate idea of any part of divine judgment 
if its antecedent part is not kept in view. 
The first stage of divine judgment made it 
clear that "the first man" was then unfit for 
endless life, and the consequents thereof keep 
that lesson before the human mind from generation 
to generation. God does not judge 
man by some permission granted, request made, 
or wish expressed; nor does he judge him by 
some impulse of the human heart, conviction 
of the human mind, or dictate of the human 
conscience: he judges him by a definite law 
enforced by an adequate penalty. The penalty 
for sin is the sum of the consequents of divine 
judgment; and the consequents of divine 
judgment are the sum of the sentence which 
was pronounced upon man. In considering 
them it is safest to observe the order in which 
they are recorded. 

THE SENTENCE. 



"Unto the woman he [the Lord God] said, 
I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; 
in sorrow shalt thou bring forth children; 
and thy desire shall be subject [margin] 
to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee." 
-Gen. 3:16. 

The sentence is one of sorrow all around, 
only sorrow, and that of the bitterest kind. 
Even the multiplication of her children, which 



naturally to the mother would have been the 
multiplication of her joy, becomes to her the 

R1476 : page 361 

multiplication of her sorrow. There is no place 
left for individual equality or individual freedom; 
the wife is placed in subordination and 
in subjection to her husband. The position 
might become incentive to treatment of the 
most cruel and brutal nature; and as a matter 
of fact it has become so very extensively. 
The duration of the sorrow is the duration of 
the life: it is sorrow even unto death. Under 
this sentence "the whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until now" (Rom. 8:22); 
and no part of creation is subjected to 
intenser pain than is woman, who is its tenderest 
and fairest part. "A woman in travail" 
has been a symbol of agony throughout all 
ages. It would be difficult to exaggerate her 
manifold and harrowing sufferings, and all attempts 
to belittle them either distort or ignore 
the dire facts of the case. 

"And unto Adam he [the Lord God] said, 
Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of 
thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree of which I 
commanded thee, saying, 'Thou shalt not eat 
of it': cursed is the ground for thy sake; in 
sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy 
life: thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth 
unto thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the 
field; in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat 
bread till thou return unto the ground: for out 
of it thou wast taken: for dust thou art, and 
unto dust shalt thou return."— Gen. 3:17-19. 

In this sentence pointed reference is made 
to the fact that Jehovah made man of the dust 
of the ground, and to the prohibition which 
he distinctly placed before him at his creation. 
(Gen. 2:7,17.) This sentence is a curse from 
beginning to end. The curse pronounced is 
the curse of the law of the first life. Cursedness 
is the anthithesis of blessedness. So long 
as man conformed to the Divine Law he was 
blessed, and as soon as he refused to conform 
to that law he was cursed. The curse is formulated 
in the sentence, and it is a formidable 
one. Instead of the spontaneous production 
of either the luxuries or the necessaries of life, 
strenuous and protracted efforts become indispensable; 
instead of joy dominating those efforts, 
they become dominated by sorrow; and 
instead of the sorrow being either trivial or brief 
it becomes profound and co-extensive with the 
life. In addition to "the herb of the field" 



being obtainable only by strenuous and protracted 
labor, there were to be "thorns and 
thistles" obtainable without any labor at all. 
The latter naturally choke the former, which 
increases and intensifies the toil, so that man's 
food is not obtainable without "sweat" being 
wrung from his face; and this hard, grinding, 
crushing toil continues until he is brought down 
to "the dust" again. All that man eats, all 
that man drinks, all that he wears and all that 
he breathes spring out of the ground, or are 

R1477 : page 361 

affected by it; so that in the curse pronounced 
upon the ground man is cursed in his entirety. 
Cursed in person and in environment, always 
cursed, and the curse is so heavy that sooner 
or later it reduces man into his original elements. 
It is sometimes quite complacently 
stated that "no curse" was passed upon man. 
In the face of this sentence such statements are 
most extraordinary. In its culmination this 
curse is the concentration of all curses. 

THE EXECUTION. 



"And all the days that Adam lived were 
nine hundred and thirty years: and he died." 
-Gen. 5:5. 

The execution of the sentence which was 
passed upon Adam is thus recorded in the oldest 
Registrar of Births and Deaths that is known 
to us. The death of Adam is recorded in conjunction 
with that of seven of his descendants, 
whose lives are all now considered to have 
been of extraordinary length. The shortest of 
the eight lives was 777, and the longest was 969 
years, but in each case the record ends with 
these unvarying and significant words— "and 
he died." The record of Adam's death is in 
perfect keeping with the sentence which was 
passed upon him, and also with the sanction 
of the law of life which was given to him. 
When Jehovah said to Adam: "Of the tree of 
the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not 
eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof 
thou shalt surely die" or (as it is in the 
margin) "dying thou shalt die" (Gen. 2:17), 
that was not equivalent to saying: Dying thou 
shalt die in twenty-four hours. And when Jehovah 

R1476 : page 362 



said to Adam: "Dust thou art, and unto 

dust shall thou return" (Gen. 3:19), that 

was not equivalent to saying, Unto dust shalt 

thou return in twenty-four hours. A "day" 

may be of twenty-four hours, or of one thousand 

years, or of any intermediate duration. In 

neither the law given nor the sentence pronounced 

has anything definite been found 

touching the element of time. It appears to 

have been purposely left indefinite, and that 

no doubt for adequate reasons. Throughout 

the whole Bible the term "day" is very largely 

used to express an indefinite period of time. 

"The day of temptation," "the day of visitation," 

"the day of prosperity," "the day 

of adversity," "the day of Egypt," "the day 

of Jerusalem," etc., may be taken as examples 

of this usage. The sin of Adam forfeited his 

life, and therefore his death was certain. 

Whether Adam died instantaneously or not for 

one thousand years could not affect either the 

nature of the penalty or the certainty of its infliction; 

but it could affect, and it did affect, 

many other things. In human jurisprudence 

mistakes are often made and criminals often 

escape, but in divine jurisprudence no mistake 

is ever made nor does any criminal ever escape. 

Ultimately these three small but significant 

words— "and he died"— were recorded respecting 

Adam, and his death had been inevitable 

from the moment in which he sinned. 

There are some points which require special 
emphasis here:— 

(1) In the Law, the Sentence, and the Execution 
of the Sentence, the death mentioned is 
the death of the man. The record of man's 
formation stands thus: "The Lord God formed 
man of the dust of the ground, and breathed 
into his nostrils the breath of life; and man 
became a living soul." (Gen. 2:7.) This is the 
earliest record that there is of man, and throughout 
the Bible his component parts are spoken 
of in accordance with it. In the Law it is not 
said, thy body shall surely die, nor thy spirit shall 
surely die, nor thy soul shall surely die; but it 
is said, "Thou shalt surely die." In the sentence 
it is not said, unto dust shall thy body 
return, nor unto dust shall thy spirit return, 
nor unto dust shall thy soul return; but it is 
said, "Unto dust shalt thou return. And in 
the record of Adam's death it is not said, his 
body died, nor his spirit died, nor his soul died; 
but it is said, "he died." It is not this, that, 
or the other part of the man that is spoken of, 
but the man from first to last. The annihilation 
of this, that, or the other part of the man 



is not under consideration here. That may be 
possible or it may be impossible, but it has 
nothing whatever to do with the present subject. 
The subject under consideration here is 
the death pronounced in the sentence, and that 
is the death of the man. 

(2) In the Law, the Sentence, and the Execution 
of the Sentence, the death mentioned 

is the first death. In the Law Jehovah did not 
say unto Adam, Thou shalt surely twice die; 
but he did say, "Thou shalt surely die." In 
the Sentence Jehovah did not say unto Adam, 
Unto dust shalt thou twice return; but he did 
say, "Unto dust shalt thou return." And in 
the record of Adam's death it is not said, he 
twice died; but it is said, "he died." Had 
two deaths been intended two deaths would 
have been stated. The one statement could 
have been made as easily as the other. The fact 
that two deaths are not once mentioned here 
makes it quite clear that two deaths were never 
intended to be inflicted, as far as the first stage 
of divine judgment is concerned. 

In England the law is that a murderer shall 
be put to death; the judge in passing sentence 
on the convicted murderer generally says that 
he shall hang by the neck until he is dead; 
and after the execution the coroner's jury generally 
brings in a verdict that he died according 
to the sentence pronounced. After that, were 
any sheriff to conceive that the convict had to 
die twice, and to attempt to execute him the 
second time, what would be the result? Instead 
of being any longer fit for his office, rational 
men would consider him fit for a lunatic 
asylum. Were he able to carry out his intention 
that would not mitigate his folly; and the 
fact that he could not do so would merely enhance 
it. The dogma of two deaths to one life 
as the penalty of sin is unmitigated folly. A 
more fiendish dogma can be found, but a more 
foolish one it is scarcely possible to find. 

R1477 : page 363 

(3) In the Law, the Sentence, and the Execution 
of the Sentence, the death mentioned 

is hereditary death. When God said to Adam, 

"Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the 

earth" (Gen. 1:28), he spoke of the extension 

of hereditary life. When Adam sinned he forfeited 

life. That life was poisoned in its head 

before it was extended at all. It was impregnated 

with the seed of death, and became a 

dying life, before it left Adam. Adam could 

not extend what he no longer had for himself 



—untainted life. He extended what he had— 
tainted life— life which inevitably ends in death; 
and that (tainted) life has been extended from 
sire to son, from generation to generation, and 
from age to age ever since. In addition to 
observation and experience there is inspired 
testimony clear and distinct on this point: "By 
one man sin entered into the world, and death 
by sin; and so death passed upon all men, in 
whom [margin] all have sinned." "By one 
man's offence death reigned by one." "The 
creation was made subject to vanity, not willingly." 
"In Adam all die." (Rom. 5:12,17; 
8:20; 1 Cor. 15:22.) Individual sin, except 
in the first man, has nothing to do with hereditary 
death. It extends to all mankind, not 
merely to the hoary-headed sinners, but to the 
new-born and unborn babes as well. 

(4) In the Law, the Sentence, and the Execution 
of the sentence, the death mentioned 
is not endless torment. Such is the perversity 
of human nature that it is still necessary to reiterate 
this. Torment is a consequent of human 
transgression, and also a consequent of divine 
judgment, but not endless torment. Transgression 
and torment are inseparable, but neither 
is endless. In the Law Jehovah said, "Thou 
shalt surely die;" but he did not say, Thou shalt 
surely be always tormented. In the Sentence 
Jehovah said, "Unto dust shalt thou return;" 
but he did not say, Unto endless torment shalt 
thou return. And in the record of Adam's 
death it is said, "he died;" but it is not said, 
he entered into endless torment. As it was in 
the law given to Adam, the sentence passed 
upon him, and the execution of that sentence, 
so it is throughout the whole Bible: there is no 
countenance whatever given to the hideous 
dogma that endless torment is either the penalty 
of human transgression or the consequent 
of divine judgment. 

Where death is the "capital punishment," 
were any sheriff to attempt to substitute torment 
for death he would be met by a howl of execration 
throughout the length and breadth of the 
land. The tormentor himself would very speedily 
become the tormented. Were endless torment 
possible its inflictor would of all be the 
most deserving of it. Infidels have uttered 
many blasphemies against God, but of all blasphemies 
that which represents God as inflicting 
endless torment is the most infamous. It 
may truly be said that endless torment is the 
sum of all fiendishness; and to represent it as 
either the penalty of human sin or the consequent 
of divine judgment is the sum of all 



blasphemy against the character of God. 
"THE SECOND DEATH." 



"These things saith the first and the last, 
which was dead and is alive." "Be thou faithful 
unto death, and I will give thee a crown of 
life." "He that overcometh shall not be hurt 
of the second death." "Blessed and holy is he 
that hath part in the first resurrection; on such 
the second death hath no power." "And I saw 
the dead, small and great, stand before God; 
and the books were opened: and another book 
was opened, which is the book of life; and the 
dead were judged out of those things which were 
written in the books, according to their works. 
And the sea gave up the dead which were in 
it; and death and hades (R.V.) delivered up 
the dead which were in them; and they were 
judged every man according to their works. 
And death and hades were cast into the 
lake of fire. This is the second death. And 
whosoever was not found written in the book 

R1478 : page 363 

of life was cast into the lake of fire." "I am 
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. 
I will give unto him who is athirst of the water 
of life freely. He that overcometh shall inherit 
all things, and I will be his God, and he 
shall be my son. But the fearful, and unbelieving, 
and the abominable, and sorcerers, and 
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in 

R1478 : page 364 

the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: 
which is the second death."— Rev. 2:7-11; 
20:6,12-15; 21:6-8. 

The first death is recorded in the first part 
of the Bible, and the present phrase— "the 
second death"— is never once met with until 
the last part of the Bible is reached, thousands 
of years afterwards. This fact is highly suggestive. 
Before there was any second death 
there was the second sin (that is, the second 
"sin unto death"); before there was any second 
sin there was the second judgment (that is, 
the second judgment initiated); and before 
there was any second judgment there was the 
second life (that is, the second life in its initial 
stage). To deprecate the use of any of these 
phrases— the second life, the second judgment, 



or the second sin— would be to deprecate the 
use of their cognate phrase— "the second 
death." 

The recipient of the first life was tried and 
proved unfaithful. The recipients of the second 
life are being tried and they may individually 
prove either faithful or unfaithful. Their 
life is untainted when received, their knowledge 
is ultimately complete, their environment 
is appropriate, and their opportunity is ultimately 
adequate. He who proves faithful does 
so in accordance with his own will, and he 
who proves unfaithful does the same. To both 
is the promise made: "Be thou faithful unto 
death, and I will give thee a crown of life." 
On the faithful "the second death hath no 
power," they "shall not be hurt of the second 
death," their names will not be "blotted out 
of the book of life," their rank in resurrection 
is "the first," they are "heirs of God, and 
joint-heirs with Christ." "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with me in my throne, 
even as I also overcame and am set down with 
my Father in his throne."— Rev. 3:21. 

On the other hand, the opposite of all this 
is true of the unfaithful. The second death 
has power over them, they shall be hurt of the 
second death, their names shall be blotted out 
of the book of life, and they shall have their 
part in the lake which burneth with fire and 
brimstone. Receiving a "crown" and sitting 
on a "throne" are symbols of the regal, judicial 
and sacerdotal authority and power of the 
faithful, and "the lake which burneth with fire 
and brimstone" is a symbol of the instrumentality 
which effects the doom of the unfaithful. 
The sum of the consequents of divine judgment, 
so far as the faithful are concerned, is 
endless life, and the sum of the consequents of 
divine judgment, so far as the unfaithful are 
concerned, is endless death. 

It is very easy for any Universalist to say: 
"These reprobates of men will have to undergo 
the horrors of the second death, but will rise 
again, for there shall be a resurrection of the 
dead, both of the just and unjust."— Acts 24:15. 

But how does he know that any man will rise 
again from the second death? No inspired 
man has yet said so, and the testimony of an 
uninspired man in such a case goes for nothing. 
If there is any inspired testimony on this 
point why is it not presented? Any child may 
quote as above, but the Apostle Paul does not 
even mention the second death in that passage, 
far less does he give in it any testimony in favor 
of a resurrection from the second death. 



"A resurrection of the dead" is one thing, and 
a resurrection of the twice dead is quite another 
thing. Before there can be a resurrection from 
a second death there must be a second death, 
before there can be a second death there must 
be a second life, and before there can be a 
second life there must be a resurrection from 
the first death. It is the resurrection from the 
first death which the Apostle there affirms, and 
therefore his affirmation does not favor one jot 
any Universalist's conclusion. As it is with 
Paul's noble testimony there, so it is with all 
other inspired testimonies: they have to be 
wrested from their original and legitimate uses 
before they can be made to favor, even in appearance, 
the groundless dogma of a resurrection 
from the second death. 

"If we sin wilfully after that we have received 
the [full] knowledge of the truth, there 
remaineth no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain 
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery 
indignation, which shall devour the 
adversaries." JOSEPH MOFFITT. 



"Let us fear lest any of us come short' 



page 365 

A STUDY IN THE GOSPEL OF LUKE. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1478 : page 365 

THE BIRTH OF CHRIST. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XIIL, DEC. 25, LUKE 2:8-20. 

Golden Text— "Behold, I bring you good tidings of 
great joy."— Luke 2:10. 

The story of this lesson is one so familiar as 



to require no special comment, and yet in its 
simple details lies the hope of the whole world. 
Four thousand years previous the birth of this 
child was promised, and all the way along during 
those forty centuries some faithful souls continued 
to trust in the promises and to look for 
the salvation to be brought about through him. 
We may surely take for granted that the humble 
shepherds to whom the message of the 
Lord's advent first came were men who thus 
hoped in the promise of God; for to such, and 
to such only, the Lord discloses his purposes. 

These men were quietly tending their flocks 
by night when suddenly the angel of the Lord 
came upon them, and the glory of the Lord 
shone around about them; and they were sore 
afraid. (Verse 9.) But their fear was soon 
overcome by the message of the angel, contained 
in our golden text, but which, strange 
to say, our lesson committee has only partially 
quoted, leaving out one of the grandest features 
of the message— viz., that it was to be to 
all people. 

The message reads, "Fear not; for, behold, 
I bring you good tidings, of GREAT JOY, which 
shall be to ALL PEOPLE." It will be observed 
that the blessedness of these tidings is 
cumulative: first it is "good tidings;" then 
it is "great joy;" and then the crowning feature 
of it is that it is "to all people"— not only 
to you shepherds who are this night looking 
for the hope of Israel, but for all your friends 
and relations and neighbors far and near; and 
to all their friends and relatives and neighbors, 
both to those who now live and to those who 
shall live, as well as to all those who slumber in 
death. 

Blessed tidings! Hearken to the gladsome 
sound: "For unto you is born this day in the 
city of David a Savior, which is Christ the 
Lord." (Verse 11.) Then he was to be a savior 
to all people: so the Scriptures clearly affirm, 
saying that, by the grace of God, he tasted 
death for every man, and that he gave himself 
a ransom for all, to be testified in due time- 
to all. (Heb. 2:9; 1 Tim. 2:6.) The testimony, 
however, is quite as necessary to the salvation of 
the sinner as the fact that Christ gave himself a 
ransom for all. The favor of salvation will not 
be forced upon any; but the testimony that it 
has been provided for every man, on condition 
of his acceptance of the favor upon God's 
terms, is to be given to every man, for his acceptance 
or rejection. And though millions 
of the race for whom Christ died have gone 
down to the grave without such testimony, still 



the fact remains that the testimony shall be 
given in due time— which due time, to all such, 
must be after their awakening from death. 

And to this agree the words of the Lord: 
"The hour is coming in which all that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of 
man and shall come forth; they that have done 
good [who during the present life have come 
into judgment and who have passed their trial 
successfully], unto the resurrection of life [the 
full reward of the faithful. Such will be the 
overcoming Church]: and they that have done 
evil unto the resurrection of judgment." (John 5:25-29.) 
That is, the latter class will come 
forth from the grave to have the truth testified 
to them then, for their acceptance or rejection; 
and their final judgment of worthiness or unworthiness 
of life will be based upon their 
course under trial after the truth has been testified 
to them— in the Millennial age. Thus the 
angel of the Lord preached the good tidings of 
the restitution of all things to the shepherds on 
the plain of Bethlehem. 

VERSE 12. Then they told where and how 
they should find this bud of promise, so that 
when they would see him they might feel doubly 
assured that this was he. 

VERSES 13,14. "Then suddenly there was 
with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host 
praising God, saying, "Glory to God in the 
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward 
men." This shows how the angels of God are 
interested in the affairs of men, and how they 
sympathize with us and rejoice over our prosperity. 
And this reminds us of other statements 
to the effect that there is joy in heaven 
among the angels over one sinner that repenteth 
(Luke 15:7); and again that they are 
earnest students of the plan for human salvation; 
and that they are all ministering spirits 
sent forth to minister to them who shall be 
heirs of salvation. (1 Pet. 1:12; Heb. 1:14.) 

R1478 : page 366 

Thus we see them to be creatures of God full of 
loving benevolence even toward a fallen race, 
and esteeming it a privilege to serve the heirs 

R1479 : page 366 

of this salvation, although they know, as they 
studiously look into God's plan, that some of 
this fallen race are by and by to be highly exalted, 
even above the angels who never sinned. 
Thus we see their humble recognition of the 



right of the Creator to do what he will with 

his own, and their cheerful and joyful acquiescence 

in his perfect will, which they know to 

be determined by his unerring wisdom and his 

fathomless love. Oh! what universal joy will 

prevail when the whole family of God in heaven 

and in earth is brought into fullest harmony 

under the headship of Jehovah's Anointed. 

VERSES 15,18 show the teachable attitude of 
the shepherds: they recognized the angels and 
their message as from the Lord, and, their fears 
being allayed, their hopes revived and their 
faith increased, and they felt that they must go 
at once and see this which had come to pass. 
And when they had so determined, a strange 
star (evidently a meteor, as it could not have 
been a fixed star) appeared, moving in the direction 
which the angel had told them to go; 
and they followed the star until they reached 
Bethlehem, when it stood still over the place 
where the young child was. And when they 
saw him they worshiped him and presented to 
him gold and frankincense and myrrh, recognizing 
in him the long-promised Messiah. 
And being warned of God in a dream, they disregarded 
the request of Herod to inform him 
of the whereabouts of the new-born king, and 
so departed into their own country another way. 
But as they went they published abroad the 
good tidings which the angels had brought to 
them, and how they had actually seen him of 
whom the prophets testified. 

VERSE 19. "But Mary [mother-like] kept 
all these things and pondered them in her 
heart," doubtless calling to mind also the 
message of the angel to her. (Luke 1:28-35.) 
Again and again we seem to hear her say, "My 
soul doth magnify the Lord;... for he hath 
regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: 
...he that is mighty hath done to me great 
things, and holy is his name."— Luke 1:46-49. 

VERSE 20. The shepherds returned to their 
flocks, fully assured of the wonderful truth that 
the promised seed of the woman who was to 
bruise the serpent's head had really come. 
And they rejoiced and glorified God for all the 
things that they had heard and seen, as they 
were told unto them. 



R1479 : page 366 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM EARNEST WORKERS. 



page 366 

Illinois. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Sister Cox and I 

are both well, and are having very good success. 
I am delighted with this place, and think 
we will do much better in country towns than 
in large cities, as the people are more plain 
and seem to do more thinking. Before noon 
of the first day I went out, I sold a DAWN in 
every house except two, and have been doing 
well ever since. All praise be to the Lord for 
using me in this way. 

I have not the words to express the comfort 
and peace I enjoy, when carrying the good 
news to others. Surely we are the Lord's 
favored people, and are living in a grand time. 
I have also been doing quite well among the 
Germans. In some houses I can sell both the 
German and the English DAWN. 

Yours in the Master's service, 

MRS. L. P. BEELER. 



R1479 : page 366 

Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your kind letter 
received— for which I thank you, as words of 
comfort and sympathy are especially welcome 
to me in my helpless condition. I am glad to 
tell you that though I am stricken, yet I am not 
cast down; for I realize that underneath me 
are the everlasting arms, and I am holden up 
and sustained. I have entirely lost my voice, 
so that I cannot sing a note. I used to pass 
away a deal of time singing the sweet Hymns 
of Millennial Dawn; but if I cannot sing here, 
I shall soon sing the song of Moses and the 
Lamb, and tell Redemption's story in a nobler, 
sweeter strain. I am kept in sweet peace, believing 
it will not be long before my Father 
calls me home, and I shall be with him whom, 
not having seen, I love. 

I cannot in my present condition pledge myself 
to send any stated sum to the Tract Fund 
at any particular time, but I would have you 
know that to me it is more blessed to give than 
to receive. I am so glad to know my beloved 
brethren and sisters remember me at the throne 
of grace. Ever yours in the blessed gospel hope, 
C. CHIPPERFIELD. 



New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been meeting 
with fair success, I think, considering the 
heavy rains to contend with— eighty orders in 
five days. Nothing in the world does me so 
much good as to meet some who are interested 

R1479 : page 367 

in these precious truths; and I know you will 
be glad to hear that the Lord has of late given 
me that privilege. One gentleman recently 
said, "You could not bring me any books that 
I would appreciate more than these, and I 
know I will believe every word of them, as I 
feel it is God's due time for us to know of the 
coming Kingdom." 

I have read the 45th Psalm many times in 
the light of the suggestions offered in your letter, 
and I think the attitude of the Church is 
beautifully pictured there. To think of being 
called out of our [earthly] father's house [the 
world], and of being on the way to the King's 
palace! Blessed, indeed, will be those who 
have the privilege of entering, and how thankful 
I am that the Lord has granted me the light, 
and the grace to walk in it. 

Yours in his love and service, 

JENNIE CLARK. 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Lord sends 
me much of blessing. Just in the last days of 
my stay in Buffalo he led me to three more 
who are feeding upon the blessed Bible truths 
to which DAWN has led their thoughts. I do 
want to tell you a little about them. 

One has for years been one of my most loved 
friends, a prominent temperance and mission 
worker. Early last fall I tried to get her to 
read the DAWNS, but she said she had no 
time to read anything but her Bible. Later I 
went to her again, and urged her very strongly 
to read the DAWNS; but she had just become 
deeply interested in another special mission 
work, and again declared that she had no time. 
I have been in the habit of visiting her frequently, 
but felt this summer that my time must 
be spent with those who had time to hear the 
truth. So I did not go to see her again until 
a few days before I left the city, and then went 
only to bid her good-bye. Imagine, then, how 
glad I was when she met me at the door and 



exclaimed, "Oh! those blessed, blessed books. 
I never was so blessed in all my life as I have 
been in reading them." It seems that in our 
talk, early in the summer, I had mentioned the 
fact that through reading them many infidels 
had been brought to a belief in Christ. Her 
work a little later bringing her in contact with 
an infidel whose arguments she could not meet, 
she bethought herself of the DAWNS, and borrowed 
from a neighbor the first and second 
volumes to lend to this infidel. In glancing 
through them she caught, here and there, a 
thought that held her, and she did not lend 
them, but read them herself. 

From one of the other two, Brother Rogers 
last year took an order for DAWN, Vol.; but 
before he came to deliver it, her pastor had 
told her it was a dangerous book to have in the 
house; and when Brother R. came she refused 
to take the book. A day or two afterward her 
married daughter came in and handed her another 
copy of Vol. I., saying, "Here, Ma, is 
a book I bought of an agent. I don't like it, 
but I guess you will." The thought struck her 
that she should read the book, since it came to 
her in spite of her first refusal to have it. Since 
she has read it, her own words are, "It was 
food such as I had never before received from 
either pastor or teacher." She then lent it to 
a friend who found it equally good. 

Both are confined at home pretty closely, so 
they could not attend our meetings; but a day 
or two before leaving the city I took my large 
chart down, and spent a very delightful three 
hours and a half in explaining it to them, and 
answering their questions. Found them, I believe, 
ripe for the truth, and rejoicing in each 
little bit that is made clear. Both will study 
the truth carefully, and walk in the light they 
receive. 

The cold weather seems to be nigh upon us. 
I must sew next week, and then labor in harvest 
work every minute that I am able. I 
wish I might be able to do as well as sister 
McPhail, but I suppose I must be always content 
to do a little. Perhaps were I permitted 
to be a really efficient worker, I should get to 
thinking of myself more highly than I ought 
to think. The Lord knows me better than I 
know myself, and will doubtless grant me all 
the success I am able to bear. 

Much love to Sister Russell and to all the 
dear ones at Allegheny. Yours in the Master's 
service, MRS. M. R. PECK. 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I take the first 
opportunity of fulfilling my promise, and herewith 
enclose Money Order for Young's Concordance, 
and the surplus for anything you 
please. Our little band will all send together 
in a month or so subscriptions to TOWER and 
Tract Fund. 

You will be pleased to learn of our spiritual 

welfare. Brother W has just returned home 

after a week's stay with us. We have the meetings 
in our home, and he was much impressed 
by the quiet work which is being done. I feel 
assured that the Lord sent him, and in so doing 
has blessed us all; and I trust he may be 
stimulated to further work in his neighborhood. 
He has thrown light upon the difference of 
colporteur work here and in the United States, 
having spent some years there himself. Colporteurs 
are looked upon with suspicion here, 
being either connected with Evangelical Associations 

R1479 : page 368 

or hawkers of encyclopaedias and larger 
works. Whereas in America much of the book 
selling is done in this manner, in England all 
has to be done through booksellers. Still I 

R1480 : page 368 

think we might be doing more than we are, although 
much is being done in a quiet way. 

[The fact is that America is overrun by book 
agents, and the people often feel very much 
annoyed by them. It would seem, therefore, 
that if there is but little done in England 
in that line, that field would be all the better 
for our Colporteurs. The people would give 
them a heartier welcome than here, where two 
or three sometimes call in one day. And we 
heard recently that nearly four thousand copies 
of a high-priced American book, containing 
much unpopular error, were sold not long since 
in Dublin, Ireland. The sale of this book at 
a high price gives us great confidence that at 
its low price thousand of DAWNS could be sold 
there. 

We find that many, even here, do not make 
a success of the Colporteur work until they 
have received some personal instruction from 
some experienced and successful worker. There 
is a particular "knack" required that all do 
not possess naturally, but which can be acquired 



by intelligent perseverance. When the way 
opens, we hope to send some experienced 
Brother from here to Great Britain in order to 
start the work there. --EDITOR.] 

I was much blessed by the letter from the 
good "three score and ten" brother. Yes, I 
am sure there is no soul hungering and thirsting 
after the Kingdom of God, that will not be 
filled sooner or later. 

The TOWERS are very precious; but I think I 
must be selfish, for I often wish that, with the 
exception of the encouraging letters from brethren, 
all discussion could be avoided. I know 
words of warning are necessary to the weak 
ones and children, but I feel sure that none of 
the Lord's little ones will be led astray by false 
teachers. And Oh! I do so love the spirit that 
has prevailed all along in the TOWER, and I 
dread anything that does not extend the same 
charity to others that we ourselves so much 
need. I seem so to revel in the beautiful pastures 
that I can only pity those who prefer to 
feed on husks. 

[We are quite in sympathy with the general 
drift of this sentiment, and the readers of the 
TOWER are witnesses that its warnings are not 
personalities nor on trifles, but respecting the 
fundamentals of the Gospel and based upon the 
plainest teachings of the Scriptures. The denouncing 
of the scribes and pharisees as hypocrites 
and the cleansing of the typical Temple 
were not the most pleasing parts of our Lord's 
work at the First Advent, but they were necessary; 
and so here the warnings are not the 
pleasantest part of our duty, but they are a part 
of it, nevertheless— "Reprove, rebuke, exhort." 
(2 Tim. 4:2; Tit. 2:14,15.) Experience has 
proved that some of the Lord's people are in need 
of words of warning in order that they be not 
deceived. Facts are more than theory. God 
does not promise to keep his little ones free 
from temptation. The Lord is seeking for his 
Bride such as love him supremely, and he permits 
Satan to promulgate seductive doctrines 
and to be successful in deceiving all but this 
special class. The Apostle recognizes this in 
his warning— "Keep yourselves in the love of 
God." (Jude 21.) Each one, in order to be 
kept, must be fully consecrated and must abide 
on the Rock. 

That some of the consecrated can be and are 
being deceived is shown by a recent experience 
which will be related in our next issue. This one, 
and others of whom we know, have been saved 



from error by words of warning and reproof, and 

brought back into the way. The Ninety-First 

Psalm intimates that human instrumentalities 

are used in bearing up those in danger of stumbling, 

as well as in the upbuilding of those who 

have remained faithful.— "He shall give his 

angels [messengers] a charge [a warning] concerning 

thee, ...lest thou dash thy foot 

against a stone." This is part of the ministry 

of the saints. Otherwise there would be no 

meaning to the words of the Apostle James (5:20): 

"He which converteth a sinner [wanderer] 

from the error of his way shall save a 

soul from death. "-EDITOR.] 

Most loving greetings to yourself and Sister 
Russell from all here. A. P. RILEY. 



page 368 



New York City. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been working 
in Mount Vernon during the past week: 
sold 160 DAWNS-making about 800 sold there 
in a little less than a month's time. Many of 
them, I trust, are in good hands, and will bring 
forth fruit to the Master's praise. 

I expect to deliver in Mount Vernon tomorrow 
and part of Tuesday, and desire to 
spend the remainder of the week in the interests 
of the meetings— calling on some of those 
to whom I sold the books last winter, giving 
out notices, etc. I have hopes that the meetings 
on the 27th will be quite well attended 
and that you will have large, intelligent and 
appreciative audiences. 

The package of Tracts has been received. 
They will, I think, come in very good. 

Truly yours, S. D. ROGERS. 



page 370 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 

It has been decided that hereafter only one 
tract subscription shall be included in a TOWER 
subscription, but that all who are thus subscribers 
to ZION'S WATCH TOWER and The 
Old Theology Quarterly may order as many 
tracts free as they can use judiciously— except 
those in booklet form, leatherette bound, viz., 
Nos. 8, 11 and 16. 

So, then, order all that you can use judiciously 
of the following:— 

No. 1. Do the Scriptures Teach that Eternal 
Torment is the Wages of Sin? 

No. 2. Calamities— Why God Permits Them. 

No. 3. Protestants, Awake! How Priestcraft 
now Operates. 

No. 4. Dr. Talmage's View of the Millennium 
—with comments. 

No. 5. Bible Study and Students' Helps. 

No. 6. The Hope of the Groaning Creation. 

No. 7. The Wonderful Story. 

No. 9. Swedish translation of No. 1. 

No. 10. A Broad Basis for Christian Union. 

No. 12. The Divine Plan. 

No. 13. Norwegian translation of No. 1. 

No. 14. A Dark Cloud and its Silver Lining. 
Arp's Comments on MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



No. 15. Thy Word is Truth. A Reply to 
Robert Ingersoll. 

OUR THREE BOOKLETS. 

"THE WONDERFUL STORY."-Poem, 156 verses. 

—The Gospel in verse.— Fifteen outline illustrations. 

—Leatherette binding.— Choice 

for children; interesting also to the matured. 

"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF THE BETTER SACRIFICES." 

— 104 pages.— Leatherette binding. 

—Just the thing for matured Christians— 

"Meat in due season." 
"THY Word IS TRUTH. "-An answer to Robert 

Ingersoll's Charges against Christianity.— 

Just the thing for Infidels and for skeptically 

inclined Christians. 

These booklets sell at the hands of Colporteurs, 
the three for fifty cents, delivered. We 
supply them to TOWER readers at ten cents 
each; and to them or other Colporteurs at 
seventy-five cents per dozen— post-paid. To 
obtain the Colporteur rates, order not less than 
a half-dozen of any one kind of the booklets. 
We have them put up in packs of six and twelve 
—each kind separately. 

THE WATCH TOWER FOR 1893. 

So far as possible we prefer to have subscriptions 
date from January each year; but where 
this is not convenient we are pleased to have 
it otherwise. Those who cannot pay now, but 
who expect to do so later, and who desire that 
their papers continue uninterruptedly, will 
please drop a card saying so. Each can see just 
how his account stands by examining the date 
on the address label of his last paper. These 
we will correct every month hereafter. 

Those who from age, accident or other misfortune 
are unable to afford to subscribe are 
still welcome to receive the WATCH TOWER free 
as "The Lord's Poor," if they describe themselves 
and make the request yearly. (Such are 
marked with a sign— thus: +— on the address 
label.) This offer is not meant for those whose 
inability to pay arises from the spending of a 
larger sum for tobacco, etc.; but all who are 
really of the class described are as welcome to 
the TOWER regularly as though they paid for it. 

But it is not too much to ask such to renew 
their request each year on a postal card. If 
you have once described your case and are 
marked (thus: +) on your label you need not 
explain again; for we understand that your circumstances 
are still the same. Such may simply 



say, "Please renew my subscription as 
heretofore," and we shall understand them. 
But others not so marked (+) should explain, for 
we have not understood them heretofore. 
Again, let us request that all the "Lord's 
Poor" renewals come in promptly before January 
'93. Those who asked the TOWER free 
during other months get it only until December 
'92 unless they now, in December, ask its 
renewal. "Ask and ye shall receive" is God's 
method— which we adopt. 



R1480 : page 371 

VOL. XIII. DECEMBER 15, 1892. NO. 24. 

"HIS WAY IS PERFECT." 



"As for God, his way is perfect: the Word of the Lord 
is tried: he is a buckler to all those that put their trust 
in him. For who is God save the Lord? or who is a rock 
save our God?"— Psa. 18:30,31. 

God's way is his plan or purpose, that which 
he purposes to accomplish and which he is 
steadily working out according to the counsel 
of his own will. Men also have various plans 
and purposes of their own which they try to 
work out as nearly as possible. Some men 
purpose to amass a fortune; some to acquire a 
liberal education and vastly to increase their 
mental capacity and power; others to gain 
fame and popular applause, or social or political 
preferment, etc., etc. But to most men 
the way they choose proves unsatisfactory after 
a brief trial, and they turn restlessly from one 
way to another; and even when they pursue 
one way to the end they realize that it has been 
an unsatisfactory way and that the end is not 
worthy of the strife necessary to gain it. 

Then again men have their various ways or 
theories as to how God will or ought to accomplish 
the world's salvation. Some claim that 
it will be accomplished by a process of evolution, 
and that it is due to the race by right. 
Some of these blasphemously claim that the 
present degradation of the world is directly 
chargeable to God, who, they say, is the real 
author of all the sin and wickedness we see in 
the world— that he made men so, and is therefore 
bound in justice to bring them up to a 
better condition. Then there are others who 



claim that God has predestinated the vast majority 
of mankind to eternal torment without 
any will or choice of their own, their doom 
having been unalterably sealed before they were 
born, while a small minority were likewise 
unalterably elected to eternal salvation and 
happiness. 

But these and various other incongruous 
theories are only the ways of men, which have 
no foundation in the Word of God, except as 
men pervert that Word. It is a serious matter 
for any of God's children to accept or entertain 
such views of his character and plan when 
it is so clearly stated in his inspired Word; 
and any one who can hear our heavenly Father's 
character thus traduced without feeling 
or expressing his righteous indignation is disloyal 
to God and unworthy to bear the name 
of Christ. If we have so much regard for the 
friendship of those who advocate such views 
of God's character that we cannot reprove 
their course, we also rank ourselves with the 
enemies of the Lord, and he will surely so regard 
us. Such indifference to God and his 
truth shows clearly that there is something 
wrong at heart; and sooner or later such will 
drift into the outer darkness unless they promptly 
repent and resolutely determine to make no 
compromises with error and to cultivate no 
friendships with the enemies of the Lord. 

But, "As for God, his way is perfect;" and 
his Word clearly sets forth his way to all the 
simple minded ones who take him at his word 
and who have no fine-spun theories of their 
own to establish. In coming to God's Word 
it is always important to remember that our 
attitude should be that of the disciple, and not 

R1480 : page 372 

the teacher. Such an attitude is itself a long 
step in the direction of a knowledge of the 
truth; for it is written that God resisteth the 
proud, but giveth grace to the humble. (James 4:6.) 
If we come to his Word as reverent 
students, expecting to find therein the delineation 
of the pure and righteous character and 
plan of our God, that plan and character will 
be revealed to us; but if we come to it in a 
captious spirit and with impure and unholy 
thoughts and ambitions, we have just the kind 
of poor imperfect brains that can warp and 
twist the Scriptures to suit our own ideas. If we 
put on the colored glasses of prejudice we can 
read God's Word as seen through them only. 
And this is what the Psalmist implied when 



he said, "With the merciful thou wilt show 

thyself merciful; with an upright man thou 

wilt show thyself upright; with the pure thou 

wilt show thyself pure; and with the froward 

thou wilt show thyself froward. For thou wilt 

save the humbled people, but wilt bring down 

high looks." (Psa. 18:25-27.) And again we 

read, "A scorner seeketh wisdom and findeth it 

not, but knowledge is easy unto him that understandeth;" 

and, "There is a way which 

seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof 

are the ways of death."— Prov. 14:6,12. 

O! how we need to beware of "high looks" 
and of the pride that goeth before destruction 
and of the haughty spirit that precedeth a fall. 
(Prov. 16:18.) For if in pride we go about to 
establish our own ways, and do not fully submit 
ourselves to the right ways of the Lord, we 
will surely deceive ourselves and be led away 
by the error of the wicked, so that God's 
way or plan, as viewed through the colored 
glasses of our ambitions and prejudices, will 
seem to our distorted vision as the Psalmist describes 
—unmerciful, impure and perverse, instead 
of as it really is— merciful and holy and 
righteous altogether. There is nothing more 
dangerous than pride, whether it be manifested 
in a love of display or in ambitions to be great 
or to be thought well of by others. If we are 
ambitious to be more generous than God, and 
go about to establish the idea of the absolute 
certainty of the everlasting salvation of every 
individual, when God plainly speaks to the 
contrary; or if we ignore God's appointed 
means of salvation, which is by faith in the 
precious blood of Christ shed for the remission 
of sins, and endeavor to climb up to life by 
some other way, and to teach others to make 
the same effort; or if we repudiate the doctrine 
of the original perfection of man, who was 
created in the image of God, and also that of 
his own free will he fell into sin and thereby 
incurred its just penalty— death, and not eternal 
torment; or if we seek out any other human 
invention contrary to the Word of God, 
and go about to establish it, it is pride that is 
asserting itself; and if it is not promptly humbled 
it will surely and shortly end in complete 
alienation from God. 

Dearly beloved, let us fear lest a promise being 
left us of entering into God's rest— into 
the rest of abiding faith in his way, his glorious 
plan— any of us should come short of it, 
and instead of calmly and confidently resting 
in God's way and in the blessed hope of its 
glorious outcome, we be left in confusion and 



doubt upon the whole subject. 

But if you have thus far stood firmly in the 
faith of God's way, we are persuaded better 
things; and if with the Psalmist you can say, 
"My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed" 
(Psa. 57:7): if your heart is established in love 
and reverence and faith in the sure Word of 
God, then with the Psalmist you may also say, 
"For thou wilt light my candle: the Lord my 
God will enlighten my darkness." (Psa. 18:28.) 
Yea, has it not been even so? Surely hitherto 
the Lord hath led us. The language of the 
prophet applies to all those humble and faithful 
ones whom the Lord has been leading— 
"For by thee I have run through a troop [of 
opposing enemies]; and by my God have I 
leaped over a wall" [of bondage, into the 
glorious liberty of a son of God].— Psa. 18:29. 

Beloved, have you been thus overcoming? 
have you been following the Lord's leading? 
have you found and are you still abiding in the 
sweet rest of faith in his plan, in his way, not 
your own? "As for God, his way is perfect:" 
it is just and merciful and benevolent and wise 
and practicable and sure of a glorious termination. 
"The Word of the Lord is tried:" 

R1480 : page 373 

when fully understood it will stand the test of 

every argument that could be formed against 

it as to its justice, its wisdom or its benevolence. 

Of this we are fully assured by our 

Lord, who prophetically declared that the testimony 

of those who come to a full knowledge 

of God's plan will be— "Great and marvelous 

are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and 

true are thy ways, thou King of saints."— 

Rev. 15:3. 

"The Lord is a buckler [a defence] to all 
those that trust in him; for who is God [is 
mighty] save the Lord? or who is a rock [a 
safe anchorage to our souls] save our God?" 
There is no other one to whom we may anchor 
our faith and hope; but, securely anchored to 
him, we may trust and not be afraid, and may 
sweetly rest under the shadow of his wing. 
"The Lord liveth; and blessed be our rock; 
and let the Lord of our salvation be exalted." 



R1480 : page 373 

FAITH VERSUS SUPERSTITION. 



There is a vast difference between these two 
principles which is not always discerned among 
the children of God, so that a superstition 
based upon a fundamental error of doctrine 
often passes current for superior and wonderful 
faith. And such persons are often lionized 
among their brethren as saints of remarkable attainments, 
while the more logical and thoughtful, 
who exercise a more real faith, are often far 
less esteemed among their brethren, though 
doubtless more approved of God. 

Real faith always has a good, sound, reasonable 
basis. It is simply an established confidence. 
You have faith in your friend because, 
you say, you have known him for years: you 
have observed and mentally noted his principles 
of action, and have found them uniformly 
the same; he has always been just, true, benevolent 
and kind; for many years and under 
many tests you have observed his steady faithfulness 
to these principles, and so your confidence 
or faith has been so established that you 
never think of doubting him. You know, judging 

R1481 : page 373 

from the past, that he will always be true 
to these principles, and hence can often tell 
just what his future course will be in various 
contingencies that may arise wherein these principles 
may be involved. 

Just so it is with those who have become acquainted 
with God through his Word and his 
providences. From year to year their confidence 
or faith has grown and taken deeper and 
deeper root, until every promise of God is now 
to them yea and amen in Christ Jesus. They 
know that what he has promised he is able to 
perform and that he will do it, and they make 
all calculations accordingly and live and work 
in this confident hope. Such a faith is a real 
faith: it has been real from the beginning, but 
it has matured and strengthened with the proofs 
of passing years. Such a faith is not mere surmise, 
imagination or guesswork: it has a sound, 
logical basis. You have drawn certain positive 
conclusions from a logical argument based upon 
an infallible and undeniable premise; and 
consequently you have full faith in those 
conclusions. 

But superstition, unlike faith, has no substantial 
basis; nor are its conclusions reached 
by logical deductions. Superstitions originate 
in the diseased brains of fallible men, and upon 



no subject are they so prevalent as upon religious 

subjects. Here they are legion. They 

are in direct opposition to true faith and should 

be carefully avoided by every sincere child of 

God. 

And not only should we avoid the superstitions 
themselves, but we should be careful to 
so frame our conversation that our true faith, 
minus all superstition, may be apparent to all. 
As instances of the lack of such care, we often 
hear such expressions as, The Lord told me 
thus and so, or, The Lord showed me this or 
that, or, The Holy Spirit taught or showed me 
thus and so, when the more careful Christian, 
who has a true faith and who is carefully instructed 
in the Word of God, often sees that 
this supposed or claimed teaching of the Lord 
or of the Holy Spirit is a fundamental or dangerous 
error, which is being thus put forth with 

R1481 : page 374 

the stamp of divinity forged upon it. Thus to 
stamp and send out error, if done intelligently 
and with a purpose to deceive, would be willfully 
to counterfeit the truth— a very criminal 
offence against God; but many very good people 
do it quite ignorantly. And what we are 
saying now is merely a caution and exhortation 
for such to greater carefulness in this respect. 

Let us not be sure the Lord has shown us 
this or that item of doctrine or course of conduct 
unless we are able to put our finger on the 
testimony of the Lord which has borne this 
witness to us, so that the faith of our friends, 
as well as our own faith, may stand, not in 
the questionable wisdom of fallible humanity, 
but in the power of God's own sure testimony. 
The Lord reproves very sharply some who recklessly 
use the expression "The Lord hath said" 
to give weight to their own imaginings or opinions. 
-Ezek. 22:28. 

Beloved, let us not cultivate the habit of 
speaking in that irreverently familiar way of 
the Lord which is becoming more and more 
common among many of the subtle adversaries 
of the truth, of saying, The Lord told me, as 
though he had spoken to you face to face, or 
through some medium other than he has appointed 
for all his saints. Let us do all things 
with a view to edifying, and not in a manner 
to "darken counsel by words without knowledge." 
(Job 38:2.) "Except ye utter by the 
tongue words easy to be understood, how shall 
it be known what is spoken?" (1 Cor. 14:9.) 
And "Let no man deceive you with vain 



words; for because of these things cometh the 
wrath of God upon the children of disobedience." 
-Eph. 5:6. 

And, further, do not aspire to be a man or 
woman of "wonderful" faith: just be contented 
with a simple, child-like faith that believes 
every thing God says and refuses to believe 
what he does not say on matters of divine revelation. 
There is nothing wonderful or specially 
praiseworthy about a real faith. On the 
common principles of reasoning we ought to 
have full confidence in every item of God's 
Word, and should continually act upon it. Let 
our rejoicing be in the testimony of our conscience, 
that with the greatest simplicity and 
sincerity (not with fleshly wisdom, but by the 
grace of God) we have spent our lives in this 
world. Especially should we be sincere toward 
the household of faith, whose development and 
perfecting should be our deepest concern. 
MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1480 : page 374 

WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 

SECRETARY'S REPORT. 

FROM DECEMBER 1ST, 1891, TO DECEMBER 1ST, 1892. 



Nothing, perhaps, furnishes so sure an indication 
of love for the truth as zeal to serve it— 
financially and otherwise. Judged from every 
standpoint, the past year has been one of great 
refreshment and of great spiritual development 
among our readers. Not, of course, with all— 
for, like other years, it has witnessed the turning 
of some from the light into the "outer 
darkness" of this world's wisdom— but to those 
who have been earnestly running the race it 
has been one of deepening experience. Undoubtedly 
the following of the Apostle's instruction, 
to lay by on the first day of the week 
according as the Lord hath prospered each 
(1 Cor. 16:2), has had its beneficial influence 
in the direction of this heart-warming mentioned: 
and the increase financially, and the 
increased effort made for the blessing of others, 
are clearly seen in the report following. The 
spiritual tone, as indicated by the wonderful 
letters we receive daily, is fully in harmony, and 
the fact is that the warmest letters are from 



those who joyfully share in one way or another 
the burden and heat of the day. 

Cash receipts from "Good Hopes" and other 
donations, including sale of Olive-wood Mementoes, 
$8298.31. 

Amount expended in forwarding the truth 
in various ways— tracts, postage, etc., etc., 
$8298.31. 

Since these sums are exactly alike, it becomes 
proper to explain that the Fund had really spent 

R1480 : page 375 

more money than its receipts, and would have 
shown an indebtedness had not a deeply interested 
friend of the cause learned of the situation 
and made up the deficiency, enabling us to 
start the new year free from debt. 

The following is a summarized statement of 
what was done with the above money in circulating 
the truth in the way of tract distribution. 

Total number of Old Theology Tracts and 
Sample TOWERS circulated free, by mail and 
otherwise, 536,503. 

As tracts are usually reported by pages we 
will so state the circulation. 

Total Amount in tract pages, 18,569,392. 

Besides this large showing in Tract distribution, 
the fund supplied large numbers of the 
Lord's children, too poor to buy, with DAWNS 
and TOWERS free, over 70,000 copies of the 
WATCH TOWER going to our regular poor list. 

It will be noticed that the above report 
makes no mention of the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
work being prosecuted chiefly through colporteurs. 
The reason is that, so far as possible, 
the DAWN is made to pay its own way— the 
price at which it is supplied to colporteurs just 
about covering cost of publishing and postage 
and incidental expenses. The Tract Fund 
therefore needs not to be hindered for this great 
and important part of the work, except that it 
supplies a credit account to enable some of the 
Brethren and Sisters to get a start in this work. 

Trusting that the year beginning may be as 
blessed and prosperous as the one just closed, 
I have the honor to subscribe myself your servant 
and the Lord's, 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, Secretary. 



R1481 : page 375 

OBEDIENCE BETTER THAN SACRIFICE. 



How necessary it is that we all hear and 
obey the voice of our good Shepherd. "My 
sheep hear my voice, and they follow me," was 
the Master's pointed statement of the case. 
And it is all in vain that any ignore his words, 
and yet hope to abide in his love and favor. 
An illustration of this truth came forcibly to 
our attention during the past six weeks, and 
we relate it here, not for the sake of the one 
vitally concerned, but for the benefit of others 
who may have similar besetments, and to whom 
this narrative may prove "a word in season," 
cautioning that obedience is better than 
sacrifice. 

One of the Colporteurs, an earnest, devoted 
sacrificer, but whose spiritual state had for 
some time caused us anxiety, recently wrote to 
us that the peace of God no longer ruled his 
heart; that he had lost that communion with 
the Lord which is so essential to a Christian's 
happiness and welfare. Some extracts from 
his letters at the time will show his deplorable 
state, and give cause for the greater rejoicing 
that he has since been restored to divine favor. 
On receipt of his first letter, telling of his 
plight and asking for help, we felt greatly relieved, 
knowing that it was a hopeful sign to 
see him realizing his position and longing for 
divine favor, and so we wrote. In reply he 
said:— 

Dear Brother Russell:— Your kind letter received. 
It both surprised me and made me 
feel ashamed. The surprise was that you say 
I was nearer to God and nearer to his blessing 
when I wrote my last letter than for a long 
time before; while in reality I feel as if God is 
now far from me. The more I try to lay hold 
on his promises the less I seem to realize them 
as mine. The Lord knows what is in my heart, 
anyhow, so I might as well reveal it. I have 
kept the matter to myself long enough and 
found that it did not change my wretched condition 
of heart. The shame is that I should 
need such advice as you gave me— to "lay 
aside my proud, know-it-all spirit," etc. I feel 
the full force of that advice, as I am indeed 
guilty of just such a spirit. I always knew that I 
had a strong self-will, and therefore hesitated 
almost two years to be immersed, because I 
knew it symbolized the death of self, the death 
of my own will. 

I had always tried to keep self under but 
failed, till at last, considering God's promise, 
that his grace is sufficient for us, I took the 



step and made outwardly the confession that I 
would reckon myself dead, and accept God's 
way and will instead of my own. Looking back 
now, I see that I again failed; for I by no means 
"paid unto the Most High my vow." In my 

R1481 : page 376 

case the words of Paul seem to be fulfilled: 
"If a man strive for the masteries, yet is he 
not crowned, except he strive lawfully." Surely 
I have been striving, but, considering the 
effects, it had brought me almost to despair 
and made me look with dread to meet the Lord 
instead of with joy and confidence. I must 
have been striving unlawfully. 

I almost believe that, as you state in your letter, 
it is "pride and self-will" that have made the 
wall that separates between God and me. Your 
kind letter throws some light on my trouble, 
showing me just why I could not "enter into his 
rest." How highly I prize those promises made 
to the "meek and lowly of heart." I now realize 
that God shows favor only to the humble, 
and see that I could not claim his promises for 
the very reason that he has not made any promises 
to such as I have been. "Oh, to be nothing, 
nothing," shall henceforth be my prayer. 
How very thankful I feel towards you for pointing 
out to me just where I failed. Sorry that 
you no sooner dared to put me on my guard: 
it would have saved me many a tear. I am 
glad to know that you remember me in prayer, 
and especially that you prayed for me even before 
I wrote you of my wretched condition of 
heart. It was perhaps your prayers on my behalf 
that helped me to overcome my pride to 
the extent of this confession. 

While I always felt humble before God, it 
had seemed impossible for me to be humble 
before fellow men. None but myself knows 
how great a struggle it was for me to write to 
you in the way I did. Even after the letter 
was written I hesitated to send it, but I now 
feel that to overcome even in so small a matter 
as this brings a certain amount of blessing. I 
feel much more free to write this letter than 
the former one, because I ignored my own will, 
and contrary to my own inclination humbled 
myself, no matter what the opinion of others 
might be. I shall once more start out, relying 
upon God's help to overcome that which hinders 
me from entering into rest. I have just 
opened my heart before you that you might be 
better able to judge just why it was impossible 
to overcome. Any advice will be gratefully 



accepted. I feel fearful and beclouded, because 
of my previous failures to overcome. 

I clearly see that if I do not overcome I can 
never fall back on a restitution; for I have in 
the past made a definite consecration of all 
human hopes and aims, and of human rights 
and privileges. Nor do I desire to go back; for 
I know what it is to be in harmony with God. 
I know something of the joy and peace which I 
once had. If I had not had a taste of it, I 
would not now know of what I was void. 

R1482 : page 376 

Another trouble with me, I think, is that I am 
not filled with the Spirit of love. If I were I 
should have no trouble in overcoming. "To 
will is present, but how to perform I find not:" 
this seems to be my experience continually. 
Can you wonder that I feel distressed and helpless 
when I look at myself in the light of the 
past, feeling that I was never able fully to carry 
out my consecration. How much more imperfect 
must have been my effort before God? I 
feel really unworthy to be a worker in this 
"harvest." I am condemned when speaking 
about the truth. I hear continually the reproof 
of our Lord to those devils which said that 
they knew he was the Son of God, but our 
Lord forbade them. This shows clearly to me 
that he wants only such as are truly his. I lack 
all evidence now that I am his. I speak to 
others about this "rest," but I am myself unable 
to enter. Oh, that the Lord once more 
would show mercy to me! 

I will now conclude this report, whereof a 
mere nominal Christian should be ashamed, 
but how much more I, who claim to have come 
out from among them into higher light. Pray 
earnestly with me for complete deliverance. 

I remain sincerely yours, trusting in the precious 
blood of Christ as the only hope, 



The above letter was answered and the following 
came quickly:— 

Dear Brother Russell:— Yours of the 24th 
inst. received. Your letter sounds very hopeful, 
and would perhaps six months ago have filled 
me with joy, but now it only increases my sorrow. 
After reading it carefully I looked up all 
the passages in the Bible to which you alluded, 
to see whether there was such hope for me or 
not. The passage in 1 John 1:7, which you 
show me to mean that Christ not only justifies 
us from past sins, but that he also justifies us 



from our daily short-comings, reads to me very 
different. I wish I could make it read so. To 
me it reads: If you walk in the light, then you 
have fellowship, and then the blood of Christ 
cleanses you from all sin. Can I, under those 
limitations, claim that promise? Have I walked 
in the light? If I had, I would not now need 
to ask you which be the first principles— how 
to obtain peace with God— which every one 
ought to know. The Apostle (1 John 4:4) says: 
"Ye are of God, and have overcome." It is 
clear to be seen from such limitations that my 
case could not be covered. 

You also quote, from Psalm 103, that God has 
mercy upon all who come to him. But here 
he also limits it to a certain class (verse 18), to 
which I can not belong, however much I may 

R1482 : page 377 

desire it. I have never kept my covenant with 

God (even when I tried hard) to my own satisfaction 

—how much less to God's pleasing. 

Next you quote Heb. 4:15. This of course 
shows that our dear Lord can sympathize with 
us in temptation, but whether he can or will 
sympathize with us after we have yielded to it 
I can not see in that text. I would need a 
high priest who could sympathize with one who 
has given way to temptation. The next text, 
1 John 2:1, gives me some little hope, but so 
very slight that I scarcely dare trust in it, because 
the context seems to show that the sins 
referred to are not the kind that I have reference 
to— pride and self-will. 

It appears to me that the Scriptures teach 
that after we have once accepted Christ as 
our justification we must walk in the increasing 
light, and that as soon as anything is revealed 
in us being contrary to God's will we must at 
once put it away. If we would continue to go 
on in that way, putting evil away just as quickly 
as it is brought to our attention, we would 
never live in any conscious sin: and consequently 
all those promises of forgiveness of our 
faults unknown to us would be verified. We 
would even then continually need the blood of 
Christ to cleanse us from the sins which we 
commit from lack of knowledge. My trouble 
is that even after I see my faults I cannot rid 
myself of them and get into harmony with 
God's will. 

I shall rejoice if I ever succeed in living up 
to the best of my knowledge. To this end I 
have been praying for the last month, but all 
effort seems vain. I have never before felt the 



depravity of my nature so fully as for this last 
month. Before, I always knew it as a theory; 
but still I had thought that we could bring ourselves 
into subjection to God's will if we only 
tried. After examining the Bible closely, I 
awoke to the fact that I myself was altogether 
out of harmony with God's will. My first 
thought was to secure his forgiveness for my 
great error, and to get into harmony with his 
will. When I began the study of God's will, 
I verily thought I could learn his will from the 
Bible, and then do it. But the result of this 
was to lead me into greater despair, for I found 
myself unable to do his will. I had never seen 
the greatness of God's will as I now see it, and 
I never saw so fully that I am as a worm which 
has nothing at all of which to glory. I had 
heretofore thought I was some one, and could 
do so and so, but now I see that I am a slave 
to self and can do nothing, not even carry out 
my own desires when I have no one with me 
to hinder me. 

I feel no nearer to God now than I did when 
I first wrote to you about my trouble: it rather 
gets darker all the time. Oh, I do feel 
wretched! I feel just as if I had been a deceiver 
because I pretended before the Brethren 
and Sisters with whom I met to have the same 
joy and peace which they had, when in reality 
I felt far from God. In their presence (if I was 
called on to pray) I would address God from 
their standpoint and thank him for things which 
I myself did not realize. Perhaps a few hours 
later I would address God privately, in my 
closet, and tell him how much I was in need 
of those things, for which a few hours before I 
had publicly thanked him, as if I possessed 
them. How abominable my course must have 
been to the Lord! No wonder he has abandoned 
me from having communion with him. The 
more I think of the past the worse I feel about it. 

Until lately I never thought of its being 
wrong, and asked God to give me rest, when 
in reality I was in my own way, and therefore 
could not receive it. I never really knew what 
was the cause of my not "entering into his 
rest," until my distress was so great that I 
thought of writing to you about it. I shall 
ever be thankful to you for pointing out to me 
that my own pride was in the way of receiving 
God's blessing. I have at last so far learned 
from my brief experience to humble myself 
under the mighty hand of God. 

No longer do I feel self-sufficient nor, as you 
expressed it in your first letter, that I "know it 
all." Continue to pray for me: it may be the 



Lord will yet in mercy remember me again, and 
give peace to my soul. Let me hear from you 
soon. Correct me if you find that this is not the 
way to find peace. Yours in Christ, 



Poor heart! it was indeed in a wretched 
plight. But those are valuable lessons for all 
to learn— of the deceitfulness of our own hearts 
and of our inability to commend ourselves to 
God; and happy are those who can learn them 
from the Word of the Lord so as not to require 
to experience them thus. 

Still longing for God, the Colporteur came 
to us several hundred miles, for further counsel 
and assistance in seeking that peace which is 
beyond all price, which the world can neither 
give nor take away, but which each can so easily 
forfeit for himself by disobedience to the voice 
of our Shepherd. 

In personal conference we pointed out the 
necessity for honesty with the Lord, how pride 
and self-will are the deadliest foes of all who 
have consecrated themselves wholly to the Lord. 

R1482: page 378 

This brought forth a confession of how the 
darkness seemed to get into the troubled heart 
—about as follows:— 

In meeting with others, I have somewhat the 
gift of debate, and can argue whatever side of 
a question I choose to take up. The Brethren 
and Sisters generally gave heed to the warnings 
of the Lord, called to attention in the 
WATCH TOWER, to the effect that when we have 
proved to ourselves that any theory, teacher 
or publication is astray on the great fundamental 
doctrine of Christianity— the death of Christ 
as the ransom (corresponding price) for all— we 
should thenceforth have nothing whatever to 
do with such (Eph. 5:11; Rom. 16:17; 2 John 10,11; 
Gal. 1:8-10); but I took a different 
course. It was after seeing the evil effects my 
liberality had upon me that I began to look the 
subject up, and then pride came in and would 
not permit me to confess my error, but rather 
said: "Hold on to the position you have taken." 
In my effort to justify the liberal position which 
I had taken, I became the defender of doctrines 
which I knew were untrue— doctrines at variance 
with the truth; and I tremble as I reflect 
how I endangered others by my wilful course. 

This came about gradually; and I now see 
that I was losing the Lord's favor gradually, 
although I did not notice for some time, nor 
realize the cause, until in my despair I wrote 



to you. When once I realized that pride was 
at the bottom of it, I was enabled to trace the 
matter to its true source, as well as to see the 
horribleness of my own position. Indeed, while 
I see the truth clearly, in harmony with its 
presentation in the DAWNS, I confess that in 
my restless state I began to look around for 
something else— seeking rest and finding none. 
Truth began to get valueless. It lost its powerful 
influence over me. I verily believe that I 
was nearing the condition mentioned in the 
parable as "outer darkness." But now, since 
I see and confess my error and am earnestly 
seeking the Lord, the truth again has a powerful 
influence over me; but I fear so much that 
I have been so unfaithful that the Lord will 
never own or use me again. 

The Lord graciously blessed us in pointing 
out to the troubled one the way of peace. We 
pointed out that while the sin was great, the 

R1483 : page 378 

confession showed that, though it was a sin 

worthy of stripes, it had features which clearly 

showed that it was not the sin unto death, of 

which the Apostle warns us (Heb. 6:4-6; 4:26-51); 

for now, under full knowledge, the sin is 

not continued as a sweet morsel, but is despised 

and confessed and abandoned. We showed 

that the measure of wilfulness had already had 

stripes— divine disfellowship— that a portion 

of the sin can clearly be traced to Adamic 

weakness, and that this portion therefore is 

forgivable through the merit of our Great Redeemer's 

sacrifice— made once for all the race, 

and for all sins and weaknesses entailed upon 

us directly or indirectly as children of Adam. 

We pointed out that not only the ambitious 

pride was in part an inherited weakness, but 

the weaknesses of others which served as a 

temptation was also a result of the fall; and 

that it is because we cannot do perfectly what 

we learn of God's perfect Law that we need a 

compassionate High Priest and an abundant 

sin-sacrifice, and that we have such a sacrifice 

and such a High Priest— Jesus our Lord and 

Redeemer, by whose stripes we are healed. 

The realization of his own helplessness 
clinched this Scriptural argument, and Jesus was 
seen as our Savior, in a grander, completer sense 
than ever before; God's favor was gratefully accepted 
and we knelt and thanked the Lord for 
the light (he promising thenceforth to walk in 
it, and to confess the error as publicly as it had 
been committed); giving thanks for the leading 



of his providence which had recovered a 

straying sheep when it had realized its lost condition, 

and cried out again for a place in the 

fold. And, above all, we thanked him for the 

lengths and breadths of the loving provision 

made for covering all our sins and weaknesses 

when fully acknowledged, repented of and forsaken; 

and there the covenant of full consecration, 

even the giving up of self-will and self -pride, 

was renewed. Thus the troubled one 

began to enter into REST. That same (Sunday) 

evening the opportunity was embraced 

for confessing publicly to the Church at Allegheny 

the error, the darkness which had followed, 

the humiliating route back to God and 

R1483 : page 379 

peace, the forgiveness, the returned peace of 

God's favor, and the determination that henceforth, 

while continuing to offer himself a sacrifice 

in God's service, obedience, which is still 

more acceptable to God, should have first attention. 

It was also stated that hereafter, instead 

of feeling more benevolent than God and the 

apostles toward those in error, the effort would 

be to take their prescribed course, rejecting 

hereafter all teaching, oral or printed, that does 

not rest squarely upon the ransom-price given 

and finished at Calvary, obeying the injunctions 

of the apostle, that if any bring another 

gospel, to receive it not, and to have no fellowship 

with the unfruitful works of darkness, but 

rather to reprove them; for he that biddeth 

God-speed to an evil doer, an evil teacher or 

an evil doctrine is a partaker in the evil. 

So far from despising the Colporteur, we all 
loved and esteemed him more than ever; for 
it is only a true and noble soldier of the cross 
who can thus shatter the idol of his own pride 
and self-will, and lift up the royal banner of 
his Redeemer. He has since returned to his 
field of labor and made similar confession to 
those whose faith and rest he once endangered, 
and he is now rejoicing in the peace of God 
which passeth worldly understanding. 

This report has been seen by him and approved 
before publication, and is published as 
a testimony of God's forgiving love, and that 
it may help in bearing up the "feet" of the 
body of Christ— lest any should stumble utterly 
over the stumbling-stone, the ransom, and 
that all might be planted the more securely 
thereon. 



page 379 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1483 : page 379 

RETURNING FROM THE CAPTIVITY. 



I. QUAR., LESSON 1., JAN. 1, EZRA 1:1-11. 

Golden Text— "The Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, 
and have compassion upon thee."— Deut. 30:3. 

The events of this lesson are located at the 
close of the seventy years desolation of the 
land of Israel and of the captivity of the people 
of Israel in Babylon. The cause of this long 
exile and this utter desolation of their land is 
stated to be their failure to let their land enjoy 
its sabbaths (2 Chron. 36:21), according to the 
command of the Lord, who, by this typical observance 
of sabbath or jubilee years, purposed 
to prefigure the blessed Times of Restitution, 
in which time the continually recurring cycles 
were ultimately to terminate. But though the 
people were negligent of the command of the 
Lord, and only partially observed this requirement, 
God did not permit their indifference 
to mar his typical prophecy, but turned 
even this circumstance to account in making 
the prediction still more emphatic by showing 
the exact number of typical jubilees which 
culminated in the grand antitype or "times 
of restitution of all things," and thus pointing 
out the exact date, both of the times of restitution 
and also of the Lord's second advent, 
which is due at that time. (Acts 3:19-21.) See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter vi., also 
Lesson X. in our issue of Feb. 15th.) 

And not only had Israel neglected to observe 
properly the typical Jubilees, but they had 
lapsed into idolatry and had polluted the house 
of the Lord, and they had mocked his messengers 



and despised his words and misused his 
prophets until the wrath of the Lord rose against 
them with the sword and with captivity and 
with the destruction of their temple and with the 
utter desolation of their land for seventy years. 
See 2 Chron. 36:14-21. 

But when God had served his purpose of 
chastising Israel and of completing his typical 
prophecy— when the three score and ten years 
of desolation of the land, in which the land 
had enjoyed her sabbaths, had expired, the 
return of the captives was due. The great 
clock of ages pointed to the time for the return 
of the exiles, and, like every other feature of 
God's plan, the deliverance of Israel from 
Babylon was promptly on time, and the agent 
for the accomplishment of their deliverance 
was on the spot. God had him marked out 
by the Prophet Isaiah for this very purpose, 
calling him by name and specifying the work 
he was to do. See Isa. 44:24,28; 45:1-6. 

It is pleasing also to note that in the land of 
their captivity Israel (with some exceptions) 

R1483 : page 380 

were reclaimed from idolatry so thoroughly as 

never to return to it again; and then, without 

the temple and its services, they learned to appreciate 

what was left to them still— the Word 

of God and the teaching and counsel of some 

of the faithful ones among them, such as Daniel, 

Ezra and Nehemiah; and thus for a time the 

forms of worship gave place to a more real heart-worship 

of the one true God; and they were led 

to a fuller appreciation of the privileges they 

had enjoyed, as manifested in Psalm 137. 

When Israel was restored, however, it was 
not as masters of the land, but as servants of 
Cyrus and his successors; for, according to the 
words of the Prophet Ezekiel (21:25-27), they 
were never again to possess the land as an independent 
nation until he should come whose 
right it is to rule— even their long-promised 
Messiah. The reference here is evidently to 
the Lord's second advent; for at his first advent 
he did not come to rule, nor did they at 
that time, nor ever since, gain full possession 
of their land. They were always tributary to 
other nations until they were finally— A. D. 70 
—dispersed among all the nations; and so they 
have continued until the present time, when, 
the time having come, their regathering has 
begun. 

The "golden text" of this lesson has reference, 
not to the return of Israel from this captivity 



in Babylon, nor from any of the minor 

captivities, but to the great regathering from 

among all the nations whither the Lord had 

scattered them. (See Deut. 30:3-5; also Jer. 32:37-42.) 

This is a deliverance which will 

need no repetition; for they shall be firmly 

planted and established in their everlasting possession. 

(See Jer. 24:6,7; 31:28.) This deliverance 

is already beginning and shall be fully 

accomplished by the close of "The Times 

of the Gentiles." See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 

III., Chapter viii. 

The story of the deliverance of Israel from 
the captivity in Babylon is not only a historic 
fact, but it has also its typical aspect. The captivity 
of Israel after the flesh in literal Babylon 
represented the subsequent captivity of spiritual 
Israel in "Babylon the Great"— the great 
Antichristian nominal church; and the deliverance 
of fleshly Israel by Cyrus, whose name 
signifies sun or brightness, represents the deliverance 
of spiritual Israel out of "Babylon 
the Great" by the bright shining of the Sun 
of Righteousness. 

And as Cyrus commanded the faithful people 
in Israel to return to the land of promise 
and to rebuild the waste places and to take 
possession of and replace in the temple the 
golden and silver vessels which the king of 
Babylon had profaned (Dan. 5:1-4), so the 
light from the rising Sun of Righteousness now 
indicates to the faithful children of God who 
are still in "Babylon," the great nominal 
church, the duty and privilege of returning to 
the blessed inheritance of the saints— the exceeding 
great and precious privileges of the 
sons and heirs of God— and of replacing in his 
spiritual temple, which is the true Church, all 
the golden and silver vessels— the divine and 
the natural truths or doctrines— so long perverted 
in "Babylon" during the dark ages of 
bondage and superstition. As to the progress 
of this work, see MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., 
Chapter iv. 

R1484 : page 380 

REBUILDING THE TEMPLE. 



I. QUAR., LESSON II., JAN. 8, EZRA 3:1-13. 

Golden Text— "They praised the Lord, because the 
foundation of the house of the Lord was laid."— Ezra 3:11. 



The narratives of the building and the rebuilding 
of the temple, as mere matters of history, 
would be of little importance or interest 
to us were it not also for the fact of its typical 
character. Viewing it thus, there is still in the 
history of that temple and in its prophetic 
teachings that which should enkindle in our 
hearts greater enthusiasm, zeal and joy than 
was ever expressed by those who saw its material 
glory. 

In the light of the teachings of the apostles 
we see that the antitype of that temple was the 
one true Church of the living God, whose 
names are written in heaven (1 Cor. 3:16,17; 
Luke 10:20)— that it is a spiritual temple built 
up with living stones, of which Jesus Christ is 
himself the chief corner stone, the sure foundation. 
He became the foundation of this 
spiritual house when he gave his life a ransom 
for many, and thus made possible the building 
up of other living stones upon this foundation 
until the wonderful structure shall reach its 
glorious completeness.— 1 Pet. 2:4-7. 

When this foundation of the spiritual temple 
was laid, all who came to a realization of 
the importance of the great work thereby accomplished 
rejoiced and praised the Lord. 
And this rejoicing in the strength and security 
of the foundation of our hopes never ceases. 
Praise the Lord! wells up from every heart that 
realizes the redemption accomplished by the 
precious blood of Christ, shed for many for the 
remission of sins. Upon this sure foundation 
the temple structure has been gradually and 
steadily progressing. The living stones are 
taken out of the quarry (the world), and, by 
the experiences and discipline of the present 
life, they are shaped and chiseled and polished 

R1484: page 381 

and thus fitted for their places in the temple 

which, during the time of the presence of the 

Lord— viz., since 1878, when he took his great 

power as king— is being noiselessly put together, 

as in the type, without the sound of a 

hammer— by the resurrection of the dead in 

Christ and the change of the living in a moment, 

in the twinkling of an eye; for "Blessed 

are the dead who die in the Lord from 

henceforth [from 1878];. ..they rest from 

their labors [from the toil and weariness of labor], 

but their works follow with them." They 

shall not sleep, but they shall be changed instantaneously 

from the human to a glorious 

spiritual body. -Rev. 14:13; 1 Cor. 15:51,52. 



But, while the Church glorified with Christ 
the Head will be the temple complete and 
glorious, it is in a less complete sense regarded 
as the temple of God now, and the various 
members as its builders, all having something 
to do in building each other up in the most 
holy faith, and thus contributing to the structure 
of the temple or Church as a whole. This 
work of building up the Church is very clearly 
set forth in the building of the typical temple; 
and the rebuilding of the temple after the captivity 
in Babylon is very suggestive of the rebuilding 
of the Church after the long captivity 
in Babylon the Great— which is generally known 
as the Great Reformation. And truly there 
has been a great Re-formation of the Church 
since the dark ages of bondage under the papal 
yoke. 

The work of re-formation has gone steadily 
forward and, like that of the typical temple, 
in the midst of great opposition. (See Ezra 4:1 1-24; 
5:3-5; Neh. 4:7-23, and compare 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter ix, and 
Vol. III., Chapter iv.) From the multitudes 
who had been enslaved under the papal rule 
some of the living stones of the true temple 
were gathered out and the work of setting them 
in order for the rebuilding of the New Jerusalem 
and its temple began. History records 
the opposition which these re-formers or builders, 
encountered; and truly, as in the type, 
"the builders, every one had his sword [the 
sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God] 
girded by his side, and so builded." (Neh. 4:18.) 
Nor may this attitude ever be relinquished 
until the work is all complete and the glory 
of the Lord has filled his temple. The enemies 
of the Lord's people and the Lord's work are 
always active in opposition, and none the less 
so when their methods are subtle and their 
course not easily discernible. Hence the necessity 
for continued vigilance against every 
encroachment of the adversary, whether he 
come as a roaring lion or as a wily serpent. 

To all who are laboring in the great work of 
building up the true temple and city of God, 
the success of Ezra and Nehemiah and their 
co-workers should be regarded as an encouraging 
prediction of the final completeness and 
glory of the Church built upon the one true 
and only foundation, Jesus Christ our Redeemer 
and Lord. -1 Cor. 3:11. 

R1484: page 381 

ENCOURAGING THE PEOPLE. 



I. QUAR., LESSON III., JAN. 15, HAGGAI 2:1-9. 

Golden Text— "Except the Lord build the house, they 
labor in vain who build it."— Psa. 127:1. 

Again we are led to view the rebuilding of 
the temple in its typical character. In our 
previous lesson we saw that the foundation was 
re-laid amidst great rejoicing, and that then, 
on account of the opposition of their enemies, 
the work was for a long while abandoned. 
Having been thus hindered in the great work, 
Israel gradually became indifferent and indisposed 
to encounter again the difficulties necessary 
to its further prosecution, and became more 
and more engrossed with their own affairs, 
leaving the house of the Lord still in ruins. 

As a consequence of this growing indifference 
to the house of the Lord, God's favor was 
measurably withdrawn from Israel and they 
were visited with drought and threatened with 
famine. Then came a message of reproof from 
the Lord to them, chiding them for neglecting 
the important work of rebuilding the temple 
and giving themselves up to their own pursuits. 
(Hag. 1:1-11.) When the Lord thus stirred 
them up to a sense of duty and privilege in the 
matter, the people and their leaders obeyed his 
voice and again began to build, and the Lord 
encouraged and helped them.— Hag. 1:12-15. 

In all this what a vivid type we have of the 
great reformation work which began in the sixteenth 
century with the preaching of Luther 
and his contemporaries, briefly noted in the 
preceding lesson. We call to mind that the 
one great work accomplished at that time was 
the laying again of the foundation doctrine of 
"justification by faith" in the one "continual" 
sacrifice of Christ, in contradistinction to 
the papal dogma of "the mass," which had set 
aside the "continual." (Dan. 11:31.) Thus 
again Christ Jesus became the recognized foundation 
of his temple, which is the Church. 
This done, there was great rejoicing among 
those interested and engaged in the work. 
While the re-laying of the foundation progressed 
the builders were greatly opposed, so 
that they were obliged to keep themselves continually 
armed with the sword of the Spirit 
against their enemies. But, as in the type, 

R1484: page 382 



when the foundation was laid they began to 
grow weary in well-doing and weary of contending 
against opposition, and so, with a few 
exceptions, abandoned the work, and spiritual 
drought and famine followed. Protestantism 
ceased to be a protest against the iniquitous 
system that gave it birth, and for a time made 
no further progress beyond the re-laying of the 
foundation of the temple of God. 

But by and by the message of the Lord was 
impressed upon some faithful souls, who still 
longed to see the completion of the temple of 
God, to arise again and build, to clear away 
the rubbish of false doctrine and establish the 
faith of the Church in the truth— that they 
might be living representatives of the truth, 
not error, and thus be recognized of God as 
living stones in his temple. Since the re-awakening 
the work has been going forward (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., Chapter iv.); 
and the Word of the Lord to all the workers is 
the encouraging promise that, when it is completed, 
it shall be filled with glory.— Hag. 2:7. 

And not only so, but it is also written that 
"The glory of this latter house shall be greater 
than of the former, saith the Lord of hosts: 
and in this place will I give peace, saith the 
Lord of hosts." (Hag. 2:9.) That this was not 
said with reference to the temple of Zerubbabel, 
which did not excel nor equal the former temple, 
is manifest, and therefore the expression 
must be regarded as a prophecy of the glory of the 
antitypical temple of God— the glorified Church. 

Let those, therefore, who are zealously engaged 
in the work of the Lord— in building up 
the Church, the temple of God, in the most 
holy faith— hear the Word of the Lord by the 
Prophet Haggai (2:4-9). 

VERSE 4. "Be strong, and work, for I am 
with you, saith the Lord of hosts." 

VERSE 5. "My spirit remaineth among you: 
fear ye not." 

VERSES 6,7 remind us of the similar promise 
of Malachi 3:1. "Behold, the Lord shall 
suddenly come to his temple," his Church; and 
it is his glory that shall fill it— the glory of his 
presence, his power, his righteousness and his 
authority; and the whole Church shall be imbued 
with the same, as his worthy joint-heirs in 
the kingdom. And when the Lord thus comes 
to his temple the whole earth will see his glory 
—will recognize his authority and power. And 
when he is thus recognized and the blessings 
of his kingdom begin to be experienced, he will 
indeed be, as the Prophet expressed it, "The 
Desire of all nations;" for it is also written that 



he is the "Prince of peace" and that he will 

speak peace unto the nations" (Hag. 2:9; Zech. 9:10), 

and that "In this place [by means of his 

temple] will I give peace, saith the Lord of hosts." 

The shaking of all nations— the heavens [the 
present ecclesiastical powers] and the earth 
[the whole civil organization of human society], 
the sea [the lawless elements] and the dry 
land [the more settled and law-abiding of mankind] 
—reminds us also of the expression of 
Malachi (1:2), "Who may abide the day of his 
coming?" and of the predicted judgments of 
verse 5 against all evil-doers; as well as the explanation 
of the Apostle Paul (Heb. 12:26,27) 
that "This word, 'Yet once more' signifieth the 
removing of those things that are shaken,... 
that those things which cannot be shaken may 
remain." 

Praise the Lord! the things that are to be 
removed are the unsatisfactory things of the 
present order, and that which is to remain is 
the Kingdom of righteousness and peace, under 
Christ the Prince of peace, whose glorious reign 
when fully inaugurated and manifested will indeed 
be "the desire of all nations." 



R1486 : page 382 
CREED-MAKING IN JAPAN. 



According to a recent issue of the Missionary 
Review, the native Presbyterian Christians in 
Japan have taken the matter of creed revision 
into their own hands. The synod of the Church 
of Christ in Japan, composed of the various 
Presbyterian bodies, has refused to adopt the 
Westminster Confession of Faith, or any other 
similar doctrine. They have fallen back upon 
the Apostles' Creed: 

"In the Confession of Faith will be observed 
a significant silence upon the subject of retribution 
and of the future state. It reads thus: 
'The Lord Jesus Christ, whom we worship as 
God, the only begotten Son of God, for us men 
and for our salvation was made man and suffered. 
He offered up a perfect sacrifice for 
sin; and all who are one with him by faith are 
pardoned and accounted righteous, and faith 
in him working by love purifies the heart. 

'"The Holy Ghost, who, with the Father 
and the Son, is worshiped and glorified, reveals 
Jesus Christ to the soul, and without his grace, 



man, being dead in sins, cannot enter the kingdom 
of God. By him the prophets and the 
apostles and holy men of old were inspired, and 
he, speaking in the Scriptures of the Old and New 
Testaments, is the supreme and infallible judge 
in all things pertaining unto faith and living. 

'"From these Holy Scriptures the ancient 
Church of Christ drew its Confession; and we, 
holding the faith once delivered to the saints, 
join in that Confession with praise and 
thanksgiving.'" 



page 383 

INDEX FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

VOL. XIIL, 1892. 



JANUARY 1. 

Vol. II. in German, DAWN agency in London, etc., Page 2 

View from the TOWER, Home and Foreign Missions 3 

Poem— "The Voice is Nigh Thee." 10 

The Evil which God Creates 10 

Bible Study: The King and the Kingdom 13 

" " A Song of Triumph 15 

JANUARY 15. 

Thanks! to Subscribers 18 

View from the TOWER, Things to Come 19 

Poem— "The Reformer." 26 

Bible Study: Overcome with Wine 27 

" " Hezekiah's Prayer 29 

" " Who Hath Believed Our Report? 30 

FEBRUARY 1. 

Special Items: "Good Hopes," Reading for Friends 34 

Until the Lord Come 35 

Presbyterian Revision of Faith 38 

Poem— "The Present and the Future." 39 

An Ancient and Interesting Document 41 

The Resurrection of Damnation 42 

Bible Study: The Gracious Call 43 

" " The New Covenant 45 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 47 

FEBRUARY 15. 

Special Items: Harvest Laborers— Pray for them 50 

An Ancient and Interesting Document (Concluded) 51 



Philanthropic Versus Humanitarian 53 

Poem— "In the Wine-Press Alone." 54 

Views Abroad 54 

Bible Study: Jehoiakim's Wickedness 59 

" " Jeremiah Persecuted 60 

" " The Downfall of Judah 60 

" " Promise of a New Heart 62 

MARCH 1. 

Special Items: Germany, Annual Gathering, etc 66 

The Doctrinal Test in Methodism 67 

Baron Rothschild Purchasing Land in Palestine 68 

Poem— "Peace Be Upon Thee." 69 

In Due Time 69 

Views Abroad 70 

Bible Study: Quarterly Review 75 

" Comfort Ye My People 76 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 78 

MARCH 15. 

Travels in the Holy Land 83 

Believers' Convention 86 

The Memorial Supper 87 

Poem— "He Careth for You." 89 

The Deliverance 89 

Bible Study: The Way of the Righteous 90 

" " The King of Zion 91 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 93 

Book Notices 95-96 

APRIL 1. 

Special Items: Palestine Mementoes, Memorial, etc 98 

The Bride, the Lamb's Wife 99 

Travels in the Holy Land 107 

Bible Study: God's Works and Word 110 

APRIL 15. 

Special Items: Bible-Study Convention, Remittances 114 

Was It not Necessary? 115 

The Methodist Revolt 118 

Poem— "Calvary." 119 

Travels in the Holy Land 119 

We have no King but Caesar 122 

Bible Study: The Lord My Shepherd 123 

" " The Prayer of the Penitent 123 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 1 25 

MAY 1. 

Special Items: The Syriac New Testament, etc 130 

Echoes from the Believers' Convention 131 

Who is Worthy? 134 



Travels in the Holy Land 137 

Preparing for the Image of the Beast 140 

Bible Study: Our House of Many Mansions 142 

" " Praise Ye the Lord 143 

" " Quarterly Temperance Lesson 144 

Consecration to a Work 144 

MAY 15. 

Providing for Colporteurs' Expenses 146 

The Glory that Excelleth 147 

Journalistic Responsibility 150 

Poem— "O! the Depth of Divine Wisdom!" 151 

The Epistle of James 151 

Jewish Items of Interest 155 

To Whom Should We Pray? 156 

Bible Study: Nebuchadnezzar's Dream 158 

" " The Fiery Furnace 158 

" " The Den of Lions 160 

" " Quarterly Review 160 

JUNE 1-15. 

Providing for Colporteurs' Expenses 162 

To Us there is One God 163 

Bible Study: Messiah's Reign 189 

" " Our Lord's Ascension 190 

" " The Spirit of Adoption Shed Forth 192 

JULY 1. 

Items: More Laborers, Our Booklets, Foreign Tracts 194 

Pulpit Infidelity of To-day 195 

Bible Study: The Early Church 205 

" " The Lame Man Healed 207 

JULY 15. 

Providing for Colporteurs' Expenses 210 

View from the TOWER, The Homestead Strike 211 

Poem— "The Faithful Servant." 214 

Bible Study: Peter and John Before the Council 215 

" " The Apostles' Confidence in God 216 

" " Ananias and Sapphira 218 

" " The Apostles Persecuted 218 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters.) 219 

AUGUST 1. 

Glean Carefully. Yet There is Room 226 

Under His Wings 227 

Poem— "Resignation." 230 

The Royal Priesthood 230 

Bible Study: The First Christian Martyrs 234 

" " Philip Preaching at Samaria 234 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 237 



Book Notices 240 

AUGUST 15. 

Young's Concordance in Great Britain— also Index 242 

Enoch, Elijah and the Sentence 243 

One Hope 245 

Universal Salvation (I) 250 

All in Adam and All in Christ 252 

Bible Study: Philip and the Ethiopian 253 

" " Quarterly Review 254 

Only One Christ in History 254 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 255 

SEPTEMBER 1. 

Faith and Works 258 

View, Behold, I stand at the Door and Knock 259 

They shall be Mine 260 

Poem— "God's Burdens." 263 

Universal Salvation (II) 263 

Faith and Feeling 267 

Bible Study: Temperance Lesson 268 

" " Saul of Tarsus Converted 269 

A Word to Colporteurs 270 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters.) 271 

SEPTEMBER 15. 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 273 

View from TOWER, Seventh-Day Adventists' Fears 275 

Moses and Elias 280 

Who is Wise among You? 281 

Future Probation for the Dead 282 

Bible Study: Dorcas Raised to Life 285 

" " Salvation Reaches the Gentiles 287 

Poem— "Perfect through Suffering." 288 

OCTOBER 1. 

Immigration of Jews 290 

Other Laborers Wanted 290 

View from the TOWER, Zeal according to Knowledge 291 

Pay Thy Vows unto the Most High 294 

Universal Salvation (III) 296 

The Thief in Paradise 299 

Bible Study: The Gospel at Antioch 300 

" " Peter's Deliverance 301 

Colporteurs' Weekly Reports 301 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 302 

OCTOBER 15. 

The Newberry Bible, Index, and Syriac Testament 306 

The Nature and Methods of God's Elections 307 

The Prodigal's Return 313 



Poem— "Prodigal, Return!" 315 

Grow in Grace 315 

Bible Study: The First Christian Missionaries 318 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters.) 319 

NOVEMBER 1. 

Items: Brother Mitchell's Free Circular and others 322 

The Law of God 323 

Palestine and the Jews 328 

Poem— "Father, Glorify Thy Name." 330 

Christian Fellowship 330 

Bible Study: Paul's First Missionary Sermon 332 

" " The Apostles Turning to the Gentiles 334 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 335 

NOVEMBER 15. 

Meetings in New York. Protestants no Longer 338 

Purgatory: Is It a Romish, a Prot. or a Bible Doctrine? 339 

Bear Ye One Another's Burdens 345 

A Mighty Force 347 

Poem-"As the Father Loveth Me." 348 

Bible Study: Work among the Gentiles 348 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters.) 35 1 

DECEMBER 1. 

Special Items: Binders, "Good Hopes" successful 354 

View, Preparing to Give Life to the Image 355 

Thou Preparest a Table before Me. (Psalm 23.) 358 

What a Disturbance May Do 359 

Consequents of Divine Judgment 360 

Bible Study: The Birth of Christ 365 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 366 

DECEMBER 15. 

Old Theology Tracts, Our Booklets, TOWER for 1893 370 

His Way is Perfect 371 

Faith Versus Superstition 373 

Obedience Better than Sacrifice 375 

Bible Study: Returning from Captivity 379 

" " Rebuilding the Temple 380 

" " Encouraging the People 381 

Creed-Making in Japan 382 

Supplement of four pages added, mentions New Bibles, 
Bible-Study Helps, Motto Cards and Good Hopes for 1893. 



