“My Help Is From Jehovah”
Youths Who Praise Jehovah Enrich Their Lives
“I WANT the best that life has to offer!” That is how one teenage boy described his expectations. But how can a young person get the very best out of life? The Bible provides a straightforward answer: “Keep your Creator in mind while you are young!”​—Ecclesiastes 12:1, Contemporary English Version.
Praising and serving Jehovah is not just for grown-ups. Samuel, a son of Elkanah and Hannah, was very young when he ministered to Jehovah at the tabernacle. (1 Samuel 1:19, 20, 24; 2:11) A Hebrew girl of tender age showed implicit faith in Jehovah when she suggested that the Syrian army chief Naaman go to the prophet Elisha in order to be healed of leprosy. (2 Kings 5:2, 3) At Psalm 148:7, 12, both boys and girls are commanded to praise Jehovah.a When he was only 12 years of age, Jesus took a keen interest in the service of his Father. (Luke 2:41-49) Because of their training from the Scriptures, some boys who saw Jesus at the temple cried out: “Save, we pray, the Son of David!”​—Matthew 21:15, 16.
Praising Jehovah Today
Today, many youths among Jehovah’s Witnesses take pride in their beliefs and courageously speak to others about them in schools and elsewhere. Consider two examples.
In Britain, 18-year-old Stephanie’s class was discussing abortion and other ethical issues. The teacher asserted that abortions are now generally accepted and that no young girl would have reason to object to this practice. When everyone in the class agreed with this viewpoint, Stephanie felt compelled to defend her Bible-based position. The opportunity to do so came when the teacher asked Stephanie for her opinion. Although she was nervous at first, Stephanie used the occasion to present the Scriptural view. She paraphrased Exodus 21:22-24 and explained that if it was wrong to injure an unborn child, then an abortion would obviously be contrary to God’s will.
The teacher, a member of the clergy, had never read these verses. Stephanie’s bold witness led to many fine discussions with her classmates on various subjects. One girl now regularly accepts the latest copies of The Watchtower and Awake!, and two others attended a district convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses to see Stephanie get baptized in symbol of her dedication to God.
Six-year-old Vareta, living in Suriname, South America, seized the opportunity to praise God when her teacher needed comfort from the Scriptures. Upon returning after a three-day absence, the teacher asked her students if they knew why she was away. They answered, “You were sick, right?” “No,” replied the teacher. “My sister died, and I feel very sad. So you have to be quiet.”
That afternoon while her mother was taking a nap, Vareta was busy leafing through older magazines, reading the titles. She came upon The Watchtower of July 15, 2001, with the title “Is There Life After Death?” Filled with enthusiasm, she awakened her mother and said, “Mommy, Mommy, look! I found a magazine about death for my teacher!” The magazine was sent to the teacher with a letter from Vareta. She wrote: “This is especially for you. In Paradise you are going to see your sister again because Jehovah never lies. He has promised that he will bring a paradise, not in heaven, but on earth.” The teacher expressed her deep appreciation for the Bible-based comfort that these articles provided.
Building for the Future
Jehovah is “the happy God,” and he wants young ones to be happy. (1 Timothy 1:11) His own Word says: “Enjoy your youth. Be happy while you are still young.” (Ecclesiastes 11:9, Today’s English Version) Jehovah sees beyond the moment and perceives the long-term consequences of both good and bad behavior. That is why his Word admonishes youths: “Remember, now, your Grand Creator in the days of your young manhood, before the calamitous days proceed to come, or the years have arrived when you will say: ‘I have no delight in them.’”​—Ecclesiastes 12:1.
Yes, Jehovah desires that youths enjoy to the full the precious gift of life. By remembering and praising God, young people can lead a meaningful, rewarding life. Even when faced with challenges, they can confidently say: “My help is from Jehovah.”​—Psalm 121:2.
[Footnote]
See the 2005 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses, March/April.
[Blurb on page 9]
“Praise Jehovah from the earth, . . . you young men and also you virgins.”​—PSALM 148:7, 12
[Box on page 8]
JEHOVAH SUPPORTS YOUNG ONES
“You are my hope, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah, my confidence from my youth.”​—Psalm 71:5.
“[God] is satisfying your lifetime with what is good; your youth keeps renewing itself just like that of an eagle.”​—Psalm 103:5.

