From Our Readers
Children—Growing Up Too Fast?  The series “Children—Are They Growing Up Too Fast?” (April 22, 2003) was very well written. It helped me understand why I have experienced certain problems. I had a gloomy childhood, and I can’t help but agree that the path of wisdom is to let children grow at their own pace.
S. M., Japan
The series truly touched my heart. I was raised in a single-parent home. I used to stay up nights listening to my mother cry because of her worries. If it were not for the Christian congregation, I don’t know how I would have ended up. Thank you for your loving efforts to feed us spiritually.
D. B., United States
I am 11 years old, and I have always had the tendency to want to grow up quickly. This series showed me the importance of cherishing my childhood while I still have it.
G. M., United States
I can identify with the story of Carmen and her sister in the article. Although I did not run away from home, as they did, I did have abusive stepfathers and a neglectful mother. Because my parents had problems with drug abuse, I was forced to raise my younger brothers, starting when I was only ten years old! Of course, this led to problems of my own. I am forever grateful to Jehovah for the help I have received over the years.
D. S., United States
Hedgehog  I am the chief executive of the British Hedgehog Preservation Society, and I was delighted to read the wonderful article “Prickly Urchin of the Countryside.” (April 22, 2003) It was beautifully written and factually accurate—unlike many articles in other publications.
F. V., Britain
Thank you very much for Awake! magazine. My mother always tells me to read the magazines. Once I start, I sometimes keep reading for an hour or so. They have many articles I enjoy, such as “Prickly Urchin of the Countryside.” I am 15 years old. Keep up the excellent job!
K. G., United States
Adoption  Thank you for the timely article “Young People Ask . . . Why Did I Have to Be an Adopted Child?” (April 22, 2003) My daughter had to put her baby up for adoption because of her circumstances, and this bothered my conscience very much. This information came just at the right time. I sent the article to my daughter.
E. D., Guyana
I am writing to thank you very much for the timely articles on adoption in the April 22 and May 22 issues. My husband and I recently adopted an infant son. In time, we will use these two articles to help our son know and understand just how much he is loved by Jehovah God, his Dad, and me.
S. R., United States
Thank you so very much for the article on adoption. I am 47 years old and still struggle with this. My adoptive parents—whom I respect and love very much—were unable to respond to my needs for love and affection. I was never really hugged or kissed, even when I asked. Such rejection was difficult for me. Anyway, the article was so very comforting and heartwarming.
D. H., United States

