Patients’ Rights Respected
‘There is no way I can perform this surgery without blood. If you want to have the operation, you will have to consent to my method of treatment. Otherwise, you will have to find another doctor.’
THE doctor’s words did not shake the faith of Cheng Sae Joo, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses who lives in Thailand. Diagnosed with meningioma, a type of brain tumor, Cheng was in desperate need of surgery. But she was determined to obey the Bible’s command: “Keep abstaining . . . from blood.”—Acts 15:28, 29.
Cheng visited two other hospitals, preferring to be treated in her own country if possible. To her disappointment, doctors there also refused to perform surgery without blood. Finally, Cheng was put in touch with the Neurological Institute of the Tokyo Women’s Medical College by Hospital Information Services (HIS) in Thailand. That hospital had treated more than 200 brain-tumor patients using the gamma knife, one of the newest developments in radiation therapy.
Arrangements were made for Cheng to stay with Japanese Witnesses living near the hospital. A group met her at the airport, including two of Jehovah’s Witnesses who speak Thai and an HIS representative. After about a week of examinations, Cheng was admitted to the hospital where she underwent treatment with the gamma knife. The procedure took only about an hour. Out of the hospital the next day, Cheng was on her way back to Thailand the day after that.
“I never imagined that so much help could be provided through this arrangement,” said Cheng. “I was really impressed by the love that was shown as well as by the cooperation between the many parties concerned.”
In reporting this news item, the Japanese newspaper Mainichi Shimbun commented: “Up until now, religious reasons for the refusal of blood transfusions have been highlighted. However, blood transfusions have side effects such as AIDS, the risk of viral infections such as hepatitis C, and allergies. For this reason there are patients who do not want blood transfusions regardless of their religious belief.”
The newspaper further stated: “Many patients who refused blood transfusions have been forced to change hospitals, but there is a need for a change on the part of medical institutions toward respecting the will of the patient. Informed consent (a patient receiving a full explanation of what is involved and then agreeing to treatment) is required, and blood transfusion cases are no exception. It should be recognized that this is not an issue involving just a certain religion.”
Like Cheng Sae Joo, many who prefer treatment without blood have to transfer to other hospitals. Nonetheless, they appreciate the efforts of doctors who are willing to respect their patients’ rights.
Hospital Information Services was set up by Jehovah’s Witnesses in branches of the Watch Tower Society to seek the cooperation of physicians who respect their beliefs. Throughout the world, HIS builds working relationships with hospitals, physicians, health-care workers, lawyers, and judges.

