Are We Friends as Well as Teachers?
1 “Bad associations spoil useful habits”! How often we have heard this basic truth declared! Yet, the thought of the opposite reaction, ‘Good associations cultivate good habits,’ has sound Scriptural backing.​—1 Cor. 15:33; Prov. 13:20.
2 This principle can be applied to our own Bible students. How can we replace their present friends, some of whom may be honest, sincere people, but who are not good associates as far as the truth is concerned? We must be more than teachers of these students. We must help the students to make friends among true Christians. We must be friends of these students ourselves.
3 Right in the congregation is one place where we can begin to help them to find good friends. In this regard one couple said: “We show hospitality by inviting them to our home where they find theocratic companionship and fellowship. We try to have other brothers and sisters and families around their own age-group so that they can make fine new friends. . . . We try to get the newly interested ones to meetings immediately. . . .  We take them to conventions with us.” Another couple who over the years have brought hundreds of people to a knowledge of the truth explained how they gained success: “Making close and intimate friends . . . , not having just a mechanical teacher-student relationship. . . . Inviting them over to our house. In general, being generous, kind and hospitable seems to be contagious and a fine, close, loving family-type relationship usually develops. Soon they reciprocate by having the friends over to their house; before long they have nothing but theocratic association, causing them to mature quickly.”
4 Numerous other possibilities exist that will help us to build a closer bond of friendship with our Bible students. For example: We can make friendly telephone calls. We can visit museums to see artifacts that help to prove the Bible record. A trip to the country or a visit to a park will help them to appreciate the wonders of creation.
5 On such excursions there is one key to having success in winning them over as Christian friends: In each situation have points in mind that will show them the value of the Bible truths and the Christian way of life. Our Christian conduct will continually attract these people who have the right heart condition. We can have a pleasant time with them enjoying an evening of conversation, sharing experiences and talking about the truth. However, we must be alert to avoid involving ourselves in social activities they may want to organize if such are detrimental to Christian welfare.

