Keep Declaring Jehovah’s Name
1 By Jehovah’s manner of dealing with Pharaoh we are able to understand why Jehovah has tolerated Satan down through the centuries until now. As recorded at Exodus 9:15, 16, Jehovah told Pharaoh how he could easily have destroyed him, but “for this cause I have kept you in existence, for the sake of showing you my power and in order to have my name declared in all the earth.” In Pharaoh’s day, Jehovah used his visible representatives, Moses and Aaron, to speak his message and declare his name as Jehovah carried out his purpose in Egypt. What a privilege it was for them to declare Jehovah’s name!
2 Now in our day too Jehovah has his visible representatives on the earth, and what a privilege it is for us to be witnesses of Jehovah, declaring his name in all the earth. How we have rejoiced to see Jehovah adding increase upon increase and swelling the declaration to his praise in all lands! The name of Jehovah has become well known because his witnesses are present among the people. Jehovah has provided his Word, which we as his servants declare, and through his organization he has made it convenient for us to reach many millions by use of the printed page.
3 In August we are happily distributing bound books that bring praise to Jehovah’s name. Soon the time will be here for the greatest demonstration of Jehovah’s power, so it is appropriate that we draw the world’s attention to the meaning of the book of Revelation and this we can do through the publication “Then is Finished the Mystery of God.” We continue to feature that book in August. However, since other publications also consider God’s purpose to vindicate his name and destroy the wicked, August will be a good month to place any or all of the books that are offered for the same contribution as the “Mystery” book, such as ‘Impossible to Lie,’ Life Everlasting, “Your Will Be Done,” and “Sanctified.” If congregations have an excess stock of those publications, we urge them to take the books from the shelves and put them into the hands of the people. Any of the books may be offered during August.
4 While we may use any sermon or presentation of our choice, and we should try to find one most effective in our particular territory, our theme for the month may remind us of a sermon on God’s name, which we have used so profitably in times past. It can fit in with the presentation of any one of the books and will magnify the name Jehovah. Often we meet people who are friendly and tell us we ‘are doing a good work.’ Can we help those people to see that there is an issue involved and they have to keep taking in knowledge of him and to call upon the name of Jehovah to be saved?​—John 17:3; Rom. 10:13; Prov. 18:10.
5 In so many ways today men deny the existence of God. Others openly reproach him. What should be our reaction? Should it not be like that of David who visited the encampment of the armies of Israel and heard Goliath’s taunts? Although not one man in all the armies of Israel then showed concern and faith enough to stand up for the honor of Jehovah, David’s heart moved him to accept the challenge and declare the name of Jehovah before two entire armies. In the name of Jehovah David went out to battle and was given the victory; the reproach was taken away, Jehovah’s name was honored. Today we want to be like David. We are concerned as we hear so many reproaches against Jehovah God. Deep down in our hearts we are aroused to accept the challenge every time and take Jehovah’s side of the issue as his witnesses, declaring Jehovah’s name in all the earth.​—1 Sam. 17:26, 45-47; Isa. 43:10-12.
[Blurb on page 1]
Declare Jehovah’s name in all the earth.

