Presenting the Good News​—Seek the Most Effective Way
1 Have you considered your habits in presenting the good news? Is there something more that you can do to impress those whom you meet? For example, have you thought of how well you maintain eye contact with a person? If you are preaching and look the other person in the eye (when you do not have to read something) your presentation takes on a more positive impact. You can be more convincing. If you stare off into space while you talk, as though fishing for the next idea, someone may question whether you believe what you say or whether you know your subject.
2 Furthermore, looking another in the eye can be very revealing. People’s eyes tell many things; you sense their reaction. If the person is angry it will show. If he really is not interested, you will be able to see it. You can tell when he doesn’t understand you or follow your reasoning. If he is getting impatient you can usually tell it. You have everything to gain by such good eye contact, for you can make appropriate moves, adjust your pace or try to arouse more interest by bringing in another thought.
3 Establishing eye contact can be very effective in street magazine service. A publisher in Puerto Rico reports that by making a conscientious effort to do this as people approached on the street and then speaking to them, it has been possible to place many magazines each day. Try it in your territory.
4 The message we have is a happy, pleasant one. Therefore our facial expression ought to reflect similar sentiments. Do you smile when you approach someone? Are you friendly? A winning smile attracts. It has often been noted by news reporters and visitors at conventions of Jehovah’s witnesses that there are so many happy faces. It makes a definite impression for good.
5 We have the truth, and we know it. Therefore it is appropriate that we present it in a very positive way. When we speak, our manner should be with conviction, not simple recitation as if memorized, and our sincerity or earnestness will add force to what we have to say. If one is an ambassador representing a government, he looks out for the interests of his government and speaks out for it in a very positive way. Christian ministers serve as ambassadors or envoys for God’s kingdom, representing an actual government, the kingdom of heaven. They imitate Christ in every possible way. (Matt. 7:28, 29; Acts 4:13; 2 Cor. 5:20) By keeping a clear vision of our commission to speak God’s message we can do so in a bold and positive manner, though at the same time we are tactful and kind.
6 First impressions are often lasting ones. So we ought to be aware of our appearance as we approach people to present the good news of the Kingdom, not only in cleanness and neatness, but in our manner and our speech.

