Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 8
Theme: Living Up to Our Name. (Isa. 43:12) Song 8.
10 min: Introduction, text, comments, Announcements, “Question Box.”
 3 min: Accounts report.
17 min: Branch Letter. Two publishers discuss it. Also discuss Theocratic News, How Did We Do in June? and July congregation report.
15 min: “Mercy​—What Part Does it Play in Your Life?” Questions and answers on article in “Watchtower,” July 1, 1971.
15 min: “Keep Declaring Jehovah’s Name.” Talk exhorting congregation to continue witnessing at every opportunity, offering the books to all kinds of people. May include consideration of sermon on God’s name based on Matthew 6:9 and Psalm 83:18, if you wish. (Forty years ago we began using name “Jehovah’s witnesses.”) Closing remarks. Song 62.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 15
Theme: Let’s Watch How We Walk! (Eph. 4:1; 5:15) Song 55.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Cleanliness Makes Sense.” Questions and answers. (“Awake!,” July 22, 1971)
15 min: “Presenting the Good News.” A talk including two 4-minute demonstrations of publishers giving witness at door​—(1) publisher who gazes away while talking and fails to impress householder; (2) pleasant person who establishes good eye contact with other person and holds attention. Ask if audience can see advantage and effect of good eye contact. (See qm, page 329.)
15 min: “Defending and Legally Establishing the Good News.” Questions and answers. Afterward as time allows refer to court opinions as mentioned in paragraph 3, dealing with situations possibly arising in your territory. Urge publishers to face all legal problems with calmness and tact.
10 min: Concluding remarks. Song 7.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 22
Theme: Applying Divine Instruction. (Jas. 1:25) Song 5.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
45 min: After some weeks have passed, how are you benefiting from what you received at the assembly? What have you done with it? What are outstanding features? Make up program based on things gained from “Divine Name” District Assembly. Or, prepare a program according to local needs.
10 min: Concluding remarks. Song 110.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 29
Theme: Encouraging Others to Serve the Creator. (Rom. 1:11, 12) Song 11.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: “Are We Friends as Well as Teachers?” Question-and-answer coverage. Perhaps local experiences could be related showing the fruitage of being friends as well as teachers.
20 min: Arouse Their Thinking Ability. Talk and demonstrations. Arousing the thinking ability of people in our territory so they will take the “Evolution” book is the goal of each publisher during the month of September. The book is designed to turn the minds of thinking people from the theory of evolution to creation’s account as outlined in the Bible. September means the opening of most schools. In addition to our regular ministry why not go to colleges, especially on enrollment days, well equipped with a number of the “Evolution” books, getting permission for and arranging a display of the books outside of the school gate or entrance where students can see it? Biology teachers may be better acquainted with the book this semester because the editor of the national magazine “The American Biology Teacher” (January 1971 issue) recommended: “Teachers who wish to become more familiar with creationists’ arguments should read ‘Did Man Get Here by Evolution or Creation?’ published in 1967 by the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society and available locally from Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Students can offer it to any teacher who did not receive it previously and to new classmates also. Another avenue to follow in placing this book is the street witnessing work near schools or in the business areas. One brother reported placing 22, another 30 in approximately an hour. This shows that adults and youths alike can have their thinking ability aroused by this subject and are quick to take a publication that presents factually the case against the theory of evolution. “Kingdom Ministry,” of August and September 1970 under “Your Service Meetings,” has some good suggestions on arousing the thinking ability of people so we can place the “Evolution” book. Demonstrate ways that would apply best to the congregation’s territory. The closing chapters of the “Evolution” book are fine for study material. From this we could switch to the “Truth” book.
20 min: Concluding comments. Include theme and talk based on “Watchtower” of June 15, 1971, “Are You an Encouraging Christian?” Mention plans for Labor Day service. Song 76.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 5
Theme: Pursue Peace as Men of God’s Goodwill. (Luke 2:14) Song 67.
 6 min: Introduction, text, comments, Announcements.
 3 min: Accounts servant’s report.
20 min: Blessings of Past Service Year. Review report and results of congregation’s activities, number of pioneers, territory reached, signs of growth in numbers and in spirituality. (Luke 10:17) Consider what to report. (“Lamp” book, pp. 103-107) Hope for more increases in new service year.
18 min: “The Christian Ministry​—What Does It Include?” Questions and answers based on “Watchtower” (Aug. 1, 1971) article.
13 min: Concluding remarks. Highlight month’s service theme, based on “Watchtower” (Nov. 1, 1970). Song 117.

