From Our Readers
How Did Life on Earth Begin?
I just had to thank you for your excellent article “How Did Life on Earth Begin?” (January 22, 1987) It was marvelously clear, concise, and simple. After reading the article, I no longer have the slightest doubt​—evolution is not a fact. The article answered important questions, such as: How did we get here? Do our lives have meaning? Thank you so much for publishing articles that help us young people to avoid being taken in by this world and its beliefs.
E. A., France
Wisdom Beyond Her Years
I was very encouraged by the article “Wisdom Beyond Her Years.” (October 22, 1987) Although I am the same age as Lisa, as I read the article I wondered if I could express my faith as superbly as she did. I felt that each and every word she spoke showed an overwhelming trust in Jehovah. I want to imitate the faith of that young girl. I am looking forward very much to her resurrection.
M. S., Japan
I felt that I must take my pen and write to you. I am 14 years old, and I am always complaining. One day I read the article about Lisa. In the whole article, I never found a word of complaint. To all young people like me who are always grumbling, I would like to say that Jehovah always provides for all we truly need, and we should be grateful to him. I have some health problems, and I may lose my sight but not my life. ‘Bravo!’ to Lisa for the wonderful example of integrity she left us all!
C. F., France
I am writing to tell you how moved I was when I read Lisa’s story. I just couldn’t hold back the tears. I think that many people, me included, are discouraged when they have to face difficulties, but from now on I will always remember the courage and determination that Lisa showed in the face of great adversities.
V. L., Italy
About Animals
This is a note of thanks for the interesting and intriguing animal articles! They have gotten my 13-year-old son to read the magazines when Mom’s not around. The brilliant pictures and fascinating facts are helping my children and unbelieving mate to see some of Jehovah’s invisible qualities. Please put at least one animal article in each issue so they will continue to have to peek inside and read!
P. M., United States
I appreciated immensely the information published about animal life in Africa. (September 22, 1987) I learned many details showing how Jehovah is the greatest of all designers. I was thinking just how good it would be if parents, instead of just showing their children photographs of animals, would help them to get to know characteristics of these animals so as to grow in love and appreciation for our Creator.
S. C., Brazil

