Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Experiences From Tuvalu
THE good news of the Kingdom is being proclaimed in the beautiful islands of Tuvalu, in the South Pacific, and a good witness has been given even to men in high station. An Australian brother who with his wife is serving in the traveling work in Tuvalu tells us of his experience:
“My wife and I were invited to attend a meal at the home of the Prime Minister of Tuvalu. The occasion was the visit of Australia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs. During the course of the meal, my wife and I had a fine opportunity to witness to both the Australian minister and his wife. When introducing us, the Prime Minister mentioned what a wonderful work Jehovah’s Witnesses are doing in Tuvalu, particularly with regard to the translation of our literature into the Tuvaluan language. ‘I have copies of all their publications in my library, and they are excellent!’ he said. Both the minister and his wife were interested to hear of the progress of our work in Tuvalu.
“Later in the evening, we attended some local entertainment of traditional dancing. Afterward the Governor General of Tuvalu approached us and mentioned that some Witnesses had visited his residence the week before and had left some copies of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. He noticed on the back of one of the magazines an advertisement for the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and wanted to know how he could get one locally. We stated that we would gladly give him a copy. The next Sunday, I went up to his residence with the Bible, and we had a fine discussion for about an hour. He mentioned how much he appreciated our work and publications. In fact, when we arrived at his home, his wife was reading the Live Forever book in Tuvaluan. So we were happy to be able to witness to some ‘who are in high station.’”​—1 Timothy 2:1-4.
On another occasion the Prime Minister of Tuvalu visited the Solomon Islands. The community of Tuvaluans who live there hosted a feast in his honor. Among those invited to the feast was one sister, who reported the following experience:
“At the conclusion of the feast, the Prime Minister allowed an opportunity to ask questions about the latest developments in Tuvalu. One question asked was, ‘Are there any new religions in Tuvalu?’ The Prime Minister replied that ‘there are some new religions that have been allowed into Tuvalu but only one good one.’ When asked which one that was, he replied, ‘Jehovah’s Witnesses.’
“Everyone was surprised by his answer, and the obvious question arose as to why Jehovah’s Witnesses are the ‘only good religion.’ He stated: ‘Because our pastors sit at home all day and only ring a bell on Sundays for us to go up and listen to them. But Jehovah’s Witnesses actually come to you, and even though you may not go to church, they will teach you about the Bible in your own home.’”
So, although some would criticize our door-to-door ministry, obviously others appreciate our taking the message to their very homes.​—Acts 5:42.

