“With All That You Acquire, Acquire Understanding”
“Wisdom is the prime thing. Acquire wisdom; and with all that you acquire, acquire understanding.”​—Prov. 4:7.
 1. What is taking place in all fields of learning in our day?
TODAY, we live in a century that has witnessed a virtual explosion of knowledge. In all fields of science and learning, information accumulates at an astonishing rate. By laboratory research, by exploration on land, deep into the sea, far out into space, new data pour in faster than men can digest and evaluate them.
 2. (a) At Proverbs 4:7, what is “the prime thing” that we are encouraged to pursue? (b) Has the world’s research resulted in the kind of wisdom spoken of there?
2 In the Bible we are told: “Wisdom is the prime thing. Acquire wisdom; and with all that you acquire, acquire understanding.” (Prov. 4:7) Does the research just described fulfill those words? Has it resulted in the wisdom we should pursue as “the prime thing”? Well, is it solving earth’s major problems? Has it led people to healthier, happier, more secure, peaceful and productive lives? Has it helped man to get along better with his neighbor? You know the answer. Today we live in a sick, mixed-up world, in times of unprecedented frustration, in a day when the very existence of man and all creatures on this planet is seriously threatened. And, paradoxically, much of man’s modern research has contributed to this very state of affairs.​—Eccl. 8:17; Job 28:4-21; Jas. 3:13-18.
 3. What knowledge that this world’s systems do not offer are many sincere persons seeking, and what do they need besides knowledge?
3 While the majority allow their attention and time to be occupied with the knowledge this world’s systems offer, a steadily increasing number of persons are looking elsewhere. They now feel a definite and urgent need for gaining a clear understanding of the Bible. They want knowledge that is solid and reliable, facts on which to base their convictions and hopes. They seek a guide to help solve the everyday problems of life, to aid in making right decisions in times of crisis. And, above all, they are interested in God’s promise of everlasting life and in knowing his requirements. This information the Bible will give them, but they need to understand what they read.​—Ps. 119:105, 160; John 17:3.
 4. To gain understanding of the Bible, what attitude must we show?
4 The Bible was meant to be understood. God offers to help us understand it. But we need to show a right attitude, a willing spirit. At Psalm 32:8, 9, Jehovah says: “I shall make you have insight and instruct you in the way you should go. I will give advice with my eye upon you. [But] do not make yourselves like a horse or mule without understanding, whose spiritedness is to be curbed even by bridle or halter before they will come near to you.” God will not cajole us into drawing near to him. We must gladly and willingly draw near by studying his Word, finding delight in doing so, and putting what we learn to work in our lives.​—Prov. 2:10, 11.
 5. With the Bible psalmist, what request is it appropriate that we make to Jehovah?
5 Is that the way you feel in your heart? Then you can and should join with the psalmist in saying: “Instruct me, O Jehovah, in the way of your regulations, that I may observe it down to the last. Make me understand, that I may observe your law and that I may keep it with the whole heart. . . . Make my eyes pass on from seeing what is worthless; preserve me alive in your own way.”​—Ps. 119:33-37.
KNOWLEDGE, WISDOM AND UNDERSTANDING
6, 7. How does wisdom differ from knowledge, and why is wisdom “the prime thing”?
6 Reading the Bible will bring us knowledge. Knowledge, however, is not enough. “Wisdom is the prime thing. Acquire wisdom, and with all that you acquire, acquire understanding. Highly esteem it, and it will exalt you. It will glorify you because you embrace it. To your head it will give a wreath of charm; a crown of beauty it will bestow upon you.” (Prov. 4:7-9) Knowledge alone will not do this.
7 Knowledge means, simply, acquaintance or familiarity with facts, gained by observation and experience or by reading and study. Knowledge is basic; without it we are ignorant. But wisdom, as the book of Proverbs says, is “the prime thing.” Why? Because wisdom means the putting of knowledge to work in a way that brings good results, desirable results. It is the “prime thing” because without it our knowledge​—life itself—​would be of little value. By wisdom we attain the goals we aim at, the purposes we pursue.​—Prov. 8:4-21, 32-36; Eccl. 7:11, 12.
8, 9. Explain what understanding is.
8 Where, then, does understanding fit in? And why does the Bible say that with all our acquisition of wisdom we should acquire understanding?
9 Understanding means to see facts as they relate to one another. It implies discernment and insight, seeing into the whys and wherefores of a matter. With understanding we see, not just the isolated points of a matter, but the whole picture. We can, in effect, “put two and two together” and come up with the right conclusion.​—Dan. 9:22, 23.
10. Illustrate the meaning of understanding and of wisdom in connection with the use of a Bible concordance.
10 We might illustrate this by the use of a Bible concordance. If we look up a certain word in the concordance, say the word “faith,” we will find many texts listed under the word. If we read them we gain knowledge. If we can see how they relate together, how they harmonize with and illuminate one another, how they affect our relationship to our Creator, then we have gained understanding. And if we then effectively apply these truths in our own lives and use them to aid others, we are exercising wisdom.​—Prov. 15:2, 7; Eccl. 12:9, 10.
11. Why is knowledge “an easy thing” to a person who has understanding?
11 Understanding helps us both in gaining knowledge and in exercising wisdom. Proverbs 14:6 says that “to the understanding one knowledge is an easy thing.” Why is this? It is because the understanding person is able to relate new facts to previous knowledge, see where they connect up and fit in. By his thus tying them in with such previous knowledge the new facts make a lasting impression on his mind and are remembered. And to really “know” something we must remember it, not simply hear or read it and forget it. Besides this, the understanding person sees things in sharper focus. He sees how they relate to God and his purposes and how they affect him himself. So understanding establishes knowledge, makes it more firm.
12. Explain how understanding fortifies wisdom and, therefore, why it is so important to acquire understanding.
12 Understanding likewise fortifies wisdom. That is why the proverb says, “Acquire wisdom; and with all that you acquire, acquire understanding.” A person may have the knowledge and wisdom to drive an automobile. But if he understands how the automobile is put together, how the different parts work and what is the function of each, he will be a better driver, a wiser driver. So, too, with the Bible. A person may read in the Bible that he should do a certain thing. Because it is in the Bible, he accepts it as instruction from God and does it. This is the course of wisdom. But if he fortifies this wisdom with increased understanding, learning why God wants such an action performed, the purpose it serves, how it relates to God’s other purposes, then his conviction and resolve to continue on in faithful performance is greatly strengthened. With understanding he can truly love and serve God with his whole heart, his whole soul and his whole mind.​—Matt. 22:37.
AID TO BIBLE UNDERSTANDING
13. (a) What did Jehovah foretell through Daniel as to understanding in this “time of the end”? (b) How can understanding of the Bible help us when we undergo persecution?
13 We have great need for increasing our understanding of the Bible today. We live in the foretold “time of the end.” By his prophet Daniel, Jehovah prophesied concerning his servants: “And as regards those having insight among the people, they will impart understanding to the many. And they will certainly be made to stumble by sword and by flame, by captivity and by plundering, for some days.” “Many will cleanse themselves and whiten themselves and will be refined. And the wicked ones will certainly act wickedly, and no wicked ones at all will understand: but the ones having insight will understand.” (Dan. 11:33; 12:10) Jehovah permits the enemy to attack his servants, testing them as to their integrity. Under such tests our knowledge must be clear and sharp. If our understanding and insight are strong, this will help us endure, having firm conviction, and we can come through clean, strengthened by the experience.​—1 Pet. 5:8-10.
14. (a) What concern expressed by the apostle Paul in his letter to the Colossians does the Christian governing body feel today? (b) In harmony with this, what new publication has been prepared?
14 The governing body of the Christian congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses appreciates the importance of gaining an ever clearer understanding of God’s Word in these critical times. Many tests are yet ahead. The concern felt by the governing body for all of God’s servants earth wide is like that expressed by the apostle Paul in his letter to the Colossians, chapter 1, verses 9-12: “[We] have not ceased praying for you and asking that you may be filled with the accurate knowledge of [God’s] will in all wisdom and spiritual discernment, in order to walk worthily of Jehovah to the end of fully pleasing him as you go on bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the accurate knowledge of God, being made powerful with all power to the extent of his glorious might so as to endure fully and be long-suffering with joy, thanking the Father who rendered you suitable for your participation in the inheritance of the holy ones in the light.” In harmony with such prayer and to help sincere persons to gain increased spiritual discernment and be made powerful so as to endure fully with joy, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society has prepared a new publication entitled “Aid to Bible Understanding.”
15. (a) When the entire work is completed, what features of the Bible account will it include in its coverage? (b) Why is it beneficial for us to study such matters?
15 The first volume of this publication was released on July 9, 1969, at the “Peace on Earth” International Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses, which was then in session in New York, Buffalo and Atlanta. When completed, the entire work will contain thousands of articles arranged alphabetically beginning with “Aaron” and continuing on through to “Zuzim.” It will contribute toward greater understanding of all the many features that go to make up the Bible account. These include people of many races and nations: what they said and did, their customs, emotions and their right or wrong worship; places: including lands, cities and villages, mountains, rivers and torrent valleys, with their native trees and plants, birds and animals; notable events: the rise and fall of empires and kingdoms, political conspiracies and oppressions, major battles; and, most important, the record of God’s dealings with men: his mercy and miraculous saving acts, his judgments, promises and prophecies​—all these things and many more have their place in the Bible record. They all have significance, and the more we know about them the clearer God’s overall purpose can become to us.​—Ps. 78:1-4; Rom. 15:4.
16, 17. How extensive has been the research involved in the preparation of Aid to Bible Understanding, and how many years has it taken?
16 Recognizing the value of a reference work that would provide a comprehensive presentation of such information, five years ago the Watch Tower Society began the preparation of such a publication. Some 250 mature Christians in over 90 countries were invited to contribute to the research involved. Within the course of a year the material they gathered was sent to the headquarters of the Society. A special staff then began the checking of this material and doing much additional research. The facilities of the Watch Tower Society’s own specialized libraries, containing thousands of volumes, as well as the facilities of several large libraries of New York city were used. Some forty different translations of the Bible, in many different languages, were consulted and are cited in this work. The foreign-language departments of the Society helped with the research in non-English publications. In this way the best scholarship, including the results of the most recent research, could be brought to bear on each subject.
17 The work involved in the preparation of Aid to Bible Understanding has been immense. Five years later there is still much to do. However, the Watch Tower Society was happy to be able to present to the conventioners the first volume of 544 pages, of the size of the Watchtower magazine, covering subjects under the letters A, B, C, D and most of E, as far as the subject “Exodus.”
THE NEED FOR SUCH AN AID
18. What characteristics of many Bible dictionaries and reference works diminish their value to a teacher of God’s Word?
18 In view of the fact that there are many reference works available today in the form of Bible commentaries and dictionaries and other encyclopedic works, one may wonder why such a time-consuming project was undertaken. Though such available reference works do contain much that is helpful and useful, they also contain much that is unreliable, inaccurate or even false. In many Bible dictionaries and reference works there is a steady trend toward modernism and higher criticism of the Bible. It is viewed as merely the work of men, not an inspired document. Therefore the conclusions of historians and archaeologists are often accepted as equal to or greater in authority than the Bible. Older works generally support the Bible’s authority to a greater degree. But such older works are often not available to the average Bible student. Furthermore, even such older commentaries and dictionaries often proceed on the assumption of the reliability of religious traditions and doctrines that either are not mentioned in the Bible or are not supported by it. So a good portion of the material in these publications is colored by sectarian doctrines and religious creeds. This greatly reduces their value and benefit to one who is a minister of God.
19. (a) Give an example of open denial of the truthfulness of the Bible by a modern-day Bible reference work. (b) In contrast, what viewpoint did the apostle Paul and Jesus Christ express concerning this incident related in the Bible?
19 There is, therefore, great need for care and caution in using all such reference works, older or more recent. While claiming to contribute toward a better understanding of God’s Word, they either openly or subtly deny its accuracy and thereby undermine faith in it. An example of open denial is found in Volume 1 of The Interpreter’s Bible, page 501. Commenting on chapter 3 of Genesis, it states: “Man was forbidden on pain of death to eat of [the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil], the reason for the prohibition being God’s fear that man, acquiring knowledge of good and evil, might become like him and, approaching too near his throne, might endanger his supremacy. But the serpent, a demon hostile to God, told the truth. He was thus no subtle tempter but, in intention, at least, a benefactor of the human race.” Now, contrast this statement with that of the apostle Paul, who, in expressing his concern for the Christians in Corinth, said: “I am afraid that somehow, as the serpent seduced Eve by its cunning, your minds might be corrupted away from the sincerity and the chastity that are due the Christ.” (2 Cor. 11:3) Jesus called the one symbolized by the serpent, namely, Satan the Devil, a “liar and the father of the lie,” as well as a “manslayer.” (John 8:44) He did not call him a “benefactor of the human race.”​—Compare 1 John 4:1.
20. (a) What impression as to the trustworthiness of details in the Bible does the book The Bible as History give? (b) Is that viewpoint reasonable?
20 Or, consider the recent book The Bible as History (by Werner Keller). In the introduction (page xxi), the author says of the Bible, “The events themselves are historical facts and have been recorded with an accuracy that is nothing less than startling. . . .” This sounds like a fine commendation of the Bible. Yet, farther along in the book (pages 167, 168, British ed.; page 161, Revised American ed.), when discussing Abraham’s time, the book states: “We must eliminate the camel from our conception of life in the ancient world of the Orient. References to [camels] in the book of Genesis must have crept in at a later date. The attractive scene, for example, where we meet Rebecca for the first time in her native city of Nahor must make do with a change of stage props. The ‘camels’ belonging to her future father-in-law, Abraham, which she watered at the well were donkeys.” We may be sure, however, that Moses, who wrote the Genesis account, and God, who inspired him, knew the difference between a camel and a donkey!
21. Why do such reference works often conflict with what the Bible says? Illustrate.
21 The tendency in many such reference works is to discredit any intervention or direction of matters by God. An effort is made to attribute everything to purely human sources or causes. Thus, under the subject of the Temple, Harper’s Bible Dictionary, page 732, says: “Solomon’s Temple was built by Phoenician craftsmen from the model of a Phoenician-Canaanite . . . chapel . . . though Egyptian and other Near Eastern influences also left impacts on its design.” Yet the Bible specifically says that David gave to “Solomon his son the architectural plan of the porch and of its houses and its storerooms and its roof chambers and its dark inner rooms and the house of the propitiatory cover; even the architectural plan of everything that had come to be with him by inspiration.”​—1 Chron. 28:11, 12.
‘HOLDING FAST TO WHAT IS FINE’
22. Why is it that these worldly men, though having much learning, often fail to grasp the meaning of God’s Word?
22 Long ago, the apostle Paul wrote: “Now we received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is from God, that we might know the things that have been kindly given us by God. These things we also speak, not with words taught by human wisdom, but with those taught by the spirit, as we combine spiritual matters with spiritual words. But a physical man does not receive the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him; and he cannot get to know them, because they are examined spiritually.” (1 Cor. 2:12-14) Despite their much study and learning, men who take a fleshly viewpoint toward God’s Word are unable to grasp its meaning and often pervert it. As the apostle put it, they do not perceive “either the things they are saying or the things about which they are making strong assertions.” (1 Tim. 1:7) When considering the “strong assertions” of men whom this world recognizes as “authorities” we should not be overawed or pressured into accepting their unfounded ideas and theories. The editing staff of Aid to Bible Understanding has been careful to “make sure of all things; hold fast to what is fine.” (1 Thess. 5:21) They have endeavored to sift out the wheat from the chaff as regards the information to be found in reference works, encyclopedias and dictionaries.
23, 24. (a) In what basic way does Aid to Bible Understanding differ from all other similar publications? (b) How has research into early languages been used beneficially in this publication, but into what pitfall do some lexicographers fall?
23 In this regard, Aid to Bible Understanding differs from all other publications of a similar nature, for it consistently accepts the Bible as the principal authority and is guided by it. It is true that knowledge of the original languages of the Bible​—Hebrew, Aramaic and Greek—​has been greatly increased by the research of lexicographers. Their research has been considered and often used in this new publication. There are other Semitic languages besides Hebrew, such as Arabic and also the ancient Akkadian language (the language of the Assyrians and Babylonians). Such languages are called “cognate” languages with Hebrew because they proceed from the same root or stock. For that reason a comparison of certain Hebrew words of uncertain meaning with similar words in Arabic or Akkadian may often give a clue as to their meaning. This is true of many of the names of animals, birds and plants mentioned in the Bible.
24 However, lexicographers at times carry this too far. They even represent certain Hebrew religious terms as being drawn from the language of the pagan Assyrians and Babylonians. For example, the expression ‘Almighty God’ comes from the Hebrew ʹEl Shad·daʹy. Some translators and lexicographers, however, try to derive this from the Akkadian word shadu meaning “mountain.” So they would render ʹEl Shad·daʹy as the “Mountain God,” instead of Almighty God. The wrongness of such imaginative conjecture is made clear in Aid to Bible Understanding under the article “Almighty God.”
25. What helpful information has archaeology made available?
25 Archaeological excavations in all Bible lands​—Egypt, Palestine, Syria, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, and many others—​have contributed helpful information. Literally hundreds of thousands of clay tablets have been found with writing in cuneiform. The word “cuneiform” means “wedge-shaped” and describes the form of the letters impressed into soft clay. Papyrus scrolls from Egypt have also been found in considerable number. Besides this, other interesting artifacts​—household items, tools, warfare equipment—​have been unearthed which give some idea of the way life was during the time the Bible was being written.
26. In preparing Aid to Bible Understanding, why did the editing staff use caution as to the conclusions set forth by archaeologists?
26 Such information has also been considered in preparing Aid to Bible Understanding. There is an eight-and-a-half-page article on “Archaeology” itself. Again, however, the editing staff was careful to avoid the error many reference works make of giving exaggerated importance to such archaeological finds. In reality, archaeologists are much like detectives who try to assemble a case from the evidence they find. While their findings may seem very impressive​—huge monuments, temples and tombs, ancient writings thousands of years old, some of them engraved in stone—​yet we should remember that grave errors are committed in modern times when detectives try to go simply by circumstantial evidence without reliable witnesses to give the true meaning to that evidence. How much greater is the possibility for error when dealing with evidence that is thousands of years old. We should realize that many of the archaeologists’ conclusions are based on conjecture, even imagination. It is therefore unwise to try to build understanding, conviction and faith on an archaeological foundation. The apostle Paul says: “We are walking by faith, not by sight,” and our faith is based on God’s Word and our own experience in our relationship with God and his people.​—2 Cor. 5:7.
27. (a) Illustrate the uncertainty of archaeologists’ interpretations of their findings. (b) Did this change of viewpoint affect the reliability of what the Bible says?
27 To illustrate how uncertain many of the archaeologists’ interpretations of their findings are, we may take the case of Ezion-geber down by the Gulf of Aqabah. During excavations there from 1937-1940 a prominent archaeologist claimed to have found the ruins of a huge copper-smelting industry which he described as the ‘Pittsburgh of old Palestine’ in King Solomon’s time. (The Other Side of the Jordan, 1945, Nelson Glueck, pages 91-98) For over twenty years this interpretation of the findings at Ezion-geber was generally accepted and published in many reference works. Then in 1965, in the face of more evidence, the archaeologist acknowledged that his interpretation was incorrect. The building he thought to be the center of a copper-smelting complex was now thought to be merely a “storehouse-granary structure.” (The Biblical Archaeologist, Vol. XXVIII, September 1965) Actually, the Bible itself makes no mention whatsoever of a copper industry at Ezion-geber. It describes only the casting of copper items at a site in the Jordan Valley, north of the Dead Sea.​—1 Ki. 7:45, 46.
28. What is the result of the approach to matters taken by Aid to Bible Understanding?
28 By keeping a balanced approach to matters, the editing staff of Aid to Bible Understanding has endeavored to “keep holding to the pattern of healthful words,” staying true to the Bible facts while taking into account other sources of information. (2 Tim. 1:13) We believe that you will find the information presented to be both factual and thought-provoking. We can be happy, indeed, to have such an aid that is reliable and trustworthy, one that will build up our faith and confidence in God’s Word, not tear it down.
BENEFICIAL USE OF THE NEW BOOK
29. (a) How can this book be used to gain greater understanding of the Bible? (b) What should usually guide one in selecting the subject under which to look for information in the book?
29 How will this volume help you in gaining greater understanding of God’s Word? It will be especially valuable in home Bible reading and study. Whenever you come across a term in the Bible that is unfamiliar, or about which you are not fully informed, you will find it very profitable to look it up in this publication. With very few exceptions, the subjects contained are words and expressions found in the Bible itself. In the complete work, we will endeavor to consider every person, place, plant and creature mentioned in the Bible. To save space and also to give the reader a greater wealth of information, some closely related subjects are grouped together under a general heading, such as “Arms, Armor”; “Attitudes and Gestures”; and “Dress.”
30. How can use of the Aid book enlarge one’s understanding of the Bible book of Acts?
30 Consider some examples of the benefits of using this publication. Likely you have read the book of Acts. But did you realize that the writer of Acts (Luke) either refers directly or alludes to some 109 different geographical regions and places? Do you know where those 109 areas and sites are? Think how much greater your appreciation of the ministry of Peter, Paul and other faithful witnesses of that time can be if you learn something about each of these places and understand their relationship to one another. In some of them congregations were formed, and Paul wrote letters to several of these congregations. If we understand something of the situation and historical background of each place, we can appreciate better why certain statements or expressions appear in those letters.
31, 32. Using material from the Aid book, explain the significance of the reference to “Carmel” at Isaiah 35:1, 2.
31 The same is true of geographical references in the Hebrew Scriptures. We may read, for example, at Isaiah 35:1, 2 that the desert plain is to blossom as the saffron and that ‘the glory of Lebanon and the splendor of Carmel and Sharon will be given it.’ Only if we know something of the fertility of Lebanon, Carmel and Sharon can we appreciate the significance of this prophecy. Concerning Mount Carmel, we read in our new publication:
32 “Its slopes, washed by the sea winds, still contain fruit orchards, olive groves and vines, and in the spring are carpeted with a magnificent display of flowers. The Shulammite maiden’s lover in the Song of Solomon (7:5) likened her head to Carmel, the simile referring either to the luxuriance of her hair or to the way in which her shapely head rose majestically upon her neck. The majestic appearance of Carmel, particularly the headland that sweeps dramatically upward from the coast, . . . was also used [at Jeremiah 46:18] to represent the imposing figure of Nebuchadnezzar advancing to the conquest of Egypt.”
33. What helpful information does the new book give as to persons mentioned in the Bible?
33 In the articles dealing with persons, Aid to Bible Understanding draws your attention to the individual’s relationship or association with other prominent Bible personages. It highlights particular qualities and attitudes displayed. It endeavors to underscore any issues involved, and to bring to bear details of time, place and circumstance that throw light on the actions, speech or attitude of the individual​—points that might otherwise pass unnoticed.
34, 35. (a) How extensive is the book’s coverage of chronology? (b) What chronology charts are included?
34 Many questions have been written in to the Watch Tower Society on the subject of chronology. In Aid to Bible Understanding you will find twenty-seven pages on this subject covering, not only Bible chronology, but also the chronologies of Egypt, Assyria, Babylon and Persia. Much of the information published in recent Watchtower articles was drawn from this source.
35 You may know that Bible texts indicate that the period from Israel’s entry into Canaan to the beginning of Saul’s reign was 356 years. Yet in reading the book of Judges, if we add up the years there listed for the various oppressions and judgeships we find they total 410 years. How can this be explained? In addition to an explanation of this matter, a helpful chart is included showing one of the ways in which these figures may be harmonized. Back in 1946 the Society published the book “Equipped for Every Good Work,” with a chart of the kings of Judah and Israel. Since then much study and research has been done and in Aid to Bible Understanding you will find a new chart covering eight pages of the “Chronology” article.
36. From the chart of the Hebrew calendar in the Aid book, what can one learn about (a) the month Sivan? (b) the month Bul?
36 You will also enjoy using the chart of the Hebrew calendar with each of the months listed, along with the festivals and celebrations, the weather conditions, the crops, and other features of each month. When you read in the Bible of an event taking place in the month of Sivan you can remember the festival of Pentecost on Sivan 6 and think of the approach of summer, the occasional blowing of hot sirocco winds, the time when the wheat harvest begins in low-lying areas, when the early figs and the almonds ripen, when honey is gathered in the Jordan Valley and oleanders are blossoming. When you read of the autumn month of Bul you can think of the rainy weather, the farmers sowing their wheat and barley, the shepherds bringing their flocks back in from the fields for the winter.
37. How is the figurative use of words treated in the book?
37 Many words are used in the Bible in both a literal and a figurative sense. This is true of parts of the body (such as the eye, the ear, the feet) and also of different animals, birds and plants. The figurative usage is often more important to understanding than the literal meaning, as in the prophetic symbolisms of Daniel and Revelation. To aid understanding, our new publication shows the sense of the figurative expressions. It does this by a study of the context, related texts and the existing circumstances. Under the heading “Beasts, Symbolic” a handy chart is given of various creatures, showing what characteristic or quality each is used to represent and how they are employed as symbolisms, both of desirable things and of that which is bad and undesirable.​—Gen. 49:14; Luke 13:32.
38. What help is offered with so-called contradictions, but why is it not possible to resolve all of them with certainty?
38 In Aid to Bible Understanding you will find satisfactory explanations for many so-called contradictions, which are only superficially so. This does not mean that the publication tries to resolve all problems or clarify every detail in the entire Bible record. There are many points that cannot presently be resolved with certainty. This is so for the simple reason that the Bible does not provide detailed information on the subject or because reliable facts are not available from secular sources. Where this is the case it is frankly acknowledged.
39, 40. (a) Why are some points that were clear to persons living at the time the Bible was written obscure to us today? (b) Until when may we have to wait for some of these details to be cleared up for us?
39 Back in the period when the Bible writers were being used to set down the Scriptures, they were dealing with facts​—persons, places, events and dates—​that were doubtless generally well known to those then living. Many of the persons who read or heard the Scriptures back then had seen, perhaps lived in or traveled through many of the very places mentioned. They understood the customs of the time, the forms of speech, the methods of counting time, the cooking utensils, the weights and measurements, the business methods, the court trials, and the thousand and one other items and practices of daily life in those lands involved in the Bible record.
40 Today some of these things may remain somewhat obscure for us. We may find it difficult to understand certain geographical points, perhaps certain boundaries of the tribal inheritances. Or, some genealogical information may not be clear to us. For example, Aid to Bible Understanding lists twenty-six individuals under the name “Azariah.” Were some of these twenty-six identical? Perhaps so. However, we should have the assurance that the points that are really vital to our being able to carry out Jehovah’s will are amply clear for our needs​—if we put forth the proper effort to gain understanding. The other points will also become clear in God’s due time. Some points may wait for the return of God’s servants of the ancient past by means of a resurrection.
41. (a) How should we view this new Bible-study help? (b) As to prophecy and principles, what does Aid to Bible Understanding include, and what does it generally not cover, and why?
41 All of us who read English should want to make full use of this Bible-study help, recognizing it as a provision from Jehovah God. How does it fit in with our other publications? We will continue to find our principal channel of Bible instruction in the Watchtower magazine. Due to its objective viewpoint, Aid to Bible Understanding may show the fulfillment of prophecy in ancient times but generally will not go into the modern fulfillment, as do many of our other publications. It may aid the reader to see principles involved in a certain account or in a Bible personage’s life. But it is generally left up to the reader to make the application of those to his present-day circumstances. So Aid to Bible Understanding replaces none of our present publications. Rather, it complements them all and can make our enjoyment and the benefit derived from any of the publications that much richer.
BENEFITS TO PARENTS AND YOUTHS
42. (a) How can our new book help family members to become “full-grown in powers of understanding”? (b) What golden opportunity should parents help their children to appreciate?
42 Aid to Bible Understanding can be of great use in the home. Today parents are faced with a difficult task indeed, that of bringing up their children in a world where corruption has gone to seed. Television and other things compete with Bible study. Jehovah God’s Word tells us that we should be “babes as to badness; yet become full-grown in powers of understanding.” (1 Cor. 14:20) There is so much to fill our minds with the badness of this present system. Aid to Bible Understanding will help us to grow up in our powers of understanding as we get a sharper, clearer picture of what is involved in each account and learn more of the way life was in ancient times. Young people should be helped to realize that in their youthful years​—before they have to take on a full weight of responsibility—​they have an excellent opportunity to do much reading and studying. Parents should help their children to appreciate this golden opportunity while it is available. The new book will help.​—Eccl. 12:1.
43. (a) Why is it important for parents to take time to find out what their children are being taught in school? (b) In what way can the Aid book be used to overcome problems that arise?
43 What are your children learning at school? Have you taken time to find out? Many times material that is included in their school textbooks openly contradicts the Bible or subtly downgrades it, misrepresenting the facts. Aid to Bible Understanding will help correct many of these points in the child’s mind. It does not matter what age the children are; there is much from which they can benefit. Why, the very subject “Alphabet” is considered in the new book. And how many children in school know that the word “alphabet” itself can be traced back to the first two Hebrew letters: ʹAʹleph, Behth?
44. How can young folks in school use material from the Aid book for classes where plants, animals and the human body are studied?
44 Young folks in school have many homework assignments. Often these are on some subject where Bible material can be worked in​—in classes such as botany, biology, or history. Why not encourage your children, help them, to look up points in the Aid book? Perhaps they have to write a report on some animal, on parts of the body, on foods. Why not include something from the Bible, which deals with so many animals, including the antelope, ape, ass, badger, bat, bear, boar, camel, dog, and dozens of others? And virtually every part of the human body is considered in some part of the Bible.
45. Why is it truly beneficial for Christian youths to learn about the events and persons of Bible history?
45 So, too, with history. The Bible actually contains more genuine history than any other ancient document, more genuine and reliable history than any modern work. It covers a longer period of time, yet its application and value are timeless. Generally schoolchildren learn the history of their native land; they often memorize the names of the rulers or presidents of their country. Why should not Christian children learn the far more important history of the events involving God’s servants in Egypt, Canaan, Arabia, Assyria, Babylon, and other lands? Why should they not learn the names of the kings of Judah and Israel? Which information is the more important, the more valuable? Schoolchildren learn of certain men, such as Washington of the United States, Benito Juárez of Mexico, or others, who are given the title of “father of the country.” Yet such were not the literal fathers of all those living in their land. Abraham, on the other hand, was the father of all the nation of Israel, as well as of the Ishmaelites and of a number of Arabian tribes. He and other faithful men who served God in ancient times will one day be resurrected and many no doubt will serve in princely positions as earthly representatives of God’s heavenly kingdom. There is every reason to be keenly interested in them and their history.​—Ps. 45:16.
46. What may result from the use of material from the Aid book in school discussions?
46 Since the Bible deals with all facets of human life and all manner of subjects relating to our earth and its contents, there is no end to the possibilities for using such material. By working such points in his presentation, the schoolchild not only will be helping to increase Bible knowledge for others but also will remember for long the points he uses. He can thus have a share in defending the truth of God’s Word. If the teacher questions some statements made orally or in written form, the student can take the Aid book along and show that he has an up-to-date and reliable source of information. Perhaps the teacher will be interested in further examining the book.
INCREASING YOUR KNOWLEDGE AND UNDERSTANDING
47. For what reasons should we be interested in acquiring a broad knowledge of the places, plants and creatures referred to in the Bible?
47 And since the Bible holds out hope of living forever on a paradise earth under righteous conditions, why should not we all, young and old, learn all we can about it now​—its lands, rivers, hills, flowers, animals and birds? (1 Ki. 4:33; Matt. 6:26, 28) True, the Watch Tower Society does not encourage spending time at worldly colleges or universities, the so-called “schools of higher learning.” But that does not mean that we are to be narrow in our knowledge. We have every reason to desire a broad knowledge, embracing many subjects. But we want it to be on things that have true value, that will enhance our appreciation of God’s Word. As Paul prayed, so we pray “that your love may abound yet more and more with accurate knowledge and full discernment; that you may make sure of the more important things.” (Phil. 1:9, 10) This is the course of wisdom and “wisdom is the prime thing.” Therefore “acquire wisdom; and with all that you acquire, acquire understanding.” Our lives will be fuller and richer if we do this. Our new book will help us.
48. How can our use of the Aid book help us to make good use of the years that remain for the present system of things?
48 We do not know how many years remain for this present system of things, but time is definitely running out. May we all make wise use of the remaining time, concentrating on increasing our understanding of the upbuilding things of God’s Word. Many non-English-reading Christians around the world would be delighted to have this new book in their language. However, material from it will be used in the Watchtower and Awake! magazines, as some already has been used, and so all of God’s servants everywhere will benefit from this new aid.
49. Why was a portion of Aid to Bible Understanding published before the entire work was complete?
49 It is the Society’s hope to complete the preparation of this work within the next year or so. If this can be done, then we will publish the complete work in one volume. But rather than hold this valuable material in the present volume until the complete work is ready, the Society felt it better to publish this much now so that you can begin to make use of it. There is such an abundance of material that you will have only begun to assimilate it by the time the complete work is presented.
50. Besides increasing our Bible knowledge and understanding, what else has this book been designed to accomplish?
50 The Bible is the most absorbing and interesting book on earth, the most profitable to read and study. Aid to Bible Understanding has been designed with the aim of increasing, not only Bible knowledge and understanding, but also a heart appreciation of Jehovah, the Creator and Almighty God, and to bring praise to his name in the minds and on the lips of all who use the book. It is our earnest prayer that it may serve to help hundreds of thousands of persons to open their hearts more widely toward Jehovah God in full devotion to him.​—1 Chron. 29:10-13.
[Picture on page 107]
G. Suiter releases “Aid” book at Atlanta. Instead of taking a critical view of the Bible as many reference works do, “Aid” accepts the Bible as the main authority
[Picture on page 114]
Conventioners at Vancouver show delight with the “Aid” book’s wealth of information. It has 27 pages on chronology alone

