VOL. XXVII. MARCH 1, 1906 No. 5 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 67 

Christian Tenets the Jews May Adopt 67 

Spontaneous Generation of Life 68 

Foreign Missions and the Second Coming of 

Christ 69 

Berean Bible Study for March 70 

Blessedness Superior to Happiness 70 

Mourners Blessed and Comforted 71 

Blessed are the Meek 72 

Blessed are the Pure in Heart 73 

Blessed the Persecuted 74 

The Salt of the Earth 75 

"Ho, Prodigal Return!" (Poem) 76 

Lessons on Self-Control 76 

An Eye for an Eye 77 

page 66 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



"IN DUE TIME."-GONE 



Our stock of this year's motto cards is exhausted; but we 
have placed another order and hope to announce plenty more 
and to fill all back orders in a few months. 

VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION. 



Organize your Volunteers for 1906 at once, as we hope to 
be filling orders by April. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 

CHARTS OF THE TABERNACLE. 



We have arranged to supply beautiful Charts of the Tabernacle 
on cloth, carriage prepaid, for two dollars each. Very 
choice, and very cheap for the quality. 

WE AGAIN HAVE THE EATON-RUSSELL DEBATES IN 
GOOD SUPPLY 



The six debates published by "Gazette" as one number for 
one cent each postpaid, any quantity. 



R3731 : page 67 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
CHRISTIAN TENETS THE JEWS MAY ADOPT. 



TO find a celebrated and influential Jew advising 
his race to "follow the letter of the Law in 
the spirit of the Gospel" is a decidedly interesting 
feature of the religious situation. Mr. Claude G. 



Montefiore, president of the Anglo-Jewish Association, 

founder of The Jewish Quarterly Review and a man of 

light and leading in British Jewry, gives his fellows 

this counsel in the current number of The Hibbert 

Journal (London). Before giving this advice, he takes 

occasion to remark to the Christian readers of his article 

that some of the doctrines which they imagine to be 

distinctively Christian were, and are, Jewish. The conception 

of the fatherhood of God and of His loving-kindness, 

for example, has been paraded as Christian, 

"whereas to the rabbinic, medieval, and modern Jew 

it was, and is, the ABC of his religion." Similarly, 

the doctrines "that reconcilement with one's neighbor 

must precede reconcilement with God, or that the 

best alms are those given in secret, or that impure 

thoughts are evil as well as impure deeds, or that there 

is peculiar joy in heaven over the repentant— these 

doctrines and several others are not only rabbinic commonplaces, 

but familiar Jewish maxims." 

The common Jewish objections to Christianity are 
that some of its teaching is "unpractical and overstrained," 
that the ideal is so high as to be "incapable 
of realization," that "if some maxims were literally 
obeyed, there would be a subversion of law and order, 
and universal confusion," that "the tendency of the 
teaching is to make a man take a too selfish interest 
in the saving of his own soul," and that it "points toward 
an ascetic morality." 

In one divergence of doctrine between the rabbinic 
religion and that of the synoptic Gospels, however, 
Mr. Montefiore seems to incline toward the latter. 
He says: 

"The rabbinic religion followed the prevailing doctrine 
of the Old Testament in holding that, on the 
whole, the right principle of human conduct, and the 
great principle of divine conduct, was that of proportionate 
requital, or tit for tat. I do not mean to say 
that other principles, such as that of the divine forgiveness, 
did not frequently cross the principle of tit for 
tat, but still it seems true to say that tit for tat occupies 
a very large place in Jewish ethics and religion, a 
larger place than the facts of life or our highest ethical 
and religious conceptions can fully justify and approve. 
Now the teaching of the synoptic Gospels seems to 
traverse that doctrine in many different ways. As between 
man and man we have, for instance, the teaching, 
'If ye love them which love you, what thank have 
ye?' and the reception of the prodigal son, and as between 
God and man the teaching seems more emphatic 
still. Not only that the sun rises on the evil as well 
as the good, but also, in the parable of the vineyard, 
I will give unto this last even as unto thee.'.... 

"Perhaps one reason, tho not the deepest, why the 
doctrine of tit for tat is less thought of in the Gospels, 
is their rather pronounced antagonism to earthly good 
fortune, their strong sympathy with, or even partiality 



for, the weak, the miserable, and the poor. The only 
treasures of any value are the treasures to be attained 
in heaven. The treasures of earth are transitory from 
a double reason— the individual dies, and the old order 
is rapidly nearing its close. The same thoughts meet us 
not infrequently in the rabbinic literature, but we note 
in the Gospels a kind of passionate glorification of 
renunciation and adversity as marks of true discipleship, 
and as the one sure passport to heaven. This note goes 
beyond— how far rightly is another question— the rabbinic 
'chastisements of love.' The soul is all. 'Adversity 
is the blessing of the New Testament.' With incomparable 
eloquence and power the Gospels disclose to 
us one aspect of the ultimate truth, one facet of reality, 
to which we can never again be blind, even tho we 
realize that it is by no means the complete reality, by 
no means the only truth through which we must work 
and live, the truth, I mean, which Professor Bradley, 
with such splendid insight, has lately shown us to be 
exhibited by King Lear, that 'the judgment of this 
world is a lie; [that] its goods which we covet corrupt 
us; [that] its ills, which wreck our bodies, set our souls 
free'; 'the conviction that our whole attitude in asking 
or expecting that goodness should be prosperous is 
wrong; that, if only we could see things as they are 

R3731 : page 68 

we should see that the outward is nothing, and the 
inward is all.'" 

And of the Christian doctrine of self-renunciation 
to save others he writes: 

"The renunciation, the self-denial, and that daily 
carrying of the cross, whereby Luke, as Wellhausen 
notes, changes mere martyrdom into a general way of 
life, are not in the Gospels urged and intended solely 
to save one's own soul, but also to save others. The 
endurance, the self-sacrifice, are not to be merely passive, 
but active. They are to be helpful and redemptive; 
through loving service and sympathy to awaken 
in the sinner the dormant capacity of righteousness 
and love. 

"Lowly, active service for the benefit of the humblest 
is an essential feature of the synoptic religion. 
'He who would be great among you, let him be your 
servant.' 'It is not the will of my Father that one of 
these little ones should perish.' The teaching of the 
synoptics in this matter seems to cluster round those 
three great sayings: 'The Son of man came not to be 
ministered unto, but to minister;' I came not to call 
the righteous, but sinners;' 'The Son of man came to 
seek and to save that which was lost' 

"And here, once more, we seem to be cognizant of 
fresh and original teaching, which has produced fruit 
to be ever reckoned among the distinctive glories of 
Christianity. It has two aspects: first, the yearning 



and eager activity to save and to redeem; secondly, 
the special attitude of the Master toward sinners and 
toward sin. The rabbis and the rabbinic religion are 
keen on repentance, which in their eyes is second only 
to the law; but we do not, I think, find the same passionate 
eagerness to cause repentance, to save the lost, 
to redeem the sinner. The refusal to allow that any 
human soul is not capable of emancipation from the 
bondage of sin, the labor of pity and love among the 
outcast and the fallen, go back to the synoptic Gospels 
and their Hero. They were hardly known before his 
time. And the redemptive method which he inaugurated 
was new likewise. It was the method of pity and 
love. There is no paltering with sin; it is not made less 
odious; but instead of mere threats and condemnations, 
the chance is given for hope, admiration, and 
love to work their wonders within the sinner's soul. 
The sinner is afforded the opportunity for doing good 
instead of evil, and his kindly services are encouraged 
and praised. Jesus seems to have had a special insight 
into the nature of certain kinds of sin, and into the 
redeemable capacity of certain kinds of sinners. He 
perceived that there was a certain untainted humility 
of soul which some sins in some sinners had not yet 
destroyed, just as he also believed and realized that 
there was a certain cold, formal, negative virtue which 
was practically equivalent to sin, and far less capable 
of reformation. Overzealous scrupulosity, and the pride 
which, dwelling with smug satisfaction upon its own 
excellence, draws away the skirt from any contact 
with impurity, were specially repugnant to him. Whether 
with this sin and with its sinners he showed adequate 
patience may perhaps be doubted, but it does seem to 
me that his denunciation of formalism and pride, his 
contrasted pictures of the lowly publican and the 
scrupulous pharisee, were new and permanent contributions 
to morality and religion. As the Jewish 
reader meets them in the synoptic Gospels, he recognizes 
this new contribution; and if he is adequately 
open-minded, he does it homage and is grateful." 

SPONTANEOUS GENERATION OF LIFE. 



We see much in the public prints respecting the 
efforts of chemists and biologists to produce life, and 
several "professors" have announced their success in 
so doing. What are the facts? 

For centuries scientific minds— skeptical respecting 
the teachings of the Bible that God is the author of 
life, the Creator of all things— have been examining 
nature to see how life has its start. At first it seemed 
that new bugs, worms and insects were from time to 
time created independently. For instance, many have 
noticed that an old, water-soaked wooden pail would 



be lifted and an enormous roach found beneath it— too 
large to have crawled under, and perhaps of a kind 
not previously seen in that quarter. 

Further research demonstrated that there are in 
the earth, the air and the water, microbes far too small 
to be seen by the naked eye, which, under favorable 
conditions, would produce larger living creatures of one 
kind or another, according to the environments and 
conditions. 

Then came the suggestion that all the larger forms 
of being were mere evolutions from lower to higher. 
With this thought the learned of this world have been 
wrestling for the past fifty years, shaking the foundations 
of faith in the Bible for millions. For if the Bible 
be true this theory is false as respects man's origin. 
Instead of further evolution being our salvation the 
Bible points us to our fall, to the redemption accomplished 
for the world by the Son of God, and to the 
coming deliverance of the groaning creation from sin 
and its death penalty. Only those who trust the Bible 

R3732 : page 68 

record are safe from the blighting influence of this 
evolution error. 

STILL ON THE WRONG PATH 

Still pursuing the wrong trail, our wise men of 
to-day conclude that although they cannot gainsay that 
our entire race sprang from one pair, and although the 
highest type of monkey still leaves an impossible chasm 
between it and mankind, even in his most depraved 
condition, nevertheless they may yet find the "missing 
link" by which the first human pair, supposedly very 
inferior and degraded, could have been produced. 
Alas ! how much more men will labor to establish an 
error than to corroborate a truth. 

Without waiting to find the "missing link," others 
of the "learned," who know not God, have started at 
the other end of the line, to prove that God had nothing 
to do with creation. Rather their claim is that Nature 
is God. And although they know her not except in 
his works, they ascribe all power and skill to Nature. 
The endeavor now is to prove that Nature is God- 
that the very lowest form of life, protoplasm, is Nature's 
oldest child, from which sprang, gradually, by evolution, 
every creature, including man, who they claim 
is progressing rapidly without a fall, without a Redeemer, 
and without need of any heavenly aid, to 
perfection. 

DR. LITTLEFIELD'S FINDINGS (?) 

Dr. C. Littlefield now steps before the world announcing 
that he by experiments has actually produced 



R3732 : page 69 

living organisms where there was no life of any 
kind previously. He asserts that he was very careful 
in these experiments and surely excluded every lurking 
microbe. If true, if it can be corroborated by others, 
it will be assumed as proof that there is no Creator, 
no God, except Nature. Ah! says one of old, "The 
fool hath said in his heart, There is no God." 

If it be true that a low form of life can be produced 
chemically, it proves nothing. What is Nature but the 
creature of our all-wise God? The divine power placed 
all the conditions of Nature and fixed her limitations 
as we behold in the various animal species. The Bible 
record is that God commanded the sea first to bring 
forth, and produced the conditions necessary to its 
teeming life. But the same Bible with explicitness declares 
the special creation of mankind in the Creator's 
likeness, and not in the image of a baboon. 

THE CLAIM IS DISPUTED 

Fortunately for the truth, when one "professor" 
seeks to shine another seems ambitious to shine by extinguishing 
him. So here we have from the Scientific 
American Professor C. E. Tingley's repudiation of 
Professor Littlefield's claims, with logical reasons for 
supposing that the experiments were not reliable. We 
quote: 

"It is a far cry from a simple protoplasmic cell to 
that of a highly organized insect such as that just 
described, in fact almost as far as it is from lifeless 
crystals to living matter. Oppositely, the higher critics 
will have none of it, basing their conclusions on 
practically the same grounds that Professor Tyndall 
took in relation to Dr. C. Henry Bastian's experiments 
nearly thirty-five years ago. This scientist, it would 
seem, was eminently qualified to investigate the origin 
of life, for he was recognized as an authority on biology 
and the pathology of the nervous system, and he was 
a strong advocate of the doctrine of spontaneous generation 
of life. In one of his many papers he pointed 
out the results he had obtained in creating life artificially, 
and he declared that 'observation and experiment 
unmistakably testified that living matter is constantly 
being formed de novo and in accordance with 
the same laws and tendencies which determine all the 
more simple chemical combinations.' Professor Tyndall 
took up the matter and carefully tested Dr. Bastian's 
experiments, but took precautions, which the 
latter had neglected, to prevent the ingress of life during 
the processes of sealing the vessels, and though he 
varied the experiment in many ways no germs of life 
manifested themselves, so that Tyndall felt impelled to 
thus testify: 'I affirm that no shred of trustworthy 



evidence exists to prove that life in our day has ever 
appeared independent of antecedent life.' 

"The moral of Tyndall's statement is obvious; the 
value of Dr. Littlefield's or any one else's experiments 
in the artificial generation of life lies absolutely and 
solely on excluding every trace of pre-existing life and 
thus preventing contamination which must otherwise 
surely follow during the progress of the tests. Carelessness 
in this respect has led biologists, even those who believe 
in the hypothesis of abiogenesis, to cry down every 
attempt made looking toward the artificial production 
of life. At various times Spencer, Huxley, Darwin, and 
Pasteur were firmly convinced that they had found the 
secret of life, but repeated experiments wherein antecedent 
life was more rigorously excluded than before 
proved their efforts futile. 

"Evidently error of a similar nature has crept into 
the tests of Dr. Littlefield, and this is not said without 
due consideration, for the present writer has performed 
the experiment as above written, not one but many 
times, and in every instance the result was not successful 
beyond the mere crystallization of the chlorides. 

"It is true that more recent reports state that the 
development took place under sealed glasses thoroughly 
sterilized before beginning and sealed from the air when 
placed on the shelf, but it is obvious that there was 
every chance for pre-existing life to slip in, and so what 
would otherwise have been regarded as a wonderful 
achievement in science has not been taken very seriously 
by men skilled in either chemistry or biology." 



R3732 : page 69 

FOREIGN MISSIONS AND THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST. 

THE following is a digest of an address given upon Foreign 
Missions at the recent session of the Friendship Association, 
by R. E. Neighbour, pastor First Baptist Church, 
Americus, Ga." 

"Brethren, hearken unto me: Simeon hath rehearsed 
unto me how first God visited the Gentiles, to take out of 
them a people for his name. And to this agree the words of 
the prophet; as it is written: After these things I will return, 
and I will build again the tabernacle of David, which is 
fallen; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will 
set it up; that the residue of men may seek the Lord, and all 
the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, sayeth the Lord, 
who maketh these things known of old." 

From these four verses, quoted from Acts 15:13-18, R.V., 
we learn: 

First. God will at first visit the Gentiles, to take out of 
them a people for his name. 

Second. After these things, Christ will return. 

Third. The tabernacle of David will then be rebuilt. 



Fourth. The residue of men, and all the Gentiles, will 
seek after the Lord. 

Here we find God, the holy Spirit, unfolding the plan 
of this age. The work of the Church, then, is what? 

To take out of the Gentiles, or nations, a people for 
his name. It is impossible to read into these words that we 
are to "take the world for Christ." This is an "elect" age. 
The Church, God's "ecclesia," are a people "called out" 
from among the nations. 

The Church is a minority, and will remain so during its 
whole existence. The work of the Church can never be 
marked "a failure," as long as it is doing the work that God 
ordained. Because the Church does not "convert the world," 
it cannot, therefore, be deducted that the Church is making 
the world worse. 

But what is the great inspiration of Foreign Missions? 
Surely, without a doubt, it is the Second Coming of Christ 
in pre-Millennial glory. And why? Because, as soon as the 
Church arouses herself and, empowered by the Spirit, gathers 

R3732 : page 70 

out of the Gentiles the certain number of God's elect, then 
he will come and establish himself on David's throne, after 
which the residue of men may seek the Lord. 

The thought in the missionary's heart, then, should not 
be "India for Christ," or "Africa for Christ," or "the World for 
Christ," but the bringing to God from the east and from the 
west, from the north and from the south, a people for his 
name. The great inspiration of a Christian worker is, "After 
this, I will return." 

Does not the truly saved yearn for the appearing of the 
Lord? Is not the very height of his glory to see him coming 
in his majesty? Then, what is the better way? To stop trying 
to win men to him, and sit down and merely pray, inasmuch 
as the coming of the Lord will bring salvation to all 
men? 

By no means. To be sure, we must pray for the coming 
of the Lord, but we must also work for it. 

If the taking of the "world for Christ" is the missionary's 
motive, he must despair. Nineteen centuries of this era 
of grace have already passed, and yet there are more heathen 
today than there were in the days of Paul. The earth is 
filled with new and strange doctrines. Whereas, if the veneer 
were removed, we would find sin and lust just as heinous as 
in the long ago. 

This is a man-glorying age. Wonderful achievements 
and startling progression are seen on every side, yet with all 
our learning, riches and advance of civilization, there is not 
a country, a city, nor even a hamlet, where Jesus truly reigns. 

R3733 : page 70 

No, brethren, the wheat and the tares must grow together 
to the end of this age. The mustard seed has grown 
into a great tree, but the birds of the air (representing the 



wicked one and his children) roost in the branches thereof. 

The meal, to be sure, is good, but the leaven (sin) is contaminating 

the whole loaf. The drag-net which holds the 

evil as well as the good will not be separated until the consummation 

of the age. 

Dear brethren, keep clearly before your mind that the 
work of the Church is to call out a people for his name; 
that the inspiration of this work is the glory of hastening the 
coming of our Lord, and that the coming of the Lord will 
bring to the Church her reward. 

How the activities of the Church ought to be quickened. 
How her gifts should be increased. How her hand should 
be reached out in every direction until God from above shall 
say, The work of the Church is done, the witness to the uttermost 
part of the earth has been borne, the elect from the 
foundation of the world have been brought in, and the day 
of her reward is at hand!— Christian Index. 



R3733 : page 70 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR MARCH. 

-FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

STUDIES IN PRAYER 

21. What is the cost of selfish prayers? Z. '02-250 (1st 
col. par. 1 to 3). 

22. What is meant by "vain repetitions" in prayer? Z. '98-28 
(2nd col. par. 2). 

23. How may we be "instant in prayer"? Z. '97-265 
(2nd col. par. 2 to 4); Z. '93-215 (2nd col. par. 2). 

24. What does it mean to "pray without ceasing"? 
Z/03-25 (1st col. par. 2, 3); Z.'04-l 18 (1st col. 
par. 1). 

25. How should we understand, "Ye shall ask what ye 
will, and it shall be done unto you"? Jno. 15:7. 
Z/96-149, 150; Z/04-234 (1st col. par. 3, and 2nd 

col. par. 1); Z/05-124 (2nd col. par. 1, 2); F.679, 
par. 1, to 680, par. 2; Z/05-343 (1st col. par. 3). 

26. What relative privileges in prayer have justified and 
consecrated persons? F.681, par. 3, to 684, par. 1. 

27. What privileges of prayer do the children of consecrated 
parents enjoy? F.531, par. 1, to 532, par. 2, 

and 684, par. 2. 

28. How should we look out for the interests of each 
other through prayer? Z. '03-218 (1st col. par. 1); 
Z.'95-170(2ndcol. par. 2). 

29. What is the relation between faith and prayer? Jas. 1:6; 
Mark 1 1:24; Z/96-162 (1st col. par. 3, to 2nd 

col. par. 2); F.691, par. 2; Z/05-345 (1st col. par. 2) 
(and 2nd col.) 

30. What is the relation between prayer and thanksgiving? 



Z.'03-8 (1st col. par. 2, 3); Z/04-24 (1st 
col. par. 1); Z. '01-271 (1st col. par. 3). 



R3733 : page 70 

BLESSEDNESS SUPERIOR TO HAPPINESS. 

--MATTHEW 5:1-16.-MARCH 4.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.' 

HAPPINESS describes the joyful moods which come to 

mankind from time to time, but blessedness relates 

to that permanent joy and comfort which are the 

result of the attunement of character to harmony with the 

divine. The people of the world may at times be happy, and 

at other times downcast, mournful and troubled; but to those 

who become followers of the Lord Jesus, and who as pupils 

in the school of Christ are taught of him, there is a peace 

of God which passes all understanding ruling in their hearts, 

bringing comfort and rest even under most adverse outward 

conditions. The lesson we are now considering describes to 

us the condition of heart necessary to the possession of the 

peace of God. In proportion as we get before our mental 

eyes the true conception and then strive to attain that ideal, 

in the same proportion will be the degree or progress of blessedness 

which will come into our hearts and lives to rule 

there and to keep us in the love of God. 

Our Lord and his disciples were on an elevated plane 
of the mountain side, and crowds of people were coming to 
hear the message of the great Teacher respecting the Kingdom 
so long anticipated and which he declared was nigh. 
His miracles had attested his divine authority as a Teacher, 

R3733 : page 71 

and this drew the people to him "who spake as never man 
spake." (John 7:46.) Seeing the gathering multitudes Jesus 
went up the mountain onto a little mound, where he 
could the better be seen and heard by all. After the manner 
of olden times he sat down while making his address, the 
people also sitting down. The customs of the times favored 
this— loose, flowing robes, sandals easily removed, and the 
people accustomed to sitting with their limbs folded under 
them in what is sometimes styled "tailor fashion." 

The teaching was addressed primarily to those nearest 
to the Lord, namely, his special disciples, the multitude interestedly 
watching for any items in the address that would 
specially enlighten them. It must have seemed strange to all 
the hearers that our Lord did not talk more about the Kingdom 
itself, explaining when and how it would be established, 
etc. But he knew that he must first suffer for the redemption 
of the world before the Kingdom could come and the 
divine will be done on earth as it is done in heaven. He 



knew, too, that the first work in preparing for the establishment 

of the Kingdom would be the gathering of the Church 

class, the elect, to be his Bride and joint-heir in the Kingdom. 

His discourse, therefore, was so directed as to divide the 

hearers into two classes— some would be disappointed because 

they were interested more in the glories and honors and dignities 

of the Kingdom hoped for than in the condition of 

heart necessary to a place in it. These probably went their 

way saying that doubtless Jesus was a great Teacher to those 

who liked his kind of philosophy, but to them it was a very 

dry and unsatisfactory portion. 

Others, though disappointed in the character of the teaching, 
found something in it which satisfied their longings as 
nothing else could do— found in it nourishment, comfort, upbuilding 
qualities. The same is true today: some hear the 
good tidings of great joy with interest merely in those features 
which relate to restitution. They are glad to know 
that there is no eternal torment in the divine plan, but that, 
on the contrary, times of refreshing are coming to the world, 
and times of restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of 
all the holy prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:19-21.) 
But aside from this, all discussion respecting consecration to 
the Lord and terms of discipleship, all descriptions of characteristic 
conditions that would fit them for the Kingdom, are 
wearisome to them, distasteful. Thus does the Truth always 
separate. 

"THE POOR IN SPIRIT" 

The message of this great Teacher differed from all 
others, and was especially attractive to the humble, the 
lowly. Whereas others would have said, Blessed are the 
rich, the learned, the prominent, the rulers, this great Teacher 
reversed the matter, saying, "Blessed are the poor in spirit" 
—blessed are those who are not self-conceited, who do not 
think very highly of themselves, who appreciate their own 
littleness and imperfection. Astounding! How are such 
blessed? Surely the world thinks little of those who do not 
think much of themselves! Surely they will make less 
progress in the world! Ah, yes! But, says the Master, their 
blessedness consists in the fact that they are of the Kingdom 
—of those from whom the Kingdom of heaven class will be 
selected. 

Self-confidence, self-esteem, may win for its possessor a 
high and honorable place in the present time, but is disesteemed 
of the Lord; and those who have such a spirit will 
be the less prepared for the tests and conditions which the 
Lord will impose in selecting the heirs of the Kingdom, the 
joint-heirs with Christ. Yes, indeed!— there is a favor and 
blessedness associated with being little in one's own estimation: 
it preserves from many a false step into which egotism 
would lead. All who are seeking to follow the instructions 
of the great Teacher, who naturally are poor in spirit, humble-minded, 
deficient in self-esteem, have much advantage every 
way over others as respects this particular element of character. 
And those who are not naturally humble should take 



heed to the Master's instruction, and humble themselves under 

the mighty hand of God, that they may be exalted in due 

time. (1 Pet. 5:6.) The Lord's followers, then, should continually 

R3734:page71 

practise humility and be especially on guard against 
pride, self-conceit, etc.; they should know on the great 
Teacher's authority through the Apostle that God resisteth the 
proud and shows his favor to the humble, the poor in spirit, 
to such an extent that only the humble will share with the 
Lord in the inheritance of the Kingdom.— 1 Pet. 5:5; Jas. 4:6. 

MOURNERS BLESSED AND COMFORTED 

Again it seems strange, contrary to the usual thought, 
to say "Blessed are they that mourn." The general thought 
is that those who mourn are to be specially commiserated. 
What principle lies behind the Master's assurance that there 
is a blessedness connected with mourning? We reply that we 
cannot suppose that there is mourning in heaven— we must 
suppose that there is happiness, blessedness there. Hence 
the blessedness of mourning must in some way relate to our 
present imperfect, sinful conditions and surroundings. Sin is 
in the world, and death, the wages of sin, is being paid out 
to the entire human family, carrying into every home more 
or less disappointment, sorrow, trouble. Where these are appreciated 
rightly there must surely be mourning. The world 
is sick and dying; with its twenty thousand million dead and 
sixteen hundred million dying in sorrow and pain and disappointment, 
he who is "merry" must surely be correspondingly 
irrational. Who but a foolish person could be merry 
in the shadow of such a charnel-house! Those who are merry 
under such conditions give evidence of so wrong a condition 
of heart and mind that we may know that they will require 
rigid disciplinary instructions (such as will be accorded to 
the majority of mankind during the Millennium) in order to 
bring them to their proper senses. 

On the contrary, those who do mourn because of a realization 
of their own imperfections, their own fallen condition, 
and who to any extent mourn in sympathy with the poor, 
groaning creation, these have corresponding advantages because 
of their saner condition of mind; they will be the more 
ready for the heavenly message, telling of the glorious blessing 
that is to come through redemption in Jesus and through 
his Kingdom, which, as the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, 
shall bring in health, healing, life and comfort to all 
the families of the earth. Blessed are these mourners now, 
because they are in that much more favorable condition to 
hear the voice of him who speaketh from heaven— speaking 
peace through Jesus Christ our Lord. They shall be comforted. 
Their comfort shall not wait either until the new 

R3734 : page 72 

dispensation of the Kingdom shall be fully inaugurated and 



bring in the blessings of restitution: their comforting will 
begin at once, for their mourning will bring a readiness of 
mind to hearken for the Lord's favor. So to these he will 
be pleased to make known something of the riches of his 
grace and lovingkindness through Jesus. They will have 
therefore the best opportunity for attaining the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding through the holy Spirit in 
this present time, and also in the dispensation to come. 

Sorrow may be associated with sin and imperfection. 
It is proper that we should realize our fallen condition and 
be sorry for it, but this sorrow may be healed at once through 
the knowledge of the great redemption sacrifice and through 
our acceptance of a share in the merit of the same. But 
there is another sorrow or mourning which is not because of 
sin but because of sympathy. Our Lord, who was separate 
from sinners, had this spirit of mourning. It was this mourning 
in sympathy that led to his tears at the tomb of Lazarus, 
and the same that led to his being called "the man of sorrows 
and acquainted with grief."— Isa. 53:3. 

In our imperfect fallen condition, even after our hearts 
are fully consecrated to the Lord and imbued with his Spirit, 
it will not be possible for us to enter so fully into sympathy 
with others as did our dear Master; but we are to cultivate 
this spirit of sympathy, which is a part of the spirit of love, 
and the more we grow in grace and in character-likeness to 
the great Teacher the more we will have of the spirit of 
sympathy, the more sorrow and mourning will appeal to us. 
On the other hand, however, the more we receive of this same 
holy Spirit proportionately we will have the greater peace, 
the greater joy in the Lord and the greater rejoicing, because 
of what we will be increasingly permitted to discern in the 
unfolding of the great plan of salvation under which all who 
mourn in Zion shall be comforted. So, then, the most advanced 
Christians, who have the deepest and most holy joy, 
should be the ones who at the same time would have the 
deepest sympathy with mourning and sorrow. Who has not 
already noticed this, that as our Lord and Teacher is the 
exemplar of perfection, so those who most nearly imitate him 
are usually such as have had deep experiences in the school 
of sorrow and mourning, and in whose hearts and characters 
deep spiritual lessons and characteristics have been 
engraved? 

The word comfort does not contain the thought of relief, 
but rather that of strengthen together, or added strength. 
In other words, the Lord does not propose to take from us 
that noble quality of sympathy which we receive in the school 
of experience, but he does propose for all those who become 
his true followers that they shall be comforted or strengthened 
together, that he will give them a blessing of strength 
to endure, which will compensate their mourning and spirit 
of heaviness. He gives this through the promises of his 
Word and the glorious hopes which he sets before us, and he 
gives it also through the living epistles of the dear members 
of the household of faith. Note how the Apostle calls this 
to our attention in 2 Corinthians 1:4, where many times over 
he repeats the thought of our comforting one another with 



the comfort wherewith the Lord has already comforted us. Oh, 
what a privilege we enjoy, not only of being comforted by 
the Lord through his Word, but of being used of him as channels 
for comforting or strengthening or upholding one another 
during this mourning time, when some, more than others, have 
in themselves weaknesses and frailties to cause mourning to 
themselves and to others. Blessed are those who, being 
comforted themselves, shall be used of the Lord in the comforting 
of the other members of his body. 

"BLESSED ARE THE MEEK" 

The poor in spirit or humble minded, who do not think 
highly of themselves, are unquestionably the same as the 
meek, the gentle. The Century Dictionary defines the 
word meek as "self-controlled and gentle; not easily provoked 
or irritated; forbearing under injury or annoyance." Webster 
defines meekness as "submission to the divine will; patience 
and gentleness from moral and religious motives." As we 
look about us in the world and note the meek of the earth 
we do not see them more prosperous than others, and our 
Lord's words that such shall inherit the earth would astonish 
us and seem quite untrue if we did not understand that 
he referred to blessings beyond the present life. Surely the 
millionaires of earth, that own the larger portion of it and its 
riches, valleys and slopes, are very rarely to be counted as 
the meek. And so we see that the Master did not say, 
Blessed are the meek, for they do inherit the earth, but "they 
shall inherit the earth." 

When, Lord? 

Answer: When God's Kingdom shall come and his will 
be done on earth as it is done in heaven— then the meek 
shall inherit the earth. So, then, if we perceive that the rude, 
the unjust, the self-assertive, are grasping the bounties of 
earth in the present time, and if we find ourselves rather 
crowded out because of meekness, let us remember our 
Lord's Word that we are especially blessed, and let us cultivate 
this quality of meekness more and more, and let us not 
think to exchange it for a spirit of arrogance and self-assertion 
and vindictiveness, to grasp earthly fame and name and 
riches. Let us rather be content to cultivate this spirit 
which the Lord assures us he approves, and let us wait for the 
time when this class shall inherit the earth. We perceive 
that the inheritance will be with a view to giving it to the 
human family under the terms and conditions instituted during 
the Millennial age. Then the meek of the restitution 
class will inherit the earth; they will be given the advantage 
everyway, and eventually all who are not meek will be 
utterly destroyed from amongst the people in the Second 
Death. 

The meek ones of the Lord's followers even now in a 
measure receive the fulfilment of this promise, as the Apostle 
declared, "All things are yours, for ye are Christ's and Christ 
is God's." (1 Cor. 3:22,23.) These have more enjoyment of 
the earth now than have others; while others are grasping 
these are enjoying. As the Apostle declares, "God hath given 



us all things richly to enjoy." (1 Tim. 6:17.) Freed from the 
grasping spirit, we can pass through the streets and observe 
the rich displays of the shop windows without covetousness, 
without wishing that we had the various works of art and 
beauty under our special care and control. We can feast 
our eyes upon them and be without the care of them at a 
time when all of our talents are consecrated to the Lord and 
his service, and when we have more important things to do 
than caring for earthly trinkets called works of art. 

R3735 : page 73 

BLESSED THE HUNGRY AND THIRSTY 

Our Lord refers to two of the most potent influences known 
amongst men. To what activity will not hunger and thirst 
spur us? Similarly there is in some a heart-hunger and 
thirst for that which is right, that which is true. The majority 
of people evidently do not have much of this hunger of the 
soul: natural eating and natural drinking are their special 
attractions. But all are not so, and there is a special blessing 
for those who have the soul-hunger to which our Lord 
refers. "They shall be filled"— they shall be satisfied. 

Nothing in this promise implies a miraculous filling or 
satisfying: the thought connected with the illustration rather 
is that, hungering and thirsting, they will make use of their 
time, knowledge and opportunities for seeking the bread of 
eternal life, which satisfies, and the water of life, which truly 
refreshes; and that in proportion as these are sought and 
found and used will be the blessing. We have the Lord's 
guarantee of the blessing for all who are in the attitude of 
mind to seek and to use the spiritual refreshments he 
provides. 

Righteousness here applies to right in every matter- 
Truth. God is the great standard of righteousness, and he 
communicates it through his Word, his exceeding great and 
precious promises delivered to us through Jesus and his 
apostles. The majority of the world, careful for the meat 
that perishes, think little of the Truth and get little of it; 
the few hungering and thirsting for it are filled, refreshed, 
sanctified by it, and in word and in deed and in thought 
are being fitted and prepared for still further blessings in 
God's due time— participation with the Redeemer in the 
Kingdom and a share with him in the work of blessing and 
uplifting mankind. 

"BLESSED ARE THE MERCIFUL" 

Mercy is akin to love, and in proportion as the fall has 
effaced love from any heart in that proportion mercy will be 
lacking. Of course we cannot always judge by the outward 
appearance, as there are outward forms and expressions of 
love without the heart. So sometimes mercy is extended 
without the real spirit of mercy prompting it. Sometimes it 
is to be seen through the recognition of a principle without a 
sympathy with that principle. The true Christian learns in 



the school of Christ not only of his imperfections and his 
need of divine mercy, but having found that mercy and having 
entered the school of Christ it becomes one of the most 
important lessons he can learn to extend similar mercy 
toward others. The Apostle declares that "Mercy rejoices 
against Judgment"— against the execution of justice. (Jas. 2:13.) 
Strange as it may appear, those who have most need 
of mercy for themselves appear usually to be the ones 
least ready to accord mercy to the failures of others. 

Contrariwise, those who grow most in the spirit of the 
Lord grow proportionately merciful and compassionate. Some 
of the Lord's people have more to overcome in this 
direction than have others, and may therefore show less 
development in proportion to their efforts; but the thought 
should be continually before the minds of all that it is very 
unbecoming for those who themselves have need of divine 
mercy to be sticklers in the last degree in their requirements 
of justice for others, in their refusal to exercise mercy toward 
others. Not only so, but this lesson which our Lord so 
frequently emphasized he intensified when he said, You do 
not from the heart forgive those who trespass against you, 
neither will your heavenly Father forgive your trespasses. 
He thus teaches us that our mercy must be more than formal, 
more than an outward forgiveness and reconciliation— it must 
be from the heart, sincere. In proportion, therefore, as we 
each realize our need of divine mercy through Jesus, in that 
same proportion let us be very merciful to others— especially 
toward the brethren and all who in any sense or degree demonstrate 
their desire for righteousness. 

"BLESSED ARE THE PURE IN HEART" 

The word pure is very comprehensive— without adulteration, 
sincere, unsullied. No member of the human family 
is by nature in this condition. On the contrary, the Scriptures 
assure us that the heart of the natural man is exceedingly 
deceitful and desperately wicked. (Jer. 17:9.) The heart 
in this text and in general conversation is used not as the name 
of one of the organs of the human system, but as indicating 
the inner mind, will, intention of the person. As originally 
created man was the image of God, and hence was then pure 
in heart, sincere, honest, truthful, perfect-intentioned; but, 
by reason of disobedience, sin and selfishness have been 
developed in the human heart and will, and the God-like 
qualities originally there have been to a considerable degree 
obliterated. Hence it is that those who become the Lord's 
people are said to have a new heart, a new will, new ambitions, 
new desires. Where the conversion from sin to 
righteousness is thorough it is truthfully said, "Old things 
have passed away, all things have become new."— 2 Cor. 5:17. 

To accomplish so radical a change of will, of intention, 
requires a powerful influence. It may be of fear and it may 
be of love, but we are assured that the results of fear are 
imperfect, and that only love produces the lasting, perfect, 
acceptable conditions. Fear may have to do with the beginning 
of a change of heart, but it certainly cannot carry the 



conversion to completion, for, as the Scriptures declare, 
"Fear hath torment," and the peace of God cannot rule in 
the heart that is subject to such distress. (1 John 4:18.) 
Hence the Scriptures set before us the heart conversion which 
results from the knowledge of God and love for him, saying, 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart," and 
again assuring us that "perfect love casteth out fear."— Mark 12:30; 
1 John 4:18. 

Our Lord's words intimate that there may be various 
degrees of impurity of heart, and so we find it: there are 
some who at heart are really black, devilish; others are drab 
or gray or speckled. But the Lord singles out the kind of 
heart that would be acceptable to the Father— the pure in 
heart. We are all witnesses that we could not claim purity 
of heart, of intention, of motive, of desire for very many of 
our friends and neighbors of Christendom, and that so far as 
we know in the heathen world the proportion would be still 
fewer. Yet the intimation of our text is that only such as 
attain to heart purity can hope ever to see God, to enjoy 
this evidence of his love. 

But lest some should be discouraged through supposing 
that purity of heart means absolute perfection of thought and 
word and deed, we hasten to correct that thought and to 
point out that the intention is not always supported by the 
words and conduct. To will right, to will perfectly, to be 

R3735 : page 74 

pure in heart, is quite possible, yea, quite necessary to all 
who would have divine approval; yet how to perform all that 
they will is sometimes beyond the ability of the Lord's most 
earnest followers. The new will, the new heart, must act and 
speak through the medium of the old body, whose affections 
are continually in opposition and must be battled against. 
Hence so long as we are in the flesh, so long as we are 
obliged to reason, speak and act through the imperfect 
medium of our fallen flesh, that long will we have need of the 
merit of Christ to continually cover its blemishes; that thus 
the new will, the new heart and not the flesh, may be judged 
of the Lord and tested as to its worthiness or unworthiness 
of the eternal life and blessings which he has proffered us. 

How precious the thought, then, that we may attain to 
absolute purity of intention, of love, etc., toward all mankind 
as well as toward the Lord, and that God will thus accept us 
in his Beloved One, not counting to us the unintentional 
weaknesses and blemishes which we realize and which others 
realize perhaps still more than we. How blessed the thought 
that such will see God, that such have the clearest views 
of God's character and plan now, that such shall see him 
shortly when changed in the resurrection, when they shall 
have awakened in the likeness of their dear Redeemer. 

BLESSED THE PEACEMAKERS 

Never was there a time when this statement of our Lord 
deserved more consideration than at present. We live at a 



time when envy and strife are in evidence on every hand, 
amongst all classes, amongst nations, in politics, in business, 
in homes and families, in nominal churches and amongst the 
fully consecrated of the true Church. The tendency toward 
strife is evidently somewhat associated with the strenuous 
times in which we live; but all the more those who are true 
members of the body of Christ are to remember the Scriptural 
injunction, "Follow peace with all men;" and again, "Be at 
peace amongst yourselves." (Heb. 12:14; 1 Thess. 5:13.) Some 
of the best people in the world have the organ of combativeness 
large, but proportionately they need to have love to control it, 
so that they shall combat only those things which are evil 
and injurious, so that they shall think generously, kindly, 
lovingly of all who take a different view of matters; and 
while standing always firm for principle, they should take 
note of the fact that principle enters into remarkably few of 
their conflicts, contentions, etc. 

Each of the Lord's children should be learning day by 
day to cultivate the fruits and graces of the holy Spirit, 
amongst which prominently are patience, long-suffering, 

R3736 : page 74 

brotherly kindness, love. These things dwelling in us and 
abounding we shall be more and more pleasing to the Lord 
and able to assist others in the same direction— to be peacemakers. 
For who can properly be a peacemaker who is not 
himself at heart a peace lover? 

There seems to be in the majority of humanity a contentious 
streak, which not only leads the possessor to be quarrelsome 
and contentious, irritable and irritating to others, but 
additionally this trait seems in many to be inclined to stir up 
disturbances in others, when the first principle of decency- 
minding one's own business— would be favorable to peace. 
As the Lord's people more and more come to realize the 
selfishness and quarrelsomeness which the whole world has 
inherited through sin and depravity, and how this is all 
opposed to the Spirit of the Lord and of meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering, love, they should not only strive to 
develop peace in their own hearts and lives but to be peacemakers 
amongst men. 

"Blessed are the peace-makers, for they shall be called 
the children of God." Yes, truly, the peace lovers, peace 
promoters, manifest that in this particular at least they are 
the possessors of the holy Spirit— the Spirit of God. Let us 
not only merit this title, sons of God, now amongst men who, 
seeing our good works and peaceable dispositions, will glorify 
our Father in heaven on this behalf, but let us by the continued 
cultivation of this same quality of love, under the 
guidance of the great Redeemer, merit the distinction of being 
sons of God on a higher plane in the Kingdom. 

BLESSED THE PERSECUTED 

Not all the persecuted, but merely the persecuted for 
righteousness' sake. Many bring upon themselves persecutions 



for foolishness' sake and for being busybodies in other 
men's affairs. Let us heed the Apostle's word along this 
line and avoid persecutions or sufferings for evil doing of any 
kind; but, as again it is declared, if any man suffer as a 
Christian let him glorify God on this behalf. (1 Pet. 4:16.) 
It is well, too, that we preserve in this matter as in all others 
the spirit of a sound mind. There are, for instance, some 
that evidently imagine themselves persecuted when really 
they are very kindly treated, and are the victims of their own 
morbid imaginations. The Lord's people should be so filled 
with the spirit of thankfulness and gratitude and appreciation 
that they would be in no danger of erring in this matter. 
They should be so generous in their thoughts of the motives 
and intentions of their friends and neighbors that they would 
be in no danger of misapprehending them and feeling persecuted 
by those who are really their well-wishers. 

As perfect love casts out fear, so also it casts out these 
false impressions of evil doing or intention toward us. The 
benevolent heart, full of love for others, will rather prefer to 
suppose that slights are unintentional oversights, or to put 
some other similar good construction upon the conduct of 
their friends, only yielding to an appreciation of persecution 
when its intention is unmistakable. Even then it should think 
generously of the persecutor, realize his share in the fall and 
be disposed to pray for those who despitefully use them and 
persecute them. Blessed are such ones who thus hold to 
righteousness and the spirit of love toward their enemies and 
persecutors, and who may be sure, therefore, that they are 
being persecuted for their fidelity to truth and righteousness 
and not for personal idiosyncrasies and peculiarities. Blessed 
are they, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. The Lord is 
looking for those who are so faithful to the principles of 
righteousness that they will exercise it toward their enemies 
even when being persecuted by them and on its account. 
If the Kingdom of heaven is for such it is assuredly but a 
little flock. Let us strive the more diligently to be of that 
little flock— to make our calling and election sure. 

REVILED FOR CHRIST'S SAKE 

The Lord's people are not to revile each other or anybody 
under any circumstances, but are to remember that they 
are pupils, followers of him who when reviled reviled not 

R3736 : page 75 

again. Whatever evil others may say or insinuate about us 
we must be faithful to our Teacher and not return evil for 
evil, reviling for reviling, nor insinuation for insinuation, but 
contrariwise must speak evil of no man and be pleased to 
notice and to mention any good qualities which even our 
enemies may possess. 

Our Lord's words, however, warrant us in expecting 
that those who will be faithful to him will share his experiences 
of being evil spoken of. With his words before our 
minds we should not be surprised at false charges and false 



insinuations made against his true followers, and that in 
proportion to their prominence as his servants and followers. 
The expression, "all manner of evil," is very comprehensive, 
while "for his sake," is worthy of notice. It does not 
imply that those who strike with the fist or weapon or 
tongue and who shoot out arrows, even bitter words, will say, 
We do this to you for Christ's sake and because you are one 
of his. We have never heard of any one persecuted in that 
manner along those lines, and this cannot therefore be what 
the Lord meant. 

What he did mean evidently is that his followers, like 
himself, honorable, moderate, possessing the spirit of a sound 
mind, truthful, honest, virtuous, would naturally be highly 
esteemed amongst the Scribes and Pharisees, the nominally 
good; they would have a high place, were it not for their 
fidelity to the Lord and to his Word. Because of loyalty to 
truths contradictory of popular errors, because of their faithfulness 
to the Word of the Lord, they are unpopular, and, 
like the Master, are hated by those prominent in Churchianity. 
These conditions bring a double test: 

(1) They test the adherents of Churchianity along the 
lines of the Golden Rule, and when they speak evil through 
malice, through hatred, through strife, through opposition, 
they are judging themselves, condemning themselves under 
the Golden Rule, for well they know that they would not 
wish others thus to speak evil of them;— either through 
malice or a concocted lie or through hearsay. 

(2) It becomes a test also to the faithful ones— Are they 
willing to endure these persecutions and oppositions cheerfully 
as a part of the cost of being the Lord's disciples? If 

under the pressure they yield and revile in return, and 
slander and backbite, they are proving themselves unworthy 
of a place in the Kingdom. If on the other hand they receive 
these lessons and experiences with patience and long-suffering, 
these serve to develop in them more and more of the 
character-likeness of their Redeemer and tend the more to fit 
and prepare them for a share with him in his glorious Kingdom. 
Our Lord's assurance is that those who are thus tested 
and who stand such a test will have the greater reward in 
heaven, and reminds them that similar persecutions from the 
Lord's professed people came to all the holy prophets of the 
past. 

THE SALT OF THE EARTH 

The declarations, "Ye are the salt of the earth," and 
"the light of the world," may be very properly applied to 
such of the Lord's followers as give heed to his teachings 
and cultivate the blessed states he has described foregoing. 
All such blessed ones in proportion as they have attained 
such conditions are indeed the salt of the earth and the light 
of the world. As salt is useful in arresting decomposition, 
so the influence of these, though they be few in the world, 
is preservative. Looking back along the aisles of history, 
we can see that a good influence extended from the Law 
Covenant God made with Israel. 



As the Jews scattered more or less amongst other nationalities 
they carried with them more or less clear conceptions 
of the divine standards as represented in the Law, and these 
wherever they went had a preservative and corrective influence 
amongst men. But it was Jesus and his higher Law of 
Love, exemplified in his own life and in the lives of his 
apostles and all his followers, who became the real salt of 
the earth, in a period when without it we know not what 
might have been the result. As it is not only the spot upon 
which the candle or lamp rests that is enlightened by it, 
but as the rays extend out in every direction, so is the influence 
extending from every true Christian. It touches not 
merely his own person or home but to some extent radiates 
throughout his vicinity. Similarly it is not merely the spot 
that is touched by the lump of salt that is preserved, but 
the influence of that lump spreads over a considerable space 
round about it, and all with preservative influence. 

At the time of our Lord's first advent the world was in 
a condition in which it would probably have hastened to 
degeneracy and corruption, but the introduction of the body 
of Christ and the beneficial influence extending from each 
member of that body were potent for the arrest of the demoralizing 
tendency of the times. The light which shone 
out from Jesus, the Light of the world, and from his followers, 
had undoubtedly a beneficial effect upon the then center 
of the civilized world. That influence is still manifest 
in so-called Christendom. And even today, although the 
truly consecrated believers in the great Redeemer are confessedly 
very few in number, yet the general influence, the 
saltiness from the teachings of the Savior, exercise a wide 
influence throughout Christendom. Without this, doubtless, 
corruption and a complete collapse would have come long 
ago. In spite of it we see very corrupting and corrupt influences 
at work in every direction and the wider our horizon, 

R3737 : page 75 

the more general our information, the more this fact will be 
appreciated. 

Before very long we expect that all of the overcoming 
members of the body of Christ will be changed, glorified, 
and the body completed on the other side the vail will be 
without members on this side. The lights will have 
gone and the darkness will hold fuller sway than ever; the 
salt will be gone and the corruption will take hold swiftly, 
and the result will be the great time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation. 

Meantime we are to let our lights shine and thus to 
glorify the Father, whether men heed or forbear to heed; 
we are to exercise our salt or preservative influence, our 
influence for righteousness and truth, whether men hear or 
forbear, though we clearly see that it is not God's purpose to 
enlighten the world through the Church in its present humble 
position. The matter will test us and prove whether or 
not we are worthy to be members of the glorified body of 
Christ, which shortly shall shine forth as the Sun in the 



glory of the Father, and enlighten the whole world in a manner 
with which our little lamps of the present time will in 
no sense compare. 

R3737 : page 76 

HO, PRODIGAL RETURN! 

"Return, return! thy Father's voice is pleading, 

Tho' far astray, I bid thee turn again! 
Thy robe is rent, thy tender feet are bleeding, 

Thy heart is faint and sick with famine pain: 
Return, my child: a welcome here awaits thee: 

No longer in the distant country rove; 
Resist the cruel tempter that belates thee, 

And keeps thee from my dwelling and my love. 

"Return, return! Thy Father's loving-kindness 

Thou long hast scorned, and done his grace despite; 
Yet in his touch is healing for thy blindness, 

And he can turn thy darkness into light. 
Return in all thy rags of sin's defilement; 

Return with all thy want and sore distress; 
Thy Father's voice bespeaks his reconcilement: 

Flee to thy Savior, and thy guilt confess. 

"Return, return! Thy substance hath been wasted— 

Thou hast not aught to bring but thy poor heart; 
Yet art thou longing for the bread once tasted, 

And for his paths of peace, and faith's good part? 
Return, for why shouldst thou delay the pardon 

Thy Father's great compassion waits to grant! 
Arise and go, before thy doubts shall harden 

The homesick yearnings of the penitent. 

"Return, return! Leave thou the swine and famine 

And seek again the plenty of thy home! 
Why dost thou toil among the husks of mammon, 

When to his rest the Father bids thee come? 
Return thou to his arms, his kiss, his blessing, 

Accept the robe, the sandals, and the ring, 
After thy sinfulness and guilt confessing, 

By Jesus found, lost treasure of the King! 

"Return, return! The angel-hosts bend o'er thee— 

They wait to bear the tidings' joyful sound. 
They have beheld the Savior dying for thee, 

And will rejoice to sing, The lost is found! 
Return, for he will heal all thy backsliding— 

Will love thee freely, and will thus forgive; 
Come, weary soul, rest in his love abiding, 

Thou hast been dead— arise to-day and live!" 



R3737 : page 76 



LESSONS ON SELF-CONTROL. 

--MATTHEW 5:33-48.-MARCH 11.- 

Golden Text:— "Keep the door of my lips."— Psa. 141:3. 

AGAIN we gather at the feet of the great Teacher 

of the school of Christ to hearken for his further 

instructions. In connection with his 

discourse on the beatitudes, which constituted our last 

lesson, the Master proceeded in the words of today's 

lesson. 

Our Lord refers to the traditions of the ancients, 
which evidently had a great control over the people of 
that time. No fault is to be found with having respect 
for the opinions and teachings of those who have gone 
before us in life's pathway, but one of the important 
lessons for every Christian to learn is that the fact that 
a matter is ancient, that it has been long believed, is 
no positive proof of its correctness. The thoughts of 
ancient times are to be weighed and tested, as well as 
those of modern times by the one standard, the divine 
revelation— "If they speak not according to this word 
it is because they have no light in them."— Isa. 8:20. 

The traditional teaching to which our Lord referred 
was not wholly erroneous, just as the traditions of the 
"dark ages" contain some elements of truth. Error 
alone is weak in comparison to error mixed with a little 
truth; hence our great Adversary usually endeavors 
to interweave some measure of truth with all the injurious 
falsehoods which have burdened the world for centuries, 
and still burden us in proportion as we are deceived 
by them. This was true in respect to the 
matter our Lord was discussing: the Law had something 
to say respecting the taking of God's name in 
vain, and tradition had modified the Law and limited 
it to false swearing. Our Lord called attention to the 
error, pointing out that the third commandment had a 
broader and deeper meaning than the tradition implied 
—that it meant that God's name should never be 
used in any irreverent manner, and not merely forbidding 
its use in connection with the violation of an oath 
in the Lord's name. Our Lord extended the thought, 
teaching his followers that they should not continue the 
custom of their day, of proving their assertions by appeals 
to God, to heaven, etc. The same lesson is for 
the followers of Jesus today: others may feel it necessary 
to emphasize their statements by oaths or expletives, 
but the followers of Jesus are to so live, so act, so 
speak, that their words pass for par anywhere and with 
anybody. To this end they must be absolutely truthful, 
so that whoever may hear them may know that their 
yea is yea and their nay is nay. 

"SWEAR NOT AT ALL" 



Oaths and solemn asseverations in the ordinary conversation 
of life imply that the truth of the speaker is 
questionable— that his yea is not always yea, and that 
his nay is not always nay. The tendency is to make 
him less careful in the ordinary statements of his 
conversation which are not thus solemnized; the effect 
is also to make him less reverent toward the Lord or 
the other holy things which he may call upon as witnesses, 
as evidences of his truthfulness. As the word 
of such people becomes common and liable to be broken, 
so their oaths would soon also become common 
and liable to be broken— such matters go on from bad 
to worse usually. On the contrary, where the word is 
held sacred the avenues of sin and error and falsehood 
are measurably stopped. 

Nothing in this injunction can properly be understood 
to apply to the taking of an oath in a court of law. 
Such oaths, commanded by the law of the State, are necessary, 
because all have not the high standard of truth 
desired. But even in the courts of law in many States 
it is permitted that an affirmation may be made instead 
of an oath if any so prefer. To one of the Lord's people 
an affirmation must mean exactly the same as an 
oath; he would not affirm what he would not be willing 
to swear to. He recognizes that, as a follower of 
the Lord and one of his representatives, his yea or his 
nay must be as truthfully kept as his oath would be. 

Whatsoever is more than yea or nay cometh from 
evil— the revised version says "of the Evil One." Indirectly 
all of our evil tendencies come from the Evil One, 

R3738 : page 77 

for was it not by his lie in Eden that the fall from perfection 
and the divine image brought us all into our 
present evil, imperfect condition, exposing us to error 
through our own weaknesses and imperfections and 
the weakness of our neighbors? While our Lord's 
injunction is good for all who have ears to hear it, it is 
especially appropriate to the little flock who have applied 
themselves to hearken to all of his commands, 
and to be taught of him, and, to whatever extent is 
necessary, to suffer with him in following the course 
of righteousness. Truly all such should be models of 
truthfulness and uprightness, and thus be burning and 
shining lights, glorifying our Father in heaven in their 
homes and in the communities where they live. 

AN EYE FOR AN EYE 

Another of the teachings of the ancients was that 
absolute justice should be rendered, an eye for an eye 
and a tooth for a tooth. Some features of the Law did indeed 
imply this. If one caused an injury to another intentionally 
he should be maimed himself correspondingly. 



This strict requiting of justice prevailed, not only 
amongst the Jews, but also amongst the Romans 
and the Greeks. It may be said to have been 
a juster law in some respects than those which 
now prevail, which indirectly favor the rich: for 
instance, the penalty today for injury to another might 
either be a fine of so much money or an imprisonment 
of so long a time. In either case the rich would have 
the advantage in that they could spare the money, and 
the loss of time would not be so disastrous to them as 
to the poor. However, there were disadvantages in a 
juster system of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a 
tooth: it cultivated a feudal spirit, and led to anger, 
malice, hatred, envy, strife, murder, works of the flesh 
and of the devil. Seeing what the strictest interpretation 
of justice would imply, let us see what the great 
Teacher would present as the preferable course of 
action. 

Hear his words, "I say unto you, resist not evil 
[do not retaliate, rendering evil for evil], but whosoever 
shall smite you on the right cheek turn to him the 
other also." This is an astounding proposition— who 
can obey it? Even if we modify it all that language 
will permit, it is still apparently beyond reach of any 
fallen human being— it teaches the ideal requirements 
of the divine law of perfect love. When seeking for an 
interpretation of the expression, Resist not the evil 
doer, but turn the other cheek, we must look to our 
Lord and the apostles as examples. We find, for instance, 
that our Redeemer was smitten upon the cheek, 
and that while he did not literally turn the other he did 
not attempt to smite back, to retaliate even in word. 
In this indirect sense he did turn the other cheek. 
And this should mark our course. Our Redeemer did 
expostulate with his smiters in kindly terms, however, 
and we may properly follow his example, and consider 
it in full agreement with his instruction in this lesson. 

We may remember him again when evilly entreated 
and taken to the brow of the hill to be cast headlong: 
he did not use his superior power to do injury to his 
opponents, but passed through their midst, evidently 
either directly or indirectly exercising over them a restraining 
influence, because his time for death had not 
yet come. So, too, we may use any moral influence we 
may possess to escape from the power of our enemies, 
and be assured that we will have the divine care and 
protection until our lessons and experiences are completed 
—until our time shall come to pass beyond the 
vail. Similarly the Apostle, learning of the threats of 
the Jews against his life, did not make threats against 
them nor pray evil upon their heads; but he did use 
such steps as were at his command to thwart their evil 
designs, sending word to the governor and invoking 
the power of the civil authority; and on another occasion 
he defended himself by appealing to the people.— 
John 18:22,23; Acts 23:1-5,17. 



The lesson for us is that we may use all lawful and 
legal means in our self-defense, and may even wisely 
run away from dangers and persecutors, as the Lord 
directed and the apostles exemplified. (2 Cor. 11:33; 
Matt. 10:23.) But we are not authorized to retaliate. 
Difficult as this proper course may appear, it undoubtedly 
will be found to be the best one. Remember our 
Lord's words, "They that take to the sword shall perish 
with the sword," and again the Apostle's words to the 
Church is, "If ye bite and devour one another, take heed 
that ye be not consumed one of another." (Matt. 26:52; 
Gal. 5:15.) The lesson evidently is,— 

"FOLLOW PEACE WITH ALL MEN" 

"If any man sue thee at the law and take away thy 
coat, let him have thy cloak also." The revisers translated 
this to mean that if any one is disposed to go to 
law with you and take away your coat you should settle 
with him, even though it deprive you of both coat and 
cloak. This lesson of submission, of non-resistance, 
is surely a very difficult one to thoroughly learn. We 
cannot doubt that many would take advantage of such 
a disposition, and that as a result he would have the 
bad end of many a bargain. However, this would not 
prove the Lord's counsel unwise even as respects the 
present life. The lesson upon ourselves would certainly 
be valuable as respects the development of the Master's 
graces, and how can we tell that the example 
would not be very potent upon those who might fraudulently, 
violently take advantage of our obedience to 
the great Teacher. 

We know, too, that the Lord would be quite able 
to compensate us for anything we might suffer in way 
of loss in obedience to his directions, to whatever extent 
he might see would be to our advantage. We 
should never forget the two occasions on which the 
Lord told the disciples to cast in their nets after they 
had toiled all night and had caught nothing, and how 
on both occasions miraculous draughts of fishes were 
caught. He who is for us is more powerful than all 
they that be against us, and undoubtedly loyalty to 
him and obedience to his Word will prove eventually 
the better part. Let us remember also the proverb 

R3738 : page 78 

which says, "There is that scattereth and yet increaseth; 
and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, 
but it tendeth to poverty." (Prov. 1 1:24.) It is not 
always those who fight most strenuously for their rights 
that fare the best even amongst the children of the 
world. 

"GO WITH HIM TWAIN" 



The next injunction is not generally understood: 
it does not mean that we should be turned aside from 
the duties and affairs of life at anybody's bidding. In 
olden times certain magistrates, governors, etc., had 
the authority of law to press the service of the people 
for governmental work. For instance, note how Simon 
the Cyrenian was compelled to bear the cross for Jesus 
a certain distance. The word compel in our lesson is 
from the same Greek word, and refers to a similar legal 
compulsion; "commandeered" would be the modern 
way of referring to such a matter. Our Lord's injunction 
is that his followers should be so broad-minded, so liberal, 
so generous, that they would not only obey the legal 
commands but be ready to go farther— to do more than 
had been required. 

In thus doing heartily, joyfully and agreeably all 
and more than would be commanded they would be 
exemplifying the generous spirit which represents our 
Lord and his teachings. By such breadth of sentiment 
they would be known as Jesus' disciples, who had 
learned of him. Indeed we may say that the whole 
trend of the teachings of the Lord and the apostles is 
in line with this, and opposed to stinginess and narrowness 
and selfishness— in accord with generosity, 
full measure, pressed down, heaped up and running 
over. The Christian measure would be nothing short, 
though it might be a little more. A Christian measure 
of anything must be full, never skimp. This is an element 
of the higher law, the law of love, and its spirit 
of generosity in our hearts. 

In similar strain the great Teacher enjoins that we 
shall give and lend to those requesting. We cannot 
suppose that he meant that a parent should give a 
razor to the child which cries for it; we cannot suppose 
that the Lord meant that our loans or gifts would be 
such as would be injurious to the recipients. Love 
must be the basis of our conduct, as it is the very essence 
of the Master's law. We cannot think either that 
he meant that we should neglect the interests of our 
own homes and families in giving to others or loaning 
to them. We are bound to suppose that our Lord in 
this, as in all things, wished his followers to be wise 
as serpents and harmless as doves. What he wished 
to enjoin evidently was that spirit or disposition which 
would have pleasure in loaning or giving to the needy, 
and which is so circumstanced as to be able to comply 
with such requests and would be glad to do so, using 
the proper discretion and judgment, as to time, place 
and persons. In other words, the spirit of Christ is a 
benevolent spirit and not a mean or stingy one, and all 
the Lord's people, more or less selfish, need to learn 
this. There are few perhaps who would be in any danger 
of injuring themselves or others immediately dependent 
upon them by any acts of benevolence. 

"LOVE THY NEIGHBOR" 



Love for the neighbor was a feature of the Law, and 
in enjoining this the traditions of the elders were quite 
right; but they added to it that an enemy should be 
hated, whereas the Law said nothing of the kind, but 
on the contrary enjoined that if an enemy's ox or ass 
or property of any kind were seen going astray or about 
to be injured they should be protected and assisted and 
held for the owner, even though he were an enemy, 
and even though at a considerable cost of time and 
trouble. Our Lord thus pointed out the real meaning 
of the Law, making it the more honorable, saying, "I 
say unto you, Love your enemies, and pray for them 
that persecute you; that ye may be sons of your Father 
which is in heaven." (The rendering of v. 44 here given 
occurs in the revised version, and is in harmony with 
the oldest Greek MS., which omits a part of this verse.) 

If we are sons of God we must have his Spirit, his 
disposition. To whatever extent we lack this disposition 
to love and desire good to our enemies as well as 
to our neighbors we lack evidence of relationship to our 
Father in heaven and to our elder brother, our Redeemer 
and Teacher. Here again the lesson of benevolence 
comes in— we must be large-hearted, generous. 

R3739 : page 78 

How can we cultivate this necessary quality, especially 

if our natural dispositions are mean and selfish, very 

much fallen from the divine likeness in this respect? 

We reply that the entire course of instruction in the 

school of Christ is in this direction. To make us compassionate 

and sympathetic with others, we are shown 

our own littleness and weakness in the Lord's sight; 

to teach us how to be generous and forgiving to others, 

we have the illustration of God's mercy and grace and 

forgiveness toward us; to impress the matter upon us 

we are assured that our forgiveness and standing with 

the Lord can only be maintained by our cultivating this 

spirit and manifesting it toward our debtors and 

enemies. 

We are to be generous with those who transgress 
against our rights and interests, our enemies. This does 
not mean that the Lord recognizes or treats his enemies 
with the same degree of blessing that he grants to his 
friends and his children, nor does it mean that we are 
to love our enemies in exactly the same sense that we 
love our bosom friends and companions. The Lord 
gives special blessing to those who are especially his, 
and we also may properly give more of our love and 
favor to those who are in accord with us. The lesson 
here again is large heartedness and generosity. 

"LOVE THEM THAT LOVE YOU" 

Our Lord points out that in merely reciprocating 



the love of others we would come far short of the standard 
he sets us, and of the lesson we must learn if we 
would be his joint-heirs and companions in the glory, 
honor and immortality of the Kingdom. Publicans and 
sinners even love those who love them— he must be a 
very mean man who will return evil for good and hate 

R3739 : page 79 

those who love him. Even though such a standard 
were recognized in the world, of loving those who love 
us, it would not be appropriate to the Lord's followers; 
they must rise to a higher plane if they would be his 
disciples. 

Similarly our greeting, our salutations, the civilities 
of life are to be extended not merely to our brethren 
either after the flesh or after the Spirit. We are to have 
kind intentions toward all, and to enjoy the privilege 
of extending these, expressing them, and thus comforting 
and refreshing all with whom we come in contact. 
Generosity again is the thought— breadth of character 
and nobility of conduct. 

PERFECT AS FATHER IN HEAVEN 

The last verse of our lesson caps the climax of all 
instruction, telling us that the copy which we are to consider 
and follow is that of our heavenly Father— we are 
to be perfect as he is perfect. Ah, yes! It would have 
been impossible for the great Teacher to have set us any 
other pattern or example or standard than the perfect 
one. And yet he knew that none of his disciples would 
ever be able in the present life and under present conditions 
of sin and death working in our mortal bodies 
to come up to this standard— to follow this copy. What 
then did he mean? We answer that he there set before 
us the perfect copy, with instruction that, in proportion 
as we love him and desire to have his approval, we 
should endeavor to pattern after the heavenly Father's 
character. 

The fact that this endeavor would not bring perfect 
results could only redound in blessings upon us, by 
bringing us to a realization of our own imperfections 
and of our need of the covering of our dear Redeemer's 
robe of righteousness, until the time shall come when 
in the first resurrection change we shall be made like 
him, see him as he is, share his glory, and be able to 
perfectly reflect, as he does, the heavenly Father's perfection. 
Meantime all of our shortcomings that are unintentional 
are graciously covered from the Father's 
sight with the merit of our Redeemer, who stands as 
our pledge or guaranty that our endeavors to follow the 
copy are sincere, of the heart. The Lord will judge us 
worthy or unworthy of the resurrection— not according 
to the flesh, but— according to the endeavors of our 
hearts as New Creatures. 



THE OLD COPY-BOOK 

Years ago it was the custom in the public schools 
to furnish the children with ruled copy-books, with 
copper-plate engraved lessons at the top of each page. 
The lesson to the pupil was the copying of those perfect 
characters. Every modest child must certainly 
have felt abashed, timid, when receiving one of those 
lessons, from the realization that it could not produce 
characters that could at all compare with the copy. It 
was, however, explained that it was not expected that the 
child could duplicate the perfect copy, but that following 
the lines of the copy it would become more and 
more expert. How well this illustrates the Master's 
words, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in heaven is 
perfect," and the way in which he intends that we 
should profit by the instruction. 

Another lesson: It was the duty of the teacher to 
examine the work of the pupil, and surely in a majority 
of cases it was found that the best copy of the original 
was found on the first line, and that the work became 
poorer and poorer toward the end of the page. So it is 
with many in the school of Christ— the great Teacher 
perceives that their first endeavors to copy God-likeness 
at the beginning of their Christian experience was more 
successful than their subsequent attempts. Why? The 
answer is the same in both cases. The child neglected 
to look at the copy and merely looked at its own imperfect 
efforts, and hence the poor results. So with the 
pupils in the school of Christ— their poor results come 
from comparing themselves with themselves, and 
neglecting to keep constantly before their minds the 
perfect copy— "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in 
heaven is perfect." 

As the earthly teacher reproved and corrected the 
pupil, so with much long-suffering and patience the 
Lord reproves and corrects the pupils in the school of 
Christ. Will not this explain many chastisements 
which are necessary for every son whom the Father 
would ultimately receive to home and glory, every one 
of whom must be conformed to the image of his Son, 
who is the express image of the Father's person? Let 
us, then, begin afresh, on a new page as it were, to copy 
the character-likeness of our perfect Father in heaven. 
Let us no longer look at ourselves and our past attainments, 
but, as the Apostle says, "Forgetting the things 
that are behind and pressing on toward the things that 
are before," let us labor with patience to learn the all-important 
lessons connected with our discipleship and 
the gracious hopes set before us in the promises of our 
Father's Word. 

"KEEP THE DOOR OF MY LIPS" 

Our Golden text presents an important thought. 



The Lord's people find the tongue the most difficult 
member to bring into subjection, and therefore may 
well pray, "Keep thou the door of my lips." And if the 
prayer be sincere, from the heart, it will imply that the 
petitioner is doing all in his power in this direction 
himself while seeking the divine aid. And the divine 
aid comes in line with this lesson, and assures us that 
the lips are not at fault, that it is the heart that needs a 
completion of the regenerative work of the holy Spirit, 
for "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh." The lesson here is that whatever difficulty 
we have through our lips needs correction at the heart. 
We need to get our hearts more in accord with the heart 
of the Almighty— more in tune with the gracious elements 
of the divine character, represented not only in 
justice toward others, but additionally in mercy, love, 
kindness and benevolence towards all. 



page 8 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 