Announcements
HELPING “THE DESIRE OF ALL NATIONS” TO COME IN
The fact that they “come in” shows that the “desire of all nations” refers to people. As the kingdoms of this world are now being shaken as foretold at Haggai 2:7, in ever-swelling numbers those who are honest-hearted among the nations flee to the ‘house of Jehovah,’ which represents his place of safety. There they must learn of God’s loving provision for their salvation. Would you like to help others? You may do so by going from house to house with the good news that the old world is nearing its end and that the new world of righteousness is at hand. During November three books containing this good news and three booklets will be placed with all who desire them on a contribution of $1.50, or the New World Translation of either the Hebrew or Greek Scriptures together with one book may be offered on a contribution of $2. Are you desirous of having a share in this wonderful work? Learn how by writing to Watchtower, 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn 1, N. Y., or contact Jehovah’s witnesses at the nearest Kingdom Hall.
LANGUAGES CHANGE—THE BIBLE ENDURES
Inasmuch as languages change over the years, it becomes necessary to revise Bible translations from time to time so that the contents are understandable. The Bible in a dead or more or less out-of-date language is of little value. God had all books of the Bible originally produced in the language then in common use, the language people could understand. Would you like to obtain a modern-day-language translation rendered from the original language? Two volumes are now available: The New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, Volume I, from Genesis to Ruth; and the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures, from Matthew to Revelation. These two volumes are obtainable in substantial leatherette binding at $1.50 each, or in deluxe leather binding, gold-edged, at $5.00 each. Order your copies right away and read the Bible with better understanding.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 14: “This Good of the Kingdom,” ¶1-25.
Week of November 21: “This Good of the Kingdom,” ¶26-52.

