Truth About Jehovah Brings Joy to Montreal Family
“IN THAT day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness. The meek also shall increase their joy in Jehovah, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.” (Isa. 29:18, 19, AS) Giving a striking example of the fulfillment of this prophecy in our day is the experience of a French Catholic family in Montreal, Canada, as related to certain of Jehovah’s witnesses residing at Trois Rivieres, by the head of the family, after he had known of Jehovah only four weeks.
It was during the five and a half years that he served in the Canadian army overseas, at a time when bombs were falling all around, that the subject of prayer came up and the question was asked as to what is God’s name. Going to the Catholic chaplain for information our friend was told: “Don’t be foolish. God’s name is Jesus.” This, however, failed to satisfy him and so for years he kept wondering.
Then one day, while visiting his sister, the question came up and she assured him that she knew God’s name and that it is Jehovah. “How do you know?” he asked her. “Why, it’s in the Bible,” she replied. “I’ve seen it. Would you like to know more?” Of course he would; and so, learning that two of Jehovah’s witnesses were calling on his sister the next evening, he returned then. After the witnesses had satisfactorily answered all his questions he arranged to have a Bible study in his home, and after the first study he, together with his family, his sister and her family, began to attend the Kingdom Hall meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses. After just one week of study he asked if he could accompany others as they engaged in the preaching activity. Regarding his family’s interest he said: “My wife studies all day long and at night she tells me all about the things she learns, and I let my three children take turns each evening in praying.”
Shortly he received a letter from one of his best friends, a monk in Trois Rivieres, telling him to ‘stop this foolishness.’ It made him so angry that he at once went to visit this monk. Usually he would have knelt in his presence and asked the monk for a blessing, but not this time. In fact, when the monk extended his hand, he refused to take it, saying, “I could not shake hands with you now when I know what you are.” Surprised, the monk put his hand on his shoulder and asked, “Why, what’s wrong, Maurice?” Maurice replied, “Don’t put your hand on my shoulder, you are too heavy to bear. You told my mother I was a Communist, did you not?” The monk tried to evade the question but eventually had to admit that he had.
After further discussion he left the monk, telling him that his attitude had only served further to convince him that he now had the truth. A few days later one of his boys, only seven years old, took his stand at school, refusing to say the prayers or repeat the catechism, for which he was severely strapped and made to kneel until five in the afternoon. Hearing of this his father telephoned the priest that his son had acted according to his wishes and if another such incident occurred the priest would be haled into court. Since then the children are being let alone. Assuring his seven-year-old son that it had been a case of suffering for Jehovah, the lad replied, “Yes, papa, I know that and I wouldn’t mind doing it for another day for Jehovah.” As the father related these experiences his eyes beamed with joy.
Truly those meek ones who have been kept deaf, blind and poor spiritually by organized religion are rejoicing as they see and hear the truth regarding the Holy One of Israel, Jehovah God.

