From Our Readers
Wholesome Entertainment  I am studying to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and I would like to thank you for publishing the series “Searching for Wholesome Entertainment.” (May 22, 1997) There are very few things on television to watch, and you gave all of us—young and old—very good advice. I hope you continue to give us information on issues like this.
D. W., United States
Will God Stay My Friend?  I’m very thankful to our kind Creator for the excellent article “Young People Ask . . . Will God Stay My Friend?” (May 22, 1997) Not too long ago, I filled out a questionnaire about how many friends I might have, and the final result assured me that I would always be surrounded by friends. Sadly, this has turned out to be totally false. Still, I realize that only Jehovah God is our best Friend. It’s true that if we’re not friends with Jehovah God, then everything else lacks meaning.
A. T. M., Mexico
Thank you for the interest you show in young people. I received the article “Young People Ask . . . Will God Stay My Friend?” just when I needed it most. I had been disfellowshipped and was recently reinstated. I have sometimes felt all alone and suffered many doubts—one of which was, Does God listen to me? After analyzing Paul’s example under the subheading “A Thorn in the Flesh,” I decided to look for a blessing from Jehovah by means of regular Bible study and candid prayer. One question, Will Jehovah continue to be my friend? has been clearly answered.
J. C. A., Argentina
Beekeeping  I am writing about the article “Beekeeping—A ‘Sweet’ Story” (May 22, 1997), in which you briefly give correct information on bees. I liked the appropriate mix of explanations, photographs, and sentiments—without any errors. An apiarist often notices imprecise or only partially correct information in the press, but there is none of that in your article. I am an enthusiastic beekeeper, and I often see more ‘good sense’ in these insects than in many people. So I think it right for me to say that in dealing with this subject, you gave a tribute to the beauty of life, especially as it is highlighted in such small creatures.
P. G. M., Italy
Caregiving  Thank you for publishing the series “Caregiving—Meeting the Challenge.” (February 8, 1997) My mother is a cancer patient, and caring for her in the final stages of her sickness has left me exhausted. The articles accurately describe the feelings of the one who is the caregiver and show others how to show consideration to those of us who are in that position. One seldom finds such articles.
F. T., Taiwan
Young People Ask . . .  I am 12 years old. I go to school and enjoy reading your magazines very much. Before I started reading them, it was difficult for me to associate with those who were older than I. But after reading the Awake! articles in the section “Young People Ask . . . ,” I have found it easier to do. Thank you!
N. T., Russia
From Our Readers  I have been a regular reader of Awake! for 26 years, and I still appreciate the magazine just as much as ever. I never fail to read the section “From Our Readers,” as the comments often move me to reread an article. Thank you for these excellent magazines.
M. B., France

