Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, then you will likely recall the following interesting points:
□ Why is Jesus’ Model Prayer like a gem?
Its value is very high. Each facet shines with its own splendor. Its worth has never faded.​—4/15, p. 3.
□ If a dedicated servant of Jehovah drifts away from the congregation, is it possible for him to return to God’s favor?
Yes, this is possible. If a person who has ceased to associate with the congregation feels guilty and disturbed at heart, this proves that he has not gone too far for God to forgive his sins. Jesus’ illustrations found in Luke chapter 15 show the interest that God, his Son, the angels and his own spiritual brothers all have in recovering such a person.​—5/1, pp. 24-27.
□ What will Judgment Day be like?
Judgment Day is one thousand years long. The judge, Christ Jesus, will be fair and just. (Isaiah 11:3-5) First, people will work together in making this earth a paradise ready to welcome back the dead who will be resurrected. Next, those resurrected will be judged on what they do during Judgment Day​—not on what they did in the past. Those choosing to serve Jehovah will gain everlasting life. This makes Judgment Day one of joyfulness.​—5/15, pp. 8. 9.
□ How can Bible counsel help protect our health?
God’s Word contains practical advice that can be applied to health care. Proverbs 25:16, 27 can help us to avoid being harmed by excess vitamins, minerals or herbs. Philippians 4:5 can protect us against forms of treatment or diagnosis that seem strange, unproved or in conflict with general knowledge. Proverbs 14:15 can be a caution against undue reliance on mere testimonials. Proverbs 22:29 may move Christians to seek second opinions from experts.​—6/15, pp. 22-27.
□ How is the book of Acts of outstanding benefit to Christians today?
The book of Acts highlights the grand kingdom hope and shows how early Christians were moved to be bold witnesses of Jehovah and his Son, Christ Jesus. This should stir Christians today to do likewise and to be unafraid in witnessing about their faith in God’s kingdom.​—6/15, pp. 18-21.
□ What can contribute to a happy family life today?
Family happiness can be attained if each family member learns and applies God’s counsel found in his marriage guidebook, the Bible.​—7/15, pp. 5-7.
□ What is the Bible’s view of borrowing money?
The Bible does not condemn the borrowing of money when such is necessary, but it warns: “The borrower is servant to the man doing the lending.” (Proverbs 22:7) Hence, the borrower might ask himself, ‘Is it really necessary?’ If it is, then it provides both the lender and the borrower an opportunity to show Christian love. (1 Corinthians 16:14)​—8/1, pp. 28-31.

