Do You Feel Secure?
What Relief Is Possible Now?
TO WHAT degree can you feel secure with regard to the problems raised on page 3? The king-poet David offers a formula for feeling more secure even now. He wrote: “I have placed Jehovah in front of me constantly. Because he is at my right hand, I shall not be made to totter. . . . My own flesh will reside in security.”​—Psalm 16:8, 9.
How does ‘placing Jehovah in front of you’ have any effect on the problems and fears that beset you? Let us briefly review the questions previously raised and see how Jehovah’s counsel can help.
The daily application of Bible principles could well affect your opportunities for employment. Their application can produce a conscientious, honest, hard worker, for God’s Word admonishes: “Let the stealer steal no more, but rather let him do hard work, doing with his hands what is good work.” (Ephesians 4:28) Normally, sensible employers will seek the services of a reliable worker. Therefore the problem of employment, though it exists, should not be as acute for the genuine Christian worker.
The Christian way of life can even soften the effects of inflation. Why? Because the Christian makes wise use of his limited resources. No portion of his income is wasted on gambling, smoking or on the abuse of alcohol and drugs. He avoids costly ostentation, which is a form of vanity, “because everything in the world​—the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life—​does not originate with the Father [God], but originates with the world.”​—1 John 2:16, 17.
How can the true Christian point of view help in the ever-present problem of crime? The Bible counsels: “Into the path of the wicked ones do not enter, and do not walk straight on into the way of the bad ones. Shun it, do not pass along by it.” (Proverbs 4:14, 15) On the basis of such advice the Christian takes wise precautions in those areas and situations that are prone to crime. He avoids association with criminally inclined people.
Even though many Christians, for economic reasons, have to live in substandard housing, their Bible-based principles guide them to have clean, pleasant homes that are above the average for the neighborhood. They know that physical cleanliness is a part of the true worship of the holy God, Jehovah. The prophet Isaiah admonished: “Keep yourselves clean.”​—Isaiah 52:11.
Christians are taught to pray: “Give us today our bread for this day.” (Matthew 6:11) That petition implies an attitude toward daily food needs that accepts sufficient for each day without worrying unduly about the needs of tomorrow. If the believer plays his part, then he knows he will not be left without his daily necessities for life, even as the psalmist David wrote: “A young man I used to be, I have also grown old, and yet I have not seen anyone righteous left entirely, nor his offspring looking for bread.”​—Psalm 37:25.
Is it possible to avoid or minimize domestic strife? The Bible counsels: “One that is slow to anger quiets down quarreling.” (Proverbs 15:18) Also: “Let all malicious bitterness and anger and wrath and screaming and abusive speech be taken away from you along with all badness. But become kind to one another, . . . freely forgiving one another.” (Ephesians 4:31, 32) Would not all marriages benefit from displaying that Christian spirit?
Many parents are deeply concerned about their children and especially about the immoral peer pressure to which these are subjected at school. In Christian families loyalty to principles and the family have to be deeply ingrained in order to help the young ones to resist the modern temptations. The Bible counsels parents to cultivate a close companionship with their children, balancing love and discipline. Discipline implies association, education, reasoning and correction.​—Ephesians 6:4; Proverbs 1:8.
The Christian who has a sure hope for the future will be less affected by those circumstances that cause depression and crisis. Addictive, escapist drugs will not be his crutch for daily life. As the psalmist puts it: “In peace I will both lie down and sleep, for you yourself alone, O Jehovah, make me dwell in security.”​—Psalm 4:8.
Although Christians know that another war between the nations is possible, they also realize that the earth’s owner is God, not man. They know that God will not allow man to destroy either the earth or the human family completely by some nuclear world war because he is “the Former of the earth and the Maker of it . . . who formed it even to be inhabited.” (Isaiah 45:18) That is why he has promised and guaranteed “new heavens and a new earth” for obedient mankind. Not a new planet and firmament but a completely new earthly system of things based on a spiritually oriented education for all. This is in harmony with the inspired prophecy of Isaiah: “Because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”​—Isaiah 65:17; 11:9.
How and why will this change be brought about? Will God use the world’s leaders to bring security? Will you share in a sure future? The final article of this series will answer those questions.
[Picture on page 7]
Applying Bible counsel leads to cleaner homes, despite the surroundings

