Questions From Readers
● Genesis 7:2 instructed Noah, “Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female.” This would mean seven of each clean kind, but some modern translations render it “seven pairs,” which would mean fourteen clean animals of each kind. Which is correct?—C. M., United States.
The original Hebrew expression literally reads “seven seven.” The Hebrew frequently indicates apportionment or distribution merely by repeating the number involved. Harper’s Introductory Hebrew Method and Manual, in discussing Genesis 7:2, 9, says on page 176: “Words are often repeated in order to express the distributive relation.” Under the heading “Syntax of the Numerals” Gesenius’ Hebrew Grammar (Second American Edition), on page 409, also states that one way of showing distribution is to repeat the number. The repeated numbers are not to be added together, but only indicate a distribution.
In 2 Samuel 21:20 we read of a giant having six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot. The Hebrew repeats the number “six,” not meaning each hand has six pairs of fingers, or twelve fingers, or that each foot has six pairs of toes, or twelve toes. The number is repeated because a distribution is involved, and the repetition shows this. Also Numbers 13:2 and Joshua 3:12 speak of taking one man from each tribe, and the Hebrew literally reads “one man one man,” repeating to show distributive relation, and not meaning a pair of men or two men from each tribe. When Numbers 34:18 instructs to take one prince from each tribe the Hebrew literally is “one prince one prince,” showing the distributive relation, and not meaning two princes.
So in Genesis 7:2 the repeating of “seven” does not mean seven pairs, or fourteen clean animals, but means seven of each kind were to be taken. In Ge 7 verses 9 and 15 of this chapter the number “two” is repeated, but the modern translations that say “seven pairs” in verse 2 do not say “two pairs” in verses 9 and 15, as consistency might suggest doing. In these verses the meaning is obvious that the unclean animals entered the ark “by twos.” Similarly, verse 2 shows the clean animals were taken in “by sevens,” as the expression is translated in the New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures. Some think seven pairs must be meant since it says after “seven,” “the male and his female,” which would require an even number if each male had its own female. However, Genesis 8:20 (NW) shows that “some of all the clean beasts and of all the clean flying creatures” were offered as burnt-offerings when Noah came out of the ark. He did not have to break up a pair to do this, since he took into the ark three pairs and one extra, the extra one being available for sacrificial purposes. So says the book “New Heavens and a New Earth,” page 102, paragraph 3.
O Jehovah, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches.—Ps 104:24, AS.

