Threats Fail to Shake Converted Sikh
CHRISTIAN missionaries in Moslem lands find many men of good will who would gladly accept Christianity with its worship of the true God, Jehovah, except for the fear of persecution of one kind or another, ranging from social ostracism to threat of death. However, the Sikh who accepts true Christianity has even more determined opposition and pressure brought upon him. In view of this fact the following experience of a Sikh’s being converted will be of particular interest.
In Bangkok, Siam, a Watchtower missionary was calling at the home of one who had previously manifested interest in the Bible. That particular person was not at home, but on the premises was another Indian sitting in a little shop selling spices and who smilingly asked the missionary what his purpose was. Of course, the missionary gave him a witness, which very much appealed to this Indian, who happened to be a Hindu. Shortly a Bible study was started, and after several months this Hindu joined the witnesses in telling others what he had learned. He also preached among his close friends and, as a result, one of them, a Sikh, took his stand for Jehovah and Christianity.
This Sikh, because of his zeal to read the Bible and to preach to others what he learned, has suffered much persecution from his fellow Indians living in his community. He was even threatened with bodily harm by his father-in-law, but neither did this deter him in any way. A deputation of fifteen Indians called upon him and appealed to him not to abandon his old religion and to stop bringing shame and reproach upon their Indian community. However, he told them that he was surprised that only fifteen came to try to change his mind, adding: “If a whole army tried to make me surrender the truth, I would never do it, because it is the truth!”
Both these Indian witnesses, the former Hindu and the former Sikh, are now zealously and persistently publishing the good news to everyone they meet, rich and poor, and have been very successful in bringing persons to the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses to hear and see for themselves. The wife of one of them has also taken her stand for the truth. Truly it is God’s will “that all kinds of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”—1 Tim. 2:4, NW.

