From Our Readers
Divorce  As I read “The Bible’s Viewpoint . . . What Kind of Divorcing Does God Hate?” (February 8, 1994), I was deeply touched. Having just recently gone through a divorce after 20 years of marriage to an unfaithful mate, I realized that Jehovah doesn’t hate my decision to divorce and I don’t have to feel guilty. True, feelings of depression, loneliness, and guilt can “surface out of nowhere.” But time and reliance on Jehovah are healing factors.
B. M., United States
During my marriage my husband was very opposed to my being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Eventually he moved in with his girlfriend and filed for divorce. I truly felt that God had ‘called me to peace.’ (1 Corinthians 7:15) The breakup was devastating to my children, and many times over the years, I have read Malachi 2:16 and wondered if I did the right thing. Your article has helped me gain a balanced view of this scripture.
J. C., United States
Moving  I can’t tell you how grateful I was to receive your “Young People Ask . . .” articles on moving. (February 22, 1994, and March 8, 1994) I’m 16 years old and about to move far away from all my closest friends. I was crying every night, wishing there was some way I could stay. Then I read your articles. I decided to start looking more on the positive side of moving. Although I’m still sad to have to move, my attitude has improved a lot.
A. D., United States
The articles were just what I needed. The best advice given was to walk orderly in the same routine when it comes to spiritual things. I had to realize that no matter where I move, Jehovah will always be there. So why not get to know him intimately by in-​depth personal study? Doing so was a big part of settling into my new home.
T. T., United States
Illiteracy  I have often wanted to write and thank you after reading some interesting article. But the series “Breaking the Chains of Illiteracy” (February 22, 1994) has finally convinced me to do so. Next week I will begin a study of the Bible with a lady who does not know how to read or write. I did not know how I was going to do it, but now I do, thanks to these articles. They arrived at the right moment!
M. A. C., Italy
Cities  I am 17 years old and spent the first 14 years of my life in New York City. So I really enjoyed your articles about big cities. (January 8, 1994) I liked the challenging quizzes it contained.
S. H., United States
Cassava  The article “Let’s Eat Cassava!” (November 8, 1993) was very interesting. As a Nigerian, I am among the millions of Africans who highly enjoy cassava, particularly foofoo and gari. In fact, I can express thanks to our Creator for making cassava available to us. Without it, millions of Africans would perish.
O. N. Y. I., Nigeria
Courageous Missionary  I was very touched by the experience of Annama Abraham in her story “Overcoming Life’s Challenges in South Asia.” (January 22, 1994) She lost her beloved husband but continues serving Jehovah with integrity. I want to tell her how much her life story encouraged me.
I. I. C. S., Brazil

