Young People Ask . . .
Why Talk About God?
“Everybody has his own religion. You shouldn’t try to force your God on other people.”​—14-​year-​old Racish, Guyana.
“I hesitate to talk about God because I’m ashamed of the ridicule that will follow.”​—17-​year-​old Rohan, Guyana.
“We should talk about God because he is our Creator and we owe our life to him.”​—13-​year-​old Marco, Germany.
LISTEN in on a group of young people talking and you will probably draw this sad conclusion: God is definitely not the most popular topic for conversation among youths, for the most part. Mention sports, clothes, the latest movies, or the opposite sex and you will usually trigger a lively discussion. Dare to mention God, though, and an awkward silence as thick as fog can quickly descend.
Some youths simply do not believe in God. They may reason that since they cannot see him, he must not exist​—talking about him seems a waste of time. Nevertheless, atheists are definitely in the minority among young people. According to a Gallup survey, about 95 percent of U.S. youths do believe in God. In fact, Gallup concluded: “For many young people the God of their belief is not some vague abstract principle, but a personal God who observes their actions and rewards or punishes them accordingly.” Why, then, are so many youths hesitant to talk about what they believe?
Why Some Hold Back
Many simply seem to think it’s bad manners to talk about matters of faith and that religious thoughts are best kept to oneself. Some youths seem to be embarrassed by the mere idea of discussing God. ‘It’s just not cool to do so,’ they reason.
Whatever the view of your peers, where do you stand on this issue? This question is particularly pertinent if you were raised as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Why? Because witnessing, telling others about God, is at the very core of that faith!​—Isaiah 43:9, 10; Matthew 24:14.
Even so, discouraged by the hostility they occasionally encounter, some Witness youths hold back from engaging in the public preaching work​—or do participate only because of persuasion by their parents. Others share in that work but secretly hope that none of their school friends see them doing so. At school, some try to keep their religious convictions a secret. Often this is because they fear ridicule from classmates. “I was scared to talk about God,” admits young Ryan, “because my associates would call me names and I did not have the courage to continue the conversation.”
Then there are those who hold back because they fear they cannot fully live up to the Bible’s standards. Feeling the lure of “the desires incidental to youth,” they reason it would be best not to identify themselves as Christians in case they do something wrong.​—2 Timothy 2:22.
Some do not talk about God because they simply feel inadequate. Nineteen-​year-​old Wilton put it this way: “I found it difficult to talk about God to my workmates because I felt that I was not qualified to defend the things I said about him. I felt that if challenged about my beliefs, I would not have a satisfactory answer.”
A Christian Obligation
Could it be that you have held back from talking about God for similar reasons? If so, you are not alone. Other youths have struggled with the same feelings. However, many have come to appreciate that, in spite of all the things that might discourage one from doing so, there are compelling reasons to talk to others about God. What are some of these?
Young Marco, mentioned at the outset, put it well when he said that God “is our Creator and we owe our life to him.” (Revelation 4:11) Yes, life is a precious gift. The psalmist said of God: “With you is the source of life.” (Psalm 36:9) Having received this gift, should you not show gratitude for it?
One way to show gratitude is to praise Jehovah God in the presence of others. He is the Originator of the sun, the moon, the rain, the air that we breathe, and the food that we eat. (Acts 14:15-17) “Every good gift and every perfect present is from above,” said the disciple James. (James 1:17) Do you thank God for these gifts? (Colossians 3:15) What finer way to express your thanks than to talk about God?​—Luke 6:45.
Actually, though, God commands us to speak about him. His Son, Jesus Christ, commanded Christians: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations.” (Matthew 28:19, 20) Youths are not excluded from the responsibility of participating in this work. Commands the psalmist: “Praise Jehovah . . . you young men and also you virgins, you old men together with boys. Let them praise the name of Jehovah, for his name alone is unreachably high. His dignity is above earth and heaven.” (Psalm 148:7, 12, 13) But you need not view this assignment as a burden. Really, it is a privilege​—you can actually be one of “God’s fellow workers.”​—1 Corinthians 3:9.
What if you simply do not feel qualified? The prophet Jeremiah had such feelings in Bible times. “Alas, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah!” he said. “Here I actually do not know how to speak, for I am but a boy.” Jehovah’s response? “Do not say, ‘I am but a boy.’ But to all those to whom I shall send you, you should go; and everything that I shall command you, you should speak.” (Jeremiah 1:6, 7) With Jehovah’s help Jeremiah did just that for 40 years!
Likewise with Christians today, “our being adequately qualified issues from God.” (2 Corinthians 3:5) Even if you are by nature the shy, retiring type, God can help you to have the courage to speak. Within the Christian congregation are provisions that can help you become more “adequately qualified” as a teacher of God’s Word. If you feel you need some personal assistance, why not talk to one of the congregation overseers? It may just be a matter of developing a program of personal Bible study or working along with someone more experienced.
What You Can Accomplish
Talking about God can give you a real sense of accomplishment. For one thing, many of your peers are searching for answers, almost crying out for help. They lack direction and have no clear vision of the future. They wonder, ‘Why are we here? Where are we going? Why is the world so full of trouble?’ As a Christian, you have the answers, and you are likely in the best position to convey such knowledge to your peers. They can relate to you and would probably rather talk to someone their own age than to an adult.
True, at times you will face rejection. But you may also find individuals receptive to the Bible’s message. One young Witness sat on a bus reading her personal copy of the book Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work.a A boy seated next to her began to read along. “This is a neat book!” the boy exclaimed. “This book talks a lot about God. Most people aren’t interested in religion.” The young Witness used this as an opportunity to have an in-​depth discussion on the subject of God’s name.
Granted, when you identify yourself as a Christian, you are obliged to behave like one. (1 Peter 2:12) But fine Christian conduct will only add to the credibility of your message. Consider the experience of a youth named Eric. He was impressed by the fine conduct of Witness youths in his school. This sparked his interest in learning more about God. A Bible study was started with him, and today he is a baptized Christian serving at the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses in New York.
Talking about God can also help you! It can serve as a protection. When your companions know you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, many will respect you. They may be less prone to pressure you into engaging in wrongdoing when they recognize that you have high standards and know that you are likely to give them a witness in response.
Of course, this doesn’t mean that every time you open your mouth you must quote scriptures. You will still have your interest in sports, clothes, or music and will want to talk about such things from time to time. But remember: “Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.” (Matthew 12:34) If love for God is truly in your heart, you’ll naturally want to talk about him. In a future issue, we will discuss some ways in which you can do so effectively.
[Footnotes]
Published by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Picture on page 15]
Are you ashamed to be seen by your schoolmates when you are in the public preaching work?

