A Revelation​—of Jehovah’s Will and Purposes
‘HAPPY is he who reads and those who hear the words of this prophecy, and who observe the things written in it.’ (Rev. 1:3) Why could this be said of the book of Revelation when so much of it is in symbolic or sign language?
Why? Because even though sign language is used, much is understandable regarding God’s will and purposes, forming a basis for happiness. The book of Revelation tells of Jehovah’s judgments upon the wicked; it commends God’s servants for their endurance, relates their coming off victorious and describes the eventual destruction of all the incorrigibly wicked and the final triumph of righteousness.
In many respects Revelation happily complements the book of Genesis. Just as Genesis 1:1 speaks of the creation of the heavens and the earth, so Revelation 21:1 speaks of a new heaven and a new earth. As Genesis chapter three reveals how sin and death entered into the world, Revelation makes known the end of these. And as Genesis mentions a tree of life and a river issuing forth from Eden, so Revelation speaks symbolically of trees of life and a river of water of life issuing forth from God’s throne.
WHAT? WHO? WHERE? WHEN?
Many Bible editions speak of Revelation as “The Revelation of St. John the Divine.” But not so. It is “A revelation by Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show his slaves the things that must shortly take place. And he sent forth his angel and presented it in signs through him to his slave John.”​—Rev. 1:1.
The apostle John himself tells that at the time of seeing these visions he had been banished to the isle of Patmos “for speaking about God and bearing witness to Jesus.” (Rev. 1:9) John was banished toward the end of Emperor Domitian’s reign, which ended in 96 C.E., right after which John was released. So quite possibly it was in that very year that John had the visions he recorded.
When did he write them down? The vividness with which he describes the things that he saw and heard would argue that he wrote these down at once. That it was his habit to write these things down without delay seems borne out by the command given to him not to write down certain things that he had just heard, indicating that that particular vision was an exception.​—Rev. 10:4.
MESSAGES TO THE SEVEN CONGREGATIONS
In the Bible the number seven is a symbol of completeness, and especially does Revelation stress that fact, “seven” appearing in the book some fifty times. To begin with, there are seven congregations, seven spirits, seven golden lampstands and seven stars.a
After his salutation and introductory remarks, John reports seeing a glorious vision of the resurrected Christ and hears the Creator speak of Himself as “the Alpha and the Omega.” (Rev. 1:8) Next, John names seven congregations to whom he sends messages. First, he commends the congregation at Ephesus and then reproves it for having left its first love, but promises a reward upon repentance. The congregation of Smyrna receives only commendation and the promise of the crown of life if faithful to death. The congregations at Pergamum, Thyatira and Sardis are given both commendation and warnings. If they repent they are to be rewarded. The congregation in Philadelphia, however, receives only commendation with a promise of reward. The congregation at Laodicea, by contrast, receives only censure, because it is neither hot nor cold; but it is promised, if it repents and conquers, the reward of sitting with Jesus on his throne, even as he overcame and sat down with his Father on His throne.​—Rev. 2:1–3:22.
SIX SEALS OPENED
John now receives a vision of heaven in which he sees a dazzling, glorious view of the Creator seated upon a throne, surrounded by four resplendent creatures full of eyes and by twenty-four elders seated on thrones, and who are saying: “You are worthy, Jehovah, even our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things.”​—Rev. 4:9-11.
The One seated on the throne has a scroll sealed tight with seven seals, and John weeps because no one is found able to open the seals. Then the Lion of the tribe of Judah, Jesus Christ, is shown as the one worthy to open the seals, and praise is repeatedly given both to Jehovah and to the Lamb.​—Rev. 5:11, 12.
With chapter six John begins to see the Lamb loosing the seals. The opening of the first seal reveals a righteous victorious warrior on a white horse, Jesus Christ. The opening of the next three seals calls to mind Jesus’ great prophecy about wars, famines and pestilence, which are part of “the sign” of the end of the world’s system. (Luke 21:7, 10, 11) As the fifth seal is opened, John sees Christian martyrs asking that their blood be avenged. Great commotion in heaven and earth accompany the opening of the sixth seal, with men fearing the coming wrath of God. Chapter seven reveals four angels holding back the wrath of God until the 144,000 spiritual Israelites have been sealed. Thereafter John sees a numberless crowd who have come out of the great tribulation and who ascribe glory, honor and salvation to Jehovah God and to the Lamb, Jesus Christ.​—Rev. 7:1-17.
SEVEN ANGELS SOUND SEVEN TRUMPETS
With the opening of the seventh seal, we note a brief reference to the prayers of the holy ones and then preparation by seven angels to sound trumpets. Five of these angels, one after the other, blow their trumpets. Then in highly symbolic language their effects are told, all of which are of a punishing nature to wicked men upon earth. With the sounding of the sixth trumpet, John is told that when the seventh trumpet is sounded the mystery of God will be finished. He is given a scroll to eat; in his mouth it is sweet as honey but in his belly it is bitter. John is then directed to measure the temple sanctuary and is told of the servants of God who, under the symbol of “two witnesses,” prophesy for 1,260 days in sackcloth and ashes. After this they are slain, to the rejoicing of their foes, but only to be resurrected and exalted.​—Rev. 8:1–11:13.
As the seventh angel sounds his trumpet, John hears the announcement: “The kingdom of the world did become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king forever and ever.” Also, the twenty-four elders worship God and say: “We thank you, Jehovah God, the Almighty, the One who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and begun ruling as king.”​—Rev. 11:15-18.
By means of a tableau, chapter twelve gives the details of what happened. John sees a woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet and wearing a crown of twelve stars, as she gives birth to a man child who is to rule all the nations with an iron rod. Thereafter war takes place in heaven: Michael and his angels battle with the dragon and his angels; Michael is victorious and the dragon, Satan, the Devil, the original serpent, is cast down to the earth along with his cohorts. This results in great woe to the earth because the Devil knows that his days are numbered.​—Rev. 12:1-17.
THE WILD BEAST VERSUS THE HOLY ONES
In chapter thirteen John tells of seeing a wild beast, with seven heads and ten horns, and which blasphemes God and wages war with God’s holy ones. Then appears another beast, which influences those on earth to worship the first beast and to make an image to it. It puts all on earth under compulsion to worship and to receive its mark, the number of which is 666.
But it does not succeed with everyone, for next John sees those standing with the Lamb on Mount Zion who have come off victorious, remaining unspotted, and who are the firstfruits. An angel is seen flying in midheaven having everlasting good news to tell and calling upon all to “fear God and give him glory.” Next, a warning is given to all who succumb to the pressures of the wild beast. But, for their endurance, the holy ones are promised: “Happy are the dead who die in union with the Lord.” Still another angel tells of the reaping of the vine of the earth and its grapes being trodden in a great winepress.​—Rev. 14:1-20.
Chapter fifteen depicts those having gained the victory over the wild beast and its image as they praise God, the One righteous and true. Then follows a scene wherein seven angels, having seven bowls of God’s anger, begin pouring out their bowls upon various parts of the wicked world. After the pouring out of the sixth bowl, it is revealed that unclean messages, inspired by demons, are gathering the nations to the war of the great day of God the Almighty at the place Har–Magedon.​—Rev. 16:14, 16.
BABYLON AND HER PATRONS MEET DEFEAT
Chapters seventeen and eighteen depict Babylon the Great as the mother of harlots riding on the back of a scarlet-colored wild beast that also has seven heads and ten horns. However, before long the ten horns strip the harlot naked, devastate her and burn her with fire. Because Babylon is doomed, the call goes forth for God’s people to flee from her lest they share in her sins and receive of her plagues. Upon her being destroyed, both patronizing world’s political rulers and the world’s leading merchantmen mourn her because of the loss that they thus sustain. We are told that, with her destruction, the blood of God’s holy ones is avenged.
Chapter nineteen opens with the command: “Praise Jah, you people!” Three more times this is repeated. Because Jehovah has executed judgment upon the great harlot, because He has begun ruling as king and because the time has arrived for the marriage of the Lamb and his bride. Then the Faithful and True One, the Lamb of God, is seen going forth with the armies of heaven to do battle with the kings of the earth and their armies, all of whom get slain by the sword.
THE THOUSAND YEARS
For a thousand years Satan the Devil will be in an abyss, unable to influence humankind. Then, when he is loosed for a little season, he will try to mislead those on earth. All who succumb to him will be destroyed, as he will be also. Before his destruction, and during the thousand years, all those in Hades will be resurrected. John also sees God dwelling with humankind, as if in a tent, as He makes an end of all tears, pain, sorrow and death. The instrument God uses to bring all of this about is the Bridegroom Jesus Christ and the beautiful bridelike New Jerusalem, depicted as a city glistening with gold and jewels. What a glorious climax! All the mischief done by Satan in Eden and since is now undone!​—Rev. 20:1–22:5.
Again, those observing the words of this prophecy are pronounced “happy.” Then the invitation is given to all who hear to take the water of life free. And those who would add to or take away from the words of this prophecy are warned of the consequences. Upon hearing Jesus promising to come quickly, John replies, “Amen! Come, Lord Jesus.”​—Rev. 22:7-21.
REVELATION TRULY BENEFICIAL
Though the book of Revelation is largely symbolic, there is truly much food for thought and fine counsel and encouragement in its plain statements. In particular are its messages to the seven congregations in Asia Minor very beneficial. Also, repeatedly we find the need of endurance stressed and the bright hope given of the eventual triumph of righteousness. (Rev. 1:9; 2:3, 19; 3:10; 13:10; 14:12) Also, throughout, it tells of or calls for worship, praise and honor to be given to the Creator, Jehovah God, and to the Lamb.
And let it be noted that, as far as its symbolisms are concerned, time and again other parts of the Bible throw light on some of these. Daniel’s use of beasts to depict powerful empires helps to identify the beasts of Revelation as powerful political entities.​—Compare Daniel 7:2-26; 8:3-25 with Revelation 13:1-18; 17:3-17; 19:19, 20.
Similarly, in the Hebrew Scriptures an apostate people is referred to as a prostitute. (Isa. 1:21; Ezek. 23:1-49) So we can gather that Babylon the Great, the mother of the harlots, must be a vast religious empire that has prostituted itself.​—Rev. 17:1-6; 18:1-24.
Also, let it be noted that there are a number of truths mentioned only in Revelation. Jesus referred to his followers as a “little flock,” but only Revelation tells us how little​—144,000. (Luke 12:32; Rev. 7:4-8; 14:1, 3) Jesus also spoke of “other sheep,” but only Revelation gives us a picture of a “great crowd” of these and tells that they have come out of the “great tribulation.” (John 10:16; Rev. 7:9-14) Only Revelation mentions the place where Jehovah’s forces and those of Satan meet in battle, namely, Har–Magedon. (Rev. 16:14, 16) Jesus and Paul mentioned a resurrection from the dead, but only Revelation tells us that there will be a “first resurrection” and a resurrection of the rest of mankind. (John 5:28, 29; Acts 24:15; Rev. 20:5, 6) And only Revelation gives us a glorious picture of New Jerusalem descending out of heaven as a bride adorned for her husband.​—Rev. 21:2.
No question about it, Revelation does reveal to us God’s will and purpose for his people and for all humankind. What good news it contains of the eventual triumph of righteousness! What stress it places on our enduring, so that we can come off victorious, and on our praising Jehovah God and his Lamb, Jesus Christ! How fitting that it has been placed at the end of the library of “little books” that comprise the inspired Scriptures! Truly ‘happy are those who read, hear and observe the things written in it’​—to the extent that they understand them!
[Footnotes]
For a detailed, verse-by-verse consideration of Revelation, see “Then Is Finished the Mystery of God,” which explains the first thirteen chapters, and “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules!, which covers chapters 14 through 22.

