How Far Should Kindness Extend?
KINDNESS is a quality that we appreciate in others. Particularly is this so when the kindness is directed toward us. And even when we do something wrong we hope that we will be shown kindness.
Jehovah God counts the quality of kindness as highly important. “His loving-kindness is to time indefinite,” says the Bible, repeatedly. (Ps. 136) God’s Son, Jesus Christ, knew him better than anyone else. Jesus counseled his disciples to imitate God, who ‘is kind toward even the unthankful and wicked.’​—Luke 6:35.
It is entirely appropriate, then, that God sets kindness as a fundamental requirement for those who wish to have His favor. He says to the one professing to serve him: “He has told you, O earthling man, what is good. And what is Jehovah asking back from you but to exercise justice and to love kindness and to be modest in walking with your God?”​—Mic. 6:8.
In dealing with people, aggravating situations can develop that put a strain on kindness. This is especially true when we are confronted by our enemies. But on this point, Jesus said: “Continue to love your enemies and to pray for those persecuting you; that you may prove yourselves sons of your Father who is in the heavens.”​—Matt. 5:44, 45.
To love our enemies and to treat them with kindness is probably the most difficult of all the duties of the Christian. And, more than a duty, it must be done from the heart. “If your enemy is hungry, feed him,” and, “when your enemy falls, do not rejoice; and when he is caused to stumble, may your heart not be joyful”​—these are principles that must be heartfelt in the Christian.​—Rom. 12:20; Prov. 24:17.
This does not mean that a Christian cannot reprove another, reasoning with him about his mistake or the badness of his doings. He might even ‘reprove with severity,’ to convince the individual and to save him from the consequences of continuing in a bad way.​—Titus 1:13.
We have the example of Jesus Christ. He was straightforward with his enemies. But he never gave them unkind treatment nor did he threaten to bring personal reprisals against them for their attacks on him. When he was on earth he did not judge individuals, or express personal condemnation of them. He spoke only the judgments of his Father.​—John 5:30.
For instance, when he was talking to his bitterest enemies, the scribes and the Pharisees, he exposed them for what they were, for God revealed their heart attitude to him. He warned them of God’s judgment as expressed in the Scriptures. Rather than saying, ‘I’m God’s Son and I’ll see to it that you land in Gehenna,’ he put, instead, the warning question to them: “How are you to flee from the judgment of Gehenna?” (Matt. 23:33) They could do so individually only by a change of their disastrous course.
When Jesus underwent the greatest unkindness at the hands of the Jews and the Roman soldiers​—he was treated far worse than a slave—​“he did not go reviling in return. When he was suffering, he did not go threatening.” (1 Pet. 2:23; Matt. 27:27-31) The disciple Stephen, the first Christian martyr, followed this pattern as he was being stoned to death by the Jews, praying: “Jehovah, do not charge this sin against them.”​—Acts 7:60.
Those who profess to be Christians want to watch that their kindness may not be less than the kindness and generosity sometimes shown by persons who do not claim to be servants of God. In the world there are people who act according to the kindness that is part of the human make-up created by God. But because of human imperfection that quality is dimmed. Therefore the Christian must strive to be sure that he is not found lacking in this vital quality.
Consider how, in the days of the apostles, the people on the island of Malta put to shame many who professed to serve God. These people of Malta, including the principal man of the island, received the apostle Paul and his shipwrecked companions, about 276 persons in all, and showed “extraordinary human kindness.” They took care of the castaways for three months. And Luke, who was one of the shipwrecked party, tells us that when another boat was available, these kind islanders “honored us with many gifts and, when we were setting sail, they loaded us with things for our needs.”​—Acts 28:1, 2, 10, 11; 27:37.
What a condemnation the kindness of these people was of those people in the cities of Israel who actually heard the Son of God and saw his miracles, yet showed him the greatest unkindness and indignity!
Likewise, today we see and read about acts of extraordinary human kindness that may, by contrast, reveal less kindness on the part of some who profess to be dedicated servants of God. No doubt God takes note of such human kindness, if it is really expressed from the heart, and will extend to these people the opportunity of learning more about himself and his own superb qualities. Jehovah’s Witnesses will kindly help all such persons whose heart God opens to a desire to know about him.
Is there ever a time when unkindness is appropriate? Does it ever accomplish good? No. ‘But,’ someone may ask, ‘what about dealing with those who deviate from God’s righteous principles, or those who even manifest a stubborn, rebellious, unrepentant spirit? Should we be kind to such persons?’
Those who make a mistake will be helped much more by kindness than by unkindness, which is actually a form of cruelty. Why should any of us, who at all times want and even need kindness from others, judge our fellowman as unworthy of kind, courteous treatment? He has enough burdens on his shoulders without added unkindnesses from us.
And even if a person is a stubborn, unrepentant violator of God’s law, can any one of us say that that one will never repent? Only God can judge whether he has committed an unforgivable sin. (Matt. 12:32) Furthermore, unkindness tends to separate wrongdoers farther from any desire to repent.​—Rom. 2:4.
Even when a congregation was troubled with divisions caused by rebellious ones, the apostle Paul did not resort to harshness, but wrote: “Now I myself, Paul, entreat you by the mildness and kindness of the Christ.” (2 Cor. 10:1) The Greek word here translated “kindness” denotes fairness, moderation, gentleness, reasonableness. It is coupled with mildness. It is a comfortable feeling to be around a person who we know will give us fair, reasonable consideration. We follow his counsel more readily.
To imitate God, therefore, let all who are striving to be faithful witnesses of Jehovah work to develop this fruit of God’s spirit that makes for our own happiness and smooths out the path of others who want to serve God.​—Gal. 5:22.

