What Defense Against Defamers of True Christians?
THE entire body of Christian teachings, which became part of God’s written Word, is the “truth of the good news” or simply the “truth.” (Gal. 2:5; Rom. 2:8) Throughout the centuries relatively few persons have accepted that fact. Blinded by the “god of this system of things,” Satan the Devil, many have fought against the “truth of the good news” by misrepresenting true Christians, their teachings and their motives.​—2 Cor. 4:3, 4.
To Christians such misrepresentation is one evidence that they are indeed walking in harmony with God’s truth. It can thus be a reason for their rejoicing, knowing that their adherence to the truth will lead to lasting blessings. As Jesus Christ said in the Sermon on the Mount: “Happy are you when people reproach you and persecute you and lyingly say every sort of wicked thing against you for my sake. Rejoice and leap for joy, since your reward is great in the heavens; for in that way they persecuted the prophets prior to you.”​—Matt. 5:11, 12.
Of course, it is not pleasant to be the object of reproach. One may become very much concerned about possible adverse effects upon those who might be led to accept the misrepresentation as truth. Especially when the defamation comes from those who at one time seemingly walked in harmony with the truth of God’s Word, one may want to fight against it. But is this the wise course?
We should never forget that many persons simply do not want to know the truth. Believing that conformity to the high standards of God’s Word is too much, some are just looking for an excuse not to listen to the Bible’s message as presented by Jehovah’s Christian witnesses. When Jehovah’s Witnesses are misrepresented, these persons want to believe falsehoods in order to justify their course of action. As 2 Thessalonians 2:11, 12 tells us: “God lets an operation of error go to them, that they may get to believing the lie, in order that they all may be judged because they did not believe the truth but took pleasure in unrighteousness.” Obviously, for Jehovah’s servants to take issue with every false charge made against them would not help such persons. These would still prefer to believe the lie.
Were Jehovah’s Witnesses to immerse themselves in refuting all false charges made against them, they could also fall into a trap of the great accuser Satan the Devil. How so? Well, Satan would certainly be pleased to see a slowing down in the work of aiding honest-hearted persons to learn the truth. Yet that is exactly what could happen. By letting themselves become sidetracked, Jehovah’s servants would lose valuable time, time that might otherwise have been used beneficially to help sincere persons to learn about God’s will and purposes respecting mankind.
Similarly, by spending a lot of time in reading attacks made against Jehovah’s Witnesses and then striving to find ways to refute them, a person could easily get himself all worked up emotionally. He could become depressed and discouraged, especially since, humanly, there is no way to silence all false accusers. Extensive public efforts in this regard would, in fact, only serve to advertise falsehoods. Some persons might even be led to view strenuous efforts to disprove the charges as reason for giving greater weight to those charges.
There is a way, however, to disprove falsehoods without becoming unduly involved in trying to combat them. What way is that? The apostle Peter points to it when saying to fellow Christians: “Maintain your conduct fine among the nations, that, in the thing in which they are speaking against you as evildoers, they may as a result of your fine works of which they are eyewitnesses glorify God in the day for his inspection. . . . For so the will of God is, that by doing good you may muzzle the ignorant talk of the unreasonable men.” (1 Pet. 2:12-15) Yes, as sincere observers note that Jehovah’s Witnesses truly live in harmony with the righteous standards of God’s Word and are prompted by genuine concern and love for others in carrying out their service, such observers can readily see that the charges made against these Christians are unfounded.
So there is no need for anyone to become overly concerned about the lying accusations of disgruntled individuals whose only interest is to attack and tear down the unity and service of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Persons who desire to find out what Jehovah’s Witnesses do and teach will have no difficulty in getting firsthand information. Each month Jehovah’s Witnesses distribute millions of pieces of literature that set forth the Biblical basis for their beliefs. Meetings at their Kingdom Halls are open to the public, as are their regional, national and international assemblies. And, of course, individually Jehovah’s Witnesses are always ready to present the reasons for their beliefs to sincere inquirers.
But if people choose to believe false accusations, they will have to suffer the consequences for having failed to make an honest investigation. This is in agreement with the words of Jesus Christ: “If, then, a blind man guides a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”​—Matt. 15:14.
Hence, rather than getting into an argument when false accusations are made, Jehovah’s Witnesses usually find it best to let the burden of proof rest with the accusers. A good example in this respect is the apostle Paul. When religious enemies made false charges against him before Roman governor Felix, Paul did not try to fight the false charges but simply pointed out that his accusers could not prove the ‘things of which they were accusing him.’ (Acts 24:13) Similarly, on one occasion Jesus Christ asked his opposers: “Who of you convicts me of sin?”​—John 8:46.
There are occasions, though, when a defense must be made under unfavorable circumstances. Public officials, such as judges, might demand a reply. Though the questions may be propounded in such a way as to belittle him and his message, the witness of Jehovah need not become angry and reflect resentment or irritation. He can remain calm and display mildness when making his reply. Knowing that the “eyes of Jehovah are upon the righteous ones,” he rightly manifests deep respect, as if he were in the presence of God. (1 Pet. 3:12) Such conduct is in harmony with the admonition found at 1 Peter 3:15: “Sanctify the Christ as Lord in your hearts, always ready to make a defense before everyone that demands of you a reason for the hope in you, but doing so together with a mild temper and deep respect.”
Whereas fighting with words could only worsen the situation, the testimony of fine conduct cannot be disputed. No reasonable person would ever conclude that qualities like unselfishness, kindness, helpfulness and empathy are characteristic of a hateful people. So praiseworthy conduct on the part of true Christians, along with calm persistence in a positive presentation of the Bible’s teachings, is their best defense against defamers. Fine conduct can muzzle ignorant talk and contribute toward helping others to become glorifiers of Jehovah God.

