Happy Because of Being Jehovah’s People
What blessings did ancient Israel enjoy due to having Jehovah as their God?
Among these blessings was the miraculous deliverance at the Red Sea in 1513 B.C.E. (Ex. 12:1–15:21) Two months later they were blessed by entering into a covenant with Jehovah and receiving a perfect set of laws from him. (Ex. 19:1–20:18) Forty years later they experienced the blessings of entering the land flowing with milk and honey. (Deut. 6:3) Under King David’s reign they enjoyed many victories over their enemies, and under King Solomon that nation’s happiness reached its peak.—1 Ki. 4:20-25.
As long as that nation worshiped Jehovah as their God its people were a happy people.—Ps. 33:12.a
Since Pentecost of 33 C.E. who have been Jehovah’s happy people and nation?
Since that Pentecost it has been spiritual Israel that has been Jehovah’s happy nation and people. On that day Jehovah poured out his holy spirit upon them, and they all began to speak in foreign tongues.—Acts 2:1-41.
These were not only anointed with God’s holy spirit to proclaim everywhere the good news of God’s kingdom but also begotten of God’s spirit to be God’s spiritual sons with the grand hope and promise of membership in God’s heavenly kingdom with Jesus Christ.
What dramatic rebirth did this nation experience in 1919?
Even as ancient Israel was released from Babylonian captivity in keeping with God’s promise, so also was spiritual Israel in modern times. It was taken captive and brought into a state of deathlike inactivity during World War I and then was reborn at “one time” in 1919. At the same time its religious position and relationship to God, its “land,” was brought forth as “in one day.” Suddenly the dynamic leading representatives of the Watch Tower Society were released from imprisonment. The international organization was reconstructed. Yes, dramatically, as if arising from the dead, the persecuted remnant of anointed Christians strode fearlessly upon the world stage of action. Fully alive, they began producing and bearing the fruits of the Kingdom; they thenceforth proclaimed God’s kingdom as having come into power at the close of the Gentile times in 1914.—Isa. 66:5-8; Luke 21:24.
Who are increasingly now sharing happiness with Jehovah’s spiritual nation?
Since the rebirth of Jehovah’s nation in 1919 its membership has increased to the full number of its citizen body, namely, 144,000. (Rev. 14:1, 3) Each year the remaining earthly members of that nation grow fewer and fewer, as one by one they complete their earthly course and are united with their Lord in heaven. Those continuing on earth lovingly endeavor to share their happiness with others.
As a result their happiness is spreading to a “great crowd” of “other sheep” who are like ‘alien residents’ dwelling within the “gates” of spiritual Israel and having become “one flock” with the remnant under “one shepherd,” Jesus Christ.—Rev. 7:9; John 10:16; Ex. 20:10.
These share with the remnant the happiness of having Jehovah, “the happy God,” as their God, and are privileged to worship him “with spirit and truth.” In turn, these endeavor to share their happiness with still others by proclaiming the good news of God’s kingdom.—1 Tim. 1:11; John 4:24; Matt. 24:14.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, November 15, 1968.

