From Our Readers
Western Poverty  In your December 22, 1992, issue, an item in “Watching the World” (“Poor Children in America”) stated: “The United States, one of the richest countries in the world, is also home to some of the poorest children.” This is misleading. There are poor kids in many countries who would regard most of America’s poor children as rich. It is indeed a tragedy that many children in America are suffering. But with all the resources available, it’s because of shameful neglect by their parents.
W. H., United States
While many extreme cases of poverty can be seen in the United States, we did not mean to imply that the standard of living among those considered poor in that country is generally the same as that of impoverished ones in other lands. The fact that widespread poverty of any sort exists in such an affluent country is alarming. True, some children do suffer because of parental neglect. Many parents, however, possess neither the skills needed to improve their situation nor access to the resources enjoyed by others.​—ED.
Family Violence  I want to thank you so much for the series “Will Domestic Violence Ever End?” (February 8, 1993) For the last 10 years of my 22-year marriage, I put up with domestic violence. Psychological abuse is the worst. Insidiously, yet systematically, your personality is deformed to such a degree that you cannot ask for help. I reached the point where I even considered suicide. I finally left my husband, and I am living on my own. But I have been strengthened and comforted by the articles in your magazine.
B. S., Germany
My mother is a victim of physical abuse by my father, and we three children are very distressed about it. Every time he beats my mother, it is as though he were beating us. Few truly understand what it means to live in a family dominated by violence and hatred, where there is no longer any understanding or love. We are encouraged by the knowledge that someone understands us.
T. G. D. A., Italy
It is very encouraging to see this issue being addressed openly. I endured 14 years with an abusive mate who claimed to be a Christian. I was often told that I needed to avoid angering him. That was asking for the impossible! Finally, I had to leave him. Thank you for the articles; they were encouraging and can help others who have never been hit, kicked, or spit upon to understand the emotional scars we bear.
L. T., United States
The articles go right to the heart of many women who have felt alone and isolated; feelings of fear and shame kept us silent. You have helped us to understand that contrary to what we have been brainwashed to believe, we did not bring this on ourselves.
B. A., United States
Weeks have passed since my copy of Awake! arrived in the mail. It took many prayers for me simply to get the magazine out of its wrapper and days before I could finally force myself to read it. Thank you so much for addressing this issue! I was a victim of domestic violence. Once my husband brutally beat me while I slept; it required plastic surgery to fix my cheekbones. I was able to get away from him with the help of the police and a kind Christian family who lived nearby. He was sentenced to several months in jail. I am now remarried to a fine Christian man.
P. H., United States

