When All Races Live Together in Peace
GOD “made out of one man every nation of men, to dwell upon the entire surface of the earth.” (Acts 17:26) That is the Bible’s simple statement regarding the origin of the human family.
What it implies is that all mankind, no matter where they live or what physical characteristics they possess, came from one common stock. It also means that in spite of all observable differences, “every nation of men” has the same potential as far as abilities and intelligence are concerned. Yes, in God’s sight, humans of every race or nationality are equal.​—Acts 10:34, 35.
If the Bible view is correct, there is hope that all the prejudices and injustices based on racial differences can be eliminated. Furthermore, if the Bible is accurate regarding the origin of the human family, then logically that same book can also provide us with information revealing how the human race can live together in peace.
Well, what do the facts show? Is the Bible record regarding human origins corroborated by science?
Scientific Evidence
The publication The Races of Mankind, by anthropologists R. Benedict and G. Weltfish, observes: “The Bible story of Adam and Eve, father and mother of the whole human race, told centuries ago the same truth that science has shown today: that all the peoples of the earth are a single family and have a common origin.” These writers also point out that “the intricate make-up of the human body . . . couldn’t possibly have ‘just happened’ to be the same in all men if they did not have a common origin.”
The pamphlet Race and Biology, by L. C. Dunn, professor of zoology at Columbia University, says: “All men clearly belong to one species, being alike in all the fundamental physical characters. Members of all groups may intermarry and actually do.” Then it goes on to explain: “Yet every man is unique and differs in minor ways from every other man. This is in part due to the different environments in which people live and in part to differences in the genes which they have inherited.”
Scientific evidence is conclusive. Biologically speaking, there is no such thing as a superior or an inferior race, a pure or a contaminated race. Characteristics such as the color of one’s skin, hair, or eyes​—things that some may consider racially important—​are no indication of one’s intelligence or abilities. Rather, they are the results of genetic inheritance.
Indeed, racial differences are minimal, as Hampton L. Carson writes in Heredity and Human Life: “The paradox which faces us is that each group of humans appears to be externally different yet underneath these differences there is fundamental similarity.”
If all humans really form only one family, why, then, do terrible racial problems exist?
Why the Problem
The fundamental reason racism exists is the bad start that the first human parents gave their offspring. Adam and Eve willfully rebelled against God and thus became imperfect, defective. As a result, Adam’s imperfection​—this tendency toward badness—​was passed to his descendants. (Romans 5:12) So from birth on, all humans are prone to selfishness and pride, which has led to racial strife and turmoil.
There is another reason racism exists. When Adam and Eve broke away from God’s dominion, they came under the rule of a wicked spirit creature that the Bible calls Satan, or the Devil. Under the influence of this one, who is “misleading the entire inhabited earth,” deliberate efforts have often been made to deceive people on the matter of race. (Revelation 12:9; 2 Corinthians 4:4) Ethnocentrism​—the idea that one’s own group is superior—​has been fanned into a consuming flame, and wittingly or unwittingly, millions have been swept along, with disastrous consequences.
To put it frankly, selfish, imperfect humans under the control of Satan have spread all the false teachings about race that have been responsible for racial problems.
Therefore, for the human race to become united, all must believe that we are truly one human family and that God did make “out of one man every nation of men, to dwell upon the entire surface of the earth.” (Acts 17:26) Furthermore, for all races to live together in peace, Satan’s influence must be eliminated in human affairs. Will these things ever happen? Is there any basis for believing that they will?
Ending Racial Prejudice
Jesus Christ revealed how racial prejudice could be eliminated when he commanded his followers to “love one another” just as he loved them. (John 13:34, 35) This love was not to be just for members of a particular race or races. Not at all! “Have love for the whole association of brothers,” one of his disciples encouraged.​—1 Peter 2:17.
How is this Christian love shown? The Bible explains when it urges: “In showing honor to one another take the lead.” (Romans 12:10) Think what it means when this is done! Each one treats others, regardless of race or nationality, with real dignity and respect, not looking down on them, but actually ‘viewing them as superior.’ (Philippians 2:3) When such a spirit of genuine Christian love exists, the problem of racial prejudice is solved.
True, on the part of ones who have been taught racial prejudice, it takes unusual effort to rid themselves of such Satan-inspired ideas. But it can be accomplished! In the first century, all of those who were brought into the Christian congregation came to enjoy unparalleled oneness. The apostle Paul wrote of it: “There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor freeman, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one person in union with Christ Jesus.” (Galatians 3:28) Indeed, true followers of Christ came to enjoy genuine brotherhood.
But some may object: ‘This will never happen today.’ Yet, it has already happened among Jehovah’s Witnesses​—an organization of more than four and a half million people! Admittedly, not all Witnesses have become perfectly free from prejudices learned from this ungodly system. One black American realistically noted about white fellow Witnesses: “I detect among certain ones of them leftover attitudes of racial superiority, and I have sometimes seen a certain uncomfortableness of some of them when in close association with persons of another race.”
Yet, this person acknowledged: “Jehovah’s Witnesses have, to a degree unmatched by any other people on earth, rid themselves of racial prejudice. They do strive to love one another regardless of race . . . On occasion my heart has been warmed to the point of uncontrollable tears to experience the genuine love of white Witnesses.”
Does the racial unity enjoyed by a few​—even if these number in the millions—​really make that much difference when millions of others are influenced by Satanic ideas of racial superiority? No, we agree that it doesn’t solve the problem of race. It is beyond human efforts to do so. Only our Creator, Jehovah God, can do that.
Happily, very soon now, Jehovah, by means of his Kingdom in the hands of his Son, Jesus Christ, will rid the earth of all injustice and all of those who selfishly promote discrimination and hatred, racial or otherwise. (Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:9, 10) Then, with a perfect educational program under the administration of Christ, all races will truly become united. As that education progresses, they will live in perfect harmony without any trace of racial discrimination. God’s promise will finally be fulfilled: “The former things have passed away. . . . Look! I am making all things new.”​—Revelation 21:4, 5.
Are you a person who longs for the time when true brotherhood prevails, when all races live together in peace? If so, we welcome you to attend a Kingdom Hall near you, where Jehovah’s Witnesses meet regularly to study the Bible. See for yourself if they do not display genuine Christian love​—for people of all races.
[Picture on page 10]
Soon all races everywhere will live together in peace

