Watching the World
Massive Transfusions as Killers
◆ The medical journal Surgical Rounds recently published the results of two studies that revealed a “greatly increased” death rate for persons who receive massive blood transfusions over short periods of time. “The overall mortality rate of 50%,” reports the journal, “reflects the severity of the problems associated with massive transfusion.” Surgical Rounds also stated: “As might be expected, there was a substantial rise in mortality rate with increased numbers of transfusions. The mortality rate with 10 to 14 units of blood was 37%; with 15 to 19 units, 53%; with 20 to 24 units, 62%; and with 25 or more units, 78%.”
For those who do not die from massive transfusions, there was a great risk of serious complications. “Approximately 85% of the patients receiving 10-19 units of blood and virtually all patients receiving 20 or more units of blood within a 24 hour period had major complications,” stated the article. “It was somewhat surprising that over 90% of the individuals receiving 15 or more units of blood developed one or more infections.”​—August 1981, pp. 47-54.
Salvation Army Withdraws
◆ Charging that the World Council of Churches is guided “by politics rather than the gospel,” the Salvation Army has withdrawn its membership from the Council. The Salvation Army protested the Council’s giving financial support to guerrilla movements.
Pistol-packing Pastors
◆ Fourteen delegates to the recent National Baptist Convention in Detroit were arrested for carrying undeclared concealed handguns across the Canadian border. ‘At least a dozen of those arrested at the Ambassador Bridge and the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel in Windsor,’ said the Detroit Free Press, ‘were ministers.’ The handguns ranged from .22 caliber revolvers to .357 magnums. Said the acting Canadian customs superintendent at the tunnel: “We asked what they were carrying with them. We also asked if they had any firearms.” In court, the pastors were fined or given suspended sentences. A judge who handled seven of the 14 cases explained: “All they have to do is tell the truth and we send them back. There’s no law against them having the guns at the border check if they just let us know.” He added: “Well, we’ve confiscated all the guns and the people will have to go home without them. And I’m sure most of them will make it. Maybe then they’ll realize they don’t have to carry guns around with them.”
Bankrupt Lottery Winner
◆ In 1979 a 26-year-old man in Chicopee, Massachusetts, won the State Lottery’s big prize​—$1 million. Even though the winner is paid in yearly installments, today this man has filed for bankruptcy and says: “I’ve been through hell the past two years. A lot of problems started with money. Most of the money I had, I lost.” Bankruptcy proceedings and claims of creditors have tied up the issuance of more money. “Vultures” began to appear at his doorstep after he won, he said, and “I was bombarded with letters from women 16 to 60.” He spent large sums of money on his lady friend. They were almost engaged when his financial troubles began and she was exposed as a gold digger. Another problem the lottery winner encountered was that he suddenly became the target of robbers. Nine times different ones assaulted him. Though he carried only a few dollars with him, he explained, “people figure that you’re a walking bank.” He added: “When you win that kind of money, it brings out the greed and jealousy in people.”
Smoker’s Face
◆ Many doctors believe that smoking may make a person’s facial skin look older. Says Albert Kligman, a Philadelphia dermatologist: “The skin of smokers is just not as good. But all we have are the personal observations​—there has not been a single study to make the comparison.” A Canadian immunologist, John Gerrard, examined 200 men to see if their immune systems were affected by smoking. He found it almost unnecessary to ask if they smoked, since, he explained, “I could easily identify the long-term smoker by his wizened [withered] appearance. The faces of smokers and nonsmokers are not very different at age 30. But by 40 and 50 the differences are apparent.”
“License to Kill” Killed
◆ After a four-year parliamentary battle, Italy has abolished a law that allowed murderers involved in so-called crimes of passion to get away with very little punishment. The law had stated that the killing of one’s unfaithful spouse “in a state of anger prompted by the affront to his or his family’s honour shall be punished by a prison sentence of from three to seven years.” Before Italy legalized divorce, some men reportedly even took advantage of the law by murdering claimed adulterous wives in order to be free to remarry after a short sentence. Now such a crime will be treated like any other murder.
Preying on Despair
◆ According to the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), each month about 4,000 refugees from Vietnam​—often called “boat people”—​are being killed by pirates in the China Sea. “Piracy has taken on the proportions of an industry with unparalleled violence,” said the ICRC. The pirates, who have been active since the 17th century, reportedly attack about 80 percent of the refugee-filled boats that leave Vietnam. And “for every four to five people who arrive at a safe port,” says the ICRC, “there are probably another five who don’t make it” because of a pirate attack.
Vancouver’s “Gay” Parade
◆ This summer the capital of British Columbia, Canada, had a parade of homosexuals and their supporters in celebration of “Gay Unity Week,” as proclaimed by Mayor Michael Harcourt. Vancouver’s “gay” community also staged an exhibition celebrating their sexual condition. The Toronto, Ontario, Sunday Star reported that “prominent exhibitors include the Jewish, Anglican, Roman Catholic and United Churches​—and the Vancouver city police force.” “This year’s homosexual parade was the first of its kind,” noted the newspaper. And “it was so successful​—it drew an estimated 1,500 parade marchers, homosexuals and their relatives and supporters—​that parade organizer Vincent Manis wants to make it an annual event.”
Revival of Militarism?
◆ More and more government officials in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party of Japan are exerting efforts to have the Shinto shrine in Tokyo, known as Yasukuni Shrine, become a national war memorial. They want August 15 to be designated as a day of mourning for those who died in World War II. However, there are many opposition groups who feel that such moves will revive militarism and the Shinto religion’s role in it. On display in the shrine compound are a midget submarine, an army tank and other war machines. The shrine’s memorial hall contains hundreds of articles, such as blood-stained uniforms, testaments and portraits of Kamikaze suicide corps members.
Way to Stop Rape?
◆ Between 3 a.m. and 4 a.m. one summer night this year, a masked man climbed through a window into a North Carolina woman’s apartment. According to a report in the Boston Sunday Globe, the would-be rapist threatened to cut her throat if she refused to submit to him. Instead of giving in, “I told him I was a Christian and could not have sex with anyone but my husband,” she said, adding: “After further discussion along those lines, he just walked out.”
Video-Game Addiction
◆ Electronic video games in arcades represent a big industry. According to U.S. industry trade publications, each machine brings in an average of $145 a week, though some in high-traffic areas earn more than $100 a day. From 20 to 30 billion quarters are dropped into these machines each year, mainly by teenagers. Some parents are now wondering about the possible effects of the games. Medical authorities on addiction are concerned about the addictive potential of the games among certain children. “The chief danger signs for parents to be aware of,” says Dr. Robert Millman, associate professor of psychiatry at the New York Hospital–Cornell University Medical Center, “are children who spend an inordinate amount of time or money on the games. If a kid keys on the games as the main reason for living, then he’s got real trouble.”
Pesticides with a Long Life
◆ No small number of soil scientists have believed that most pesticides degrade in the ground into their basic components, thereby ending any danger for mankind. But scientists at the University of Pennsylvania now report that certain pesticides in widespread use do not disintegrate readily in the soil. “They found,” reported the New York Times, “that such pesticides as DDT, Sevin and 2,4-D tend to polymerize, or combine with other molecules, in the soil, producing new toxic chemical components that can have even longer lives than the original ones. Such transformed components also tend to become bound to the soil or humus, resulting in unknown effects on the environment.”
Volcano Revisited
◆ In what was called Operation Pulse, about 150 scientists spent two weeks studying the area of destruction resulting from the May 18, 1980, eruption of Mt. St. Helens. A biology professor heading a team of scientists studying animal life reported finding an unexpected variety of wildlife within seven miles of the volcano, including deer and elk. They also found mice, gophers, mountain bluebirds, crows and ravens and in the crater itself many hummingbirds. “The amazing thing is the lack of spiders and other aerial insects,” said the professor. “We think they will return when vegetation returns.” A small lake seven miles northeast of the volcano was thought to be “dead.” But it proved to be full of life. For example, scientists sighted a beaver and a muskrat in the lake, and one team of scientists netted seven large trout.
World’s Air Safety Record
◆ On July 30, 1971, a Japanese commercial jet carrying 162 persons was hit by an air defense training jet high over northern Japan. All 162 aboard the airliner died. Following that disaster, Japan improved its air safety facilities. The result? In over 10 years there have been no commercial air fatalities, Japan thereby setting a world record. Officials report, however, that the airspace over Japan is becoming crowded. They point out that in the past seven years at least 50 near misses were reported. Constant alertness will be needed to maintain this fine record of air safety.
Japan’s Crime Soars
◆ Japan may have a world record in safety for commercial air transportation, but things on terra firma are not so rosy. An all-time high in crimes was reported by the National Police Agency. The figure is 8.1 percent higher than for the same period in 1980. Statistics show that juvenile crime is increasing faster than last year​—and last year’s juvenile crime report was the worst in 35 years, or since World War II.
Search for Intelligent Life
◆ “I have always thought that if they were going to look for intelligence, they ought to start right here in Washington,” declared Senator William Proxmire. The U.S. Senate responded by cutting out an appropriation to help carry on the search for radio signals from intelligent life in outer space. NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) had wanted $1 million for next year and $15 million more during the next seven years to continue the search for intelligent life. “It’s hard enough to find intelligent life right here,” declared the senator. “It may be harder than finding it outside our solar system.”

