From Our Readers
Learning Problems
Your article “Does Your Child Have Learning Problems?” (May 8, 1983) has aided me greatly as a schoolmaster to identify the problems affecting some of our students. The child psychology I read in college never gave me such far-reaching information as contained in your magazine. I can now better treat such children with understanding and provide valuable advice to parents.
C. B. D., Nigeria
On Budgeting
I was grateful for the timely article “Do You Spend More Than You Earn?” (April 8, 1984) and for the practical suggestions it contained. For the past 24 years my husband and I have been using a family budget like the one the article describes. We use the “cash-envelope method.” Our friends laugh at us for doing this, but it works! Even on vacation we use the envelope plan and we generally return home with a little money left.
H. B., Federal Republic of Germany
Problems at School
I want to thank you in particular for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Won’t the Kids Let Me Alone?” (February 8, 1984) I am a mother of an eight-year-old girl and I used this article for personal study with her. She told me things about her feelings that I would never have suspected. She identified herself in almost all the experiences narrated in the article. This has helped her to make some changes following the advice given in the article. It has also helped me because it made me understand my daughter more and make her problems mine.
B. D., Italy
They Resisted Rapists
Thank you very much for the article “They Resisted Rapists.” (February 22, 1984) After receiving this magazine, I was asked by my youngest sister for suggestions on how to resist the efforts of the son-in-law of the man for whom she works. He had tried twice to rape her and had said, “I won’t give up until I have got her.” Thanks to your article I was able to give her some good suggestions for her to rid herself of this would-be rapist.
L. R., Brazil
Thank you for the article “They Resisted Rapists.” Last week I was attacked by an armed man in my apartment. The first thing that came to my mind was the above-mentioned article and the experiences of those in similar situations. I immediately asked the man “Do you know Jehovah God? He sees what you are trying to do.” He told me to be quiet. He started pushing me toward my bedroom. With a loud voice I told him to leave my apartment. He told me to be quiet and pushed even harder on me. I started yelling and pushing him away. He looked at me strangely, looked around for a few seconds and then ran away. Thank you for this life-saving article.
M. M., Maryland, U.S.A.

