‘I Have Nothing to Wear!’
Women the world over have a common interest in the kind of clothing they wear. Since styles differ from land to land, this article has been written with the Western woman in mind. However, some of the principles noted may be of use elsewhere too.
“SOMEONE once calculated that most people wear 10% of their wardrobe 90% of the time,” said Family Circle. And many women, especially, who have stood staring in frustration at a bulging closet complaining, ‘I have nothing to wear,’ are living proof of that statement!
Sounds familiar? Yes, but is it that we have nothing to wear or, perhaps, that we don’t know how to wear what we have?
The challenge most women face is dressing expensive-looking on a far-from-expensive budget. Perhaps inflation has robbed you of extra spending money you once were accustomed to having. Maybe you never had the “extra” money to begin with. Or your family’s needs come ahead of your own. Still other women find they wish to cut down on working to devote more time to special volunteer work​—as many Christian women have already done to become full-time preachers of the Bible’s good news. So how can you still dress with style and a sense of satisfaction? Take heart, it can be done.
First Stop​—Your Closet
Let’s start by taking inventory. The best way is to empty your entire closet! Separate items into two piles: the winners and the losers. The winners are clothes you constantly wear, feel most comfortable in and that really suit you.a The losers are items that are either outdated or that no longer fit.
If you haven’t worn something in the last year or two, discard it. (You can swap it or give it to a friend.) But of the clothes you don’t wear, could a blouse that is a little too small be worn under a pullover sweater or jumper? Could some garments be altered to fit or make them more up to date? If so, put these with the winners.
This should leave you with a nucleus that you are happy with and that looks good on you. Don’t panic if it doesn’t seem like much. You don’t need a lot of clothes to own a lot of outfits. And you probably didn’t wear the loser pile much anyway.
Closet Math
Next, hang up only the clothes from the winner pile. Take a good look at what you have and see what mix-and-match possibilities are right in front of you. Could the jacket to a suit double as a blazer with a different skirt? How about putting that jacket or a vest with a dress? Will a two-piece dress give you a new blouse and separate skirt to wear with a different top? Will a blouse that is the same color as a separate skirt make a dress, finished off with a contrasting jacket? Could you use the bow tie from its matching blouse with a different blouse to spice up an old outfit?
This is ‘fashion math.’ You take a few items and multiply their versatility. For instance, only 12 items of clothing​—2 jackets, 3 skirts, 4 blouses, 2 sweaters and 1 dress—​can equal 48 different outfits! And this is done using just two basic colors. That means you could wear a different outfit every day for over a month and a half. Add interesting accessories and just keep multiplying. But the best part is that this math was calculated in your closet, not your pocketbook.
Before You Head for the Store
But the day will come when you do need to purchase new items. So while you are looking at what outfits you have right now, make a list of what your future needs will be in order of priority, according to a realistic budget. Then before you go shopping, review the following suggestions:
● Stick to your list. Do not impulse shop. Develop calm, ruthless self-discipline!
● Select garments that go with items you already have. For a correct match of color, wear or bring the garment(s) with you.
● Start with classics. As one clothing researcher put it: “Any garment that’s been around for decades even though the fashion industry doesn’t push it is apt to be a very good buy.”
● Consider value per wear. Divide initial cost of garment by the number of times you expect to wear it the first year. Divide that figure by number of years of garment’s expected lifetime. In other words, a $100 suit you would wear once a week for half a year would be $3.85 each wearing the first year. This suit could last for five years, thus costing you 77 cents each wearing. But a $50 party dress worn only three times a year would be $16.67 per wearing the first year, and, having a shorter lifetime, $5.55 each wearing over a three-year period.
● Consider cost of upkeep. If the garment will require dry cleaning or alterations, add that to the initial cost.
● Look for versatile clothes. A raincoat with a detachable lining can double as a lightweight coat in milder weather.
● Get dressed up to go shopping. You will be better able to judge clothes on yourself. Wear the right undergarments, stockings and shoes for what you want to buy.
Sales, Seasons and Seconds
For real bargain hunters a favorite word is SALE! Excellent savings are found at sales in conjunction with special events peculiar to a country or locale. Other big savings to watch for are at beginning-of-season and particularly end-of-season sales. Seasonal sales will depend on what country or part of that country you live in. Beginning-of-season sales offer fair savings with the largest selection. End-of-season sales can save as much as 50 percent of the original price tag, but you may forfeit a large selection of styles and colors by then.
Many shoppers also love the word OUTLET. What is the difference between factory, wholesale and manufacturers’ outlets? Factory outlets sell directly from the manufacturer and you can expect 40 to 50 percent savings. Most of the merchandise will be first quality here, but many items will be irregulars or have defective design, so examine every garment carefully.
Wholesale outlets involve a middleman and depend strictly on the overruns and mistakes of the manufacturer. Savings are up to 50 percent. However, if the manufacturer doesn’t supply enough merchandise, the wholesale outlet may purchase cheaper garments and try to sell them as discounted quality items. These outlets are good if you know quality.
Manufacturers’ outlets sell clothing bought from several manufacturers, offering the least discount with markdowns at 20 to 30 percent. In any outlet, choose an irregular over a second or damaged item if possible, as it may involve less repair. Either way, know exactly what is wrong with the garment and be sure you can fix it​—or live with it.
Not to be overlooked are the large discount chain stores. These stores purchase brand-name clothes at prices 20 to 60 percent below regular department-store prices. Another possibility for savings is asking for the buyer or store manager, requesting a markdown on the price of a slightly damaged garment (stain, missing button, tear, seam opened). Further savings can be found at thrift shops, flea markets and garage or yard sales. And tremendous savings can be had if you follow the fabric sales and learn how to sew.
The Best-Dressed Woman
But when all is said and done the most beautiful and important clothing a woman can wear is described eloquently in the Bible. As part of the many qualities that make a woman truly beautiful, chapter 31 of Proverbs says that “strength and splendor are her clothing.” (Pr 31 Verse 25) She dresses in the solidness that being a support to her family and friends would require, and yet she shines with a brilliance as only femininity can.
The apostle Peter counsels that her “adornment” should “be the secret person of the heart in the incorruptible apparel of the quiet and mild spirit, which is of great value in the eyes of God.” (1 Peter 3:3, 4) Any woman who wears this style will be wearing a flawless and timeless fashion.
[Footnotes]
For suggestions on how to determine proportion, style and color selection, see the article “Fig Leaves, Fashions and Figures” in the November 22, 1984, issue of Awake!

