Purposeful Use of School Time
YOUNG ministers of Jehovah’s witnesses who are yet in secondary or high school often have an unusual outlook toward their time in school. In contrast with so many young people today, they do not consider school a waste of time. Rather, they view their school years as an opportunity to receive education that will help them to serve as qualified ministers and training so that they can maintain themselves in the ministry. When possible, Witness families select courses that will be particularly beneficial to these ends.
One sixteen-year-old girl in California well exemplifies this. In harmony with her purpose to devote herself to the ministry upon graduating from school, she has been taking courses that will aid her to do this. Recently the Chairman of the Business Education Department at her school wrote these unsolicited comments to her parents:
“Donna is a student in my Recordkeeping class and I want to take just a moment of your time to tell you how much I appreciate her. It is a pleasure to have worked with her this past semester. Her ways are mature and she works without complaining. She is in a class where students work at their own pace and has needed no prodding from me to utilize her time profitably. Seldom does she ask for help, preferring to solve problems herself. This trait is most appreciated as this frees me to work with other less self-directed young people.
“Donna is quiet at school, while being most courteous to both students and faculty. I have never heard her utter a harsh word to anyone. We often feel a little defeated with some young people, but Donna is one who provides a lift to our spirits. Thank you for having such a fine girl and for letting us work with [you] on her education.”
The regular family Bible study conducted in the home by her parents has aided Donna to have this purposeful outlook on her school years. Thus in the future she will not have occasion to look back with regret but, rather, with satisfaction, knowing that her serious and wise view of her school years contributed to her lasting happiness as a servant of God.

