Announcements
● Literature offer for December: My Book of Bible Stories or You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth for a contribution of $3.00. Small-size Live Forever book is $1.50. The brochure “Look! I Am Making All Things New” may be offered for a contribution of 30¢ when regular offer is not accepted. January and February: Any 192-page book published before 1980 and printed on groundwood (newsprint) paper that the congregation now has in stock, for a contribution of 50¢. Books printed on better-grade (free-sheet) paper are not to be used in this offer. Choosing, Commentary on James, and Word of God, although printed on better-grade paper, may also be offered for 50¢ during these two months. Congregations that do not have these older books may offer any other 192-page book available locally for a contribution of $1.00 each. March: Revelation​—Its Grand Climax at Hand! for a contribution of $3.00.
● Congregations should begin ordering bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! for 1988 on their December literature orders. (See the 1988 Cost List, paragraphs 7-10.) The bound volumes will be available in Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, and Spanish. Until the bound volumes are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Bound volumes are controlled stock items and will be charged at $6.00 each for congregation, public, and pioneers. (See the Cost List, paragraphs 23-25.)
● Shipment of the reprinted Watchtower bound volumes for 1960 through 1964 has begun, and the Society will now accept orders for the years 1965 through 1969. Congregations and individuals desiring to have these volumes for their library should determine the total number of volumes they need for each year and submit their requests through the congregation. The total quantities should be entered on the Literature Order form (S-14) and SUBMITTED DURING THE MONTH OF DECEMBER 1988. (See the Cost List, paragraphs 7-10.) Printing of the 1965 through 1969 bound volumes, for the English Watchtower only, will commence in early 1989. Please do not place orders for years other than 1965 through 1969 until future direction appears in Our Kingdom Ministry. Since the Society will not stock these reprinted volumes, we urge all to consider the matter carefully and place orders for the 1965 through 1969 volumes that are needed. Later orders will only be filled as long as existing supplies last. These reprinted volumes are controlled stock items and are to be paid for upon receipt. The price will be $6.00 each.
● The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit the congregation’s accounts on December 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● Many brothers desire to have a tour of the Jersey City Assembly Hall when they visit the Society’s headquarters in Brooklyn. The Assembly Hall will be open for tours Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Tours are not conducted after 5:00 p.m. or on weekends.
● Beginning in January 1989, the Awake! will be published monthly in the Arabic language. The subscription rate for this monthly magazine will be $2.50.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—With References (Rbi8)—​Dutch
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Deluxe pocket edition; DLbi25), available in black or maroon​—Italian
Comprehensive Concordance​—Danish
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?​—Thai
Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry​—Dutch, Finnish
Revelation​—Its Grand Climax at Hand!​—Danish, Dutch, Finnish, German, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Swedish
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Burmese
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Bassa (Liberia), Kekchi
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Hungarian, Kuna, Maltese, Turkish
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Kinyarwanda
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Jeremiah, Lamentations (set of five; congregation and public: $7.50; pioneers: $6.25)​—Japanese
● A revised version of Kingdom Melodies No. 1 will be available on January 1, 1989. This cassette includes only songs from the 1984 songbook and was rerecorded by the Society’s orchestra using newer recording methods to make the music more enjoyable. Eventually this will also be the case with Kingdom Melodies Nos. 2 and 3. However, do not order these at this time, as announcements will be made when cassettes become available.
Kingdom Melodies No. 1 (congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)
● A convenient, empty eight-cassette storage album is now available for preserving your Kingdom Melodies cassettes.
Kingdom Melodies Album (without cassettes) (congregation and public: $5.00; pioneers: $4.00)
● The following publications are now available in grade-two English Braille:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Hebrew Scriptures, 14 volumes; Greek Scriptures, 4 volumes) in vinyl binders. Complete set of 18 volumes for $144.00, or $8.00 per volume
Revelation​—Its Grand Climax at Hand! (four volumes in vinyl binders: $32.00)
Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1989 (four volumes: $5.00)
Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1989 (free upon request)
To obtain Braille publications, send a separate order to the Society’s BRAILLE DESK, giving the name and address of the person who will use them. Include remittance for purchase. Do not include with congregation orders for printed literature.

