Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 5
Song 8
 8 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Include comments on December magazines dealing with holiday celebrations. Remind brothers of magazine activity for second Saturday of the month.
20 min: “Manifesting Faith by Fine Works.” Question-and-answer coverage of paragraphs 1-12.
17 min: “United in Doing Jehovah’s Will.” Discussion between elder and ministerial servant. Demonstrate offer as mentioned in paragraphs 3 and 4, one presentation from house to house, the other in informal witnessing.
Song 224 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 12
Song 65
12 min: Local announcements. Include accounts report along with Society acknowledgment of contributions made by congregation. Comment briefly on “Prepare Well for Congregation Book Study.”
15 min: “Manifesting Faith by Fine Works.” Question-and-answer coverage of paragraphs 13-21.
18 min: “The Theocratic Ministry School Brings Benefits.” Talk by school overseer, stressing benefits and pointing out adjustments for coming year. Mention total enrolled, and encourage those who have not yet enrolled to do so.
Song 118 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 19
Song 162
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage sharing in magazine work on fourth Saturday. Outline arrangements for holiday witnessing. Briefly demonstrate one or two appropriate introductions.
15 min: “Pay Constant Attention to Your Teaching.” Consider practical points from article in July 15, 1988, issue of The Watchtower. Stress using Reasoning book to improve introductions, as mentioned on pages 16 and 17 of article.
20 min: “This Is the Way.” Questions and answers. Include one or two brief demonstrations to show how to direct interest to the organization by using Doing God’s Will brochure.
Song 42 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 26
Song 26
12 min: Local announcements. Outline arrangements for witnessing on the holiday weekend. Demonstrate offer for the month of January, using introduction from Reasoning book. Suggest other introductions that could be used with offer.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In Territory Frequently Worked.” Questions and answers. Adjust according to local needs. Emphasize need to work territory thoroughly and to call back on all placements.
15 min: Local needs or talk on “Remember Christian Principles” from The Watchtower of October 1, 1988, pages 26-9.
Song 206 and concluding prayer.

