Presenting the Good News​—In Territory Frequently Worked
1 How often are you working your territory? If the territory is covered often, you are especially blessed. Why? Because congregations that work their territory frequently usually experience rapid growth. This has been the experience of congregations in many large cities. For example, in New York City, where most territory is worked regularly, there are now more than 340 congregations.
2 When working a territory that was being covered weekly, one brother met a woman who said she had never been contacted before. She eagerly took literature and was glad someone found her. So there are still people in such territory who have not had the opportunity to hear the good news. (Compare 2 Peter 3:9b.) Thorough coverage of frequently worked territory is important in order to search out sheeplike people.​—Matt. 10:11.
MEETING THE CHALLENGE
3 Where territory is worked frequently, it is vital to keep an accurate house-to-house record. Lists of not-at-homes can be used to keep groups busy in the field when other territory is not available. Why not use evening witnessing periods to try to reach those not found at home earlier in the day? Remember, those away during the day and on weekends are often relaxing at home in the evenings.
4 If you cover your territory several times while using one Topic for Conversation, it is beneficial to vary your introduction. You can find appropriate introductions on pages 9-15 in the Reasoning book. Use these to help start conversations with those you meet.​—Prov. 1:5.
5 Another way to vary your introduction is to offer a tract. Tie the subject of the tract in with the Topic for Conversation. Also, make use of current news events. Asking questions about such things may provide a basis for a fine discussion.
WITNESS TO ALL
6 Do you spend about 50 percent of your service time making return visits and conducting Bible studies? If you keep a separate house-to-house record of those who show interest, you will be able to give your record of not-at-homes to the one holding the territory. Be sure to call back promptly on all who accept literature as well as on any others who show interest.
7 We will be able to reach even more people with the good news if we are alert to all our opportunities to give a witness. For example, while working our territory, we often see people leaving homes or apartments. Wherever possible and appropriate, why not briefly offer the magazines or a tract?
8 Even where territory is worked each week, keep in mind that very likely there are honesthearted ones who have not yet been found even though we have made repeated efforts to contact them. And though you have witnessed at the same door previously, you may meet a different person this time. Therefore, like the apostles, let us witness thoroughly in our assigned territory.​—Acts 8:14, 25; 20:20, 21.

