“This Is the Way”
1 Isaiah 30:21 states: “Your own ears will hear a word behind you saying: ‘This is the way. Walk in it, you people.’” That “word behind you” is the voice of Jehovah speaking through his Word and organization. Are you giving heed to that “word,” and are you helping others to respond to it?​—Jas. 4:17.
2 Those with whom we study need to appreciate that Jehovah has an organization. We must help them to view the organization in harmony with the fulfillment of prophecy and become motivated to cooperate with it. (Acts, chapter 2; compare Romans 12:5.) What can we do to emphasize the role of the organization in their lives?
MAKE GOOD USE OF BROCHURE
3 The brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide can be very useful in directing Bible students to Jehovah’s organization. It makes effective use of the Scriptures, pictures, and review questions. It is very beneficial to spend ten minutes or so during or at the close of each study period to discuss information from the brochure.
4 The student should be encouraged to review the article or the portion that can be covered during the allotted time. Perhaps you will want to limit your discussion to one or two questions. For example, when discussing “Jehovah Gathers and Equips His People for Work,” you could spend the entire time on the third question on page 11. Using the scriptures cited while reviewing the points made on pages 8 and 9 can help the student understand Jehovah’s direction.
5 Make good use of the pictures in “Congregations for Building Up in Love and Unity,” beginning on page 12. Why not make a point of using these to show the basic responsibilities of the elders? Such emphasis will make it easier for the student to learn to go to the elders when experiencing problems.
6 When reviewing the meetings, consider only one each week. This can be done when you are about to discuss the answer to question 2 in the article “Meetings for Inciting to Love and Fine Works.” Show the student how you prepare for the Congregation Book Study.
KEEP IT SIMPLE
7 There are many other topics in Doing God’s Will that can be developed as the need arises. As one brother put it: “The thing for which to strive is simplicity. Just a couple of scripture texts, a brief discussion touching on the need for being present at meetings, and would you believe it?​—it works!” Another brother stated: “In my opening and closing prayers, I always refer to Jehovah’s organization.”
8 The Doing God’s Will brochure can provide direction and help to keep your Bible study alive, moving, and progressive. Remember to consider points from the brochure on a regular basis. Let us then take the lead in directing attentive students to Jehovah’s organization and join with Jehovah in saying, “This is the way.”

