VOL. XII. MARCH, 1891. NO. 3. 

THE COMING ANNIVERSARY SUPPER, 

-COMMEMORATIVE OF- 

OUR LORD AND HIS DEATH FOR OUR SINS. 



The Supper which our Lord instituted as a 
remembrancer of his great sacrifice for our sins, 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of 
the whole world, is striking in its appropriateness 
and its simplicity. The world's great men 
have always sought very different means of perpetuating 
their memories. In whatever way 
they would remind their followers of their 
merits and their greatness, it surely has not 
been by a reminder and commemoration of 
their death— especially if, as in our Lord's case, 
it was a death of ignominy and shame, a death 
as a malefactor and criminal. Another more 
probably would have left instructions for medals 
to be struck commemorating some of his mighty 
works; such, for instance, as the awakening of 
Lazarus, or the stilling of the tempest on the 
sea, or the triumphal entry into Jerusalem, 
while the multitude strewed the way with palm 
branches, and cried, Hosanna to the King, the 
heir of David! 

But our Lord chose as his remembrancer that 
which represented what was, in his and in God's 
estimation, his mightiest work— his sacrifice as 
a sin-offering on our behalf; and that which 
his real followers, and they alone, would appreciate 
more than any other feature of his mission. 
True, his followers would have appreciated 
something commemorative of his wonderful 
words or works, but the worldly also 
could have appreciated those things. But not 
so the value of his death as our ransom-sacrifice, 
the basis of our reconciliation and atonement, 
which has never yet been fully apprehended 
and appreciated by any but the consecrated 
little flock— the elect. And it was for 
these that the remembrancer was arranged and 
instituted. And though a Judas was present, 
he was given a sop and went out from the others 
before the supper was ended; thus no doubt 
representing that in the close of this age, before 
the little flock will have finished their 
part of having fellowship with their Lord in 
his suffering, the sup of truth will have become 



so strong as to drive forth from the company 

and communion of the faithful all who do not 

rightly appreciate and value the ransom accomplished 

by the Lamb of God for the taking 

away of the sins of the world.— 1 John 2:19. 

As early as January letters of inquiry as to 
the date of the anniversary this spring began 
to come in; showing clearly that our Lord's 
death, the great event thus celebrated, is appreciated 
very highly as the very foundation of all 
our present and prospective joy in God. We 
rejoice that this great truth is so clearly seen 
and so dearly prized by so many WATCH TOWER 
readers. 

The date of the anniversary this year will be 
Tuesday evening, April 21st, after 6 o'clock P.M. 

R1289:page34 

But since the date is nearly a month later than 
the date recognized by the Church of England 
and the Church of God, who will celebrate Good 
Friday on March 25th, it will be more satisfactory 
to some to have the two methods of calculation 
explained. 

The date of the Paschal Supper at which the 
Jews ate a lamb, commemorative of their deliverance 
from Egyptian bondage and of the 
sparing of their first-born at that time, was of 
course calculated by the Jewish method of reckoning 
time— viz., lunar time. (Exod. 12:2-14). 
Instead of dividing the months as we do, 
they allowed the new moon to mark the beginning 
of a new month; and the difference between 
sun time (solar time) and moon time 
(lunar time) was equalized every year by always 
beginning the new year with the appearing 
of the first new moon after the spring 
equinox. In celebrating their religious festivals 
the Jews still maintain this method of reckoning. 
And since our Lord, the apostles and 
the early Church followed this same rule for determining 
the date for the annual celebration of 
our Lord's Last Supper, we follow the same rule. 

The spring equinox this year will be on 
March 20th; and the first new moon thereafter 
will appear on the afternoon of April 8th. And 
at 6 P.M. of that day begins the first day of 
the Jewish month Nisan, the first month of the 
Jewish sacred year. Beginning on the 1st of 
Nisan the Hebrews counted, and on the tenth 
day the Paschal Lamb was chosen. On the 
fourteenth day it was killed and eaten at the full 
of the moon;* and on the fifteenth day their 
Passover Feast began, lasting eight days, the 
first and the eighth days being observed as specially 



holy, as Sabbath days or high days. On 
the sixteenth day the omer of the first-fruits of 
the barley harvest was offered to the Lord, and 
fifty days after (Pentecost Day) they offered 
before the Lord two wave loaves.— Lev. 23:17. 

These things done by the Jews every year 
were, as we have already seen, types of greater 
and grander occurrences. The choosing of the 
lamb on the tenth day typified how, if Israel 
would be blessed and recognized as first-born 
in the antitypical Passover, they must accept 
of Jesus then, five days before that Passover, 
and four days before his crucifixion; and it evidently 
was on that very date that our Lord 
offered himself finally to that nation— when he, 
as their King, rode into the city on the colt. 
(Compare John 12:1,12.) They, however, neglected 
to receive the Lamb of God, and ceased 
from being the first-born, even in type. 

The 14th day (which this year will begin at 
6 o'clock on the evening of Tuesday, April 21st, 
and last until 6 P.M. of the 22nd) was the day 
in which the Paschal lamb was to be killed and 
eaten; and the counting of time (doubtless 
divinely arranged for this very purpose) permitted 
the eating of the Last Supper upon the 
same day that the Lord was crucified. The 
Passover Supper of lamb and herbs and unleavened 
bread (fulfilling the Law, which was 
not ended until the cross) was eaten shortly 
after 6 P.M. Then followed the institution of 
the Memorial Supper of bread and wine, representative 
of the death and eating of the antitypical 
lamb. This thereafter, as oft as the occasion 
returned (yearly), was to be observed instead 
of the eating of the literal lamb— as the 
commemoration of the antitypical lamb and the 
greater passing over of the antitypical first born 
which his blood effects. 

The waving of the barley sheaf of first-fruits 
on the 16th of Nisan ("the morrow after the 
Sabbath" or Passover of the 15th-Lev. 23:5,6,11,15,16,) 



*As the sun is a symbol of Christ's Kingdom, so a moon 
or month symbolized Israel as a nation. (Rev. 12:1.) 
The 12 and sometimes 13 lunations symbolize the tribes of 
that nation. The moon was at its full at the time of 
Christ's crucifixion. There it immediately began to wane 
and waned for as long as it had previously increased. So 
Christ's death was the turning point between the two equal 
parts of Israel's history. See M. DAWN, Vol. II., page 218. 

As those Jews who were unclean, and hence could not 
keep the Passover properly in its proper season, were permitted 
to do so on the 14th of the second month (at the 



full of the next moon— Num. 9:8-13), the lesson 
taught seems to be that all prevented by sin and ignorance 
from accepting Messiah as their Redeemer, when 
offered to them, will have an opportunity of doing so 
when, in the Times of Restitution of all things, their nation 
or moon shall again be full of blessings in the later harvest. 

R1289:page35 

typified the resurrection of 

Christ our Lord, as "the first fruits of them 

that slept."*-l Cor. 15:20. 

The two wave loaves offered on the fiftieth 
day represented the presenting of the Church 
before God and its acceptance through the 
merit of the great High Priest, indicated by the 
anointing of the spirit at Pentecost. The 
Church really is but "one loaf" (1 Cor. 10:17), 
the two loaves representing the same thing 
as the two goats presented on the Day of 
Atonement. It indicated that, although all presented 
were acceptable to God through Christ 
Jesus, he yet knew that all presented would 
not come up to the conditions of faithfulness 
unto the end. The two loaves represented, 
therefore, the two classes of the consecrated— 
the overcoming little flock and the "great company" 
of the consecrated servants of God who 
do not make the high calling theirs, by overcoming 
the world as they might and should do. 



*Here is the strongest possible confirmation of the 
correctness of the position taken in MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. II.— that our Lord was not three full 24-hour days in 
the tomb, but only parts of three days and nights; that he 
was crucified on the day corresponding to our Friday 
afternoon, and rose on what corresponded to our Sunday 
morning. The showing of this type that the Paschal 
lamb was to be killed sometime during the 14th of Nisan, 
and the wave offering of the sheaf of first-fruits was to occur 
on the 16th, should settle the matter for all. It agrees 
with the repeated statement (1 Cor. 15:4; Luke 24:46) 
that our Lord rose on the third day, according to the 
Scriptures. This Scripture concerning the first-fruits is 
the only one which we recall as in any way pointing 
out the time of our Lord's resurrection. Then, too, the 
fact that history, as represented in the traditions and customs, 
points out Good Friday and Easter Sunday 
as celebrations of our Lord's death and resurrection, 
should have some weight on so trivial a matter, unless 
some motive or reason for misstating the dates can be assigned. 
The only scripture seeming to oppose all these 
facts is the one which declares that our Lord would be 
three days and three nights in the earth; and the only 



explanation that can be offered to this is that the expression 
is used in a general and not in a specific manner, 
the nights being mentioned to preclude the idea of any 
cessation of death until the third day. Thus understood, 
the expression would signify that during portions of three 
days and nights our Lord would be in the tomb. At all 
events, the evidence is overwhelming that he died on the 
14th of Nisan and rose on the 16th— the third day after. 

R1290:page35 

The method of calculating the date for Good 
Friday and Easter Sunday in vogue among 
Episcopalians and Roman Catholics differs 
from the foregoing in this: They celebrate, as 
Easter Sunday, the first Sunday following the 
first full moon after the spring equinox, and 
the preceding Friday is recognized as Good 
Friday. This method of counting was instituted 
by the Council of Nice, A.D. 325. The 
name Passover was used— and not Easter* 
Sunday— for a long time; but after Papacy 
had been established in political influence, and 
the ignorant pagans began to flock to the system 
which enjoyed the favor of the government, 
the name Easter was substituted for the Passover, 
because about the same time as the Passover 
the pagans had been in the habit of celebrating 
the festival of their Goddess Easter 
(German Ostera)— Estera, goddess of the East. 
This was one of the many methods adopted by 
an ambitious "clergy" for gaining numbers 
and influence. 

Sometimes the two systems of counting indicate 
the same days, but not often; and occasionally 
their results are nearly a moon or month 
apart, as in the present year, when the first full 
moon after the equinox is on March 25th, while 
the first new moon after the equinox marks the 
1st of Nisan on April 8th, and the 14th on 
April 22d-beginning at 6 P.M. of the 21st. 

We have given the details as to the counting 
as a general answer to many questions on this 
subject, and not because of any weighty importance 
or bondage attaching to the exact anniversary 
day. We recognize no such bondage 
upon those made free by Christ. For though 
desirous of observing the Memorial properly 
upon its proper anniversary, as intended by our 
Lord when he said, "This do ye (every time 
you celebrate this yearly memorial) in remembrance 
(lit., for commemoration) of me," we esteem 
it more as a privilege than as a duty; and 
if we should err in the matter of selecting the day, 
through ignorance or misunderstanding, we believe 



*The use of the word Easter in Acts 12:4 is a mistranslation; 
it should be rendered Passover. 

R1290:page36 

the Lord would accept our good intentions, 
and forgive the error and grant his 
blessing. Indeed, we believe that the Lord 
owns and accepts the good intentions of many 
of his children who, because of erroneous 
teachings and human traditions, select various 
other times and seasons for celebrating this 
memorial of his death, instead of its anniversary, 
which he designated. Similarly we would 
sympathize with the patriotic intentions of the 
man who should "celebrate" the independence 
of the United States three, four or fifty 
times a year, forgetful of the date, or ignorant 
of the fact that the Fourth of July is the anniversary 
of the event, and was appointed as the 
date for celebrating it. 

This, like other truths long buried under the 
rubbish of the dark ages, God is now making 
clear to his people. And all who are truly his 
people are anxious for the truth and the right 
upon this, as upon all other subjects revealed 
in God's Word. 

YE DO SHEW FORTH THE LORD'S DEATH. 

"For I received from the Lord, what I also 
delivered to you— That the Lord on the night 
in which he was delivered up took a loaf, and 
having given thanks, broke it and said, 'This 
is that body of mine, which is broken on your 
behalf; this do ye in my remembrance.' In 
like manner also, the cup, after the supper, saying, 
'This cup is the new covenant in my 
blood; this do ye, as often as ye may drink, for 
my remembrance.' For as often as you may eat 
this bread or drink this cup you declare the death 
of the Lord till he come."-l Cor. 11:24-26. 

There is no necessity for discussing with honest 
minds what is and what is not meant by the 
expression— the Lord's death. Some, in an anxiety 
to get away from the doctrine of the ransom, 
or, rather, in their anxiety to get away from 
the logical deductions associated with the doctrine 
of the ransom, are claiming, regardless of 
all Scripture to the contrary, that our Lord Jesus 
had two deaths, one when he came into the world, 
and the other at Calvary; and that the death 
of "the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 
ransom for all," at Calvary, was of small importance 



as compared with the other. They seem 
willingly ignorant of the fact that the Scriptures 
declare, "In that he died, he died unto 
sin once;" and that that one death, and the 
only one ever referred to by our Lord or his 
apostles, was the death at Calvary. 

The Apostles declare that he spoke of the 
death which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. 
This one and only death of our Redeemer is 
what is symbolized by this Remembrancer— his 
body, his flesh broken for us, the merits and 
life of which all who would have life everlasting 
must partake. "Let no man deceive you 
by any means," on this important question. 

But as water baptism is not the important 
baptism, but only the symbol representing the 
real, so partaking of the emblematic bread and 
wine is only the symbol of the more important 
feast of our appropriation of the merit of Christ, 
which secures to us eternal life through his broken 
body and shed blood. Thus by faith accepting 
his finished sacrifice, and by similar 
faith, as instructed by him, appropriating to 
ourselves all the merits and perfections and rights 
which the man Christ Jesus possessed and laid 
down in death for us, we really feed upon the 
bread of everlasting life, the bread which God 
sent to us from heaven. This is the bread which 
if men will eat they will never die— the flesh 
which he gave for the life of the world, that all 
the dead and dying race might have life. This 
is, primarily, what the symbolic bread symbolizes 
and signifies to all who partake of it rightly 
and intelligently. It is a memorial of the ransom 
of Adam and his family from the bondage 
of sin and death. 

Secondly, the broken loaf was to symbolize 
another matter. It was to be a symbol of the 
entire Church— the entire Christ of God, head 
and body. As its breaking symbolized the 
death of Christ Jesus, the head, its breaking 
was also to symbolize the breaking or sacrifice, 
even unto death, of all the consecrated body 
of Christ, which is pledged to suffer and be broken 
with him, if so be that its members may also 
be glorified together with him. This the Apostle 
teaches in the preceding chapter, verses 16 and 17: 

R1290 : page 37 

"The cup of blessing, for which we 
bless God— is it not a participation of the 
blood of the Anointed one? The loaf which 
we break— is it not a participation of the body 
of the Anointed one? Because there is one 
loaf, we the many [members] are one body." 



"TILL HE COME." 

"Till he come." What is the full significance 
of this expression? 

Since our Lord who instituted the Memorial 
Supper placed no limit upon its observance, 
this expression by the Apostle is not to 
be understood as limiting the length of time in 
which it will be appropriate to commemorate 
the death of our Lord Jesus, our ransom-sacrifice, 
and our consecration with him to sacrifice. 
Rather, he is showing that it was not to be considered 
a limited arrangement, for a few years, 
but was to be continually observed until the 
Lord's second coming. Looking down to and 
speaking of the second coming of our Lord, 
the Apostle includes in that expression the gathering 
and exaltation with him of his Church or 
Kingdom, to rule and bless the world. This is 
yet a common and a proper way of speaking of 
matters so closely identified and so dependent 
one upon the other. The Christ, Head and 
body, is coming to rule the world, coming into 
power and great glory. The presence of the 
Lord or head is necessary first; then commences 
the change of the sleeping members of 
his body, the sifting of the living members, 
and their gradual gathering together unto him. 
And though the Kingdom may be considered 
as begun from the time the King began the 
exercise of his great power (Rev. 11:17) in 
1878, it will not be set up in the full sense of 
the word until the last member of the Kingdom 
has been changed or glorified— until the 
breaking of the loaf, the Church, the body of 
Christ, is completed. While one member suffers 
the body suffers. While one member is 
unglorified the Kingdom is not fully come into 
power and dominion. 

It is the coming of Christ as including the 
full exaltation of his Church or Kingdom that 
the Apostle evidently meant when he said, 
"As often as you may eat this [Passover] bread 
and drink this cup, you declare the death of 
the Lord [as your hope and confidence] till he 
come." The same thought of the Kingdom 
glory being the end of the symbol may be 
gathered from our Lord's own words on the occasion 
of the institution of the memorial— "I 
will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the 
vine, until that day when I drink it new with 
you in my Father's Kingdom."— Matt. 26:29. 

And surely if it was ever proper and expedient 
for those who believe that our Lord's death 
was the ransom-price for sinners to confess it— 



to show it forth as the basis of all their hopes 
—it is now, when this foundation doctrine of 
God's Word is being traduced and 
misrepresented. 

Let all who hold fast the confidence of faith 
in his precious blood [his sacrificed life] as the 
propitiation [satisfaction] for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world, be more zealous and fervent than ever before 
in confessing this great truth; "for even 
Christ our Passover [sacrifice] is slain; therefore, 
let us keep the feast." None of the first-born 
shall be passed over, and become members 
of the Church of the first-born in glory, except 
those who, during this night, abide under the 
blood, and partake of the merits, of the Lamb of 
God which taketh away the sin of the world. 

R1291 : page 37 

WHO MAY PARTAKE. 

The Lord's Supper is not for the world, not 
for merely nominal believers, but for those who, 
accepting of Christ as their Redeemer and sin-bearer, 
are consecrated to him and his service. 
But it is not for us— nor for any man or set of men 
—to decide who may and who may not partake. 
It is our duty to point out from the Word of 
the Lord what are the proper qualifications for 
participation in the cup and participation in the 
loaf, and then to say as did the Apostle, Let 
every man examine himself, and then, if he 
think proper, let him partake.— 1 Cor. 11:28. 

Now that God's people are emerging from 
the errors of the dark ages, when this Memorial 
can be more clearly understood, the judging or 
examining of one's self can be more thorough 

R1291 : page 38 

than ever before. Let each ask himself— Do 

I believe the Scripture teaching that I, as a 

member of the human family, was under that 

condemnation to death which passed upon all 

because of original sin? Do I believe that 

my only hope of escape from that condemnation 

of sin and death was through the ransom-sacrifice 

of the man Christ Jesus, my Lord? 

Do I believe that he gave himself— his flesh and 

blood, his humanity— as my ransom price, pouring 

out his soul unto death, making his soul a 

sin-offering (Isa. 53:10,12) on this behalf? 

Do I see that the consecration to death, made at 

Jordan when he was baptized, was fulfilled by 

his sacrifice of himself for mankind, which, beginning 



there, was finished on the cross when 

he died? Do I see that the rights under the 

Law, which he secured by obedience to it 

(the right of lasting life and the dominion of 

earth), were what he through that same sacrifice 

bequeathed to the fallen, dying race— to as 

many as shall accept the blessings under the 

conditions of the New Covenant? Do I see 

that his flesh and blood, thus sacrificed, stood 

for, represented, those blessings and favors which 

they purchased for us? Do I see that the partaking 

of the bread and wine symbols of his 

flesh and blood signifies my acceptance of those 

favors and blessings which the flesh and blood of 

my Lord bought for me and for all? And if I 

do thus heartily accept of the ransom thus 

memorialized, do I consecrate my entire being 

—my flesh and my blood, justified through that ransom 

—to the Lord, to be broken with him, to 

suffer with him, to be dead with him? If we 

can answer these questions affirmatively we 

clearly or fully discern the Lord's body, give 

credit to his meritorious sacrifice and may eat— 

should eat— "Eat ye all of it." 

Those, however, who deny that a ransom 
for sin and sinners was required and given, 
who feel that they need not to partake of 
Christ's merit, who deny that the merit of one 
can be imputed to another, who have cast 
off the wedding-garment of Christ's righteousness, 
who feel "happier" and "freer" in the 
filthy rags of their own righteousness, and who 
now consider the precious blood wherewith they 
were once sanctified a not-holy or an ordinary 
thing— such we advise to stay away from memorializing 
that in which they no longer believe, 
as they would merely be adding hypocrisy to 
unbelief. For such to partake, is to add condemnation 
to themselves and their no-ransom 
theories. 

But, better still, let us advise all who have 
merely been entrapped into this error, by the 
sophistries promulgated through various channels 
by the great Adversary, to reject all vain 
human philosophies and to receive again the 
simple word of God, and to accept of the truths 
therein set forth— that all are fallen, and that the 
only way open for our reconciliation and restitution 
consistent with the divine law and sentence 
was the giving of the full and exact corresponding 
price or ransom for our sins. See 
that God declares that in no other way could 
he be just and justify sinners. See that our 
Lord Jesus as the Lamb of God bore the full 
penalty for our sins in his own body on the tree 
—that he gave the full ransom for you and for 



all. The philosophy of it is very plain, but if 

you cannot grasp it, at least grasp the fact that 

God declares it to be so. Return unto the Lord, 

and he will abundantly pardon. Ask for the 

guidance of the spirit and the anointing of 

your eyes, that you may be able to comprehend, 

with all saints, this, the foundation of all the 

grace of our God in Christ. Thus in true acceptance 

of the broken body and the shed 

blood— realizing that the sacrifice was for your 

sins and that the blood shed [life given] seals 

for you and for all the New Covenant— commemorate 

the greatest event of history, the 

shedding of the precious blood, the sacrifice of 

the precious life of God's dear Son for your 

sins. Nevertheless we know from God's Word 

that these words or any words will not succeed 

in turning back to the way, the truth and the life 

those who have wilfully and knowingly gone out 

from under the blood of sprinkling. There 

will be no pass-over for them. "It is impossible 

to renew them again unto repentance." (Heb. 6:4-10 

and 10:26-30.) We well know that 

R1291 : page 39 

even these words of loving admonition and 

these faithful references to the words of inspiration 

will be attributed to spite and malice and 

envy and every wicked feeling on our part instead 

of to the real motive— a desire to serve 

the Lord and the truth and any brethren or sisters 

unwittingly stumbling. 

Many indeed have in the past partaken of the 
emblems of the Lord's body and blood without 
fully appreciating the philosophy of the ransom, 
who nevertheless did so with reverent appreciation 
of the fact that the death of our Redeemer 
had purged us from our guilt and relieved 
us from its penalty. Such discerned the 
real significance of the Memorial, though, because 
of gross errors associated with the truth, 
they did not discern its simple philosophy as 
many of us may now do. 

ONLY THE BAPTIZED. 

But some Baptist brother will perhaps remark 
—You have forgotten to mention baptism as a 
necessary qualification to partaking of the 
Supper. 

No, we have not forgotten baptism. We 
agree with you that the baptism is necessary 
—that the Memorial Supper is only for the 
Church; and that baptism is necessary before 
one can belong to the Church. But we differ 



with you as to what the Church is. We hold 
that the Baptist Church is not the Church. Like 
all other churches organized and governed by 
fallen men, the Baptist Church contains tares as 
well as wheat; but the Church contains wheat 
only. Surely no one will claim for any sect of 
Christendom that his sect contains all the wheat 
and no tares. But the Church, whose names 
are written in heaven, includes all the wheat and 
has not a tare on its roll. This is the one Church 
which our Lord established, and of which all 
the elect must become members— the Church 
Passed-over— "The Church of the First-born 
ones, whose names are written in heaven." 
-Heb. 12:23. 

Nor can we admit your claim with reference 
to baptism. The Scriptural view is still 
more exclusive than yours. You have in the 
membership of the Baptist Church some who 
would be far from acceptable as members 
of the "Church of the First-borns." They 
passed your test of water-baptism, but they have 
not passed the test of the greater baptism which 
is required of all members of the Church whose 
names are written in heaven. The real baptism 
is a baptism into Christ's body— the Church- 
by a baptism or immersion into Christ's death, 
and a resurrection therefrom in his likeness. 
Water immersion is a beautiful symbol of the 
real immersion of the human will into the will 
of Christ, a beautiful illustration of a full sacrifice 
even unto death; but it is only an illustration 
or symbol— just as the bread and wine 
of the Supper are not the real life-giving elements 
of our Lord's sacrifice of which we are 
to eat, but merely their symbols. 

We agree, therefore, that none but the Church, 
the immersed, should partake of the Supper; 
but we recognize as really immersed all whose 
wills are dead and buried in the will of Christ, 
and who, as new creatures in him, are risen to 
walk in newness of life, while waiting for the 
consummation of their course in literal death 
and their awakening as actual new beings in the 
first resurrection. All such, whoever or wherever 
they may be, are the real members of 
Christ's body, the Church, whether they have 
performed the enjoined water-symbol or not. 
Of course, when such consecrated ones, dead to 
their own wills and alive only to the will of 
Christ, come to see that our Lord's commands 
include the symbol of water immersion or burial 
as well as the burial of their wills, they will 
be glad to follow and to obey their Head and 
Lord in all things— especially when they realize 
that as infants they were not "believers," and 



that a drop of water could not in any degree 
symbolize burial and resurrection. Such as see 
the value and beauty of this injunction of God's 
Word should, if possible, be buried in water also, 
as our Lord and his apostles showed us, before 
partaking of the Supper. See TOWER for May, 
1888, article headed "Baptism and Its Import." 

HOW TO PARTAKE. 

If there are in your neighborhood others of 
God's consecrated people besides yourself, you 

R1291 : page 40 

should know it. Your faithful love for them 
and for the truth should have led you to seek 
them out to bless them with the truth shortly 
after you yourself received it. If there are such 
with whom you can have communion and fellowship 
invite them to join you in the Memorial; 
but not if you know them to be deniers of the 
ransom, lest you assist in bringing condemnation 
upon them. 

Meet with few or many, as the circumstances 
will permit, but better far with a few who can enter 
with you into the spirit of the Memorial, than 
with a throng devoid of that spirit of fellowship 
and union in Christ. 

R1292:page40 

Provide for the occasion, if possible, unleavened 
bread (or crackers), such as the Lord used, 
and such as Hebrews now use; because the pure, 
sweet, unleavened bread best symbolizes the sinless 
flesh of the Lamb of God, who knew no sin 
[of which leaven is a symbol], who was holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from the race 
of sinners. Provide some drink from "the fruit 
of the vine," as the Lord directed. Undoubtedly 
he and the disciples used "light wines." 
Most unquestionably we regard wine as the more 
appropriate symbol; but since our Lord did not 
stipulate wine, but merely the "fruit of the 
vine," we can conceive of no objection that 
can be urged against the strained juice of 
boiled raisins, which are dried grapes. And 
surely this would be "the fruit of the vine" as 
really as wine is. We do not urge this raisin-liquor 
upon any who feel a conscientious 
desire to use wine; we merely remind all that 
our circumstances, climate, habits, etc., differ 
greatly from those of the early Church, and we very 
much doubt if our Lord would have us symbolize 
his blood with many of the intoxicating 



wines of our day— especially in view of the 
fact that some of the saints may have an inherited 
weakness of the flesh, which one taste might 
re-enkindle into a great temptation. "Let each 
judge not to cast a stumbling-block before his 
brother." If wine is preferred choose a "light 
wine," or mix a little wine with the raisin-juice. 

The memorial service should be very simple- 
it is chiefly a season of communion. Have a 
table in the midst of the assembly for the bread 
and wine. After the singing of a hymn one of the 
brethren should, in a few chosen words, express 
the object of the service and read a few verses 
from the Scriptures on the subject; another might 
then give thanks for the bread of life, the broken 
body of our Lord; after which the unleavened 
bread [or soda biscuit if more convenient] 
should be passed to all the communicants. An 
opportunity for remarks on the bread of life 
might here be given. Then a prayer of thanks 
for the cup and for the precious blood symbolized 
in it should be offered and the cup of 
"fruit of the vine" passed. Here an opportunity 
might be given for remarks on the precious 
blood. But avoid discussions at this meeting. 
However appropriate to contend earnestly 
for the faith on other occasions, this is not 
such an occasion. This is a meeting for fellowship 
and communion with the Lord, our Redeemer 
and present King. If any seem to be 
contentious, let him have his say, and let the others 
refrain from discussion, that the holy moments 
of special communion with him, which the Master 
appointed for our blessing, be not marred. 

Those who celebrate the Memorial with guileless, 
earnest hearts receive a great and refreshing 
blessing, and for this it is well to have seasons 
of quiet in the midst of the service, when no one 
will be speaking audibly and when the hearts of all 
can come very close to the Master in communion— 
in realization of his love, past and present, 
in reviewing the pledge made to be his faithful 
followers even unto death, in considering 
how that pledge has been kept or violated during 
the year preceding, and in resolving afresh to 
run with patience the race for the prize of joint-heirship 
with our Lord, to which we are invited. 

A beautifully appropriate hymn for closing 
the Memorial is No. 276 in the new hymn-book. 
And it will surely add to our joy to realize that 
some of like precious faith in all parts of the 
world are celebrating the same great sacrifice, 
thinking of the same gracious Lord, being comforted 
and encouraged by the same exceeding 
great and precious promises, resolving by the 
grace of our King to do greater service and to 



R1292:page41 

make greater sacrifices in his service and in the 
service of his people thenceforth, and closing 
with the same song of praise and worship. 
"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 
Thus before the cross we'll spend; 
Life and health and peace possessing 
From the sinner's risen Friend." 

Of the first Supper it is written: "They sang 
a hymn and went out." Let us do the same. 
Let each go to his home with his heart full. 
We suggest the omission on this occasion of 
the usual and generally proper after-meeting 
greetings, and all common-place remarks and 
thoughts, that we may prolong our communion 
and fellowship with the Master. Keep within 
sight of him throughout the next day. Hear the 
clamor of the people against the guileless one; 
see them incited by the clergy of Jerusalem; 
see him before Herod and his soldiers; see him 
arrayed in robes of mock -royalty and crowned 
with thorns, then buffeted and spat upon. 

See him crucified as a felon, and taunted with 
the very gracious deeds which he had performed 
—"He saved others, himself he cannot save." 
Remember that he could have saved himself; 
that he could have asked for, and would have 
received, "more than twelve legions of angels" 
to deliver and protect him; that he could have 
destroyed his enemies and vilifiers, instead 
of dying for them; and that our hope of a resurrection 
and everlasting life depended upon his 
willing offering of himself as our ransom-price. 
Consider his love for you and for us all, and it 
will surely strengthen you as his follower to 
endure more and more hardness as a good 
soldier of the cross. Aye, consider him who 
endured such contradiction of sinners against 
himself, lest ye become weary and faint in your 
minds under the light afflictions now permitted 
for your trial and discipline, which, if faithfully 
endured, will work out for each a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 

THE CELEBRATION AT ALLEGHENY. 

As usual the Church at this place will celebrate 
Christ our Passover slain for us; and as usual 
we will have in connection with it a general 
meeting for Bible study and spiritual feasting. 
But, contrary to our usual custom, the meetings 
this year will begin three days before the Memorial 
Supper. These three days before the Supper 
it is proposed shall be the time specially 



devoted to Bible study and conference on the 
various features of present truth. The day following 
the Supper, the anniversary of our Lord's 
crucifixion, it is proposed shall be specially devoted 
to worship and praise and communion 
and conference on themes close to our hearts. 
The remaining three days of the week will be 
devoted to considering the general interests of 
the harvest work, and especially the colporteur 
work, in which the more successful laborers will 
have opportunity to impart their zeal and a 
knowledge of their methods to the less successful. 
The desire is thus to lift up the hands 
which hang down, to strengthen the feeble knees, 
and to make straight paths for all who desire to 
pursue the good work as reapers in the present 
harvest. 

This convention for Bible study and for celebrating 
the Lord's Memorial Supper is called in 
the name of 

THE TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

IT WILL CONVENE IN 

BIBLE HOUSE CHAPEL, ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 

COMMENCING 

SUNDAY, APRIL 19TH, AT 10 A.M. 

It will continue, with adjournments for food 
and rest, until Wednesday evening, when the 
general session will close, and be followed by 
the conference on Harvest work and methods 
by the colporteurs and other laborers in the 
vineyard, which will occupy the remainder of 
the week. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER 

WILL BE CELEBRATED ON TUESDAY EVENING, 

APRIL 2 1ST, AT 8 P.M. 

On the same day, at 1 1 A.M., an opportunity 
will be afforded any who may desire to symbolize 
their consecration unto death by baptism 
into water. All services will be at the 
chapel above designated. 

The opening meeting of the Convention will 
be a Reunion and Testimony Meeting. It will 

R1292:page42 

open with the singing of Hymns Nos. 55 and 
170, and close with No. 1. Those who cannot 
be present can join their hearts and voices and 
prayers with ours, and think of the full and lasting 
reunion in the sweet by-and-by. 

HO! EVERY ONE THAT HUNGERETH AND 



THIRSTETH, COME YE TO THE FEAST. 

All who can heartily say— 
"I am trusting in Jesus for all, 
And my will is the will of my God," 
are most cordially invited to this Convention— 
to the fullest participation in its Bible-study, 
and in the Memorial Supper. Let all such who 
can, turn aside with us thus for special blessing 
and refreshing: for grace to help them over the 
difficulties of their own pathways, and thus to be 
enabled in turn to help others. Come, with 
your hearts full of love and loyalty to the Redeemer 
and his word, and to all the "body" 
possessing the same spirit; and with kindest 
sympathy for the spiritually halt and lame and 
blind. Come, seeking only the interests of the 
Kingdom of Heaven and its righteousness, and 
you will not return without a blessing. Come, 
hungering and thirsting for truth, and you shall 
be filled. 

All the colporteurs, and those who have the 
special talent of time, which they desire to use 
more fully in the Lord's service, and those who 
have tried the colporteur work with only moderate 
success— all these are specially urged to 
attend the Convention. We assure such that 
the suggestive hints to be gathered from the experiences 
of those who are very successful in this 
ministry will much more than compensate them 
for the time and expense in coming, and enable 
all the unencumbered to pursue the harvest 
work. 

ENTERTAINMENT AND EXPENSES. 

It is proposed this year to divide this honor 
of serving the Lord's body, so as to give a 
larger number a share in the privilege, by dividing 
the visitors. One of the marks of female 

R1293 : page 42 

saintship in the early church was, "if she 
have washed the saints' feet." (1 Tim. 5:10.) 
Feet-washing, being a necessity of that time, became 
a synonym of service and kindly hospitality. 
To illustrate this same principle of service 
and humility, our Lord used this same custom 
on the night of the Last Supper; and the 
entertainment of any of the household of faith 
is really the fulfilment of our Lord's injunction, 
"See that ye wash one another's feet." But 
none should be permitted to overdo themselves 
in this blessed service, nor to deprive themselves 
of the spiritual communion of the meetings. 



To this end all have been urged to make 

only very simple arrangements, that both visitors 

and entertainers may have their principal 

feast upon the spiritual meat. Come, then, expecting 

a warm welcome to such plain things as 

we have ourselves. 

The only expense you need anticipate will be 
25 cents a day for dinner at a restaurant, and 
your railroad fare; and it has been arranged 
that the latter shall cost you only two-thirds of 
the usual full rate from points as far East as 
New York, as far West as St. Louis, as far North 
as Canada, and as far South as Florida. 

HOW TO PROCURE R.R. TICKETS. 

This concession or reduction of one-third 
the regular fare is made by what is known as 

THE TRUNK LINE ASSOCIATION OF RAILROADS 
(which includes roads Eastward from Pittsburg 
and Buffalo to Vermont); 

THE CENTRAL TRAFFIC ASSOCIATION OF RAILROADS 
(which includes railroads West of Pittsburg 
and Buffalo to Chicago and St. Louis- 
north of the Ohio river); and 

THE SOUTHERN TRAFFIC ASSOCIATION OF 
RAILROADS (which includes nearly all the Southern 
roads). 

We desire that all, as far as possible, even 
those coming short distances, shall avail themselves 
of this reduction, as we were obliged to 
pledge a certain number so as to obtain the 
reduction. 

If your home is on a railroad not a member 
of any of these R.R. Associations, ascertain 
which road nearest you has membership and 
write to the ticket agent at the nearest town, 
telling him of the kind of ticket and certificate 

R1293 : page 43 

you desire, and have him promise to have such 
certificate ready for you at such time as you 
will reach his station en route. 

The ticket agents for all railroads which are 
members of these associations should have 
printed certificates to fill out with ink, stating 
that you bought a ticket for Allegheny or Pittsburg 
(The two cities are connected by bridges 
and street-cars), on a certain date, for the purpose 
of attending a yearly convention called by 
the TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, that you 
paid full price for said ticket, and that you are 
entitled to purchase a return ticket at one-third 
the full rate. Such certificate must accompany 
each ticket to secure the return ticket at one-third 



the regular fare. Prefer tickets via the 
Penna. Co. R.R., or the B. & O.R.R. 

If you intend coming, make inquiry of your 
ticket agent at once (but do not purchase your 
ticket more than one day before starting). If 
there is anything about this which you do not 
understand, write us a postal card at once. 

Start so as to reach the WATCH TOWER office, 
Bible House, No. 58 Arch street, Allegheny, Pa., 
on Saturday afternoon, April 18th. Even if 
you have previously written that you are coming, 
please send us a postal card two weeks before you 
start, stating how many are in your party, and 
indicating which are males and which females, 
that suitable arrangements can be made. 



page 43 

THE WONDERFUL STORY. 

We have now sent to each WATCH TOWER subscriber 
a sample copy of The Wonderful Story, 
illustrated. It was our intention to send these 
out to all during the holidays, but other features 
of the work have delayed most of them until now. 
We make no charge for these samples. Please 
accept them as little remembrancers of the TOWER 
TRACT SOCIETY. Should you desire other 
copies you will find the terms mentioned on 
the second page of the TOWER cover. 

Subscribers to the Old Theology Tracts have 
been sent proportionate quantities of these. 



R1295 : page 43 
"AT ALL TIMES." 



"I will bless the Lord at all times; his praise shall continually 
be in my mouth."— Psa. 34:1. 

"All times" with me are times of praise; 
Or rayless nights, or radiant days! 
The Summer bright, the Winter drear, 
The tearful Spring, the fading year, 
The stormy March, the tranquil June, 
Through each my harp to praise I tune. 

The changeful seasons come and go; 
No pause my grateful song shall know. 
The love of God glows 'mid the embers 



Strewn on the hearth of life's Decembers; 
And gold is mingled with the gray 
Of dim November's murkiest day. 

My bark on flowing seas may ride, 
Or strand, forsaken by the tide; 
There's music for me in the flow, 
Nor less when ebbing waters go; 
If now the chorus louder swell, 
'Twas then a sweeter cadence fell: 
Major or minor be the tone 
Praise still shall be the theme alone! 

All places echo with my song, 
Alone, or in the hurrying throng; 
The placid lake, the billowy sea, 
Shall hear and join the melody. 
In sunless rifts, on lofty steep, 
In desert vast, on ocean deep. 
In caverns dark, on golden heights, 
'Midst veiling mists, or flashing lights, 
In God I live, and am, and move. 
I'll sing, for while I live I love! 

Nor will I cease though Nature frown, 

Though trees be bare, and fields be brown; 

Life pulsates underneath the sod, 

Love palpitates within the clod. 

God lives, though all the earth seem dead; 

Though birds be mute, and sunshine fled, 

The universe is vocal still; 

While, down from heaven's holy hill 

Come floating strains of music sweet 

To those who worship at his feet. 

Take down again thy dusty lute, 
And tune each slack, discordant string; 
Nor ever let thy soul be mute. 
Lift up thy voice, exulting sing ! 
"At all times" let the measure move, 
For know "at all times" God is Love! 
—James Yeames. 



R1293 : page 44 

A JEWISH KINGDOM PROPOSED. 



Washington, D.C., March 5th, 1891. 

William E. Blackstone, of Chicago, to-day 
visited the President in company with Secretary 
Blaine, and presented a memorial in behalf of 
the Russian Jews. 



He explained that the memorial was the result 
of a conference of Christians and Jews recently 
held in Chicago, and called special attention 
to the fact that it did not antagonize Russia, 
but sought in a peaceable way to give the 
Jews control of their old home— Palestine. 

He pointed out many evidences of the possibility 
of great development of that country, both 
agriculturally and commercially, under an energetic 
government and said that the railroad 
now building from Joppa to Jerusalem, if extended 
to Damascus, Tadmor and down the 
Euphrates, cannot fail to become an international 
highway. 

He said that the poverty of the Turkish Government 
gives emphasis to the proposed indemnity, 
by funding a portion of the Turkish national 
debt through Jewish capitalists, and that only 
peaceable diplomatic negotiations are asked for, 
to the end that all private ownership of land and 
property be carefully respected and protected. 
In closing he said that, being on such friendly 
terms with Russia and having no complications 
in the Orient, it is most fitting and hopeful that 
our government should initiate this friendly 
movement, to give these wandering millions of 
Israel a settled and permanent home. 

The President listened attentively to Mr. Blackstone's 
remarks, and promised to give the subject 
serious consideration. 

THE MEMORIAL. 

The text of the memorial is as follows:— 
What shall be done for the Russian Jews? It 

is both unwise and useless to undertake to dictate 

to Russia concerning her internal affairs. 

The Jews have lived as foreigners in her dominions 

for centuries, and she fully believes that 

they are a burden upon her resources and prejudicial 

to the welfare of her peasant population, 

and will not allow them to remain. She is determined 

that they must go. Hence, like the 

R1294:page44 

Sephardim of Spain, these Ashkenazim must 
emigrate. But where shall 2,000,000 of such poor 
people go? Europe is crowded and has no room 
for more peasant population. Shall they come 
to America? This would be a tremendous expense 
and would require years. 

Why not give Palestine back to them again? 
According to God's distribution of nations it is 
their home— an inalienable possession from 
which they were expelled by force. Under their 



cultivation it was a remarkably fruitful land, sustaining 

millions of Israelites, who industriously 

tilled its hillsides and valleys. They were agriculturists 

and producers as well as a nation of 

great commercial importance— the centre of civilization 

and religion. 

Why shall not the powers which, under the 
treaty of Berlin, in 1878, gave Bulgaria to the 
Bulgarians and Servia to the Servians, now give 
Palestine back to the Jews? These provinces, 
as well as Roumania, Montenegro and Greece, 
were wrested from the Turks and given to their 
natural owners. Does not Palestine as rightfully 
belong to Jews? It is said that rains are increasing, 
and there are many evidences that the 
land is recovering its ancient fertility. 

If they could have autonomy in government, 
the Jews of the world would rally to transport 
and establish their suffering brethren in their 
time-honored habitation. For over seventeen 
centuries they have patiently waited for such a 
privileged opportunity. They have not become 
agriculturists elsewhere because they believed 
they were sojourners in the various nations, and 
were yet to return to Palestine and till their own 
land. Whatever vested rights, by possession, 
may have accrued to Turkey can be easily compensated 
for, possibly by the Jews assuming an 
equitable portion of the national debt. 

We believe this is an appropriate time for all 
nations, and especially the Christian nations of 
Europe, to show kindness to Israel. A million 
of exiles, by their terrible sufferings, are piteously 
appealing to our sympathy, justice and 
humanity. Let us now restore to them the land 
of which they were so cruelly despoiled by our 
Roman ancestors. 

To this end we respectfully petition his Excellency 
Benjamin Harrison, President of the 
United States, and the Hon. J. G. Blaine, Secretary 
of State, to use their good offices and influence 
with the governments of their imperial 

R1294:page45 

majesties— Alexander III., Czar of Russia; Victoria, 
Queen of Great Britain and Empress of 
India; William II., Emperor of Germany; 
Francis Joseph, Emperor of Austro-Hungary; 
Abdul Hamid II., Sultan of Turkey; Her Royal 
Majesty Marie Christina, Queen Regent of Spain; 
with the government of the Republic of 
France and with the governments of Belgium, 
Holland, Denmark, Sweden, Portugal, Roumania, 
Servia, Bulgaria and Greece, to secure the 
holding, at an early date, of an international 



conference to consider the condition of the Israelites 
and their claims to Palestine as their ancient 
home, and to promote in all other just and 
proper ways the alleviation of their suffering 
condition. 

[The memorial is signed by prominent men 
of all professions and creeds from Chicago, Boston, 
New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore and 
Washington.] 



R1294:page45 

AS VIEWED BY OTHERS. 

A SELECTION. 



"The time will come when Bible prophecy 
with its chronology will be confirmed by history 
in so exact and signal a manner that malice and 
infidelity alone will be able to deny its inspiration. 
Then, too, the world will have had its last 
say, impiety will have let fall its last mask, intolerance 
will have practiced its last cruelties, superstition 
will have descended the lowest round of 
idolatry, faith will have won on the scaffold its 
most brilliant victories, and in presence of the last 
great revolution history will have learned from 
prophecy to comprehend and to judge itself. The 
transformation which it will experience will be so 
complete that a very small remnant will be found 
of what the world to-day calls its Philosophy.' 

"Thus wrote Frederic de Pougemont, the 
earnest Swiss pastor, nearly a generation ago, 
and behold, we are already standing upon the 
threshold of the days to which he alluded. 

"They must be blind indeed who fail to 
read the warning written upon the walls of the 
modern temple of theology. In its continued 
subdivision into sects the Protestant church has 
had its strength so decimated that, as the 
Master long ago predicted, it is doomed to fall. 
-Matt. 12:25. 

"We, Protestants, are prone to draw invidious 
comparisons against Rome, while she in turn 

R1295 : page 45 

points out the ever-widening breaches which divide 
our house against itself! Just where the 
balance of error actually resides is hard to tell. 
The fact is, the spirit of Laodicea presides over 
the whole city of modern Babylon, whatsoever 
be the particular ward in which we dwell, and 
the cry should now go up throughout all its precincts, 



'Come out of her, my people, that ye 

be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 

not of her plagues.'— Rev. 18:4. 

"This is the midnight cry itself, and it appeals 
to all 'the wise,' wherever they are domiciled, 
to go out to meet their coming Lord, and to 
take naught with them but that oil which burns 
with the bright flame of faith in the integrity of the 
whole Bible. That we ourselves are dwelling 
in this Laodicean Babylon is patent to all who are 
familiar with the methods upon which its 'primaries' 
are conducted, nor can we fortify our assertion 
better than by quoting once more from 
our trenchant Swiss pastor, who wrote as follows 
of a state of the Church, in his day future, but 
now, alas! only too realistic:— 

"The closing epistle of Christ to the seven 
churches (Rev. 3) is directed to Laodicea. It 
corresponds to the time of Jewish phariseeism 
and sets forth the state of the Protestant nations 
at the Lord's return, when there will be little or 
no faith left on the earth. The missionary zeal 
of the church of Philadelphia, which at one 
time inflamed the whole mass of reformed Christianity, 
will have subsided into lukewarmness. 
The whole area will be Christian, and pride itself 
on its profession. A high standard of morality, 
an upright life, a conservative creed, will 
be never so popular. There will be no open 
enemy of Christ, as in Philadelphia, no outspoken 
infidel; only phariseeism and lukewarmness, only 
the happy medium between impiety and pietism. 
There will be a little faith, but not too 
much; a profession of orthodox principles confined 
within wise limits. There will be some 

R1295 : page 46 

fear of God, but much fear of men; great respect 

for the Bible, but enough good sense to 

keep men from viewing its doctrines, its precepts 

and its denunciations in a serious light; 

society wholly given to the acquisition of temporal 

blessings, and yet diligent enough in 

public worship not to doubt the pardoning mercy 

of God. 

"They will consider themselves very rich in 
spiritual life, even as having need of nothing. 
But the Lord will vomit lukewarm Laodicea 
from his mouth. He will not fight against 
her, as against Pergamos, and Thyatira. He 
will not judge her like Sardis; but he will wholly 
cast her off with scorn, and leave her to her 
wallowing in the mire. Still, she is a church, 
and oh, mystery of grace! He even speaks to 
her of love. He counsels her, rebukes her, treats 



her like a child subjected to salutary discipline: 

'I would that thou wert cold or hot.' 'Be zealous, 

therefore, and repent.' He offers her a 

collyrium, that she may open her eyes to her 

wretched state; the white raiment of his righteousness, 

that the shame of her nakedness may 

not appear; gold tried in the fire of faith, that 

she may be truly rich. But his offers will not 

be accepted by the vast majority of the Laodiceans; 

few of them will ever hear his voice 

when he stands at the door and knocks to invite 

his guests to the bridal supper. Those, however, 

who in the midst of the universal apathy 

have persevered in love to the end will receive 

the highest honor of all the faithful: they will 

sit down with Jesus on his throne. 

"The church of Laodicea is no far-fetched 
type; it mirrors the Protestant world to-day, 
and its distinct presence is not one of the least 
of the sign-posts that guide the weary pilgrim 
along his midnight highway." 

C. A. L. TOTTEN. 



R1294:page46 

HARVEST WORK AND MEETINGS IN CANADA. 

A WORD FROM BRO. S. D. ROGERS. 

As some parts of a wheat field are ripe at one 
time and some at another, so with the field in 
which the Lord's children are scattered: one 
part sometimes appears to be more fully ready 
for the sickle than another. And we can safely 
trust the Lord of the Harvest to direct the reapers 
in the several parts of the field. 

While I have been in Canada but a short time, 
it has been my privilege to see an excellent 
interest awakened and the harvest work well 
started here. The Master has some "faithful 
servants" here who are seeking to walk in the 
light that shineth more and more. There are 
over 5,000 DAWNS out in Ontario now, and the 
work is only well begun. Bro. Utley, Bro. Zink 
of Manitoba and Bro. G. F. Rogers and myself 
have been working in and near Toronto 
for the past few weeks. After getting out about 
2,000 DAWNS in this city and awakening many 
to a study of God's great plan as now opened up 
to us, we decided to ask Bro. Russell to come 
here to speak. And though over-crowded with 
work at home, he kindly consented to speak 
here on the 22nd of February. 

The first meeting was appointed for 10:30 



A.M. Subject:— "The Times of Restitution of 
All Things." When he arrived there were over 
four hundred gathered to learn more of these 
times, concerning "which God hath spoken 
through the mouth of all his holy prophets." 
Most of those present of course belong to the city, 
but some came 50, 60, 70, 100, and one Bro. 
came over 200 miles; and those who were 
hungry indeed had a feast. At the first meeting 
Bro. Russell spoke over two hours, reasoning 
from the Scriptures on the deliverance of the 
groaning creation from the bondage in which 
it has so long been held. Some who have been 
used to husks could scarcely contain their joy 
when being fed on the oil and wine and strong 
meat of the Word. About 1 o'clock the meeting 
adjourned for dinner. The second meeting 
was appointed for 3 P.M., and at that time there 
were about seven hundred gathered to hear Bro. 
Russell speak of "God's Kingdom." After 
speaking about two hours on this interesting 
theme, permission was given to any who desired 
to retire. But the majority remained to hear 

R1294:page47 

clear and logical views on the manner and object 
of the setting up of the Lord's Kingdom. All 
present seemed delighted with the truth brought 
to light, and longed for more. Some of those 
present expressed their intention to attend the 
Anniversary meeting at Allegheny. 

In the evening, from 7 to 8.30 P.M., Bro. 
Russell addressed Brother Brookman's congregation 
in the other end of the city at their usual 
place of meeting (Jackson Hall, Cor. Yonge 
and Blood streets), returning before 9 o'clock 
to the place of the day meetings to take part in 
a Questioner's Meeting, which followed an address 
by myself on the "Plan of the Ages," 
and which did not conclude until after 10 
o'clock. The evening meetings, like the others, 
proved very interesting, and we trust were very 
helpful to all present. 

There is another side of the work to look at 
briefly. While the harvest work is thus progressing, 
and the wheat is being gathered, we 
cannot expect that the tares will all be gathered 
into bundles for burning without some resistance, 
and so we are not surprised to find some 
gnashing of teeth and gnawing of tongues. And 
this will no doubt be seen more and more as the 
servants of the Master are the more faithful and 
enterprising in proclaiming the message of present 
truth. The "hirelings" say: It is all right for 
you to hold these views but you should not go about 



telling them to others. The Good Shepherd says: 
"Feed my sheep." And the more we feed the 
sheep so much the more will the false shepherds 
complain. In Canada, as well as elsewhere, some 
of the would-be shepherds are speaking all 
manner of evil things against the messengers of 
the truth. They do not understand us a bit better 
than the Jews understood our Lord and his little 
band of disciples. Light hath no concord with 
darkness. At least two nominal ministers in 
Ontario have publicly burned the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, and heaped all kinds of reproach on the 
author and those who are circulating this peculiar 
book. But is not this a fulfilment of our 
Master's words: "If they have persecuted me 
they will also persecute you"? The "furnace" of 
trouble for the tares is getting well heated, and 
soon shall the righteous shine forth as the sun 
in the Kingdom of their Father. 
Toronto, Feb. 25th, 1891. S. D. ROGERS. 



R1293 : page 47 
THE PLANK BEARS. 



"The BLOOD maketh Atonement for the Soul." 
-Lev. 17:11; Exodus 12:13,14. 

The BLOOD of Christ... purge your conscience 
...to serve the living God. Heb. 9:14. 

The BLOOD of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth 
us from all sin. 1 John 1:7. 

My BLOOD of the New Testament, which is shed 
for many. (1 Tim. 1:2) Mark 14:24. 

My BLOOD. ..which is shed for many for the remission 
of sins. Matt. 26:28. 

Ye were. ..redeemed. ..with the precious 

BLOOD of Christ. .as of a Lamb without blemish. 1 Pet. 1:18,19. 

Ye who... were afar off are made nigh by the 
BLOOD of Christ. (1 Pet. 3:18) Eph. 2:13. 

Boldness to enter into the holiest by the 

BLOOD of Jesus, by a new and living way. Heb. 10: 19,20. 

Unto obedience and sprinkling of the 
BLOOD of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1:2. 



Ye are come unto Mount Zion and to the 

BLOOD of sprinkling that speaketh better things. Heb. 12:18-24. 

Washed... and made them white in the 
BLOOD of the Lamb. Rev. 7:14. 

They overcame him (Satan the accuser) by the 
BLOOD of the Lamb and. ..their testimony. Rev. 12:1 1. 

(Jesus Christ) having made peace through the 
BLOOD of his Cross. Col. 1:1-20. 

Much more, then, being now justified by His 
BLOOD, we shall be saved from wrath. Rom. 5:9. 

In whom we have redemption through His 
BLOOD, the forgiveness of sins. Eph. 1:7. 

In whom we have redemption through His 
BLOOD, even the forgiveness of sins. Col. 1:14. 

Set forth. ..a propitiation through faith in His 
BLOOD, to declare His righteousness. Rom. 3:25. 

This cup is the New Testament in My 
BLOOD, which is shed for you. Luke 22:20. 

Thou... hast redeemed us to God by Thy 

BLOOD out of every kindred and tongue. Rev. 5:9. 

Washed us from our sins in His own 

BLOOD, and hath made us kings and priests. Rev. 1:5,6. 

That He might sanctify the people with His 
BLOOD, suffered without the gate. Heb. 13:12. 

Purged with BLOOD; and without shedding of 
BLOOD is no remission. Heb. 9:22. 



-Sel. 



R1295 : page 49 
