R132 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1880. 

NO. 3. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. A. ALLEN, .... HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R132 : page 1 



IMPORTANCE OF BAPTISM. 

Before considering what constitutes Scriptural baptism, let us 
inquire whether it is essential. We have no hesitation in saying 
that it is indispensable, and that no one will have a part in the 
"little flock" or be of "The bride, the Lamb's wife" who has not 
been baptized. Further, we have scriptural proof that all who are 
baptized shall be saved, that all such shall be in the "first 
resurrection." Let us hear Jesus' words- "He that believeth and is 
baptized shall be saved." But Paul is yet more explicit and says: 
[Rom. 6:3-8.] "For if we have been planted together in the 
likeness of his death we shall also be in the likeness of his 
resurrection." Notice that the subject is baptism; and that there is 
not an if, nor a but, nor any other contingency mentioned than 
baptism. How important then that we know what it is and 
understand how it should be performed. 

The meaning of the Greek word Baptizo is to bury, immerse, 
cover up, submerge. Now apply this significance to the word 
baptized; then associate it with yourself and you find that you 
are to be buried or submerged. But into what are we to be 
immersed— into water? No, we answer: Paul tells us that those 
who are really baptized "were baptized into Jesus Christ." The 
true baptism then is to be submerged, covered up, or immersed 
into Christ. If immersed into Christ we lose ourselves; we will 
no longer do our own will or way, for that will is buried. We 
have a new will or mind; it is the mind of Christ. "Let the same 
mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus." If we have been 
baptized into Christ it is that we may be members of His body, 
the church. And since "He is the head of the body, the church," 
[Col. 1 : 1 8] it follows that the only controlling authority for those 
who are members of that body is the will of Christ Jesus the 
head. This is complete immersion into Christ, and who will 
doubt that if thus dead to self and the world and alive only as a 
member of his body, obeying no will but that of "the head," we 
say who can doubt, that if thus immersed we shall be in his 
likeness in the resurrection; that if we thus know him, we shall 
also know the power of his resurrection. [Phil. 3:1 1.] 

But, by what means can one become thus immersed into Christ? 
Shall we be baptized into Christ by being immersed in water? 
Not at all; thousands are so immersed who will not be in his 
likeness in the resurrection. Let us ask Paul into what we must 
be immersed. He answers (Rom. 6:3) "Know ye not that so 
many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into 
his death?" 

Ah yes; It is a difficult matter to attain to the prize of our high 
calling. While many, "a great company" (Rev. 7:15) shall stand 
before the throne in glory, only "the body" of overcomers are to 
sit with him "in the throne." Rev. 3:21. It is only him that 
overcometh that "shall inherit all things" and be "joint-heir with 
Jesus." Not to the "great company" of "the household of faith" is 



the promise of the kingdom given, but to the "first-born" of the 
heavenly family-Jesus the head, the "church of the first-born" 
the body. To this first-born is the promise made: "Fear not little 
flock it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. " 

This is the prize and all Christians are in the race course. All 
Christians in the race shall be saved and shall ultimately reach 
the goal, if they continue in this pathway. They will all 
ultimately reach the completeness of the "Divine nature," but it 
requires the putting forth of every effort in the race if we would 
win the prize and be found in Him as members of the body of 
the first-born and "heirs of all things." Therefore Paul exhorts 
[not the world, but Christians] to "so run that we may obtain" 
[the prize of our high calling]. "Let us lay aside every weight 
and the sin that doth so easily beset and run with patience the 
race set before us." They that so run shall 

R133 : page 1 

win the prize— be the Bride-the body. They that run but do not 
so run as to win, "suffer loss," the loss of the prize which they 
would have obtained had they been willing to "lay aside every 
weight. " They shall suffer loss but themselves shall be saved so 
as by fire. [Coming through "the great tribulation."] Their lives 
shall be saved but their works shall suffer loss. [Phil. 3:15]. 

Yes, beloved, it is a prize such as never before and never again 
will be offered and what wonder if it is very difficult of 
attainment- if it be "Through much tribulation shall ye enter the 
kingdom." By being baptized into his death, we are to be 
members of his body, "therefore we are buried with him by 
baptism into death. " But what is it to thus die his death. Is it 
simply to put "away the filth of the flesh," that is to deny 
ourselves only such things as are sinful? No, that would not be 
"being made conformable to his death." "In Him [Jesus] was no 
sin; " consequently he could not put to death a sinful nature. But 
while his nature was pure and his every desire was to do things 
right and proper for him as a perfect man, yet he yielded his 
rights and will as a natural man for us. For instance as a holy 
undefiled one he had a right to seek his own ease and pleasure 
but instead of so doing he was moved with compassion toward 
the people and went about spending his life for the sinner's 
benefit, taking our infirmities and bearing our sicknesses, and on 
more than one occasion he might have said: "Virtue [power, 
vitality] is gone out of me. " 

Yes he went about doing good spending his perfect life powers 
for the good of sinners because he was full to overflowing of the 
perfect love. Finally after having thus shared our sorrows and 
our griefs, He bought us and paid the price of sin [death] for us, 
that we sinners might be accounted righteous, and therefore 
have again the right to live. This was the great, grand, 
culminating expression he gave of his love: When he gave the 



life upon which sin and death had no claim in order that, in due 
time the race should go free, from sin and from death by a 
resurrection to perfect life. Surely he might have kept this life 
which he gave. It was not like ours, forfeited; as he himself 
testified: "No man taketh it from me; I lay it down of myself"- 
Even now I could ask the Father and he would give me more 
than twelve legions of angels, but these things to which he had a 
perfect right he gave up freely. 

Now it is his death, that we are to be conformed to. True it will 
include the giving up of the sins or "filth of the flesh," and the 
"denying of ungodly lusts," etc., but, thus far it is simply duty. 
You only give up things you never had a right to, there is no 
sacrifice in it. If we would be made conformable unto his death, 
it must be by the giving up of things not sinful and to which you 
have a right, as men. Jesus did not his own will, but the will of 
him that sent him, and we should "Let the same mind be in us 
which was also in Christ Jesus our Lord. " The Father's will as 
done in Christ Jesus was the giving up of natural things, and 
comforts, and life, on account of sin in the world. Sin and 
sufferings are still in the world and the disciples of Jesus most 
willing to "spend and be spent," to "labor and suffer reproach," 
making "himself of no reputation," such a disciple most closely 
follows Him "who has set us an example that we should walk in 
His footsteps." 

When asked of the two disciples whether they might sit on the 
right and left hand in the kingdom he answered: "Ye know not 
what ye ask; are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, 
and to be baptized with the baptism that I am [to be] baptized 
with?" Jesus shows what cup he meant when in the garden he 
exclaimed, "Father, if possible, let this cup pass from me. " He 
shows the baptism referred to also, that it was not the baptism of 
John in Jordan, but of death when he says, "I have a baptism to 
be baptized with and how am I straightened 'til it is 
accomplished. " 

Such, baptized into Christ's death will not make earthly ease and 
comfort their aim, but will seek to "do good unto all men as they 
have opportunity especially to the household of faith. " Their 
self-denial and God-likeness will seek to benefit and lift up the 
physical man, and how much more will it lead to self-sacrifice 
in order that others may be helped on to the divine life. Thus it 
was that the apostles spent themselves that they might declare 
"the unsearchable riches of Christ. " It was for this cause that 
Paul says: "I now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for 
his body's sake, which is the church. " Jesus left a measure of 
suffering, etc., for his church as his body to complete, or fill up, 
and Paul was zealous to bear as much of it as possible. Glorious 
ambition to spend his life in bearing the glad tidings of the 
"High calling" to those who would receive it. This is the 



ambition which Jesus both exemplified and commended, saying, 
"He that would be greatest among you let him become servant 
of all." 

If we thus live a divine life and crucify and ignore the natural 
life, we shall be considered "a peculiar people zealous of good 
works," and we will thus be so very different from the ideas of 
the natural man; that we must needs remember Jesus' words— 
"Marvel not if the world hate you, ye know that it hated me 
before it hated you." "The disciple is not above his Lord." "If 
any 

R133 : page 2 

man will be my disciple let him deny himself and take up his 
cross and follow me. " Self-denial means much, and will never 
be experienced except as we crucify the human nature with its 
affections and desires. 

We see what it is to be baptized into Jesus' death. Let us inquire 
whether it is an instantaneous act performed when we first come 
to Christ and seek admission into "the body" or, a life work? We 
answer it is both. 

When we first come to God through Jesus we covenant with 
Him that we will take up our cross and follow him through evil 
and good report, whether it brings the favor or frown of our 
fellows. Jesus tells us it means the loss of the friendship of the 
world, the gain of the friendship of God, the loss of worldly 
honor, the gain of heavenly honor, the loss of earthly life and 
earthly nature, the gain of the divine nature and the divine image 
-a spiritual body like unto Christ's glorious body. He illustrated 
his teaching on the night he was betrayed. He took bread and 
brake, saying, this is my body broken for you, eat ye all of it. 
The bread symbolized Jesus as the truth. "I am the truth"-"the 
heavenly manna. " After supper he took the cup of wine saying, 
This is my blood of the new covenant shed for many for the 
remission of sins; drink ye all of it. The wine symbolizes the 
blood and after we have tasted of the truth (bread) and seen that 
the Lord is gracious he says, Here is the cup of my sufferings 
and death, drink ye all of it— you must share this cup of 
sufferings if you would share my glory. "Yes," says Paul, "If we 
suffer with him we shall also be glorified together. " 

This covenant of death we make with God when we first come 
to him and He says He will, from the moment of covenant 
forward, reckon us dead indeed to the world and sin, although 
the entire life is to be a time of crucifying, or putting to death up 
to the time we die actually. God's part of the covenant is, that 
these who thus die shall have part of the divine nature, and from 
the moment we make this covenant, He seals it by giving us the 
Holy Spirit as a guide and comforter; which is an earnest of our 
inheritance, which full inheritance we shall receive when all the 
"little flock" have crucified themselves. Notice then that we first 



covenant to die, etc., and then receive of the Spirit's begetting 
power giving us spiritual life, whereby we can carry out our part 
of the covenant. 

But as crucifying is a lingering death, so our dying is well 
expressed thus, It is hard to die in any sense, but it is especially 
hard to be dead to the world, its opinions, pleasures and wishes, 
while still in it. In the world but not of it. Separate from sinners. 
Often will we need to "look unto Jesus the author (and soon to 
be) the finisher of our faith. " We will often need, as Paul said, to 
"consider Him who endured such contradiction (opposition) of 
sinners against himself lest (we) be weary and faint in (our) 
mind." "Be not weary of well-doing, for in due time we shall 
reap if we faint not. " 

No words that we can use can express so forcibly as do Paul's, 
the necessity of this immersion into Christ's death. "What things 
were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. [Paul was fitted 
for a high social and political position, both by birth and 
education.] Yea, doubtless I count all things but loss for the 
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom 
I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but 
dung that I may win [a position in the body of] Christ, and be 
found in him, " covered with the righteousness of faith. "That I 
may know him and the power of his resurrection -(experience 
the same resurrection as Jesus to a spiritual body and immortal 
life— the first resurrection) and the fellowship of his sufferings, 
being made conformable unto his death, if by any means I might 
attain unto THE (first) resurrection." (Phil. 3:8-11.) "For if we 
have been planted together in the likeness of his death we shall 
be also in the likeness of His resurrection." (Rom. 6:5.) 

But while the above mentioned is beyond question the essential 
baptism, was there not a baptism into water enjoined also and as 
a type? Assuredly there is. When the new hearers had heard of 
Jesus' death for them, and of their high calling to share it with 
him and afterward to share his glory, they made the covenant 
with God and gave outward expression to it by the beautifully 
expressive type of being buried in water, and said by the act we 
die to the world and earthly conditions and rise to "walk not 
after the flesh but after the spirit. " 

R134 : page 2 

I rise to walk in heavens own light, 
Above the world and sin, 
With heart made pure and garment white 
And Christ enthroned within. 

The ordinance of water baptism is so beautifully expressive of 
our hope and covenant, that if there was no divine injunction as 
to its performance, as there is, we should still feel it a privilege 
to show forth and illustrate our planting (burying) together in the 



likeness of his death and our expectation of being in his likeness 
in the resurrection. 

When Cornelius had received the Holy Spirit Peter inquired, 
Can any man forbid water that these should be immersed? And 
so we ask, who can say aught against water being thus used as a 
type of our death? And we might put the question in another 
form for some: Can any man refuse to thus show forth his death 
if he has indeed died to the world? We think not. That which 
hinders many in the public illustration of the death they profess 
is we fear, generally pride, fear of mental or uttered reproach of 
fellow disciples and of the world. But dear fellow disciple 
reflect that these objections to water baptism indicate that the 
true essential baptism has never fully taken place. You may be 
partly dead, and have given up part of your own will, but when 
fully crucified you will say with Him, "I delight to do thy will, 
O Lord." I count all things but loss and dross that I may win 
Christ-the great prize. 

Let us, dearly beloved, live up to our covenant, and not only 
bury ourselves and our wills in Christ's, but also keep our bodies 
under-dying daily until fully delivered into the blessed 
kingdom— which deliverance we believe to be so very nigh at 
hand. 



R141 : page 2 

In most situations of life the consciousness of innocence is 
truly our best shield, and our firmest security. 



R134 : page 2 

"THE CHRIST OF GOD." 

The word Christ or Kristos is a Greek word introduced into our 
English language but not translated into it. Its translation or 
meaning is ANOINTED. 

Unto us a child was born, etc., and "They shall call his name 
Jesus." The name Jesus means Deliverer or Savior, and the child 
was called in view of a work he was to do; for we are told, "He 
shall save His people from their sins." Jesus was always His 
name, but from the time of His baptism, when the Holy Ghost 
descended upon Him and anointed Him as the High Priest 
preparatory to His making "The sin-offering" on the cross and 
thus accomplishing what is indicated in His name Jesus (viz. : 
saving his people from their sins). From the time (baptism) that 
God thus "anointed him with the oil of gladness above his 
fellows," his title has been "The anointed"-Jesus "the Christ 
(anointed) of God." Luke 9:20. 



Jesus was frequently called by this title instead of by his name; 
as English people oftenest speak of their sovereign as "the 
Queen" instead of calling her by her name- Victoria. 

But, as Jesus was in God's plan as the anointed one before the 
foundation of the world, so too the church of Christ was 
recognized in the same plan, that is, God purposed to take out of 
the world a "little flock" whom he purposed raising up above the 
condition of the perfect human nature, to make them "partakers 
of the Divine nature. " The relationship of Jesus towards these is 
that of "Head over all, God blessed forever. " For he hath given 
him to be head over the church (of the first-born), which is His 
body. As Jesus was foreordained to be the anointed one, so we 
also were chosen to the same anointing of the Spirit as members 
in his body and under him as our head. And so we read: (Eph. 
1:3) "God hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ 
according as He hath chosen us in Him before the foundation of 
the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him 
in love; having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by 
Jesus Christ, to himself... where he hath made us accepted in the 
beloved." (See also vs. 20-23.) Again (Rom. 8:29), "Whom He 
did foreknow he also did predestinate to be conformed to the 
image of His Son, that He (head and body) might be the first- 
born (heir) among many brethren. " 

God's plan of saving the world by a "restitution of all things" 
waits until first this bride of Jesus-these members of the spirit- 
anointed body shall be gathered out from the world according to 
His purpose. God's intention being to display to the world his 
wonderful and mighty "love wherewith he loved us" as we read 
(Eph. 2:7.) "He hath raised us up together... in Christ Jesus, that 
in the ages to come He might show the exceeding riches of His 
grace (favor) in His kindness toward us in Christ Jesus," for we 
are "elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father 
through sanctification (setting apart) of the Spirit unto obedience 
and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ." (1 Pet. 1:2.) This 
shows us that the election is not an arbitrary one. God elected 
first that Jesus should taste death for us, thus releasing us from 
death. Second, that the knowledge of this redemption should be 
declared. Third, that those who believed the proclamation 
should be invited or called to become "partakers of the Divine 
nature," "heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord, if 
so be that they suffer (death) with him that they might be also 
glorified together." (Rom. 8:17.) His purpose being that when 
this "promised seed" is developed in, through, or by it "all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed." [Gal. 3:29.] The seed is to 
crush the serpent's head. [Rom. 16:20] thus destroying evil and 
bringing about "the restitution of all things." 

To be thus a part of "The Seed," "The Christ," we must see to it 
that we comply with the conditions [suffer death with Him if we 
would be found in Him] thus making our calling and election 



sure. We make sure of our being part of the elect company by 
obedience to the call: for "They that are with Him are called, 
and chosen and faithful." [Rev. 17:14.] Being faithful to the call 
insures our position among the chosen. They that "follow the 
Lamb whithersoever He goeth" in the future, are the same that 
bend every power and lay aside every weight to "walk in His 
footsteps" here. 

A beautiful illustration of our oneness with Jesus, as members of 
the anointing of Aaron as high-priest: All of the anointing oil 
[type of the Holy spirit,] was poured upon the head; the under 
priests stood by, their heads covered with 

R135 : page 2 

bonnets (Lev. 8:13) indicating thereby, that they were not the 
head. Aaron who stood with uncovered head, was the head of 
their priesthood. They took part in the ceremony and were 
anointed symbolically in him as members of His body, for the 
oil poured on the head ran down over the members of His body, 
as we read, (Psa. 133:2): "It ran down the beard even Aaron's 
beard: that went down to the skirts of the garments. " So we who 
claim not to be the head but members in Christ's body receive 
full anointing by the same spirit. "For as the body is one, and 
hath many members, and all the members of that one body, 
being many, are one body, so also is Christ for by one spirit are 
we all baptized into one body. 1 Cor. 12:12. "As many of you as 
were baptized into Christ were baptized into his death." Rom. 6. 

Our oneness with Jesus as members of the Christ-anointed body 
—may be clearly illustrated by the figure of the pyramid: 



The topstone is a perfect pyramid of itself. Other stones may be 
builded under it and if built in exact harmony with all the 
characteristic lines of the topstone the whole mass will be a 
perfect pyramid. How beautifully this illustrates our position as 
members of "The Seed, " "The Christ. " Joined to, and perfectly 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R136 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 

in harmony with our head we are perfect; separated from him we 
are nothing. 

Jesus the perfect one has been highly exalted, and now we 
present ourselves to him that we may be formed and shaped 
according to his example that we may be built up as a building 
of God. In an ordinary building there is no "chief corner-stone, " 
but in our building there is one chief corner-stone the "topstone" 
as it is written, "Behold I lay in Zion a chief corner-stone, elect 



precious"— "to whom coming as unto a living stone.. .ye also as 
lively (living) stones are built up a spiritual house an holy 
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ." 1 Pet. 2:4-6. And very soon we trust the union 
between Jesus and the body will be complete; as expressed by 
the prophet: "He shall bring forth the head-stone, therefore, with 
shoutings of grace unto it. 

And dearly beloved, many blows and much polishing must we 
have, much transforming we must undergo, and much 
conforming unto his example under the direction of the great 
Master builder; and in order to have the ability and ideality of 
the builder displayed in us we will need to see that we have no 
cross grained will of ours to oppose or thwart his will being 
done in us; We must be very childlike and humble- "Be clothed 
with humility, for God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to 
the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand 
of God that he may exalt you in due time." 1 Pet. 5:6. 



R134 : page 3 



THE WAITING VIRGIN. 

From Zion's watch tower gazing, 
Christ's Bride perceives the morn, 
Her eyes to heaven raising, 
She heeds not Satan's scorn. 

The smell of precious ointment 
Floats on the balmy breeze, 
The signs of Christ's appointment 
In all around she sees. 

Anon with earnest longing, 
She looks across the plain, 
Where rosy light is dawning, 
And tunes her plaintive strain. 

"I know not now the moment 
When Thou, dear Lord, shalt call, 
But, with the wedding garment, 
I wait for my sweet Home. 

Not through the grave's dark portal 
May I be called, dear Lord; 
But clothe e'en here this mortal 
By Thine immortal word. " 

Still of her Bridegroom sueing, 
In soft low tones she speaks; 
He listens to her wooing, 
And answers while she seeks. 



"Cease now, my spouse, from weeping; 
Thy loved one like a hart, 
O'er hills and mountains leaping, 
Shall cause Thy foes to start. 

The morn of Thy salvation 
E'en now bright gilds the sky, 
Through every tribe and nation 
My heralds swiftly fly. 

The bridal song is swelling, 
The guests are gathering fast; 
Angelic hosts are telling 
That life's battle's won at last. 

~"M. J." Princeton, N.J. 



R174 : page 3 

LOOKING UNTO JESUS. 

HEBREWS 12:2. 

It is one purpose, at least, of the Holy Ghost in this epistle, to 
show that in all things Jesus has the preeminence. First, He 
brings forward the angels, but only to set them aside in the 
presence of Jesus; for unto which of the angels said God at any 
time, "Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy 
footstool?" (1:13.) Second, He brings forward Moses, but only 
to set him aside in the presence of Jesus; for "Moses verily was 
faithful in all his house, as a servant,... but Christ as a son over 
his own house." (3:5,6.) Third, He brings forward Aaron, but 
only to set him aside in the presence of Jesus; for the former was 
made after the law of a carnal commandment, without an oath, 
not suffered to continue by reason of death, and offered up 
sacrifice, first for his own sins; while the latter was made after 
the power of an endless life, with an oath, who ever liveth to 
make intercession for us, and is holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners. (7.) 

Fourth, He brings forward Melchisedek, "first being by 
interpretation king of righteousness, and after that also king of 
Salem, which is king of peace," but only to set him aside in the 
presence of Jesus; for it is his highest glory to be a passing 
shadow, a momentary type, of the man of Calvary who is the 
very center of God's counsels. Fifth, He brings forward the old 
and broken covenant of works, but only to set it aside in the 
presence of Jesus, in whom is confirmed the new covenant, the 
better covenant, established upon better promises, securing 
beyond the possibility of failure the eternal salvation of all His 
people. (8.) Sixth, He brings forward the imposing ritual of the 
tabernacle service, but only to set it aside in the presence of 



Jesus; for it could "never with those sacrifices which they 
offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto 
perfect," while of Jesus it is said, "By one offering he hath 
perfected forever them that are sanctified." (9:10.) Seventh, He 
brings us at last into God's gallery of portraits, illustrating the 
power of faith, but only to set them aside in the presence of 
Jesus, the Princely Leader and Completer of faith; who stands so 
far above angels, above Moses, above Aaron, above 
Melchisedek, above the covenant at Sinai, above the tabernacle 
of the wilderness, above the saints of four thousand years, that 
we are told to look off and away from all others and from self 
unto Jesus, and unto Jesus alone, "looking unto Jesus."— The 
Truth. 



R173 : page 3 

THE LORD'S JEWELS. 

BY H. GRATTAN GUINNESS. 

The Christian church as a witness for God in the world has 
failed, like the Jewish nation, and become apostate. There is a 
little flock, there is a true church, but its members are scattered 
abroad and almost invisible in the great Babylon; they are the 
seven thousand who have not bowed the knee to Baal, they are 
the called and chosen and faithful who follow the Lamb, they 
are those who have turned to God from idols, to serve the living 
and true God, and to wait for his Son from heaven; they are 
those who have not the form only, but the power of godliness, 
those who keep themselves unspotted from the world, and 
overcome through faith. They are found in every section of the 
professing church, and the Lord knoweth those that are his- 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in the day when I 
make up my jewels." 

But for the rest-for the vast professing body which bears the 
name of Christ, it has not continued in the goodness of God, it 
has turned his grace into licentiousness, its sentence is gone 
forth, it must be "cut off. " The long-suffering of God has been 
abundantly manifested; it is right that his holy severity should be 
again revealed. The professing church has long been unworthy 
of the sacred name it bears, and of the high and holy 
responsibility of being God's witness on earth, which belongs to 
it; it is time it should cease to hold the position it has so fearfully 
forfeited. Instead of being the instrument of spreading the truth 
of the Gospel among men, it is the worst hindrance to their 
attaining that knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ whom he 
has sent, in which life eternal lies. Like the Pharisees of old it 
stands as the great obstruction, neither entering itself into the 
kingdom, nor suffering those who would, to enter in. The name 
of God is blasphemed among the nations, by reason of the 



corruption of the professing church; the light that should have 
been in it, is become darkness, and great is that darkness! The 
church is confounded with the world, and the true saints are 
strangers in its society. It is no longer the pillar and ground of 
the truth, it is the hotbed of heresy, false doctrine, and 
corruption of every kind. What contrast can be more complete, 
than that between the church as Christ intended it to be, and the 
church as it now exists in the world! An end must come to all 
this ! Not only does the Word of God predict it, not only does 
our own sense of righteousness demand it, but the solemn 
analogies of history distinctly intimate it. Let the undeniable fact 
that past apostasies brought down the judgment they deserved, 
forewarn men what must be the end of the existing apostasy of 
the professing people of God. Babylon must fall! Great Babylon 
must come in remembrance before God, who will give unto her 
the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath, for her sins 
have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her 
iniquities. 



R135 : page 3 

THE REPULSIONS OF CHRISTIANITY. 

We dwell much upon the attractions of Christianity, but rarely 
stop to think that it may also have repulsions which are vitally 
necessary to its purity and permanence. If the church of Christ 
draws to herself that which she cannot assimilate to herself, her 
life is at once imperiled; for the body of believers must be at one 
with itself, though it be at war with the world. Its purity and its 
power depend first of all upon its unity. So that if perchance the 
church shall attract men without at the same time transforming 
them; if she shall attach them to her membership without 
assimilating them to her life, she has only weakened herself by 
her increase, and diminished herself by her additions. It is a hard 
and ungracious saying, then, to declare that the church of God in 
the world must be able to repel as well as to attract. 

NATURE IS AN AUSTERE TEACHER 

on this point. She has given to the rose its exquisite fragrance, 
but she has also armed it with thorns, so that while the delicious 
odors attract, these little sentinels stand guard with their drawn 
bayonets to defend the flower, which is endangered by its very 
beauty and sweetness. And the church of Christ has too much of 
loveliness and excellence to be trusted on earth without 
defences. Hypocrites will hide under her beautiful garments; 
covetous men will make gain of her godliness; pleasure-seekers 
will turn the grace of God, which she offers, into lasciviousness, 
and the avaricious will make merchandise out of her pearl of 
great price, unless her outward attractiveness is guarded by 



some counter defences. "The Bride of Christ," has the church 
with wonderful honor been named. And think you that the 
Heavenly Bridegroom would leave her in this world without 
endowing her with that stern chastity of holiness, and that native 
aversion to impurity which should be her defence against such 
as would betray her? "The king's daughter is all glorious within; 
her clothing is of wrought gold. So shall she be brought unto the 
king in raiment of needle- work. " But "as the lily among thorns 
so is my beloved among the daughters." The beauty of Christ's 
church is guarded by the asperity of her discipline. Her graces 
are hedged about with self-denial; her gifts are compassed with 
crosses and her triumphs are crowned with thorns. This is her 
only safety from such as might otherwise be won to her only to 
waste and dishonor her. 

SANCTITY OF LIFE AND CHARACTER 

which Christ requires in his church is her most powerful 
defense. It is her native chastity and constitutes her truest 
safeguard. Nothing is so severe as purity; nothing so effectually 
repels the familiarities of the wicked. We think to fence the fold 
of God with guards and restrictions so that the unsanctified and 
the unclean may not come in. This is a confession of weakness 
and frailty. The holy virgin of the Lord has been endowed with a 
native purity which is her true shield and defense. What means 
the Scripture when it commands us to stand, "having on the 
breastplate of righteousness?" Is it not an intimation of that 
which all experience verifies, that righteousness is the strongest 
repellant of wickedness and corruption which the soul can wear? 
You say that purity shrinks from contact with impurity; but 
remember that this aversion is mutual. Uncleanness recoils from 
purity; it sinks abashed from its presence as the wild beast 
cowers and quails before the imperial eye of a fearless man. I 
am not theorizing on this point. Ungodly men have confessed to 
a discomfort amounting almost to torture which the enforced 
association with the good and holy has produced. It is said that if 
we live in the same luxury, and dress with the same 
extravagance, and drift in the same tides of fashion; if we seek 
wealth with the same greed, and pursue pleasure with the same 
fondness, and love society with the same devotion; and if with 
all this we are popular preachers and eminent Christians, and 
zealous churchmen, we shall win multitudes to our faith. We 
shall have made men think well of themselves, by these cordial 
affiliations, which is the surest step to making them think well 
of us and of our church. And so we have won them. 

But alas ! what have we done? We have gained them by being 
ourselves "conformed to this world," instead of by their being 
"transformed by the renewing of their minds." We have brought 
them into the church by lowering its fellowship to them, instead 
of by raising them to its fellowship. 



The church that is holy is armed with a perpetual decree of 
excision against the hypocritical and profane and unclean. It 
says to the worldly and ungodly and impure: "Stand by thyself; 
come not near to me, for I am holier than thou"-words which 
are most improper for any man to speak with his lips; but most 
honorable for the church to express by her silent, unconscious 
example. Do I speak coldly and harshly of the relations of 
Christians to the world-as though it were their principal care to 
keep aloof from it, or if touching it by enforced association, to 
gather up their garments, lest they be defiled by its contact? God 
forbid that I should so think. "This man receiveth sinners and 
eateth with them, " is the blessed tribute which was paid to Jesus 
Christ, by his enemies. If we at all bear his character and do his 
work we shall be like him in this respect. 

Or take another exhortation of Scripture. "Let us put on the 
armor of light." Here light is made the Christian's shield— light 
whose beams search into every nook and corner of earth's 
impurity and yet contract no defilement; absorbing from 
everything the clear crystal water, but rejecting every particle of 
uncleanness— attracting always, but always rebuking. These, O 
church of God, are thy weapons of defence and conquest. 

Then again, we find in the doctrines and invitations of the 
gospel just that mingling of tenderness and sternness which is 
calculated to draw men from their sins instead of drawing them 
in their sins. "Come 

R135 : page 4 

unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give 
you rest," and, "If any man will come after me, let him deny 
himself and take up his cross and follow me. " What worldling is 
likely to run hastily after Christ in obedience to such a 
summons? What disciple is likely to be captured with such an 
invitation before his heart is really won? There is the check of 
rigid exaction in Christ's calls, as well as the allurements of 
gracious love; so that while men are drawn, they may not be 
hurried into an impulsive, premature profession. 

Have you thought to analyze the attraction of Christ's cross, to 
see how strongly this principle holds there?" "And I, if I be 
lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me," says Jesus. 
But what is it that is thus set forth as the central attraction of 
Christianity? The most repulsive object on which the natural 
man can look— 

R136:page4 

CHRIST CRUCIFIED: 

unto the Jews a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks 
foolishness." Draw men it will, as long as there is a sinner 
sighing for pardon, or a penitent seeking peace; draw men it 



will, when they have guilt to be cleansed, and burdens to be 
lifted, and stains to be washed. But it will draw no one through 
his aesthetic tastes, or his sense of the beautiful, or his poetic 
sentiment. There is a cross which can do so: that jeweled and 
exquisitely carved adornment which hangs upon the neck of 
beauty -that cross wrought with diamonds and robbed of its 
"offence," "Which Jews might kiss and infidels adore"- that can 
attract men without converting them. And who knows what evil 
it has done to men's souls on this account— this cross in which 
beauty culminates and ignominy utterly disappears. How it has 
filled eyes with its charms which have thereby been cut off from 
beholding "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the 
world;" how it has helped to substitute sentiment for faith, and 
poetic feeling for godly sorrow, and the crucifix for the 
Crucified. You see what the true cross of Christ did when Peter 
held it up on the day of Pentecost. It wrought intense conviction 
as it showed men what their sin had done. Its nails seemed to be 
plucked out and driven into the breasts of the multitude, till 
being "pricked in their hearts" they cried out: "Men and 
brethren, what shall we do?" And then it brought peace as 
quickly as it had brought contrition, when it was made known 
that this Crucified One had "borne their sins in his own body on 
the tree. " This is the attraction of that cross which is ordained to 
be the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth. 
It is an attraction which pierces while it draws, and wounds 
while it wins, and thus proves a worthy instrument of God's 
electing love. And we have seen in the history of the church 
what the spurious cross could do; as for example, when the 
monks went forth among our ancestors in Britain to win them to 
Christianity. The crucifix was lifted high; it was supplemented 
by all the pomps and splendors of an imposing ritual; chants 
were poured forth, censers were waved, bodies were prostrated, 
and thousands in a day gave in their allegiance to the new 
religion. But it was the senses that were won, not the hearts; and 
baptized pagans were brought into the church only to paganize 
Christianity. This is an illustration of the evil that always comes 
of magnifying the attractions of the cross while diminishing its 
wholesome repulsions. 

And the same law holds in regard to all the institutions of 
Christianity. Its baptism is described as a "burial with Christ," a 
"baptism into death; " so that he who submits to it must in spirit 
become like his Lord, "obedient unto death, even the death of 
the cross." Its sacrament of fellowship is "a communion of the 
blood of Christ," and "a communion of the body of Christ"- 
expressions from which the natural man has always revolted. Its 
worship is required to be "in spirit and in truth;" its music the 
"sacrifices of praise;" its gospel the "foolishness of preaching," 
its example before the world "in simplicity and godly sincerity. " 
Enough here surely to temper the inducements of Christianity! 
But this is evidently according to the divine plan-that the gospel 



should act upon men by an elective affinity, winning their faith 
but offending their pride; constraining the sincere by their love 
of Christ, but testing the superficial with the searching question 
of Christ, "Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, 
and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" 

My brethren, we are living in a time when men are 



BENT ON MAKING A LUXURY OF RELIGION. 

They demand that our doctrine shall be pleasant, our worship 
refined and artistic, our ordinances beautiful and alluring. No 
"bitter herbs" must be upon our tables as we keep our passover; 
no heavy crosses must be laid upon our shoulders as we follow 
Christ. 

Shall we "preach Christ crucified in a crucified style"— putting 
the nail through those refinements of reason that so often cover 
up the blood of expiation, and pressing the thorns into that 
intellectual pride which would soften propitiation to a moral 
influence? Shall we be content with that plainness in worship, 
and strive for that holiness of life, which can commend Christ 
while humbling us, and gain men's hearts though offending their 
tastes? Oh, ungracious calling, that we must displease the world 
when we might perchance delight it, and turn its impatient gaze 
upon its sins, when we might rivet its admiration on ourselves! 
But so long as good and evil are in the world, grace and severity 
must be in our lives and our doctrines. Wonderful is that high 
commendation of the Son of God— "Thou hast loved 
righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, 
hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows."— 
(Extracts from a sermon by Rev. A. J. Gordon, D.D., in 
Messiah's Herald.) 



R136:page4 



NUMBER SEVEN. 

(CONTINUED.) 



There are seven petitions in what is commonly called the 
"Lord's prayer"— more properly the prayer He taught His 
disciples. Matt. 6:9-13. This prayer, so brief and so expressive 
of human wants, is based on the sacred number which we have 
found underlying so many things in God's plan. Does not this 
fact show that the mind which invented this prayer, so to speak, 
knew that principle? It is to us an additional evidence of the 
inspiration of the Bible. Our Lord Jesus spoke from His own 
Divine fullness, "I am the Truth"— and hence in harmony with 
human wants. 



The central petition in this remarkable prayer is, "Give us this 
day our daily bread. " This doubtless includes both natural and 
spiritual bread. It is as certain that we need spiritual bread-the 
truth- constantly, in order that our spiritual life be sustained, as 
that we need natural bread daily to sustain our physical life. In 
this as in almost everything else in the Bible the natural 
represents the spiritual. Hence Jesus could say both, "I am the 
Truth" and "I am the true Bread which came down from 
heaven. " Truth is to the spiritual life as bread is to the natural 
life, hence: "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every 
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. " Matt. 4:4. (If, as 
some would have us believe, Jesus while here in the flesh, was 
nothing but a man, having left His Divine nature and life, will 
some one tell us how He could truly say I came down from 
heaven?) (If His flesh came down from heaven, then we all 
came down from heaven.) 

In a preceding chapter we saw that Joseph was a type of Christ 
as the bread-giver, and also that there were seven years of plenty 
followed by seven years of famine, or what would have been 
famine had it not been for the abundance in the storehouse. 
Since that was written it occurs to us that those two periods of 
seven express typically the relation between the Jewish and 
Gospel dispensations. This new thought— new to us— looks very 
clear and beautiful and tends to confirm our faith in the equality 
and parallelism of the Two Dispensations. 

Where do we get our spiritual food during the Gospel 
dispensation, but from the full storehouse of the Old Testament? 
The Jewish age was emphatically a period of direct 
communication from God. All the Old Testament was written 
during that age. The gospel in all its glorious fullness, is 
contained in the types and prophecies of the Old Testament. The 
New Testament is but the development and fulfillment of the 
Old. Christ and the Apostles quoted from and applied the 
teachings of the Old Testament. The New was in the Old as the 
kernel in the shell, or as the light is in the oil before it is burned. 
The burning is the process of bringing out the light. The work of 
the Holy Spirit as Christ's representative has been to bring out 
from the rich storehouse the treasures of wisdom and 
knowledge. Not all at once, nor all to one person, has the truth 
been unfolded, but to the church in its varied capacities, and as 
meat in due season. 

The want of these direct communications, and of visible angelic 
ministrations has made the Gospel age emphatically one of faith, 
and it would have been, like the second seven, a period of 
famine, had it not been for the full stores laid up for us by our 
Joseph-Christ the Bread Giver. How very wise His provisions, 
and how precious the constant, daily, supply! 

As human wants are expressed in seven petitions, so Christian 
character is comprehended in seven graces added to faith. 2 Pet. 



1:5-7. This language is addressed to Christians, as shown by the 
exhortation to add to faith. Faith is fundamental, and these 
graces are as the house of Wisdom built upon it. "Wisdom hath 
builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars." Prov. 
9:1. Pillars are not only for beauty but for strength. "If ye do 
these things ye shall never fall." "Without faith it is impossible 
to please Him: for he that cometh to God must believe that He 
is, and that He is the rewarder of them that diligently seek Him. " 
Heb. 11:6. Peter says to those who have faith, "Besides this, 
giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue, 
knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, 
patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly 
kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity." By comparing 
Paul's and Peter's statements above, it will be seen that diligently 
to seek 

R137 : page 4 

and come to God is to build this house of Wisdom, and so form 
a character like God, or grow up into Christ our Head in all 
things; and it will be seen also, by reading the context that the 
reward, of the abundant entrance is to him who thus builds. 

We have been surprised at times by a statement of a Christian 
brother, something like the following: "If you expect to gain the 
high calling on account of character you will be greatly 
disappointed. " This statement, we believe, has a worse meaning 
and influence than he who wrote it supposed. Had it been said, 
"If you expect to form such a character out of Christ you will be 
greatly deceived, " we would have said a hearty AMEN. But 
from Peter's statement and the general teaching of the New 
Testament, it is evident that the object of union with Christ is 
that we bring forth fruit unto holiness; and we may safely say 
that whoever expects to have a part in the high calling of God 
without character will be greatly disappointed. And we firmly 
believe that the writer above referred to would agree to this. 

Men are sometimes led to make statements in the heat of an 
argument, the legitimate effects of which they would reject. 
Their hearts in such cases are better than their statements. But 
when the doctrine of holiness is obscured by such statements, 
then the Lord gives a fullness of expression to this subject by 
His Spirit, enabling us to defend the truth and ourselves against 
the wiles of the Devil. And we are justified, for the sake of the 
flock of God who are in danger, in contending earnestly for the 
truth. 

See how emphatic Peter is upon this point. "If these things be in 
you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren 
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. " Verse 
8. As much as to say though we have the knowledge, yet lacking 
these we will be both barren and unfruitful. "He that lacketh 



these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten 
that he was purged from his old sins." Verse 9. 

The doctrine of the forgiveness of sin is made very prominent in 
the Bible, and is a strong motive to a holy life. He that is 
conscious of being forgiven much loveth much; hence the 
danger of forgetting it, and of falling into the idea that every one 
must suffer the full penalty for his own sins. The Psalmist says 
"Bless the Lord, O my soul! and forget not all His benefits. Who 
forgiveth all thine iniquities" &c. Psa. 103:2-3. The very first 
great benefit is 

R137:page5 

forgiveness of all our sins. According to Peter the effect of 
forgetting this is the neglect of the Christian graces. Hence he 
would put them in remembrance and says: "Wherefore the 
rather, brethren, give diligence [by adding these graces] to make 
your calling and election sure: for if ye do [add] these things ye 
shall never fall; for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you 
abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in 
remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be 
established in the present truth. " Peter did not consider it enough 
that his brethren should be established in the present truth, but in 
addition to that he would continually remind them of these 
things— the seven graces. We have here a good reason for our 
importunity on this theme, though unfortunately it may be 
distasteful to some. May the Spirit of truth help us to appreciate 
and to add these seven cardinal graces. 

J. H. P. 



R174:page5 

God the Director of Forces. 

JOSEPH COOK. 

The Scotch philosopher Beattie once went into his garden and 
drew in the soft earth the letters C. W. B. He sowed these 
furrows with garden cresses, smoothed the earth and went away. 
These were the initials of his little boy, who had never been 
taught anything concerning God, although he had learned to 
read. "Ten days later," says Beattie, "the child came running to 
me in amazement, and said, 'My name has grown in the 
garden.'" "Well, what if it has?" said the philosopher. "That is 
nothing," and turned away. But the child took his father by the 
hand, led him to the garden plat, and said, "What made those 
letters?" "I see very well," the father replied, "that the initials of 
your name have grown up here in the garden. That is an 
accident;" and he turned away again. The child followed him, 



took him by the hand, brought him back to the spot, and said 
very earnestly, "Someone must have planted the seeds to make 
the letters." "Do you really believe those letters cannot have 
been produced by chance?" said the father. "I believe somebody 
planted them, " said the son, who probably did not know what 
chance meant. "Very well," said the father; "look at your hands 
and your feet; consider your eyes and all your members. Are 
they not skillfully arranged? How did your hand get its shape?" 
The boy replied: "Somebody must have made my hands for me." 
"Who is that some one?" said the father. "I do not know," said 
the child. "Do you feel certain that somebody planted those 
seeds, and sure that some one made your hands?" "Yes," said the 
boy, with great earnestness. And then the father communicated 
to the child the name of the great Being by whom all things are 
made, and the boy never forgot the lesson, nor the circumstances 
which led to it. 

Now I bring the materialist, or any one who doubts the validity 
of the argument from design to prove the existence of a God 
possessing intelligence, to this garden plat. I say, "Will you 
explain for me the letters C. W. B?" The materialist replies: "I 
will do so, and can do so very easily, for the letters are explained 
by the powers in the seeds." "Let us hear your explanation in 
detail," I reply. "Very well," the materialist goes on to say: 
"there is a garden cress making the head of the letter C. Is not 
that garden cress accounted for by the seed from which it 
grows?" "Yes," I say. And so he goes on through the fifty 
garden cresses that make up the letter. He accounts for each one 
of the cresses, and then infers that he has accounted for the 
letter. I stop him and say, that to account for each one of those 
garden cresses, is not at all to account for the arrangement of the 
cresses into the shape of the C. Why did they not arrange 
themselves as a W, or a B, or in any form, or in no form at all? 
Here is the distinction between the existence of the forces of 
matter and the direction of those forces. 



R137:page5 



THE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

What do you understand to be the sin against the Holy Spirit? 
is a question frequently asked by Christians and others, of those 
who are teaching that, that is the only unpardonable sin. 

It is a question which has puzzled many Christians, and they 
have had fears lest they would commit it, or were already guilty. 

Jesus says: All manner of sins and blasphemy shall be forgiven 
unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Spirit shall not be 
forgiven unto men. 



And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall 
be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy 
Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world (age), 
neither in the world (age), to come. Matt. 12:31,32. 

Those who oppose the idea of a future age of probation; say the 
world to come was mentioned for the sake of emphasis. 

Why speak of it in connection with this one sin, if no sins shall 
be forgiven in a future age? 

The language would certainly be meaningless, were there not 
two ages, during which the spirit does a work for the human 
family, making it possible for some to commit the sin which 
shall never be forgiven, in each. The Spirit is choosing a bride 
for Christ, during the Gospel age; at the end the marriage is 
consummated; and during the millennial age, the Spirit and the 
bride say come. Rev. 22:17. 

The church as a chaste virgin espoused to Christ-2 Cor. 1 1 :2; is 
chosen through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth. 
2Thess. 2:13. 

Jesus says: "If ye love me, keep my commandments, and I will 
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he 
may abide with you forever; even the Spirit of truth; whom the 
world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth 
him; but ye know him, for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in 
you." 

"But the Comforter, which is the Holy Spirit, whom the Father 
will send in my name he shall teach you all things and bring all 
things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. 
John 14:15,16,17,26. But when the Comforter is come, whom I 
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, 
which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me. " John 
15-26. 

Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the 
heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that 
love him; but God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit; for 
the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.. ..So 
the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 
2:9-11. 

Again, Jesus says: Nevertheless, I tell you the truth: it is 
expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away the 
Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send 
him unto you. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth is come, he 
will guide you into all truth. John 16:7-13. These passages seem 
to teach, conclusively, that the Spirit began its work at 
Pentecost, where the Comforter came, after Jesus went away; 
consequently does its work in the two ages referred to; also that 
only those who have been made partakers of; and led, to some 
extent, at least, into truth, can commit the sin under 



consideration. Certainly it would seem that no one would claim 
that the Spirit has done so much for the great mass of the human 
race, during the gospel age, to say nothing of previous ages. 

But a question involving a forever, we should expect to find 
very plainly stated and so we read: "Leaving the principles of 
the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying 
again the foundation of repentance from dead works; and of 
faith toward God; of the doctrine of baptisms; and of 
resurrection of the dead; and eternal judgment. " (A broader 
foundation, surely, than most Christians build upon.) "And this 
will we do if God permit; for it is impossible for those who were 
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were 
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and tasted the good word of God, 
and the powers of the world to come; if they shall fall away, to 
renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to 
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open 
shame." Heb. 6:1-6. 

It is positively certain, that whatever of spiritual truth is received 
by anybody, it is by the help of the Spirit. "The natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are 
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they 
are spiritually discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14. 

Paul says further: "Wherefore I give you to understand, that no 
man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed; and 
that no man can say that Jesus is Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." 1 
Cor. 12:3. 

Of course he means that no man can say so understandingly, 
from a scriptural standpoint. As has already been shown, the 
purpose for which the Spirit was given, was to lead into truth; 
the object of truth is to sanctify-set apart for a holy purpose. 
And this is the class who could sin against the Holy Ghost. 

This conclusion is confirmed by another scripture, viz.: "If we 
sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the 
truth; there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins; but a certain 
fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery indignation; which 
shall devour the adversaries. He that despised— violated— Moses' 
law died without mercy under two or three witnesses; of how 
much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, 
who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted 
the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an 
unholy thing, and hath done despite -unto-insulted-the Spirit 
of Grace. Heb. 10:26-29. Peter says: For if after they have 
escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of 
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled 

R138:page5 

therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the 
beginning; for it had been better for them not to have known the 



way of righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from 
the holy commandment delivered unto them. But it is happened 
unto them according to the true proverb: "The dog is turned to 
his own vomit again;" and, "The sow that was washed to her 
wallowing in the mire." 2 Pet. 2:20-22. 

Or as Paul says: "A fearful looking for of judgment and fiery 
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries." 

These passages give us a part of the sorer (worse) punishment; 
but not all. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall 
remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the 
Father; and this is the promise that he hath promised us, even 
eternal life. 1 John 2:24,25. 

But if any "fall away," or count the blood of the covenant, 
wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, they will not 
receive the eternal life promised; but the opposite, eternal death: 
the second death. 

There is a sin which is unto death; I do not say that ye shall pray 
for it. 1 John 5:16. It has been shown that the "Gospel by 
Moses" shadows forth so many good things; which were to 
come; will it seem surprising if we shall find the unpardonable 
sin typified also? It may be found that the "jots and tittles of 
Israelitish history, as well as of the law and prophets, have a 
meaning, and point to something. " 

The tribe of Levi, chosen to do the work of the tabernacle of the 
wilderness, represents the gospel church, chosen for the service 
of the "true tabernacle. " The other tribes then must represent the 
nations to be blessed by the church, in a future age. 

We find in Num. 16, an account of Korah and others of the tribe 
of Levi; and a company of men of renown, of the children of 
Israel, murmuring against God's commands, given through His 
servant Moses, and a new thing happened to them, different 
from the common lot of men: "And the earth opened her mouth, 
and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that 
appertained unto Korah, and all their goods." Is it far-fetched, to 
claim that this was typical? Is not the "second death," which is 
the end of those who commit the "sin which is unto death," a 
different thing from that which happens to others? whether in 
this age, or in the age to come. They are twice dead, plucked by 
the root. Jude 12. 

B. W. K. 



R141 : page 5 

"TRUTH is always consistent with itself, and needs nothing to 
help it out. It is always near at hand, sits upon our lips, and is 
ready to drop out before we are aware. A lie is troublesome, and 
sets a man's invention on the rack, and one trick needs a great 



many more to make it good. It is building upon a false 
foundation, which is continually in need of props to shore it up. " 



R138 : page 6 



ASCEND, BELOVED. 

Ascend, beloved, to the joy, 

The festal day has come; 

Tonight the Lamb doth feast his own, 

Tonight he with his bride sits down, 

Tonight puts on the spousal crown, 

In the great upper room. 

Ascend, beloved, to the love, 
This is the day of days; 
Tonight the bridal song is sung, 
Tonight ten thousand harps are strung, 
In sympathy with heart and tongue, 
Unto the Lamb's high praise. 

The festal lamps are lighting now, 

In the great marriage hall; 

By angel hands the board is spread, 

By angel hands the sacred bread 

Is on the golden table laid; 

The King his own doth call. 

Long, long deferred, now come at last, 
The Lamb's glad wedding day; 
The guests are gathering at the feasts, 
The seats in heavenly order placed, 
The royal throne above the rest- 
How bright the new array. 

Sorrow and sighing are no more; 
The weeping hours are past, 
Tonight the waiting will be done, 
Tonight the wedding robe is on; 
The glory and the joy begin, 
The crown has come at last. 

Without, within, is light, is light; 
Around, above, is love, is love; 
We enter to go out no more; 
We raise the song unsung before, 
We doff the sackcloth that we wore, 
For all is joy and love. 

Ascend, beloved, to the life, 
Our days of death are o'er; 
Mortality has done its worst, 
The fetters of the tomb are burst, 



The last has now become the first, 
Forever, evermore. 

Ascend, beloved, to the feasts, 

Make haste, the day has come; 

Thrice blest are they the Lamb doth call 

To share the heavenly festivals 

In the new Salem's palace hall, 

Our everlasting home. 

[Selected for "Watch Tower"] 



R138 : page 6 



"OUR HIGH CALLING." 



We are called to be saints (holy ones) for without holiness no 
man shall see the Lord. Also, we must crucify the old man, that 
thus we might destroy the body of sin, and henceforth not serve 
sin. We that are baptized into Christ, are baptized into His 
death... and he that is dead is freed from sin. Even before we 
have succeeded in putting to death the flesh, if we do that we 
would not it is not us but sin that dwelleth in the flesh; for we 
delight in the law of God after the inner man; hence, when we 
have succeeded in crucifying the flesh and its lusts, we are freed 
from sin. The law of the mind wars with the law in our members 
until the former has completely overcome the latter. So long as 
we are carnally minded we are not subject to the law of God, 
and while we are in the flesh cannot please Him. If we live after 
the flesh, we shall die, but if we through the spirit, do mortify 
the deeds of the body, we shall live. By crucifying the flesh, we 
become dead with Christ. During the crucifying we suffer with 
Him, that we may be also glorified together; and if we do not 
share in the suffering, we have no right to expect to share in the 
glory. I know of nothing else that could be filling up the 
sufferings of Christ which are behind, except the crucifixion of 
the flesh, and many will find that to cut off desire, is more 
painful than to cut off a right hand, but though it be as dear, we 
should do so if we would follow in the footsteps of Christ, and 
overcome as He overcame, and thus have a place on the Throne 
and reign with Him. We are to present our bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable 
service. By the death of Christ we were justified to life natural. 
Now we have the chance of giving this life as a sacrifice and 
thus gaining spiritual life, and as the latter is so much higher 
than the former, it is only reasonable service for us to accept the 
conditions. 

It seems to be in God's plan that there are to be two lives, perfect 
natural and spiritual. The first we get by the death of Christ, the 
latter, by sacrificing or crucifying what he gave us; we cannot 



have both. We prize the former because the stepping stone to the 
latter, that is we value very highly that which Christ purchased 
for us by His death, because were it not that His death justifies 
us to the natural life, we would not have anything to give in 
order to gain the spiritual, but like Christ we are willing to give 
the natural to gain the other, for then we partake fully of the 
divine nature. This explains to us how many may be called and 
few chosen; also, narrow the way and few find it, and many 
shall strive to enter and not be able, because many do not crucify 
the flesh. We used to think that it was the degree of light that 
decided whether we belonged to the little flock or not, but now I 
am convinced that any who put to death the flesh, and presents 
their bodies living sacrifices and Holy, will receive the spiritual 
body and share the glory of their Lord, when the time comes and 
which we think is not far distant. 

Paul says: "That I may know Him and the power of His 
resurrection and the fellowship of His sufferings, being made 
conformable unto His death." He further says: "I am crucified 
with Christ, nevertheless I live: yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, 
and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of 
the son of God." Yes, friends, if we are truly Christ's, we have 
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, therefore, set 
your affections on things above... for ye are dead (to this world), 
and our life is hid with Christ in God. Forasmuch then as Christ 
hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with 
the same mind; for he that hath suffered in the flesh, hath ceased 
from sin. But rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings, that when His 

R139 : page 6 

glory shall be revealed ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. 
It is well worthy of notice that the glory is always associated 
with the sufferings. No cross, no crown, is true, for 'tis a faithful 
saying, that if we be dead with Him, we shall also live with 
Him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with Him. There are many 
apparently who do not see that we must die with Christ, if we 
would be one of the Bride Company. This fact we think is 
clearly brought out in Lev. 16, as has been shown by Bro. 
Russell, Aaron was to offer a bullock for a sin offering, this 
bullock was for himself (or instead of himself) and for his house 
and represents the offering made by Jesus when He gave himself 
for the church and became the Savior of His body. (Eph. 5:23- 
25.) The world does not seem to have been the object primarily 
in the death of Jesus, but the church. This we think is shown by 
the caution of Adam and Eve— Eve was taken from Adam and so 
the church is taken from Christ. The world of mankind came 
into existence from the uniting of those two, and when united 
God called their name Adam. It was in the two all died, and we 
can show that it will be in the Second Adam and Eve, all will be 
made alive. Paul in 1 Cor. 15 is speaking of death which came 



by man. But as Eve was the instrument direct in their death, she 
must be included in the statement, "as in Adam all die," and if 
she is, the next, "so in Christ shall all be made alive," must 
include the church. The first two God called Adam, and they 
brought death and misery on the human family. The second pair 
God calls "The Christ or seed" (Gal. 3:16-29) and they bring life 
and bless all nations of the earth. That the church is included in 
the sin offering which justifies the world to life is shown by the 
type. 

Aaron was to take two goats from out the congregation for a sin 
offering. He was to cast lots upon them, and the one on which 
the Lord's lot fell, he was to offer for a sin offering. With this 
goat he was to do just as he had done with the Bullock (verses 
15-27). This goat was the sin offering for the people. Now we 
will turn to Heb., and see by the connections, if we cannot prove 
beyond a doubt that the goat is just as sure a type of the church 
as the Bullock was of Jesus. In the 9th chapter, where Paul is 
speaking of the patterns and that the patterns of things in the 
heavens should be purified with these (that is by the blood of 
bulls and goats) but the heavenly things themselves with better 
sacrifices than these, it must here be noticed that the blood of the 
two animals is contrasted with the sacrifices, (plural) not 
sacrifice which seems to include Christ and church. 

But to be more sure let us look at Heb. 13:11. For the bodies of 
those beasts (plural) whose blood is brought into the sanctuary 
by the High Priest for sin, are burned without the camp. Let us 
go forth therefore, unto Him without the camp... then there 
would be two without the camp, (He and us) just as there were 
two beasts taken without. Certainly then those two beasts 
represent Christ and the church. Hence the age of sacrifice and 
suffering continues all through the Gospel Age. And not until 
the last member has ceased to suffer will the sufferings of Christ 
be completed. And so when the Prophets searched to know what 
manner of time the spirit of Christ which was in them did 
signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and 
the glory that should follow, they referred to both Head and 
Body-Christ and the Church, which is His body. Surely, 
friends, ours is a "high calling," and while we bear about in the 
body the dying of the Lord Jesus, it is that the life also of Jesus 
might be made manifest in our mortal flesh, for we which live 
are always delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, and though the 
outward man perish, the inward man is rewarded day by day, 
and our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for 
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Therefore, 
dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain 
from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul (life) and humble 
yourselves under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you 
in due time. And while here may we like the Captain of our 
salvation be made perfect through suffering and thus be able to 
sympathize with others and then when glorified together with 



Jesus we shall reign with Him as Kings and Priests to rule and 
bless the world. Yes a King shall reign in righteousness and 
Princes rule in judgment and Saviors shall come up on Mt. Zion, 
when the kingdom is the Lord's. 



A. D. J. 



R139 : page 6 

"IT IS WRITTEN AGAIN." 

These words of our Savior addressed to the tempter, suggest 
incidentally a very important lesson for all Christians. 

The devil in his assault upon Jesus had just quoted from the 
Scripture, saying, "It is written" thus and so. Very well replies 
Jesus, suppose it is written as you say— "It is written again;" i.e., 
the Scripture contains something else besides what you have 
quoted. From these words of our Lord, "It is written again," we 
gather a principle which ought to govern us in our doctrinal use 
of the Scripture. We cannot safely found either doctrine or 
practice on an isolated passage of Scripture. One passage cannot 
be interpreted independently of other Scripture. Here lies our 
only safety from the most monstrous errors. We must go, not to 
a solitary passage, but to the whole Scripture to learn what is the 
will of God. There is a unity in the Scripture like the unity of the 
human body. One part balances another. One part requires 
another part to complete it. One portion of Scripture needs to be 
explained by other portions. When a man or a sect quotes an 
isolated passage as the basis of some absurd doctrine or practice, 
our reply must be, "It is written again. " There are other 
Scriptures besides that which you have quoted and your 
Scripture must be interpreted in harmony with the remainder of 
the Scripture. You take a single passage of Scripture out of its 
connection, and give it a distorted use and claim that you have 
God's truth. But that is the way the devil uses Scripture. He 
would gladly acknowledge the authority of the Scripture if he 
could be permitted unrebuked to use it as he chose, and handle it 
deceitfully. Most of those errors which the church of Christ 
brands as heresies are simply one sided, exaggerated truths. 
They are torn out of their connection with counter truths. 



R173 : page 7 

Mr. Oliphant's Scheme for 
Colonizing Palestine. 

The London Times says: The Rev. George Nugee gave a 
lecture yesterday, May 13, at St. George's hall, on a proposal for 
colonizing Palestine by Jews, and referred incidentally to the 



existing establishment of a Jewish agricultural colony of fifty- 
five inhabitants near Jaffa. After some statistics relating to the 
modern Jews, who, he said, had shown themselves so alive to 
the advantages of education that they numbered half the 
university students, half the barristers, and more than half the 
merchants of Vienna, the lecturer proceeded to develop a plan 
which he said had met with the approval of many Jews and had 
been communicated by Mr. Lawrence Oliphant to the sultan, 
who received it favorably, for establishing a Jewish colony on 
the east bank of the Jordan. 

The plan was to purchase 1,500,000 acres, to introduce a 
European element into the government, and to settle colonies 
there, either of Jewish peasant farmers or of Jewish farmers 
employing the labor of the 

R173 : page 7 

indigenous fellah. The incursions of the Arabs were a danger, 
but might be bought off. He had sent a circular to Mr. Goschen, 
the new special envoy to Constantinople, who had expressed a 
deep interest in the scheme. The lecturer described the country 
which was to be settled as exceedingly fertile, and identified it 
with the land allotted to Reuben, Dan, and the half tribe of 
Manasseh. 



R173 : page 7 

An international convention of Hebrews from all portions of 
the world will be held at Paris, September 10, under the auspices 
of the Alliance Israelite Universelle. Matters affecting the 
interests of the whole Hebrew race will be discussed. Delegates 
have been appointed from ten countries, the Rev. Myer S. Israel, 
the Rev. H. S. Jacob, Myer Stern, William Seligman, and Simon 
Wolf being the delegates from the United States. Among the 
subjects to be discussed are the amelioration of the Hebrews in 
Palestine and the promotion of emigration to that country, the 
promotion of Hebrew literature and education, and the 
persecution of Hebrews in Roumania and elsewhere. 



R173 : page 7 

JERUSALEM seems to be growing in favor as a place of 
residence for foreigners who find their native countries 
uncomfortable. The foreign Jewish population has, according to 
Consul Moore, increased considerably of late years. That 
community is now estimated at 15,000, including native Jews, 
against 10,000 in 1873. The desire to avoid compulsory military 
service now enforced in most European countries, and the right 
of holding real property in Turkey, probably account for the 
increased immigration. The German colony at Jerusalem now 



numbers nearly 400 persons, that at Jaffa about 300. There is a 
third German settlement at Califfa of about equal number with 
the last mentioned. The settlers are mechanics, artificers, 
carriers, and agriculturists, and are fairly prosperous. 



R139:page7 



THE LOVE OF CHRIST. 



If ye keep my commandments ye shall abide in my love. (John 
15:10.) 

It is true that God loves the world because He is Love, rather 
than because there is aught in them to call forth His love. It is 
also true that Christians are loved by both Father and Son in a 
special way. "He that loveth me, shall be loved of my Father, 
and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him. " (John 
14:21.) 

God's love for the world is all-embracing and powerful. There is 
no being so obscure and sin43linded that he is not included in 
God's providence, even as he receives the free blessings of air 
and sunlight. That care will follow him until he is unshackled 
from sin and made to appreciate what has long been true: That 
none who will accept the responsibilities of life, are made in 
vain. The possession of life is pledge and proof that all are 
needed in God's economy. 

The Lord illustrates in His dealings with men, the Savior's 
commands to us. "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you; 
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that 
despitefully use you and persecute you, that ye may be the 
children of your Father which is in heaven. " (Matt. 5 :44.) Even 
some Christians overlook the fact that the Lord acts upon the 
principle that the best way to conquer an enemy is to convert 
him into a friend by kindness. They try to drive men to Christ to 
escape punishment. This is not the best motive, though it may 
sometimes succeed. The severest of all punishments was 
experienced by the Son of God to redeem men from the effects 
of sin. What heart can withstand the power of this truth when 
once realized? 

A person's idea concerning God is a fair index of his relation 
toward God. "To the pure He will show himself pure, and to the 
froward He will show himself froward. " (Ps. 18:26.) 

Seen from afar, the Lord is clothed with terror and awfulness. A 
near approach changes the terror into worship. Those who see 
the Lord (He is manifest to those who love him, John 14:21,23), 
yield to Him homage, and glory, and praise, because they cannot 
help it. Their hearts bow down before Him, as must the hearts of 



all who are once made to appreciate goodness, truth and 
perfectness. In turn He gives to them Fatherly love and pity. 

The love of Christ is as the love of a bride-groom. It is typified 
in the story of Isaac and Rebecca, and of Jacob, and Rachael, 
and prophetically told in the Songs of Solomon. 

The love of Christ is what unites Christians, for the marriage is 
the complete expression of union between not only Head and 
body but all the members of the body. 

His love rewards our faithfulness. We have His fellowship 
according 

R140:page7 

to the degree of progress we have made in the path of life. That 
pathway is indeed holy, for His footsteps have pressed it. When 
He putteth forth His own sheep He goeth before them. However 
varied the experience of Christians may be, the Lord knows all 
about it, for He has felt the same, "yet without sin." Herein is 
that saying of His true: "I know my sheep and am known of 
mine. " He knows us fully, we know Him in part, known as we 
progress, but when the journey is finished then shall we know 
even as also we are known. Let this truth encourage us to 
renewed effort, for each step in our progress will bring its own 
reward. 

"If ye love me, keep my commandments." This precept is for the 
beginner in the journey; and no Christian will ever get beyond it. 

L. A. A. 



R174 : page 7 



LET THEM GO DOWN. 



Coaxing the devil to support the Gospel is a modern devise. 
The primitive church knew nothing of it. When Paul was 
collecting funds to aid poor saints at Jerusalem, he used no fairs, 
festivals, "mum sociables," kissing games, or other sacrilegious 
snares, to accomplish his object. The Christians paid their own 
bills, and did not expect Satan to pay for the weapons which 
they used in warfare against him. When the devil does support a 
church, he does so in his own interest. He carries on his 
operations with a full knowledge of the fact that "a kingdom 
divided against itself cannot stand. " For every dollar paid out of 
his coffers to the church, he receives full value. Church 
partnership with the evil one never benefits the former, but 
always the latter. Hands off! 

Untold harm comes to the church by the use of even 
questionable measures to raise money for the support of God's 
work. It creates the impression on the minds of the world that 



the church is a kind of pauper, dependent for its existence on the 
community, that it is a sort of genteel beggar, which it is proper 
and fashionable to support; that it is an object of charity, or even 
pity and contempt, which is grateful for the tolerance of the 
people that let it live. The ungodly regard such churches as 
engaged in seeking money rather than souls, and exalting 
wealthy members more than poor saints. To stand before the 
world in this light is humiliating and degrading beyond 
expression. Such churches ought to be cleansed or closed, cured 
or killed. 

Churches that are doing the Lord's work, and are worth 
supporting can be supported without the use of questionable 
means. Others deserve no support. Let them go down.- Banner 
of Holiness. 



R140:page7 

ANSWERS TO 
CORRESPONDENTS' QUESTIONS. 

Ques.— Bro. Russell please give your opinion of Jesus' words: 
"Every branch in me that beareth not fruit He taketh away. " 
John 15. Can it be that a truly regenerated soul will be lost? 

Ans.-As expressed in article- "Restitution-for whom?"-in the 
August number, I believe that the Divine nature once imparted 
never ceases, except in those who commit the unpardonable sin 
counting "the blood of the covenant wherewith they were 
sanctified an unholy thing." Heb. 10:29. We answer your 
question then by saying: A truly degenerated soul who abides 
under the blood never will be lost. "His seed remaineth in him. " 
Jesus is the great Shepherd and says of his sheep: "I will give 
unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall 
any pluck them out of my hand." John 10:28. Vs. 26, shows that 
all who believe are his sheep. 

What shall we say then of the text "Every branch in me that 
beareth not fruit He taketh away." Simply this: Jesus is the vine 
[the head] we are the branches [the body]. The only "calling 
held out before us now, as we come to God is, to join the vine, 
become members of the "body of Christ"— to become members 
of His "bride"-the "little flock." There is no calling to be a part 
of the second-or "great company. " No, "ye are called in one 
hope of your calling" and all coming to God are reckoned at 
first, "Babes in Christ"- "Branches" in the vine. And it is God's 
will that they shall continue in Him and thus make their "calling 
and election sure. " But how many do not, "go on unto 
perfection. " How many would like to be branches in this vine, 
and yet, would not like to "crucify the flesh" and be made 
"conformable unto His death. " Jesus used the red juice of the 



grape [the fruit of the vine] to symbolize his death— his shed life 
["this is my blood"] and the fruit expected of every branch of the 
vine is the same, viz: a giving of your life for the world "being 
crucified with Christ"- "filling up the measure of the sufferings 
of Christ which are behind. " Those who do not bring forth this 
fruit, are cut off from membership with the body— the vine; and 
as touching our high calling in Christ Jesus [to be his bride] they 
become castaways. 

This was what Paul guarded against saying, "I keep my body 
under [crucified] lest after having "preached to others I myself, 
should become a castaway." 1 Cor. 9:27. He is talking about 
running the race for the great prize— an incorruptible crown. [See 
vs. 23-25.] He does not fear losing the Divine nature and eternal 
life, for again he says, "I am confident that he is able to keep 
that which I have committed unto him." [Life.] 2 Tim. 1:12. 

The cut off branch referred to is not one which has withered, of 
course the husbandman would trim such off or rather they cut 
themselves off; such dead branches would represent those who 
commit the unpardonable sin. But, the branches here mentioned 
as cut off are what Vine dressers call "suckers." They usually 
make the most show and seem to grow the fastest and are well 
covered with leaves [professions]. Alas how fitly does this 
picture many who starting as members of the body agreeing to 
"take up their cross and follow" the head, make only 
professions, and never bear his fruit-self sacrifice to death. 

Oh, yes, the blood of sprinkling covers the entire household of 
faith, and they shall never perish if they abide under the blood 
and continue to trust in its sufficiency. If cut off from the body- 
bride— vine, they will be cast forth and will be burned "delivered 
over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh that the spirit [life] 
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." Their works shall be 
burned-they shall suffer loss of the glorious joint-heirship 

R140 : page 8 

of the bride, but themselves shall be saved. 1 Cor. 3:15. 

All having the new nature are children of God, for "the Spirit 
beareth witness with our spirit that we are the children of God. " 
But will all be heirs? No, only the first-born are heirs; "Christ 
(head and body) "the first-fruits; afterward they that are Christ's 
at his (parousia) presence. " Christ (head and body) "the first- 
born among many brethren" -the great company. All are 
brethren because begotten by the same Father-God, but not all 
first-born, therefore not all heirs. When they were called it was 
in this hope of their calling— viz. : that they should be "heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Christ," but there were conditions put 
upon them if they would be joint-heirs, viz. : "If so be that we 
suffer (death) with Him, that we may be also glorified together. " 
(Rom. 8:16,17.) 



To be a joint-heir with Jesus means a great deal. It means to 
share all the glory, and all the power, and to inherit all things. 
None but "the bride," "the overcomers" who suffer with him 
shall reign with him. Oh, ours is a high calling-a great prize, let 
us "so run that we may obtain. " 



Q.-Bro. R. we feel so deeply interested in the WATCH 
TOWER and its teachings that we think its monthly visits too far 
apart; would it not be advisable to make it a semi-monthly or a 
weekly at a corresponding advance in price? We should like it 
so, as it is almost the only "meat" some of us get. 

A. -We think it not advisable to change for three reasons: One 
is, that the present price, fifty cents a year, is quite beyond the 
means of many of the readers; Another reason is that to issue 
more frequently would necessitate a great deal of "clipping" and 
publishing of "little anecdotes" and "tales," a surfeit of which 
reading is easily attainable, from thousands of other papers, and 
our third and chief objection is, that we do not think that our 
readers can fully digest the mental and spiritual food put before 
them each month in less time than a month. Permit us to suggest 
that if you read each article thoroughly three times before going 
to another you would get fully three times as much nourishment 
from the paper. Then, too, it would be well to keep a "file" of 
the paper convenient and to re-examine and refresh your 
memory on subjects of previous issues. Careless reading may do 
for light subjects and anecdotes, but God's word and arguments 
drawn from its "deep things" require careful study. 

Q.-Your exposition of Rev. 15, "Song of Moses and the Lamb" 
in last No. is quite satisfactory, except that Moses' song was one 
of deliverance after Israel had left Egypt. I had supposed Egypt 
a type of earth and that we would sing that song after we had left 
earth. Can you explain this feature? 

A. -We understand that this song of deliverance will be sung by 
mankind in general during the Millennial age. But we sing it 
now, because we have now gotten the victory over the world 
(Egypt), and over "the beast and his image," etc., the bindings of 
human traditions and man made creeds, and are no longer in this 
condition of mental slavery to great ecclesiastical authorities. If 
you will notice, those who sing this song have gotten this very 
victory, vs. 2. That it is sung before the pouring out of the vials 
is evident from v. 6. In those vials is "filled up (completed) the 
wrath of God, " and we understand that those who get the victory 
over the beast, etc., are the ones "accounted worthy to escape all 
those things coming upon the world"-a "little flock." 



R140 : page 8 



OPTOMAI. 

The Greek word Optomai rendered, shall see, in Rev. 1:7.- 
"Every eye shall see him," and rendered, shall appear, in Heb. 
9:28 "To them that look for Him shall he appear a second time," 
does not always mean to see with the eye. It rather signifies 
attend and recognize. Illustrations of its meaning attend: The 
priests and elders answered Judas; "See {Optomai— attend) thou 
to that." Matt. 27:4. Again, Pilate said, "I am innocent of the 
blood of this just person; see (optomai— attend) ye to it." Vs. 24. 
Also the word look in Acts 18:15. 

The general signification of the word however, is recognize, as 
may be seen in the following illustrations viz: 

"There appeared (optomai) to him (Moses). ..an angel of the 
Lord in a flame of fire in a bush," and "he drew near to behold 
it." (Acts 7:30.) Moses did not see an angel but a flame, but 
receiving a command of the Lord from out the 

R141 : page 8 

flame, he (optomai) recognized it as the angel. Again, "The God 
of glory appeared (optomai) unto our father Abraham." Acts 7:2. 
From the fact that we are told that, "No man hath seen God at 
any time," we presume this scripture to mean, that God gave 
Abraham instruction in such a manner that he recognized his 
instruction as of the God of Glory. 

Again, Jesus said to Mary concerning Lazarus' resurrection, 
"Said I not that thou shouldst see (optomai) the glory of God? 
John 1 1:40. Mary's eyes saw no glory but she did see Lazarus 
raised, and in the power thus displayed she recognized the glory 
of God. 

Again "All flesh shall see (optomai -recognize) the salvation of 
God." Luke 3:6. In the light of these illustrations of the use of 
the word we can realize that there may be but little seeing of The 
Christ on the part of the world with the eye. See how similar is 
the last illustration with the first text quoted— "every eye" and 
"all flesh" shall recognize Him as the salvation of God. 



R141 : page 8 



THE ORACLE OF MESSIAH. 

Isaiah 52:13-53:12. Connection and structure by John Brown, 
D.D. Text by various eminent translators. 



OPENING PROCLAMATION OF JEHOVAH. 

"Behold, my servant shall prosper; he shall be raised aloft, and 
magnified, and very highly exalted. "-Lowth. 



"As now many are astonished before him (so disfigured in his 
aspect before men, and his figure before the children of men) so 
shall many nations exult in him; kings shall close their mouths 
before him: for what had not been related to them, shall they 
see; and understand what they had never heard. "-Gesenius. 

THE COMPLAINT OF THE PRIMITIVE 
EVANGELISTS. 

"Who hath believed what we have understood by hearing? 
Who perceives what the arm of Jehovah is preparing?"- 
Rosenmuller. 

STATEMENT AND PROFESSION 
OF THE JEWISH CONVERTS. 

"He hath grown up as a twig before him, as a shoot out of dry 
ground. He had no form nor beauty. We looked at him, but there 
was no fair appearance that we should be desirous of him. "— 
Rosenmuller. 

"Despised and neglected by men, a man of sorrows and familiar 
with sufferings, and like one who hideth his face from us [to 
bury his griefs in seclusion]; disdained; and we gave him no 
attention. "-Pye Smith. 

"But it was our griefs he bare, it was our sorrows he carried. We, 
indeed, accounted him smitten; stricken by God, and afflicted. "- 
-Henderson. 

"But he was wounded for our transgressions; was smitten for our 
iniquities; the chastisement, by which our peace is effected, was 
laid upon him; and by his bruises we are healed. "-Lowth 

"All we, like sheep, have gone astray; we have turned each to 
his own way; but Jehovah hath inflicted upon him the 
punishment of us all. He was severely afflicted, yet he submitted 
himself, and opened not his mouth. As a lamb that is led to the 
slaughter, or as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he 
opened not his mouth."— Henderson. 

"By an oppressive judgment he was taken away— the men of his 
age who shall describe?"— Brown. 

"For he was cut off from the land of the living; on account of the 
transgression of my people was he smitten."— Henderson. 

"A grave is assigned him with the wicked; but his tomb is a rich 
man's: for he hath done no injustice, and no guile is in his 
mouth. But Jehovah is pleased to crush him with sufferings ! If 
he will offer himself a sacrifice for sin, he shall see his posterity, 
he shall prolong his days, and the gracious purpose of Jehovah 
shall prosper in his hand."— Pye Smith. 



THE CLOSING PROCLAMATION OF JEHOVAH, 

CONFIRMATORY OF THE STATEMENT OF THE 

JEWISH CONVERTS. 

"The effects of his soul's pain he shall see, and shall be richly 
satisfied. By his knowledge my righteous servant shall make 
many righteous, and shall take away their iniquities. "-Pye 
Smith. 

"Therefore will I distribute to him the many for his portion; and 
the mighty people shall he share for his spoil: Because he 
poured out his soul unto death, and was numbered with the 
transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made 
intercession for the transgressors." -Lowth. 

W. I. M. 



R141 : page 8 

WHEN ELSE OR HOW ELSE? 

A sister writes that she did not like the application of the 
parable of the "wedding garment" in our last issue. To this sister 
and to any others who may feel so we wish to say, that the 
fulfillment of the parable referred to, seemed so marked and 
complete in every particular that we felt it to be our duty to call 
attention to it. Of all the parables which Jesus uttered is it not 
true, "I have told you before it come to pass that when it is come 
to pass ye might believe. " We have looked for years for a 
fulfillment of this parable the only one for which we had no 
satisfactory solution to offer. Now, we see it fulfilled in every 
particular-the laying aside of the robe of Christ's righteousness, 
and the foretold going into outer darkness denying the presence 
and all of the prophetic light which proves it. 

Notice too the time-just when the virgins are "going in to the 
wedding." Some already have been for some time in the guest 
chamber believing that the Bridegroom is present and are 
preparing their robes and waiting for the union. Tell us when 
else, or how else could it be fulfilled, if you can think of any 
other way and time? 

The WATCH TOWER desires to be a faithful servant of God 
and of "the household of faith." "Who then is a faithful and wise 
servant whom his Lord hath made ruler over his household to 
give them meat in due season. Blessed is that servant whom his 
Lord when he [Elthon]-has come— shall find so doing." Matt. 
24:46. 

(An exegesis of this scripture given in tract called "The object 
and manner of our Lord's return," pages 52 and 53-which see.) 
If our words were severe they were lovingly so, for we sought 



by calling attention to the outer-darkness of the parable to keep 
some from going blindly into it. 

Does not the thought of the fulfillment of this last to be fulfilled 
parable seem to bring us down very close to the time when the 
last wise virgin may come into the light, the door to the "high- 
calling" to be shut, the union, or marriage of bridegroom and 
bride be accomplished by our being changed from natural to 
spiritual bodies like unto Christ's glorious body, that being like 
Him we may see Him as He is? Oh glorious hope! The "chaste 
Virgin church" -"little flock" is said to "make herself ready. " 
Are you seeing to it that the robe of Christ's righteousness is 
clean and white "unspotted from the world. " "Without spot or 
wrinkle, or any such thing?" and are you doing all you can to 
help others to the same condition of readiness? This is the will 
of God concerning you. 



R141 : page 8 



Returned Home. 



We have returned, having spent very pleasantly and we hope 
profitably two weeks with little bands of waiting ones. As usual 
we found them very loving ones, partakers to a marked degree 
of this element of the divine nature- love. We visited Elyria and 
Cleveland, Ohio, and Lapeer, Almont, Belle River, Brockway 
Centre, and Detroit, Mich. To most of them we were strangers in 
the flesh "unknown and yet well known," for we had all drank of 
the water from the spiritual Rock— Christ. We want to visit all 
the dear flock that we may know them and will be ready for 
another trip during October. 



page 8 



Bro. A. D. Jones. 



Will be in the vicinity of New York City and Philadelphia 
during September. If any living in this direction desire him to 
give a series of discourses on The object, manner, etc., of the 
return of our Lord, he will take pleasure in serving you. Neither 
pay, nor traveling expenses asked. This is true of all our 
preaching brethren associated with the WATCH TOWER. We 
leave money matters entirely with Him who says, "All the gold 
and silver of the mountains are mine and the cattle upon a 
thousand hills." Address immediately A. D. Jones, Pittsburgh, 
Pa. 


