805,401 Share in Proclaiming God’s Kingdom!
All Looking Forward to 1959 Assemblies
WHAT a thrilling report! 805,401 persons in all parts of the world unitedly shared during this past December in publicly announcing that God’s kingdom rules and that it is the only hope for mankind. That means that 88,313 more shared in the ministry during that one month than the average number reporting during the 1958 service year, yes, even more than any peak number ever before reported! Reports from 110 lands show that they reached at least a 10-percent increase in the number of those sharing in the ministry, and the combined report for the world shows over a 12-percent increase! What joy this report brings to everyone interested in the advance of pure worship!
December was the month when world-wide distribution of the Resolution adopted at the Divine Will International Assembly began. There were 70,000,000 copies to be put into the hands of the people, pointing out the reason for the present appalling world conditions and drawing the attention of all men to the Kingdom of God. What a demonstration of the unity and zeal of the New World society of Jehovah’s witnesses that December report reflects!
It is also a pleasure to note that throughout the world during the same month Jehovah’s witnesses conducted 576,012 home Bible studies each week with individuals and families, lovingly assisting them to come to an accurate knowledge of the truths in the Bible. This represents a tremendous increase over the report for last year. In fact, from the beginning of September to the end of December 554 new home Bible studies were established each day, on an average. These were cared for in addition to the thousands already in operation.
It is clearly evident to persons of good will that Jehovah’s witnesses are the ones who follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus by preaching publicly and in the homes of the people, directing their attention to God’s kingdom. And as they realize it, they say, as long ago foretold: “We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.”—Zech. 8:23, AS.
1959 ASSEMBLIES
For the blessing of all these active ministers and the thousands with whom they are studying the Bible and all other persons who are of good will toward Jehovah God and his new world of righteousness, the Society has arranged for a series of district assemblies worldwide during the summer of 1959. The Awake Ministers District Assemblies of Jehovah’s Witnesses will provide a four-day program, beginning Thursday, with a talk at about two o’clock, and continuing in its various features until 5:45 p.m. Sunday. The first three mornings will be devoted to the field ministry; afternoons and evenings and Sunday morning and afternoon will be devoted to assembly sessions. In most cases the baptism will be Saturday morning.
For your convenience in making necessary vacation plans the dates and locations of the assemblies are given below. The same program will be presented at each assembly. Select the one you plan to attend, and make your vacation arrangements now. Do not miss even one day of this Awake Ministers District Assembly. Additionally, be of assistance where you can to see that everyone associated with your congregation and all persons of good will with whom you study have a way to get to the assembly. Now is the time when it is urgent for each one to stay awake, benefiting from every provision made to stay spiritually strong and active as faithful servants of Jehovah God.
Assembly Dates and Locations
JUNE 4-7: San Diego, Calif., Del Mar Fairground Grandstand.
JUNE 18-21. Tampa, Fla., Plant Field, Fairground.
JUNE 25-28: Des Moines, Iowa, Fairground Grandstand; Stockton, Calif., Fairground Grandstand; Philadelphia, Pa., Convention Hall.
JULY 9-12: Eugene, Oreg., Fairground Grandstand: Evansville, Ind., Roberts Municipal Stadium; Flint, Mich., I.M.A. Auditorium, Fresno, Calif., Fairground Grandstand; Jackson, Miss., Fairground New Exhibit Buildings.
JULY 16-19: Albuquerque N. Mex., Albuquerque Civic Auditorium; Cincinnati, Ohio, Cincinnati Gardens; Rapid City, S. Dak., Fairground Grandstand.
JULY 23-26: Boise, Idaho, Borah High School; Chattanooga, Tenn., Engel Stadium; Rochester, N. Y., War Memorial Auditorium.
AUG. 6-9: San Jose, Calif., Fairground Grandstand; Wichita, Kans., Municipal Forum Building.
AUG. 13-16. Charlotte, N. Car., Charlotte Coliseum; Providence, R. I., Rhode Island Auditorium; Tacoma, Wash., College of Puget Sound Memorial Field House.
AUG. 20-23: Corpus Christi, Tex., Memorial Coliseum.
Canada
JULY 9-12: Winnipeg, Man., The Arena.
JULY 23-26. Ottawa, Ont., Lansdowne Park.
AUG. 13-16: Halifax, N. S., The Forum.
AUG. 20-23. Saskatoon, Sask., The Arena Rink.
AUG. 27-30: Calgary, Alta., Exhibition Grounds.
SEPT. 3-6 New Westminster, B. C., Queens Park.
Great Britain
Assemblies will be held at Belfast, Dundee, Middlesbrough and three other cities to be announced later.
(Rooming information will be announced later; please do not write to the assembly auditorium.)

