Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
March is the third month of the Watchtower campaign. Jehovah’s witnesses everywhere will continue to offer this vital magazine to persons of good will at $1 for a year’s subscription, giving three free Bible booklets to each new subscriber. Encourage your friends and neighbors to subscribe for The Watchtower; it will help them to learn how to gain life in God’s new world. For further instructions on how you may share, go to the nearest Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses.
OBSERVE THE LORD’S EVENING MEAL
“This do in remembrance of me,” said Jesus as he instituted the celebration commemorating his death. This year the date to observe the Lord’s evening meal, or the Memorial of his death, is March 23, after 6 p.m. All persons of good will are invited to be present with Jehovah’s witnesses when they assemble at their local meeting places in obedience to the command of the Lord Jesus to observe this most important occasion. Following a discourse on the Lord’s evening meal, the bread and the wine will be passed separately, after Jehovah’s blessing has been asked upon each emblem. In conclusion all will be invited to share in special weekend field service to spread the Kingdom message. Congregations should make a diligent effort to help all good-will persons to be present at the Lord’s evening meal. If any of our readers do not know where the meetings in their vicinity are held, write to this office for information.
ISAIAH, JEREMIAH AND LAMENTATIONS
The newest addition to the popular New World Translation is Volume IV of the Hebrew Scriptures containing the inspired message of Isaiah and Jeremiah as well as the book of Lamentations. Never before have the thrilling prophecies of these outstanding Bible books been read with such keen enjoyment by English-speaking people. Because of their deep significance to us in their application to our day, you will thoroughly appreciate this volume as an important part of your regular reading program. Send $1 today for your copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 26: Keeping Strict Watch on How We Walk. Page 165.
May 3: Helpers Toward Walking Wisely. Page 172.

