VOL. XVI. JUNE 15, 1895. No. 12. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: Missionary Envelopes 138 

The Work at Home and Abroad 138 

Views from the Tower 139 

Whose Glory is in their Shame 140 

St. Paul's Earnest Desire 142 

Secret and Beneficial Societies 143 

Bible Study: Our Lord's Ascension 145 

Bible Study: Review 146 

Bible Study: The Ten Commandments 147 

Into his Marvelous Light. (Letters.) 147 

page 138 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

We are placing an order for another lot of our usual Missionary 
Envelopes, and make the proposition that any who can use 5000, can 
have them at less than half the usual cost,— with their card printed at 
the corner. This is to induce a very general circulation of this tract 
envelope. Order at once. 



R1825 : page 138 

THE WORK AT HOME. 

The colporteur work of late is encouraging. The older colporteurs 
are succeeding better than for some time; and several new ones have 
started recently. We are at present giving special attention to New 
England and the Pacific and Southern states. "Pray ye the Lord of 
the harvest that he will send forth more laborers into his vineyard." 

The Lord seems willing to make use of every modern invention 
for spreading the truth. Brother and Sister Bell who had hoped ere 
this to be in the colporteur work and who to this end have been trying, 
but without success, to sell their prune ranch on the Pacific coast, concluded 
that they must serve in some manner and at once. Bro. Bell 
assured us that he, by God's grace, possessed the eight qualifications 
mentioned in the Oct. 15, '94 TOWER, and that he continually strives 



to abound in those graces of the spirit. He received of the Society 
a Letter of Introduction, and at once began to visit and, so far as 
possible, to help the Church in the vicinity of his own home. On Christmas 
last he and his wife received bicycles as presents from their relatives, 
and they at once concluded that these should be made to serve the truth 
also. They have extended the range of their ministry and when last 
heard from were 300 miles from home encouraging the Lord's people 
and being encouraged by them. Thus the bicycle has been yoked in 
as a servant to the "good tidings of great joy." 

Several brethren with Letters of Introduction are doing good service, 
some giving spare time from their business as commercial travelers, 
some from stores, etc., and Bro. McPhail giving his entire time. Letters 
received show that the Lord's flock is being refreshed by these agencies. 
We here remark that brethren and sisters desirous of symbolizing their 
consecration, the immersion of their wills into the will of Christ, by 
water immersion, can be served by any of these Brethren when they 
come your way. 

Let the love and sympathy and prayers of God's people everywhere 
embrace and support these dear co-laborers; and forget not those of less 
favorable opportunities who are not ashamed of the Lord and his Word, 
but daily confess the truth, as they can,— by their means, their words, 
their example and by tracts, letters, etc. 



PROGRESS OF THE WORK ABROAD. 

Brother Joseph Winter has for some time been at work colporteuring 
MILLENNIAL DAWN amongst people of his own nation— Denmark. 
He is meeting with fair success and is now much encouraged by one of 
his converts joining him in colporteuring. May the Lord continue to 
bless and use them. 

Brother and Sister Westall have just started for England to engage 
in the "harvest" work there— colporteuring MILLENNIAL DAWN. A 
great work should be possible in Great Britain, and for some time we 
have been watching to see whom the Lord would esteem worthy, putting 
them into the work. (1 Tim. 1:12.) The Tract Society sends 
these two forth with hope-prayers that they may make full proof of their 
ministry to the praise of his glory who hath called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light. May they be faithful and be greatly blessed. 

Brother Oleszynski, a Polander who received the truth into a good 
and honest heart some three years ago, has gone to his native land to 
search out consecrated ones to preach to them the grand gospel of ransom, 
restitution and the high calling. He has much of the spirit of the 
truth, and in the day of rejoicing will bring his "sheaves" with him. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. I., II. and III., English and German, 
VOL. I. in Swedish and Dano-Norwegian, at uniform prices, 25 cents per 
volume in paper covers, $1.00 per volume in embossed cloth binding. 



R1824:page 139 



VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



RELIGIOUS conventions have been numerous during 
the past month. The American Baptist 
Union met in Saratoga. The Presbyterian General 
Assembly and The United Presbyterian General Assembly 
met in Pittsburg, and The Unitarian Association in Boston. 
The latter alone seems to be suffering a serious decline. The 
time was when Unitarians had a monopoly of "liberalism" 
and general disbelief in the Bible, its miracles, etc., but it 
has lost this distinctiveness; not by reason of any reform 
on its part, but because ministers in so-called "Orthodox" 
churches have out-run them in disbelief of the Bible, its 
inspiration, its miracles and its doctrines. 

As for the Baptists, they are in great danger of losing 
their liberty and coming into bondage to their Ministerial 
Associations which, anxious for power, are drawing the 
cords tighter and tighter about their confiding lambs and 
sheep. Increase of wealth among Baptists in the large 
cities of the North is an important factor in the binding 
process. The poorer Baptist churches and their ministers 
are finding union more and more desirable. Baptists have 
been among the most firm defenders of the Bible: indeed, 
denying, as they do, all church authority, they have nothing 
else than the Bible as a foundation to their existence, 
and the denial of it would mean the destruction of every 
excuse for their existence as churches, and leave them merely 
moral and social clubs or societies. Nevertheless, among 
Baptists, as well as among the organized denominations, disbelief 
in the inspiration of the Bible and in the very 
foundation of Christian doctrine— that the death of Christ 
at Calvary was man's ransom-price— is spreading rapidly, 
especially among the ministers. 

The U.P. Assembly received very warmly a committee 
from the Presbyterian Assembly, and heard and applauded 
their addresses, which were to the effect that they hold 
much of doctrine, history and practice in common, and 
little at variance, and that the two denominations should 
become one, etc. They took steps looking to the control 
of U.P. Theological Seminaries, fearing a difficulty similar 
to that between the Presbyterian body and Union Seminary 
of Briggs fame. Evidently their hearts are failing 
them for fear as they see other quarters of the ecclesiastical 
heavens being shaken. 

The Presbyterian Assembly decided that the graduates 
of Union Theological Seminary shall not be ordained as 
Presbyterian ministers. This seemed to many a bold, courageous 
course in defense of the Bible; but when all the facts 
are recognized, it appears very much less. It has taken cognizance 
of Prof. Briggs' teachings, has examined him, has 
recognized his teaching as Infidelity of the most pernicious 
sort, has refused to longer recognize him as a teacher and 
suspended him as a minister until he shall have time to recant. 
He repudiates all ideas of recanting, and still holds 



and teaches his unbelief in the Bible, with increased energy. 
The other professors at Union Seminary have approved 
Dr. Briggs' course and teachings, and are still recognized 
as good enough to represent Presbyterianism. The Directors 
of the Seminary have disregarded the orders of the 
General Assembly, have endorsed Dr. Briggs and retained 
him; and yet some of those very Union Seminary Directors 
were specially honored by being reelected to places of 
special influence by this very Assembly. Why?— Because 
of the love of money. Mr. Briggs' friends are wealthy and 
influential, and the past year has shown that Missionary 
and other Societies of the denomination have fallen behind 
financially; and Presbyterianism as a whole, as well as many 
of its ministers individually, keeps close watch as to which 
side of every question brings the golden butter to its bread. 
In no other way can its action be accounted for in selecting 

R1824 : page 140 

to its Board of Home Missions three out-and-out Briggs 
sympathizers. (Infidels so far as the Bible is concerned- 
believers so far as morality is concerned.) One of these, Mr. 
J. Crosby Brown (a very rich man and eminent banker who 
is President of the Board of Directors of Union Seminary, 
and who has a son a Professor in that institution), has been 
made President of the Board of Home Missions. Another 
made a director is Dr. Hastings, the noted leader and 
President of Union Seminary, whose teachings are recognized 
as so bad that a man instructed there is so likely to 
be an out-and-out infidel, that no matter what he may confess 
or profess to believe he cannot be recognized as a 
Presbyterian minister. The Assembly is learning not to 
put much faith in the professions of men taught in Union. 
And, indeed, do they not know from their own consciences 
that not one minister in ten believes what he professes at 
the time of his ordination? Evidently it will not be long 
before the time-and-money-serving spirit will sweep all denominations 
into practical infidelity, as the Scriptures have 
pointed out to us. 



On Sunday, June 2, "Whitsunday," by a very general 
arrangement, sermons were preached in churches of various 
denominations favoring a union of all Protestant sects. 
The Pope, in an encyclical, offered Roman Catholics a 
premium to have them pray for the conversion of Protestants 
to the church of Rome. The premium offered was 
release from Purgatorial pains— so many days release for 
each prayer offered during the nine days preceding Whitsunday 
and for the eight days following it. 

But neither the motives for union nor the desired object 
are good, reckoned from the Bible standpoint. They 
are on a par with the Pope's claim to control the future as 
well as the present life. 

The same bigotry that during the "dark ages" established 



Inquisitions with their dungeons, and torture chambers 
furnished with every device that wicked hearts and 
brains and hands could prepare, would now fain grasp again 
the power lost in the Great Reformation. It would, no 

R1825 : page 140 

doubt, at first conduct itself more moderately than in the 
past; but minds trained to believe that God has prepared 
"hell" as a great bake-oven and that he is not only sweeping 
his creatures into it by the million, but that he has 
pleasure in so doing,— that he made that "hell" for those 
creatures and those creatures (foreknowingly) for that hell, 
are wholly unfit to be trusted with power over their fellows. 
They are sure to be influenced by their perverted ideas of 
God's methods to perhaps send heretics a little sooner to 
the burning. The evil is only intensified by adding to 
these errors the superstition that the pope carries the keys 
of hell and purgatory (and delegates that power to priests), 
and controls the future destiny of fellow creatures, many of 
whom, thank God, are much better every way than himself. 

Here is the premium for prayers referred to above, the 
words of the man who claims to be infallible, unerring, the 
italics and explanatory words in brackets being ours:— 

"To all who, for nine consecutive days before Pentecost, 
either publicly or privately, recite some special prayers 
to the Holy Spirit, we grant on each of those an indulgence 
of seven years and seven quadrgenes [40 days]; and a 
plenary [full, complete] indulgence [from any and all sins 
that he may commit] on any one of these days, or on the 
feast of Pentecost itself, or on any day of the following 
octave, provided, having confessed their sins and received 
absolution and holy communion, they pray God, according 
to the intention which we have above expressed. 

"We further grant that those who desire to repeat for 
the eight days following Pentecost upon the same conditions 
may gain both of the above indulgences. These indulgences 
may be applied to the souls [of the dead, already] 
in purgatory." 



The Rev. Thos. Dixon (Baptist), on May 26, preaching 
in New York City, declared that Christianity is a failure 
in that city and had been repudiated by the spirit of Christ. 
He is reported by the N.Y. World to have said:— 

"The Baptist denomination in this city owns $4,000,000 
worth of property, and, although within the last twenty 
years 15,000 children have been born into that faith, they 
have in that time lost 2,000 members. The combined 
wealth of the Baptist, Presbyterian and Methodist churches 
here is $16,000,000. There are in those churches the 
brainiest men of the age, and yet they are not holding their 
own. They are a curse, because they are only maintaining 
the traditions of a dead past." 



R1825 :page 140 

WHOSE GLORY IS IN THEIR SHAME. 



"Out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee." 

HOW gradually people may drift away from their own 
landmarks is nowhere better illustrated than in 
that very prosperous denomination known as Episcopal 
Methodists. Its founder, John Wesley, an Episcopal clergyman, 
realized that the common people were being neglected 
religiously, and, prompted (we believe) by the best of motives, 
started the movement which is now world-wide in its influence, 
and which in these United States numerically and 
otherwise is the strongest of all Protestant denominations. 

But prosperity has made Methodists proud, and has 
largely killed the spirit which gave birth to the organization. 
It is so changed to-day that its founder would not recognize 
it, and if Mr. Wesley or the Lord Jesus were to appear 
again and teach the same things in the same manner as of 
old, neither would be acceptable— neither would be allowed 
to preach a second sermon in any popular M.E. Church of 
any large city. We have evidence from Methodist sources 
on this subject which we will present below. 

We learned recently that a new M.E. Church in Allegheny, 
which is completing a fine church-building about six 
blocks from our office, to be known as the "Calvary M.E. 
Church," had decided that in order not to encourage the 

R1825 : page 141 

poor it would rent no sittings to servants. At first we 

could scarcely credit the testimony, but were finally convinced 

that it must be the truth; for even a worse expression 

of the same spirit manifested itself in the North 

Avenue M.E. church, two blocks from our office, on the 

same street. In the latter church a spirit of rivalry with 

the former had sprung up; and, as a result, a meeting was 

called to decide whether or not they would best dismiss 

their present pastor, Mr. Story. At that meeting the astounding 

charge against the pastor, plainly stated, was that he 

was bringing into the church too many of the poorer classes, 

R1826 :page 141 

and that the wealthier people were consequently leaving for 
other churches. 

After considerable discussion, covering so far as we can 
learn about two weeks, it was decided to have Mr. Story remain. 
But Mr. Story, having learned that his stay is not the 
unanimous wish of the people, has very properly resigned. 

Following closely our knowledge of the above facts 



came the article which we reproduce below, by an M.E. 
minister, published in a leading Methodist journal— The 
Northwestern Christian Advocate— without one word of 
comment or criticism, and hence endorsed by it as the new 
standard of Methodism which it advocates. This abundantly 
proves that the spirit of Methodism in Allegheny is 
the claimed new spirit of Methodism everywhere. The 
writer so thoroughly draws the contrasts between present 
and past Methodism that comment from us is needless, except 
to say that in our view of matters they are boasting 
and glorying in their shame. 

Brother Compton, who sent us the clipping (formerly 
a Methodist), in the letter accompanying it says: "Nothing 
that I have ever read in the TOWER has so forcibly shown 
the decadence of the modern church as this complacent 
article by a 'Minister of the Gospel.'" Yes, the same 
principle, we fear, applies also to all other denominations 
to a greater or less extent. 

We give the article entire (the italics are Brother 
Compton's). 

"SOME FEATURES OF AMERICAN METHODISM. 



"The revival of religion in the eighteenth century under 
the leadership of the Wesleys and Whitefield purified 
the moral tone of the Anglo-Saxon race and put in operation 
new forces for the elevation of the unevangelized. 
Secular historians, both English and American, have united 
in crediting the movement originated by these remarkable 
men with much in modern church machinery and statement 
of doctrine which tends to spread and plant our civilization. 
The doctrine of 'free will' preached by them and 
their successors has, with the evolution of modern experiments 
in secular government, been one of the most popular 
dogmas engaging the thoughts of men. Among our American 
fore-fathers this doctrine was peculiarly contagious. 
Throwing off the yoke of kings, and disgusted with a nationalized 
and priest-ridden church, what could be more enchanting 
and more in harmony with their political aspirations 
than the doctrine that every man is free to make or 
mar his own destiny here and hereafter? 

"The doctrine of the 'new birth' upon which the 
Methodists insisted, and the preaching of which by Whitefield 
in New England was like the telling of a fresh and 
unheard story, likewise produced effects upon which the 
secular and even the unreligious looked with approbation. 
For this doctrine not only demanded a 'change of heart,' but 
also such a change in the daily life as to make the Methodist 
easily distinguished from the man of the world by his behavior. 
The great purpose for which the church existed was to 
'spread scriptural holiness over these lands.' This was the 
legend on her banner— with this war-cry she conquered. 

"Another reason for the phenomenal success of Methodism 
in this country is to be found in the fact that to its 



simple, popular service the common people were gladly 
welcomed. Only those who have been untrained in ritual 
can appreciate this apparently insignificant but really very 
important fact. To know that you may enter a church 
where you can take part in the service without the risk of 
displaying your ignorance of form and ceremonies is of 
greatest concern if you have no desire to make yourself 
conspicuous. Thus the plain, unstudied service of the early 
American Methodist church was exactly suited to the 
people who had but lately abandoned the pomp of Old 
World religions. Lawn sleeves, holy hats, diadems, crowns 
and robes were repugnant to their rough and simple tastes. 
The religion that taught them that they could make their 
appeals to the Almighty without an intermediator of any 
kind emphasized the dignity and greatness of their manhood 
and appealed to their love of independence. 

"The marked triumphs of this church may also be attributed 
in part to the fact that she had not then laid down 
the Master's whip of small cords. There was in those 
early days, from time to time, a cleansing of the church from 
pretenders and the unworthy which had a most wholesome 
effect, not only on the church itself, but also upon the surrounding 
community. For after the storms which often 
accompanied the 'turning out' of the faithless, the moral 
atmosphere of the whole neighborhood would be purified, 
and even the scoffer would see that church-membership 
meant something. 

"A factor also assisting in the success of which I write 
was the pure itinerancy of the ministry which then obtained. 
Without doubt there were heroes and moral giants in those 
days. The influence of a strong, manly man, possessed by 
the idea that here he had 'no continuing city,' making 
no provision for his old age, requiring no contract to secure 
his support or salary, denying himself the very things 
the people were most greedy to obtain, and flaming with a 
zeal that must soon consume him, must have been abiding 
and beneficent wherever it was felt. 

page 141 

"No mean part in achieving her commanding position 
in this country was played by the singing of the old-time 
Methodists. Serious, sensible words, full of doctrine, joined 
to tunes that still live and rule, there was in such singing 
not only a musical attraction, but a theological training 
whereby the people, uncouth though they might have been, 
were indoctrinated in the cardinal tenets of the church. 
The singing of a truth into the soul of child or man puts 
it there with a much more abiding power than can be found 
in any kindergarten or Quincy method of instruction. 
Thus, without debate, doctrines were fixed in the minds of 
children or of converts so that no subsequent controversy 
could shake them. 

"It remains now to show that 

R1826 :page 141 



THESE ELEMENTS OF SUCCESS HAVE BECOME ANTIQUATED, 
AND THAT A NEW STANDARD OF SUCCESS HAS BEEN SET 
UP IN THE METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH. 

"Let me not assume the role of boaster, but rather be 
the annalist of open facts, a reciter of recent history. So far 
as the standard of doctrines is concerned, there is no change 

R1826 : page 142 

in the position held by the church, but the tone and spirit 
which obtain in almost all her affairs show at once the 
presence of modern progress and light-giving innovations. 
The temper and complexion of this mighty church have so 
far changed that all who are interested in the religious welfare 
of America must study that change with no common concern. 

"The doctrine of the new birth— 'Ye must be born 
again'— remains intact, but modern progress has moved 
the church away from the old-time strictness that prevented 
many good people from entering her fold, because they 
could not subscribe to that doctrine, and because they never 
had what once was called 'experimental religion.' Now 
Universalists and Unitarians are often found in full fellowship 
bravely doing their duty. 

"The ministry of the present day, polished and cultured 
as it is in the leading churches, is too well bred to insist on 
'holiness,' as the fathers saw that grace, but preach that 
broader holiness that thinketh no evil even in a man not 
wholly sanctified. To espouse this doctrine as it was in 
the old narrow way would make one not altogether agreeable 
in the Chautauqua circles and Epworth leagues of the present. 

page 142 

"The old-time, simple service still lingers among the 
rural populations, but in those cultured circles, where correct 
tastes in music, art and literature obtain— among the 
city churches— in many instances an elaborate and elegant 
ritual takes the place of the voluntary and impetuous praying 
and shouting which once characterized the fathers. To 
challenge the desirability of this change is to question the 
superiority of culture to the uncouth and ill-bred. 

R1826 : page 142 

"When the church was in an experimental stage, it 
possibly might have been wise to be as strict as her leaders 
then were. There was little to be lost then. But now wise, 
discreet and prudent men refuse to hazard the welfare of a 
wealthy and influential church by a bigoted administration 
of the law, such as will offend the rich and intellectual. If 
the people are not flexible, the gospel surely is. The church 
was made to save men, not to turn them out and discourage 
them. So our broader and modern ideas have crowded out 
and overgrown the contracted and egotistical notion that 



we are better than other people, who should be excluded 
from our fellowship. 

page 142 

"The love-feast, with its dogmatic prejudices, and the 
class-meeting, which was to many minds almost as bad as 
the confessional, have been largely abandoned for Epworth 
leagues and Endeavor societies. 

R1826 : page 142 

"The present cultured ministry, more than ever in the 
history of the church, conforms to the Master's injunction 
to be 'wise as serpents and harmless as doves.' Who among 
them would have the folly of the old-time preachers to tell his 
richest official member who is rolling in luxury to sell all for 
God and humanity and take up his cross and follow Christ? 
He might go away sorrowing— the minister, I mean. 

"While evolution is the law, and progress the watchword, 
rashness and radicalism are ever to be deplored, and 
the modern Methodist minister is seldom guilty of either. 
The rude, rough preacher who used to accuse the God of 
love of being wrathful has stepped down and out to give 
place to his successor, who is careful in style, elegant in 
diction, and whose thoughts, emotions and sentiments are 
poetical and inoffensive. 

'"The time limit,' whereby a minister may remain in 
one charge five years, will be abandoned at the next General 
Conference in 1896. In the beginning he could serve 
one charge but six months; the time was afterward extended 
to one year, then to two years, then to three, and lately 
to five. But the ruling, cultured circles of the church see 
that if her social success and standing are to compare favorably 
with other churches, her pastorate must be fixed so that 
her strong preachers may become the centers of social and 
literary circles. For it must be remembered that the 
preacher's business is not now as it often was— to hold protracted 
meetings and be an evangelist. No one sees this 
more clearly than the preachers themselves. Great revivalists 
used to be the desirable preachers sought after by the 
churches, and at the annual conferences the preachers were 
wont to report the number of conversions during the year. 
Now, however, a less enthusiastic and eccentric idea rules 
people and priest alike. The greater churches desire those 
ministers that can feed the aesthetic nature, that can parry 
the blows of modern skepticism and attract the intellectual 
and polished, while at the annual conference the emphasized 
thing in the report of the preacher is his missionary collection. 
The modern Methodist preacher is an excellent collector 
of money, thereby entering the very heart of his people 
as he could not by any old-fashioned exhortation or appeal. 

"How great the lesson that has been so well learned by 
these leaders of Christian thought, viz., that the gospel 
should never offend the cultured and polite taste. To a 
church that can so flexibly conform to the times the gates of 



the future open wide with a cheery greeting. What more 
fitting motto can be found for her than the herald angels 
sang: 'Peace on earth, good will to men.'" 
—Rev. Chas. A. Crane. 
Danville, 111. 



R1827 :page 142 

ST. PAUL'S EARNEST DESIRE. 



"For me to live is [to live] for Christ, and to die, gain. But if to live 
in the flesh, this is to me a fruit of labor; and what I should choose I 
do not exactly know. I am indeed hard pressed by the two things 
(I have an earnest desire for the returning and being with 
Christ, since it is very much to be preferred); but to 
remain in the flesh is more requisite on your account. 
-Phil. 1:21-24, Diaglott translation. 

IT will be observed that the chief difference between the 
above and the common English version of this passage 
is the substitution of the word "return" for the word 
"depart." In justification of the use of the word "return" 
the translator in a footnote says:— 

"To analusai, the loosing again or the returning, being 
what Paul earnestly desired, could not be death or dissolution, 
as implied by the word depart in the common version, 
because it seemed a matter of indifference to him, which 
of the two— life or death— he should choose; but he longed 
for the analusai, which was a third thing, and very much 
to be preferred to either of the other two things alluded to. 
The word analusai occurs in Luke 12:36, and is there 
rendered return;— 'Be you like men waiting for their 
master, when he will return,' etc. Jesus had taught his 
disciples that he would come again, or return, John 14:3,18; 
thus, also, the angels said to them at his ascension, 
Acts 1:11. Paul believed this doctrine and taught it to 
others, and was looking for and waiting for the Savior from 
heaven, Phil. 3:20; 1 Thess. 1:10; 4:16,17, when... 
he would 'ever be with the Lord.'" 

An examination of the Greek word analusai shows 
that it is used in Greek literature by Plato in both ways— 

R1827 : page 143 

as signifying sometimes depart and sometimes return; but 
the word occurs only twice in the New Testament, here 
and in Luke 12:36. In the latter instance, as stated above, 
it is rendered "return," and manifestly could not be otherwise 
rendered and preserve the sense. In the case we are 
discussing (Phil. 1:23), we hold that it should be rendered 
return, for the very simple reason that, even when used to 
signify depart, it must carry with it the thought of depart 



again, to depart to a place where one had previously been. 
The Greek prefix ana in ana-lusai signifies again as our 
prefix re in return signifies again. Hence, if rendered depart, 
we would be obliged to add the thought re-depart or 
depart again. And this would spoil the matter as related 
to St. Paul; for he had never been with Christ in glory, 
and hence could not "depart again" to be with Christ there. 
But when we translate analusai "re-turning," and apply 
it to our Lord, every difficulty seems to be removed. 

Let us note the circumstances which gave rise to the expression. 
The Apostle had been for some time a prisoner 
at Rome, and while at times well treated by some of the 
Emperors, he was constantly liable to be put to death 
on some caprice. He wrote this Epistle in acknowledgment 
of a substantial gift from the Church at Philippi, and 
took the opportunity to tell them fully of his own condition, 
the progress of the Lord's work, etc., and to encourage 
them to steadfastness to the end. 

Since they would like to know his prospects for release, 
he tells them that enemies (seeing his liberty for two years, 
Acts 28:30) were explaining Christianity, hoping thereby 
to add affliction and perhaps death to his bonds. (Phil. 1:16-19.) 
But he realized the prayers of the Church on his 
behalf and expected that his trial before Nero would result 
in his deliverance,— his acquittal, or his sentence to death. 
Then he tells them that as to his own preferences it would 
be difficult for him to choose between life (with its sufferings) 
and death (with its rest from toil); but while he had 
no choice as between these two things possible, he had a 
longing, an intense desire for a thing he well knew was impossible, 
a thing which he knew, and had taught the Church, 
was a long way off (2 Thes. 2:1-8)— the returning of Christ 
and being with him. Then, leaving the impossible and returning 
to the possibilities, he assures them that he has a 
conviction that God has a work for him yet to do for the 
Church, and that he would be released. And although the 
Scriptures give no account of it, tradition declares that he 
was acquitted by Nero and had some five years of liberty 
and service before being rearrested and executed. 

It is worthy of note here that several other words are 
repeatedly used in the writings of both Paul and Luke when 
depart is manifestly meant. And it should be remembered 
that Luke was the Apostle's amanuensis, who traveled much 
with him and was accustomed to use words in the same sense. 

But if any yet contend for the word "depart," rather 
than "return," we submit the following. 

No doubt Paul would have desired, especially in view 
of his knowledge that the Lord's second coming could not 
occur soon, that he might depart to heaven or anywhere 
else in order to be with the Lord at once. But he knew 
that such a desire could not be granted in harmony with 
the divine plan, and hence, although it would have been 
his earnest desire, it did not enter into consideration as 
one of the possible things: he was still left in a strait of indecision 
as to his own preference of the two possible things 
—to live and serve the Church in suffering, or to die and 



rest from his labors— waiting "for that blessed hope, the 
glorious appearing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 
who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned 
like unto his glorious body." 



R1827 : page 143 

SECRET AND BENEFICIAL SOCIETIES. 



DEAR BROTHER:— I would like to have your opinion 
on the subject of life insurance. They are organizing 
lodges all around here— United Workmen, Knights 
of Pythias, Red Men, Masons, Odd Fellows, etc. They are 
working it just about like sectarianism in the churches. 
Would like to see an article in the TOWER on the subject. 
Yours in the love of the truth, W. E. KILLAM. 

OUR REPLY TO THE QUERY. 



In our judgment the majority of "secret societies" are 
merely beneficiary and have no secret schemes antagonistic 
to the general public welfare, the secret rites and ceremonies 
being merely "boys' play," occupying the time and attention 
of persons who have no greater aims than those which 
pertain to the present life. We note, however, that several 
Roman Catholic Societies seem to have schemes connected 
with the use of fire-arms, and are therefore to be classed as 
malevolent rather than benevolent. 

We note also that the Order of Free Masons, if judged 
by its past history, has some secret object or scheme, more 
than fraternity and financial aid in time of sickness or 
death. And, so far as we can judge, there is a certain 
amount of profane worship or mummery connected with 
the rites of this order and some others, which the members 
do not comprehend, but which, in many cases, serves to 
satisfy the cravings of the natural mind for worship, and 
thus hinders it from seeking the worship of God in spirit 
and in truth— through Christ, the only appointed Mediator 
and Grand Master. 

In proportion as such societies consume valuable time 
in foolish, senseless rites and ceremonies, and in substituting 
the worship of their officers, and the use of words and 
symbols which have no meaning to them, for the worship 
of God, in his appointed way— through Christ, and according 
to knowledge and the spirit of a sound mind— in that 
proportion these societies are grievous evils, regardless of the 

R1827 :page 144 

financial gains or losses connected with membership in them. 



But respecting those orders which are merely Mutual 
Insurance Societies, in which the members pay a certain 
weekly sum of money to their sick, and at death a larger 
sum to their families, we must concede that they represent 
a good principle. It is certainly in harmony with the 
golden rule to help our neighbor when he is in need. The 
only objection we see to this is, that it puts the matter on 
a business or selfish basis and thus destroys its benevolent 
features; for each one joins, not for the good he can do, 
but for the help he hopes to obtain for himself or his family. 

If, therefore, the matter be considered merely as a 
business arrangement, we can see no more wrong in joining 
such Mutual Benefit Societies than in taking out a policy 
in a regular Life or Accident Insurance Co., or insuring 
property in a Fire Insurance Co.— provided always that 
there be no confession of error or binding obligation required, 
contrary to the liberty wherewith Christ makes free. 
Wherever oaths of secrecy are demanded it is safe for God's 
people to touch not, taste not, handle not,— except as 
oaths are prescribed by public law, as before courts or in 
reference to documents for public record. In every other 
case the children of God will be blessed in obeying strictly 
the admonition,— Let your Yea be yea, and your Nay, 
nay; for "whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil." 
It is in connection with his description of the "last days" 
of this Gospel age that St. James cautions against all binding 
oaths, such as many Secret Societies demand.— Matt. 5:37; 
Jas. 5:12. 

We suggest, however, that, even as business concerns, 
many will be disappointed greatly by these Mutual Benefit 

R1828 : page 144 

Societies, in the near future. When the time of trouble 
shall have fully culminated, these Societies, as well as the 
great Life Insurance Companies and business in general, 
will all be paralyzed; and those leaning upon them will be 
sorely disappointed. The only ones who will be secure 
then will be those who have laid up treasures in heaven, 
where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt and where thieves 
do not break through and steal. All others, even the rich, 
will "weep and howl for the miseries" which shall come 
upon them." 

The present agitation for Societies and Unions, which 
is taking the world by storm, seems to be foretold in the 
Scriptures, and includes, we believe, not only Church 
organizations, but all the various organizations which tie 
men up together in bundles, to-day as never before. (See 
Isa. 8:12; Matt. 13:30.) These "bundles" or Societies 
may seem simple and harmless just now, but when the symbolic 
fire reaches them, when the great time of trouble shall 
have kindled the passions of the world in general, then it 
will be almost impossible to escape from these bundles. 
Pride will hold them together;— none will wish to show the 
"white feather" of cowardice;— none will wish to appear 
disloyal in the hour of trouble;— Societies will act en 



masse, and individuals will thus be led into positions which 
they never would take alone. Money also will be a factor. 
After having paid in considerable "dues," they will not feel 
disposed to lose that money;— especially when they see the 
cloud of trouble getting darker and nearer. Thus bound 
together they will suffer from the "burning," the distress, 
of the time of trouble, which God declares will be such as 
was not since there was a nation. 

Better far will those be who lean not upon Egypt 
(Ezek. 29:6,7— the world), for help, but who lean upon the 
Lord. The Lord will be their fortress in the day of trouble. 

Such societies, on selfish business principles, are 
foreign to the spirit of God's Church. In it, those who 
have this world's goods should be ready to assist the needy 
of the Lord's family, hoping for nothing again. And all 
who are members of the true Church whose names are 
written in heaven, all who have the spirit of the Head, will 
be willing and anxious to do good unto all men as they 
have opportunity, especially to the household of faith, 
who are not leaning upon earthly Societies, but who, instead 
of spending "dues" in that way, are using their 
means to serve the Lord, his truth and his people. 

Since we do not condemn Life Insurance Societies 
conducted upon business principles, even though we fear 
that they will be very insecure dependencies when the time 
of trouble shall have fully commenced, some one may ask, 
How are we to understand our Lord's words,— 

"TAKE NO THOUGHT FOR TO-MORROW." 



We are to understand these words in perfect harmony 
with the Apostle's words, "Provide things honest in the 
sight of all men," and "He that provideth not for his own 
[as he may be able] hath denied the faith and is worse 
than an infidel." Our Lord's words signify, Do not be 
weighed down with anxious care for to-morrow; but while 
seeking to know and to do God's will, trust in his providential 
care, which he has promised will cause all things to 
work together for good to them that love him supremely. 
It is as right for the husband to consider the future welfare 
of his wife, as for the Heavenly Bridegroom to provide for 
the Church (Eph. 5:25.) It is as proper for the earthly 
father to make provision for his children— especially in 
good training and fair education, as for the Heavenly 
Father to plan for and educate and prepare a future home 
for his children. (1 Cor. 2:9.) It is when parents attempt 
to become rich and to leave their children rich that 
they specially err. (1 Tim. 6:9,17,18; Mark 10:23,24.) 
They in attempting to contravene the law of God (that 
sinners learn to labor and to eat bread in sweat of face) 
work an injury to their children. But their error does not 
justify other parents in neglecting to give their children the 
best patrimony, an education, at least rudimentary, including 
religious and moral training. 



Those who leave their children such a legacy and the 
example of a noble, upright life of fellowship with God 
leave a bequest which the breaking of banks and insurance 
companies and all the terrible troubles of "the great day" 
will only make the more pricelessly valuable. 

So then our advice to God's consecrated people is,— 
"Trust in the Lord and do good, and verily thou shalt be 
fed." Use time and money in the Lord's service, and rely 
upon him to cause all things to work for your highest good. 



R1828 :page 145 

OUR LORD'S ASCENSION. 



-JUNE 23, LUKE 24:44-53.- 

Golden Text— "And they worshipped him, 
and returned to Jerusalem with great joy." 

WHILE all who are still true to the sure foundation 
of the Christian faith and have not been moved 
away from the hope of the gospel recognize the necessity 
of Christ's death as the payment of our ransom, and see 
in his resurrection the pledge of salvation to all them that 
believe, few seem to consider what was accomplished for us 
and also for himself by his ascension. Yet this was a feature 
of the divine plan as necessary to our salvation as were 
the sacrifice and the resurrection. 

This feature of the plan is clearly shown in the service 
of the typical tabernacle. It corresponds to the act of the 
high priest, Aaron, in entering the Most Holy with the 
blood of the atonement sacrifice and presenting it before 
the Mercy Seat together with the sweet incense which represented 
the human perfection of Christ.* As God said to 
Moses, referring to the Tabernacle, "See that thou make 
all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the 
mount," and required that the whole service of the Tabernacle 
should be performed with exactness according to the 
prescribed directions, so in the antitype every feature of 
the divine plan must be carried out in line with the type so 
carefully given. 

Our Lord's ascension was therefore, according to the 
type, an essential part of the divine plan. Nor was it arbitrarily 
indicated in the type: there was a necessity for it, 
else it would not have been expressed there. In referring 
to it before his death, Jesus said to his disciples, "I go to 
prepare a place for you, and if I go and prepare a place for 
you, I will come again and receive you unto myself, that 
where I am, there ye may be also."— John 14:2,3. 

If we inquire whither he went, we have his answer, 
"I go unto my Father." (John 14:12.) But why was it 
necessary that he should go away? Had he not finished 



the work of sacrifice? and could he not now have remained 

on earth for the personal direction and supervision of the 

work of the Gospel age? Granted that that work was the 

selection and the teaching, training and discipline of a 

people for his name, had he remained as the visible head of 

the Church would it not have been greatly to her advantage? 

Then all matters of faith and conduct could have had authoritative 

settlement; and the dissensions of "Christendom" 

would have been a thing unknown; and "that Man of Sin, 

whose coming was after the working of Satan, with all 

power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness 

of unrighteousness," could never have arisen: no 

blasphemous popes or others could then have lorded it 

over God's heritage. Oh, how blessed would it have been, 

seemingly, according to human judgment, had the Lord remained 

with his people after his resurrection! Why might 

it not have been so? Why was it necessary that he should 

go away and leave them apparently at the mercy of every 

wind of doctrine and of all the machinations of the powers 

of darkness to overcome them— by arts, temptations, allurements, 

deceptions and by persecutions in every conceivable 

form? 

Well, however it may appear or may have appeared to 
human judgment, the Lord himself said, "It is expedient 
for you that I go away." "But consider, "Lord, the disciples 
might have urged, "that the Church, as it increases in numbers, 
and as false teachers will surely arise among us, will 
greatly need a visible head to direct her course and to save 
her from endless divisions and discords. How can the 
Church remain one, as thou hast prayed (John 17:11), in 
the midst of the conflicting voices and influences that will 
arise?" But no, the early disciples asked no such questions: 
they were not so self-confident as the multitudes of 
professed Christians of later date, who seem to have concluded 
that, since the Lord had so unwisely ignored the 
subsequent conditions and necessities of the Church, they 
would select from their midst one upon whom they would 
confer the title, "the vicar of Jesus Christ," and consider 
him and his successors in office the visible heads of the 
Church, who should be considered by all as infallible authority 
in all matters of faith and conduct. 

Both the Church and the world are aware of the evil 
results of this heady philosophy, and of the monstrous 
usurpations of authority and power that have made both 



*See Lev. 16; also TABERNACLE SHADOWS, p.48,50. 

R1829 : page 145 

the church and the world to groan under the iron heel of 
oppression. And yet, strange as it may seem, though the 
folly of this measure has been so glaringly manifest, and the 
hated power of the false head of the Church has been cast 
off, again there is a great cry for his restoration to power 



and authority. The religious leaders of to-day are saying, 
We need and must have a visible head to reorganize and 
unify the divided hosts of "Christendom"— Christ's (?) 
kingdom;— and many are looking anxiously to the Papacy 
for that head. 

Nevertheless, we are of those who still believe that it 
was expedient for Christ to go away; and that, too, without 
leaving any visible head to represent him in office. It 
was expedient for various reasons; and those in view of all 
the seemingly adverse conditions that could, and that the 
Lord knew were sure to, arise; for he foretold the very 
things that were to come to pass— the coming of the Man 
of Sin, the false teachers, and plausible false doctrines and 
how they would prosper, and the persecutions of the saints 
through long and weary centuries, and the treading down 
of the truth and the prevalence and prosperity of error. 

His going away was expedient for the following 
reasons:— 

(1) As already intimated, in order that, in accordance 
with the pattern given us in the typical high priest, Aaron, 
in the service of the typical tabernacle, he, as our great 
High Priest, should enter into heaven, into the presence of 
God— the antitypical holy of holies— for us. To this the 
Apostle Paul refers, saying, "For Christ is not entered into 
the holy places made with hands [into the typical tabernacle, 
as did Aaron the typical high priest], which are 
figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear 
in the presence of God for us."— Heb. 9:24. 

If we would know what Christ our High Priest did for 
us after his ascension to the "most holy," to heaven itself, 
the presence of God, we have but to look back to the type 
which was made to illustrate it. There we see the high 
priest, after he had sacrificed the bullock which represented 
the humanity of Christ (while he himself then represented the 
new creature of the divine nature), entering the Most Holy 
with the blood of the bullock, and there presenting it before 
the mercy seat in the presence of the Shekinah glory; 

R1829 : page 146 

thus formally presenting to God the evidence of the typical 

sacrifice for the sins of the people, and so typically completing 

the work of atonement toward God. (See Lev. 16:6,14,17; 

Heb. 9:7.) And the Apostle in Heb. 9:7-14, 

shows that this work, thus typically accomplished by the 

typical high priest, was actually accomplished by Christ 

after his ascension to the Father, and that this formal presentation 

of the fact of his sacrifice for our redemption, 

was therefore a necessary part of the work of atonement, 

without which, according to the type (Lev. 16:2,3), 

his sacrifice would have availed nothing. It was only after 

the sacrifice had been made in exact conformity to the prescribed 

method, and after the evidence thereof (the blood) 

had been duly presented in the Most Holy, that the blessing 

of God could be granted to those for whom the atonement 

was made. Every part of the prescribed work was, in 



the antitype, as in the type, a necessary part, without which 
the whole would have been a failure. The typical sacrifices, 
of course, availed nothing, except to illustrate to our minds 
the actual processes of the work of atonement and the reasonable 
necessity of all its various features.* 

(2) His going away was expedient also for himself, 
and again for us indirectly. This our Lord illustrated in 
his parable of the young nobleman going into a far country 
to receive for himself a kingdom and to return. (Luke 19:12.) 
Paul tells us that our Lord's great exaltation, which 
included, not only his change to the divine nature, but also 
his official elevation to the right hand of God, was 
granted to him as a reward for his atoning sacrifice— "And 
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore, God also hath highly exalted him and given 
him a name which is above every name." This full exaltation, 
it is manifest, could not have been experienced until the 
sacrifice had been, not only made, but presented as well, as 
the fulfilment of this part of the divine plan. This full exaltation 
was that "glory" to which the Lord referred 
when he said, "Ought not Christ [according to the Scriptures] 
to have suffered these things, and to enter into his 
glory?" (Luke 24:26.) His going away was necessary, 
therefore, to this exaltation to the right hand of God— an 
exaltation which also is greatly to our present as well as to 
our future benefit. 

But let us consider further what is said of this glorious 
exaltation for which purpose it was necessary that our Lord 
should go away. The Apostle Paul says (Eph. 1:17,20,21), 
"The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of 
glory,... raised Christ from the dead and set him at his 
own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality 
and power, and might and dominion, and every 
name that is named, not only in this world [age], but also 
in that which is to come." And in his Revelation to John 
on Patmos, Jesus said, "I am set down with my Father in 
his throne." The inference is plain, therefore, that our 
Lord was exalted as Jehovah's Prime Minister in the throne 
of universal dominion, for which exalted office he was also 
duly qualified, being made a partaker of the divine (immortal) 
nature, a dignity never before conferred upon any 
created being. Such has been the honor and glory of our 
blessed Lord ever since he ascended up on high, there to 
appear in the presence of God for us. 

But what does it signify to us that our Lord was thus 
exalted so far beyond even our comprehension of the glory? 
Oh, it signifies much! it signifies that "when he ascended 
up on high, he led captivity [death] captive;" for he that 
ascended thus into the heavens is he, the very same Jesus, 
"that descended first into the lower parts of the earth [the 
grave]; [and] he that descended is the same also that 
ascended up, far above all heavens, that he might fill all 
things." (Eph. 4:8-10.) It signifies that we have now "a 
great High Priest, that hath passed into the heavens [one 
who is now on the most intimate terms and in the closest possible 



favor with the Sovereign of the whole universe],... 
and not a High Priest which cannot be touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities; but [one who] was in all points 
tempted like as we are, yet without sin;". .."a merciful 
and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, 
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people;" and "in 
that he himself hath suffered, being tempted, he is able to 
succor them that are tempted." It signifies that, "if any 
man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the righteous;" and therefore, we may "come boldly unto 
the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in time of need." (Heb. 4:14-16; 2:17,18; 
1 John 2:1.) His very presence there in the glory of his 
enduring priesthood is the only appeal that is necessary on 
our behalf; for Jehovah himself loveth us— the dear purchase 
of the precious blood of his Anointed One (John 16:27); 
in fact, the whole plan of this reconciliation was of 
God, and is wrought out in Christ. Yes, praise the Lord! 
"Before the throne my surety stands; 
My name is written on his hands."— Heb. 7:22; Isa. 49:16. 

Yet the ascension of our blessed Lord to the right hand 
of power signifies more even than this: it signifies his 
ability now to "give gifts unto men." At the appointed 
time— the times of restitution of all things— he comes forth 
from that holy of holies, heaven itself, whither he hath 
entered for us, and he will lift up his hands and bless the people 
(Lev. 9:23), and there will be a thousand years of his 
glorious reign. But this is not all; for as soon as he had ascended 
up on high and presented his sacrifice on our behalf, 
he sent the Comforter, the holy spirit of adoption, into the 
hearts of his disciples (on the day of Pentecost), whereby 
they were enabled to cry, Abba, Father. It was with reference 
to this gift that Peter said on that day, "Therefore, 
being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received 
of the Father the promise of the holy Spirit, he hath 
shed forth this which ye now see and hear." (Acts 2:33.) 
And this gift has continued with the Church ever since. 
It was sent according to his promise— "It is expedient for 
you that I go away; for if I go not away the Comforter 
will not come unto you: but if I depart I will send him 
unto you." This gift, the Apostle John shows, could not 
be given to the disciples until after the Lord's ascension. 
"For the holy spirit was not yet given, because that Jesus 
was not yet glorified."— John 7:39. 

With some idea at least of the necessity of the Lord's 
departure in their interest, and assured of his coming again 
in glory and power, we can understand the rejoicing of the 
disciples as they returned to Jerusalem after his ascension. 
They were comforted and blessed, not only by the hope of 
his return, but also by the promise of the Comforter, as a 
token of his love and of the Father's favor, not many days 
after. 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES. 



R1829 : page 146 

A REVIEW OF OUR LORD'S MINISTRY, ETC. 

-JUNE 30.- 

Golden Text— "Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our 
faith."-Heb. 12:2. 

In view of all the precious lessons of this quarter 
gathered from the life and death and resurrection of our 
Lord, we have only to repeat to those who are endeavoring 
to follow in his footsteps, the exhortation of the Apostle: 
"Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so 

R1830 : page 147 

easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is 
set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of 
our faith; who, for the joy that was set before him, endured 
the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right 
hand of the throne of God." 

He who by his example and teaching has inspired our 
faith will, if we continue to follow his leading, finish, perfect 
it. He will establish, strengthen, settle us so that we 
cannot be moved; and finally present us to himself "a 
glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing." He will also perfect us by present experiences for 
our office as the "royal priesthood" as he was "made perfect 
through suffering" for his office as Chief Priest. 

R1830 :page 147 

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. 

-JULY 7, EXOD. 20:1-17.- 

Golden Text— "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy 
mind; and thy neighbor as thyself."— Luke 10:27. 

For a full presentation of the subject of this lesson, the 
reader is referred to the following articles in previous issues 
of this journal; viz., 

(1) The Divine Law, Universal and Eternal.— Nov. 
1-15, '94. 

(2) The Law of God. -Nov. 1, '92. 

(3) Taking God's Name in Vain.— May 15, '93. 

(4) The Bond of Perfectness.-Oct. '91. 



R1830 :page 147 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Although we 
are strangers to you, you are not strangers to us; and as a 
slight evidence of our appreciation of the blessings your 
books have brought us, we venture to trespass upon your 
precious time long enough to tell you something which may 
prove of interest. 

We are a young husband and wife who have been 
members of the nominal church for about ten years; but 
are now, we trust, stepping from its darkness into the light 
of the new day now dawning for the consecrated children 
of the Most High. 

About the first of December, '94, Miss Erlenmyer, one 
of your colporteurs and one of the Lord's dear saints, 
called at our home, and finding us deeply interested in the 
subject of our Savior's return, had little difficulty in persuading 
us to take the first volume of DAWN, promising to 
call again as soon as we had had time to read it. 

We began to read and in two or three weeks were interested 
to such an extent that although nearly everything 
else was mixed up and we scarcely knew what we believed, 
we did see clearly that there certainly is some special prize, 
some exceptional opportunity, for which the humble, sacrificing 
members of Christ's flock are invited to strive. We 
felt that there was only about one plank in the old platform 
left for the Christian worker to stand upon, and that was 
the one in which we have always been most interested, 
"Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every 
creature." We have always been expecting to fall into 
some trap unless we clung close to our Savior, and at the 
time of which we speak were by no means sure that your 
interpretations of the Scriptures, despite their apparent 
harmony with them, were not the well-meant views of another 
class of those unfortunates who unwittingly go about 
"deceiving and being deceived." 

This hesitancy to accept the message led us into a most 
serious predicament from which, however, the Lord has extricated 
us, and that, too, in a manner which seems to us 
unmistakable personal evidence that your views of the Word 
are correct. A few words of explanation are necessary to 
understand the way we got into what has proven the greatest 
testing season of our lives. 

Long before we ever met each other it was our earnest 
wish that we might serve the Lord, if it chanced to be his 
will, as missionaries in the foreign field. One of us has, 
however, been for years physically unable to go; the other 
had no opportunity to go before our engagement took place, 
and as he received only the next day after that event a 
notice of acceptance of an application made nearly two 
years before, from which nothing had been heard in the 
meantime, but which, had it been received even one day 
sooner would have been considered a "call" and prevented 
our engagement altogether, it seemed to both of us that we 
had been plainly shown the Lord did not wish to use us in 



that direction. 

In this city there is a young lady who from her infancy 
has wished and expected to some time go to the foreign 
field, and she has had the advantages of the education usually 
given at Mr. Moody's Northfield School and the Chicago 
Training Institute to fit her for such work. She is now the 
city missionary of the church with which we are at present 
connected, and is, we believe, earnestly trying to do her 
Master's will. 

To come to the point: One evening early in January, 
after a long discussion of the sore needs of what seemed to 
us the Master's work, and of the ways and means at our 
disposal, we decided to send the above mentioned young 
lady to the foreign field and sustain her in the work as God 
saw fit to favor the plan, provided she was willing to accept 
the call. We concluded that if the DAWNS were right we 
had not many years in which to work and that whether 
they were right or wrong we would be doing the Lord's 
will by giving up for him every earthly prospect. 

We invited the young lady in question to call as soon 
as possible, which she did the next evening, and we found 
her not only ready but anxious to take up the work. The 
next day she sent in her application to the Mission Board, 
asked to be appointed to the field to which she has from 
her childhood wanted to go, and even mentioned the date 
she would like to start. 

About a week later Miss Erlenmyer called, as she had 
promised, renewed our interest in the DAWN, left VOLS. II. 
and III., and such a sea of trouble as our first examination 
of the Chronology plunged us into, we earnestly hope we 
may never be called upon to go through again. We saw 
the old landmarks of orthodoxy topple and fall on every 
side, and although God's Spirit enabled us to look with a 
sense of joy upon the ruins of the creeds and catechisms, 
it did not extricate us from our contract to engage in work 
which we see is no longer necessary, and we did not have 
the confidence, as yet, in these, to us, new interpretations 
of the Word, to enable us to withdraw our offer. 

In our extremity we asked our Father in Heaven to 
show us the truth or falsity of your teachings by sending 
our friend as we had planned, or preventing her from going. 

Since that time we have gone on reading and studying 
the books and growing in the doctrine of grace and in the 

R1830 : page 148 

knowledge of the love of God until, from a comparison of 
their teachings with the infallible Word, confidence in the 
DAWN has become heart-certainty that they are right. But 
although we have been for several weeks fully convinced, 
and have been growing stronger and stronger week by week, 
we have done nothing to interfere with the plans mentioned, 
fearing to take out of the Lord's hands what we had placed 
in them, and knowing from many rich experiences in the 
past that in his own good time he would answer us in a way 
that would satisfy. 



Our confidence in the Lord has not been in vain, for 
as fast as we have come into the light we have received our 
answer, although in a manner that has given us much pain. 
Our dear friend whom we had expected to send began about 
six weeks ago to have trouble with her eyes. A month ago 
the affliction had become so serious as to require regular 
treatment twice a week. Now she is unable to read or 
write and cannot even bear the light for any length of time. 

A week ago she told us that it would be years before 
she could go, and day before yesterday informed us she 
had written to the Mission Board and requested them to 
let the matter drop. Of course we know that the Lord has 
not sent this affliction upon her for the purpose of answering 
our prayer, but we know, too, that the young lady in 
question has heretofore enjoyed good health and we believe 
this trouble, which it now appears has been coming upon 
her unobserved for years, has been providentially postponed 
until now, or otherwise so ordered as to give us an opportunity 
to "Prove whether these things be so." 

Now we have proved the Lord, and he has answered 
us, and we mean to obey the call. With fear and trembling, 
but with confidence in our mighty King, we enter at the 

R1831 :page 148 

eleventh hour to run the race for crowns which others have 

flung aside. The thought that others have had them and 

lost them almost unnerves us. Oh! may he grant to 

strengthen our weak hands and confirm our feeble knees, 

that we be not castaways after having once entered the 

Holy Place and feasted on the wonderful truths so providentially 

placed in our way, is the heartfelt prayer of 

Your loving brother and sister in Christ, 

EMMA AND CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 

[Since writing the above the Brother and Sister have 
withdrawn from the earthly organization of which they were 
members; but they are more than ever united to the one 
Church "whose names are written in heaven."— ED.] 



page 148 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-Enclosed find order for 
One Dollar for which please send to the undersigned for 
one year ZION'S WATCH TOWER. I feel that I must have 
it, for as far as I have read in the DAWN I am more than 
ever convinced that it is leading me into that truth which 
will make me free. For nine years I have been groping in 
the M.E. church for what I have found in your book in as 
many hours. With the teachings of that church I have always 
felt, as they often sing, that "there was a void that 
never was filled." I have been a local preacher in that 
church, but have now renounced all connections with it, 
and as fast as the truth is gained by me, with the help of 
God I will teach it. 



I have already given three lectures which have created 
quite a stir here, and many are looking up the Word to 
find me mistaken; but the truth still stands, thank God! 
Coming in at the eleventh hour, I am reminded that "the 
time is short." Am now sixty years of age; but when 
speaking in the light my "strength is renewed like the 
eagles." There are two or three already who are showing 
a desire to be led into the light. May God bless and help 
you still to unfold to me and other seekers the blessings that 
will follow from a true knowledge of him who gave himself 
a ransom for all. I take the liberty to subscribe myself, 

Your brother in Christ, JAMES BUNTING. 



DEAR BROTHER:-Last October a gentleman called at 
my house and drew my attention to a book he was selling. 
I was upon the point of refusing when the title, "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN," interested me. I consented to examine 
it, saw at once it was something I wanted, and ordered all 
three volumes. After going through them two or three 
times, to say I was astonished is a very mild expression. 
Although I had been brought up in the fear of the Lord 
and in the faith as taught by the Methodist church, still I 
had strayed far from all religion, believing that a God who 
would torment one forever could not be the God of love I 
had been taught. I was not far from atheism, but those 
DAWNS, thank the Lord, altered all that. I am now trying 
to serve God, and thank him sincerely that the colporteur 
called at my house. I will pray for him, and may his 
efforts be blessed in spreading the truth. 

The DAWNS having proved such a blessing to me, I 
am anxious that others should have the benefit of the truth 
which they contain. I enclose Money Order and several 
addresses. May God spare you long for his work. 

Yours in the faith, E. E. MITCHELL. 



DEAR SIR:— Excuse a perfect stranger for troubling 
you, but will you please tell me if the fourth volume of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN is yet published, and where I can get 
it? I got the first three volumes from one of your agents 
last year, and have read them through five or six times 
with both pleasure and profit. I consider them books not 
to be read merely but to be studied. Every time I have 
read them I have gathered something new. In my opinion 
this is the true religion, the only one that combines reason 
with faith, and that is not contradictory to the sciences. 

Your respectfully, E. S. . 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-I am carefully studying Vol. 
I. of MILLENNIAL DAWN. It is the clearest production I 
have yet found, and I desire to read VOLS. II. and III. Enclosed 



find order. If you have a catalogue of other works 
please send it, and oblige, 

J. W. S , Pastor M.E. church. 



R1831 :page 148 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-God be praised that at last I 
have willingly yielded to the Spirit's call through the Word, 
and have left Babylon, never to return, and am now happy 
in Christ my Redeemer. How blessed is the light that 
hath shined into our hearts! And now we realize fully the 
words of the Apostle— "And we, brethren, are not in darkness, 
that that day should overtake us unawares." 

I have been reading DAWNS for about a year and a 
half. I heard the Spirit's call through the Word, but was 
so weak and so strongly bound to Babylon, that it was hard 
to throw off the shackles of bondage and enter into the 
liberty there is in Christ; but he will not break the bruised 
reed, or quench the smoking flax; and in his wisdom he 
sent among us Brother V. C. Haviland to do colporteur 
work. Bro. H. sought me out, and strengthened me, even 
as Ananias did Paul; and now I am in the light, bless his 
holy name, O my soul, and all that is within me! 

Yours in hope of eternal life. FRANK H. RUSS. 



page 149 
