Have You Ever Wondered—
Is There Any Real Solution to the Energy Crisis?
THERE is hardly a place on earth where energy is not getting more expensive. Not only the cost of gasoline, but also the bills for heating oil and electricity are going up. All of us would welcome a solution​—a real solution—​to the energy crisis.
WHAT DO YOU THINK IS CAUSING THE ENERGY CRISIS?
Two of the basic factors are these: First, the amount of energy available; and, second, the way it is being used.
Many nations rely heavily on oil, gas and coal, but these sources of energy can’t last forever. Someday they will run out, and we will have to use something else. But that hasn’t happened yet. Some scientists estimate that there is ample petroleum to last for several decades, and a United Nations report pushes the figure even higher. Obviously, there is more to the problem than that the supply is running low.
Today’s energy crisis finds its real roots in mankind’s selfishness. Not only powerful business organizations but also individuals have been selfish as well as unwise in their use of energy and of the sources from which it is produced. Man himself, for the most part, is creating the problem.
WHAT CAN BE DONE TO EASE THE PROBLEM?
One obvious way to ease the energy crisis is to find and make fuller use of new sources of energy. A second way is to conserve, rather than waste, the energy we already have. This calls for people to be unselfish.
A number of alternative energy sources have been suggested. Attempts have been made to harness the wind, the tides and the movement of the ocean waves. Synthetic fuels derived from a variety of sources​—even from garbage—​are being developed and tested. And even though the initial cost of equipment is high, an increasing number of persons are turning to solar energy to heat their homes and other buildings.
Most of us could do much more to conserve energy. For example, it has been suggested that Americans could cut down their use of energy by 30 to 40 percent without any decline in economic growth or any major adjustments in their life-style. Many of them are now realizing that such things as added insulation in walls and ceilings, use of storm windows and weather stripping, as well as the shutting off of heat in unused rooms and keeping the doors to those rooms closed, can result in a sizable cut in home heating bills. And many have installed an electric igniter on their stove, instead of letting a pilot light burn. They use only about half as much gas! Conservation is good common sense. It can save you money and will help to make available sources of energy last longer.
IS YOUR SAVING ENERGY THE COMPLETE ANSWER?
You can cut back only so much in your use of energy in today’s world. Even if you lower your thermostat, insulate your home and drive your car less, you still need energy​—lots of it. For most of us, alternative sources of energy are either too expensive or simply not available. So there is another basic factor involved in this energy crisis.
The business organizations that develop and sell oil realize its value. They appear determined to squeeze all the profits they can from others who depend so heavily on oil. Does it seem to you that such groups will simply change on their own and generously reverse the trend? Do you think they would welcome a vast change to alternative sources of energy? Just consider the billions of dollars invested in processing plants, equipment and leasing operations by these giants. Would they stand idly by and see all of this become valueless? Hardly. And remember, these are very powerful organizations.
Consider also the millions of persons employed by these organizations that produce oil. A sudden change in energy sources would have disastrous effects on their livelihood. The problem is certainly complicated by the way the present system operates. There is little we can do about it.
The solution would require, first of all, the use of awesome strength. Why? Because in reality, a basic change in the present structure of human affairs would be needed. Additionally, wisdom of the highest sort would be required to create a better system.
WHO HAS THE MEANS TO PROVIDE A FINAL SOLUTION?
All of us will agree that the universe is full of energy. Its Creator is described in the Bible as having an ‘abundance of dynamic energy and power.’ (Isa. 40:26) So God certainly has the power and the technical skill to cope with the problem of energy. The Bible clearly says that he will do so soon.
How God will do this is also explained in the Bible. “Jehovah is guarding all those loving him, but all the wicked ones he will annihilate.” (Ps. 145:20) Yes, God purposes to destroy this present system completely. He will deal with selfish men who refuse to change, by the use of the only thing they understand​—power. Removal of such ones will pave the way for those who love God, and who respect this beautiful earth and its natural resources, to survive into a world filled with righteousness.​—2 Pet. 3:13; Rev. 11:18.
Certainly the God who sustains all the universe is fully capable of providing proper direction or forms of energy that will then enable all to live comfortably. His Word says of him: “Jehovah himself will not hold back anything good from those walking in faultlessness.” (Ps. 84:11) He will provide man with all the energy he needs! You certainly have nothing to lose by further investigation of this grand prospect. To the contrary, you have much to gain.
[Picture on page 3]
Heating Costs
Oil Profits

