R785 : page 1 
VOL. VII. PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER, 1885. NO. 2. 

page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 



we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it— "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

FORTUNATELY we have come across another small lot of 
"YOUNG'S ANALYTICAL GREEK, HEBREW AND ENGLISH 
CONCORDANCES"-the best-the "Author's Edition," at much 
below the present price of the work. We desire that many might 
avail themselves of the opportunity for obtaining a work so 
valuable, indeed almost indispensable to Bible study. This great 
book is cheap at the regular price, five dollars; but we have secured 
this lot so as to offer them to you at just half the price. They are 
new and perfect. See last page, last column. 



R785 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The announcement in our last issue, that we had in view a plan by 
which those zealous for service could probably use as much time as 
they could gather from the absolute necessities of life, brought a 
shower of Postal Cards to our office. These, should they lead to 
nothing more, have proved already a blessing to your fellow 
servant, the Editor, refreshing his heart as he perceived from your 
earnest words how deeply the truth had taken hold of your hearts as 
well as of your intellects. 

When one's heart is absorbed with the truth, he not only seeks by 
every means and every sacrifice to promulgate it, that others may 
be blessed with it, but he will look for fruit from his labor; he 
cannot help it. And thus it is that you and I as we labor for the 
cause we love, desire as the Apostle expresses it, to "know that our 
labor is not in vain in the Lord;" to see some of the fruit. Yet we 
must learn to labor on steadily whether fruit appears or not, 
knowing that though the germination be tedious and the growth and 
ripening slow, the ultimate success of the labor is assured by the 
all-wise Master in whose service we engage. If we go forth earnest 
in the service, and fully consecrated, he will surely use us; and if 
done for him only, our labor cannot be in vain. "He that goeth forth 
and weepeth [feeling the importance and cost of the work in self- 
sacrifice] bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again 
bringing his sheaves." Psa. 126:6. 



Sometimes the blessing comes in an unlooked for way, even as in 
the present case your cards were refreshing messengers to us. And 
again, the blessing of consecrated service, is sure to be greater upon 
ourselves than upon others. He that watereth others, shall himself 
be abundantly refreshed. To the extent that you have been a laborer 
for the Master and have sacrificed anything for the spread of his 
truth, we feel sure you have received present pay of this sort, as 
well as persecutions (2 Tim. 3:12) besides the laid up hopes and 
promises "reserved in heaven for you." 

This, your experience and mine, was the experience of others 
before us in the service; and to us, as to them, God sometimes 
grants a glimpse of the fruit of labor when we feel faint and 
discouraged. Thus it was with the Lord; after considerable labor 
and teaching "many went back" and followed him as disciples no 
more, and Jesus said unto the twelve, "Will you also go away?" 
Then came the refreshing evidence that the truth had taken fast hold 
of some, when Peter answered "Lord to whom shall we go? Thou 
hast the words of eternal life, and we believe and are sure that thou 
art that Christ, the Son of the living God." (John 6:66-69.) Not only 
was Jesus' heart cheered by Peter's zeal, but Peter also was blessed, 
"Blessed art thou Simon." Matt. 16:16,17. 

Elijah felt lonely, and that his efforts to refute the false teachers of 
Baal were yielding no fruit, and prayed that he might die; but God 
who knew all about it, encouraged him with the assurance that 
seven thousand of Israel were still faithful to the truth, who 
doubtless had been helped and strengthened by Elijah's labors. 

Paul, the great Apostle, whose writings have been, and yet are 
God's storehouse of wisdom and instruction, from which the 
faithful throughout the age have been supplied with "meat in due 
season," appears to have written almost all of his epistles with a 
view to correct some doctrinal errors into which he saw the various 
companies of God's children liable to fall, or to help them out of 
errors into which they had already fallen. Little did he suppose 
probably that his zeal and efforts to assist the saints and guard them 
with truth, were to be so widespread in their influence as God's 
guideposts to the Pilgrims of eighteen centuries. 

So with us dear friends; we must not gauge our sacrifices and 
efforts by the little we are permitted to see of the results, but must 
press on. In fact while interest in the work enters largely into our 
sacrifice, we must beware and remember that our sacrifice was 
made to God, and not in any particular interest of our own, in the 
work; and while we take an absorbing interest in the work, as the 
development of his plans, we should remember that our 
consecration was to the Lord; that in accepting it, the Lord made no 
promise to show us any fruit of labor, and hence whatever we enjoy 
in this way is God's favor more than promised. In order that we 
may ever feel our own insufficiency, and that all the needed power 
and wisdom for the work is in him who is at the helm "working all 
things after the counsel of his own will, we are not permitted to see 



much fruit from our own individual labor. Otherwise success in his 
labor might enkindle pride and self-sufficiency, and make us unfit 
for further service. But we thank God that we are given so clear a 
view of the grand results at the end, worked out by the various 
agencies operating under divine supervision. 

Seeing the final results, portrayed in God's Word, should lead us to 
diligence and sacrifice that we at that time may find, that by the 
favor of God our labors and tears, and weariness, and endurance of 
the reproaches of Christ, (Luke 6:22,23.) were not in vain, and that 
in the accomplished results we shall have some share, and then 
more fully than now appreciate the privilege of being co-workers 
with God and with our Lord Jesus in the greatest and grandest work 
of God- Redemption, Reconciliation, and Restitution of the race. 

Ah, yes; the Master saw little fruit of his sacrifice when he died, 
and you and I must expect a similar experience. But of him it is 
written, "He shall see the travail of his soul and shall be satisfied. 
(Isa. 53:11.) The grand results will abundantly prove the wisdom 
of God, and the cost, though great, will prove none too great when 
actually seen as God already foresees it. Then, too, all who now 
sacrifice for and suffer with Christ shall be satisfied fully. If they 
have had travail and have made sacrifices, not for error, but for the 
truth; not for sects, but for Christ, they shall receive great reward 
(Matt. 5:11,12); they shall be satisfied when they enter into the joys 
of their Lord. 

Recently, in looking over our list of English readers, the smallness 
of the number suggested the fact that each of the about three 
hundred had cost an outlay of about forty dollars. (The outlay, of 
which these are as yet the only fruitage, amounted to nearly eleven 
thousand dollars, aside from the willing labor connected with it.) 
And the thought came, How many of these appreciate the truth? 
How many, as they see what it costs in reputation to hold the truth, 
regret that they ever received it? How many— how few— appreciate 
the truth at forty dollars-at what it cost to bring it to their ears? 

These were discouraging thoughts; and then we thought of the great 
cost— of the Master's sacrifice— of what the expense of our salvation 
had been; not in silver and gold, but the precious blood of Christ, 
and the precious cost as well, in self-denial to him who made 
himself of no reputation, and, though rich, became poor for our 
sakes, that he might redeem and bless us. As we saw how few there 
are who appreciate the first great cost, or endeavor to do a part in 
the same direction, we said to ourselves, Ah! it is because they and 
we all see but imperfectly. The world, the flesh and the adversary 
paint things in false colors before men's minds, and it is only as the 
truth shines in and gets possession of us that we are able even to 
approximate its value. 

The mail then brought us three English letters, one from a new 
reader, who had just received a copy of "Food," and two from older 
readers, one of which, from dear Brother Riley, was just in time for 



the last TOWER, which contains some extracts from it. We said, as 
we read Bro. R.'s letter, and saw how firmly the truth had taken 
hold of him, What is such fruit worth? Our answer, as we 
considered our own estimation of the value of the truth— beyond 
price, preferred to millions of money and oceans of respect and 
influence— was, one such heart made glad and brought nigh to the 
Lord and refreshed by his glorious plans, as seen in the unfoldings 
of his word of truth, is well worth the entire expenditure, made in 
England, of time and labor and money. If no other one there had 
been reached and blessed, doubtless Bro. R. would refuse such a 
price in exchange for it. And who can tell how many shall yet 
believe through the words and efforts of these already blessed. 

Then came the memory of sacrifices which we knew some had 
made [and we know probably of but few of the sacrifices and 
sacrificers— God alone knows them all]; the sick sister who, not 
being able to give time or money, cast into the Lord's treasury two 
long switches of her hair to be sold, and the funds used in the 
spread of the truth; and the sister who, in the same interest, sold a 
gold watch chain, in which she had once prided. Under the 
influence of truth that pride had given place to zeal for the truth. 
We remembered also the brother in Kentucky who, having no 
money to spare, sent a watch, and a sister who, from the same 
motives, sent a gold ring; and many others who we know are 
denying themselves many things which they once prided in, such as 
costly apparel, etc., that they may have means which they can and 
do use in the blessed service. Let all such remember, as they hear of 

R786 : page 1 

hearts made glad by the truth, that they have had a share in the 
work of blessing. 

R786 : page 2 

If we may not see much fruit from our individual labor, thank God 
for what we are permitted to see of fruit to our united efforts. As 
memory called up these and other sacrifices, and the many whom 
we know to be using the spare moments and holidays in spreading 
the truth, or attempting to spread it (which is as highly appreciated 
by him who looks upon our hearts— who accepts our endeavors 
rather than our results); and as we noted the many and earnest 
answers to the proposed new plan of labor mentioned in our last 
issue, which have come, and are still coming to hand, we thanked 
God and took courage afresh. 

We need scarcely tell you that "a book of remembrance"— a special 
record— is made in our office of those whose zeal for the Master and 
his Word is thus evidenced; and who can doubt that such and a 
much more perfect record is kept by the Master. They are his and 
found on his side in this day, when he is selecting his jewels. As he 
tests each one, can we doubt that he measures their love for him by 
the spirit of sacrifice for the truth which actuates them? Then let us 
value more and more our privilege of showing our love for him by 



gladly bearing reproach, and dishonor, and weariness, and 
inconvenience in the cause of truth— the cause of God. 

These thoughts, encouraging and strengthening to us, we give to 
you, that they may likewise do you good. 

"Truth! how sacred is the treasure; 
Teach us, Lord, its worth to know; 
Vain the hopes, and short the pleasure, 
Which from other sources flow." 

If we could properly estimate truth, it would make us careful lest 
we should lose it, and we should value less its price in self-denial, 
and appreciate more the privilege of communicating it to others, 
even at the cost of further self-denial. Sacrifices of time, and 
money, and reputation would be considered "light" matters and 
would "work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory," while we would be prepared thereby to look not at the 
things which are seen, our sacrifices, etc., but at the things which 
are not seen— the exceeding great reward in reservation for the 
overcomers. 



R786 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

page 2 

St. Louis Co., Mo., Sept. 28, 1885. 

C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR FRIEND IN CHRIST:-You will find 
enclosed one dollar to pay for the TOWER. I am doing all I can to 
spread the glorious truths. I am very poor in this world's treasures, 
but rich in faith. Year before last I had the TOWER sent to a 
brother of mine and he loaned it to his neighbors. I was there since, 
and was surprised to see how much good fifty cents could do. Men 
who had never feared God, who would not talk on religion, had 
their Bibles searching for more light, and would hardly talk of 
anything else. I am "anxious for greater service in the vineyard," 
and wish to know the plan you have to suggest. I have one copy of 
"Food" very nearly worn out by loaning and desire more, please. I 
know it is but little I can do, but I know it will be acceptable to our 
Father. 

Yours in Christ, 
R786 : page 2 

Yorkshire, England. 

GENTLEMEN: -Working in an empty house some days ago, I 
found some leaves of a book treating on the Bible. There is nothing 



to lead me to a conclusion as to what the title is, but every leaf I 
have is about the Bible and its teachings. "Why Evil was Permitted, 
The Day of Judgment, The Plan of the Ages," etc. These leaves 
have whetted my appetite, and after searching well I found what 
appears to be the last leaf, and it directs me to address a letter as 
this is directed for further information on these matters. I can only 
say that, not only I, but others with whom I associate, are never 
tired of talking, reading or hearing of these things. The leaves I 
have I would not sell for money, but I should like more, and I hope 
you may be able to supply me, God bless you richly. Yours in 
Christ, 



Berrien Co., Michigan. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER.-Dear Friends: -A pamphlet published 
by you, accidentally came to my notice a few days ago, and 
although torn and mutilated, I have read all I can of it, and desire 
more of that light that seems to have penetrated your soul. In 
accordance with your request, which I find on last page of cover, I 
write you as an earnest, prayerful seeker after truth; knowing that in 
time past it has pleased God to send light to his children through 
one another, as in the case of Cornelius (Acts 10). My prayer is 
"Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" 

Now I send to Pittsburgh, to Zion's Watchman, that he may tell me 
what to do, and send me what he thinks I need. I think I could use 
several of the pamphlets to good advantage. 



Yours in fellowship of Christ, 
page 2 



London, England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is with heartfelt thankfulness 
that I write to you for the TOWER. Praise God from whom all 
blessings flow. The TOWER is looked for with delight, not by 
myself alone, others here look for it with equal pleasure, and we 
desire you to send it for another year. The subjoined list are the 
names of those who send money. We have of late had a real feast 
through the TOWER; it has opened up the Scriptures so that we can 
now search for ourselves. What once was to us very nearly a sealed 
book, now becomes full of harmony and beauty. We are already 
despised and rejected of nominal Christians, but we count it joy that 
we are accounted worthy to thus suffer with him. Since we have 
seen something of the truth, and are no longer building with the 
wood, hay and stubble of men's traditions. 

Our little Bible class does not grow very large, but we are not 
building on numbers. We find we get some very precious seasons 
with about four, and I think up to the present our best meetings 



have been the smallest; and during the week when two or three 
meet for a few minutes we often part with some new thought or 
reminder of the grandeur of the plan or character of God, and go 
forth with renewed energy to serve him. I find the experience 
vastly different from my previous experience in the nominal 
church, then doubting and fearing with a very indefinite idea of 
what was future both for the servants of God and those who did not 
serve him. 

But now we are glad to see that all shall be taught of God. Looking 
at the unfolding plan of God we cannot but see that his ways are 
higher than our ways and his thoughts higher than our thoughts. 
Please send more reading matter. We are gradually finding 
interested readers. 

Your brother in Christ. . 



R786 : page 2 



Neosho Co., Kan. 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:-If I should not be too late please 
forward a wall chart to my address for which I will pay express 
charges. I expect to return to my own nation in the near future 
(Cherokee Indians) and I will be more able to make the vision 
plain. I would send you money to pay for one or two years 
subscription of your paper, the Z.W.T., if I had it; but just now I am 
so pressed financially that I can scarcely keep my family, but hope I 
can do something soon. I preach as often as I can leave home, and 
ride from ten to twenty miles to make known this truth. Pray the 
Lord to bless his poor servant, who once was blind but thank God 
that now I see. I ever remain your brother in the Anointed One. 



[N.B. The supply of WALL CHARTS is exhausted.] 



Toledo, Ohio, Sept. 20, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Again is the welcome Z.W.T. at 
hand. But alas I can not read it any more. [A cataract has been 
forming over his sight gradually.] Having it read second-hand, and 
by those not consecrated however well meaning they be, it has not 
the satisfactory result as when read by myself. I am hungry for the 
glad tidings, but for the present cannot be satisfied and must now 
draw on the store gathered when natural sight was one of the 
blessings. Please inform me what your plan is for the consecrated 
ones. If I cannot see to read I may find a willing ear to talk to. 
Hoping you may be able to gather the meaning of this 
communication, the Lord bless you and be with you in his work is 
my prayer. 



Yours in Christ, 
page 2 



Mitchell Co., N.C., Sept. 29, '85. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-A suggestion in your last number 
of WATCH TOWER to those having time to invest in the Master's 
service at the eleventh hour, caught my eye and moved my heart, as 
I had been asking the Lord to open up the way that I might be 
enabled to do more effectual work in his vineyard. Not that I have 
been idle or careless about the "glad tidings of great joy which shall 
be to all people," or of the Church's glorious position, either; as I 
have been lecturing on these glorious themes for some time past 
until this summer, when the powers of darkness became somewhat 
alarmed, taking possession for the present, but it is only for the 
present, for they have already whipped themselves. 

It was after this manner: I had, as a feeble instrument in the hands 
of the Master, built up a considerable Sunday attendance, on 
lectures and Bible readings, in a section deserted by all 
denominations, but formerly belonging to the Baptists. They saw a 
good chance to reorganize their church and Sabbath school, which 
they did, offering me the superintendent's place if I would join 
them. Telling them I was not for sale, of course they left me "out in 
the cold." Many were dissatisfied with the proceedings and caused 
considerable interruption, so much so, that they now have no 
Sabbath school and very seldom any preaching. 

Their preacher passed my house today and told me that perhaps he 
would leave this fall, not having been here quite twelve months. 
Truth will prevail. He sees there are impressions of God's eternal 
truth so deeply rooted that he will either have to submit to it or 
leave. 

I was lecturing on the Millennium and God's promises to the Jews, 
when by a strange circumstance I fell in with your Sample Copy of 
Z.W.T. This has been over two years since. I was led by God's 
Word to see that there are deeper and richer blessings for the church 
and world than held out by the sects. Praying for more light on 
these glorious truths, the Lord sent your publications. It would be 
strange to you indeed, if you could know the harmony in our 
teachings before I saw your views, or heard of them. But I only had 
the outlines until the Lord brought us together. O then, what light 
indeed, rayed forth from "ZION'S WATCH TOWER. " 

Ever since I have been circulating your publications and lecturing. 
In this and the adjoining county deep impressions have been made 
and I feel confident will show fruit in God's "due time." The 
Methodists and Baptists prevail in this country, and held strong 
antagonism until the true light burst forth; since, they have become 



alarmed and are holding meetings together. Pilot and Herod were 
made friends in condemning the Lord of Glory. Strange coincident 
with his first rejection! It is only a question of time, when the way 
will be open for more successful labor. Patience for the Lord's "due 
time," is what we all, perhaps, are deficient in. May we "let 
patience have her perfect work." 

I have engaged a school, but am not bound for any definite period; I 
only take it while waiting for the Lord to open up something in 
which I can serve him better. If he has directed through you in the 
"plan" mentioned in last TOWER we will shortly "know of his 
will." I wish to stand ready for whatsoever and whenever he may 
call me. 

Being aware of the great value of time with you, and the vast 
importance of the glorious work in which the Lord has called you, 
makes me feel as an intruder by writing so much, but I cannot close 
without giving you an expression of my feelings and desires as a 
co-worker in the closing gospel harvest of the age, which indeed "is 
ripe" while "the laborers are few." 

The vast importance of the truth of the millennial glory so thrills 
my whole being, that I could proclaim the "glad tidings from 
Greenland's icy mountains to India's coral strand," and "from the 
rivers to the ends of the earth" in honor to the name of Jesus who is 
riding forth in his majesty. 

Sweetest name on mortal tongue, 
Sweetest notes in Seraph's song. 

Truly, 



R784 : page 2 

NOT to know evil, that is innocence; but to know evil and choose 
the good, that is virtue. 



A WORD spoken pleasantly is a large spot of sunshine on a sad 
heart; who has not felt its effects? A smile is like the bursting out 
of the sun behind a cloud to him who thinks he has no friend in the 
world. 



TRUE repentance consists in the heart being broken for sin and 
from sin. Some repent, yet never reform; they resemble a man 
traveling in a dangerous path, who frequently starts and stops, but 
never turns aside. 



"THAT fortitude which has encountered no dangers, that 
prudence which has surmounted no difficulties, that integrity which 
has been attacked by no temptation, can best be considered but as 



gold not yet brought to the test, of which therefore the true value 
cannot be assigned." 



R786 : page 3 



OUT AND INTO. 

Out of disaster and ruin complete, 
Out of the struggle and dreary defeat, 
Out of my sorrow, and burden, and shame, 
Out of the evils too fearful to name, 
Out of my guilt and the criminal's doom, 
Out of the dreading, and terror, and gloom; 

Into the sense of forgiveness and rest, 
Into inheritance with all the blest, 
Into a righteous and permanent peace, 
Into the grandest and fullest release, 
Into the comfort without an alloy, 
Into a perfect and permanent joy. 

Wonderful love that has wrought all for me! 
Wonderful work that has thus set me free! 
Wonderful ground upon which I have come! 
Wonderful tenderness, welcoming home! 

Out of the terror at standing alone, 
Out, and for ever, of being my own, 
Out of the hardness of heart and of will, 
Out of the longings which nothing could fill, 
Out of the bitterness, madness and strife, 
Out of myself and of all I called life; 

Into the light and the glory of God, 

Into the holy, made clean by blood, 

Into His arms, the embrace and the kiss, 

Into the scene of ineffable bliss, 

Into the quiet, the infinite calm, 

Into the place of the song and the psalm. 

Wonderful holiness, bringing to light! 
Wonderful grace, putting all out of sight! 
Wonderful wisdom, devising the way! 
Wonderful power that nothing can stay! 



-Sel. 



R787 : page 3 



ONE MEDIATOR. 

There is "one mediator between God and men, the man [Greek 
anthropos— human being] Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom 
[Greek antilutron -a corresponding price] for all."- 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

The Greek word translated Mediator in this text is meshes, and 
has the significance of the English word mediator, viz., "middle 
man," or reconciler, or, as defined by Webster, "one who interposes 
between parties at variance for the purpose of reconciling them." 

On this subject there are two views, both of which we believe to be 
very erroneous. First, we mention the view growing popular 
recently among so-called advanced thinkers, viz., that God, after 
trying to secure man's attention and love and reconciliation for four 
thousand years with very little success, changed his plan of 
operations and sent Jesus to entreat for him with mankind and to 
win man's love over to God, that thus reconciliation between God 
and men might be effected. They take this view because a false 
theory compels it; their theory being that God has nothing against 
mankind that would require a Mediator to adjust and settle, while 
mankind has supposed grievances against God which the Mediator 
was needed to dispel. This class, for the same reason, find no 
meaning or sense in the Scriptural statement that Jesus was a 
ransom for all men. They claim that God required no ransom for 
sinners, but was so full of love for men that he could not permit his 
justice to act in opposition to them; that God's love over-mastered 
his justice. 

This theory makes void the ransom, and the atonement through it, 
in a most deceptive manner, because it pretends to accept all the 
Scriptural statements on these subjects, though it as really opposes 
and makes void the Scriptures on these subjects as do open infidels. 

Its influence is really more misleading than theirs. But not only 
does such a theory make void the ransom, but it is totally 
unreasonable of itself, being in opposition to all the known facts. 

Facts testify in hundreds of ways that "the wrath of God" rests upon 
the race. Sickness, pain and death, pestilence, cyclones and 
earthquakes are facts however we may account for them. We must 
either conclude (1) that our Creator cannot prevent and remedy 
these evils, or (2) that he is careless of our welfare, or (3) these 
evils are permitted by him as a penalty for sins, and as a 
manifestation of his just wrath and righteous indignation therefor. 
We are not left to conjecture as to which of these views of the facts 
are correct; for the Bible not only assures us (1) that God is able to 
prevent evil, and has all power in heaven and in earth, and (2) that 
he is not careless and indifferent to the welfare of his creatures, and 
that he loves them; but (3) that death with all its attendant miseries 
and troubles, is the just penally for sin, (Rom. 6:23; Deut. 32:45; 
Gen. 2:17; 3:17-19; Rom. 5:17-19.) and that exposure to the 
disorders of nature as experienced in earthquakes, cyclones, etc., 
are incidental adjuncts of the curse which came upon man as the 



just wages or recompense for the sin of their representative Adam, 
and are therefore evidences of divine disfavor or opposition. 

That the Scriptures clearly state these facts to be evidences of the 
WRATH of God, should be known to all. The apostle speaking for 
himself and the Church, says, We "were by nature [through the 
fallen nature inherited] children of wrath even as others. " (Eph. 
2:3.) "For the wrath of God is revealed [displayed] from heaven 
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness." (Rom. 1:18.) Not 
only is there the present general display of divine displeasure 
against the race, (death, etc.) but the Scriptures point to a "wrath to 
come," "a day of wrath and righteous judgment of God" (Rom. 2:5.) 
the great time of trouble in the end of this age. The wrath 
manifested in death, etc., for Adam's sin, is supplemented by that to 
come because of the wilfulness and perversity of Adam's fallen 
children. 

Such as shall accept of Christ as their ransom, we are expressly told 
"shall be saved from wrath through him" (Rom. 5:9): while on such 
as believe not in the Redeemer "the wrath of God abideth" 
[continues]. (Jno. 3:36.) Such as now accept of Christ and become 
his obedient followers, are saved or delivered from wrath to come; 
and even now, though not delivered from present wrath and 
penalties of sin, they are assured of God's acceptance of the ransom 
and of his favor toward them and of a full release shortly from 
every vestige of the curse and wrath now resting on all. Thus by 
faith we reckon ourselves delivered or "saved from wrath through 
him" (Rom. 5:9.) whom God raised from the dead, even Jesus, 
which delivered us from wrath to come. 1 Thess. 1:10. The same 
word is rendered vengeance, Rom. 3:5. Is God unrighteous that 
taketh vengeance? Compare verses 23 to 26. 

From these texts, as well as from the facts about us, slow indeed 
would be the mind, or obstinately obtuse the heart that would claim 
that the great Creator could not be angry under just and proper 
cause. It would be as improper for our Creator to refrain from 
righteous indignation and wrath when there is a just and proper 
cause, as it would be for him to be angry without a cause. He is 
angry with wickedness and sin every day (Psa. 7:11), and declares 
that ultimately, sin, and all who love it, shall be no more. 

The same Greek word rendered "wrath" in the above texts, is 
rendered "angry" in Mark 3:5, "He [Jesus] looked about on them 
with ANGER, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts. " This 
was proper anger, a righteous indignation at hypocrisy and wilful 
opposition to the light. 

While God announces his anger, and shows its justice, he bids us 
beware of it, lest, because of our fallen condition, we err in 
judgment. We therefore recognizing ourselves as imperfect in 
judgment, are admonished to leave it for him who cannot err, and 
who says "Vengeance is mine I will repay." Hence we are exhorted 
to "put off all these-anger, wrath," etc., (Col. 3:8) and let all 



bitterness and wrath and anger... be put away from you," (Eph. 
4:31.) and to be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath." (James 
1:19.) The Greek word used in these three illustrations referring to 
the Church is orge the same exactly as used above in referring to 
the "wrath" of Jehovah, and the "anger" of Jesus. The reason, as we 
have shown, is that we are not capable in our present fallen 
condition to judge our fallen fellow creatures; hence while God's 
wrath is a righteous indignation "the wrath of man worketh not the 
righteousness of God." (Jas. 1:20.) Hence the command, "Be ye 
angry and sin not." There may be instances of wrong and 
oppression when we should be angry, when to be otherwise minded 
would be wrong, and would show either a sympathy with the 
wrong, or a lazy fear of the result of opposing it. We must 
remember our own weakness and liability, and be ready to cease 
resentment upon evidence of true repentance and reform, 
remembering that God has said, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay, 
saith the Lord." (Rom. 12:19.) We say, therefore, that this view, 
which ignores and denies the wrath of God against sin and sinners, 
and which therefore sees no necessity for Christ as a mediator for 
man's sin toward God, is in direct opposition, both to the facts of 
life and to Scripture testimony. 

But now let us look at the other distorted view of the mediation of 
Christ, the view generally known as orthodox. It pictures before 
men's minds, a God so angry as to be ferocious and cruel, whose 
rage against sinners pursues them not only during the present 
existence, but beyond the grave, and supplies them with existence 
for the one and only purpose of torturing them everlastingly. Then 
dropping for the time being their unscriptural and absurd idea that 
there are three Gods, "one in person," they speak of Christ Jesus as 
being very different from Jehovah; for whereas the one, as 
described, would be the personification and embodiment of hate, 
anger and malice, the other, they represent as love and love only. 
While according to this view Jehovah was engaged in hurrying off 
earth's millions to everlasting torture, Jesus appeared and by a 
sacrifice of himself, placated, or in a measure, satisfied the wrath of 
Jehovah. 

According to this view, Jesus having finished the sacrifice for man's 
sins, ascended to heaven, where it is claimed he sits upon what is 
termed his mediatorial throne. It is claimed that Jesus will occupy 
the mediatorial throne until the end of all probation. Their claim is 
that while he sits as mediator between God and men, he will plead 
for the sinner, and importune God not to send him into everlasting 
torture, but to let him come into heaven; and that when Jesus shall 
leave that mediatorial throne and come a second time, there is no 
more hope for sinners. Then it is claimed Jesus will look again 
over the already fixed verdict of the just and unjust, in what they 
term the judgment day, and thereafter Jesus and his Church join 
with Jehovah in the grand (?), glorious (?) and delightful (?) work 
of superintending the everlasting and hopeless torture of the great 



majority of the human race in endless woe, either mental or 
physical, or as claimed by some, both. 

We deeply pity the benighted mind to which this view of God's 
character and plan has the slightest appearance of right or truth. 
Such know neither the Father nor the Son. 

The idea of so-called Protestants on the Mediatorship of Jesus is 
very closely related to that of Roman Catholics on the same subject. 
The Church of Rome directs the sinner to go to the priest, who will 
intercede for him with the Virgin 

R788 : page 3 

and dead saints, and these in turn intercede with Jesus, who finally 
intercedes with Jehovah and secures the forgiveness of sin. 
Protestants, leaving out the mediation of priests, dead saints, and 
the virgin, come directly to Jesus, as a Mediator and Intercessor. 
The thought presented is that of the angry Jehovah approached by 
the loving Jesus, who PLEADS for us, showing the wounds of 
Calvary, until finally the Father relents and reluctantly receives the 
sinner. This view is forcibly expressed in the following verse from 
an old and familiar hymn: 

For me he ever lives, 

For me to INTERCEDE; 

His all redeeming love, 

His precious blood to PLEAD. 

Forgive him, O forgive, they cry, 

Nor let that ransomed sinner die. 

Alas ! that any claiming the name of Christ, and possessing the 
Bible, should be in such ignorance of the character of Jehovah 
therein revealed. Instead of repelling his ransomed creatures and 
requiring the pleading and interceding of a Mediator to induce him 
to be reconciled to us, the very reverse is true. All the mediation is 
in the past, so far as God is concerned; and ever since the ransom- 
sacrifice of Jesus was accepted as the propitiation or satisfaction for 
our sins and the sins of the whole world, Jehovah's attitude has been 
propitious [favorable -gracious] toward the sinner, ready and 
willing to receive all that come to him in and by the merit of that 
propitiatory sacrifice. And it has been the mission of the Apostles 
and of all who have become the children of God through faith in the 
finished work of Christ, to herald the fact to all men that God is 
now ready and willing to receive all who thus come. Therefore, as 
says the Apostle, it is, "As though God did beseech you by us, we 
PRAY YOU in Christ's stead, BE YE reconciled to God." (2 Cor. 
5:20.) This text shows that the part of Christ's work of mediation 
which related to the settlement of the claims of justice against us, as 
sinners, was at a full end-finished, completed, and that the part 
remaining was the making known of this divine reconciliation to 
the sinners, making them aware of God's favor and willingness to 
receive all that come unto him through the finished work of the 
Mediator. 



How clearly the Scriptures guard us against the two extreme 
theories of man. They assure us that God is love; that the Lord is 
very pitiful and of tender compassion; that he has no pleasure in the 
death of the wicked, but would that all would turn unto him and 
live; that he authorized Christ and all his followers to be his 
ambassadors and ministers, to make known the good tidings of 
reconciliation accomplished "by the death of 

R788 : page 4 

his Son, whom he set forth to be a propitiation for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." (Rom. 3:25, 
and 1 John 2:2.) They assure us also that Jehovah's love and 
wisdom planned the redemption, and that, in raising Christ from the 
dead, he gave proof of the acceptableness of the sacrifice, and of 
the certainty of the resultant blessing. It is not only true that in due 
time God sent his only begotten Son for our redemption (Rom. 5:6), 
and that God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we 
were yet sinners, Christ died for us (Rom. 5:8), but it is true also 
that this was Jehovah's original plan, and that before sin entered, 
even before the foundation of the world (1 Pet. 1:18-20; Rev. 13:8), 
his wisdom and love provided, and beheld in the distance, "the 
Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." 

So far as God is concerned, the mediation of Christ Jesus is all in 
the past. As the Apostle expresses it in the text under consideration, 
the Mediator who stood BETWEEN the just Creator and his 
condemned and guilty creatures, was "the man Christ Jesus," and 
not the exalted Jesus. He mediated by giving himself a ransom [a 
corresponding price] for all. It is not the glorified Jesus that 
intercedes as mediator and prays pardon for sinners. If such were 
the case, the Son of God need not have come into the world to die 
for the sinners, but might from the first have prayed for them. But 
if prayers only were needed, no mediator would have been 
necessary, for God himself "SO LOVED the world" —"while we 
were yet sinners." It was because no mediation, in the sense of 
entreaty, was necessary, and because no such action could mediate 
between God's violated law and the sinner, that the mediation was 
accomplished in a totally different manner. The Mediator was the 
man Christ Jesus. He became a man that he might be the Mediator. 
The act of mediation consisted in the man Jesus giving himself a 
ransom [corresponding price] for all men, to meet the penalty of the 
law of God against all men, that henceforth the condemnation of sin 
and its penalty death being removed, there might be no obstacle 
hindering men from the enjoyment of God's blessing and favor. In 
a word, the sacrifice for sins is the mediation, and the Sacrificer at 
the time of the sacrifice is the Mediator. 

That this is the correct idea, is not only borne out by reason, and the 
above statement of Scripture, but by every text in which the word 
Mediator, as applied to Jesus, occurs. The same word occurs as 
follows: Gal. 3:19,20; 1 Tim. 2:5; Heb. 8:6; 9:15 and 12:24. These 
refer to Jesus and Moses, both as mediators. They show that Moses, 



as the mediator of the Law Covenant, was a type of Jesus, the 
Mediator of the New Covenant. 

The apostle, after informing us that Christ was mediator of the New 
Covenant, adds, (Heb. 9:15-22-Diaglott) "For where a covenant 
exists, the death of that which has ratified it, is necessary ...a 
covenant is firm [binding] over dead victims, since it is never valid 
when that which ratifies it [or, is to ratify it] is alive. Hence not 
even the first [i.e. the Law Covenant] has been [was] instituted 
without blood," [though the blood used in the type was not the 
actual blood of Moses the typical mediator of that typical covenant, 
but the blood of beasts representing Moses' blood]. For every 
commandment of the law having been spoken by Moses to all the 
people, taking the blood of bullocks and of goats with water and 
scarlet wool and hyssop he sprinkled both the book [of the law, the 
covenant] itself, and all the people, saying, "This is the blood of [or 
evidence of the death, of that which ratified] the covenant which 
God enjoined on you." 

It will be observed that the killing [shedding of the blood] of the 
bullocks and goats, was the mediation, their death representing the 
death of Moses the mediator of that covenant. In the killing of 
these, the mediation was completed; the covenant was ratified and 
in full force that very instant. The sprinkling of the blood upon the 
book and people was not a part of the mediating of the covenant, 
for the covenant had no force or binding value until the mediation 
was complete, finished. That which mediated for the sins of the 
people RATIFIED, or completed the covenant, i.e. made its 
provisions applicable to the people. The sprinkling of the people 
and book came as a result of the ratifying of the covenant; as a 
result of the mediation for their sins typically represented in the 
death of the beasts. 

As in the typical, so in the real mediation for sin, which ratifies and 
brings into force the better covenant-the New Covenant. The man 
Christ Jesus mediated or came between God and man by meeting 
the penalty of the law against which mankind had sinned. He 
opened up a new and living way [a new way of life] by bringing 
into operation a New Covenant or new arrangement between God 
and man. The original arrangement entered into between God and 
his creatures was, that if obedient to God, man should live forever. 
This we failed in as a race, represented in Adam, and the penalty- 
death— came upon all. God could not make another contract or 
covenant with men whereby they could have life, while they were 
already under sentence of death for the violation of the original 
covenant or arrangement. Hence it was impossible for a new 
covenant or arrangement between God and man to take effect at all, 
until the penalty of the violation of the original engagement had 
been met by the payment of a ransom- a corresponding price. The 
one paying that price and removing the obstruction which hindered 
the making of a New Covenant, is the MEDIATOR. The man 
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a corresponding price, did thus 



cancel the penalty of the violated covenant, and thus opened the 
way for the "New Covenant," or new contract between God and 
men; wherefore he is called, "The Mediator of the New Covenant." 
Compare Heb. 9:15. 

Thus the death of Christ, by meeting our penalty, mediating for us 
or making "reconciliation for iniquity," RATIFIED or established 
the New Covenant, putting it into force, and so, immediately after 
Jesus' sacrifice was complete and had been formally presented to 
God on our behalf, came the Pentecostal blessing, marking the 
beginning of the New Covenant. 

It may help us to appreciate the matter, if we examine the New 
Covenant and see what kind of an arrangement it is, and also the 
typical covenant of which Moses was the mediator, as represented 
in the dying beasts. 

The New Covenant or new arrangement between God and man, is 
that expressed to Israel, whose sacrifices, covenants, etc., were 
typical of those to be instituted once for all men. "Behold, the days 
come, saith the Lord, that I will make a New Covenant with the 
house of Israel and with the house of Judah.... This shall be the 
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: After those days 
[after a while or by-and-by], 

R789 : page 4 

saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it 
in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people. 
And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every 
man his brother, saying, 'Know the Lord'; for they shall all know 
me from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: 
for I will forgive their iniquity and remember their sin no more." 
Jer. 31:31-34. 

The new and future covenant is here compared and contrasted with 
the Law Covenant, under which, as a nation, they had long been. 
The thing to be desired was to get rid entirely of the original sin and 
condemnation, and to get a clear understanding of God's 
requirements and have a fresh trial-i.e., to be permitted each 
individually to stand trial for life or death according to obedience or 
disobedience, in hope of obtaining and retaining everlastingly the 
right of life. 

Israel supposed that they had received virtually this, when the Law 
Covenant was ratified. With great pomp and solemnity, that 
covenant was instituted at the hands of Moses, and they were 
assured, as the items of the Law were announced to them, that "The 
man that doeth these things shall LIVE" as a consequence [have life 
as long as he doeth them]. Rom. 10:5; Gal. 3:12; Lev. 18:5. But 
their bright hopes were soon blighted, for one after another died, 
giving evidence that none of them kept their part of the covenant 
fully; and it soon became evident that, By the deeds of the Law 
[Covenant] could no flesh be justified in God's sight. Rom. 3:20. 



This was God's object in giving them that typical covenant. He 
thus showed them their own depraved condition, to convince them 
that a great remedy was needed for the great malady of sin— that a 
great Saviour was needed to deliver them from the enemy's power. 
The Law Covenant was given to teach this lesson, and to typify and 
illustrate the operations of the New Covenant coming after it, as 
well as to fill up the time intervening before the right time of the 
introduction of the New Covenant which it typified. 

The New Covenant is like its type, the Law Covenant, except that 
its range will be greater; it will embrace the world represented by 
Israel; its provisions will be grander and deeper as an antitype is 
always superior to that which is used to typify it. Comparing the 
two, under the Apostle's direction, we can see the vast superiority 
of the New Covenant over its type: The typical covenant, 
established or ratified or mediated by the death of bulls or goats as 
sacrifices for original sin, was insufficient; for such sacrifices "can 
never take away sins"; (Heb. 10:11), their death was not a ransom- 
not a corresponding price, to the death of man, not equivalent in 
value to the penalty resting upon mankind for the violation of the 
original covenant by their representative, Adam, and nothing short 
of this could cancel the sin and remove its penalty really. That God 
so regarded their covenant is evident from the fact that it had to be 
repeatedly ratified every year by the sacrifice of more bulls and 
goats on the typical "Day of Atonement," thus indicating that the 
original guilt was not blotted out and canceled, but merely 
RECKONED SO for a year at a time. This process of ratifying the 
typical covenant yearly, and offering life to every Israelite who 
would live up to its requirements, was kept up for centuries, though 
none of them gained the coveted boon-until the man Christ Jesus, 
came— a perfect man whose life came not through a father of the 
Adamic race, but from Adam's Father, Jehovah. Thus we see 
another use for the Law Covenant; it pointed out and served to 
prove the man Christ Jesus the only perfect man, and hence the 
only one who could give a ransom— a corresponding price for the 
transgression of the first perfect man's failure to obey the first 
covenant. 

But as the sacrifices by which the Law covenant was mediated were 
only typical and temporary, and hence of no lasting value to 
sinners, so also, the other provisions of that covenant; for instance, 
the law given them and which they covenanted to obey, was written 
in tables of stone, and their hearts being left in the depraved 
condition, to keep the law was an impossibility— it could only 
condemn them, as out of harmony with it. 

Now contrast with this the New Covenant and its better conditions. 
The foundation of the New Covenant is sure; the mediation is 
thorough and complete and needs not a yearly repetition; the 
putting away of original sin is by "one sacrifice for sins forever" 
(Heb. 10:12), because the Mediator of the New Covenant mediated 
not with the blood of others [bulls and goats] "but by his own 



blood," by "better sacrifices" than those (Heb. 9:12 and 23), "when 
He offered up himself" (Heb. 7:27) "a ransom for all." Thus seen 
the security of the New Covenant rests upon the cancellation of the 
penalty of the original covenant violated by Adam our 
representative. A corresponding price, i.e., a ransom, is the only 
complete settlement of the old case which would admit of a new 
covenant being entered into with us. Hence the importance of 
realizing the RANSOM price given by the man Christ Jesus, the 
mediator of the New Covenant, before we can appreciate fully its 
blessed provisions. The man Jesus was not only a better sacrifice 
than bulls and goats, but His better sacrifice became the "surety of a 
better covenant." Heb. 7:22. 

Notice that by the provisions of the New Covenant the sinners 
released from the penalty of the former violated covenant, will not 
only have a new trial, but will, in addition, have restored to them 
the original perfections of being, whereby they shall individually 
have as full an opportunity of rendering obedience, and meriting 
life everlasting, as Adam their representative had under the first 
covenant. And their trial will be backed up by the lesson learned 
from Adam's disobedience and their own experience under sin. 
This is indicated in the promise of the New Covenant- "I will put 
my law in their inward parts and write it in their hearts. " Thus it 
was with Adam; he needed not to have God's law written on tablets 
of stone, for his instruction, because his very being was permeated 
with that law. His mind (spirit) was in harmony with God's mind 
(spirit). Sin had not warped and twisted his judgment and made 
wrong to appear right. Malice, selfishness and pride had not at that 
time displaced righteousness and love, the image of God in which 
he was created. And not only was his mind in harmony with God, 
but his body also. He had then none of the physical imperfections 

R789 : page 5 

and tendencies to evil that now so hinder and incapacitate, for 
perfect obedience to God: So deeply was the Law of God originally 
written in the perfect human organism that even the past six 
thousand years of degradation, sin, ignorance, superstition, and 
misery has not entirely blotted out that law; and to-day even the 
most degraded savages give evidence of some appreciation of right 
and wrong, even without the written law. "These having not the 
[written] law," "show the work [or give evidence] of the law, 
written in their hearts ...their thoughts the meanwhile accusing or 
excusing." (Rom. 2:15.) This glimmer of conscience, often so 
distorted by superstition and error as to lead into deeper error, 
serves to illustrate what it would be to have the full Law of God 
clearly and deeply written in the heart. 

But, moreover, the word "heart" is used to represent the center of 
affections, hence the promise of the New Covenant is not only to 
give mankind an intellectual knowledge of the Lord, so that they 
shall need no further instruction one of another, but the law will be 
deeply and lastingly engraven in the very center of the affections of 



all who will accept the provisions of that covenant. O how 
different is this new covenant from its type given to Israel! how 
much grander the sacrifice of mediation which cancelled the old 
and ratified the new. How much better to have the heart-written 
law (which implies restitution to God's image) than the law written 
on tables of stone. 

Thank God for the New Covenant, praise him for its bountiful 
provisions for every member of the fallen race; and above all, 
noting how all else depended upon its mediation and ratification by 
the settlement of our indebtedness or penalty under the original 
covenant (death), let us, above all, praise God for the gift of his 
Son, the Mediator, "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a 
ransom." Compare Heb. 10:16-20 with Jer. 31:31-34. 



R789 : page 5 

OUR ACCESS TO GOD THROUGH THE 
ONE MEDIATOR. 

"Having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood 
of Jesus." Heb. 10:19. 

"No man cometh unto the Father but by me." John 14:6. 

From the foregoing it will be plain, we trust, that the mediation is 
all in the past, that it is not the living, glorified Jesus who is now 
mediating between God and men and propitiating God as toward 
and for us, but that the mediating and propitiating work, is all 
completed, finished, ended by the Mediator who gave himself as 
the mediatory or propitiatory sacrifice -the man Christ Jesus. 

This being true, it is evident that there is no longer any barrier or 
hindrance to prevent any sinner who accepts of that mediation-the 
ransom— from having access to the Father without any one to 
intercede further on his behalf. It is evident that to obtain the 
forgiveness of sins provided for by that propitiating ransom, the 
sinner for whom it was given has only to go to God and claim the 
forgiveness, and needs not to bring any other sacrifice for sins than 
that ONE, and needs no Mediator either in earth or heaven. This 
simple truth is beautifully expressed by the poet:- 

"In my hand no price I bring, 

Simply to The cross I cling." R790 : page 5 

Alas ! how humanity would bar the way which God through 
Christ has made so open and free. How the traditions of men would 
hinder and obstruct the way of the sinner. Papacy set the example, 
saying by actions and practices, God is not fully satisfied with the 
ransom: He must be approached by Jesus and pleaded with to 
receive you; and Jesus loves his mother, say they, and would make 
special effort for the sinner if his mother requested it, and the 



Virgin Mary, say they, would not take special interest in the sinner's 
plea for mercy and forgiveness unless she were importuned by a 
regularly ordained priest, and the priest would not spend his effort 
for the sinner unless it paid either in money or influence. Protestant 
sects obtained much of the same spirit of error from the false 
doctrine that the penalty for sin is everlasting misery instead of 
everlasting extinction -death. This false doctrine has produced an 
awful dread and fear of God which love cannot cast out, while life 
and this error lasts. Of this the Lord speaks through the Prophet, 
saying, "Their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men." Isa. 
29: 13. Having such a fear of Jehovah and not seeing clearly that 
the ransom given cancelled all the claims of justice against the race, 
and silences forever the condemnations of the curse against those 
who, by faith, lay hold of that ransom, they still feel a need for 
some one to stand between them and Jehovah and plead forgiveness 
for them. And this wrong idea leads to other wrongs of action. 
Teaching an unwillingness on God's part to receive the sinner freely 
and fully, without being urged to do so by Jesus, is the foundation 
of what is known among some of God's children as the "mourner's 
bench," where the repentant sinner, seeking forgiveness, is taught, 
by practice and example at least, that tears and groans and 
entreaties of himself and others must precede any forgiveness of 
sins or acceptance with God. To thus represent him as requiring 
entreaty is to misrepresent God and the teaching of his Word, and 
to undervalue the efficacy of the precious ransom sacrifice by 
which we have full, free and uninterrupted access to the Father. 
The way to life does not need to be opened by groans and 
pleadings; it was opened more than eighteen centuries ago by the 
Mediator-the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a RANSOM for 
all. 

The custom of so-called Revival Meetings to call upon sinners to 
arise, and thereby request an interest in the prayers of Christians 
present, is a part of the same error. It is virtually saying to sinners 
that they need the intercession or pleading of saints with Jesus, and 
of Jesus with the Father, before they can be at harmony with God. 
It thus deceives the sinner and helps to fix an error in his mind, 
which even though he should become converted, will for years be a 
stumbling block to him, and through him to others, preventing 
many from correctly apprehending God's character and plan. 

Doubtless from this error, in conjunction with others, has sprung 
the erroneous but common custom of praying for the conversion of 
friends. While it is proper for us to make known to the Lord our 
interest in our friends, and in sinners in general, yet it is not proper 
for us to request God to change his plan and arrangements and to 
adopt our plans. Rather, we should listen to his word, and learn 
what is his way and then reverently say, Not my will but thine be 
done, and not my way and time but thine. 

For an imperfect human being to attempt to direct the all- wise 
Jehovah, is the very extreme of presumption. It is evidently born of 



the idea that we love the sinner more than God loves him; that our 
love is deeper and stronger than that of the Father, who so loved the 
world, while all were yet sinners, as to send his Son to mediate and 
ratify the New Covenant, which would bless all the families of the 
earth; or that our love is deeper than that of him who declares, 
"Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for 
his friend. " Those who feel that their love for sinners is greater than 
this, should reflect that they have shown less love and made less 
sacrifice for sinners. 

A proper view of the matter would lead to some such conclusion as 
the following:- 

Here is a friend whom I love; I desire that he shall come into 
harmony with God-be converted from ways of sin and unbelief to 
ways of righteousness and faith. What shall I do about it? Shall I 
pray to God and entreat him to love him and to provide for his 
welfare? No; because I realize that he already loves him more than 
I do, and that he has already made provision for him at great cost. 
What then can I do for my friend? First of all, I can inform myself 
of what plan and arrangement God has made for him, assured from 
the very outstart that that plan must be as much more wise, loving, 
and just, than any I could design, as God is more wise, just and 
loving than I am. 

When I find in God's word that a full ransom has been given for all, 
and that a New Covenant, a new way and arrangement, was thereby 
opened for all, I realize that my friend, myself, and all others are 
sure to be given an opportunity for life everlasting under its 
bountiful provisions. Thanking God then, that my friend has been 
redeemed, and that "in due time" he will be brought to understand 
the conditions of the New Covenant, and helped to comply with 
those conditions, I rejoice in this. 

Then, I inquire of the Lord through HIS WORD, whether, in order 
to partake of the New Covenant blessings, my friend must 
recognize and accept of its provisions now; and I find the answer 
there, and in the facts of life, that only a few of the whole race, who 
shall be blessed by that covenant, learn anything of it in this present 
time, that the vast majority die in infancy and in almost total 
ignorance of it, but that whoever hears of it and receives it now, 
during the Christian age, has the opportunity and privilege of 
sacrificing, and thus of receiving the additional favor promised to 
such. Now I say to myself: I know that my friend will be blessed 
through the ransom, and brought to a knowledge of that blessed 
truth, and to the enjoyment of the favors thus opened up— some 
time. There can be no doubt of this. But now, I wish that he could 
see it and receive the truth now, that thus he might have the honor 
and blessing to be conferred on the overcomers of this age. The 
fact that God says that some are so blinded by the ruler of this 
world (John 12:31) that they cannot see the truth, suggests at once 
that there is a strong possibility that my friend might be one of 
these, whose mind is so prejudiced and blinded that he cannot 



receive the message of redemption and reconciliation until the next 
age shall have removed the obstacles and hindrances, when all the 
blinded eyes shall be opened. Isa. 35:5. 

But desirous of doing all I can for my friend, and, if possible, of 
getting him upon the race course for the grand prize of the divine 
nature, I inquire again of God's Word-Lord, according to thy wise 
and gracious plan, are all who may run for that prize arbitrarily 
called? or is the call for all who can hear and receive it? The 
answer is, "He that hath an ear, let him hear;" "To-day, if ye will [or 
shall] hear his voice, harden not your hearts" (Heb. 4:7); for 
whosoever cometh unto the Father by the Mediator is accepted, and 
has every privilege and opportunity of any other. So then, all that I 
can do in the matter is to try in every way to reach the "ear" of my 
friend with the good tidings. Some have less ear to hear than 
others, therefore the Lord tells us that we should use wisdom and 
prudence, not in what we shall tell him, for we must tell the truth 
and nothing else; but we should use wisdom and prudence in how 
we tell it; that time, circumstances and manner may be favorable for 
reaching his ear with the truth concerning God's love, God's plan 
and the favors now obtainable. Therefore, if I go to God in prayer 
concerning the matter, I may not pray for my friend, that God 
would change his plan, and do the work of reaching his ear; for if 
that were best, he would do so without my asking. But I may well 
pray for wisdom to guide me in my endeavor to proclaim the good 
tidings, so that if my friend have "an ear to hear" I may be able to 
reach it and "let him hear." 

The Apostle declares, that it has pleased God by the foolishness 
[i.e., seemingly slow and unsuccessful method] of preaching 
[teaching-declaring] to save them that believe. (1 Cor. 1:21.) He 
does not say anywhere that it is God's plan to save people because 
people pray for them; nor is there an instance in Scripture where 
Jesus or the Apostles prayed for the conversion of any one. 
Whence then comes the practice to-day, except, as we say, it is born 
of erroneous views of the love of God and a failure to appreciate 
the fullness of the ransom and the ultimate breadth of its results, 
under the provisions of the New Covenant? The bringing of men 
into harmony with God in the next age, will be by the same means 
as in this age— preaching— but under circumstances more favorable 
to their hearing [i.e., believing or accepting] than at present. 

But stop, here is another consideration: There is a limit placed upon 
the time, "To-day if you will [or shall] hear his voice." Yes, to-day 
limits it in two ways; it is to-day, or during the Christian age, that 
there is any if about the hearing, for in the coming age all shall 
hear; for this is the will of God, that all shall come to a knowledge 
of the truth (1 Tim. 2:4); and one of the provisions of the New 
Covenant, ratified by the blood of the Mediator, is, that the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, and then none 
shall need 

R791 : page 5 



"say to his neighbor, know thou the Lord, for all shall know him." 
Yes, it is shall hear and shall know then, but it is if any man have an 
ear, and if he come in contact with the truth, and if he hear, now. 
The "if" is limited to "to-day" -the present Christian age; it has no 
place beyond. 

But further, the "if," and the to-day, limit it in another way. If we 
hear to-day, i.e., during the Christian age while the CALL to the 
divine nature is being made; if we hear that call, to both suffer and 
reign with Christ. But "if" we do not hear it "to-day" we will not 
again hear that call; for the "little flock" to be joint-heirs with Christ 
and partakers of the divine nature will have been completed, and 
the call will be different thereafter, though it will be grand 

R791 : page 6 

also. It will have all the blessings and promises contained in the 
New Covenant, but not the added blessings of the Abrahamic 
covenant. None will then be called to be of the "seed"-the Christ 
which shall bless the world (See Gal. 3:29) for that company will 
be complete, but the call will then be to share the blessings of the 
New Covenant, and be thus blessed by the "seed" now being 
selected through suffering and sacrifice. 

And since we find the Scriptures teaching clearly that the CALL to 
the divine nature is now at an end, we must not in preaching 
express that call to our unconverted friends, but should point them 
to the New Covenant blessings of restitution. We may say to them, 
See the goodness of God, the breadth of the salvation, the ransom 
fully as far reaching as the curse; let it lead thee to repentance; give 
thy heart to God, let him at once begin to write upon you his perfect 
law, and at once begin to restore you, both mentally to his image, 
and to physical perfection. It took 6,000 years to blot out that law 
and bring you to your present unlikeness to him, but it will not take 
so long to restore you. He promises that it shall be done, for all 
who will accept it, within the 1,000 years of the reign of Christ. 
Begin at once to taste the fellowship with God, and to express by 
obedience your appreciation of his great love as manifested in his 
great and loving plans. 

We see, then, that ALL and the FULLEST MEDIATION between 
God and man, was accomplished in the death of the Mediator-the 
man Christ Jesus, though God did not formally accept of it for 
several days after it was made, and though all mankind will not 
even have ability to accept its provisions until some time in the 
millennial day. Reconciliation on God's part was deferred until 
Jesus had ascended on high and formally presented the ransom 
given for his formal approval and acceptance. It was accepted by 
God, and this was indicated by marked manifestation of the Holy 
Spirit on the day of Pentecost. So many of the race then living as 
had ears to hear and eyes to see, and who accepted of the ransom 
and the New Covenant which it ratified, were then brought into 
harmony and fellowship with God. So many of the race as have 



since heard and accepted have had the privilege, while others, the 
great mass of the race for whom the ransom was given, will come 
to "see" and "hear" only after the Prince of darkness shall be bound 
and the Sun of righteousness shall have risen with healing in his 
wings, bringing blessings and restoration, mentally and morally as 
well as physically, to all the blind, deaf and lame. Then they shall 
hear and all shall know, and thus be enabled to avail themselves of 
every blessing provided under the New Covenant, even to life 
everlasting, as a reward of obedience everlasting. 

Thus seen, the ONE Mediator, the man Christ Jesus was sufficient, 
and the mediation accomplished by him when he gave himself a 
RANSOM was abundant, and therefore the way of access to God 
and to everlasting life, stands open wide to every sinner who shall 
either now, or in the next age, see by faith the sacrifice, and grasp 
by faith the ransom and the mediation accomplished in it. 

Then take away the hindrances and let sinners come to God. Put 
away the false idea of Jesus standing before the throne of God 
pleading for the sinners as though God were unjust and unwilling to 
grant the favors which he himself had arranged for by the sacrifice 
of his Son. Take away priests, and saints, and virgin; take away 
your mourners benches and your unscriptural prayers which only 
hinder the sinner. And instead of praying with him or for him 
instruct him; point him to the strait road, the open way to life. Give 
him full assurance of your faith, making very plain to him the 
greatness and all-sufficiency of the ransom given and the mediation 
completed, FINISHED at Calvary. 

Dear dying Lamb thy precious blood, 
Shall never lose its POWER, 
'Till all the RANSOMED ones of earth 
Are saved from Satan's power. 



R791 : page 6 

AN ADVOCATE WITH THE FATHER, 
INTERCEDING FOR US. 

"If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation [satisfaction] for our 
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." 
1 John 2:1. 

This passage is supposed to favor the thought, that when coming 
to the Father, the glorified Jesus must act as an ambassador or 
advocate with the Father, to plead for our acceptance and 
forgiveness. This we have already shown to be contrary to reason as 
well as contrary to the spirit and word of God. How then is this 
statement of John's to be understood? We answer that when this 
statement concerning the advocate is taken in connection with the 
context, all is clear and plain. The evidence of our ransom, 



presented by Jesus when he ascended on high, is, and ever shall be, 
our advocate. As the blood of Abel "cried" or spoke to God after 
his death, so the blood of the man Christ Jesus, the Mediator, 
speaks for every sinner for whom he died, for all who come unto 
God trusting in his sacrifice for sins. The blood of Abel cried for 
vengeance, but not so the blood of Christ. (Heb. 12:24.) It speaks 
peace and pardon to the sinner, and speaks full satisfaction 
(propitiation) to God, for our sins. That blood, that sacrifice, that 
ransom presented by Jesus, is our advocate; ever with the Father, 
ever heard on behalf of every repentant sinner, and Jesus, the 
glorified, has no need to further plead for our forgiveness. 

And this is plainly the apostle's teaching. In the preceding verse he 
says, "If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves." "If we 
confess our sins, he [God] is JUST TO FORGIVE us our sins." 
Then in explanation of why we may know certainly of our 
forgiveness and see how God to be JUST must forgive us, the 
apostle points to our advocate, the blood which speaks for us— 
"Jesus Christ the righteous"— without sin, therefore a perfect 
ransom, the satisfaction for our sins and for all sins. He thus points 
us to Calvary and to the acceptance of that ransom price as our 
advocate. 

We read of the INTERCESSION of Christ for us, and it is well that 
we should appreciate its meaning. "It is Christ that died, yea rather 
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also 
maketh intercession for us." "He is able to save to the uttermost all 
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make 
intercession for them." (Rom. 8:34; Heb. 7:25.) These statements 
are not out of harmony with the foregoing. They do not teach that 
Christ Jesus prays or entreats with the Father for our acceptance. 
The Greek word used rather signifies to deal or to show cause. He 
ever liveth to deal or negotiate for them. The same Greek word is 
translated "deal" in Acts 25:24. 

Now the question arises, What negotiation is necessary? If the man 
Christ Jesus by the sacrifice of himself met all the obligations and 
penalties of the original covenant, and opened up a new way of life- 
-by ratifying a new covenant with his blood, and if whoever cometh 
to the Father by him-accepting of the ransom from the old, and the 
conditions of the New Covenant, is acceptable with the Father, why 
need there be any further dealing or negotiation on our behalf? 

We answer, The rolling away of the condemnation of the first 
covenant is not sufficient. If all the old score were blotted out, the 
sinner would still need to be helped; for if when the old score was 
settled, he was presented to God as a person against whom not a 
charge could be found— fully cleared of all guilt, how long would 
such an one maintain such a standing? Not a moment; for though 
cleansed, if not made perfect; if not freed from the weaknesses 
resulting from the fall, we would be condemned again under the 
new covenant, were it not that the Great High Priest deals for us. 



As our Redeemer he bought us. His sacrifice is our price. As our 
Restorer he will bring us to perfection and to fellowship with the 
Father. Because he is perfect and acceptable with the Father, we, 
whom he purchased, and whom he represents, are acceptable 
through him representatively. 

As in the person of Adam, death passed upon all represented in him 
long before each individual became totally dead, so in Christ's 
person as their representative, a right to life has come to all 
mankind long before each individual becomes fully alive— perfect. 
(Adam was the representative of the race by nature, by creation; 
Christ being their representative by virtue of ownership; having 
bought us with his own precious blood.) We will not be personally 
worthy of recognition by the Father until made actually perfect. 

Thus, then, while imperfect, Christ deals with us for God; judging 
and correcting us, etc., and he deals with God for us, by 
appropriating to us the merit of his own sacrifice. When the present 
trial is past, if we are accounted worthy of life, when we reach the 
point of actual perfection we shall need no one to "deal" 

R792 : page 6 

for us, or to represent us, but we will deal directly with the Father 
ourselves. 

But now, and so long as we are imperfect, it would be "a fearful 
thing to fall into the hands of the living God." (Heb. 10:26-31.) 
Fearful, in that every imperfect being, judged by the law of God, 
would be found imperfect, and hence as unworthy of life, 
condemned to death. Specially fearful, because it would be "the 
second death," for all were released from the condemnation of the 
first or Adamic death by the ransom, and should be hid or covered 
by the Redeemer until perfected. And all may be so covered who 
are willing to be; hence if they "fall into the hands of the living 
God" before perfection has been reached, it must be by a willful 
rejection of the Redeemer's merit. In thus removing their cause 
from his negotiation or dealing, such are face to face with Him 
whose laws they violate, and whose appointed way of reconciliation 
they thus spurn when they reject Jesus' merit as their justification, 
and attempt to deal with God themselves as though perfect or not 
requiring a ransom. 

But in all this there is nothing in favor of the usual idea of 
INTERCESSION, of Jesus pleading for sinners, and praying the 
Father to accept them. It is rather that of a representative or 
attorney, who, as our case is called, acts for us, represents us, 
applying the merits of his ransom- sacrifice to each one coming to 
the Father by him. He continues to supply and apply that 
meritorious sacrifice until we, made perfect, shall have no further 
need of it, though that sacrifice and merit shall never be forgotten - 
in eternity. Thus he not only redeems us from guilt, but is able (and 
willing) to save to the uttermost— completely —all who come to the 
Father by him. 



Thus every Scripture points to the merit of the sacrifice on our 
behalf. His sacrifice redeemed us, he bought all; all are his, and he 
represents all whom he purchased, and will continue to represent 
them, and to deal for them, until such times as he shall have 
perfected them and presented them perfect to the Father, (1 Cor. 
15:27,28 and Jude 24.) unless they wilfully and designedly remove 
their case from his charge. 

Those whom the apostle mentions as falling into the hands of the 
living God and receiving his fiery indignation, and being devoured 
or destroyed as his adversaries, are those who reject the ransom and 
refuse God's spirit of favor therein extended to them-who reject the 
efficacy of the blood which sealed and ratified the New Covenant 
and attempt to stand before God and deal for themselves with all 
their imperfection. 



R792 : page 6 

THE LAW COVENANT AND ITS MEDIATION 
TYPICAL NOT REAL. 

The Law Covenant made with Israel was binding upon them 
when they accepted its conditions, to the extent that it was a REAL 
covenant. And well it is for Israel that theirs was only a typical 
covenant and its conditions, penalties, etc., only typical; because, 
had that covenant been real, they in coming under its conditions 
would have become individually liable to its penalty, DEATH. For 
though this penalty is no worse, but in fact the same, that was upon 
them and the whole world, before, as sharers of the condemnation 
upon Adam their representative, yet there would have been this 
difference: that instead of one man's disobedient act and one man's 
penalty, to be met before another covenant could be ratified or put 
into operative force, there would have been the disobedience of 
every one of the millions of Israelites to be met by a corresponding 
price. Nothing short of ten million saviours would have been a 
corresponding price for ten million individual sinners. 
Consequently, only one man's disobedience and penalty, being thus 
far settled by one man-Christ Jesus, it follows, that if Israel's 
covenant had been real, if its Mediator brought them under a new 
condition of individual obligation, then indeed the Law Covenant 
would have been a curse and injury and not a blessing; for under 
that covenant all would have been individually condemned to death. 
And not one of those individuals could have life or any other 
blessing under the New Covenant, because if individually liable 
under the Law Covenant, each Jew would require an individual 
redeemer to die for him-to pay his ransom price, death. 

We know that millions of saviours have not died to ransom millions 
of Jews, consequently, if their covenant were a real one, they are 
not redeemed from its penalty to this day. 



R792 : page 7 

But that their covenant was not real, but typical only, can be 
clearly shown in two ways: First, because no new covenant could 
be made by the Creator, with any of the race, offering them life on 
any conditions whatever, SO LONG as they were already under his 
own condemnation, as unworthy of life for the violation of a former 
covenant. In other words, the sin, the condemnation, the penalty of 
the covenant violated by the race representatively, through Adam 
must be fully paid by a ransom— [a corresponding price]— before 
any new covenant guaranteeing life could be ratified or instituted. 

The Law Covenant was not preceded by settlement or cancellation 
of the claims of the Adamic covenant against the Israelites. True it 
was preceded by sacrifices of bulls and goats (Heb. 9:19-22) as, or 
representative of sin-offerings, but it must be evident to all that 
those sacrifices "could never take away sin" (Heb. 10:4 and 11,) 
because they were not a ransom; that is, they were not a 
corresponding price for man's sin. The price of man's sin was man's 
destruction -man's death, and not the destruction of bulls and 
goats. The death of millions of bulls and goats would not settle the 
penalty of the broken covenant; nothing could settle it short of the 
death of a perfect man, against whom the original covenant had no 
claims. No, such sacrifice for sins was made until Jesus was "made 
flesh" for this very object and gave himself a ransom. And in this 
act of giving himself a ransom, we have seen that the man Christ 
Jesus mediated the New Covenant and the only real covenant ever 
ratified or sealed since the fall in Eden. 

That the Law Covenant was not a real one, but only typical of the 
New Covenant, is proved also by the fact that Jesus Christ, by the 
grace of God, tasted death for every man (Heb. 2:9), and that "as by 
the offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation, 
even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon ALL 
MEN unto justification of life. " (Rom. 5:18.) For if Israel, or any 
of the race were justified to life, i.e., freed from the condemnation 
of death which came through the violation of the Adamic covenant 
by the mediation of the death of bulls and goats as a sacrifice for 
sins, so as to make another covenant with them possible, before 
Jesus came, then the Apostle was in error on the subject; for in that 
case it would not be true that the justification to life came on all 
through Christ, EVEN AS the condemnation came on all through 
Adam. 

But all were justified by the one Mediator whose sacrifice was real 
and complete, and the only satisfaction of the penalties of the 
original covenant; hence the only mediation capable of establishing 
another covenant. Consequently, the Covenant of the Law based 
upon a typical and not an actual mediation or sacrifice for sins, 
could only have been a typical covenant, since it is impossible for 
any covenant to be of more value than is given it by the ratifier: The 
ratification being typical, the covenant could be no more. 



It follows then, that the Law Covenant was introduced in order that 
sin might be recognized in its full enormity; that the individual 
responsibility under the new covenant might be illustrated, and that 
the necessity of the help, or mediation of the sacrifice given by the 
man Christ Jesus, might be shown. Since the Law was not the real 
new covenant, but only its type, it follows that in being placed 
under it, and being unable to meet its requirements, Israel incurred 
no additional guilt to that which they in common with all mankind 
already were under, incurred through Adam's failure. Hence the 
benefits resulting to them, through Jesus' ransom, which cancelled 
the old and ratified the New Covenant, is the same exactly as that of 
all the rest of mankind. The end of their typical covenant, by the 
introduction of its antitype, the new, removed entirely and forever, 
all the provisions of their typical covenant, whether as seen from 
the above standpoint, it (typically) increased their sin and 
condemnation, or whether viewed as a typical favor and blessing; in 
either case it passed away totally when the real took the place of the 
typical. 



R792 : page 7 

SPECIAL FAVORS BEYOND THOSE OF 
THE NEW COVENANT. 

The question may arise with some, Do not the Scriptures hold out 
special promises and blessings to Israel above the blessings 
promised to mankind in general? And if, as above shown, the New 
Covenant applies equally to all men because its Mediator gave 
himself a ransom for all, then where come in the special promises 
and blessings and favors promised to Israel (as well as to the 
Christian Church) as the Apostle quotes: "This is my covenant unto 
them, when I shall take away their sins." (Rom. 11:27.) Does not 
this point to special favors, to be fulfilled toward them in the 
future? 

We answer, that God made his covenant in two parts. One part was 
that he would take away all sin and imperfection, and write his law 
again in the heart of flesh as originally possessed by Adam. This 
was typified in the Law Covenant, and will be fully realized under 
the New Covenant. The other part of God's plan is shown in 
another promise or covenant-the Abrahamic Covenant or promise 
that, THE SEED OF ABRAHAM should be honored by being used 
as an instrumentality in bringing those New Covenant blessings to 
the world of mankind. 

R793 : page 7 

But though the Abrahamic promise, "In thee and in thy seed shall 
all the families of the earth be blessed," was made before the formal 
announcement of the New Covenant, yet it was made dependent on 
the ratification of the New Covenant, since none could be "blessed" 



truly while all were under "the curse" of death for the violated 
Adamic covenant. Hence the utter removal of sin was typically 
shown in the symbol of circumcision, and the sacrifice of 
atonement for sin kept continually before the minds of Abraham 
and all the patriarchs as a pre-requisite to communion with God. 

The conditions of the New Covenant then will apply to all mankind 
alike, and not in any special manner or degree to Israel. All 
mankind were alike condemned through Adam, alike redeemed and 
ransomed by Christ, and will have equal privileges under the 
redemption. All shall have full opportunity for believing and laying 
hold upon the ransom and of being restored to harmony with God 
through it; and by obedience to God's law all will have equal rights 
and opportunities to have life everlasting. Consequently the extra 
blessing which comes to "Israel after the flesh," the natural "seed of 
Abraham," and to the Church, the true Israel of God, the higher 
"Seed of Abraham" (Gal. 3:29) is wholly outside the provisions of 
the New Covenant-embraced in the promise made to Abraham. 

To the Abrahamic promise then we must look for special blessings 
or privileges, always remembering, however, that none but those 
who shall first have shared in the blessings of the New Covenant 
are eligible to those privileges and opportunities of blessing others 
by administering the favors of that New Covenant. 

Though not generally discerned, the promise to Abraham includes 
TWO SEEDS children according to natural process, of generation, 
and children by special power of God, not actually children of 
Abraham, but children of Him whom Abraham typified, (Rom. 
4:17-margin.) children of God. These are the Spiritual Israel. 
These two seeds were typified by Ishmael and Isaac— Abraham's 
sons. (See Gal. 3:7,29 and Gen. 22:17,18.) The one, the natural, is 
represented in the promise "as the sand of the sea"; and the other 
"as the stars of heaven." (Gen. 22:17.) In the fulfillment of all the 
provisions of the New Covenant blessings, there will be ample 
opportunity for using both of these "seeds," though the fact that 
there are two, has been hidden from the sight of the majority both 
of Israel fleshly and spiritual. The former saw and yet see, only the 
fleshly seed; the latter see generally only the spiritual seed; but we 
find clear Scriptural evidence that there are two seeds-the natural 
and the spiritual, not only from the foregoing, but, says the same 
Apostle, the promise made through Abraham is "of faith" and favor 
in order that "the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that 
only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of 
Abraham." (Rom. 4:16.) Hence it is written, "I have made thee a 
father of many nations"-or seeds. Isaac, the chief of Abraham's 
seed, represents the Church-the spiritual seed; Ishmael, Paul 
assures us, represented fleshly Israel (Gal. 4:22-25), also blessed 
through Isaac. 

The spiritual seed— "as the stars of heaven" is the choicest portion of 
the promise; and the natural children of Abraham were first offered 
this honorable position in the beginning of the Christian age. A few 



of them accepted and laid hold of it, and the remainder of that elect 
company has been in process of selection and will be completed 
during this age, and will be composed chiefly of Gentiles. This 
entire company will be made like their head Christ Jesus-spirit- 
beings and will be engaged with Jesus in the most exalted sense in 
the accomplishment of the blessing of all earth's families. But there 
will be a use, and place, in this work of blessing in which men, 
human beings, may be used; and in this part of the blessing some of 
the natural children of Abraham shall share. Israel shall be among 
the first to appreciate the kingdom of Christ when it shall be fully 
inaugurated or "set up," and among the first to render obedience to 
it. They will be the first, therefore, to be blessed by it and in turn to 
be associated with the spiritual powers in conferring its blessings 
upon all the families of the earth. 

This is shown clearly in Paul's argument on this very subject. Read 
his question, Rom. 11:1, and then his reply in verses 23,24 and his 
proof in verses 25 to 27. Then comes the grand climax of his 
argument: "As concerning the gospel [the special favor of the 
Christian age, though a few have received it, as stated in verse 5, 
yet the nation as a whole have been cut off from the gospel favor] 
they are [treated as God's] enemies for your sakes [that you 
Gentiles might become inheritors in the Abrahamic promise]. But 
as touching the election, they are [still] beloved for the fathers' 
sakes. For the gifts and callings of God, are without repentance." 
He has promised certain blessings to the natural children of 
Abraham, and He did so with full knowledge of all succeeding 
circumstances and developments, and He never changes from any 
unconditional promise, such as that made to Abraham. Verses 28 
and 29. Then follows in verses 30 to 33 a statement of how Israel 
shall obtain mercy and be made to share the original promise 
through the instrumentality of the Christian Church, "They shall 
obtain mercy through your mercy"-They shall obtain this promised 
favor of God, through, and by means of, your receiving the chief 
favor, and thus the boundless unsearchable riches of God's wisdom 
and favor, will be manifested to them, as well as to us, and through 
them from us and to the world in general. 

The same root promise bears both these "seeds" of Abraham, but 
both are not developed at once. First the natural, afterward the 
spiritual, and then, as Paul informs us (Rom. 11), finally the natural 
grafted in again. The natural "seed" mentioned in that promise 
started as branches out of the first, and as such, Abraham, Isaac, 
Jacob and the prophets and the man Christ Jesus were developed as 
worthy and fit to have part in the work of blessing when the right 
time should come. Then, when the time had come for the 
development of the spiritual seed -The Church of which Jesus the 
"new creature" is "HEAD"-those natural branches were "broken 
off" and cast aside, while a new set of branches were grafted into 
that original root-the Abrahamic covenant. During the Christian 
age, the new growth of the new kind of branches, has been 
developing, and at the end of this age another change will come and 



the re-engrafting of the original branches will take place. These 
natural branches which for so long have seemed as thoroughly cast 
off of God as the Gentiles appeared to be previously, shall be 
grafted in again, and shall be sharers again of the richness of the 
root-promise, though they are and always will be, natural or human 
branches, while the overcoming Church selected during the 
Christian age will have secured the choicest portion of that same 
promise. (Rom. 11:7,8.) Thus the two sets of branches, or two 
seeds-natural and spiritual- come out of the ONE ROOT 
PROMISE made to Abraham, and together, though in very different 
ways, these two seeds become instrumentalities in blessing all the 
families of the earth under the provisions of the New Covenant 
mediated and ratified by the man Christ Jesus, when he gave 
himself a ransom for all who were condemned to death under the 
original covenant in Eden. 

It will be perceived, then, that the blessing of the World under the 
New Covenant mediated and ratified eighteen centuries ago waits 
for the full development of the "Seeds" of Abraham, The spiritual 
seed, Christ (Gal. 3:29) and the natural seed developed previously, 
to which shall be added the broken-off branches of the same root 
who, as the Day Dawns, shall not continue in unbelief, and thus and 
then the blessing shall spread to all the families of earth. 



R793 : page 8 

NOT WITH OBSERVATION. 

"And as it was in the days of Noah so shall it be also in the days 
of the Son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, 
they were given in marriage. ...Even thus shall it be in the day when 
the Son of man is revealed." Luke 17:26-30. 

We once read this passage as though the ordinary affairs of life 
would be condemned as crimes in the day of the Lord's presence. 
But the above words were occasioned by the demand of the 
Pharisees as to when the kingdom of God should come, and imply 
that so unobserved would be the incoming of that kingdom that the 
world would know nothing of his presence for a time, and buying, 
selling, eating and drinking, etc., would go on without interruption. 
He would not come as an earthly conqueror comes, with chariots 
and horses and armies with banners flying, and all the pomp of war. 
Nor would His heralds proclaim his presence in the "desert," or in 
the "secret chambers" of one organization or another, doing many 
wondrous works. Neither shall a great invisible trumpet sound out 
so loudly as to be heard over all the earth, and causing graves to 
open, rocks to rend and mountains to shake, be the signal of his 
coming. If he came in any way like these, his approach would be 
observed, and it would not be true that "The kingdom of God 
cometh not with observation," and it would be hard to deceive the 
commonest observer with regard to it— much less "the elect." 



R794 : page 8 

Peter tells us (2 Peter 3:4) that so unperceived will be his 
presence that scoffers will say, "Where is the promise of his 
coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they 
were from the beginning," and adds: "The day of the Lord will 
come as a thief in which the heavens shall pass away with a great 
noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth, 
and the works in it shall be burned up" (discovered —ancient MSS.). 
This is in harmony with the Master's words to the Pharisees. The 
day comes unobserved; the heavens (ruling powers, political and 
ecclesiastical, founded as they are by usurpation and with tyranny, 
despotism, injustice, error, superstition, prejudice and ignorance 
entering largely into their very foundation principles)-these shall 
pass away with a "rushing sound," as escaping steam that must 
obey the decisive action of the "fervent heat." 

The Son of man himself in his "day" is as the lightning "flashing 
out of the one part under heaven and shining to the other part under 
heaven," as the flashes of truth upon all subjects and questions 
lighten up more and more the understandings of mankind, and as 
they come to see more clearly their condition of bondage and their 
rights to life and its blessings, they will per-force act and respond to 
the influence of those truths: The sword out of his mouth- the "Fire 
of God's Wrath;" the "Fire of his Jealousy;" the "Fervent Heat" 
which will compel the usurpation to pass away with great noise, 
and burn up all the works however wonderful they may have been, 
that man has so fondly or proudly done in opposition to the plan of 
this kingdom, although done in the name of the King himself. 

By the FIRE of truth shall every man's works be tried, of 
whatsoever sort it is; God's PLAN of his kingdom and saving of 
mankind from their enslaved condition under the Prince of this 
world— together with the subjugation of all his enemies, is so far 
beyond, and more excellent than man could conceive, that we can 
rejoice to "wait upon the Lord" until the day that he rises up to the 
prey- seeing it is his determination-his plan declared-"to gather 
the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them 
mine indignation, even all my fierce anger, for all the earth shall be 
devoured with the fire of my jealousy. For then will I turn to the 
people a pure language (one manner of communication) that they 
may all call upon the name of the Lord with one consent" (Zeph. 
3:8,9). 

In all this the trouble and vexation consequent upon the burning up 
of every obstacle to his kingdom will be observed plainly enough, 
for there is no single question that must not pass through the fire. 
Yet his presence is unseen, except as revealed by these his acts. 
And the world will be well along in the Day of the Lord eating, 
drinking, etc., before they perceive the cause of the change of 
rulership and recognize the kingdom of heaven that "cometh not by 
outward observation. " 



H. L. GILLIS. 



R794 : page 8 



'A THROUGH TICKET." 



The above is the caption of a tract published and circulated in 
great quantities, by THE AMERICAN TRACT SOCIETY of New 
York City, from which we give the following extract: - 

"Dying fellow travelers to eternity, how long have you been on the 
road? May-be it is only a few years; yet in that short time, how far 
and fast you may have journeyed in the wrong direction —on the 
road which ends in woe. Apply at once for a through ticket upon 
the royal road which the King of heaven himself has cast up and 
opened-a through ticket, with the life insurance included. You 
know not how soon you will reach your journey's end, or pass the 
station beyond which it will be impossible to change your course. 
An hour longer may fix your home in hell forever, as you cannot 
come back to remedy the neglect. 

"Are you old, and near the end of your journey, and still in the 
wrong train, or uncertain where you are going? Oh, awake to your 
danger. Heaven or hell must soon burst on your vision; a company 
of angels or devils are waiting for your arrival; their conveyances 
are all ready; your place is prepared. Holy angels and saints are 
waiting to greet you with joy, or devils and lost spirits to aid in 
torturing your wretched soul. Maybe you will find among them 
your own children, to curse you for your example, and charge their 
damnation on your neglect of their souls." 

The thought that in any age any but savages would believe and 
teach such things must be humiliating to every one who feels the 
least respect for human intelligence; but when we remember that 
this is published in the Nineteenth Century when Bibles are printed 
by the million every year and can be had by the poorest, and that it 
is published in America, the land of freedom and schools, the 
humiliation is more than doubled. 

But even worse than all this, this blasphemy against our Heavenly 
Father's character and plans, is published in the name of 
Christianity— in the name of him who so loved sinners as to give 
himself a ransom for all. Alas! Alas! Dear Master, how far from 
thy spirit is that of some who call themselves by thy name! How far 
from thy words are theirs ! how far from thy thoughts and plans are 
theirs ! As the heavens are higher than the earth, so are thy ways 
higher and grander and more beneficent than theirs, and thy 
thoughts than their thoughts. (Isa. 55:9.) Oh that they would taste 
and see that the Lord is good, that his mercy endureth forever. (Psa. 
34:8; 106:1.) Language fails us in seeking to express our 
abhorrence of such unscriptural, God-dishonoring statements. How 
then must it appear to the Master himself? 



And yet as shown by the report of the " Amer. Tract Society" for the 
year past, their receipts were $357,470, out of which 56,000,000 
pages of tract matter were published and distributed, carrying 
poisonous blasphemy, of which the above is one sample, into 
thousands of homes. 

Those giving their dollars and their influence in proclaiming such 
doctrines, such poison, labelled "Gospel" will ere long be greatly 
ashamed of their misuse of their Lord's money. "They shall be 
ashamed" when "He shall appear to your joy" (Isa. 66:5) who from 
love of THE TRUTH, and in its support, have sacrificed time, 
money, influence— all. 

Think of it! over a third of a million dollars to enable the "Amer. 
Tract Society" to proclaim: -"Heaven or hell must soon burst upon 
your vision; a company of angels or devils are awaiting your 
arrival; their conveyances are all ready.. ..Holy angels are waiting to 
greet you with joy, or devils and lost spirits to aid in torturing your 
wretched soul;" and less than two thousand dollars for the same 
time to enable "Zion's Watch Tower Tract Society" to tell the 
"Good tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people." 

And yet those few who have given of their "living," intelligently, 
from the heart desiring the spread of the "good tidings," have not 
only "cast in more" than the wealthy of Babylon in the esteem of 
the Master, but they have given in such manner as to glorify instead 
of dishonor him. And furthermore, the influence and effect of the 
little sum, under God's blessing is far greater than that of the large 
one. The walls of Babylon are crumbling and its doctrines of 
Eternal Torment, dying gradually, but surely, notwithstanding over 
a hundred thousand ministers are paid large salaries for its support, 
and millions of dollars are spent annually to enforce and support 
these doctrines and systems. 

Ah, what better evidence could we have of the present power of the 
"Prince of this World" "The God [ruler] of this World," to blind and 
deceive and use God's careless children as his tools, than we have 
here before us in this and other similar systems and circumstances: 
wearing the garb of Christ's service, yet [deludedly] diverting 
money, influence and energy to the support of blasphemous errors 
and calumnies upon Jehovah the God of Justice and Love. Arise, O 
Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered. Awake, O Zion, put on thy 
strength, for one shall chase a thousand. Their ROCK is not as our 
rock, our opponents themselves being witnesses. 



R794 : page 8 



AN OBJECTION ANSWERED. 

A reader takes exception to a statement made in our last issue, 
page 3- The Undefiled One. We say therein- "Had Adam 
remained perfect-his life unforfeited and unimpaired, his offspring 



would have been the same (i.e. perfect), any imperfections of Eve 
would not have affected them." An objector thinks we have erred 
in such conclusion, because experience teaches that children do 
frequently partake of the nature and disposition of their mother. 

We fully agree that, as it is, children do partake from the mother, 
but our statement does not apply to present condition of things. Let 
it be distinctly noted that we stated as shown in the above 
quotation, the conditions under which we claimed children would 
not be affected by the mother, viz. : If the originally perfect father, 
Adam, had REMAINED PERFECT. 

But what difference can the blemish of the father have upon the 
mother's influence upon the child? may be asked. 

None, we answer. It would not affect the mother but it would 
vastly affect the unborn child and its dependance upon the mother. 
As we endeavored to show in our last issue, we claim that a perfect 
life germ from a perfect father could appropriate to its use and 
perfect development such elements of nutrition provided by the 
mother as would be beneficial, and could reject or pass off without 
injury any undesirable elements. And that on the other hand an 
imperfect, diseased, dying germ from an imperfect and dying father 
would be less able to rightly appropriate what is supplied, even if 
the supplies furnished were the purest and best, from a perfect 
mother and where the supply would be diseased from a diseased, 
dying mother, the influence on the already dying germ can well be 
surmised. It would appropriate the bad as well as the good 
elements, and being weakly already, would be very susceptible to 
injurious influences. 

And this is in harmony with all known facts of science as well as in 
harmony with God's revelation. We remind our readers again of 
the illustration given in the original article, viz., the effect of the 
same food upon a sick person, as compared with its effect upon a 
comparatively healthy person-to the one it might increase the 
sickness, to the other promote health. 

As we are upon the side of the Scriptures, we leave others to 
discuss it with the author of the Scriptures if they cannot see this to 
be clear— it seems very clear and harmonious from our standpoint. 

The Scriptures positively declare the facts; we have merely coupled 
them together to show, any who can see them, their reasonableness 
and harmony. It is a Scriptural statement that death came through 
Adam, not Eve— By one man's disobedience death passed upon all. 
And again it is of the Bible, that one perfect man was born of one 
imperfect mother. He was holy, undefiled, separate from sinners- 
one who inherited not death and imperfection; but on the contrary, 
"In him was life." The life, the perfection, the purity was not 
tainted with the imperfections of which his mother in common with 
others of the condemned race was a sharer. The cause of this is 
found in the fact that the life principle was not imperfect, but 



perfect-transferred from the higher plane of a pre-existent 
condition,-"In him was life." 

Hence it is that he alone could redeem mankind. He alone could 
give the ransom or corresponding price. A perfect man had been 
tried as the representative of a perfect race and had sinned; had 
been condemned with all in him, and a perfect man alone could be 
the ransom. Jesus was a ransom, hence Jesus was a perfect man. 
Hence perfect men and women could have been born of Eve, as 
Adam's children, had he not sinned. 

But our questioner asks, If Jesus was perfect why is it written that 
he was "MADE PERFECT through sufferings." (Heb. 2:10.) We 
answer that he was perfect as a man, but was made a perfect "new 
creature" of the DIVINE nature through or because he obediently 
suffered death on our behalf. This is more fully elaborated in our 
issue of January, '82 under the caption, "Jesus made perfect." See, 
also, March, '83 issue, "Perfecting the new nature." 


