
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
1 Corinthians 10:13—“God Is Faithful”




“No temptation has come upon you except what is common to men. But God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.”—1 Corinthians 10:13, New World Translation.
“No temptation has overtaken you except such as is common to man; but God is faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able, but with the temptation will also make the way of escape, that you may be able to bear it.”—1 Corinthians 10:13, New King James Version.



Meaning of 1 Corinthians 10:13

This verse points to an endearing quality of God, namely, his faithfulness. God’s loyal worshippers can rely on his help, especially when they face trials or temptations.
“No temptation has come upon you except what is common to men.” God’s worshippers may be tempted to do something that displeases him. Such tests, although difficult, are not unusual or uncommon in that many people have experienced them.a Thus, God’s worshippers can be sure that they too are able to bear such things.
“God is faithful.” Jehovahb God is trustworthy and dependable. He has always kept his promise that he will not abandon those who love him and remain loyal and obedient to him. (Deuteronomy 7:9; Psalm 9:10; 37:28) Therefore, those who worship him can trust that he will also keep the two encouraging promises that follow in the verse.
“He will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear.” God shows his faithfulness by not allowing trials to become so severe that it would be impossible for someone to endure them. He knows the limitations of all his worshippers.—Psalm 94:14.
“Along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.” God can either remove a trial or provide what his worshippers need to endure it. For example, he can provide guidance by means of holy spirit, comfort from the Bible, or practical assistance through fellow believers.—John 14:26; 2 Corinthians 1:3, 4; Colossians 4:11.



Context of 1 Corinthians 10:13

This verse appears in a letter that the apostle Paul wrote to the Christian congregation in Corinth. In this part of his letter, Paul used the history of ancient Israel as a warning example for the Corinthians. (1 Corinthians 10:11) Paul lists a number of tests and temptations that the Israelites faced, including idolatry and sexual immorality. (1 Corinthians 10:6-10) Some of them gave in to these temptations. Based on their example, Paul reminds Christians that they should not be overconfident, thinking that they would never give in to temptation. (1 Corinthians 10:12) However, he goes on to reassure them with the words of 1 Corinthians 10:13. God’s loyal worshippers are able to overcome any trial.
Read 1 Corinthians chapter 10 in the study edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. This easy-to-read Bible contains audio recordings, explanatory notes, cross-references, pictures, videos, and maps.


Watch this short video to see an overview of the book of 1 Corinthians.




a The Greek word rendered “temptation” can refer to a test or a trial.
b Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”

