
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
2 Corinthians 12:9—“My Grace Is Sufficient for You”




“My undeserved kindness is sufficient for you, for my power is being made perfect in weakness.”—2 Corinthians 12:9, New World Translation.
“My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.”—2 Corinthians 12:9, New International Version.



Meaning of 2 Corinthians 12:9

God promises to give the apostle Paul the strength he needs to cope with his trials and limitations.
“My undeserved kindness is sufficient for you.” God’s answer to Paul’s repeated prayers can also be rendered “my kindness is all you need.” In other words, God’s undeserved kindness would be enough to help Paul cope with his trials. How so? The word translated “undeserved kindness,” or “grace,” describes a free and unmerited gift given generously by God. Paul’s writings show that he benefited greatly from God’s undeserved kindness. Although Paul was a former persecutor, God gave him the strength he needed to change his behavior and to help others become Christians. (1 Corinthians 15:9, 10; 1 Timothy 1:12-14) Paul could confidently rely on God’s help to overcome any problems or challenges he faced.
“For my power is being made perfect in weakness.” The Lord Jehovaha reminds Paul that His power is most evident when it works through weak and imperfect humans. (2 Corinthians 4:7; 12:8) When Christians recognize their limitations and look to Jehovah for help, they allow God’s power to be fully at work in them. (Ephesians 3:16; Philippians 4:13) In that sense, God’s power is manifest in human weakness.



Context of 2 Corinthians 12:9

Paul wrote an inspired letter to the Christians in Corinth about 55 C.E. In the latter part of that letter, he defended his authority as an apostle. He felt moved to do so because some self-proclaimed teachers had criticized him, perhaps judging him by his appearance or his speaking ability.—2 Corinthians 10:7-10; 11:5, 6, 13; 12:11.
In his defense, Paul explains that he could not in his own strength have accomplished his ministry and endured numerous trials. (2 Corinthians 6:4; 11:23-27; 12:12) In chapter 12, he speaks figuratively of “a thorn in the flesh,” apparently a persistent affliction that was causing him physical or emotional pain. (2 Corinthians 12:7) Although Paul did not describe his affliction, he was determined to endure it with God’s help.
Christians today may also face hardships and persecution. They find comfort in knowing that God’s power can make them equal to any challenge they may encounter. Like Paul, they can confidently say: “When I am weak, then I am powerful.”—2 Corinthians 12:10.
Read 2 Corinthians chapter 12 in the study edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. This easy-to-read Bible contains audio recordings, explanatory notes, cross-references, pictures, videos, and maps.


Watch this short video to see an overview of the book of 2 Corinthians.




a Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”

