
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
Ecclesiastes 3:11—“He Has Made Everything Beautiful in Its Time”




“He has made everything beautiful in its time. He has even put eternity in their heart; yet mankind will never find out the work that the true God has made from start to finish.”—Ecclesiastes 3:11, New World Translation.
“He has made everything beautiful in its time. He has also set eternity in the human heart; yet no one can fathom what God has done from beginning to end.”—Ecclesiastes 3:11, New International Version.



Meaning of Ecclesiastes 3:11

“He has made everything beautiful in its time.” The Hebrew word here rendered “beautiful” can refer to more than just physical or aesthetic beauty. It can also be translated “well-arranged,” “proper,” or “appropriate.” (Ecclesiastes 3:11, footnote) God’s beautiful works include not just all the things he has created but also all that he does to accomplish his will.—Daniel 2:21; 2 Peter 3:8; Revelation 4:11.
“He has even put eternity in their heart.” God created humans to live forever. (Psalm 37:29) Logically, then, he also implanted that desire in them. However, the first human couple, Adam and Eve, disobeyed God and brought death upon themselves and their descendants. (Genesis 3:17-19; Romans 5:12) Yet, God promises to “satisfy the desire of every living thing,” including the human desire to live forever. (Psalm 145:16) The Bible explains how Jehovah has made it possible for humans again to have the prospect of eternal life.—Romans 6:23.
“Mankind will never find out the work that the true God has made from start to finish.” God’s wisdom is so deep and vast that the Bible says it is “beyond tracing out.” (Romans 11:33) However, God is willing to reveal his purposes to those who want to please him.—Amos 3:7.



Context of Ecclesiastes 3:11

The book of Ecclesiastes was written by King Solomon of ancient Israel, a man renowned for his God-given wisdom. It contains practical advice on what is truly worthwhile in life and on what is valueless. (Ecclesiastes 1:2, 3; 2:1, 17; 7:1; 12:1, 13) In chapter 3, Solomon describes some of the continuing cycles that are common to life. A number of different activities or occupations are mentioned. (Ecclesiastes 3:1-8, 10) God has given humans the freedom to choose which of these activities they will engage in and when they will do so. (Deuteronomy 30:19, 20; Joshua 24:15) Solomon explains that it is only when humans cooperate with God’s purpose and respect His “appointed time”—his timetable—that they can truly enjoy the results of their endeavors. This Solomon calls “the gift of God.”—Ecclesiastes 3:1, 12, 13.
Read Ecclesiastes chapter 3 in the study edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. This easy-to-read Bible contains audio recordings, explanatory notes, cross-references, pictures, videos, and maps.


Watch this short video to see an overview of the book of Ecclesiastes.




