
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
Isaiah 41:10—“Fear Not, For I Am With You”




“Do not be afraid, for I am with you. Do not be anxious, for I am your God. I will fortify you, yes, I will help you, I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.”—Isaiah 41:10, New World Translation.
“Fear not, for I am with you; be not dismayed, for I am your God. I will strengthen you, yes, I will help you, I will uphold you with My righteous right hand.”—Isaiah 41:10, New King James Version.



Meaning of Isaiah 41:10

Jehovaha God reassures his loyal worshippers that he supports them, no matter what problems they face.
“I am with you.” Jehovah gives his worshippers a reason why they should not be afraid—they are not alone. Because he sees what they go through and he hears their prayers, it is as though he were right there with them.—Psalm 34:15; 1 Peter 3:12.
“I am your God.” Jehovah calms his worshippers by reminding them that he still considers himself to be their God and that he accepts them as his worshippers. They can be certain that no circumstance will ever prevent God from acting in their behalf.—Psalm 118:6; Romans 8:32; Hebrews 13:6.
“I will fortify you, yes, I will help you, I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.” Using three phrases to convey one thought, Jehovah emphasizes the certainty of his support. He uses a word picture to convey how he reacts when his people need help. If someone falls, God can extend his right hand to pull him up.—Isaiah 41:13.
A primary way that God strengthens and assists his worshippers is by means of his Word, the Bible. (Joshua 1:8; Hebrews 4:12) For example, God’s Word offers practical wisdom to those who face trials, such as poverty, illness, or the loss of a loved one. (Proverbs 2:6, 7) God can also use his holy spirit, or active force, to give his worshippers the emotional and mental strength needed to endure trials.—Isaiah 40:29; Luke 11:13.



Context of Isaiah 41:10

These words provided comfort to the faithful Jews who were later taken captive to Babylon. Jehovah had foretold that toward the end of the Jewish exile, there would be reports of an approaching conqueror who would devastate the surrounding nations and threaten Babylon. (Isaiah 41:2-4; 44:1-4) While Babylon and the surrounding nations would tremble in fear at such news, the Jews would not need to worry, because Jehovah would protect them. Three times he reassured them with the words “do not be afraid.”—Isaiah 41:5, 6, 10, 13, 14.
Although initially directed to faithful Jews in Babylonian exile, Jehovah God had the words of Isaiah 41:10 preserved for the comfort of all his worshippers. (Isaiah 40:8; Romans 15:4) He helps them today, just as he helped his servants in the past.



Read Isaiah chapter 41 along with explanatory footnotes and cross-references.

a Jehovah is God’s personal name.—Psalm 83:18.

