
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
Isaiah 26:3—“You Will Keep in Perfect Peace Those Whose Minds Are Steadfast”




“You will safeguard those who fully lean on you; you will give them continuous peace, because it is in you that they trust.”—Isaiah 26:3, New World Translation.
“You will keep in perfect peace those whose minds are steadfast, because they trust in you.”—Isaiah 26:3, New International Version.



Meaning of Isaiah 26:3

With these reassuring words, the prophet Isaiah shows that God protects those who fully trust in Him. He does so by helping such ones to feel secure and at peace.
“You will safeguard those who fully lean on you.” This part of the verse describes those who are fully resolved in their minds to trust in Jehovaha God at all times. Those who trust God recognize that they need to depend on him. For example, they do not rely on their own thinking when making important decisions. Instead, they take God’s thoughts into account in everything they do. (Proverbs 3:5, 6) They determine God’s view on a matter by carefully reading his Word, the Bible, and by thinking deeply about what they read. (Psalm 1:2; 119:15) When facing challenging situations, they turn to Jehovah in earnest prayer, asking for his help. (Psalm 37:5; 55:22) By doing so, they demonstrate their confidence in God, who in turn gives them peace.
“You will give them continuous peace.” In the original Hebrew, the word for “peace” appears twice for emphasis; therefore, to reflect that emphasis, this expression can be rendered “continuous peace,” “perfect peace,” or “complete peace.” In other words, those who fully trust in Jehovah enjoy a sense of peace, an inner calm that does not depend on their circumstances. (Psalm 112:7; 119:165) This peace comes from having a close, personal relationship with Jehovah and striving to do what is right in his eyes.—Proverbs 3:32; Isaiah 48:18.
This “continuous peace” does not mean that God shields his worshippers from difficulties, freeing them of all anxiety. (1 Samuel 1:6, 7; Job 6:1, 2; Psalm 31:9) Rather, he helps them to deal with their difficulties. (Isaiah 41:10, 13) He responds to their prayers, giving them wisdom, strength, and comfort. (Psalm 94:19; Proverbs 2:6; Isaiah 40:29) As a result, they can remain calm even in difficult circumstances.—Philippians 4:6, 7.



Context of Isaiah 26:3

The prophet Isaiah lived during the eighth century B.C.E. Many in Judah at that time, and in the years that followed, did not faithfully worship Jehovah God. As a result, Jehovah eventually allowed their capital city, Jerusalem, to be destroyed in the year 607 B.C.E.
However, more than a hundred years before the destruction, Isaiah wrote the prophetic song of praise to Jehovah recorded in chapter 26. (Isaiah 26:1-6) That song pointed to a future time when a city in the land of Judah, apparently Jerusalem, would be restored.
Jerusalem was restored in the years following 537 B.C.E. Once that happened, faithful repatriated Jews could feel secure and say: “We have a strong city.” (Isaiah 26:1) However, the fortified walls of the city were not what made it strong. Rather, the security of the city depended on Jehovah’s blessing and protection.—Isaiah 26:2.
It is similar today. Those who fully trust in Jehovah feel secure because they view him as their “Rock,” or refuge.—Isaiah 26:4.
Read Isaiah chapter 26 in the study edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. This easy-to-read Bible contains audio recordings, explanatory notes, cross-references, pictures, videos, and maps.


Watch this short video to see an overview of the book of Isaiah.




a Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”

