
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
Isaiah 42:8—“I Am the LORD”




“I am Jehovah. That is my name; I give my glory to no one else, nor my praise to graven images.”—Isaiah 42:8, New World Translation.
“I am the LORD: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.”—Isaiah 42:8, King James Version.



Meaning of Isaiah 42:8

God tells us his personal name and adds that he does not share his praise or honor with idols.
 God gave himself this personal name, which is commonly translated “Jehovah” in English.a (Exodus 3:14, 15) Although the divine name appears nearly 7,000 times in the Old Testament (Hebrew-​Aramaic Scriptures), many translations replace it with the title “LORD” (in capital letters). An example is in Psalm 110:1, which refers prophetically to both Jehovah and Jesus. In the King James Version, we read: “The LORD [Jehovah] said unto my Lord [Jesus].” (Acts 2:34-36) The New World Translation removes any possible confusion between the two “Lords” by putting the divine name in its rightful place. It states: “Jehovah declared to my Lord: ‘Sit at my right hand until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.’”
A number of scholars believe that the divine name means “He Causes to Become.” Only the true God can live up to such a name, because he alone can cause himself or his creation to become whatever is necessary to fulfill his purpose.
 As our Creator and the only true God, Jehovah deserves our exclusive devotion. No one else and nothing else is entitled to our worship, and this includes idols and images.—Exodus 20:2-6; 34:14; 1 John 5:21.



Context of Isaiah 42:8

In the opening verses of Isaiah chapter 42, Jehovah foretold the work of his “chosen one.” This approved servant, God said, “will bring justice to the nations.” (Isaiah 42:1) Regarding that promise, God stated: “Now I am declaring new things. Before they spring up, I tell you about them.” (Isaiah 42:9) The prophecy about the “chosen one” sprang up, or came true, centuries later when the Messiah, or Christ, arrived and carried out his earthly ministry.—Matthew 3:16, 17; 12:15-21.



Isaiah 42:8 From Additional Translations

“I am Jehovah, that is my name; and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.”—The ‘Holy Scriptures,’ by J. N. Darby.
“I am Jehovah; that is My name; and I will not give My glory to another, nor My praise to engraved images.”—A Literal Translation of the Bible.



a God’s name in Hebrew consists of four consonants, which are often written in English as YHWH. Some English translations render God’s name “Yahweh.” For further information, see “The Divine Name in the Hebrew Scriptures” in Appendix A4 of the study edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.

Read Isaiah chapter 42 along with explanatory footnotes and cross-references.


