
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
Jeremiah 11:11—“I Will Bring Evil Upon Them”

“Therefore this is what Jehovah says, ‘Here I am bringing on them a calamity that they will not be able to escape. When they call to me for help, I will not listen to them.’”—Jeremiah 11:11, New World Translation.
“Therefore thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them.”—Jeremiah 11:11, King James Version.



Meaning of Jeremiah 11:11

God was addressing the Jews who lived in the time of the prophet Jeremiah. Because the people disregarded Jehovah’sa righteous laws and the loving correction given by his prophets, he would not protect them from the tragic consequences of their bad ways.—Proverbs 1:24-32.
“Therefore this is what Jehovah says.” The word “therefore” links the preceding verses with what follows. At Jeremiah 11:1-10, Jehovah told his people that they had broken the covenant, or binding agreement, that their forefathers had made with him. (Exodus 24:7) Instead of worshipping their Creator, the Jews turned to idols. This apostasy fostered all kinds of wickedness—even child sacrifice!—Jeremiah 7:31.
“Here I am bringing on them a calamity.” The Bible often speaks of God as doing something that he merely allows. How was that true in this case? By turning to false gods and ignoring Jehovah’s wholesome standards, his people brought untold suffering upon themselves. They also lost God’s protection. As a result, a powerful enemy—the king of Babylon—was able to conquer Jerusalem and take its inhabitants into exile. The false gods in whom the people had trusted could not save them.—Jeremiah 11:12; 25:8, 9.
By allowing those tragedies to befall his people, God was not being unjust or evil. “With evil things God cannot be tried, nor does he himself try anyone,” states James 1:13. Granted, the King James Version says that God “will bring evil upon [the Jews].” However, the original-language wordb translated “evil” at Jeremiah 11:11 can also be rendered “calamity” or “disaster”—terms that accurately describe the sufferings that overtook the Jews.





“When they call to me for help, I will not listen to them.” Jehovah does not listen to the prayers of those whose “hands are filled with blood” or of those who look to false gods for deliverance. (Isaiah 1:15; 42:17) However, he does listen to those who sincerely repent of their bad ways and humbly return to him.—Isaiah 1:16-19; 55:6, 7.



Context of Jeremiah 11:11

In the year 647 B.C.E., Jehovah commissioned Jeremiah to be his prophet. For 40 years, Jeremiah warned the people of Judah about God’s coming judgment. But they refused to listen. During that time, the prophet penned the words found at Jeremiah 11:11. Finally, in 607 B.C.E., the prophetic warnings were fulfilled when the Babylonians destroyed Jerusalem.—Jeremiah 6:6-8; 39:1, 2, 8, 9.
The book of Jeremiah also contains a message of hope. Jehovah said: “When 70 years at Babylon are fulfilled, . . . I will make good my promise by bringing you back to this place [the Jewish homeland].” (Jeremiah 29:10) Jehovah ‘made good’ on that promise in 537 B.C.E., following the conquest of Babylon by the Medes and Persians. Jehovah allowed his people, who were scattered throughout the empire, to return to their homeland and restore true worship.—2 Chronicles 36:22, 23; Jeremiah 29:14.
Read Jeremiah chapter 11 in the study edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. This easy-to-read Bible contains audio recordings, explanatory notes, cross-references, pictures, videos, and maps.


Watch this short video to see an overview of the book of Jeremiah.




a Jehovah is the common English rendering of the four Hebrew letters for the personal name of God. To find out why many Bible translations use the title “Lord” instead of God’s personal name, see the article “Who Is Jehovah?”
b The Hebrew Scriptures, commonly called the Old Testament,  were originally written in Hebrew and Aramaic.

