
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
Proverbs 22:6—“Train Up a Child in the Way He Should Go”




“Train a boy in the way he should go; even when he grows old he will not depart from it.”—Proverbs 22:6, New World Translation.
“Train up a child in the way he should go; even when he is old he will not depart from it.”—Proverbs 22:6, English Standard Version.



Meaning of Proverbs 22:6

Parents who teach their children to love God and respect his laws can expect such training to have a positive and lasting influence.
“Train a boy in the way he should go.” These words can also be rendered “start a child on the right road.” Time and again, the book of Proverbs urges parents to teach their children about right and wrong early in life. (Proverbs 19:18; 22:15; 29:15) Yet, loving parents recognize that their children, like adults, have free will. So rather than merely tell their children what to do, they reason with them and help them to grow into mature and responsible adults who are able to make good decisions on their own.—Deuteronomy 6:6, 7; Colossians 3:21.
Some Bible scholars suggest that this expression means “train a child in accordance with his nature,” or according to his natural tendencies. Such an interpretation might sound practical, but the Hebrew expression rendered “in the way he should go” likely refers to a life course that is good and righteous. The book of Proverbs highlights two ways that a person can go. One is called “the way of good people,” “the way of wisdom,” and “the right way.” (Proverbs 2:20; 4:11; 23:19) The other is called “the way of evil men,” “the way of the fool,” and “the wrong way.” (Proverbs 4:14; 12:15; 16:29) The way that a child “should go” thus refers to “the right way”—the way of life taught in God’s Word, the Bible.—Psalm 119:105.
“Even when he grows old he will not depart from it.” When parents teach their child God’s moral standards, he is more likely to stay on the right path throughout his life. This does not mean, however, that a child who receives proper training will never “depart” from the right way or stray from God’s laws. For example, if a person spends time with people who promote what is bad, he may leave “the upright paths” and do what is wrong. (Proverbs 2:12-16; 1 Corinthians 15:33) Even so, when parents train their children to follow God’s standards, they are giving them the best opportunity to be successful in life.—Proverbs 2:1, 11.



Context of Proverbs 22:6

Proverbs chapter 22 is made up of short sayings that reflect God’s wisdom regarding a variety of situations in life. These sayings emphasize the value of having a good reputation with Jehovah,a something that a person can acquire by showing humility, generosity, and industriousness. (Proverbs 22:1, 4, 9, 29) In contrast, other verses show that those who ignore God’s standards and oppress the poor will suffer bad consequences.—Proverbs 22:8, 16, 22-27.
Although most of the verses in Proverbs chapter 22 do not refer to child training, they do outline a way of life that leads to God’s favor and true happiness. (Proverbs 22:17-19) By training their children in harmony with that way of life, parents show that they want what is best for their children.—Ephesians 6:1-3.
Read Proverbs chapter 22 in the study edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. This easy-to-read Bible contains audio recordings, explanatory notes, cross-references, pictures, videos, and maps.


Watch this short video to see an overview of the book of Proverbs.




a Jehovah is the personal name of God. (Psalm 83:18) See the article “Who Is Jehovah?”

