
BIBLE VERSES EXPLAINED
Proverbs 17:17—“A Friend Loves at All Times”

“A true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress.”—Proverbs 17:17, New World Translation.
“A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born for a time of adversity.”—Proverbs 17:17, New International Version.



Meaning of Proverbs 17:17

Real friends are reliable and trustworthy. Like close siblings, they are loyal and caring, especially during difficult times.
“A true friend shows love at all times.” This phrase can also be rendered “friends always show their love.” The Hebrew word for “love” used in this phrase involves more than an emotion or a feeling for a person. It is an unselfish love that is shown to another through actions. (1 Corinthians 13:4-7) Friends bonded by that kind of love stick together when their relationship is tested, perhaps by misunderstandings or the trials of life. They also forgive each other freely. (Proverbs 10:12) And a friend does not become envious when things go well for the other person. Rather, he rejoices with his friend.—Romans 12:15.
“A true friend . . . is a brother who is born for times of distress.” The proverb draws on the fact that siblings can be especially close. So when we do our very best for a friend who is going through a stressful time, we are acting just as a true brother or sister would act. Moreover, the bond that unites such friends is not weakened by tests. Rather, it is strengthened thanks to increased love and respect.



Context of Proverbs 17:17

The book of Proverbs offers profound wisdom in the form of concise sayings that make the reader think. King Solomon wrote much of this Bible book. His writing style is typical of Hebrew poetry that instead of using rhyme uses both parallel and contrasting thoughts, where one line may build on the other or contrast with it. Proverbs 17:17 is an example of parallel poetry, the second part of the verse building on the first. Proverbs 18:24 is an example of contrasting thoughts. “There are companions ready to crush one another, but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.”
When writing Proverbs 17:17, Solomon may have had in mind the close friendship that his father, David, had with Jonathan, a son of King Saul. (1 Samuel 13:16; 18:1; 19:1-3; 20:30-34, 41, 42; 23:16-18) Although David and Jonathan were not related, they were closer than brothers. Jonathan even risked his life for his young friend.a








Other Renderings of Proverbs 17:17

“A friend is loving at all times, and becomes a brother in times of trouble.”—The Bible in Basic English.
“A friend is always a friend, he is a born brother for adversity.”—The Moffatt Translation of the Bible.
“A friend shows his friendship at all times—it is for adversity that [such] a brother is born.”—The Complete Jewish Study Bible.
Read Proverbs chapter 17 in the study edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. This easy-to-read Bible contains audio recordings, explanatory notes, cross-references, pictures, videos, and maps.


Watch this short video to see an overview of the book of Proverbs.




a See the article “Bound Together in Close Friendship.”

