How to Protect Yourself From AIDS
FIRST, avoid the sources of contamination. How do you do that? By living in harmony with the standards of conduct that Almighty God provided. Consider how these would have protected the thousands now dying of AIDS.
The Most Susceptible Group
These are sexually active homosexuals, especially those continually in search of new partners. The Bible says:
“You must not lie down with a male the same as you lie down with a woman. It is a detestable thing.”​—Leviticus 18:22.
“The males left the natural use of the female and became violently inflamed in their lust toward one another, males with males, working what is obscene and receiving in themselves the full recompense, which was due for their error.”​—Romans 1:27.
“Make no mistake: no fornicator or idolater, none who are guilty either of adultery or of homosexual perversion . . . will possess the kingdom of God.”​—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10, The New English Bible.
Who Else Is Susceptible?
Persons who have sexual relations with anyone who has the AIDS virus, whether that person be a male or a female. The Bible says about this:
“Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be without defilement, for God will judge fornicators and adulterers.”​—Hebrews 13:4.
“Deaden, therefore, your body members that are upon the earth as respects fornication, uncleanness, sexual appetite . . . On account of those things the wrath of God is coming.”​—Colossians 3:5, 6.
Others Who Are at High Risk
Drug abusers who defile their bodies with drugs, injecting themselves with infected needles. The Bible’s condemnation of drunkenness would certainly apply to the abuse of modern drugs whose stupefying or mind-bending effects are at least as strong as those produced by alcohol.
“Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God’s fear.”​—2 Corinthians 7:1.
“Do not be misled. Neither fornicators . . . nor drunkards . . . will inherit God’s kingdom.”​—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.
Another High-Risk Group
Persons who receive contaminated blood through blood transfusions. Significantly, the Bible forbade humans to consume blood. It says:
“You must not eat the blood of any sort of flesh, because the soul of every sort of flesh is its blood. Anyone eating it will be cut off.”​—Leviticus 17:14.
“For the holy spirit and we ourselves have favored adding no further burden to you, except these necessary things, to keep abstaining . . . from blood.”​—Acts 15:28, 29.
Not everyone is willing to apply Bible principles regarding these matters nor to accept the fact that God has the right to tell us what to do. But people who have done so are happy that they did.

