VOL. XXVIII JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A.D. 1907-A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 19 

"What will the Poor Do with the Rich?" 19 



Socialistic President in 1912 20 

The Climax will Surely Come 21 

Religious Toleration 21 

The Crime of Suggestion 21 

The Socialists' Scheme 22 

Hygienic Value of Prayer 22 

Disobedience, Penalty, Hope 22 

The Shadow of God's Hand (Poem) 25 

"Sin Lieth at the Door" 25 

Some Interesting Letters 29 

Public Ministries of the Truth 32 

page 18 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



CHARTS OF THE TABERNACLE 



We have arranged to supply beautiful Charts of the Tabernacle 
on cloth, carriage prepaid, for two dollars each. Very 
choice, and very cheap for the quality. 

PITTSBURGH DISPATCH RENEWALS 



The publishers of the Dispatch notify us that they will continue 
to report Brother Russell's weekly discourses during 1907; 
and we accordingly notify our readers that they may send their 
subscriptions TO US at once. Indeed we have guaranteed the 
Dispatch a certain number of subscriptions. 

We suggested that if the price were cheaper more would subscribe, 
but the Dispatch says the weekly sermons should be 
worth the price aside from the best news service in the world. 
Its publishers supply the paper to us at clubbing rates, but refuse 
to allow us to quote a less price than they charge, namely, 
$6.00 per year. 

We adjust matters thus: For $6.00, the price of the Dispatch 
(2c each), we will send the Dispatch and three dollars 
worth of any other publications from our Catalogue (Dec. 1, 
'06). Or, if you subscribe for the Dispatch for 6 months, 
through us, we will present it to you free for the following six 
months. Or you can send us three dollars and authority to 
charge the balance of $3 against your Tract Fund remittance. 



R3923 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
"WHAT WILL THE POOR DO WITH THE RICH?" 



UNDER this caption quite a striking article has 
appeared recently in the London Daily Mail. 
The form of the question is very suggestive. 
It is not a great while since the question continually 
asked was, "What shall we do with the poor?" How 
shall we build almshouses for them, restrain them, and 
arrange soup-kitchens and shelter for those out of 
work? It is quite a new question, therefore, to reverse 
the matter and say, "What shall the poor do with the 
rich?" This great change has been effected by two 
things: (1) The public demand for universal suffrage 
which has only prevailed, except in our own land, for a 
comparatively short time; and (2) the other factor in 
the situation is the increase of knowledge. Many are 
running to and fro, and knowledge is being increased— 
and knowledge, as some one has said, is power. The 
poor have learned that they are in the majority, that 
each vote has its count, and that the majority of votes 
means the control of the government. It is surprising 
that it has required so long a time for the masses to 
awake to the power that is in their hands through the 
ballot. When they do become thoroughly awake it is 
very easy to be seen that with the power in their hands 
the poor will see to it that the rich do not have as great 
advantage in the future as in the past. 



Only in this last election, as we have stated, have 
the British voters gotten awake to the situation, and 
now they are planning for the future, arranging to take 
over as much of the government as possible into their 
own hands and to effect legislation favorable to their 
own interests. In the United States a similar movement 
is on foot amongst the labor unions. It may be a 
few years before it reaches the point of danger to the 
present social structure, but its coming is inevitable. 
We may be sure that it will be heard in full force and 
weight by the end of "Gentile times." In Germany 
matters have already progressed further. The Socialists 
there would have matters in their own hands were 
the voting privileges theirs on the same basis that they 
are in the United States and Great Britain. The Germans, 
however, foresaw something of coming conditions 
and shielded the government and the wealthier 
and middle classes from the poor by providing certain 
conditions under which the favored classes have a 
larger number of votes at the polls. Nor do we think 
this an unreasonable position— that education and 
property should be represented. The point we make, 
however, is that all these matters are culminating on 
time. Hearken to the words of Scripture, applicable 
now: "Go to now, ye rich men; weep and howl for your 
miseries that shall come upon you."— Jas. 5:1. 

We quote below the article referred to:— 

"WHAT WILL THE POOR DO WITH THE RICH?" 

"Of peculiar importance and significance at the 
present time, when England is wondering whether or 
not the Socialist Party is in the immediate future to 
control the fate and fortunes of the United Kingdom, is 
Sir Henry Wrixon's political study, published under 
the obscure title of 'The Pattern State.' Sir H. Wrixon 
stands far aloof from purely British controversies; he 
is an Australian publicist and statesman; yet his contribution 
to political science is the more valuable since 
he has seen in Australia the working of the very tendencies 
which he describes. 

"The great problem of today, to his mind is, 'What 
will the poor do with the rich?' The general election 
in England has marked a change more profound than 
the French Revolution. Power has passed finally and 
forever from the English middle-class to the wage-earner. 
Nor is it probable that the conditions which 
now exist in this country will speedily change. The 
middle class, Sir Henry thinks, were accessible to 
argument and reason; the wage-earning class are not. 
The middle class sought, on the whole, the interests of 
the nation, and were divided because some took one 
view and some another of what those interests might 
be. The wage-earning class seek first and foremost 
their own personal interest, to ameliorate their own 
economic condition, to obtain higher wages and greater 



R3923 : page 20 

comfort from the State, at the expense of others, and, 
in a word, to eliminate the struggle for existence. 
Hence they are and will remain solid and united. The 
political pendulum will swing no longer. 

THE DREAM OF MR. GLADSTONE 

"The political forecasts of the immediate past have 
been belied. Political reformers, down to the late Mr. 
Gladstone, thought that the wage-earners would, if 
given votes, be content to follow the judgment 'of those 
who have superior opportunities, and have also, or are 
supposed to have superior fitness of all kinds.' The 
very contrary has happened. The wage-earners, instead 
of voting for the orthodox Liberal or the orthodox 
Unionist, have voted for Labor members, trade 
unionist representatives, and others of their own class 
and station, without the education and training which 
gave Mr. Gladstone's 'superior fitness' to govern. The 
poor are not following the lead of the well-to-do, but 
are kings in their own right. 

"This kingship of the people (by 'the people' being 
understood the poor, who are in every nation the majority) 
will produce immediate and inevitable results. 
In the first place, we shall see the rule of ignorance. 

"Theories and proposals that under a middle-class 
rule would be regarded as too wild to require an 
answer will be favorably regarded even by learned professors. 
...They will be discussed with all the care 
and respect that is due to a monarch's words.' 

"Municipal government in England and the United 
States has already shown that political intelligence 
does not widen as we descend in rank and station, and 
that universal education has not the enlightening results 
which were promised in its name. Hence the 
prospect of the future is the rule of the wire-pullers, 
bribing the electorate with the plunder of the rich, to 
be bestowed in the form of 'political outdoor relief.' 

"The elector will no longer be asked, What have you 
done for your country? but, What has the Government 
done for you? We have reached a condition of affairs 
where the political conditions are in absolute opposition 
to the industrial. At the polling station the worker 
is the equal of the master, nay, even his superior, since 
he has on his side a vast numerical advantage, which 
virtually reduces the employer to a state of political 
impotence. But within the factory affairs are reversed. 
There the employer is king, and his equal at the voting 
station is his inferior. 

A BLACK OUTLOOK FOR INDUSTRY 

"Such conditions could only persist while the attention 



of the voter was confined to 'what are properly 
called politics, or the public affairs of the nation.' If 
the scope of politics is extended— as it has been— so 'as 
to include the management of the industrial side of 
life, with the purpose of there enforcing that equality 
which is so dearly prized on the political side of life, 
then we come directly upon that problem which western 
civilization must either solve or perish in the attempt 
to solve.' In a word, political equality is irreconcilable 
with industrial inequality. One or other 
must go. 

"This is clearly seen and understood by the Labor 
party; it is the doctrine also of a considerable body of 
Liberals, numbering not much less than 100, outside 
the Labor ranks, though Sir Henry does not note this. 
If that section gives effect to its doctrines, backed by 
the majority of voters, the whole order of civilization as 
we now know it must change. 

"Already in the municipalities the change has begun. 
The exploitation of the few rich by the many 
poor, their oppressive taxation, and the provision of 
comfortable conditions for the poor, who find themselves 

R3924 : page 20 

possessed of supreme power in virtue of their 
numbers, is the system known as municipal Socialism. 
Already it is taken for granted. 

'"That it is the duty of the State to find work for 
its people; to provide all citizens with pensions in old 
age; to fix hours of work and rates of wages. ..and 
it is the duty of county councils to tax property so 
many shillings in the pound, to improve the surroundings 
of the poor.' 

"The municipal Socialist, when resisted, can always 
appeal to an army of the proletariat and vote 
down those owning property. In fact a stage has been 
reached where taxation is levied on one small class by 
another large class, and spent wholly or mainly in the 
interests of the latter class. That is a state of affairs 
which earlier thinkers pronounced contrary to the 
rights of man; it is, in other words, a barely disguised 
tyranny. 

INEVITABLE DECLINE AND FALL 

"This tendency will proceed further, Sir H. Wrixon 
holds. The tyranny will become as complete as it 
was in the democracies of Greece, when the plunder of 
the rich was the normal rule, and as it was in the 
French Revolution, when the assertion of political 
equality was instantly followed by an attack on property. 
He points out that the modern demagogues exhibit 
a marked antagonism to private property, and 
propose to wipe it out of existence by graduated 
taxation. 



"There will be no violent revolution, unless property 
resists by force, but simply a series of confiscatory 
laws. Industry after industry will be municipalized or 
taken over by the State, when efficiency will inevitably 
decline. 'All the causes that promote expense and inefficiency' 
will be present; absent only the causes 
which stimulate energy and inventiveness. There will 
be no penalties for slackness, and, if for a time, all 
goes well, this will be because the State is living on its 
accumulated capital. A gradual decay will set in, and 
either a fresh revolution will be accomplished, or the 
State will be crushed by some foreign power...." 

SOCIALISTIC PRESIDENT IN 1912 



At the First Presbyterian Church, St. Louis, Rev. 
Chas. Steizle, secretary of the Church and Labor Department 
of the general Presbyterian Church, delivered 
a sermon in which he asserted that the labor problem 
is purely a religious question. He said in part:— 

"For three years I have traveled all over the country. 
I have a personal acquaintance with all the labor 
leaders of the United States. It seems to me the workingmen 
are moving in two general directions: (1) Political; 
(2) economic. Who has not been appalled by 
the tremendous growth of socialism? In our own 
country the growth in the last four years has been sevenfold. 
If it increases in the same ratio in the next 
eight years the socialists will be able to elect a President. 

R3924 : page 21 

Whatever one may think of the economic value 

of socialism, this fact remains that socialism is becoming 

to thousands of workingmen a substitute for the 

Church." 

THE CLIMAX WILL SURELY COME 



"Words will not wake up the masses to realize the 
maze into which capitalism is plunging them, but 
words will wake up a few of them. It will take conditions 
to do what words have not the power to do. And 
these conditions are coming like a cyclone. But when 
conditions begin to press harder and harder, when the 
clock strikes the ominous sound, precipitated by some 
insignificant matter, perhaps, then the words that the 
masses have read will come to them with great force. 

"The howling of the abolitionists did not awaken 
the antagonism to chattel slavery, but the firing on 
Fort Sumter with popguns created a condition that 
made the people jump to their feet with a determination 



to settle the question of which power should 
rule the nation."— Appeal to Reason. 



There can be no doubt about it that recent revelations 
of how rich men have acquired much of their 
wealth has come as a revelation to the general public. 
Though long known among the rich, it has been hidden 
from "the man in the street" by financial terms 
which he did not comprehend. With his increase of 
knowledge he has received a "shock." His reverence 
for the rich and the great is shattered. This is but the 
precursor of the complete loss of confidence in everybody 
and every thing, pointed out in the Scriptures as 
the very foundation of the coming anarchy. 

The immediate effect upon many is to lead them to 
philosophise thus: "So, so; I see now how it is all 
done! I used to wonder how a man could accumulate 
even one million dollars honestly, but supposed the 
honorable millionaires were the very personification of 
honor and justice, after the style of their requirements 
of the bank clerks and cashiers of railroads, etc. Now 
I see differently. Well, I hope my chance may come 
soon, that I also, by the methods which I see are 
'usual,' may become a multi-millionaire." 

RELIGIOUS TOLERATION 



"The disposition among worthy and earnest men 
to ignore religious differences in pursuit of common 
and noble ends was strikingly shown at the recent international 
arbitration conference at Lake Mohonk. 
There, at the opening devotional exercises which 
marked each daily session of the conference, were to be 
seen as active participants a cardinal of the Roman 
Catholic Church in his scarlet robes, a Quaker in his 
simple garb, an Episcopal bishop, a Congregational 
judge, together with Presbyterian, Baptist and Methodist 
clergymen. The Quaker read the hymn of peace, 
written by a Unitarian. The Roman Catholic and 
Quaker sang from the same book, and after a psalm 
the cardinal read prayers in English, with many a 
Protestant responding 'Amen.' 

"To say such a scene was remarkable is simply to recognize 
the fact that as respects religious and sectarian 
differences the world has moved forward out of that bigotry 
and intolerance which for so many ages obscured 
the vision and warped the judgment of many otherwise 
good and worthy men. We are doing now only what 
rational and sincere men should always have done in 
the past, and which they will continue to do in the 
future, until scenes like that at Mohonk will be so much 
in the natural order that they will cease to be notable." 



-Leslie's Weekly. 



In view of the above general tendency to religious 
toleration is it not remarkable the amount of intolerance 
that is displayed against all who sympathize with 
the teachings of MILLENNIAL DAWN? The manifestations 
of hatred and opposition come from all denominations, 
and the various persecutions in a small way 
practised against individuals in their homes, amongst 
their business and Church relatives, is surely remarkable. 
Why is it so? We might just as well ask why 
was it that Scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of the 
Law, all classes and parties of the Jews, opposed 
Christ and his simple, straightforward teachings at the 
first advent. Why was it that with the wide differences 
existing between themselves these all could unite in 
the opposition to the light, the truth? Whoever can 
answer those questions respecting the harvest of the 
Jewish age will be able probably in similar vein to answer 
the similar questions pertinent to the harvest of 
this Gospel age. General doubt and darkness on all 
theological questions is settling down rapidly upon all 
denominations— "They believe they know not what," 
hence why should they any longer quarrel with each 
other? We know what we believe, and in that sense of 
the word are certainly amongst the few Christians. 
Our presentations in MILLENNIAL DAWN are clear cut, 
Scriptural; and the Scriptures are thus shown to be 
opposed to all the sects and parties of Christendom, and 
their various creeds are shown to be out of accord with 
the Word of God. "If the world hate you ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the 
world the world would love its own: but because ye 
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you."— John 15:18,19. 

THE CRIME OF SUGGESTION 



It would appear that the average German citizen 
has a higher sense of the obligation of an oath than 
have some religious teachers. This is shown in the 
following report from the London Daily Mail. It 
causes us to wonder how the common people would 
decide the matter if some of the clergy were put on 
trial for the violation of their vows of ordination— in 
preaching contrary to their solemn covenants. The 
item follows:— 

"Father Geisert, a Catholic priest, of Lautenbach, 
Baden, has been sentenced to a year in the penitentiary 
for attempting to induce a parishioner to swear 
falsely in the Catholic Party's interest in the course of 
a bye-election contest for the Landtag. 



"The priest made a pathetic supplication to his 
judges to let him off, confessing that the letter wherein 

R3924 : page 22 

he made the incriminating suggestion was written to a 
parishioner in a moment of foolish zeal, and that he had 
done penance for it many times over. 

"The defense introduced as a last resort the evidence 
of Professor Mayer, the authority on 'moral theology 
as related to the question of the oath.' He declared 
that during the time of the Inquisition a certain 
'mental restriction' was permitted to persons who took 
oath, and said that Geisert may have had this in mind 
when he advised his parishioners to lie." 

THE SOCIALISTS' SCHEME 



"The recent increase in the activity of socialist 
propagandists has been noticeable. The latest development 
is the formation of an intercollegiate society 
to spread the principles of socialism not only in the 
colleges of the country but among the pupils of high 
schools in the larger cities. Literature is to be distributed 

R3925 : page 22 

broadcast, while lecturers will be sent from school 
to school to explain the doctrines for which it is hoped 
to make many converts. Among those back of this 
movement we are not surprised to find E. Benjamin 
Andrews, Jack London and Charlotte Perkins Gilman." 
—Pittsburgh Gazette. 

HYGIENIC VALUE OF PRAYER 



At a recent medical conference Dr. Hyslop paid a 
remarkable tribute to the hygienic value of prayer, 
says the English Churchman. In treating of the influence 
of moral and religious environment, he said it ought to 
be their object, as teachers and physicians, to fight 
against all those influences which tended to produce 
either indifference or intemperance towards religion. 
Of all hygienic measures to counteract disturbed hope 
or depression of spirits, he would undoubtedly give 
first place to the simple habit of prayer. Its effect 
on the mind was more beneficial than any other therapeutic 
agent known. 

Apropos of which may be quoted the following 
from Longfellow's "The Day is Done": 

"Such songs have power to quiet 



The restless pulse of care, 
And come like the benediction 
That follows after prayer." 



R3925 : page 22 

DISOBEDIENCE, PENALTY, HOPE 

--GENESIS 3:1-6,13-16.-JANUARY 20.- 

"As all in Adam die, so all in Christ 
shall be made alive."— 1 Cor. 15:22. 

IF THIS LESSON were properly taught in all the Sunday 
Schools and Bible classes of Christendom it would 
of itself revolutionize all the theology of Christendom. 
The wonder is that reasonable, thinking people can con over 
this lesson without apparently getting the least ray of light 
therefrom. Our own past experiences along the same line 
enable us to sympathize with others in their blindness, 
stimulating us to render them all the assistance in our power, 
to the intent that their eyes of understanding may be opened, 
that they may be able to discern the fundamentals of the 
divine plan, and thus come into a better understanding 
thereof and closer harmony with the Lord every way. 

From Genesis to Revelation the serpent is set before us 
as the synonym of Satan. The introduction of sin is charged 
to the great Adversary of God, who, following his ambition, 
sought to secure our first parents and their posterity as his 
subjects under the new empire which he hoped to establish, 
that he might be like the Most High. This sinful, disloyal 
ambition not only wrought havoc in a cherub, degrading 
him and making him an adversary of God, but through him 
it wrought havoc to our race— divine condemnation to death, 
with all the attendant miseries of sickness, pain— mental, 
moral and physical— deteriorating, culminating in death. 
We all are witnesses of the penalty; the doctors' signs, no 
less than the crape and the cemetery, assure us that the sentence 
of death still rests upon our race— the most awful 
calamity that could be imagined. 

MOTHER EVE'S TEMPTATION 

That a serpent was used in Mother Eve's temptation 
there can be no doubt, but whether it spoke with audible 
voice or only by its actions we cannot know— it was quite 
probably the latter, as we sometimes say, "Actions speak 
louder than words." Satan merely used the serpent as the 
instrumentality of his temptation. His desire was to alienate 
the affections, love and respect of our first parents from 
God to himself. He attempted to do this by passing as their 
friend and giving the insinuation that God, although the 
Creator, was the transgressor, who desired to hinder their 
best and truest advancement and prosperity. The Lord had 



placed our first parents in the Garden of Eden, which was 
highly favored every way, and entirely fitted for the perfect 
pair to enjoy their human perfection to the full. In it were 
all kinds of trees, some beautiful to look upon and some 
good for food— trees of life— the eating of whose fruit would 
perpetuate life in full degree. But amongst the trees of 
life in this orchard was one tree of very marked peculiarity, 
which our Lord had called the tree of knowledge and of 
whose fruit he forbade our parents to eat. This restriction 
would not necessarily have been perpetual. In due time, 
after the test of obedience had demonstrated the loyalty of 
our first parents, no doubt they would have been granted 
full liberty in the use of the tree of knowledge, but partaking 
of it before the Lord's time would mean not only their 
disobedience but their injury, and would bring upon them 
the divine sentence, "In the day that thou eatest thereof 
thou shalt surely die"— margin, "Dying thou shalt die." 
This restriction on the tree of knowledge became the 
channel of temptation. Satan was aware of that trait of 
nature which leads everyone to be interested in and to have 
more or less desire for anything that is forbidden— to wonder 
why it is forbidden, etc. Such thoughts had undoubtedly 
passed through the minds of Adam and Eve, and had 
been set aside as improper, because surely their Creator, who 
had done so much for their blessing and joy, would not 
withhold from them anything really to their advantage; 
hence in appreciation of his goodness they settled the matter 

R3925 : page 23 

that they would be obedient to the Lord and would not 
taste the forbidden fruit. Now came Satan's attack: posing 
as their best friend he intimated selfishness on God's part 
as the basis of their restriction. More than this, he suggested 
that they never could be happy without the valuable 
knowledge which the fruit of that tree would bring them, 
and, further, that God had lied to them in saying that death 
would surely follow the eating of the forbidden fruit. 
Had Satan appeared and held personal conversation 
with them directly or through the serpent, they seemingly 
should have been on guard, and would probably have wondered 
why any of God's creatures should speak disparagingly 
of his wisdom and his love. Our conjecture is that the whole 
matter was done by signs— that under Satan's guidance the 
serpent partook of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, 
and when mother Eve saw that no harm came to the serpent, 
but perceived that it was one of the most cunning of all 
the animals of the earth, the operation of her mind was, "Has 
God deceived us? Has he an object in deceiving us? Why 
did he tell us that we should die if we ate of that fruit, 
whereas we see that the serpent eats of it and does not die? 
Quite probably it is because of the partaking of this fruit 
regularly that the serpent is the wisest of all the living 
creatures under our control." And when the woman perceived 
by this process of reasoning that the tree was good 
to make one wise, her desire for wisdom entrapped her into 



disloyalty to the command of her Creator. She ate, and as 
a result did indeed get a great increase of knowledge, with 
condemnation, sorrow, pain, tears— because the knowledge 
came not in God's time and order, but in violation of his 
command. 

"A MURDERER FROM THE BEGINNING" 

In thus entrapping mother Eve, and through her bringing 
upon Adam and his race the death penalty, Satan became 
the great murderer of the race, as our Lord Jesus 
declared, "He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode 
not in the truth." His counsel, and indeed the counsel of 
all who are out of harmony with God is evil, injurious, and 
whosoever heeds or agrees therewith is not wise. The Apostle 
says, "The serpent beguiled Eve," and this is his general 
procedure in all of our temptations. He does not come out 
into the open, but everywhere seeks to put darkness for light 
—to deceive, to mislead. We are to remember, too, that 
mother Eve had no experience with sin, nor with any adversary 
of God and of righteousness, and hence was the more 
easily misled in this temptation. Coming from her the 
temptation was an hundred-fold what it otherwise would 
have been, for we are informed by the Apostle that "Adam 
was not deceived." He was aware, fully convinced, that 
death would be the penalty for his partaking of the forbidden 
fruit, irrespective of its effect upon the serpent. His 
temptation, however, touched him upon his most vulnerable 
point— his love for his wife. 

There are intimations that the fall took place one and 
a half years after father Adam's creation, but for what portion 
of that time he had his beautiful and loved companion, 
Eve, we are not informed. It is clearly intimated, however, 
that he was alone for a sufficient period to realize that there 
was no companion suitable for him amongst all the beasts, 
cattle and creatures under his dominion; and when, finally, 
the Lord gave him a wife of his own flesh and bones, of his 
own nature, he evidently found in her that complement to 
himself for which he had so greatly longed. And now, 
when he perceived that Eve had eaten of the forbidden fruit 
and that she must die, the poor man evidently felt that without 
her life would lose its charms, and determined that whatever 
the cost he would share it with his bride— therefore 
he partook of the fruit at her instance, with the full knowledge 
that it would mean his death. He not only knowingly 

R3926 : page 23 

and willingly disobeyed the divine command, but did it 
intentionally— he suicided. 

SATAN'S DECEPTIONS STILL PREVAIL 

We must not censure our first parents too severely, but 
remember that, although they were perfect in their capacities, 
created in the image of God, they were not perfect in 



knowledge. They should have been wise enough to know, 

to realize, their limitations of ignorance and to have trusted 

to the Lord. Lack of faith was mother Eve's difficulty, and 

had father Adam possessed a sufficiency of faith and maintained 

his obedience no doubt God would have arranged 

some way for the recovery of his companion, but for their 

undeveloped condition the trial was too strong; they succumbed, 

as no doubt nearly all of their children would have 

done under similar circumstances. We blame them not, yet 

we see that God, foreknowing what course they would take, 

preferred to allow them to take that course rather than to 

interfere with them, intending to ultimately overrule their 

disobedience for a higher and wider development of his own 

gracious purposes through the redemption and ultimate 

blessing which the divine plan centers in Jesus. 

What do we see today but similar disobedience, notwithstanding 
the fact that we have larger experience than 
our first parents as respects contact with sin and its penalty? 
In how many instances today does ambition, love of knowledge, 
lead to disobedience of divine restrictions to the serious 
injury of the disobedient one? One would think that 
the lesson before us would be so powerful, so convincing, 
that all who have a knowledge of it would flee from temptation 
in such directions and resolve that at any cost they 
would be obedient to the Word of the Lord. How many 
today, like Father Adam, would be willing to sacrifice their 
eternal interests for the joys and pleasures of earthly companionship, 
even to the extent of disobedience to the divine 
requirements. 

WHOM SHALL WE BELIEVE? 

Whoever may be inclined to condemn mother Eve for 
hearkening to the voice of the serpent should reflect that 
the great majority of the world today are believing Satan's 
lie, rejecting God's message. The heathen, numbering 
1,200,000,000, almost without exception believe Satan's lie, 
"Ye shall not surely die," so that when their friends die 
they claim that they are not dead but more alive than ever. 
Nor is this the worst of it: so-called Christendom, representing 
400,000,000 of our race, have very generally 
accepted the same lie, and similarly believe that none are 
dead— that all in the moment in which they appear to die 
really become more alive than ever before. How can we 
blame mother Eve on this score while we see the deceptions 
spread abroad far and near, notwithstanding all the lessons 

R3926 : page 24 

which she learned and which her children should have 
learned through her example. As to believe God always 
leads us in the right direction and brings blessings, so to reject 
God's counsel, to receive the serpent's counsel, always means 
to bring injury in some sense or degree. 

Look about over the world today— see the heathen 
worshiping their ancestors, and imagining that they hold 



communion with those whom the Scriptures declare are dead 
and know not anything, and never would know anything 
had it not been for the redemption accomplished at Calvary 
by Jesus, and who would not in any sense of the word be 
conscious until awakened by our Lord at his second coming 
in resurrection power. Look at Christendom, and perceive 
that two-thirds of these believe in the doctrine of a present 
purgatory, in which their relatives and friends are suffering 
from the moment of death. See them praying for the dead 
and paying for masses for their relief from pain. Think of 
the thousands of injurious superstitions that are built upon 
this error, and reflect that Spiritism, which is already having 
a great influence and, according to the Scriptures, will shortly 
have still wider and more baneful effect; and note how it 
has all its power from this false doctrine which the Adversary 
originally started in Eden— that the dead are not dead, 
but alive, and ready to communicate through mediums, etc. 
Consider how Satan has used this error all the way down 
through the ages, and how, through the fallen angels, the 
demons, he has personated the dead and sought thus to entrap 
the living. Let us learn the lesson; let us say, with 
one of old, "Let God be true, though it make every man a 
liar."— Rom. 3:4. 

CURSING AND BLESSING 

Let us realize that every one who opposes or denies the 
divine testimony is a liar and the truth is not in him; but 
let us set to our seal that God is true, and realize that the 
penalty of death is real, that the redemption price paid by 
our Lord Jesus was his death, also real, and that the blessed 
provision of the divine plan for the future is the awakening 
of mankind from the sleep of death, from the unconsciousness 
of death, for the very purpose of bringing them to a 
clear knowledge of God and his truth and releasing them 
from the superstitions and evil influences, degradation, etc., 
which came upon them through disobedience, through the 
fall, through the following of Satan's original lie. 

The curse that rests upon the race, upon the earth itself 
and upon the serpent and Satan is a condemnation, a 
penalty, a reprobation. The serpent, under divine reprobation, 
experienced some kind of a change of form and locomotion, 
and became to mankind a synonym, a representative, 
of everything evil, loathsome, vile— the synonym of sin and 
Satan. Not only in our lesson is this brought to our attention, 
but also in the typical system of natural Israel. Fiery 
serpents were sent upon Israel as a curse or penalty for sin; 
and when, through their doubts, the people were perishing, 
under the Lord's instruction Moses raised upon a pole a copper 
serpent, looking to which in faith the Israelites were 
recovered from the poison of the serpents. Thus the Lord 
early intimated that Christ would be made a curse, a sin 
offering for us, and that we would be healed through looking to 
him in faith. 

BRUISING THE SERPENT'S HEAD 



In pronouncing the curse against the serpent— against 
evil— the Lord declared, "I will put enmity between thee 
and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall 
bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his heel." The Scriptures 
show us clearly that this divine prophecy is to be fulfilled, 
that our Lord Jesus is the seed of the woman through 
whom the blessing shall come, and that his Church, his 
Bride, is to be joint-heir with him in the suffering incidental 
to the attainment of the honorable position of joint-heirs 
with him also in the great work of delivering mankind from 
all the evils that have come upon us through Satan, through 
the serpent. The head and the heel are referred to symbolically 
as representing vital and non-vital portions of the 
body. 

Thus the Christ, Jesus the Head and the Church his 
members, throughout this Gospel age have all suffered something 
from the serpent, from evil, from Satan, but under 
God's providences their sufferings are not serious, not deadly 
—they are wounded in the heel, so to speak. This seed 
class is begotten of the holy Spirit, New Creatures; hence 
nothing that can come to them in their earthly, human experiences 
can prove injurious to their spiritual welfare. All 
the bruising of the heel, under the Lord's supervision, shall 
work together for good to the development of character, to 
the preparation of the injured members for the far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory by and by. Thus it has 
been with our dear Redeemer, who being wounded for our 
transgressions has been highly exalted of the Father. We 
also who are sharers with him in his sufferings, ignominy, 
death, are to be sharers in his glory. 

As for the serpent, his head shall be crushed, all evil 
shall be utterly destroyed in God's due time. Not yet, however; 
evil is still rampant, not only as much as it has ever 
been in the world's history, but more so, and this is in full 
accord with the divine record that "evil men and leaders 
astray shall wax worse and worse," and a few short years 
ahead will fully demonstrate the power of Satan over and 
in those who are his subjects. But victory is coming to 
those who are now wounded. The Christ shall by and by 
bind that old serpent, the devil, Satan, and cast him into 
the abyss and set a seal over him that he may deceive the 
nations no more until the thousand years of the Millennial 
reign of Christ be passed— until all mankind shall have had 
a full opportunity of coming to a true knowledge of God and 
of accepting and using the grace provided through the great 
Redeemer's sacrifice. 

As for the Church, we also will have to do with this 
work of crushing evil— as the Apostle expresses it, "The 
very God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet 
shortly."— Rom. 16:20. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 

Our Golden Text fits the subject well, especially in the 
better translation which we have given. All of Adam's posterity, 



all who are in him, are dying as a result of his disobedience. 
Failing to maintain his hold upon the gift of 
God, eternal life, he has also failed to transmit that character 
and degree of life to his children. The six thousand 
years of crying and dying have been an awful lesson to the 
world of the exceeding sinfulness of sin, but thank God the 

R3927 : page 25 

time of this groaning of creation is nearly at an end, the new 
dispensation is near at hand. He that gave himself a ransom 
for Adam, and who thus incidentally purchased not 
only him but all of his race who had lost life in him, this 
great Redeemer is about to establish the rule of righteousness 
in the world and to inaugurate that era of blessing, the 
Golden Age, for which the whole creation waits and longs, 
whether intelligently or unintelligently. 

The blessing of life in its full, everlasting, complete 
sense is coming to "all in Christ" and to none others. Now 
is the opportunity for coming into relationship with him as 
his Bride and joint-heir. Blessed are we whose hearts of 
understanding and ears of appreciation have recognized this 
grand opportunity, so that we have been glad to accept the 
Lord's proposition at the cost of every earthly interest. 
Surely the faithful shall be like him and see him as he is 
and share his glory. Then in the time of his presence the 
world of mankind in general will be granted an opportunity 
to see and to hear and to accept of divine mercy in him— 
not by becoming the Bride, for that class will have then 
been filled, but they will be granted the privilege of coming 
into relationship with the Christ as children, receiving of his 
life, being begotten again to restored life— to a restitution 
of all that was lost in the first Adam and restored in the 
second Adam. He that hath such a hope in him may well 
purify himself and strive to come into relationship with 
Christ, and thus to as quickly as possible attain to the joys 
and blessings of the divine favor. He that hath the Son 
hath life, he that hath not the Son shall not see life eternal. 
-1 John 5:12. 



THE SHADOW OF GOD'S HAND 

Bright and fair the sun was beaming 

O'er my smooth and easy way, 
And my soul moved lightly onward; 

Fear and care were far away. 
Hope was bright and winged my footsteps, 

Eagerly I pressed along, 
And the joy of heavenly favor 

Filled my heart with praise and song. 

I could see my Father's wisdom, 

Loving care and sheltering arm, 
Leading me through pleasant places, 



Guarding me from every harm. 
I could feel love's flame arising 

High and higher in my breast, 
And my lips o'erflowed with gladness, 

All was joy and peace and rest. 

When at once a voice within me 

Seemed to thrill my very soul: 
Could I stand if joy departed, 

Sorrow flooding all my soul? 
In an arid desert lonely, 

Would my faith endure the test? 
Would my spirit, still undaunted, 

Praise him then as when at rest? 

This one thing my soul pursueth, 

To attain thy perfect love, 
Love, unwavering and loyal, 

Rising all things else above; 
I would have the faith enduring, 

Stronger when most sorely tried, 
"Spare me not, but prove me, Father," 

Anxiously my spirit cried; 

When across my clear horizon 

Suddenly a cloud arose, 
Spreading wide and lowering darkly, 

Threatening my soul's repose. 
Stranger voices sounded near me, 

Scarce a step was plain before, 
But my Father's arm sustained me, 

What, then, could I ask for more? 

And, while leaning hard upon him, 

His sweet peace was given me, 
By the Spirit's gentle whisper, 

"This is his great love for thee; 
Well he knows thy deepest yearnings 

To reflect his image bright- 
All thy prayers come up before him, 

And are precious in his sight. 

"And this darkness come upon thee 

Is the shadow of his hand, 
Never raised except in blessing, 

Though thou may st not understand." 
Then my heart grew strong and trustful, 

And with joy my soul was stirred; 
"Teach me, Lord, to trust thee fully," 

This my prayer so soon was heard. 

Fearless then, I started onward, 

Compassed by the gloom of night, 

For, by Father's love surrounded, 
Darkness is as safe as light! 

Still I pray, "O, lead me, Father, 



By thy goodness and thy might, 
Till, beyond time's misty shadows, 
Dawns the pure, eternal light." 

—Bessie P. Lockerbie. 



R3927 : page 25 

"SIN LIETH AT THE DOOR" 

-GENESIS 4:3 -15. -JANUARY 27.- 

Golden Text:— "Whoever hateth his 
brother is a murderer."— 1 John 3:15. 

THE STORY of Cain and Abel itself is a sharp contradiction 
of the Evolution theory. Had Adam been but a 
slight remove above the monkey, and lower than the lowest 
type of man today, his children would have been little if 
any better. But our lesson shows us two sons of Adam, 
clothed and in their right minds, the one a tiller of the soil, 
the other a shepherd and herdsman. Do apes exhibit such 
dispositions at the present time? Assuredly not. Furthermore, 
these two men of noble character esteemed it a duty 
and privilege to acknowledge God with their substance. 
They did not worship idols, nor sun nor moon nor stars, but 
the living God, the Creator. Surely neither apes nor the 
lowest forms of man exhibit such tendencies today. And 
even after Cain had become a murderer, his reverence for 
the Almighty and his appreciation of his crime marked him 
as not only higher than the brute creation, but very much 

R3927 : page 26 

higher than many of his race today who have little regard 
for life, fearing chiefly the penalty. 

At what particular time our lesson dates we may not 
surely know, the chapter in which it occurs passing over 
centuries of time. In the first verse it tells of the birth of 
Cain, in the next verse he is a full-grown man and has a 
full-grown brother Abel, and quite probably they both had 
large families, though through neither one is Adam's genealogy 
reckoned, and Abel's children, if he had any, are not 
mentioned at all. The third verse, with which our lesson 
opens, intimates a considerable period of time after Abel 
was a keeper of sheep and Cain a tiller of the ground, saying, 
"And in the process of time it came to pass that Cain 
brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord, 
and Abel an offering of the firstlings of his flock." 

THE RESPECTED OFFERING 

Nothing either good or bad is recorded of either of these 
men, Cain and Abel, up to the time of this lesson and their 
presentation of their respective offerings before the Lord. It 



was but natural, and we might say proper, that each should 
present to the Lord an offering representing his own industries, 
and the Lord's acceptance of Abel's offering and failure 
to accept Cain's should not be considered as any slight 
upon the latter, but rather as a lesson of instruction, a leading 
of divine providence, indicating the character of offering 
that would be most acceptable and pleasing to the Lord. 
The reason for the acceptance of Abel's offering is apparent 
—God desired that all offerings from his creatures should 
recognize original sin and the necessity for a great sin-offering, 
the sacrifice of the life of the Redeemer. Thus early 
did God begin the lesson of instruction emphasized by the 
Apostle that without the shedding of blood there is no remission 
of sins.-Heb. 9:22. 

So near to perfection, the first-born son of the perfect 
Adam, Cain had undoubtedly inherited a fine human organization, 

R3928 : page 26 

nearly perfect in all of its parts, comparatively well 

balanced; but as Adam, who was perfect, could allow love 

for his wife to misguide him into disobedience of his Creator, 

so Cain allowed the wrong view of matters to enter his mind, 

to have control and ultimately to bring forth its evil fruit, 

murder. We can sympathize with him in his grief that his 

sacrifice was not acceptable to the Lord: we can appreciate 

his surprise that the offering of his younger brother, a blood 

offering, should be more acceptable. But here we who have 

the new mind, begotten of the holy Spirit, can see that he 

took the wrong course in allowing envious, angry feelings 

against his brother, whereas he should have gone to the 

Lord in supplication to know why his sacrifice was not acceptable. 

Had he done so the Lord would undoubtedly 

have told him that his desire to worship and serve were appreciated, 

but that it must be a divine regulation amongst 

men that all sacrifices, to be acceptable to the Lord, must be 

those which would typify the death of a ransomer and atoner 

for sin. 

Here we see the fine, subtle, entering wedge of sin, and 
who that has had experience may not trace analogies in his 
own experience and note when and where the wrong thought 
was permitted to have control of his mind and the proper 
thought was not entertained? Many of us can perhaps see 
by how narrow a margin we have escaped a wrong course, 
it may be, on various occasions. It is in such respects that 
the New Creatures in Christ have much advantage every way 
over natural men, however well disposed they may be; for, 
as the Apostle explains, as New Creatures we have the 
"spirit of a sound mind," which enables us to think calmly, 
dispassionately, temperately of our own experiences and those 
of others, and leads us to look to the Lord for the wisdom 
from on high as a guide in the interpretation of our daily 
experiences. Whoever learns to look to the Lord in all his 
sorrows and disappointments, as well as in his joys, has 
learned a valuable lesson, which Cain had not yet learned, 
and which he never learned, because none were begotten of 



the holy Spirit or permitted to receive the new mind of 
Christ until after the real atonement had been made and 
Pentecost came as a result of the acceptance of that atonement 
on our behalf by the heavenly Father. 

"WHY ART THOU WROTH?" 

The power to be angry, the power to be wroth, is not a 
result of the fall nor an evidence that Cain was bestial. 
The Lord uses these same words in reference to his own attitude 
of mind at times, declaring that he was wroth under 
certain conditions and that he is angry with the wicked 
every day. (Psa. 7:1 1.) The force of character which permits 
of anger is the very same force which otherwise directed 
signifies intensity of love: the inability to be angry under 
proper cause would imply imperfection, blemishes, just 
as inability to love strongly would imply similar defects of 
character. To be perfect implies a full-rounded capacity in 
every direction. The perfectly shaped head would not be a 
bumpy one representing some of the organs large and others 
small, but would be a well-rounded head in all particulars. 
In such a perfect organization, while every power would be 
there, the higher powers of veneration for God, spirituality, 
conscience, etc., should be in control and indicate when combativeness, 
destructiveness, should and when it should not be 
exercised. It is a mistake to suppose that a perfect being 
would be deficient in combativeness: on the contrary, every 
Christian must have this quality of mind, otherwise how 
could he become an "overcomer"? how could he "fight the 
good fight"? The desirable thing is that every organ of our 
heads should be perfect, and that these all shall be under 
the perfect control and regulation of the higher reasoning 
faculties. 

Cain was not rightly exercised by his experiences. He 
went about sullenly for a time, brooding over the fact that 
God had not recognized his offering and had recognized 
Abel's. He was angry— it seemed to him an injustice on 
God's part: he had been as faithful in his department as 
Abel had been in his. 

God did not leave him to himself, but considering the 
fact of his inexperience and that there were none others to 
give him proper counsel, the Lord admonished him with the 
query, "Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance 
fallen? If thou doest well shalt thou not be accepted? 
and if thou doest not well sin lieth at the door." This suggestion 
should have been sufficient. Cain should at once 
have appealed to the Lord, and having learned God's will, 
should have prepared himself to offer such a sacrifice to the 

R3928 : page 27 

Lord as would be pleasing to him. The inference that he 
was not now doing well, not now pleasing the Lord in his 
wrath and sullen attitude, was a reprimand; and the suggestion 
that sin was lying at the door, or (revised version) 
"crouching at his door," should have suggested to him the 



danger of a misstep. Nothing is intimated of a wrong condition 
prior to this sacrifice, and the sacrifice itself was not 
wrong— it was merely that Cain was ignorant. The wrong 
began when he became angry and sullen instead of applying 
himself to learn the lesson of the Lord's providences. Sin 
was now crouching at his door like a wild beast, ready to 
spring upon him and devour him. And, alas for him! he 
failed to heed the Lord's warning and allowed the crouching 
enemy, sin, to enter into his heart and to make of him a 
murderer. It was the spirit of Satan that entered into him, 
taking the place of the spirit or disposition of the Lord, 
which was his originally as one closely in the likeness of 
God, not greatly marred as yet by the fall. This the Apostle 
intimates, saying that he was "of that wicked one"— he 
partook of Satan's disposition, spirit. (1 John 3:12.) And 
as Satan was a murderer from the beginning, so his spirit 
in Cain was a murderous spirit— John 8:44. 

ALL HATERS ARE MURDERERS 

Here we have the vital point of this lesson as respects 
the household of faith, especially the New Creation. We 
who have been begotten of the holy Spirit and who thus 
have the "mind of Christ" (1 Cor. 2:16), have the mind or 
disposition that is loving, generous, kind, forgiving toward 
our fellows and that is reverential and obedient toward God. 
This is the spirit or disposition that is of the Father and of 
the Son: the opposite disposition or spirit is of the Adversary. 
The two spirits or dispositions are so opposite that we 
cannot have both at once— we cannot serve God and Mammon, 
Christ and Belial. 

The Lord lays down his regulations in this matter in 
most positive terms, telling us in the Golden Text of this 
lesson that "he that hateth his brother is a murderer"— telling 
us also that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him, 
and assuring us that the spirit or disposition of murder is 
the spirit or disposition of the Adversary, who was the first 
murderer. If we resist the devil he will flee from us, but if 
we allow anger and a souring disposition to take possession 
of our minds, the Adversary comes closer and closer until 
he crouches at the door of our hearts, ready to leap in and 
have possession at a favorable opportunity. In Cain's case, 
he was not counted as having sinned at the time he thought 
of his brother in angry mood— his sin was in the outcome of 
that angry mood— murder itself. 

With us the matter is different, because the Lord is not 
dealing with us according to the flesh but according to the 
spirit, the will, the intention. Our flesh is reckoned as degenerated, 
hopelessly dead, and we are accepted of the Lord 
purely on the basis of our new minds, our faith in Christ, 
and our consecration to walk in his steps. For all such 
New Creatures murder would be an impossibility. How 
could one who has the Spirit of the Lord commit murder? 
It would be impossible for him to desire or commit murder 
under any conditions. It would imply that he had lost the 
Spirit of the Lord entirely; and since under the Lord's Covenant 



he would not be permitted to do this ignorantly and 

without reproof, it would imply a wilfulness in the sin. 

Still stronger is the statement that hatred would be murder 

for the New Creation. The angry thought might be suggested 

through the imperfect, fallen brain, but the mind, the 

will, must be so loyal to God and so well instructed respecting 

his will that it would repulse such a suggestion as that 

of hate. The New Creature, the New Will, the New Intention, 

cannot deliberately entertain a feeling of hatred toward 

a brother— it would mean the spirit or disposition of murder, 

and thus the reverse of the Lord's Spirit. 

WORKS OF THE FLESH AND OF THE DEVIL 

Another Apostle, in cautioning the Church, assures us 
that the works of the fallen flesh and of the devil are manifestly 
different from the works or operation of the Spirit of 
the Lord in his people. The latter he tells us brings forth 
the reverse, or the fruitage of gentleness, meekness, patience, 
long suffering, brotherly kindness, love, etc.; the former, 
the spirit of the fallen nature, the Adversary— anger, malice, 
envy, hatred, strife, backbiting and slander. 

It is only as we get this matter well before our mental 
vision that we have the proper conception of the Spirit of 
the Lord in contrast with the spirit of error, the spirit of the 
Adversary, the disposition of sin. Whoever gets such an 
opening of the eyes of his understanding will be assisted, 
quickened thereby to fresh zeal in his opposition to sin in 
its every form. And the wider the eyes of his understanding 
open to a discernment of God's character and the beauties 
of his law of love and justice, the more vigilant will he 
be in his opposition to the downward tendencies of his own 

R3929 : page 27 

flesh— the more on guard lest he should be overtaken in 
such faults. 

DESIRE CONCEIVES SIN 

We read, "Lust [desire] when it has conceived bringeth 
forth sin, and sin when it is finished bringeth forth 
death." (Jas. 1:15.) Here we have a suggestion of the insidious 
character of sin; it does not stalk about openly in its 
horrible aspect, rather it starts in desire: it is prompted by 
selfishness of some kind, either in envy as in Cain's case or 
in ambition as in Satan's case. Small, refined, insidious 
are the beginnings of such desires, with no suggestion whatever 
of disloyalty to God or murder of our fellows. It is 
when these selfish desires and envyings, being unrepulsed, 
have gradually grown stronger and stronger, that, as the 
Apostle suggests, they conceive and bring forth to fruition, 
where they have life actually. Then the course is longer or 
shorter according to the individual or the circumstances, 
but the tendency of a desire that has conceived is to bring 
forth— to have the desire, the ambition, the envy, reach a 



consummation, and such a consummation is always sin. 
Such sin continued in, unrepented of, cherished, would surely 
lead on to death— the Second Death. How important, 
then, it is that we keep a close watch upon the desires of 
our hearts, and remember that out of the heart, out of the 
desires, proceed not only the good, kind, loving, generous 
sentiments, conceiving and bringing forth good deeds, kind 
words and proper conduct, but also out of the heart desires 
proceed the envyings and wrong and selfish ambitions which 
lead farther and farther away from the Lord and nearer and 

R3929 : page 28 

nearer to that condition which he would ultimately declare 
worthy of the Second Death. How appropriate the words 
of the poet:— 

"I want a principle within 

Of jealous, godly fear; 
A sensibility of sin, 

A pain to feel it near; 
I want the first approach to feel 

Of pride or fond desire; 
To catch the wandering of my will, 

And quench the kindling fire." 

"THOU SHALT RULE OVER HIM" 

After cautioning Cain that sin crouched at the door of 
his heart, the Lord added, "Unto thee shall be his desire and 
thou shalt rule over him;" that is to say, Satan desired 
to have Cain, but the latter's proper course would be to resist 
the devil, to rule over him by keeping his heart in tune 
with the Lord and the recognized spirit of righteousness, 
justice, love. St. Peter found the Adversary desiring to 
have him, to sift him as wheat, to get him out of the discipleship 
of which he was one of the strongest characters and 
leader. We have all seen how nearly the Adversary succeeded 
in Peter's case as he entirely succeeded in Cain's. 
Peter had the advantage of the Lord's prayers and of his 
contact with him and of the lessons he had learned as his 
disciple, and in his case a victory resulted, even though for a 
time he was overcome. 

Is it not the same with all the Lord's true followers? 
Is not Satan desiring to have us to sift us— to hinder us 
from being garnered amongst those who shortly will 
shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father. (Matt. 13:43.) 
Assuredly this is the case, and our experiences today 
are in full accord with the testimony of the Scriptures 
that we are now in a very trying time— subject to the special 
temptations of the Adversary, but succored of the Lord in a 
special manner through his Word, through the brethren, 
through the various helpful instrumentalities which the Lord 
has provided for this harvest time for those who look to him 
for assistance and who are willing and glad to accept those 
aids which he proffers them. Yea, we see that we are living 



in that particular time which the Scriptures designate the 
hour of temptation, which shall come upon all them that 
dwell upon the face of the whole earth.— Rev. 3:10. 

Temptations, trials, there must needs be: without these 
there would be no such thing as demonstrating or perfecting 
character, and the Lord proposes that only overcomers shall 
be joint-heirs with his Son in the Kingdom. Instead, therefore, 
of temptations being a sign of divine displeasure they 
should be regarded by us as evidences of the Lord's favor- 
that he still considers us worthy of being further proven; 
that he still has us in hand with a view to our preparation, 
chiseling, polishing, making ready for places in his glorious 
heavenly Temple. Let us learn, therefore, to rejoice in tribulation 
and, as the Apostle urges, let us also fear. (2 Cor. 7:4; 
Heb. 4:1.) Thus between the rejoicing and the fear, 
and carefulness and watchfulness and prayerfulness, we 
shall be in that attitude which will assist us in the knowing 
and doing of the good and acceptable and perfect will of 
God. 

"MY BROTHER'S KEEPER" 

How long Cain brooded over his trouble, how long it 
took for his wrong desire, his envy, to conceive and bring 
forth the sin of murder we are not told— merely the fact is 
stated that this was the bitter fruit. The Lord did not hinder 
the murder, and even dealt most generously with the 
murderer, to whose attention the matter is called by the inquiry, 
"Where is Abel, thy brother?" As the question implied 
ignorance on the Lord's part, Cain may have wondered 
to what extent the Almighty was omniscient, all-seeing, and his 
answer was in line with this. "I know not: am I my brother's 
keeper?" This question continually recurs, not only 
amongst the members of Adam's natural family but also 
amongst the brethren of the Lord's family, the New Creation. 
To what extent is one his brother's keeper? how far does 
our responsibility go? 

Let us look first at the spiritual family: Its members 
are declared to be bounden or holden one to another by the 
cords of love, by membership in the body of Christ, so that 
if one member suffer all the members suffer with it, and if 
one member be honored all the members are honored. (1 Cor. 12:26.) 
The Apostle, expatiating on the importance of 
the various members of the body, declares that even the 
humblest is necessary— that the hand may not say to the 
foot, I have no need of thee; and that as in our natural 
bodies we take the greatest care of those members which are 
least pleasing, so in the spiritual family those which are 
least attractive of themselves need our attention and sympathy 
and covering with the garment of charity more than do 
others. The new commandment which the Lord gave to his 
disciples was, "That ye love one another as I have loved 
you." We cannot love the world with that deep, intensive 
love— it is not incumbent upon us to sacrifice our own interests 
for the world; but it is made obligatory that we have 
the Lord's Spirit toward all the household of faith, so that, 



as he did, so shall we rejoice to lay down our lives for the 
brethren, serving them with our moments and our hours at 
the cost of our own self-denial. 

"EVERY MEMBER IS NECESSARY" 

According to this, the law of our Head, the terms and 
conditions of membership in his body, we are our brothers' 
keepers: each one has a responsibility for his fellow— not 
to intrude upon him as a busybody, but to look out for his 
interests, his welfare, and to do all for that brother that he 
would have that brother do for him— yea, more than this: 
that he would lay down his life for his brother, as Christ 
loved the Church and gave himself for her. If all the Lord's 
brethren could realize this to be the divine rule governing 
the New Creation, and realize that only those who do live 
up to this rule are making their calling and election sure, 
what an awakening of zeal amongst the brethren for the 
service one of another would result, and what a blessing 
would come to all of the Lord's dear flock! Let us take 
heed that no man take our crown— that we be found possessors 
of the Master's Spirit toward the fellow members, 
and thus be accounted worthy of a share in the Kingdom 
class. 

As for the world: We are to remember that while there is 
a wide gulf between the natural man and the New Creature 

R3929 : page 29 

in Christ, nevertheless according to the flesh there is a brotherhood 

which we are not to disdain or overlook. The entire 

groaning creation are our brethren according to the flesh, 

and have claims upon us that the Lord would have us recognize. 

They are our "neighbors," and according even to 

the Jewish letter of the Law the neighbor must be loved 

as one's self— his interests are to be safeguarded as we 

would guard our own interests. Hence, in the whole world 

of mankind, this question, "Am I my brother's keeper?" 

would properly be answered, Yes, each one should be on the 

lookout for the interests, the welfare of others as well as his 

own, and so doing would not be disposed to override or cheat 

his neighbor, but, according to the Golden Rule, to do unto 

others as he would have them do to him. 

We cannot hope that the world, blinded by selfishness, 
and devoting all the energies of life along selfish lines and 
ambitious channels— we are not to expect the world to appreciate 
this high standard of the divine Law. But surely 
all who are New Creatures in Christ should appreciate it, 
and in their dealings with the world, therefore, should not 
only be just, but more— loving and generous and kind, unwilling 
to injure but willing to bless. Thus the Lord's people 
are to be peculiar people in that they unselfishly will 
seek to be their brother's keepers, looking out for the interests 
of others as well as for their own interests. Not necessarily 

R3930 : page 29 



laying down their lives for their neighbors, but ready to do 
good unto all men as they have opportunity, especially to the 
household of faith.— Gal. 6:10. 

THE VOICE OF ABEL'S BLOOD 

Putting the matter in figurative language, the Lord declared 
to Cain that Abel's blood cried from the ground for 
vengeance. It was another way of telling Cain that the 
Lord was omniscient, knew everything that transpired, knew 
that his brother had died at his hand. In this figurative 
sense all sin cries for the punishment of the wrong-doer— it 
is the voice of justice. The Apostle Paul, referring to the 
death of our Lord, who similarly was murdered by his 
brethren, and whose blood might be expected to cry out 
against them, against the whole world of mankind, tells us 
that, instead of crying for vengeance, our Lord's blood- 
shed as a sacrifice on our behalf, as an atonement for our 
sins— cries out not for justice but for mercy! O, how gracious 
that our dear Redeemer, laid not the sin to the charge 
of those who crucified him and despitefully used him, but 
that in his generosity he is willing to make an appropriation 
of his precious blood on behalf of the sinners, to effect 
their reconciliation to God by the blood of the cross— by his 
death on the cross. 

The Apostle's words are that the blood of Jesus speaketh 
better things for us than the blood of Abel. (Heb. 12:24.) 
Let us not forget that blood stands for or represents 
something higher than itself— that when we speak of 
the blood of Christ we are not referring merely to that which 
coursed his veins and arteries and which flowed from his 
wounded side, but we are speaking of that which the blood 
represents, namely, the life: as the Lord said, "The life is 
the blood." Hence, whenever the shedding of blood is referred 
to, the giving up of life, the death, is the main 
thought— thus the passage, "We are not redeemed with corruptible 
things such as silver and gold, but with the precious 
blood of Christ," signifies that we are redeemed with the incorruptible 
life of Christ— the life which was not under penalty, 
not forfeited, not condemned, but approved, and which 
was yielded up as a sacrifice, a corresponding price, a ransom, 
for the forfeited life of Adam and his race. 

The curse of God was upon Cain, the murderer— divine 
condemnation rested upon him; he was cut off from communion 
with God, previously enjoyed, and according to his 
own language felt his condemnation and outcast condition 
severely. The Lord declares through the Apostle that no 
murderer hath eternal life. This signifies that anyone having 
the spirit of murder in his heart is unfit for eternal 
life, could not, according to divine arrangement, be granted 
that great boon or blessing— he himself must die, because 
unfit for life. This does not mean that there will be no hope 
for Cain in the future: we know not to what extent he may 
have repented of his crime before he died. But we are sure 
that he, as well as all mankind, not only will receive a just 



recompense or punishment for their sins, but also secure a 
measure of the blessing which God has provided for every 
member of the race through the dear Redeemer, who bought 
us with the precious blood. 

On the other hand, for one of the Lord's consecrated 
ones, begotten of the Spirit, to commit murder intentionally, 
willingly, in the first degree, would undoubtedly mean his 
Second Death; because it would signify that the spirit of 
love, the Spirit of God, must have entirely perished in his 
heart ere such a deed could be deliberately and intentionally 
committed. We would have no hope for such an one. 
More than this, for wilful and deliberate hatred toward a 
brother to be engendered in the heart would seem to mean 
the perishing of the spirit of love there, and if so would 
mean the Second Death. However, because of the weaknesses 
of the flesh it would be very unsafe for any of us to 
attempt to judge closely upon this point. But it would be well 
indeed that we should be fearful along these lines, as the Apostle 
suggests, "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest any of us should seem to come short of it." 
(Heb. 4: 1 .) Let us fear, therefore, any approximation of a 
feeling of hatred, anger or malice against a brother in the 
Lord or against anybody. Let us strive more and more that 
the new mind shall control positively in our thoughts and 
intentions, and so far as possible in our outward deportment. 



R3930 : page 29 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

There are three churches quite close to us, Free 
Methodists, United Brethren, and Methodist Episcopal. 
We were not here very long before they found out that 
Bro. Wagner knew something about the Bible, and the 
Free Methodists came and asked him to come to Sunday 
School and teach their Bible class. He told them 
if they would let him teach the way he understood the 
Bible he would teach, and that he would not teach anything 
or accept anything without a direct proof from 
the Bible. "Yes," they said, "he could teach that way," 
and he has taught it that way ever since. While some 
did not altogether agree with what he taught they could 
not find anything to disprove it and had to let it go. 

R3930 : page 30 

A short time after he started teaching there the United 
Brethren asked him to take their Bible Class also, because 
they heard he was so "wonderful" on the Bible, 
and as their school was in the afternoon and the other 
in the morning he could do it. He accepted on the 
same terms as with the Free Methodists. One of the 
class leaders of the M.E. Church heard so much that 



he came to our house to investigate, and Brother Wagner 
gave him a brief outline of God's plan. We gave him 
some tracts and he soon came back to hear more and 
get more to read. We gave him Vol. I. in "Scripture 
Studies," and he told us on Sunday night he wanted us 
to send for the TOWER, Diaglott and a set of the "Studies. 
Last Sunday, when he got his quarterly to look 
at the lesson he said the explanation was too "rank," 
and he would not go to Sunday School at all, as he 
said he did not have enough of the Truth to teach yet 
and would not teach error. 

The Free Methodist minister said Sunday before 
last that he thought this was not suitable doctrine to 
teach in the Sunday School, which this M.E. class 
leader found out, and immediately came to ask Bro. 
Wagner if he would take charge of a Bible class if he 
started one, and teach the Truth. Bro. Wagner consented 
and he arranged one for last Sunday night. 
His brother class leader became alarmed and decided 
to come also and show his brother his foolishness, but 
after the meeting he came humbly forward and shook 
hands with Brother Wagner and said he had never 
heard anything like it and begged for permission to 
come again. There were fourteen at the meeting with 
their Bibles and all thoroughly interested. The interested 
had not all been notified, as the time was too 
short, and we expect many more next Saturday night 
at our house. The membership of either of these 
churches does not exceed twenty, so you see there is a 
good percentage interested in the Truth. 

Your sister in his name, S. M. W.,~ Pa. 



page 30 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As such I am indeed glad to address you. I am a 
stranger to you in the flesh, but am of "the household 
of faith." You have not the time to listen to my experience, 
for it is but one of many that you have heard 
and of which I trust there shall be many others. Yet 
it differs in many particulars. For perhaps nine years 
I had been seeking the truth; had seen it as a land 
afar off. I came up closer to it, however, after coming 
to this place in May, 1905, where I have been as pastor 
of a Baptist Church. Before coming here for a number 
of years I had been a student of the subject of the 
Lord's return, and before coming here I had come upon 
the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN. I did not get 
interested in it until some time about September or 
October of last year, when a Pilgrim brother came and 
I happened in, as it seemed, being attracted by the advertisement 
of the meeting. There the seed was sown. 
I had come so far that I have concluded to resign my 
pastorate here. I have done it really, though unknown 



to all the Church, and have been for nearly two months 
working at my old trade, carpentering, and on the 
Lord's day ministering in the Truth to the people here. 
Circumstances are such that I cannot locate elsewhere 
until about the middle of November, so I shall resign 
here to take effect then. I am really out of Babylon, 
and the satisfaction is simply indescribable. I am 
glad to have obeyed the Master's voice. 
Yours in the common faith, , Pa. 



R3930 : page 30 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Pilgrim service continues a source of great 
blessing to me, and where a request for Pilgrim visits 
was sent to the TOWER office I believe the visits are 
especially refreshing to the friends of the Truth in that 
locality. There, too, the spirit of love and good fellowship 
is more pronounced, and generally there is manifest 
a greater degree of zeal for the service of the 
Truth. Indeed, how could we expect it to be otherwise? 
And where Pilgrim visits are requested I find 
more hungering for truth, and of these it is written, 
"They shall be filled." They seem to show more the 
disposition of self-sacrifice and less inclination to criticize 
each other. The characteristic of contentment 
dominates more largely, while at the same time they 
deplore their inability to do a great deal more for the 
Master. 

Some are disposed to think their accommodations 
for entertaining a Pilgrim are not good enough. But I 
assure them to the contrary, for so often they are much 
better than we deserve. Our service is so easy, so 
devoid of weariness of mind and body, and withal so 
blessed and spiritually uplifting that anything the dear 
friends have to offer is good enough for us, and "our 
cup runneth over" with joy continually. 

There seems one thing, however, that needs to be 
corrected, so far as my observation goes, and that is 
the bringing to the meetings of small children, who 
cry and fret and talk aloud and thus disturb others 
who are present, as well as distract the attention of the 
speaker, so that he cannot do justice to the occasion. 
Many of the friends tell me they cannot get from the 
service the good they would like to have gotten, because 
some infant or small child present drew their attention 
despite their effort to keep the mind on what the Pilgrim 
was saying. And I find, too, that the fretful 
child impairs the service in that the speaker's attention 
is drawn from his subject, and causes more or less 
of rambling talk and disconnected sentences, and an 
extra effort and weariness. 

R3931 : page 30 



While personally I have not been troubled much in 
this respect, the friends tell me of many instances 
where the service of other Pilgrims (and in one instance 
your own talk) was spoiled by a fretful child. 

Wherever I go, dear Brother, I hear expressions of 
sympathy for yourself and deep appreciation of your 
work and the Truth in general. I think the Church is 
drawing together more and more closely in bonds of 
love and Christian unity. 

Faithfully in Christ, your brother, 

J. A. BOHNET,-Pilgrim. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Knowing that you would be specially interested in 
having a more particular account of the condition of 
the harvest work in the Maritime Provinces than could 
be possible in our reports, I have thought that a letter 
to this end would be acceptable. 

One of the most significant things noted, as contrasted 
with last visit, was that there seemed to be a 

R3931 : page 31 

greater desire to look into what, to many there, seems 

to be a "new doctrine." This was manifested in an increased 

attendance of Church members at the different 

meetings, who had been reading to some extent the 

harvest literature. The meetings were held in Presbyterian, 

Baptist, Unitarian, Disciple, and MacDonalite 

churches; also, in two instances, in Y.M.C.A. halls. 

In H we had quite an interesting time. The 

friends secured a Disciple Church for the meetings. 
The minister and some of the members of the committee 
having in charge the leasing of the Church were 
out of town when the permission was granted, but on 
the evening of the first meeting all the members of the 
committee were present. 

I spoke on God's Plan of Salvation and was listened 
to very attentively, and before the close of the 
meeting announced another meeting for the next evening. 
After the close of the meeting I noticed several 
of the audience, who I afterwards learned comprised 
the committee, gathered together and conversing very 
earnestly. Then I saw them call the brother who had 
secured the hall, and begin conversation with him in a 
very animated manner. I scented trouble of some kind, 
and when it seemed opportune approached them and 
enquired what was the matter. One of the committee 
replied that in the absence of their minister they did 
not care to assume the responsibility of allowing us to 
hold another meeting, and also said that if all the members 
of the committee had been at home when the application 
was made we would not have been permitted to 



have the use of the Church at all. I told them that the 
meeting had been announced for the next night, and 
that I did not see who could assume the responsibility 
if they did not. Then one of the committee asked why 
we had come to them to secure their Church— why we 
had not secured one of the several halls in the city. I 
answered that I had nothing to do with that matter, 
but that the reason doubtless was because our brethren 
were aware of the fact that the Disciple Church professed 
to be an unsectarian Church, having no creed, 
and held that all who believed in Christ as Savior and 
Lord were their brethren in Christ; and as their 
Church was the only Church of this character in the 
city, it was quite natural for them to ask this favor of 
their brethren in the cause of Christ. This had the 
effect of silencing the brother, and appealed to the 
"Disciple pride" of the others. 

I then said that we recognized the peculiar circumstances 
under which they were placed and that possibly 
under similar circumstances we might act as they 
were doing, and on this account, to avoid getting them 
into difficulty, we would relieve them of any responsibility 
by giving up the use of the Church and would 
try to secure another place. 

Just at this point in the conversation a man who 
had been listening very attentively stepped up and 
said, "I think you are all wasting time. The meeting 
has been given out for tomorrow night, and there were 
quite a number of strangers here who will come tomorrow 
expecting to hear this man, and I can't see any 
reason why this committee can't let the meeting be 
held as announced. I am not a member of the committee, 
but I am of the Church, and have a voice in the 
matter. I myself was interested in the discourse, and 
I want to hear the brother to a finish." This had an 
instantaneous effect upon the committee, who then, 
after a few moments consultation, decided to let us 
have the Church for the next evening. 

On leaving the building, a sister, who was a member 
of the Disciple congregation, approached me and 
said, "The committee did not tell you what their chief 
objection was to your having the use of the Church. 
The fact is that you are under the bann. It is reported 
that some time ago you spoke at a Disciple Church at 

P , and were instrumental in splitting the Church 

there." I told her I did speak in P two years ago, 

but that it was in a private house, and that it was at 

the invitation of the President of the Women's Foreign 

Mission Society who had previously been reading the 

literature of the W.T.B. Society and had, three 

months before the time of my visit, withdrawn from 

the Disciple Church. Further, that the minister of the 

Disciple Church was present with several of his congregation, 

but that they came of their own free will. 

I told her further that our work, which had been going 

on for years, did not have the object of establishing a 



new sect, but simply to bring the truth within the reach 
of all lovers of Christ and his Word. 

The next evening quite a number of the Disciple 
Church were present at the meeting, including all the 
committee. We spoke on "How to Study the Bible Intelligently," 
giving an outline of the ages, dispensations, 
etc. The interest was much deeper than on the 
previous evening, and I have learned since that it had 
the effect of awakening an inquiry concerning what was 
to become of those who have never had a full opportunity 
to be saved in the present life. The literature was 
taken quite freely and is being read. 

At our visit to P after this we found a Methodist 

minister who had been obliged to give up his labors in 
his Church on account of physical weakness, and had 
on this account found time to read the DAWN series and 
had come into the Truth. He attended all the meetings, 
and expressed a desire, if his health was restored 
to him, to engage in some active part of the harvest 
work— the colporteur work preferably. 

In S we found a Presbyterian minister who had 

read all the DAWNS, and was so favorable to the teaching 
that he allowed us to have the use of his chapel for 
a public meeting. We had a very good hearing, and 
trust the results to the Lord's keeping. 

At S J at one of the meetings six ministers 

were present. They doubtless were stirred to look after 
their flocks. 

We found the friends in all the places were more 
zealous in their efforts to bring the Truth within the 
reach of the people, and had advertised the public 
meetings quite extensively. They were all very demonstrative 
in expressing their appreciation of the efforts of 
yourself in ministering to their spiritual needs; they 
also expressed their deep sympathy for you in your 
trials, and desired that we convey to you an expression 
of their complete confidence and full sympathy for you 
in all your work and labor of love. There is a great 
desire in all the different places to see and hear you. 
It would be of great help to the furtherance of the harvest 
message. 

With Christian love to you and all the dear friends, 
I am, as ever, yours in Christ, 

R. E. STREETER.-Pilgrim. 



page 33 



SEMI-MONTHLY 