Helping Others to Find God to Be True
EVERY dedicated Christian witness of Jehovah has found God to be true. There is no question in his mind that “it is impossible for God to lie.” Has not God caused to be recorded more than seventy instances of his backing up his word with his oath so that his servants might have the utmost confidence in his word? (Heb. 6:18) With the apostle Paul, each one of these witnesses says: “Let God be found true, though every man be found a liar.”—Rom. 3:4.a
They let God be found true whenever there is a dispute between God and the word of men, for they have found Bible principles, Bible history and Bible prophecies to be dependable. More than that, they give the truth to God s Word by their very actions, even as Jesus did by his obediently fulfilling Bible prophecies.—John 9:4.
Having for themselves found God to be true, they have the obligation to show love of God and neighbor by helping others also to find that God is true. So they look for those with the will to believe God by going from house to house offering to study the Bible with those they meet, by offering Bible literature to passersby on busy thoroughfares and by being alert for opportunities to ‘preach the word’ incidentally. Only by engaging in such activities can they hope to locate those willing to be helped to find God to be true.
After finding those with ears willing to hear, what will the zealous Christian minister do? Place Bible literature with them and let it go at that? By no means! If we would help others to find God to be true we must keep calling back upon them time and again, pointing out to them why we know that God is indeed true, that we can depend upon his promises and his prophecies. How necessary such return visits are the 1966 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses repeatedly shows. For example, see page 198, paragraph 3.
But all this we will do only if we have a keen appreciation of our privileges as well as of the peoples’ need. And we must take a genuine interest in these persons, even as did the apostle Paul when teaching the newly interested ones at Thessalonica. Why, he says of himself and those with him: “We became gentle in the midst of you, as when a nursing mother cherishes her own children. . . . we were well pleased to impart to you, not only the good news of God, but also our own souls, because you became beloved to us.”—1 Thess. 2:7, 8.
Such a mental disposition includes much. It means being tactful, dependable, punctual, patiently teaching them, not easily discouraged because of a lack of progress or dependability on their part. Rather, let us make certain that we ourselves manifest the right appreciation, that we are dependable, that we have a keen love of the truth. If we consistently manifest these qualities in our teaching and conduct, we can hope to help others to find God to be true.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, November 15, 1965.

