From the Road to Death to the Road to Life
FOR many years my life was scarred by my addiction to drugs. I began with soft drugs and ended up on the harder ones, such as LSD. Drugs came to symbolize liberation from all sorts of personal and social problems. Sadly, I encouraged other young people to accompany me along the road to death.
Since I was known as a drug peddler, I was under police surveillance. I must admit I was afraid, for I knew that being arrested would have meant years in prison. Though I lived in anguish, it was not enough to make me change my ways.
My parents tried to help me by taking me to a mental home for treatment. It was hoped that the medicines and the treatment received there would solve my problem, but as soon as I came out, my parents realized that not even medical treatment could change me. They tried to help me further by having me talk to a priest. This didn’t work either. I smoked marijuana and drank in front of him, as if he weren’t there. I just didn’t want to change!
My fiancée, Oriana, was strongly opposed to my way of living, and I didn’t want her to leave me. On the face of it, this seemed a good incentive to make the change. But, instead, I continued my drug habit in secret. I made Oriana believe I was sick. Soon I became a real human wreck. I kept promising myself that I would quit, that I could manage it, but it was useless. I was only moving further along the road to death.
As I wanted to marry Oriana as soon as possible, we contacted an interior decorator to do some work in our apartment. His wife was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and she spoke to us about her faith. At first the conversation made a deeper impression on Oriana than on me, but as it progressed, I realized that Jehovah’s Witnesses firmly believe that God will soon make this earth a paradise and that people will live here forever in peace.
I wanted to find out for myself if it was true that “even now Jehovah’s Witnesses show love and respect for one another,” as the lady had said. So Oriana and I went to the Kingdom Hall. I felt embarrassed because of my long hair and my shabby clothes, but the welcome the Witnesses gave us made me feel at home at once. I felt I could trust them. It was clear that sincere love and respect for one another were already a reality for them.
From that day on, I began regularly attending Christian meetings, and I began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. I cut my hair and changed my way of dress, and with great effort, I managed to quit smoking and taking drugs. (2 Corinthians 7:1) However, there was another serious problem in my life. Without realizing it, I had become an alcoholic. When I drank, I got into trouble. I argued with people and became very jealous of Oriana. I fell into a state of profound unhappiness. (Proverbs 23:29-35) I made an effort to break the habit, and with the help of Jehovah, the power of prayer, and the help of Christian brothers, I was able to root this bad habit out of my life.
My wife and I were baptized on August 23, 1974. Thanks to the truth, our lives now had meaning. Since I had regained my self-confidence, I earned respect at work. My wife and I both made good money, but then we realized that we had little time left for our sacred service. If we wanted to enjoy a closer relationship with Jehovah, we would have to make changes in our lives. Otherwise, there was the risk that our initial love for the truth would cool off. So in 1979 we began pioneering, devoting ourselves more fully to the preaching work.
Why did I make this decision? Well, where would I be today without the light of the truth? Those who were with me on the road to death are now either alcoholics or no longer have a family or are in prison​—or are dead. Yet, it was the Bible’s message that liberated me. Treatment and willpower were simply not enough. Strong motivation was needed. Seeking to cultivate true friendship with Jehovah, the Creator, provided such motivation. Now, it is my sincere desire to do all I can to help those who are slaves of the drug habit, as well as those who are suffering or are seeking a way out of their problems. By actively sharing in the Christian ministry, my wife and I have been doing just that. We have been privileged to help many persons along the road to life. Among these are three people I personally had introduced to drugs. At present I am serving as a circuit overseer in the north of Italy.
It is true: Drug abuse is like a road that sooner or later leads you to death or at least to an empty life with no future. Words fail me in expressing my gratitude to Jehovah God! He showed me the way out of the darkness I was living in and pointed out the road to life, full of light, that leads to an eternal future.​—As told by Ruggero Polotti.

