R512:page 1 

VOL. V. PITTSBURGH, PA., AUGUST, 1883. NO. 1. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send paper money to the amount of two 
dollars, by mail, at our risk. Larger amounts may 
be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or Registered 
Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 



send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 
can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it- 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently- and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



R512:page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

This number commences Vol. V., and 
from the Tower we look backward over 
the last few years, and as we see the 
pathway shining more and more, we rejoice, 
thank God, and take courage. 

"Looking back, we praise the way 
God hath led us-led us, day by day." 

Each step on the shining path brings 
us nearer and nearer the perfect light of 
day-nearer to the perfect appreciation 
of truth in all its parts and relationships 
-the whole truth. 

Our confidence in our Leader is 
strengthened too, in that while we have 
endeavored to make no paths for ourselves, 
but to follow his leading implicitly, 
we can look back and see that he 
has led us in a straight and progressive 
course. We have not been blown about 
by every wind of doctrine, but have 
been piloted in a course direct toward 



the light, "as the needle to the pole." 

Let us glance backward a few years 
and trace again, our guided footsteps in 
this shining way; we all need the encouragement 
which such manifest leading 
of the Lord affords. 

"Then well see what God hath wrought: 
Let us PRAISE HIM-praise Him as we ought. 
So short a time ago as 1870 we saw, in 
addition to the first principles of the 
Gospel, only the two bare facts-the 
Lords second coming and the Restitution 
--and these but vaguely; for though 
we then saw restitution taught in Scripture, 
we were much in doubt as to its 
comprehensiveness, questioning often 
whether it would include all the billions 
of the dead whom the god of this world 
had in the present life blinded. And 

R513 : page 1 

concerning the Lords second coming, 

while we realized that he is no longer a 

man, but is now the new creature-the 

express image of the Fathers person- 

a quickening spirit, yet we failed somehow 

to make a proper application of 

this to his second coming, and unthinkingly 

and ignorantly, rather expected 

his coming to be as a glorified man, 

than as a spiritual being. It was not 

until about 1874 that these things became 

clearer, so that we realized that 

when Jesus should come, it would be as 

unobserved by human eyes as though 

an angel had come; and that it could 

be known only by some miracle, by 

some manifestation or demonstration. 

About the same time the completeness 
of the Restitution to be brought 
about, came clearly to our vision. It was 
in this way: we had seen the various 
Scriptures which spoke of the Sodomites 
return to a former estate (restitution), 
and Israels return at the same 



time, and how all the families of earth 
were to be blessed through Christ, when 
he should take his great power and 
reign, etc., etc. But all these failed to 
convince us of restitution for all, because 
we could see that God could in 
perfect justice, take away the lives which 
he had given- -could entirely blot men 
out of existence as easily as he could 
bring them into being. And we felt 
much inclined to believe that many 
of the dead billions would never be 
brought into existence again, until we 
came to see more fully the value of the 
Ransom Price given for our sins, "and 
not for ours only, but also for the sins 
of the whole world." 

When we came to scrutinize Gods 
dealings, we found that He showed no 
mercy on sin, but injustice condemned 
it and executed the penalty of death 
against all; that justice must be met and 
fully satisfied, before mankind could go 
free from that death penalty; and that 
Gods mercy was displayed, not in opposing 
and setting aside his justice, but 
in providing a Redeemer or ransom 
price which fully met all the claims of 
His own just laws against us. This 
convinced us that the various Scriptures 
which predicted the saving of all 
men from the curse-death-meant literally 
all they said: That when Paul 
said, "He gave himself a ransom [antilutron 
-equivalent price] for all" fl Tim. 2:6"), 
it involved the necessity of 
a release from death of all who were 
thus bought. It gave a depth and scope 
to many scriptures, such as "Rom. 5:18,19": 
By one mans sin came death 
upon all; and by our Lords righteousness 
and obedience unto death (our 
penalty) comes life to the same all; for 
as through or by Adam all die, even so 
by or through Christ shall all be made 
alive, fl Cor. 15:22\) Thus our faith 



in the ransom, that it was an equivalent 
price for ALL, was the rock into which 
entered as an anchor our hope for a 
"restitution of all things." 

Next our attention was drawn to the 
subject of the TIME of our Lords 
coming. Before this we had strenuously 
ignored time, partly because of 
its being made so much of by "Second 
Adventists," and because of the frequent 
failures of their expectations. 
Moreover, the fact that they claimed 
the destruction of the world to be the 
impending event, and used the periods 
of time mentioned in Scripture to mark 
the time of that destruction, was another 
reason why we were disposed to ignore 
the subject of time. Their erroneous 
theory of the destruction of the world 
cast discredit on the time which they 
associated with it. 

When, however, the manner of our 
Lords coming was seen in the light of 
what he is-a spiritual, and no longer a 
human being-then we saw that our 
Father had provided TIME in the Bible, 
that thus we might know, or see with 
the eye of our understanding, what we 
could not see with our natural eyes— 
viz., the Lords presence. A careful 
study of times and seasons taught in 
Scripture convinced us that the Lord 
was due to be present in 1874, and 
other time teachings of the Word 
showed that in the spring of 1875 the 
restitution of all things was due to 
commence. 

This conclusion was rather startling, 
and surprised us thoroughly. It would 
have seemed so much easier to believe 
had the prophecies pointed twenty years 
ahead and shown us that then Jesus 
would come-be present and do a separating 
work in the nominal Church, and 
during a time of trouble should so order 
the truth that it, as his word, would 



smite down evil and error of every 
form, including "the kingdoms of this 
world," under "the prince of this world." 
We re-examined every point carefully, 
and every part fitted to every other 
with a completeness that bore the stamp 
of truth, and with a strength which testified 
that the calculations came from 
and were the testimony of Gods 
chronometer. 

Very cautiously every expression of 
Jesus and the Apostles and Prophets 
was scanned, to see whether their testimony 
would correspond. Gradually we 
found them, one after another, to be in 
fullest accord; for instance, Jesus words 
CMatt. 24:37"), "As the days of Noah 
were, so shall also the coming of the 
Son of man be." Examining this passage 
we found that the word coming does 
not convey the proper meaning. The 
Greek word Parousia signifies PRESENCE 
--that the person has arrived, and is no 
longer in the act of coming. Another 
text we will mention fl Thes. 5:1-5"): 
"Of the times and seasons, brethren, ye 
have no need that I write unto you, for 
yourselves know that the Day of the 
Lord so cometh as a thief in the night 
[stealthily, quietly], and when they [the 
world] shall say peace and safety, then 
sudden destruction cometh upon them 
as travail upon a woman with child, and 
they shall not escape. But ye, brethren, 
are not in darkness that that day should 
overtake you as a thief; for ye are all 
children of the light." The children of 
light walk in the shining path enlightened 
by the Lamp-the sure word of 
prophecy, from which the light shines 
out, showing them that the time is fulfilled, 
that the harvest and its events 
are commenced, and that the Reaper is 
present in his day-the Day of the Lord. 

[The Millennial Day-Dawn will contain 
these various TIME PROOFS. It is 



being prepared as rapidly as other 
duties will permit.] 

Engaged in searching and teaching 
thus, time sped on till 1878 had come. 
While our previous leading into truth 
was blessed and sweet, yet since 1878, 
has come the richest feasting and most 
blessed growth in favor and knowledge 
--for it is since then, that the Lord has 
given us to see the deep things of God, 
at some of which we shall now glance 
briefly. All having been published, and 
being fresh in your memory, it is needless 
to now treat them in detail. 

(1). It was there, that our "Lamp" 
showed us that the nominal church was 
cast off from favor, spued out from 
being the Lords mouthpiece, and from 
that time the message has been freely 
given, "Babylon is fallen! Come out of 
her my people." And as we look at 
her present condition of decay and falling, 
looking back we see that she began 
to fall at the time indicated on the prophetic 
dial. 

(2). Next the rays of divine illumination 
fell on "Rev. 12" and "13", opening up 
before us, with marked clearness of 
detail, the history of Papacy-the Beast, 
and Protestantism its image-and the 
great control these would possess in the 
Church, ultimately causing the masses 
of the Church to mark or name themselves 
so as to indicate a support of 
their claims and systems; and prohibiting 
and forbidding the right of buying 
and selling-the free exchange of truth 
-by those who do not recognize these 
systems. This left no doubt as to the 
mind of the Spirit toward those systems 
here termed the "Leopard Beast," "the 
two horned beast," and the "Image of 
the Beast," and their ultimate destruction 
by the bright shining of truth from 
the present one. This in turn helped 
us to appreciate more clearly that an 



important part of the overcoming expected 
of us, is to get free from the 
binding and blinding influences of these 
systems-as shown in "Rev. 20:4\ 

(3). Following this, came light upon 
the short bed and narrow cover of "Isa. 28:20", 
which we saw was the uncomfortable 
and unsatisfactory creeds in 
which a babe in Christ might, but a developed 
man could not stretch himself 
or find any rest. All who are "weaned 
from the breasts" and are no longer 
babes in Christ ("verse 9"), to these God 
will teach his doctrines and then they 
will speedily get out of the short trundle-bed 
creeds, and, instead of vexation, 
find rest in the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes free. 

(4). Then the bed of "Luke 17:34" 
was seen to be the same as the short 
one mentioned by Isaiah, and the shining 
of the one cast light upon the other 
and its surroundings. Thus we saw 
that the one taken and the other left in 
the presence of the Son of man, referred 
not as we had once supposed, to a 
change from natural to spiritual bodies, 
but to a translation out of the domain 
or kingdom of darkness into the light 
and liberty of the kingdom of light: in 
short, to the gathering of some out of 
short creed-beds to follow the Lord, 
and the leaving of others in their uncomfortable 
position. 

The same ray of light, shining on the 
connected statements, showed those 
grinding at the mill to represent teachers 
seeking to prepare food for the 
household of faith- some of these will 
be taken, others left to grind on at the 
unsatisfying husks and chaff. The 
taken ones went-where, Lord? Jesus 
answered, "Wheresoever the body [carcass 
-food] is, thither will the eagles be 
gathered together." Thus we see that 
the class gathered in the presence of the 



Son of man-in the day when he is 
being revealed (Verse 30")— will be gathered 
to the real food-to a satisfying 
portion. And all the saints whom the 
truth has called out of the short bed 
and from grinding the husks of human 
tradition, to the heavenly food now 
provided for us, can truly say, it is "a 
feast of fat things." 

(5). While it is difficult at such a 
feast to decide which is the richest food, 
yet we believe that what we are now 
about to mention is of all the food the 
best, viz: The appreciation of the 

R514:page 1 

sacrifices of Leviticus-especially of the 
Day of Atonement for sins, as pictured 
in "Lev. 9" and "16". Nothing ever showed 
us so clearly the necessity and value of 
a sacrifice for our sins, and not for ours 
only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world. We feel confident that no one 

R514:page2 

who has a clear understanding of the 
details of these sacrifices for sin, can 
ever question the ransom. Here is 
clearly shown the sacrifice of Jesus as 
the bullock and the "little flock" who 
follow him, represented by the Lords 
goat. Nowhere else is our share with 
our Lord in the work of sacrifice "filling 
up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ" ("Col. 1:24") so 
clearly shown. But we need not tarry 
with this topic-you have it in detail in 
the Tabernacle pamphlet, which we 
trust you have not only read, but studied 
in connection with the Scripture. 

(6). Shining through this appreciation 
of the sacrifices for sins, came greater 
light upon a number of subjects related 
to the fellowship of the "little flock" in 



Jesus sufferings. We saw now a 

greater depth in Baptism, and as the 

light from Leviticus shone upon v Rom. 6:3-5\ 

we saw that Baptism into 

Christ, by a baptism into His death, 

meant much more than an immersion 

or burial in water, though that is a 

beautiful figure and symbol; appropriate 

as an outward sign or symbol of our 

consecration to death as sacrifices with 

Christ. And looking through this open 

door we saw the meaning of being dead 

WITH Christ that we might also live 

WITH him— suffering with him that we 

might also be glorified together-having 

fellowship (or part) in His death 

that we might have fellowship also in 

His resurrection. 

(7). Following now in order, came 
light to discern the difference of natures 
-that animal or earthly beings, were 
distinct and separate every way from 
spiritual or heavenly beings; that while 
both were bodily conditions, yet as explained 
by Paul they are distinct and 
separate, one earthly, the other heavenly. 
"There is a natural [animal] 
body and there is a spiritual body." 
fl Cor. 15:44\) Thus we saw that as 
there are various orders or grades of 
earthly creatures-beasts, birds, fishes 
and the chief of all these man, yet 
each is a distinct nature. So also on 
the spiritual plane there are various 
orders or degrees, the chief of whom is 
Jehovah; yet those on the spiritual plane 
do not blend, hence the angelic nature 
never will develop into a divine 
nature, because they are distinct and 
separate natures, even as man and fish 
are separate natures. 

We were aided in seeing this by the 
light from v Lev. 16 v ; for in it we saw 
that those who sacrificed surrendered a 
human nature (represented by the 
bullock and goat) to partake of a new 



nature (represented in the Priest); this 
being in harmony with much of Pauls 
testimony concerning the same class of 
sacrifices, that as the natural man 
perished or was sacrificed, they were 
developing as "new creatures." The 
transformation at first being merely a 
mental one-from a natural or earthly 
mind to a heavenly or spiritual mind- 
will at the resurrection be complete, for 
then the new or spiritual mind will be 
joined with a new or spiritual body- 
thus completing the change now begun 
from animal to spiritual beings. But 
this change of nature we saw was not 
designed for all mankind-no, only for 
those who sacrificed the human nature 
with Jesus, that they may gain a promised 
share with HIM, in life as spiritual 
or heavenly beings-highly exalted, not 
only above the human nature, but also 
above angelic nature. For know ye not 
that when exalted we shall judge or 
govern angels, and be joined in heirship 
with him who has been made so 
much better than the angels? 

(8.) Then came-"The narrow way 
to Life," and we saw as never before 
the meaning of Life— Immortality— and 
the narrowness of the way which leads 
to it. It is narrow; there is no room 
to lug along worldly hopes and ambitions; 
it is steep and rugged, and every 
step is a denial and sacrifice of the 
rights and comforts of the human 
nature. The steps in this narrow way 
are not merely conflicts with sin. No, 
that may be done anywhere by the 
justified only, as well as by the sanctified, 
and all who enter this "narrow way" 
have already been justified from all sin 
in Gods sight by the ransom price 
given by Jesus. On the contrary, the 
steps are of sacrifice: sacrificing those 
things to which as men they have a 
right. 



As the steps are very difficult ones, 
which few would ever find, and fewer 
yet would care to walk in if they did 
find them, so it is but reasonable to 
infer that the prize at its further end is 
of wondrous value. The prize is Life 
--not merely existence, but Life in the 
superlative degree-i.e., independent 
of all conditions, as God has "life in 
himself," and not dependent on surrounding 
circumstances and elements. 
Life in this degree belongs not to 
angelic or human nature, but to the 
Divine nature only. And the fact that 
the narrow way which few find, leads to 
this Life, proves that on it is the class 
who seek for "glory, honor and immortality," 
and to whom are given 
"exceeding great and precious promises, 
that by these they might become 
partakers of the Divine nature." f2 Pet. 1:4\) 
With joy we saw too, that 
though few find this "narrow way," and 
few would gain that prize of life-immortality 
-yet these few were to be the 
instruments of God in the restitution of 
human existence to the WORLD, which, 
if used in harmony with Gods will, may 
be everlasting existence. 

(9.) With the light shining from a 
better appreciation of the distinctness 
and separateness of human and spiritual 
natures, we soon began to see clearly 
the two phases or parts of the kingdom 
of God-the spiritual phase composed 
of Jesus and His Church over all and 
above all, and the earthly phase composed 
at first of Israel after the flesh, 
restored to favor and ruling and teaching 
men as the earthly representatives 
of the spiritual kingdom, and gradually 
gathering into union and harmony with 
it all the families of the earth, except a 
few incorrigible ones who shall be 
destroyed. 

(10.) In turn, this discernment of the 



two parts or elements of the one kingdom, 
led to the appreciation of many 
Scriptures previously obscure, and enabled 
us to see how Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob, and all the prophets, would 
be in the kingdom of God (human 
phase), though having lived and died 
before the Spirit-dispensation began- 
before the narrow way to LIFE was 
opened up by Jesus our Guide and 
Forerunner in it. 

(11). Next light flashed out upon the 
words of Jesus fRev. 2: 1 V). "He that 
overcometh shall not be hurt of the 
second death." Never before had we 
realized that we are called to go into 
the second death, but promised that it 
should not be a permanent injury or 
"hurt." Now we saw that what is 
termed the first death is the Adamic 
death, which would have been the utter 
end except for the ransom given, which 
bought all out of its grasp and control. 
The actual recovery of mankind out of 
death (i.e., restitution) awaits for its 
accomplishment the glorious reign of 
Him who "bought us with his precious 
blood." But now we are told to reckon 
ourselves, free from sin and pure, and 
to reckon ourselves freed from Adamic 
death, which is the penalty of sin. Thus 
one death is in the past to us, and this 
reckoned-restored life we present to 
God asking that our justified humanity 
be permitted to share death with 
Jesus spotless sacrifice. This would be 
our second death. First we were under 
and in Adamic death, but were lifted 
(by faith) out of that death that we 
might become dead with Christ. 

Hence though death came to Jesus but 
once and was his first death, to those 
who become dead with him it is the 
second death, because Jesus was not in 
the Adamic death while we were. 
But the overcomers shall not be hurt 



of the second death. Ah, no; they will 
be greatly blessed by it, for if they thus 
become dead with Him they shall also 
live and be glorified with Him fRom. 6:8 V 
and v 8:17 v ). 

But to all who enter the second death 
as a punishment for their own wilful 
sins, after being enlightened by the 
Spirit of truth and not as justified sacrificers 
with Jesus, it will be a great hurt, a 
severe loss, the loss of all hope, the extinction 
of all life, in which there is no 
hope of a resurrection; for Christ dieth 
no more; and for such there remains no 
further share in the sacrifice for Adamic 
sin, and which released from Adamic 
death fHeb. 10:26 v ). 

(12). Next we saw that the living 
members of Christ-those that are alive 
and remain in the presence of Christ- 
these have a special work to do, in introducing 
the present King. We had 
long since seen that among the many 
figures used to represent the union and 
fellowship which exist between Jesus 
and his Church, one of the most forcible 
is that which represents all as one person, 
Jesus the head, and the Church the 
joints and members of the body. In 
this figure the last members would be the 
feet; and while there has been a hand 
and foot class all along in every age of 
the Church, yet of the Church, as a 
whole, the last members are the feet. 
Hence if we have the right appreciation 
of the Word, the living members are 
the feet of the anointed body-the 
Christ. 

And just in harmony, we here found 
the Prophet testifying, "How beautiful 
are the FEET of Him that bringeth 
good tidings of good... that saith 
unto Zion thy God REIGNETH flsa. 52:T). 
We found not only that the living 
saints were the feet class, but that we 
were making this very proclamation to 



Zion as foretold by the Prophet, saying, 
"Thy God reigneth"-the Lord 
is present-the kingdom is being set up 
and is beginning, in its own quiet way, 
the breaking in pieces and consuming 
of every opposing thing. 

(13). About next in order came, "The 
blessed dying," mentioned in v Rev. 14:13", 
and we saw for the first time that 
the evidence is clear, that all who 
become sacrifices must die. The difference 
between those who remain unto 
the presence of the Lord and those who 
"fell asleep in Jesus" previously, being 

R515 : page 2 

that we shall not sleep. The overcomers 
in these days of his presence 
will not sleep, for in the very moment of 
death they "shall be changed" from 
human to spiritual beings. Hence, 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the 
Lord from HENCEFORTH; yea, saith 
the Spirit, they shall rest from their 
labors, but their works follow with 
them." 

This in turn led to the appreciation 
of v Psa. 82:6, 8 V : "I have said ye are 
GODS; all of you children of the Highest: 
but ye shall all die like MEN." This 
was very confirmatory of what we had 
seen of the distinctness of nature between 
men and the "new creatures," between 
human nature which we have 
from Adam, and the divine nature 
promised to those who follow the captain 
in sacrificing the human nature. 

Of the light shining during the past 
year-on Revelation, on the invisible 
things of God, the increasing evidence 
of the presence of Christ both in the condition 
of the Church, and the continued 
preparation of the world for a conflict, 
by uniting into societies, are fresh in 
your memory. Also the evidence presented 



of the credibility and authenticity 
of the New Testament Scriptures, 
called out by the claim of some that 
they were as competent, and better 
able to understand and express truth 
than the Apostles. Also the discussion 
in all its phases of that important question, 
"Whose Son is He?" We found 
no lack of evidence that he was the 
Anointed Son of the living God, and 
that his life was "from above," and 
came not through the sin and death-tainted 
line of Adam. We thus disproved 
the claims of some who asserted 
that he was the son of Joseph; and not only 
so, but proved that, if a son of Joseph, he 
would have been of the line of Solomon 
and hence not the heir to "Davids 
throne," since the promise to Solomon 
was on condition of loyalty to God, and 
he was cast off, that the true heir should 
come by another of Davids sons- 
Nathan-from whom Mary descended. 
And with many truths has the Lord fed 
us, making very clear, we trust, to all 
the little flock that the basis of all hope 
to the Church or the world is the favor 
of God exercised by and through a 
Redeemer and a ransom price. Lastly, 
we have seen that the "Arch-angel"- 
the chief messenger of Jehovah-is now 
our highly exalted Lord of all, the 
Redeemer of the world, the Head or 
Bridegroom of the Church. 

And now, commencing another year, 
we trust that it will refresh and strengthen 
you all, to look back at the way that 
God hath led us. 

"He leadeth us; oh, blessed thought" ! 

What better evidence could we have 
that we are on the shining way to perfect 
Day, than by glancing back. Ours 
has truly been a shining path-shining 
more and more. Each new ray of light 
has added to, instead of contradicting 
that previously received; and thus we 



may expect it to continue until the full 
blaze is reached-when we shall know 
as we are known-if we continue to 
follow humbly the Masters leading. 

Truly, this is not only an evidence of 
the Lords leading but His presence, 
for thus he told us it should be, when he 
would come and knock; blessed would 
be those servants who would be watching 
and open unto him immediately- - 
He would come in to them and cause 
them to sit down to meat (food-refreshing 
and strengthening truth) and come 
forth and serve them ("Luke 12:37" and 
"Rev. 3:20"). 

We would not presume on past leading 
as a proof of leading during another 
year now beginning, but would keep in 
mind that as the natural branches were 
broken off because of boastfulness and 
unbelief, so we should be in danger if 
we ceased to "hold the head" in proper 
reverence. But by the grace of God we 
start upon another year trusting the 
same promises, that "He that seeketh 
findeth, and to him that knocketh it 
shall be opened." We shall expect 
more meat in due season from the 
Master who is feeding us-yet doubtless 
there will be trials and testings of 
courage and faith, to see whether we 
have made proper use of the meat 
already given us. Beloved, let us give 
more earnest heed, lest at any time we 
should let those things slip; but, laying 
aside every hindrance and weight, let 
us, afresh with vigor, lay hold upon 
the great hopes set before us in the 
Gospel-glory, honor and immortality 
-the divine nature. 

Let us bear in mind that the Presence 
of Christ, and Whose son is he? 
were the tests at the first advent, and over 
that stone the fleshy house of Israel 
stumbled, as now in His presence a 
second time, the same questions are 



asked and discussed, and over the 

same stone now present in the path 

many are falling, for "He shall be for a 

stone of stumbling and for a rock of 

offence to both the houses of Israel" flsa. 8:14" 

and "1 Pet. 2:5-8"). 



R515 : page 2 

Below will be found some extracts from 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Birmingham, England. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-The Emphatic 
Diaglott received this morning, 
for which many thanks. I have now 
pleasure in forwarding my yearly subscription 
and a small contribution to the 
Tract Fund; should rejoice if it were 
more. 

For twenty years, and indeed until 
the advent of "Food" twelve months 
ago, the United States was of all places 
in the world the last that I should have 
thought of for receiving spiritual instruction 
and consolation from; and the 
smile of pity, or amazement, or incredulity 
with which the mention of these 
glad tidings, or the presentation of 
"Food," is received by the image worshipers 
here, appears to indicate that it 
is the last place they wish to receive it 
from. 

The good news appears to be most 
acceptable to "Dissenters," and still 
more so to those who are sectarians in 
name only, but to the "Orthodox" ones 
it is most objectionable.... A great 
stumbling block to many is the fact that 
we have no sectarian badge, and while 
seeing but little truth in many so 
fettered, they cannot realize any in 
those who are absolutely free. I thank 



my Lord that this great light has shone 
upon me, and I pray that I may be 
enabled steadfastly and faithfully to 
walk in the light until death. 

Your article in January WATCH 
TOWER, as to the solitariness and loneliness 

R515 : page 3 

of individual believers has, doubtless 
been felt by many besides myself, 
but though sometimes wishing for 
kindred companionship, I rejoice in the 
deliverance from the bondage of the 
multitude; and although I should be 
glad to meet with others for instruction 
and communion, I often think this severance 
is preferable, lest a sectarian 
spirit should spring up. 

how clear is the Word from the 
new teaching, and how harmonious; 
how vividly at times is the truth revealed, 
and what a comforting change 

from the doubts and misgivings, and 
the continual unrest and disquietude of 
former days ! I thank the Lord for all 
these mercies, and pray that he will 
bless and prosper and enlighten and 
keep steadfast in his truth those who 
are disseminating his Word. 

1 am, Dear Brother, 

Yours faithfully in the Lord, 



page 3 

Omaha, Neb. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Many warm 
thanks for your publications, which besides 
the "Concordance," reached me in 
due time. I think they are inestimable 
in value, as they explain the blessed 
Word so that all that "have an ear to 
hear" ought to hear. 

I have thrown aside all literature except 
the Bible, and even that single 



book would now take more time to 
study than I really can get. While in 
the past I never studied so much as 
now, and while the reading of other 
books occupied most of my time, yet I 
thought to know the doctrine of the 
Bible by heart. Whenever I read a 
chapter, it seemed to me so old and 
indifferent that I never could delight 
myself in reading it. But now everything 
is new, all is full of life and 
fire, which warms my heart up to devotion 
and praise, so I can thank God 
now that I ever was born. Especially 
I adore Him that I have the privilege 
to live in this grand time, when knowledge 
is increased, and that I am found 
worthy to suffer with our Lord, that I 
also may be exalted with him. 

I have observed through your paper 
the sound position which you hold, and 
my constant prayer is, that the God of 
all grace might give you more wisdom, 
and build you up more and more. 
Surely you have a very difficult position, 
which requires constant watchfulness, 
and especially prayerfulness, in 
order to escape the snares of the 
adversary. 

I am enabled, by Gods grace, to say 
that I am leaning on Gods Word, feeding 
in the pleasant pasture of peace, 
drawing water out of the wells of salvation, 
and rejoicing in hope of glory. 
My faith is unwavering, my prayers 
fervent, and I have the assurance that 
God the Father accepts my sacrifice. 
Though only five years in this country, 
only 20 years of age, I have seen hard 
times, experienced many things, and 
have been led wondrously by the hand 
of my heavenly Father; and my will 
in the future is to live only for our 
Redeemers cause, come what will. 

I have a perfect knowledge of the 
German language, and I am meditating 



upon what I could do. When the German 
people are won, they are faithful. 
I am assured there will be a way opened 
to them by our divine Lord somehow. 
To Him be praise, honor and glory, 
both now and forever. 
Yours in Christ Jesus, . 

Covington, Pa. 

C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR SIR:-Last 
October I received a copy of "ZIONS 
WATCH TOWER." I do not know what 
I thought of it then, but recently I came 
across it in looking over old papers, 
and for two days I have been reading 
and re-reading it very attentively. 

There are many thoughts which strike 
me with a force that forbids their dismissal 
as bare speculations. 

I am a Presbyterian greatly interested 
in Bible study, but for years I 
have felt that I was barely clinging to 
the verge of the true light yet to be 
revealed. And yet, enough has been 
graciously vouchsafed to me by breaking 
away from denominational theories, 
and comparing scripture with scripture, 
to satisfy me that richer, greener pastures 
are within reach of every Christian 
than the great majority are ready or 
willing to feed in. With the slight advance 
I have made by striving to sink 
self-will in the Divine will, and trusting 
and believing in the Holy Spirits 
power to enlighten my mind in the 
study of the Word, I find many, in 
pulpit and pew, whom I know have 
little sympathy in what they deem departure 
from "old landmarks." But 
that is all nothing to me. I have exulted 
in the restfulness and joy that 
certain new unfolding s have brought to 
me, and from the remaining restlessness 
and discontent, I know I am not yet 
fully anchored upon the solid foundation, 
cleared of the "hay, wood and 



stubble" of human building, and am 
looking, fully expecting the clearer understanding 
of "things to come" which 
Christ has promised to his "friends." 
Will you please send me "Food for 
Thinking Christians." 
Yours very sincerely, . 

Newburg, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Last 
week I made two hundred calls here; 
and after exhorting each one to "test" 
the "WATCH TOWER" by Gods own 
word, and not by old sectarian ideas, I 
left them the Oct. number, with the 
understanding that should they become 
interested in the themes of that number, 
they should have more truth on the 
same line. I see that God has set me 
right in the very best channel for doing 
good. I find it to be very humiliating 
to the natural man to thus suffer as I do, 
but to the spiritual it is a holy highway 
in which I walk, carrying armfuls of 
"FOOD" to starving saints. I think if 
every city could have a true, suffering 
and competent saint to go from house 
to house with this "BREAD," that many 
of the enslaved ones would soon see deliverance 
coming, and thus be lifted out 
of the fearful snare of the devil, from 
which I have been picked and set at 
liberty. 

I have stood in the pulpits of different 
denominations, exhorting sinners to 
escape eternal torment, and I thus scared 
many into the church. Thus I went 
from town to town and city to city telling 
the people of the eternal pain and 
anguish they must surely expect except 
they took my advice. And all that time 
I did not know whether eternal torment, 
or heaven would be my everlasting 
abode. I used to say these very 
words to my hearers: "A moments 
space removes me to that heavenly place, 



or shuts me up in hell." But where are 
my scared hearers now? Their religion 
turned out to be a forced profession 
through fear of hell, and not LOVE to 
God. And nearly as soon (and sometime 
before), I left them they got back 
again as before. But now, how changed 
is all this! I have now spent nearly a 
year going from town to town scattering 
the real truth-this blessed Gospel. I 
now no longer wonder why Jesus came 
4,000 years too late. Thank God he 
has tasted death for all; and, as Peter 
said, in the TIME of restitution he will set 
the captive free. O how I long to see 
it come! Your brother in Christ, 



Alameda, Cal. 

DEAR FRIENDS:-Paper and Tabernacle 
Tract at hand, for which accept 
my thanks. O what joy thrills my 
heart at the receipt of anything from 
your office! I never had anything like 
it in all my life. When I read in TOWER 
about your celebration of the Lords 
Supper, I was overcome with an inexpressible 
joy that I couldnt read the 
article for tears for some time. When 
I reached the point where Bro. Sunderlin 
called to mind Jesus words, "Verily 
one of you which eateth shall betray 
me," I thought, O how often I had 
denied the dear Lord in the past through 
ignorance of the true teaching of His 
Word. O, what a Gospel feast now! 
"Wonderful things in the Bible I see." 

How He feeds me on the Bread of 
Life! His flesh is meat indeed, and 
His blood is drink indeed. 

The ground seems very hard and 
sterile here. I see so little fruits of my 
labors that sometimes I feel lonely and 
sad; but when the WATCH TOWER 
comes, I seem to be on an oasis for a 
while, and I dive afresh into the great 



mine of truth; and I know not how 
many times I say, "Glory to God," before 
I get through my feast; but I sow 
in great hope, for I know it is good 
seed and must take root somewhere. 

I expect to take a trip in the country 
next week, the Lord willing, and shall 
publish salvation as I go. Wife joins 
me in much love to you and all the 
brethren. 

Yours in the blessed Christ, 



P.S.-My health is poor now, but O, 
what peace is upon me! 

R515 : page 3 

Delhi, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER: -The time is come 
when a remittance is due. I enclose 
$15. Last year I took ten papers in 
the hope of interesting and doing good 
to some. I find some actually refuse 
them; others refused to be interested; 
and as I do not believe in forcing men, 
nor think it proper to cast pearls in 
an unseemly place, this year you 
may send me five copies. It would 
give me pleasure to increase rather than 
decrease the number, but when Jesus 
says, "Let them alone," I obey. Please 
send me a Variorum Bible, and, if you 
can, send me two more of "Food for 
Thinking Christians," and two more 
"Tabernacle Teachings," as a reserve 
for opportunity to do good. I know 
that the others I got have done good. 
What remains of the remittance place 
where you think best. I think the claim 
of the Swedes is good. 

Perhaps you would like to know who 
I am or what I am. I am over seventy 
years of age; what the world would call 
a poor man, a shoemaker, or rather a 
shoemender. But I bless God for his 
goodness to me. I was brought up a 
Presbyterian; came to this country forty-four 



years ago. From conviction I became 
a Baptist; afterwards in 1845 or 
46 George Storrs sermons were the 
means of a great theological revolution 
with me. The hand of fellowship was 
withdrawn from me, because I believed 
I had no immortality now, but rejoiced 
I had it as a PRIZE BEFORE ME, and 
also because I believed that Jesus Christ 
was the Son of God. The Bible then 
seemed to me like a new book, and I 
bless God it has been brighter and 
brighter all along. 

As proof texts for the restitution of the 
human race, although I have no remembrance 
of seeing them alluded to, I 
would quote "Ps. 90:3\ "Thou turnest 
man to destruction; and sayest, Return, 
ye children of men," I used to look upon 
the word return, as to return to dust, 
but I was forcibly impressed by noticing 
that word marked by a capital R 
as being an emphatic word-and the 
reason assigned in the "following verse\ 
"For a thousand years in thy sight are 
but as yesterday when it is past, and as 
a watch in the night." God is not limited 
by years nor ages for the accomplishment 
for his gracious purposes. 

Again, "Jeremiah 12:15-17": "And 
it shall come to pass, after that I have 
plucked them out I will return, and have 
compassion on them, and will bring 
them again every man to his heritage, 
and every man to his land. And it 
shall come to pass, if they will diligently 
learn the ways of, my people to swear by 
my name the Lord liveth; (as they taught 
my people to swear by Baal;) then shall 
they be built up in the midst of my people. 
But if they will not obey, I will utterly 
pluck up and destroy that nation, saith 
the Lord." By carefully reading the 
"preceding part of the chapter", I came to 
the conclusion these promises are yet in 
the future. "Oh, that men would praise 



the Lord for his goodness, and for his 
wonderful works to the children of 
men." Yours in love, 



page 3 

New Hampton, N.Y. 

DEAR BRETHREN:-I have read the 
"Food" in connection with the "Tower" 
and, owing to the clearer light obtained, 
find much pleasure therein. Thanks to 
Bro. G. A. Rose, who introduced them 
in this section. In response to the 
statement, that you have other reading 
matter for earnest inquirers, I write in 
the hope of obtaining. 

It seems as if the dense night that has 
enshrouded us is at last dissolving, and 
the glorious light of the Word is slowly 
but surely breaking upon our benighted 
minds. We open our eyes in a convulsion 
of fear, just as the horrid nightmare 
is about to crush us with eternal torment, 
and lo, we are surrounded with the full 
radiance of day! A sweet sense of relief 
fills us with unutterable joy. But 
millions more are still blindly agonizing 
with their dreams, fearing to open their 
eyes lest they should find the awful 
vision real. This view is sad enough, 
but the break of day is near. 

Surely God will prosper your undertaking. 
Continue your work; rouse the 
erring ones to their duty; bring them 
back to the fold. 

Yours sincerely, 



Hobart, Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-... 

The Food and Tabernacle have been at 
work. We have been calling the attention 
of our neighbors and friends to 
read, but have only found one or two 
that want to learn. As for me and my 



house we are fully determined to follow 
after the truth, and lay aside our church 
creeds and rely on the Word of God. 
I am over sixty years of age; and have 
been very active in the cause of Christ 
for 40 years, but my light was dim until 
I got the WATCH TOWER and pamphlets. 
I held the office of deacon of 
the Baptist church here one year ago, 
but have come out of her, and, with one 
or two more, we stand alone. I have 
but very little of this worlds goods, but 
I feel truly rich to think that I have 
found the light and truth even in my old 
age. It is more pleasure to me now to 
read Gods Word than it was before. 
Your brother in the Lord, 



R516 : page 3 

THE INTEGRITY OF THE BIBLE. 

"We hear so much said of this suspected 
text, and that doubtful passage; 
of this probable interpolation from the 
margin, and of the long quarrel which 
scholars have waged over that Greek 
letter, mark, or accent, that we sometime 
forget that God, in his constitution 
of the Bible, has made it impossible 
to seriously pervert it. Of course there 
will be erroneous transcriptions. The 
hand of the scribe is not inspired. Of 
course there may be, here and there, 
insertions, or marginal note written into 
the text. Of course there may be a 
word dropped out, or a vowel omitted, 
in one passage or another. The eye of 
the scribe will sometimes fail to discern 
distinctly what it sees or what it omits; 
and there must be of necessity more or 
less liability to minute error in making 
of so many writings. But the great 



course of doctrine cannot be eliminated 
from the Scriptures, except as you tear 
the whole fabric into tatters. It is interwoven, 
each part with every other- 
story, law, precept, proverb, the biographies 
of Christ by the evangelist, 
and the argument of Christ by the 
Apostles, and the vision of Christ in 
Apocalypse; until, if you throw away 
one part, you must equally throw away 
many others. You may get rid of the 
story of Balaam; though, if you do, you 
will miss one of the most picturesque 
and impressive stories in all the Old 
Testament. But, what then will you do 
with the reference to him in Micah, in 
Peter, and in Revelation? You may 
get rid, perhaps, of the miracle of the 
passage of the Red Sea, and suppose a 
mere shift of the wind when Pharaohs 
army was divinely destroyed. But, 
what then are you to do with the Song 
of Moses and of Miriam? and what with 
the seventy- sixth Psalm, and the one 
hundred and fourteenth? and what with 
the Song of Moses and the Lamb, in 
the crowning book of the Apocalypse? 
They are inter-braided, like threads 
that have been woven so closely together 
that you cannot tear them apart 
without destroying the fabric. You 
cannot extract one and leave the rest, 
with any ingenuity or by any force. - 
H. L. Hastings. 



"LOVING words will cost but little, 

Journeying up the hill of life; 
But they make the weak and weary 

Stronger, braver for the strife. 
Do you count them only trifles? 

What to earth are sun and rain? 
Never was a kind word wasted, 

Never one was said in vain." 



R516 : page 4 

"WHO LOVED ME." 

"Who loved me, and gave himself for me."- 
v Gal.2:10\ 

Three little sunbeams, gilding all I see: 
Three little chords, each full of melody; 
Three little leaves, balm for my agony. 

WHO? 
HE loved me, the Fathers only Son; 
He gave himself, the precious spotless One; 
He shed his blood, and thus the work was done. 

LOVED! 
He LOVED, not merely pitied, here I rest; 
Sorrow may come-I to his heart am pressed; 
What should I fear while sheltered on his breast! 

ME! 
Wonder of wonders, Jesus loved ME! 
Wretched-lest-ruined-sunk in misery. 
He sought me-found me-raised me-set me 

free. 

My soul, the order of the words approves- 
Christ FIRST, me LAST, nothing between but 

LOVE! 
Lord, keep me always down, thyself above! 

Trusting in thee, not struggling restlessly, 
So shall I daily gain the victory. 
I- "yet not I"-but "Christ"-"WHO LOVED 
ME." -Selected. 



R516 : page 4 

"HAVE THEY NOT HEARD"? 

"But I say, Have they not heard? Yes, verily 
their sound went into all the earth and their 
words to the ends of the world." v Rom. 10:18". 



By many, this scripture is understood 
to mean, that in Pauls day the Gospel 
had been preached everywhere and 
heard by everyone. This is a mistake, 
as we shall see. To make such a statement, 
would not only contradict Pauls 
utterance in the "fourteenth verse" of this 
same chapter and elsewhere, but it 
would also contradict facts, for we know 
that the Gospel was not preached before 
Jesus came, and that, since then- 
during the few years after, when Paul 
wrote this epistle-it never reached in 
the remotest sense, one-tenth of all the 
world. It could not have reached the 
vast countries then undiscovered and 
unknown— America, Lower Africa, 
Further Asia, Australia, etc. 

The Apostles meaning will be clear 
when his discourse is considered as a 
whole. The ninth", "tenth" and "eleventh" 
chapters should be taken together, and 
studied as one subject. Then it will be 
seen that the apostle, by reasoning from 
the Old Testament Scriptures, is showing 
that the Gospel is to be preached to 
all the world, and not to Israel only, as 
some had imagined. To support his 
argument he repeatedly quotes from the 
Prophets. This is not clearly shown by 
the ordinary translation, in reading 
which it is difficult to discern which are 
Pauls words and which the statements 
of the Prophets. 

It should also be borne in mind that 
the Prophets seldom speak of things 
as future, but instead, they take a future 
standpoint and speak of things future as 
though they were accomplished in the 
past. Thus Isaiah, in referring to the 
birth of Jesus-a thing then future- 
spoke of it as though already accomplished, 
saying, "Unto us a child is 
born, unto us a son is given." ("Isa. 9:6".) 
Thus also "went," in the above 
text, should be understood; and the 



real meaning of the passage is seen to 

be "Verily their sound shall go into all 

the earth." In harmony with this custom 

of the Prophets, our translators 

should have rendered Pauls expression 

as future also. It would then read: 

"But I say, Shall they not hear? Yea, 

verily their sound shall go into all the 

earth." The same Greek word here 

translated heard (past tense) is in "Acts 3:22,23\ 

and elsewhere translated shall 

hear (future tense). 

To set our view of Pauls argument 
clearly before you, we will briefly paraphrase 
"Romans 9:30 to 11:36", placing 
Pauls quotations from the prophets in 
italics. 

["Rom. 9:30-33".] What must we 
conclude, then, concerning Gods dealings 
with Israel and the Gentiles? We 
conclude that though Israel has been 
seeking to be right and justified before 
God for over 1800 years, and the 
heathen nations were indifferent to and 
ignorant of it, yet now that it is offered, 
Israel will reject and the heathen accept 
the Gospel. Why? Israel, as a nation, 
is really hindered because they expect 
it by works, while the heathen will be 
better prepared to accept it by faith in 
Christs finished work. Israel, feeling 
so confident that she can approve herself 
to God by works of obedience, 
stumbles at the simplicity of the Gospel 
and cannot believe that 
"Jesus died and paid it all, 
All the debt we owe." 
Therefore, instead of accepting of 
Christs ransom, they stumbled over 
and rejected the only way to God. 
This was foreshown by the prophets 
words: "Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling 
stone, and rock of offence; and 
whosoever belie veth on him shall not be 
ashamed." 

["Chap. 10:1-4".] Though I speak 



thus plainly about Israel and their 
stumbling, do not understand me to rejoice 
in their fall, for I desire and pray 
that they might be saved. I do not accuse 
them of indifference and willful 
unbelief; nay, they have great zeal for 
God, but they have a plan and way of 
their own, and are thus blinded and 
cannot see Gods way and plan of justifying 
through a ransom. Hence they 
are striving to keep the Law in every 
particular, which in their degenerate 
condition is an impossibility, and are 
rejecting Christ, who before the tribunal 
of justice became the ransom, substitute, 
or representative of all who will 
accept of his service; and for all such 
he met and fulfilled the claims of the 
Law-DEATH. 

TVs. 5-10\] Moses explains fLev. 18:5^) 
that the man who does right according 
to the Law shall continue to 
live, and not die; but in all the time since 
Moses thus wrote, none have succeeded 
in meriting life-death claimed all. 
It is therefore useless to longer look to 
works. We are proclaiming that Christ 
is the end of the law for righteousness 
to every one that believeth. Jesus 
death settled the claims of the law upon 
all who accept his ransom, and this is 
the glad tidings which we now proclaim, 
that a right to life may be had by accepting 
of the redemption provided 
through Christs sacrifice for our sins. 

But, my brethren, as Moses also said 
fDeut. 30:11-14"), this thing is not hidden 
from them, neither is it far off, difficult 
to understand, and those who banish 
prejudice and exercise faith will not 
say, Who ascended into heaven to bring 
Christ down from above, or who descended 
into the grave to bring Christ 
back from the dead? But what will 
faith say? Faith will say just what 
Moses said fDeut. 30:14 v ). The word 



(that is, the truth which we preach), is 
nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in 
thy heart-it is reasonable and plain 
that you may understand. Faith accepts 
of the coming of Christ from 
above, his death, his resurrection and 
ascension, and finds abundant foundation 
in the words of Jesus, the Prophets 
and Apostles-unimpeachable witnesses. 
Unless you believe this, you of course 
cannot accept of his sacrifice as being 
the end of the law and the cancelling of 
its death-penalty against you as a violator 
of it. 

But if you would lay hold of this 
great salvation, you must publicly and 
openly confess that Jesus is Lord-your 
Master; that by his death he purchased 
you and thus became your owner; for 
"To this end Christ both died and revived, 
that he might be LORD [owner, 
master] both of the dead and living." 
fRom. 14:9 V ) And you must not only 
own and believe that he is your purchaser, 
Redeemer and LORD, but also 
that he is a living LORD-that God 
raised him from death and highly exalted 
him to a higher nature than that 
which he gave as our ransom. To believe 
and thus confess is acceptable with 
God, and to such believers it will be 
plain that Christ settled all the condemnation 
of the Law against them, 
and such may have joy and peace in 
thus believing. After all, it is with the 
heart that men believe. No matter how 
much their minds may be convinced of 
the truth, if their hearts are stubborn 
they will not believe. Brethren, get 
your hearts right, and then you will be 
able both to believe on and confess 
Jesus as your Lord. 

fVs. 11-13".] This general principle 
of faith and release from condemnation 
in Gods sight, is proved by the prophets 
words to apply not only to Israel 



but to all mankind, viz: "WHOSOEVER 
believeth on him shall not be ashamed." 
This shows that no matter how much 
preference was shown the Jew under 
the Law, there is to be no difference 
shown under the Gospel, for the same 
Lord over all is rich enough to settle 
the claims of all that come unto him 
and ask for a share in his ransom. We 
have proof of this in the prophecy 
which says: "WHOSOEVER shall call 
upon the name of the LORD shall be 
saved." 

f Vs. 14-17\] And this brings us to 
another question, namely: Is it not 
very proper to preach the glad tidings 
of ransom and salvation through Christ 
to the Gentiles or heathen, as well as to 
Israel? Certainly, the quotation last 
made implies this; for how could all 
call on Christ as Lord without believing? 
and how could they believe on 
him except they should hear? and how 
could they hear without a preacher? 
and how can preachers go forth truly 
unless commissioned and sent of God. 
Hence it is evident that God meant this 
glad tidings to be preached to the Gentiles 
and to every creature. Not only 
can we reason it out logically thus, but 
we find a positive statement that the 
glad tidings will be preached, which 
implies that the Law will be at an end 
to every one who heareth and believeth. 
The prophets Isaiah and Nahum testify 
of this preaching, saying: "How 
beautiful the feet of them that preach 
the gospel of peace [reconciliation 
through his blood-the remission of 
sins] and bring good tidings of good 
things," which come as a result. 

But we must not hastily suppose that 
when preached all will receive the glad 
tidings; for the Prophet, speaking of 
things future as though they were past, 
again testifies of the result of the preaching, 



saying: "Lord, who hath believed 
our report?" Which implies that the 
real believers and confessors would be 
few, at least for awhile. But this proves 
that faith is to be the result of hearing 
--hearing Gods truth. 

fVs. 18-21\] Now we inquire, Will 
the fact that few will believe prove that 
the testimony will reach all, in proof of 
which I again quote from the Prophet. 
He says: "Their sound went [shall 
go] into all the earth, and their words 
to the ends of the world." This proves 
that the Gentiles shall yet have this 
Gospel preached to them. Now how 
about Israel? Shall not they as a people 
come to know-understand and appreciate 
-the glad tidings? Yes, but 
not for a long time; they are yet a 
stiff-necked and stubborn people. As 
Moses said, God will (have to) provoke 
you to jealousy by them that are no people, 
and by a foolish nation will anger 
you. 

But Isaiah speaks yet more pointedly 
of Israels rejection of the message and 
the acceptance of it by the heathen, 
saying: "I was found of them that 
sought me not, I was made manifest 
unto them that asked not after me." 
And speaking of Israel he says, "All 
day long I have stretched out my hands 
to a disobedient and gainsaying [or self-willed] 
people." 

fChap. 11:1-5".] In view of these 
declarations of the Prophets showing 
that Israel will have to be thus 
dealt with and disciplined, I ask: 
Hath God utterly cast away his people 
Israel? God forbid; for I also am an 
Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of 
the tribe of Benjamin. God hath not 
utterly cast away his people whom he 
formerly recognized and favored. Call 
to mind Elijahs prayer against Israel, 
saying: "Lord, they have killed thy 



prophets and digged down thine altars, 
and I am left alone, and they seek my 
life." But what was Gods answer? 
"I have reserved to myself seven thousand 
men who have not bowed the knee 
to Baal." Even so at this present time 
there is a remnant who through Gods 
favor will accept the glad tidings and 
will not stumble. I, Paul, rejoice that 
I am of that favored remnant. 

P"Vs. 6-8\] But now another point; 
this remnant is not saved by the works 
of the Law, nor because they almost 
kept it, but by accepting of Gods favor 
through Christ. While Israel as a nation 
fails to receive the blessing sought 
by works of the Law, the chosen ones, 
the remnant of Israel and those of the 
heathen who receive the glad tidings- 
these get the blessing. These being 
justified, not by works, but by faith in 
Christ as their Redeemer (substitute), 
thereby gain the privilege of becoming 
sons of God in the divine plan and 
joint heirs with Jesus Christ in the 
coming kingdom. The rest, both of 
Israel and the nations, will be blinded 
to the Gospel glories. The God of this 
world will blind them all except those 
who by faithfulness make their selection 
sure-a "little flock." 

fVs. 9,10\] David also foretold 
Israels stumbling, saying: "Let their 
table be made a snare and a trap and a 
stumbling-block and a recompense unto 
them" [i.e., their downfall shall be over 
the very blessings which God gave 
them; over their blessings they shall 
stumble. God had given them food 
such as he gave to no other people-to 
them God had committed the oracles 
of truth, the prophecies and the types 
which shadowed forth the sacrifice for 
sin, and the blessings following that 
atoning sacrifice; yet becoming proud 
and vain of the honors conferred; they 



thereby stumbled over the very graciousness 

of Gods plan shown to them 

in types.] Thus their eyes were darkened, 

and they were bowed down to 

see only the earthly promises. 

fVs. 11-14".] But now we come to 
another question-admitting that Israel 
will and is stumbling as foretold-I ask: 
Have they stumbled to fall irrevocably 
-will they ever again come into 
fellowship with God? God forbid that 
they should forever remain cast off; 
the significance of their fall is rather to 
be a blessing to the Gentiles than a permanent 
injury to Israel. And we may 
reason that if their fall from favor results 
in riches to the world-the Gentiles 
-then their restoration to favor, 
which Gods promises guarantee, will 
imply an abundance of divine favor 
both to Jew and Gentile. I speak to 
you Gentiles thus, because being the 
apostle to the Gentiles I desire to show 
the importance of the Gentiles in Gods 
plan, and to stimulate my countrymen 
to emulation, and thus recover some of 
them from blindness. 

f Vs. 15-21\] Thus is seen the breadth 
of Gods plans. We know that there 
are certain promises made to Israel 
which must yet be fulfilled; and if they 
be temporarily postponed and a blessing 
unexpectedly given to the Gentiles, 
it argues that Gods plans, as we now 
see them, are broader than we had at 
first supposed, and include Gentiles as 
well as Jews; for if the casting away of 
them opens a door of favor to the Gentiles, 
what shall the receiving of them 
be but life from the dead. That is to 
say, Gods promises to Israel are such 
as imply their resurrection from death 
-their restitution-and now that we 
learn that the World in general is reconciled 
to God and their sin atoned for 
by the ransom, we may reasonably conclude 



that "life from the dead"-restitution 
--will come to all the heathen as 
well as to Israel. We see Israel to be 
merely a first-fruit of the world, the 
first favored; and if God has a blessing 
for them as promised, it follows that he 
has the same blessing for other nations, 
for if the first-fruit, or sample, be holy 
-acceptable and blessed of God-so 
also the mass which it represents. 

If the root or original promise of God 
made to Abraham and Israel retain its 
life, it must bring forth the promised 
fruit-the blessing of all the families of 
the earth. The root of these promises 
is Abrahamic and Israelitish, and though 
some of the natural branches or offspring 
were broken off, and wild heathen 
branches grafted in instead, with them 
to partake of the life from the root-yea, 
the very fatness of the promise-yet 
they should not be puffed up against 
the broken off branches, but humbly 
and thankfully remember that they are 
occupying the place originally belonging 
to the natural descendants. Walk 
humbly, for if because of pride and unbelief 
they failed and were cast off, God 
would be as likely to cut off the wild 

R516 : page 5 

branches under similar circumstances.* 

["Vs. 22-24\] Here we find two prominent 
characteristics of our Heavenly 
Father illustrated-his love and his justice 
-his goodness and severity. He 
is abundant in mercy and goodness, but 
will by no means clear the guilty. His 
goodness is manifest by the promise 
and the blessings it contains and his 
severity or justice in the cutting off 
from those favors of all the unfaithful. 
But even in cutting Israel off, God is 
merciful and kind; and even though cut 
off they may be re-engrafted, if they 



exercise the needful faith. 
THE MYSTERY. 

["Vs. 25-2T.] Here is a point not 
generally known; it is a secret as yet- 
a mystery-and will show you that 
Gods plan is more comprehensive than 
you have yet appreciated; and by showing 
you that you have not all wisdom, 
it will enable you to keep humble and 
to search for the further unfolding s of 
Gods plans. The mystery is this: 
The blindness and breaking off of 
Israel will not continue forever, it will 
only last until the choicest, fittest 
branches from the Gentiles have been 
properly engrafted on the root-the 
Abrahamic promise. Then the broken 
off branches shall be reunited to the 
root. The fact is, the root or promise 
contains a double set of branches first: 
the select branches (natural and engrafted) 
the spiritual seed of Abraham 
--the Christ which is to bless all nations; 
and secondly, a lower order of 
re-engrafted branches (Israel restored) 
-the natural seed of Abraham through 
which the spiritual seed will principally 
operate in blessing all nations. 

Thus seen, all Israel will be saved 
FROM THEIR BLINDNESS in due time, 
and shall yet share in the very blessings 
they expected when they were 
broken off, viz.: the natural or earthly 
part of the blessings-the better or 
spiritual part of the Abrahamic blessing 
being conferred upon the elect, the 
chosen, who through much tribulation 
and crucifixion of the flesh and following 
of the Master are counted worthy 
of the chief honor-the spiritual blessings. 
In proof of what I state as to the 
recovery of Israel from her cast-off condition, 
I quote Jehovahs words by the 
prophet: "There shall come out of 



Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away 
ungodliness from Jacob: For this is my 
covenant unto them when I shall take 
away their sins." 

['Vs. 28-30\] This prophetic statement 
shows us, beloved Gentile grafts, 
that though the natural branches are 
treated as enemies for the present, and 
for your exaltation, yet really they are 
still beloved of God, and he has blessings 
yet in store for them, as promised 
to their fathers; for any free gift and 
promise which God makes is sure of 
fulfilment. He knew all about this temporary 
lopping off, before he made his 
promises concerning them, and knowing 
the end from the beginning makes 
it unnecessary for him ever to repent of 
a promise made to any. 

Let us now analyze this prophecy 
and see that it implies what we have 
before suggested to be Gods plan, viz., 
to bring the natural branches again into 
Gods favor. Jacob clearly means fleshly 
Israel, and from these ungodliness is 
to be turned away- -but not until God 
himself shall "take away," or "put 
away," or "blot out" their sins. As 
elsewhere shown, the sins of the world 
are not put away, until the close of the 
Gospel age, until the sufferings of the 
body of Christ are ended. During this 
age, only the sins of those who now believe 
are cancelled or put out of sight 
by God. But he who now justifies believers 
will then justify them, as believers 
in the ransom, and he will thus take 
away their sin through the ransom 
which he gave for sin-even his Son. 

In turning away ungodliness a Deliverer 
is made use of. This is none 
other than Christ, the great Deliverer 
whom Moses promised. He shall deliver 
from all evil, from death, from pain 
and sickness, from ignorance and blindness, 
from every oppression of the 



Devil. He shall bind Satan and set 
free his captives, for he is Jehovahs 
Deliverer. This deliverer is the complete 
Christ, the members of the body 
with the Head united, complete-no 
more twain, but one. This deliverer 
comes out of Zion; it is the first-born 
of Zions offspring-the overcomer and 
heir of all things. Hence, before the 
promised blessings come to Jacob 
(fleshly Israel) the heir of the spiritual 
blessings must first be developed. 

Nor should we suppose that the 
blessings and deliverances will stop 
with Jacob, for, as already shown, they 
are but a first-fruits of restored mankind, 
and when they are turned to God, 
they shall become a channel through 
which the Deliverer will bless and release 
"all the families of the earth." 

f Ver. 31\] Lift up your eyes and 
take now a comprehensive view of 
Gods dealings with Israel-both spiritual 
Israel and "Israel after the flesh"- 
and see how grand and large is the 
plan of God which as yet is only budding. 
As for a long while you (Gentiles) 
were strangers and aliens from 
God, and seemingly unloved and uncared 
for, yet now have obtained mercy 
and favor, while fleshly Israel is cut off, 
even so these of the fleshly house are 
now unbelievers and cut off, that by and 
by they may obtain mercy and find 
favor through you: that is to say, God 
is blessing them at the very time he is 
cutting them off, for in blessing you 
and preparing the spiritual seed and 
Deliverer, he is making ready to bless 
them through you, when you as the 
body of Christ are complete. fGal. 3:29\) 
Thus through the mercy which 
God now shows you, he is also providing 
mercy for them, to be manifested in 
his due time. 

fVer. 32\] God treated Israel as a 



nation of unbelievers, and cast them 
aside nationally in order that he might 
have mercy upon them, and bring them 
as a people to inherit the earthly promises 
made to them. 

Looking at the deep workings of 
Gods plan thus, in the light of what he 
tells us is future, as well as past, we can 
but exclaim: Oh, the rich depths of 
Gods wisdom and knowledge! how 
useless for us to try to discover his 
dealings except as he is pleased to 
reveal his plans to us. His doings are 
all mysteries to us except as enlightened 
by his Spirit. Who knew this gracious 
plan, so much beyond human conception? 
Who helped the Lord to arrange 
such a plan, think you? This is not 
human wisdom and supposition. God 
only could be its author. A Jew never 
would have planned to graft in Gentiles 
to share the chief blessings of the 
promise! A Gentile never would have 
arranged the original stock and branches 
Jewish and himself a favored graft. No, 
the plan is clearly of God, and illustrates 
well both his goodness and just 
severity. Of him is all the plan, through 
his power it is all brought to pass, and 
to him be all the glory forever. 

When the Spirit of Pauls argument is 
caught, it can be clearly seen that he 
quotes from Isaiah the words "Their 
sound went into all the earth and their 
words to the end of the world," not to 
prove that the Gospel had been universally 
published, but that it would be 
in due time. 



*How we see this fulfilled in the breaking off 
of the Gentile branches-the nominal Church- 
now blinded and cast out and only the elect few 
branches, "the little flock," remaining. They 
are no more respected than were the natural 



branches, and are broken off for the same cause. 
- v Rev. 3:15-17\ 



R516 : page 5 

PREACHED FOR A WITNESS. 

'And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be 
preached in all the world for a witness [testimony] 
unto all nations, and then shall the end come."— 
v Matt. 24:14\ 

We have seen from many evidences 
heretofore pointed out that we are now 
living in the time of the end of the 
Gospel Age, and that the special work 
of the present hour is the reaping of its 
harvest of ripened wheat under the 
direction and leading of the Lord of the 
harvest now present. Realizing this 
fact, not only from the testimony of the 
Word, but also from the actual work of 
harvest progressing before our eyes, 
and by the clearer light now shining, 
discerning as never before the blessed 
import of the glorious Gospel, we inquire, 
Has this Gospel been preached 
in all the world? We find that darkness 
still covers the earth and gross 
darkness the people; and the great 
nominal Church, the professed light-bearers 
and heralds of the Gospel of 
the Kingdom are also in darkness, and 
few either preach or realize fully this 
message of the kingdom. But if we 
consider for a moment what constitutes 
the Gospel of the Kingdom we will be 
assisted in realizing that this Gospel has 
been preached to every nation. 

The work to be accomplished under 
the Kingdom or reign of Christ, is the 
restoration of all mankind to perfection 
of being and consequent eternal life, 
and this reign and work will be possible, 



because all have been redeemed from 
the curse of death by our Ransom or 
Substitute-because all were bought with 
a price, even the precious blood of 
Christ. 

Though the Gospel or good news of 
the kingdom embraces all that can be 
known of Christs dominion over evil, 
and subjection of it, and while but a 
few have seen the deeper and more 
secret parts of Gods plan, and who 
therefore have appreciated the "good 
tidings" more fully than others, yet the 
central element of the "good news" has 
been published throughout the world to 
every nation. Though much beclouded 
and dimmed by the traditions of men 
and the deceptions of Satan, and so 
transformed as to rob it of much of its 
goodness, yet, we repeat, the central and 
vital point of the good news of the 
kingdom has been preached in all the 
world. That central point is, that 
"Christ died for our sins"; that by 
him "we have redemption through his 
blood, even the remission of sins"; that 
by the death of the Just One, many 
are justified freely from all things; 
that as we were condemned and delivered 
to the destroyer, now we are 
bought back with a price, even the 
precious blood of Christ, and are in His 
hands who promises to deliver the 
groaning creation into the liberty of 
sons of God; and that all accepting of 
Christ are to be blessed in his kingdom. 
This central element and first principle 
of glad tidings has certainly been 
preached in all the world, and is a fulfilment 
of this prediction of our Lord. 

Whatever of error the nominal 
Church has held, this kernel of truth- 
redemption through the precious blood 
of Christ-has so far been maintained 
and widely heralded, though its mixture 
with error has greatly hindered its 



proper reception. Not only has the living 
teacher gone forth as a herald to every 
nation, but the Word of God, printed 
in every language, has been scattered 
like autumn leaves. 

But though the good news that 
Messiah has come and paid our ransom 
price, has been so widely published, 
the world still shows no signs of being 
converted to God, and many who 
looked for this result are greatly disappointed. 
Such have entirely misapprehended 
the object of this dispensation 
in supposing it to be the conversion of 
the world to God, and therefore, notwithstanding 
the marked and foretold 
signs of the end, they cannot believe 
that we are really in its closing days. 

The general object, of the preaching 
of the Gospel during this age, as expressed 
in the above text, is "for a witness 
unto all nations." Our Lord knew 
beforehand, that under the present reign 
of evil-under the blinding influences 
of the "god of this world"-the message 
would not convert the world, as many of 
his disciples have erroneously supposed; 
hence, instead of saying that the Gospel 
would be preached in all the world for 
its conversion, he said it would be "for 
a witness." [As heretofore shown, there 
is also in addition to this a special object 
for the preaching of the Gospel, elsewhere, 
but not here expressed, viz: the 
selecting of a little flock of consecrated 
believers, to be joint- heirs of the Kingdom 
with Jesus.] 

But while a witness or testimony has 
been offered to the nations, it has not 
been received except by a few. "Who 
hath believed our report? and to whom 
is the arm of the Lord [Jehovah] revealed?" 
flsa. 53: V) (Jesus is Jehovahs 
arm stretched down to ransom 
and restore men.) If the Gospel is to 
be a witness to any, they must be able 



to see or accept of the testimony, or 
witness; and we see that though it has 
been preached to the nations FOR a 
witness, they were so blinded that they 

R517 : page 5 

could not receive it. But when their 
blindness is taken away, as we are told it 
shall be, then the present testimony will 
serve its purpose as a part in Gods 
plan; for in due time the good news is 
to be testified to every individual, and 
the due time for opening the blind 
eyes, etc., so that the witness or testimony 
can be received, is in the Millennial 
Age, as we have seen. 

Next let us see how the preaching of 
this Gospel during this age will serve 
as a witness in the coming age: When 
earths dead millions are again restored 
to life, this same Gospel-good news- 
will be testified to all, viz: that their 
restoration has been brought about as 
the direct result of Jesus death. Thus 
we read fl Tim. 2:4-6 v ); "God our 
Saviour will have all men to be saved, 
and to come to the knowledge of the 
truth. For there is one God, and one 
mediator between God and men, the 
man Christ Jesus who gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time." 

All the restored nations having heard 
of this ransom will recognize the fact. 
Israel will remember how with wicked 
hands they slew the Lord. They shall 
remember and be ashamed; they shall 
look upon him whom they have pierced, 
and mourn over it as over the only one. 
CZech. 12:Kr-Young; v Ezek. 16:61\) 
Those who lived in that day will testify 
that Jesus did come in the fulness of time 
as foretold by the Prophets, and that 
he was as a lamb without spot, that he 
was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and 



that as a sheep before her shearers is 
dumb, so he opened not his mouth. 
They will also remember his claim of a 
coming kingdom and great power. 

Others down the centuries of the 
Gospel Age will say, Yes, we heard of 
that event. Zealous disciples of the 
Lord went everywhere telling it; it was 
an unmistakable fact of history; but we 
heard it so often and yet saw no results 
from it, that it seemed like an idle tale, 
and we paid no attention to it. 

Still others, all along the centuries 
preceding the advent and sacrifice, will 
say: We remember how we were required 
to offer bloody sacrifices to God 
for our sins; and that we could not 
approach him in any other way. We 
often wondered what it all meant, but as 
Paul since our day has explained, we 
now see, that they were all intended as 
types of the only acceptable sacrifice 
which should actually "take away the 
sin of the world," which the blood of 
bulls and goats typified, but never accomplished. 
Now we see that our sins 
have really been cancelled by his sacrifice, 
for as a result we are actually released 
from sins penalty-death. 

That marked event will thus stand 
out in bold prominence before all peoples 
and nations, and the proclamation 
now made will thus serve its purpose. 
Thus all the redeemed millions of earth, 
as they again step upon the stage of 
action, will become witnesses to the fact 
that the precious blood of Christ has 
accomplished their redemption. Thus 
will the Gospel-the good news that 
Christ gave himself a ransom for all- 
be testified to all and by all, in due time. 
Thus "the knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth." Thus "he shall 
turn unto the people a pure language, 
that they may call upon the name of the 
Lord to serve him with one consent." 



OZeph. 3:9\) 

Heretofore the word preached has 
generally fallen upon deaf ears, and the 
sacred page has been opened before 
blind eyes, but soon, ignorance and 
prejudice being removed, the blind eyes 
shall be opened and the deaf ears shall 
be unstopped, flsa. 35:5\) 

Men will then recognize that the risen 
and glorified Christ is again present to 
restore and bless all the families of the 
earth, and that he is the great Prophet 
(teacher) whom Jehovah hath raised 
up, and they will be ready to hear and 
obey, as saith the Prophet Isaiah: "And 
many people shall go and say, Come ye 

R517 : page 6 

and let us go up to the mountain of the 
Lord [i.e., let us submit ourselves to the 
authority of his kingdom], to the house 
of the God of Jacob; and he will teach 
us of his ways, and we will walk in his 
paths,... and all nations shall flow 
unto it." Ochap. 2:2,3\) 

How comparatively weak and ineffectual 
upon the world are the efforts 
now put forth, and how few can discern 
the blessed hope in the joyful message 
we carry! But when the great Prophet, 
Priest and King shall fully take to himself 
his great power and dominion, not 
only shall the prince of darkness be restrained, 
but all his works of darkness 
shall be destroyed by the bright shining 
of the Sun of Righteousness. 

Nevertheless we see that it was necessary 
and expedient that the message 
should go unto all nations, though they 
did not receive it. The few who did 
receive it thereby received "power to 
become sons of God"-"partakers of 
the divine nature" and joint heirs of the 
kingdom fJohn 1:12"; "2 Peter 1:4"; 
"Rom. 8:17"), while it also served as a 



witness to the nations. MRS. C. T. R. 

R517 : page 6 

THE PRESENT JUDGMENT. 

"Now is the judgment of this world; now 
shall the prince of this world be cast out."- 
70HN 12:31\ 

The meaning of this text and a class 
of parallel texts, has been, like much 
other Scripture, comparatively obscure 
until of late. As the seals one after another 
have been opened, each has cast 
light upon the others. 

We think it is fair to infer that the 
prophets understood less about what 
they were writing than the apostles did, 
because they were inspired more to 
write than to understand, and had to 
study their own prophecies after they 
had written them, in order to understand 
them, and they were inspired to 
write them more specially for the benefit 
of those who live now, than for their 
own benefit, fl Peter 1:10,11, 12\) [This 
the regular readers of the WATCH 
TOWER know, but we repeat it for the 
possible benefit of those who are not 
regular readers.] We use the word 
"now" in the preceding sentence to 
cover a period of time embracing the 
entire Gospel age. 

The Apostle Peter uses the word 
us, in the passages referred to, in a 
similar sense to embrace the Christian 
body living not only at that time, but at 
any time during the Gospel age. 

We conclude, also, that as the prophets 
understood less of their own writings 
than the apostles did of those same 
writings, so the apostles understood less 
of what they heard Christ say prophetically 



than the members of Christ who 
read them now at the close of the age. 
This we say of the present living phase 
of the body and not of any individual. 

Not that the members living now are 
more inspired, nor more consecrated, 
nor anything of that kind, but they 
have passed more mile-posts along the 
way, have seen the fulfillment of much 
that was foretold by Christ and the 
apostles, as one after another of their 
sayings have been verified from that 
day to this. We (all consecrated 
Christians, members of the body of 
Christ) have had the benefit of most of 
the things which the revelator saw in 
vision. 

We have seen most of the things 
spoken of by our Lord in 'Mart. 24 v th 
chapter fulfilled. We have seen those 
magnificent buildings thrown down, and 
"not one stone left upon another." 

We have seen the "falling away" and 
the man of sin revealed, the son of perdition 
spoken of by Paul f2 Thes. 2:3 V ) 
in his waxing and waning power. We 
have seen Israel scattered among all 
nations without favor, under the withering, 
blighting curse of God, a distinct 
people but not a nation. We have seen 
"Jerusalem trodden down of the Gentiles," 
and remember that the condition 
was to continue "until the times of the 
Gentiles be fulfilled" fLuke 21:24 v ). We 
have seen the beginning of their gathering 
"out of all countries" to their 
own land. We have seen the gospel 
"preached in all the world for a witness 
unto all nations." We have seen the 
parallels of the ages, and looked with 
wondering gratitude into the plan of 
God, and now recognize the dawning 
of the day of the Lord, the presence 
of the Master. 

Having been permitted to see these 
things (some of which probably Paul 



saw but was not permitted to utter 
plainly then, as it was not then due to 
the world, neither is yet, our principal 
work being to "build each other up") 
we are enabled by the light thrown upon 
them, to see other things, among 
which is the statement of our Lord 
quoted at the beginning of this article. 

It will be noticed by the thoughtful 
reader, that this statement is not in harmony 
with the popular theology, which 
places the judgment of all men in the 
future. For that reason it is a troublesome 
text to all those who would have 
all Gods purposes regarding the probation 
of mankind accomplished in this 
world, age or dispensation. 

What can such say to a statement 
like this, "Now is the judgment of this 
world," or, as most authorities have it, 
"Now is a judgment of this world"? 
But what could our Lord mean by saying 
that? What kind of judgment is 
it, who are judged now, and what is 
meant by the term "now"? How 
strange and yet how comforting it is, to 
find many of these passages which 
have so long been so troublesome, now 
as the temple approaches completion, 
are the very stones needed to complete 
the work. 

To appreciate the sentence, let us 
take a look back and see what had been 
done for the world, in the way of redemption, 
at the time these words were 
spoken. We find upon examination 
that absolutely nothing had been done 
except to promise. That was enough, to 
be sure, to base a hope upon, for Gods 
promises are "yea and amen," but actually 
there had not been anything 
done to redeem the race from death, 
and those who were the chosen people 
of God, chosen for a purpose, supposed 

R518:page6 



that they were the only people 
that the Lord cared anything about. 
The Lord had said so much to them 
about being his chosen people that they 
got the idea that he could never choose 
any other people. 

He has said, "Ye are the children of 
the Lord your God;" "Thou art a holy 
people unto the Lord thy God, and the 
Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar 
people unto himself above all the nations 
that are upon the earth" fDeut. 14:1,2"), 
and very many times he expressed 
himself in a similar manner; 
but if they had known that they were 
not chosen so much for their own sakes 
as for Gods "holy name sake" fEzek. 36:22 v ), 
which means for the sake of 
love to all men, they would not have 
arrogated so much to themselves. But 
with all their perverseness they were a 
very fit instrument for the purpose for 
which they were chosen, else they 
would not have been chosen by infinite 
wisdom, of course. 

"Unto them was committed the oracles 
of God," and they kept them very 
well, the same as a son would keep the 
"last will and testament" of his father 
written in a language which he did not 
understand, but which he supposed conveyed 
the whole estate to himself. 

At the time the words were spoken, 
to which our attention is now directed, 
they had accomplished about all that 
was required of them at that time, and 
the further purposes of God were of 
such a nature that they were unfit instruments 
to be used for the accomplishment 
of them, and as God would 
not use instruments unadapted to his 
purpose, of course they had to be set 
aside. But why were they unfit? Because 
they had purposes of their own to 
accomplish which were not in harmony 



with the further purposes of him who 

had chosen them to be his people. 

They had agreed to be his obedient 

people, and that he should be their 

God fJosh. 2A-2T), but they had 

broken their agreement, they had made 

another choice, they had elected in 

their hearts that they would not follow 

the lead of any except he be a mighty 

one of earth, a chief among men, one 

who would lift them up to a condition 

of grandeur upon the earthly plane; it 

was earthly glory and honor that they 

wanted, and as the "prince of life" 

considered all such things of secondary 

importance, and made humility and 

self-denial requirements of the first importance, 

they chose to be under the 

leadership of the "prince of this world," 

who had offered to bestow the kingdoms 

of this world upon Christ if he 

would fall down and worship him. 

True, the prince of this world was a 
usurper, but he was nevertheless ruling 
this world, and for the time being had 
control. He had usurped the rulership 
of the world for four thousand years, a 
long reign, and it would seem claimed 
it by possession, but the lawful "heir" 
had come, and was preparing to take 
it, but until he actually did take it, he 
would not be its ruler or prince, and 
he never so styled himself, nor is he so 
called by the Apostles, but on the contrary 
he expressly says to Pilate, "My 
kingdom is not of this world" (Kosmo, 
arrangement); it was to be quite a different 
arrangement. So, if his kingdom 
was not of this world, he could not be 
the "prince of this world," then his language 
could have no reference to himself 
as some suppose, thinking perhaps 
that there is ground for that opinion in 
v Matt. 21:33-45 v ; but though that parable 
had regard to his lawful heirship, 
there is no intimation that he was the 



prince or ruler, and, as we have said, 

his words to Pilate are in direct contradiction 

to any such thought. 

Then we must seek for the meaning 
of these words somewhere else. We said 
there had nothing been done, actually 
toward redeeming the race. There had 
been sin-offerings, so-called, and various 
kinds of sacrifices, but none of them 
could redeem the race from death, none 
could make atonement for sin; they 
were all "shadows of good things to 
come." All that the house of Israel 
had and did was typical, and was to be 
superseded by others. Their sacrifices 
pointed to "better sacrifices," their 
promises to "better promises," their 
covenant to a "better covenant," their 
hope to a "better hope," and their testament 
to a better testament." fHeb. 7:19-22 v ; 
V 8:6 V ; v 9:23\) But when would 
these better things be? When the 
prince of this world should be cast out. 
But Jesus said "now shall the prince of 
this world be cast out," and we do not 
see things very much better yet. 

Then we had better examine that 
little word "now," and perhaps now is 
as good a time for it as any. Let us 
first look at some passages of Scripture 
where the word is used in a similar 
sense, which will perhaps give us a 
clue to it, making the sense more 
readily recognizable. 

Paul says fl Cor. 13:12 v ), "Now we 
see through a glass darkly." "Now I 
know in part." That was true then and 
is still true, though, as it is a little lighter, 
this much farther along we can see 
better. Yet we still see through the 
same glass somewhat darkly; it is still 
"Now." In v Matt. 3:1(T we read: 
"Now also the axe is laid [applied] unto 
the root of the tree," etc. The same axe 
of Gospel requirement, reckoning the 
intention for the act (see v Matt. 5:22-28 v ), 



still lies at the root of the trees. This 
is the real circumcision, and cuts off the 
"old man," whose place is supplied by 
the new creature. The old requirement 
(or axe) lopped off some of the 
branches; but "now," throughout the 
Gospel age, it is applied at the root. 
There must be an utter destruction of 
the flesh; there must be a "new lump." 
The past experience with the old has 
shown to the world that there must be 
a "new man," a new house, and that 
house is now being built up "a spiritual 
house." 

That "now" is not yet quite complete. 
In ^Rom. 3:20,21\ we read: "By the 
law is the knowledge of sin; but "now" 
the righteousness of God without the 
law is manifested, being witnessed by 
the law and the prophets." The same 
is still true with regard to the same 
things; it is still the same "now." 

Again, in v Rom. 8:22\ we read: "For 
we know that the whole creation groaneth 
and travaileth in pain together 
until now, and not only they, but ourselves 
also, which have the first fruit of 
the spirit, even we ourselves groan 
within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, 
to wit, the redemption of our 
body" (the church, which is his body), 
not bodies. We are still groaning, we 
are still waiting, the same "now" is not 
expired. 

We understand that our Lord uses 
the word now in the same sense that it 
is used in these passages; that is, it 
applies to the whole time from Christs 
first to his second coming at least, and 
covers the Gospel age up to the time 
that Christ with his saints takes the 
kingdom. 

As though he had said, the time 
to begin the work of salvation has come. 
There is now no further use for "bleeding 
birds, and bleeding beasts," the 



reality which these typified is now to 

take place, the "better sacrifices" now 

begin to be offered as the head laid 

next to the body is placed upon the 

altar. fLev. 1:12,13\) "Now" the 

real work commences, and in it is included 

a judgment of this world, and 

the overthrow, casting out of its prince. 

"The royal majesty of the heavens 
has approached," "The kingdom of 
heaven is at hand," "The hour is at 
hand," "My time is at hand." 

The result of that which is now beginning, 
is that the ruler of this world 
shall be cast out, and it will be at the 
desire of his own subjects. And even 
though he may seem to triumph because 
I am "lifted up from the earth," 
yet by that very means I will draw all 
unto me. "Now is the judgment 
(krisis-accusation, condemnation) of 
this world; and "judgment (krima, 
which includes law) must begin at the 
house of God." What do we see? The 
old house of God, the house of Israel, 
was condemned and "left desolate"; 
and even that was a type, for that which 
has happened to the second house is the 
same, and it is from the remnant of both 
houses that the new house is formed. 
Compare v Isa. llillVRom. 9:27V 11:5"; 
"Eph. 2:15\ See, also, "Isa. 8:14\ "The 
remnant [of both houses] of Israel shall 
not do iniquity, nor speak lies; neither 
shall a deceitful tongue be found in 
their mouth." fZeph. 3:13\) 

This remnant of "both houses of 
Israel" (how significant is the meaning 
of Israel: RULING WITH GOD; see 
Youngs Con.) judge themselves; and 
"when we are [thus] judged we are 
chastened of the Lord, that we should 
not be condemned with the world." 
fl Cor. 11:31,32".) He who is among 
this class "cometh not into [future] 
judgment, but has passed [legally] out 



of death into life." fJohn 5:24\ R.V.) 
"There is therefore now no condemnation 
[consequently no future judgment] 
to them that are in Christ Jesus. For 
the law of the Spirit of life in Christ 
Jesus made me free from the law of sin 
and death." fRom. 8:1,2% R.V.) 

While thus judging themselves they 
judge (condemn) the world the same as 
Noah did fHeb. 11:T), and their 
"judgment is just" because they seek 
not their own will, but the will of their 
Heavenly Father. 

Another sense in which we should 
consider the words, "Now is the, or a 
judgment of this world," though a secondary 
sense, is yet an important one, 
and though it is not a legal judgment, 
because rendered by those who are 
themselves legally dead (under sentence), 
yet it is a fact that such a judgment 
is being passed-i.e., this world 
is now passing judgment upon its rulership 
and condemning it, and the result 
will be in harmony with the judgment 
of the other class. The world (by acclamation) 
will cast out the prince of 
this world, and the universal desire will 
be for a different ruler. There are yet 
but a few comparatively who desire a 
righteous ruler, but the oppression of 
the present power will become so great 
that the universal desire will be for a 
king to rule in righteousness. Then 
the "Desire of all nations shall come," 
and the glory of this latter house (rulership) 
shall be greater than the former." 
fHag. 2:7-9\) Who, especially among 
those who are watching, cannot see the 
discontent prevailing with regard to the 
rulership of this world? Communism, 
Nihilism, and all that element, is the result 
of this judgment of the world, who 
suppose that they can bring this prince 
to terms. But, ah! they can neither 



R519:page7 

bring him to terms nor cast him out, 
because they operate upon the same 
principles that he does. They can express 
their judgment and dissatisfaction, 
but that is all they can do; they cannot 
even bind him. But the "Prince of 
life" is getting things ready, and when 
all is complete Satan will fall from his 
present position as ruler "like lightning." 
This Jesus saw in vision ("Luke 10:18"). 
But oh, the terrible events connected 
with his overthrow! What tongue 
or pen can portray them? 

Probably no more vivid description 
could be given than is given in the 
Book of "Zephaniah". You should read 
it all carefully; and let those who are 
not familiar with these things, and yet 
desire to have truth and righteousness 
prevail in the earth, dwell upon the 
"third verse of the second chapter"; and 
let all those who have sacrificed with 
Christ rejoice in what is said in the 
"third chapter, from the 16th to the 20th" 
verses, inclusive. 

There are some (they are "a solemn 
assembly") who see many of these 
things, but they follow afar off, for "the 
reproach is a burden" to them; but 
when the tribulation gets heavy enough 
they will be separated and gathered; 
this is reason for our comfort concerning 
them ("18th verse"). 

Another argument which we would 
present against the thought that the 
words "prince of this world" might refer 
to Christ himself and "the judgment 
of this world" refer to his trial before 
the Sanhedrim and Pilate, is this: Paul 
says ("1 Cor. 2:7,8"): "The hidden wisdom 
which God ordained before the 
world unto our glory, none of the princes 
of this world knew, for had they known 
it, they would not have crucified the 



Lord of glory." 

This would preclude his being either 
the, or a prince of this world. Jesus 
made the announcement, "The kingdom 
of heaven is at hand," and authorized 
his disciples to proclaim the 
same, but soon after said to Pilate, "My 
kingdom is not of this world." 

This is a dark and disorderly arrangement; 
it has been a night of sin all 
through the reign, but "the night is 
far spent, the day is at hand"-the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand." 

These terms are all of similar import 
and were true then; indeed, that work 
of Jesus and his disciples was the beginning 
of the end, it was the first part 
of the period embraced in the word 
"now," and we are in the last part 
of the same period. 

Some persons who are not Christians, 
and some who are, now think that because 
Christ said, and the disciples proclaimed, 
the kingdom of heaven at hand, the 
disciples thought it was to be set up 
during their life-time. There might be 
such a seeming to one not familiar with 
the Scriptures bearing upon this point, 
but to the careful Bible student, who 
compares scripture with scripture, there 
would be no trouble, for Paul says: f2 Thes. 2:1,2") 
"Now we beseech you, 
brethren, touching the coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering 
together unto him, to the end ye be 
not quickly shaken from your mind, 
nor yet be troubled, either by spirit or 
by word, or by epistle as from us, as 
that the day of the Lord is just at 
hand ("has set in"; Rotherhams trans.) 
Let no man beguile you in anywise, for 
it will not be, except the falling away 
come first, and the man of sin be revealed, 
the son of perdition." (R.V.) 

Peter understood what our true guide 
about this was, when he said, "We would 



do well to take heed to the more sure 
word of prophecy, as unto a light that 
shineth in a dark place, until the day 
dawn" f2 Peter l:19 v ). So we see the 
day had not dawned then, although it 
was at hand, but not "just at hand," 
that is, not as near as the dawning. The 
night is far spent when we have past 
midnight, but the dawning is the beginning 
of day. 

We understand that we are in the 
last part of the period embraced in the 
word "now," in the text. The "more 
sure word of prophecy" assures us that 
this period is nearly filled up. We understand 
that the servants of God are 
being "sealed in their foreheads"; the 
last thing before the "four angels" "hurt 
the earth and the sea" fRev. 7:2, 3 V ); 
that we are just about entering the 
time of trouble, of which the destruction 
of Jerusalem was but a type. 

Many are being "purified and made 
white and tried." A judgment is in 
progress now, and there is still another 
to come, and the associate judges for 
that tribunal are being prepared fl Cor. 6:2,3'); 
and when the prince of this 
world is cast out, they will enter upon 
their further work of judging the world. 
One thought more. How much this 
class need to study and become familiar 
with "the books," according to which 
the judgment both now and then is to 
be given fRev. 20:12 v ). Yea, and how 
much we need to have the testimony of 
Jesus, for the testimony of Jesus is the 
spirit of prophecy." 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R519:page7 

MR. OLIPHANTS VIEW. 



Mr. Oliphant, the great advocate and 
mover in favor of the restoration of persecuted 
Jews to Palestine, says: 

"That one of the first countries which 
must be affected by an independent 
Egypt, is Palestine, which lies on its 
borders, is certain; that it must of necessity 
become the first upon which the 
destinies of the adjoining countries must 
turn is no less self-evident. As our 
(Englands) policy in Egypt develops- 
as, under the pressure of circumstances 
it is inevitably bound to develop, the 
assurances of the government notwithstanding 
--with the virtual administration 
of the country by England, the national 
susceptibilities of France, Russia, 
and Italy, already strained almost beyond 
bearing, will find active expression. 
Compensations will be demanded, 
which must infallibly be the prelude to 
conferences, or wars, or both, when the 
Europeans will have to consider French 
claims in regard to Syria, Italian claims 
to Tripoli, Russian claims to Armenia, 
and the problem of Palestine and the 
holy places will present itself as the first 
for solution. We shall not, therefore, 
have long to wait before the fate of 
Palestine will become a burning 
question." 



R519:page7 

MOSES MONTEFIORE AND THE JEWS. 

On October 24th, 1884, Sir Moses 
will, if he should live, have reached the 
hundredth year of his age. The comparatively 
near approach of an epoch so 
interesting to all friends and co-religionists 
of the still hale and hearty philanthropist 
has attracted attention abroad 
as well as at home. A movement is on 



foot among the Hebrews of New York 
to prepare a suitable testimonial to Sir 
Moses Montefiore on the expected centennial 
of his birthday. An ardent advocate 
of the old faith, he did not let 
the toils of money-getting blind him to 
the unjust political disabilities under 
which the British Jews labored in his 
early days nor to the benighted and 
unfortunate condition of his brethren 
abroad, particularly in Palestine. In 
1827 he made the first of a series of trips 
to Palestine with a view to personally 
investigate the cause of the abject state 
of his brethren in that land. The result 
of the first visit was the founding of the 
Palestine fund, of which he has since 
constantly been the administrator. In 
1862 his beloved wife and helpmeet 
died. Her death marked an epoch of 
princely charities and donations by Sir 
Moses. Though grief burdened his 
soul and physical debility bowed his 
whitened head, it did not prevent him 
from immediately proceeding to Morocco 
in the following year, 1863, to 
plead the cause of the prosecuted Jews 
of Port Saafi, who were being massacred 
and tortured by the Spanish on a 
trumped-up pretext that the Spanish 
council had been murdered by the really 
inoffensive and innocent Jews. The 
venerable man succeeded once more in 
throwing oil on the troubled waters and 
restoring peace and happiness to his 
persecuted brethren, and also securing 
valuable privileges for resident Christians 
there from the Grand Shereef of 
Morocco. In 1875 he made his seventh 
and last visit to the Holy Land, the 
land of his love. Upon his coat of arms 
is a flag staff, and therefrom flowing a 
banner, on which, inscribed in Hebrew 
characters of gold, is the word Jerusalem. 
To see Palestine the seat of a Jewish 
state, with Jerusalem as its capital, is and 



has been the fond ambition and dream 
of his life-never to be personally realized 
in his time, as he himself is fully 
aware. But to the consummation of 
this wished-for end he has bent the best 
efforts of a longer life than is usually allotted 
to man. -London Christian 
Herald. 



R520 : page 7 

A GREAT WORK PROPOSED. 

"The latest proposition is to build a 
maritime canal through Palestine, and 
an English company, with the Duke 
of Marlborough at its head, has been 
formed for the purpose of making investigations 
and preliminary surveys. 

So far as at present proposed, the work 
will include, in the first instance, a canal 
twenty-five miles in length, from 
Halifax, in the Bay of Acre, through the 
plain of Esdraelon to the valley of the 
river Jordan. The depth of the proposed 
canal is to be forty feet, and its 
width 200 feet. This work will bring 
the Mediterranean into the heart of 
Palestine, and go far toward making a 
seaport of Jerusalem. It is further 
proposed to construct a canal 100 
miles in length from the head of the 
Gulf of Akaboan to the Dead Sea, and 
thus unite the waters of the latter with 
the Red Sea. If these things were 
successfully performed it is expected 
that an inland sea about 300 miles 
long, varying in width from three to 
ten miles, and deep enough to float 
vessels of the largest size, would extend 
from the Mediterranean to the 
Red Sea. There are some matters besides 
engineering difficulties which may 
hinder the execution of this project. 



The consent of the porte is indispensable, 
and certain European Powers 
would undoubtedly oppose the granting 
of a firman conferring upon England 
the exclusive right of way by 
water through Palestine. The Holy 
Land also has sacred associations for 
Christians throughout the world, and 
a wide- spread sentiment among all 
churches and sects would doubtless be 
raised in opposition to the innovation." 
--London R.R. News. 



R520 : page 7 

THE BIBLES PLACE IN THE WORLD. 

Thinking men are coming to place a 
higher estimate upon the value of Scripture 
history than formerly. It was fashionable, 
a few years since, for the literati 
of Europe to talk of myths of the Bible, 
and to speculate largely as to their probable 
origin "on the hazy horizon of the 
morning of time." But these morning 
fog-banks of antiquity have been lifting, 
and to the astonishment of these philosophers, 
these fancied myths are fossil 
facts. The same research and marvelous 
developments in the East that have 
done so much for the credibility of 
Herodotus, have also riveted mans faith 
to the Bible. 

The uncovering of Nineveh alone has 
wrought wonders. Nineveh, that great 
city. Nineveh, buried so long ago 
that Herodotus, the Father of History, 
knew nothing of it, not even its name; 
so long ago that Xenophon led his immortal 
ten thousand over its very site, 
utterly unconscious of the fact that a 
vast city was smouldering beneath their 
tread; so long ago that Volair dissolved 
the name into a mere film of mythology 



--Nineveh suddenly looms up into the 
gaze of the world with its vast palaces, 
its massive mausoleums, its gorgeous 
galleries of art, and libraries whose rock 
volumes and historic scrolls are but 
the faithful duplicates of many of the 
Scripture annals. The Nineveh of the 
Bible is there, and from her tomb of 
Jonah, from her place of Sennacherib, 
from her very stone archives, there 
comes a thousand voices attesting the 
authenticity of Bible history. In the 
library of the royal palace, besides the 
numerous treatises on ancient science, 
and grammars of Assyrian dialects, 
there are the annals of the empire, giving 
minute details of extended conquests, 
and siege and capture of walled cities, 
the fate of captives, the levying of tribute, 
and, in fact, all the concomitants 
of successful war. 

Among other campaigns, those into 
Judea are given with a carefulness of 
detail that is surprising. The names of 
Jerusalem, Samaria, Libnah, Lachish, 
Gaza, Ascalon, and others-of Jehu, 
king of Israel, of Hazael, Menahem, 
Hezekiah, Rezin, Omri, Hiram, king of 
Tyre, Illulous of Sidon, were evidently 
as familiar to the students of Assyrian 
history as they have ever been to Jewish 
or Christian readers of any age. They 
are perpetually recurring in many of the 
inscriptions. In a lengthy document is 
given the Assyrian history of "The Battle 
of the Kings," recorded in "Genesis 14\ 
The names of most of the kings 
who took part in this first important 
raid are given, together with the names 
of many of the cities of the plain. 

Corresponding to the Bible account ("2 Kings 18"), 
is the siege and capture of 
Lachish, which is amply illustrated on 
the walls of the palaces, and full particulars 
given. Over the head of the king, 
in one of the illustrations, is the following 



inscription in the cuniform or wedge 
shaped characters: "Sennacherib, the 
mighty king, king of the country of 
Assyria, sitting on the throne of judgment, 
before the city of Lachish. I give 
permission for its slaughter." In immediate 
connection with this inscribed on 
a massive cylinder of stone, is a confirmation 
remarkable indeed. The inspired 
record says: "Sennacherib came 
up against all the fenced cities of Judea 
and took them," f2 Kings 18:13"), and 
that when Hezekiah desired to purchase 
a peace, the invader demanded of him 
thirty talents of gold and three hundred 
talents of silver. The Bible also informs 
us that Hezekiah gave all the silver that 
was found in the house of the Lord and 
of the royal treasury, and that he also 
cut off all the gold from the doors and 
pillars of the temple, and sent to the 
haughty monarch. But only emboldened 
by this submissive spirit of Hezekiah, 
the scripture says that after repeated 
insults, Sennacherib advanced 
for the destruction of Jerusalem, but was 
discomfitted by the angel of the Lord, 
who slew in one night 185,000 men, 
compelling the haughty Assyrian to return 
to Nineveh. 

The two histories discovered are paralleled 
in a remarkable degree. The inscription 
on the monuments make Sennacherib 
to say: "Because Hezekiah, 
king of Judah, did not submit to my 
yoke, forty six of his strong fenced cities 
and innumerable smaller ones which depended 
upon them, I took and plundered, 
but I left to him Jerusalem his 
capital." The scripture account is a 
sufficient explanation for this fact. 
02 Kings 19:32\) "And because Hezekiah 
still refused to do me homage I attacked 
and carried off the whole population, 
fixed and nomadic, which dwelt around 
Jerusalem with thirty talents of gold and 



eight hundred talents of silver-the 
accumulated wealth of Hezekiahs 
court, and of his daughters, with the officers 
of his palace. I returned to Nineveh 
and I accounted their spoil for the 
tribute which he refused to pay me." 

The only apparent discrepancy (for it 
is apparent, not real,) in the whole of 
both accounts is in regard to the number 
of the talents in silver. The Bible 
states the amount demanded-the rock-records 
the amount carried off. The 
Bible gives the amount demanded of 
Jerusalem alone-the Assyrian the 
amount obtained from the whole of 
Judea. 

A confirmation still more remarkable 
is given in reference to the humiliation 
of Nebuchadnezzar-his being driven 
forth to dwell with the beasts for a season 
--an event which least of all we 
should expect to find recorded in the 
annals of an Eastern satrap. On a tablet 
now in the East India House, in London, 
is an inscription which may be regarded 
as the official report of that 
amazing calamity. Breaking off abruptly 
in the midst of the narration of 
the kings achievements in the architectural 
decoration of Babylon and Borsipa, 
the historian suddenly denounces the 
Chaldeans and astrologers, and then 
goes on to say: "The kings heart was 
hardened against them. He would 
grant them no benefactions for religious 
purposes. He intermitted the worship 
of Merodach, and put an end to the 

R520 : page 8 

sacrifice of victims. He labored under 
the effects of enchantment." There is 
much more that is obscure in this episode, 
and yet at its close the architectural 
narration is as abruptly closed. 
What clearer account of that awful visitation 



could be expected from a nation 

pre-eminent for haughty pride and vain-glorious 

pomp. 

So deeply was one of the infidel editors 
of the Boston Investigator impressed 
with the evidence of Layard, that he 
said in his columns in 1859: "Hereafter, 
whatever we freethinkers may 
have to say of the divinity of the old 
Book, not one of us shall ever question 
the genuineness of its history. "-Extracts 
from Chautauqua Lectures. 



R520 : page 8 
QUESTION COLUMN. 

Ques. If our debt is paid, Why is it 
said in Scripture that we are forgiven 
our trespasses? 

Ans. It would be useless for a sinner 
to approach God asking to be forgiven, 
because he also forgives trespassers 
against him. This would be no ground 
for forgiveness and is never held out 
thus in Scripture. The prayer referred 
to-"Forgive us our trespasses as we 
forgive those who trespass against us" 
-is not for sinners. Jesus said, "After 
this manner pray YE. Ye who recognize 
in Jesus, "the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world"-ye 
who were once aliens, but are now made 
nigh by the blood of Christ- Ye may 
say to Jehovah, "Our Father who art 
in heaven." And having made a covenant 
of self-sacrifice, if ye, through 
temptation, sometimes fail of perfectly 
keeping it, ye may pray to your Father 
forgive; and "whatsoever ye shall ask 
the Father in my name, he will give it 
you fJohn 16:23 v ). The world may not 
call God Father, but we "have received 
the spirit of adoption whereby we cry 



Abba, Father" fRom. 8:15\) "He that 
abideth in the doctrine of Christ hath 

R521 : page 8 

the Father" 02 John 9 V ). 

Ques. Can a man who has made full 
consecration to the Lord remain a member 
of a secret society? 

Ans. We cannot speak from personal 
experience, never having been a member 
of any such society. But if we 
should even take for granted that they 
are in no way opposed to the doctrines 
of Christ, and that they cultivate morality 
(which is at least questionable), 
still we should feel that we were out of 
place in them. We believe that neither 
consecrated time, money, nor influence 
could be thus devoted without interference 
with the saints consecration vow 
to use all their time, all their money, 
all their influence, not only not against 
the Lord but in his service. Since this 
Journal addresses specially the consecrated 
class, we feel it unnecessary to 
do more than point out this confliction 
with the consecration vow. The same 
argument holds true exactly against 
every sectarian society called churches. 
Consecrated time, money and influence, 
cannot be thus wasted without injury to 
the cause, and violence to the vow, in 
our opinion. The wide scope of our 
consecration should, to the thoughtful 
saint, settle all the minor details of its 
fulfilment. 

Ques. Again, can such consecrated 
ones consistently insure either life or 
property? 

Ans. It is certainly a teaching of 
Scripture that we should "do good 
unto all men," and that, if even an 
enemy hunger, we should feed him. 
Insurance of life or property, like poor-houses 
and hospitals, is merely the putting 



of the teachings of Christ into a 
business form. It is the creating of a 
general fund by a large number, for the 
assistance of any one of their company 
in an extremity. 

We see nothing in this out of harmony 
with the Masters teachings. Life 
Insurance is equivalent to the laying 
aside in a savings bank of a small sum, 
regularly, for the benefit of some dependent 
ones. We believe that such a 
provision by a father for a dependent 
family is not contrary to the spirit of 
Jesus words, when he said, "Lay not 
up for yourselves treasures upon earth." 
A treasure is that upon which the heart 
is set, and many people make treasures 
of things of less use and value than 
money quite frequently-reputation, 
dress, pleasure, relics, etc. 

To the truly consecrated no earthly 
thing should be treasured, all must be 
counted as dross in comparison with the 
heavenly things promised. All must 
be lightly esteemed, so that, at a moments 
notice, we shall be ready and 
willing to sacrifice them to the will of 
the Lord or, heavenly interests. Some 
statements by Paul should be understood 
to be in harmony with our Lords 
words. He exhorts the Church to lay 
up money every week for the Lords 
family-the Church fl Cor. 16:2"); and 
if right to lay up for this, would it be 
wrong to use reasonable precaution in 
laying aside whatever might be reasonably 
spared from the demands of the 
present for the future necessities or 
emergencies of an earthly family entrusted 
to your care by the same Lord? 

But while remembering the words, 
that "He who provideth not for his 
own household, hath denied the faith 
and is worse than an infidel" fl Tim. 5:8"), 
let us also beware of the much more 
common error, of grasping miserliness 



which hoards, denying the necessities 
of the present in their families, and robbing 
them of the privilege of sharing 
in the furtherance of the Lords work- 
one of the greatest privileges we can 
deprive ourselves of. 

Ques. If those who die in infancy are 
to be restored to perfection on the 
human plane, please explain Jesus 
words: "Of such is the kingdom of 
heaven"? 

Ans. The import of this text evidently 
is: Of such like is the kingdom. 
This will be better seen by reading the 
next verse ("Mark 10:15"): "Verily, I say 
unto you, whosoever shall not receive 
the kingdom of God AS a little child, 
HE shall not enter therein." See also 
Matthews account of this, "ch. 18:1-6". 

This shows that Jesus is representing 
the gentle, teachable, guileless, humble 
disciple by a little child. How beautiful 
the thought- "children of God!" 
"Howbeit, in malice be ye children, 
(having none) but in understanding be 
men." fl Cor. 14:20"). 

Ques. Please explain "Heb. 12:8"? 

Ans. The Diaglott renders this passage 
thus: "But if you are without discipline, 
of which all have become partakers, 
then truly you are spurious and 
not sons." The apostle shows that during 
the present time those who are called 
of God to the new nature, must anticipate 
trials and temptations and oppositions, 
such things being necessary to 
their preparation for the grand and glorious 
future work for which God designs 
them; the overcoming of evil being a 
proper test of all who are designed to 
be sharers of Gods kingdom power. 

Paul in the context shows, that to be a 
follower of Jesus, is not to be carried to 
glory on flowery beds of ease; not to 
reign, but to seek to win a right to the 
kingdom; not to put on the dress of a 



racer merely, but to so run as to obtain 

the prize, which implies weariness, difficulties 

and obstacles to be encountered. 

He points out that thus it was with the 

first runner of this course-Jesus, our 

leader, captain and forerunner- who 

opened up this "narrow way" to us by 

giving himself a ransom for us. Paul 

argues that we should look to Jesus as 

a pattern: if his was a race of trial, discouragement 

and conflicts with evil, we 

should expect the same, and not be surprised 

at fiery trials. Was his name 

cast out as evil- was he hated without 

cause-did his brethren disown him- 

was he cast out of the synagogue because 

he told the truth-and were all 

these things grievous rather than joyous 

-discipline rather than pleasure? 

If so it was with the example and pattern, 

so it will be with every true follower. 

Instead, then, of regarding such 

sufferings of the present time as evidences 

of disownment by the Lord, we 

should look for and receive them as 

evidences that we are accepted as sons, 

and in training for the promised royal 

honors. To be without such evidences 

would indicate that we had never been 

"begotten by the word of truth." 

James 1:18\) 

Though they might have been begotten 
to some other hope by the word of 
traditions of men, promising a kingdom, 
etc., on other conditions- such would 
be spurious and not real heirs of the 
kingdom. 

Ques. What will become of those 
who hear the Gospel and reject it? 

Ans. We would say first, that many 
are supposed to hear the Gospel who 
really never do hear it. Jesus said, 
"Him that hath an ear let him hear." 
But the God of this world (Satan) has 
stopped many ears and blinded many 
eyes, so that they cannot recognize the 



joyful message we bear. We have the 
promise, however, that in due time all 
these deaf ears shall be unstopped, and 
the blind eyes shall be opened, and then 
this Gospel in its fulness shall be "testified 
to all." 

If you do not refer to this class (which 
includes the great mass of the world), 
but to a class who have actually heard 
and received the fundamental truth of 
the Gospel, that Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures, and who 
were actually justified by faith, but who 
never consecrated themselves as living 
sacrifices to God, and thus rejected the 
good news of high calling, we would 
say of these that they lose their privilege 
of joint-heir ship and reign with Christ. 

But if you refer to still another class, 
viz., those who having heard the Gospel, 
and having been justified by faith 
in it, have also covenanted to become 
living sacrifices, and who afterwards reject 
the Gospel and become the enemies 
of the cross of Christ, counting the blood 
of the covenant wherewith they were 
sanctified a common thing; for such the 
Scripture says there remaineth no more 
a sacrifice for sin. Such are, indeed, in 
a sad condition. In their justification, 
such had received by faith the benefits 
from Jesus death which the world in 
general will actually receive soon; then 
they gave up that justified human hope 
for a hope of sharing the divine nature. 
Now if they cast aside the only anchor, 
and "count the blood of the covenant 
wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy 
[common, ordinary] thing;" such 
having had the full benefits of the ransom, 
and having then cast it aside, for 
such there remaineth no more an interest 
in that sacrifice, and, since Christ 
dieth no more, they are without hope. 
For such, death will be the second death, 
i.e., not the one on account of Adams 



sin, but for their own. 
Q. Please explain v Matt. 23:33\ 
A. This expression was addressed to 
the Pharisees as a class, and to the scribes 
or theologians among them, who zealously 
promulgated the traditions of the 
elders. They were looking for a future 
life as a reward for keeping the Law- 
or rather the traditions of the elders. 
Jesus, denouncing their hypocrisy, points 
out their real character, and, expressing 
his just indignation, exclaims: "Ye 
serpents, ye generation of vipers, how 
can ye escape the damnation (judgment) 
of hell (Gehenna). That is, how 
can ye escape the judgment to destruction. 
Gehenna was a place, outside the 
city of Jerusalem, for the burning or 
destruction of offal and the bodies of 
criminals. Jesus here uses it as a 
symbol of destruction, to which they 
were justly condemned. 

Think not, however, that they were 
the poor degraded outcasts of society. 
I tell you, nay. They were the most 
strict religionists and the most popular 
and refined theologians of their day- 
having a form of godliness, but denying 
the power thereof. But, though they 
shall not have a resurrection to life as a 
reward, as they expected it, and though 
they were justly condemned to destruction, 
with all the rest of mankind, they 
shall have a resurrection, because he 
whom they rejected and slew bought 
them with his own precious blood. 



R522 : page 8 

ETERNAL TORTURE. 

A brother who was at one time pastor 
of the "Christian Church" in Boston, 
and whose attention had been directed 



to the doctrine of eternal torment, thus 
writes of the sympathetic view of that 
doctrine. We give you extracts: 

"In pursuing the subject [eternal 
torment] I found no relief from the 
arguments or considerations advanced 
by the advocates of eternal woe respecting 
the sympathies of the righteous. 
Take for example the sentiments uttered 
by Jonathan Edwards: 

"The woes of sinners in hell will not 
be a cause of grief to the saints in 
heaven-but of rejoicing. This rejoicing 
will be the fruit of an amiable disposition, 
and a perfect holiness, and 
a conformity to Christ. At the judgment 
you may be ready to fly to some 
godly friend, but you will see them unconcerned 
for you, with joy ascending to 
meet the Lord, and not less joyful for the 
horror in which they see you. When 
THEY HEAR YOU GROAN and SIGH and 
GNASH YOUR TEETH, these things will 
not MOVE them to pity you. After your 
godly parents shall have seen you lie in 
hell millions of years, or ages, in torment 
day and night, they will not begin to pity 
you then. They will praise God that 
his justice appears in the eternity of your 
misery. The torments in hell will be 
immeasurably greater than being in 
a GLOWING OVEN, A BRICK KILN, OR 
FIERY FURNACE." 

"My soul sickened at such sentiments. 
It seemed to me that none but 
a monomaniac upon the subject could 
so write or believe. Scholastic theology 
may calmly reason of eternal 
woe; but when we examine the subject 
in the light of the fact that we, our 
families, friends, and fellow-men, as 
beings of sensitive natures, keenly alive 
to mental and physical suffering, are exposed 
to such a peril as the dogma of 
eternal misery asserts, one may indeed 
attempt to receive, or imagine it as true; 



but as Bp. Newton has well said, 
"Seriously believe it you cannot!" It 
would be a perversion of human nature 
to do so, to say nothing of the spirit of 
Christianity. 

"Our Heavenly Father has taught us 
by both precept and example to be 
"kind to the unthankful and unholy" in 
this life, and our hearts are easily roused 
by the sufferings of our common humanity. 
But we are told, in the world 
to come we shall behold countless 
myriads of the lost in the torments of 
hell, as in an unfathomable sea of 
liquid fire, where the wicked must drink 
in everlasting torture, and not feel one 
sympathetic emotion, or our happiness 
be for a moment marred by the terrible 
scene!" 


