A Campaign That Gets Results
Three weeks before the start of their convention, congregations will once again participate in a campaign to invite interested ones from the territory to attend. There is good reason for this annual campaign. Those who accept the invitation and come to the convention are often impressed by the Scriptural talks, the well-organized departments manned entirely by volunteers, and the good conduct and unity we display. (Ps. 110:3; 133:1; Isa. 65:13, 14) Even so, does our campaign get results, especially in areas where interested ones must travel some distance to attend the convention?
After the 2011 district convention, a branch office received a letter from a woman who had found an invitation in her door. She usually hid when Jehovah’s Witnesses knocked. She wrote: “I had a beautiful home, a wonderful husband, and I thought I had everything that would make me happy. Sadly, I was still not happy, and my life truly had no purpose. So I decided to drive 200 miles [320 km] to attend the Saturday program.” She enjoyed the convention so much that she phoned her husband to tell him that she was going to stay overnight and attend on Sunday too. “I listened to all the talks, I met many Jehovah’s Witnesses, and I decided that I never wanted this to end.” After returning home, she began studying and after four months became an unbaptized publisher. “I am so glad that I found that invitation in my door because now my life truly has purpose!”
Some who receive an invitation will attend. Therefore, have a zealous share in this important campaign. Bring any leftover invitations with you to the convention city, and use them to witness informally.
[Box on page 5]
How Will We Offer the Invitation?
  In order to cover our territory, we should be brief. We might say something like this: “Hello. We are sharing in a global effort to distribute this invitation. Here is your copy. You will find more details on the invitation.” Be enthusiastic. When sharing in the campaign on the weekends, we should also offer the magazines when appropriate.

