Listen and Learn
 1. Why may extra effort be required to listen and learn at the district convention?
1 Soon the 2013 district conventions will begin. Much work has gone into preparing a program that addresses the current needs of the worldwide field. Have you made arrangements to be present all three days of the convention? Large conventions can have many distractions, so extra effort may be needed to pay careful attention to the program. Since the sessions last longer than congregation meetings, concentration must be maintained longer. In addition, travel and other factors may cause a measure of tiredness. What will help us to remain alert so that we can listen and learn?—Deut. 31:12.
 2. How may we prepare our heart for the convention program?
2 Before the Convention Begins: Our official Web site, www.jw.org, posts the convention program, which includes the titles of all the talks and one or two key scriptures for each one. If we have access to the Internet, previewing this information will help us to prepare our heart for what will be presented. (Ezra 7:10) During your Family Worship evening, could you devote time to building anticipation for the upcoming program?
 3. What will help us to listen carefully?
3 During the Program: If possible, care for restroom needs before the start of the session. Turn off your cell phone so that you will not be distracted by calls or texts or be tempted to text others during the program. If you must have your phone on, put it on a setting that will not distract others in the event that someone calls. If you use an electronic tablet during the program, do so in a way that is not distracting to others. Avoid eating or drinking during the program. (Eccl. 3:1) Keep your eyes focused on the speaker. When a scripture is read, follow along in your Bible. Take brief notes.
 4. How can parents help their children to listen and learn?
4 We also want our children to listen and learn. Proverbs 29:15 says: “A boy let on the loose will be causing his mother shame.” Therefore, it is good for families to sit together so that parents can make sure that their children are paying attention to the program rather than talking, texting, or walking around. Even if they are too young to understand everything that is discussed, children can be trained to remain awake and sit quietly.
 5. Why is it beneficial to review the program, and how may we do this?
5 After the Program Concludes Each Day: Do not stay out late. Go to bed early enough to get sufficient rest. Reviewing what you heard will help you to remember it longer. Therefore, it would be beneficial to take a few minutes to discuss the program as a family each evening. If you go to a restaurant with friends, why not take your notes along and share a point or two that you especially enjoyed? When you return home after the convention, you might spend some time during your Family Worship evening discussing how you can apply the information as a family. You could also set aside time each week to review a portion of any new releases.
 6. Is merely being present at the convention sufficient? Explain.
6 A banquet serves little purpose unless the food is eaten and digested. We can say the same regarding the spiritual banquet that will be served at the district convention. May we benefit fully by being in attendance for each session, by listening carefully, and by applying what we learn.

