2001 “Teachers of God’s Word” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
1 The prophet Isaiah described Jehovah as the Grand Instructor, who in a fatherly way urges: “This is the way. Walk in it, you people.” (Isa. 30:20, 21) But how do we hear Jehovah’s words spoken for our benefit? Jehovah speaks to his people through the pages of the Bible as well as Bible-based publications, meetings, circuit events, and district conventions provided by “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45) We can be thankful to Jehovah that he continues to direct us in the way in which we should walk.
2 Each year, the district convention provides us with the opportunity to gather with fellow believers and listen attentively to Jehovah’s instructions. Last year, 1,428,139 persons attended the spiritually refreshing “Doers of God’s Word” District Conventions. In 2001, three-day “Teachers of God’s Word” District Conventions will be held throughout the country. We know that you are looking forward to making your arrangements to attend, so we are providing the following instructions to assist you.
3 Making Your Hotel Reservation: To prevent hotels from overcharging the brothers and sisters attending the convention, the Society gives direction regarding acceptable room rates to the local Rooming Department in each convention city. All hotels that cooperate with these room-rate policies are placed on the Recommended Lodging List, a copy of which is sent to each congregation. However, you will notice that hotels included on the list one year may not be included the following year. This usually happens for one of three reasons: (1) Hotel personnel have decided that they will not offer room rates that are acceptable to the Society. (2) The Rooming Department has chosen to list a different hotel for reasons of price or location. (3) The hotel has fallen below the Society’s standards for cleanliness and/​or safety.
4 The Society would like to continue holding our conventions in convenient convention cities. Because the Society and the local Rooming Department have your long-term interests at heart, each year we ask that you make reservations only at hotels that are currently working with the Watchtower Convention. By the first week in January, your congregation will have received the Recommended Lodging List for your convention. When making your reservation, carefully follow the instructions in this insert in the box entitled “Steps in Making Your Hotel Reservation.” Because of fire and safety regulations, you should arrange for no more than four persons in each room. If a particular hotel permits more than four persons to a room, this will be clearly indicated on the Recommended Lodging List under the heading “Adults.”
5 Be sure that you have called all the hotels on the Recommended Lodging List before informing your congregation secretary that there are no rooms available. Using the address or telephone number shown at the top of the list, he will contact the Rooming Department and advise them of the situation. A revised list will be sent to your congregation. Rather than making a reservation at a hotel not on the list, wait for the new list. Once you have made a reservation, please do not switch your reservation to another hotel. Hotels are added because there are brothers and sisters who still need rooms, not to provide more choices for those who already have rooms reserved. Following this direction gives us the opportunity to demonstrate our love for our Christian brothers and to avoid the world’s me-first attitude.​—1 Cor. 10:24.
6 Sending Deposits to Hotels, and Handling Hotel Problems: To guarantee a room reservation, within ten days of making your reservation, a one-night deposit must be made for each room reserved. Without a deposit the hotel has the right to give your room to someone else. Any difficulties experienced before or after the convention may be reported by writing or calling the Rooming Department, using the address or telephone number shown at the top of the Recommended Lodging List. If a problem arises during the convention, you should go to the convention Rooming Department as soon as possible so that the brothers can assist you before you check out of the hotel.
7 Caring for Those With Special Needs: The elderly, the infirm, those in full-time service, or others may require assistance in attending the convention. Relatives, the elders, and others in the congregation who are aware of the unique circumstances of those with special needs can lovingly make the necessary arrangements. The responsibility of family and congregation should not be shifted to the convention organization. (1 Tim. 5:4) The Society’s Special Needs Room Request form outlines the qualifications for submitting this form. The Congregation Service Committee should review each applicant’s qualifications before forwarding this form to the Rooming Department. The congregation secretary should include his telephone number on the form so that the Rooming Department can contact him if there are any questions. The approved forms should be mailed to the convention address shown on the reverse side of the form.
8 Attending Another Convention: If you need a Recommended Lodging List or information for another convention, the congregation secretary can provide you with the address of the convention headquarters, which is found on the reverse side of the Special Needs Room Request form. Always enclose a stamped, self-addressed envelope with your request. If there is more than one convention held in that city, be sure to indicate the dates of the convention you will attend.
9 How Do Hotel Personnel Feel About Jehovah’s Witnesses? After commenting on the good behavior of Jehovah’s people, the general manager of a hotel in the Midwest said: “When I see Jehovah’s Witnesses checking in on Thursday, I ‘check out’ until Monday morning. I know that any problems will be minor. It is always a pleasure to have your people here.” A hotel salesperson exclaimed: “Wonderful group! Everyone just kept saying, ‘Thank you.’” Does it not make you proud to hear our brothers spoken of in this way? Imagine how happy Jehovah God is when he sees us acting in a way that brings praise to his name!
10 Conclusion: As the time draws near for you to attend your district convention, make it a matter of prayer to Jehovah that you can be in attendance at all sessions on all three days and derive the most benefit from the program. Have you already requested time off from work for the three days of the convention you plan to attend? If you have not, do so as soon as possible. Last-minute requests for time off from work usually are not granted. The faithful and discreet slave has arranged this year’s “Teachers of God’s Word” District Convention to provide for our spiritual instruction and to build up our faith. So start making your plans now to be in attendance, following the psalmist’s admonition: “In congregated throngs bless God”!​—Ps. 68:26.
[Box on page 3]
Program Times
Friday and Saturday
9:30 a.m. – 5:00 p.m.
      Sunday
9:30 a.m. – 4:00 p.m.
[Box on page 4]
Steps in Making Your Hotel Reservation
 1. Call hotels during regular business hours (in January if possible). Use the hotel telephone numbers provided on the Recommended Lodging List.
 2. Inform the hotel that you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses attending the Watchtower convention.
 3. Provide the dates you will stay in the hotel.
 4. Be sure that you are receiving the room rate(s) shown on the Recommended Lodging List. Do not accept a higher rate.
 5. If rooms are not available, call another hotel on the list.
 6. Make your reservation, and ask for a confirmation number.
 7. Make your deposit by credit card, check, or money order. Do NOT send cash. If deposit is made by
Credit card: Instruct the hotel to charge the deposit to your card immediately.
Check or money order: Write the confirmation number on the front, and mail within ten days.
Also Please Observe:
▪ Stay only in hotels on the Recommended Lodging List.
▪ Reserve room(s) only for yourself or for people with whom you have made specific arrangements.
▪ Keep your first reservation.

