Do You Preach With Boldness?
1 Despite being arrested and threatened by opposers, Peter and John continued declaring the Kingdom message with boldness. (Acts 4:17, 21, 31) What does it mean for us today to preach with boldness?
2 Boldly Giving a Witness: A synonym for “bold” is “intrepid,” which means having “resolute fearlessness, fortitude, and endurance.” For true Christians, preaching with boldness means being unafraid to speak up whenever there is an appropriate occasion to share the good news with others. (Acts 4:20; 1 Pet. 3:15) It means that we are not ashamed of the good news. (Ps. 119:46; Rom. 1:16; 2 Tim. 1:8) Thus, boldness is a quality needed to accomplish our commission to preach the good news of the Kingdom in this time of the end. It moves us to share the good news with people wherever they may be found.​—Acts 4:29; 1 Cor. 9:23.
3 Boldness at School: Does an inclination to be fearful or timid make it difficult to preach to your schoolmates? At times it is not easy; in fact, it can be a real challenge. However, Jehovah will strengthen you if you pray for boldness to preach to others. (Ps. 138:3) Boldness will help you to identify yourself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and to withstand ridicule. As a result, your preaching at school may save those who listen to you.​—1 Tim. 4:16.
4 Boldness at Work: Are you known as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses at work? The only way your workmates can be reached with the good news may be by your preaching to them. Your boldness will also help you to get time off for your Christian meetings and conventions.
5 Bold When Under Trial: Mustering up boldness is crucial when we face opposition. (1 Thess. 2:1, 2) It helps us to hold fast to our faith when we are subjected to threats, ridicule, or outright persecution. (Phil. 1:27, 28) It fortifies us to stand firm when under pressure to compromise our adherence to the standards of our God, Jehovah. It strengthens us to maintain our peaceableness when others provoke disputes.​—Rom. 12:18.
6 Whatever difficulties we personally face, may we persevere in preaching the good news with boldness.​—Eph. 6:18-20.

