Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting December 11
Song 50
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. If the congregation has copies of the Greatest Man or Great Teacher books in stock, show how they can be used to good advantage in the ministry during the holiday season. Encourage everyone to view the video The Bible​—Accurate History, Reliable Prophecy in preparation for the discussion at the Service Meeting the week of December 25. Those who have the video can share it with others who do not have it, or perhaps they can watch it together.
15 min: “Fear Jehovah All Day Long.”a Include the explanation of godly fear given on page 26 of the January 8, 1998, Awake! Emphasize the wholesome benefits of fearing Jehovah.
20 min: “Peer Pressure and Your Privilege to Preach.” Talk and interviews. Invite individuals who have experienced peer pressure to relate how they were able to keep active in the preaching work in spite of it.
Song 78 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 18
Song 94
15 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Outline special field service arrangements for December 25 and January 1. Answer the question: Is there any objection to sharing in celebrations that may have unchristian roots as long as this is not done for religious reasons?​—See Reasoning book, pages 178-80.
12 min: “The Theocratic Ministry School for 2001.” Talk by the school overseer. Encourage all to keep up with their weekly Bible reading and to be diligent in fulfilling assignments in the school.
18 min: “Do You Preach With Boldness?”b Elicit comments on the scriptures in the article. Using the Our Ministry book, page 86, show how we can acquire greater boldness and be more effective in field service.
Song 124 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 25
Song 126
10 min: Local announcements. Invite audience to relate any recent experiences they have had in their witnessing activity. Review literature offer for January.
10 min: Local needs.
25 min: “Learning From the Video The Bible​—Accurate History, Reliable Prophecy.” Audience discussion. Offer suggestions on how this video can be used to motivate others. (1999 Yearbook, pages 51-2) In February we will review the second video in this series, The Bible​—Mankind’s Oldest Modern Book.
Song 151 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 1
NOTE: Congregations are not to move their Service Meeting for the week of January 1 to an earlier night unless the circuit overseer is visiting. In every congregation the convention insert should be considered on the Service Meeting as scheduled. If there is a circuit assembly this week, book study conductors should announce the convention location and dates at their regularly scheduled book studies. A copy of the Recommended Lodging List should be made available so that those in attendance can copy the hotel telephone numbers for making their reservations.
Song 171
 8 min: Local announcements. If your congregation will change meeting times for the new year, kindly urge everyone to maintain regular meeting attendance at the new times. Inform Bible students and other interested ones of any changes, and begin using handbills that show the new schedule. Comment on September field service report for the country and the local congregation. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for December.
17 min: How to Prepare for Return Visits. Father discusses with his family how they can be more productive in their ministry. He stresses Scriptural reasons for following up all interest found. Using guidelines provided in the July 1, 1999, Watchtower, page 22, paragraph 18, they prepare to make some return visits. All acknowledge that they have contacted people who should be visited again. Each one describes the response he got on an initial call, and the others suggest an idea and a scripture to use on the return visit. They find points in the Require brochure that might be used effectively. The parents have one of the children practice what he will say on his call. They plan a specific time to make return visits during the coming week.
20 min: “2001 ‘Teachers of God’s Word’ District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Secretary handles question-and-answer coverage of article in insert. First, read the December 15, 2000, convention assignment letter from the Society. Then use the cited scriptures to show why all of us need to follow the Society’s direction closely. Stress the importance of arranging for time off from work as soon as possible in order to be free to attend all three days of the convention. Commend everyone for cooperating with the Society’s arrangements.
Song 212 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

