Our Principal Textbook
1 How do you feel when you receive a new publication from the Society or a new issue of The Watchtower or Awake!? Really, we are deeply indebted to Jehovah for his provisions and very grateful for his loving direction, aren’t we? And, above all, the Word of Jehovah itself, the Bible, is our most treasured publication and principal textbook, for it is the very basis of our faith in Jehovah’s promises. Surely we ought to know how it was produced, what it contains and how to use it.
2 As Jehovah’s people we realize that without the Bible we would never have come to know the real purpose of life, but learning what it really is has been most encouraging to each and every one of us. This has helped us to press on despite worsening world conditions. The Bible contains information that otherwise would not be available to us, such as a knowledge of things that took place before man was on the scene. (Gen. 1:1-26) The Bible also tells us about conversations that took place in the heavens and that no human ears could hear unless Jehovah provided the information. These things strengthen our faith!
3 More importantly, the Bible acquaints us with Jehovah himself, his name, his outstanding qualities, his Son and the important place that he occupies in God’s purposes. (Col. 1:17, 18; 2:3) And as a book of prophecy, the Bible truly is outstanding. It has no equal. It alone has given true significance to events of history and shows why they turned out the way they did. (Luke 19:41-44) Moreover, the Bible shows the future of all present worldly governments (Dan. 2:44) and explains the events of our day, showing that soon Jehovah will clear away all of the wicked. (Ps. 37:9, 10) What compelling reasons there are to read God’s Word daily!
4 If you have had difficulty in keeping up with the suggested schedule for Bible reading each week, could you make it your resolve to try to keep pace during December? This would mean reading Jeremiah 38 to 52, only 15 chapters. If we allowed about five minutes a day to read half a chapter, that would keep us nicely abreast of this fascinating material. And since there is so much power in the Word of Jehovah, it will motivate us from the heart to be witnesses of Jehovah’s Messiah everywhere.
5 Yes, reading and studying the Bible give us the courage to be witnesses of Jehovah’s Messiah in these momentous days. December offers us a splendid opportunity to share the Bible with everyone whose heart is inclined toward righteousness, for we will be using the New World Translation in all the languages in which it appears, together with the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God?, for a $1.25 contribution. What an excellent combination! Also, many of us in our own personal study and research have been thrilled with the value of The Kingdom Interlinear Translation of the Greek Scriptures. This translation has opened up new vistas of understanding and depth of appreciation for Jehovah’s Word. Those of us who are acquainted with individuals who are very much interested in a study of the Bible and who enjoy it may want to introduce The Kingdom Interlinear Translation of the Greek Scriptures to them.
6 As you receive this issue of Kingdom Ministry, surely you are rejoicing in the series of talks currently being delivered on the new book, “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How? Are not these talks stimulating our appreciation for Jehovah and motivating us to share these truths about his name and his will with others before it is too late? Take advantage of opportunities to pass on this information. In those cases where the householder already has the New World Translation, we encourage you to offer the new book, together with a booklet, for 50 cents.
7 Now, for a few minutes, think about those with whom you might be able to place the Bible or one of the new books this month. Why not make a list? If you write down the names of these folks and then call on them as early as possible during the month, it may be surprising to see what can be accomplished during December. And since we really want to help these people, you might want to take a few moments with other members of your family to practice how to approach various householders and interested ones in your territory. This will sharpen your ability to present the offer and your desire to share in the field ministry.
8 If it is possible to get some persons started in the actual field ministry this month, especially those who have been studying the Bible for a number of months and who qualify as well as show a desire to share in presenting the good news, why not do so at this time. What a blessing this will mean for them and for those who listen to them! Indeed, our principal textbook, the Bible, is an influence for good in our lives.
[Blurb on page 1]
Everywhere be witnesses of Jehovah’s Messiah.
[Blurb on page 4]
When you teach, endeavor to reach the heart.

