Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 5
Theme: Urgently Teaching the Good News. (1 Cor. 9:16) Song 25.
 7 min: Introduction, text and comments, also Theocratic News.
20 min: Talk and audience discussion on “Teacher, Teaching” from “Aid” book, pp. 1579, 1580. Highlight appropriate points from “Teachers in the Christian Congregation” and “How all Christians should be teachers.” Show that we should be at this work urgently, teaching effectively. Be sure to encourage each one to bring “Aid” book to service meeting this month and prepare to comment during discussions based on material from “Aid” book. Family preparation before each meeting will enable all to share.
15 min: “Our Principal Textbook.” Question-and-answer coverage. Demonstrate appropriate points.
 3 min: Accounts report.
15 min: Concluding comments. Include fitting points from “‘Preach the Word’​—Where and Why?” November 15, 1971, “Watchtower.” End meeting on spiritual note. Song 89.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 12
Theme: “Happy Is the People Whose God Is Jehovah!” (Ps. 144:15) Song 29.
12 min: Introduction, text and comments, and handling of Branch Letter by warm family discussion at supper table. Family members respond enthusiastically.
15 min: Presenting the Good News. Question-and-answer coverage and demonstration of appropriate points on paragraphs 3, 5 and 6.
18 min: Talk and audience discussion of “Happinesses,” “Aid” book, pp. 711, 712. Feature primarily “The Source of Happiness,” “Christ’s Counsel on Happiness,” and “Take Delight in Jehovah.” Speaker should make practical application to fit needs of congregation, reviewing main points in conclusion.
15 min: Concluding comments. Include some points on progress of campaign with Bible and/​or experiences this month. Highlight main ideas from “Are You Happy With Your Life?” September 22, 1971, “Awake!,” pp. 3-5. Song 24.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 19
Each congregation should plan its own spiritually upbuilding service meeting for this week. Announce arrangements for witnessing over holiday weekends.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 26
Theme: Praising Jehovah Day by Day. (Ps. 96:2) Song 28.
 8 min: Introduction, text and comments, and any announcements for the evening.
10 min: Discussion of the “Question Box” material.
12 min: “Your Part in the Ministry School.” Talk and question-and-answer coverage by school servant.
15 min: Helping Others to Appreciate the Bible’s Value. Demonstrate and then discuss the value of the following presentation designed for use during the “Watchtower” campaign. The presentation will serve as a “springboard” to lead into the first article of the magazine (issues of January to April). Be sure that the demonstration is brief, to the point (not wordy), hence can easily be copied by others.
Theme: Benefits of Living by Bible Teachings.
“[After greeting:] I’ve been talking briefly to your neighbors about something that has greatly helped me. I think you will agree that we live in times when we face many problems. Often we wonder what decisions to make. Is there any way to be sure? Note what the Bible says here in Psalm 119:105. [Read verse, letting householder see it.] Will the Bible really do that​—light our way and show us what course to take in these confusing times? We could never know unless we tried it out, isn’t that right? To help persons to do that, this magazine is published. [Draw attention to first article and comment on points made at beginning.]”
Let the brothers say what they like about the presentation and how it might be adapted to the local territory. Discuss how to direct attention to our free home Bible study service.
15 min: Concluding comments. Include some helpful thoughts from article “When to Be as a Babe,” October 1, 1971, “Watchtower,” pp. 605-607. Song 58.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 2
Theme: Serve Jehovah with a Complete Heart. (1 Chron. 28:9) Song 70.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: Talk on theme for the month. See March 1, 1971, “Watchtower.”
10 min: Mature brother gives talk on “What About Dating?,” October 1, 1971, “Watchtower,” pp. 593-595.
12 min: “A Marvelous Provision.” Question-and-answer coverage. Also select and comment on a portion of “Yearbook” report you found especially impressive.
 8 min: Announcements for week by congregation servant and “A Few Suggestions.”
 5 min: Family head (preferably one of the “older men”) handles material in “Aid” book, pp. 564, 565, on “Christ Jesus and the Christian Family Unit,” by question-and-answer method. Be sure to emphasize how good oversight of family and fine cooperation by various members thereof help us successfully to praise Jehovah. Song 74.

