Be at Your Preaching Urgently
1 “And this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.” (Matt. 24:14) With these words Jesus impressed on his disciples the importance of delivering the message of the Kingdom. An urgency was manifested in his words. The end of wickedness could not precede the delivering of this important message. God’s kingdom in the hands of his Son will act decisively against wickedness, but only after this message has been delivered “for a witness to all the nations.”
2 Further highlighting the urgency of preaching, Paul counseled Timothy, “Preach the word, be at it urgently in favorable season, in troublesome season, . . . do the work of an evangelizer, fully accomplish your ministry.” Timothy had to apply himself in giving instruction inside the congregation, but ‘evangelizing’ was also necessary. So Paul urged Timothy to ‘fully accomplish his ministry’ by sharing in the preaching work under all circumstances. He was to display the “art of teaching” and yet work with a sense of urgency.—2 Tim. 4:2, 5.
HOW CAN WE DO IT?
3 Today we are being directed to preach “this good news of the kingdom” and we should be at it urgently. The world scene indicates that the nations are rapidly moving toward their end. Not much time remains to do this pressing work. How can we get on with the preaching work and get it done before the end comes? How can we be good teachers while working with a sense of urgency?
4 A fine instrument has been provided by the “faithful and discreet slave” to aid us in getting our urgent work done. It is the book “Let Your Kingdom Come.” We have been offering it along with the Bible during the past two months, and now we have the opportunity to offer this fine publication alone for a contribution of 75c. No doubt you have found it to be very helpful in focusing the attention of the householder on the Kingdom theme.
5 Have you been able to use the suggestions given in the last two months? Perhaps you have been able to use the boxes containing pointed information about the Kingdom, such as the one entitled “The Reality of God’s Kingdom” found on page 11. Or, you may have found success using the fine color illustrations in the book, such as the beautiful paradise scene on pages 4 and 5 or the full-page illustrations on pages 148 and 149 highlighting “The Kingdom Theme of the Bible.”
6 Perhaps you have been able to use one of the suggestions in the January 1982 Our Kingdom Ministry, so as to start a Bible study. If you have not tried these yet, why not do so during February as you place the “Kingdom Come” book? Or, you may want to return to visit householders with whom you have placed the book but who do not yet have a home Bible study. The suggestions offered are beneficial for new publishers or those with more experience.
7 Have you been able to offer this new book to members of your own family who are not Jehovah’s Witnesses? What about those who are on your magazine route? Would they be interested in obtaining a copy of the “Kingdom Come” book? Can you think of others who may want it? Fellow employees? Schoolmates? Business contacts? Landlords? Neighbors? Seek out every opportunity to offer this book.
WHAT LIES AHEAD
8 It is the coming of God’s kingdom by Christ and knowing what it will do that makes it possible for all praisers of Jehovah to have faith now. So, during these last days of Satan’s system, should we not be moved to speak the “good news” to others so they in turn may have faith and wait for God’s kingdom to remedy earth’s affairs? Surely we will want to make every effort during February to see that we distribute the “Kingdom Come” book to everyone that desires a copy. We should be at our work urgently since the time left to to it is short.—Mark 13:10; 1 Pet. 4:7.

