Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 31
Song 31
 5 min: Introduction and local announcements; remind congregation of first Sunday field service arrangements.
25 min: Question-and-answer coverage of insert material on 1982 “Kingdom Truth” District Convention.
15 min: Question-and-answer coverage of main article: “Be at Your Preaching Urgently.” Remind audience of Topic for Conversation theme and scriptures.
Song 66 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 7
Song 88
 7 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: “Can You Tell Right from Wrong?” October 1, 1981, Watchtower, pages 9-12. Talk. If chalk board or other means of display before congregation is available, show the four factors that make it difficult for Christians to attain mature perception.
13 min: “Presenting the Good News—Using Bible Tracts.” As time permits entertain suggestions and experiences from audience on how tracts can be used locally.
10 min: Elders can arrange locally or give talk on February 1, 1982, Watchtower article, “Expansion at the ‘House of God.’” Encourage all to share in second Saturday magazine work.
Song 51 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 14
Song 78
10 min: Local announcements, Announcements and article “Witnessing to Prisoners.” Animated discussion between two brothers.
20 min: “Can They Be Helped?” Talk by elder highlighting what is being done to help inactive ones in territory. Secretary and service overseer will work together in arranging for persons to be called on. Qualified publishers will be asked to conduct study with inactive ones. Time, return visit and study should be reported by publisher conducting study. Relate one or two experiences from article showing that some will respond. Demonstrate how one would approach inactive publisher with object of starting study. Make demonstration realistic. Read paragraph 8.
15 min: “Having Plenty to Do in the Work of the Lord.” Discussion between service overseer and a brother or sister active in field service. (Portion based on Organization book, chapter 7, “Serving Jehovah Whole-souled” and January 1, 1982, letter, “Territory Seldom Worked.”) What is involved in whole-souled service? Review letter “Territory Seldom Worked.” Emphasize how this is a way we can increase our service on a temporary basis. Explain difference between serving where need is greater and working unassigned territory. Encourage brothers to consider working, on a temporary basis, areas that have not been covered in a year or two. (See article, “Step Over into Macedonia and Help” in June, 1980 Our Kingdom Service.) Explain how one can apply to work unassigned territory. Conclude with thought that Jehovah blesses those who put Kingdom interests first. We have plenty to do in the work of the Lord. Will our circumstances permit us to do more than at present?
Song 82 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 21
Song 73
 5 min: Introduction and local announcements.
15 min: “Sexual Morality—Is It Really Possible?” November 1, 1981, Watchtower, pages 3-6. Talk by an experienced elder. Commend youths in congregation for keeping morally clean.
15 min: Questions and answers on article, “Benefit Fully from the Circuit Overseer’s Visit.” Encourage whole-hearted support for his visit by all in the congregation, building appreciation for this provision to help the congregation remain spiritually strong.
10 min: Getting Ready for Field Service. Review Topic for Conversation and offer. Have a young publisher demonstrate presentation. Remind all to share in fourth Saturday magazine work.
Song 103 and prayer.

