Presenting the Good News—Using Bible Tracts
1 Early in the modern history of Jehovah’s Witnesses much of the public witnessing was accomplished through the extensive distribution of Bible tracts. Many first heard the Kingdom message in that way. Today, tracts still play an important role in our public ministry of the “good news.”—Matt. 24:14.
2 Last summer at our “Kingdom Loyalty” District Conventions, Kingdom News No. 30 was released and used from house-to-house in the convention cities. Since that time this new tract, entitled Is Planet Earth Near the Brink? has been made available to congregations for free distribution to the public. (See announcement in the September 1981 Our Kingdom Service.) Are you making full use of this new tract?
3 This attractive new tract with its thought-provoking title can prove to be most helpful in giving a thorough witness in your territory. Many brothers have effectively used the tract at the beginning of their presentation to catch the eye of the householder. Others prefer using it for stimulating further interest in concluding calls where no literature has been placed. Most of all, perhaps, the tract is being left at doors where no one was found at home or where the householder has been too busy to listen at the time the call was made. If the tract is being left at not-at-homes, make certain that it is placed neatly out of sight of passers-by.
4 During recent years several tracts have been released and used in special efforts to get a brief message into every home in our territories. This present tract is intended for continuous use in field service. Have you made arrangements to carry a few of these tracts with you at all times so as to be able to use them on every appropriate occasion?
5 Tracts are particularly convenient for giving to persons we may engage in conversation when traveling, shopping or when going about the daily affairs of life. Several of these tracts may be kept conveniently available in a coat pocket, purse or briefcase. Why not keep a few at your place of employment or among your school books and papers? Having the tract with you may in itself encourage you to be more alert to opportunities to witness informally.
6 Yes, using Bible tracts is a time-tested and effective means of presenting the “good news.” Be sure to pick up a supply soon and use them at every opportunity.

