From Our Readers
Are We Changing Our Weather?  I am 17 years old and am preparing for my diploma. The examination includes geography, and the series “Are We Changing Our Weather?” (May 22, 1998) was of great help to me in preparing. After the exam, my classmates asked me where I had found this information on the weather, and half of them asked for copies.
A. G., Switzerland
I was pleasantly surprised by the analysis of the greenhouse effect in this issue of Awake! I am a staunch ecologist and a Christian. Jehovah’s Witnesses don’t always get good press. But the contents of your magazine are worth thinking about. Ecology and faith are at their lowest ebb. At last, religious people who are interested in God’s creation!
M. C., France
I am 14 years old and want to thank you for the articles. I never gave much thought to the weather, but I have now thought seriously for the first time about what we may be doing to our planet. These articles ought to force many people to wake up, because who wants to destroy our environment? We shouldn’t simply throw away a gift of God.
S. Q., Germany
It felt good to read something about the climate, in a magazine people consider to be religious. It just shows how much Awake! cares about people—not only religiously but also physically. Although we take it for granted, the weather really affects our lives.
M. F. M., Germany
Fingernail Care  It is amazing that for nearly 52 years, apart from two brief periods, I have bitten my nails. Having read in the Awake! of May 22, 1998, the article “Your Fingernails—Do You Take Care of Them?,” I have stopped. Why? Because Jehovah God is the Designer of them and wants us, as with everything else, to take care of them. Thank you for your lovely reminders.
D. H., England
Since I take care of both house and garden and look after my crippled mother-in-law, you can imagine that I have more to do than simply care for my hands. My nails have been bothering me for some time, as they are broken and cracked. So the article came at just the right time.
W. B., Germany
Ever since I was small, I have bitten my nails and have thus been ashamed of their uneven shape. As I read the article, my appreciation that nails are a wonderful part of our human bodies was deepened. It encouraged me to work on correcting my habit.
K. Y., Japan
Role Model  When I read the piece in the May 22, 1998, Awake! entitled “Young People Ask . . . Who Should Be My Role Model?,” I reflected on the way that articles such as this one have enriched my life. After my family disintegrated, I was naturally drawn first to friends who were my own age. But then I started to think seriously about people who had the most positive impact on my life—the older Christian sisters. Now I search out relationships like those of Paul and Timothy or Ruth and Naomi. My best friend is a sister about 50 years old who has taught me about joy, love, compassion, kindness, and generosity. We are joining forces—we have become roommates and are well on our way to entering the full-time ministry. Thank you for your sound guidance and direction.
C. F., United States

