Rescuing the Codex Sinaiticus
THE Codex Sinaiticus has been described as “the most important, exciting, and valuable book in existence.” This is not just because it is at least 1,600 years old but because it forms a vital link in our catalog of Bible manuscripts. Its rediscovery, by Tischendorf just over a hundred years ago, is a fascinating story.
Konstantin von Tischendorf was born in Saxony, northern Europe, in the year 1815 and educated in Greek at the University of Leipzig. During his studies, he was disturbed by higher criticism of the Bible, voiced by famous German theologians seeking to prove that the Christian Greek Scriptures were not authentic. Tischendorf became convinced, however, that a study of early manuscripts would prove the genuineness of the Bible text. As a result, he determined to research for himself all known manuscripts, hoping to discover others in the course of his travels.
After four years spent searching through Europe’s finest libraries, Tischendorf, in May 1844, reached the Monastery of St. Catherine, situated 4,500 feet [1,400 m] above the Red Sea in Sinai. Access to the monks’ fortresslike retreat was by a basket suspended on a rope through a small wall opening.
REWARDING FINDS
For some days he was permitted to search through their three libraries, without success. Then, just as he was about to leave, he spotted what he had been looking for​—ancient parchments! They filled a large basket standing in the hall of the main library. The librarian told him that they were to be burned, just as two full baskets had already been. Among these parchments, Tischendorf was amazed to find 129 leaves from the oldest manuscript he had ever seen, a Greek translation of parts of the Hebrew Scriptures. He was given 43 sheets, but the rest were denied him.
Tischendorf revisited the monastery in 1853 to discover only a fragment of Genesis from the same fourth-century manuscript. He was convinced “that the manuscript originally contained the entire Old Testament, but that the greater part had been long since destroyed.” The complete manuscript probably consisted of 730 leaves. It was written in Greek uncial (capital) letters on vellum, fine sheep and goat skins.
Six years later Tischendorf made his third visit to the monks at Sinai. On the eve of his departure, he was casually shown not only the leaves he had saved from the fire 15 years earlier but many others as well. They contained the entire Christian Greek Scriptures plus part of the Greek translation of the Hebrew Scriptures.
Tischendorf was permitted to take the manuscript to Cairo, Egypt, to copy it, and eventually to carry it to the czar of Russia as a gift from the monks. Today it reposes in the British Museum, exhibited alongside the Codex Alexandrinus. The earlier 43 sheets are in the University Library of Leipzig, in the German Democratic Republic.
We should be grateful to Tischendorf for devoting his life and talents to searching for ancient Bible manuscripts and particularly for rescuing the great Codex Sinaiticus from destruction. But our highest thanks go to Jehovah God, who has seen to it that his Word has been so accurately preserved for our benefit today.
[Box on page 30]
Using the Codex
  The symbol for the Codex Sinaiticus is the Hebrew letter א. This codex confirms the accuracy of more recent papyrus manuscripts of the Bible. It also helps modern Bible scholarship by pinpointing subtle errors that crept into later copies.
  For example, John 1:18 reads: “No man has seen God at any time; the only-begotten god who is in the bosom position with the Father is the one that has explained him.” The footnote of the “New World Translation Reference Bible” reveals that “the only-begotten god,” rather than the alternative rendering of “the only-begotten Son,” is supported by the Codex Sinaiticus and other old manuscripts. The footnote reference אc also gives the notation of a corrector of this codex to substantiate the restoration of the definite article in “the only-begotten god.” The position of Jesus Christ is unique, as this scripture testifies.
[Pictures on page 31]
St. Catherine’s Monastery at the base of the traditional Mt. Sinai. [Inset] Its present library
[Credit Line]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.
[Credit Line]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.
[Picture Credit Line on page 31]
Courtesy of the British Museum, London

