How to Cope With Negative Feelings
● Asaph complained: “Surely it is in vain that I have cleansed my heart and that I wash my hands in innocence itself. And I came to be plagued all day long, and my correction is every morning.”​—Psalm 73:13, 14.
● Baruch groaned: “Woe, now, to me, for Jehovah has added grief to my pain! I have grown weary because of my sighing, and no resting-place have I found.”​—Jeremiah 45:3.
● Naomi lamented: “The Almighty has made it very bitter for me. I was full when I went, and it is empty-handed that Jehovah has made me return. Why should you call me Naomi, when it is Jehovah that has humiliated me and the Almighty that has caused me calamity?”​—Ruth 1:20, 21.
THE Bible contains numerous examples of faithful worshipers of Jehovah who at times became overwhelmed with feelings of discouragement. The fact is that as imperfect humans all of us experience such feelings from time to time. Some of us may be more prone to discouragement​—perhaps even with a degree of self-pity—​than others because of having lived through tragic experiences.
Left unchecked, however, these emotions can ruin your relationship with others and with Jehovah God. One Christian woman who is prone to self-pity admits: “I have turned down many invitations to social activities because I felt that I was not a worthy associate for those in the congregation.” What a devastating effect such feelings can have on a person’s life! What can you do to counteract them?
Draw Close to Jehovah
In Psalm 73, Asaph wrote candidly about his perplexity. When comparing his own lot with the prosperous life of the wicked, he became envious. He observed that the ungodly were haughty and violent, and they seemed to get away with this. Asaph then expressed doubts about the value of his pursuing an upright course in life.​—Psalm 73:3-9, 13, 14.
Have you, like Asaph, observed the apparent success of the wicked who flaunt their wrongdoing? How did Asaph overcome his negative feelings? He continues: “I kept considering so as to know this; it was a trouble in my eyes, until I proceeded to come into the grand sanctuary of God. I wanted to discern their future.” (Psalm 73:16, 17) Asaph took positive steps by turning to Jehovah in prayer. To use language later employed by the apostle Paul, Asaph suppressed the “physical man” by awakening the “spiritual man” within himself. With renewed spiritual vision, he understood that Jehovah hated badness and that in due time the wicked would be punished.​—1 Corinthians 2:14, 15.
How vital it is that you allow the Bible to help you focus on the reality of life! Jehovah reminds us that he is not blind to what wicked people do. The Bible teaches: “Do not be misled: God is not one to be mocked. For whatever a man is sowing, this he will also reap . . . So let us not give up in doing what is fine.” (Galatians 6:7-9) Jehovah will put the wicked “on slippery ground”; he will make them “fall to ruins.” (Psalm 73:18) Divine justice will always prevail in the end.
An unceasing program of spiritual feeding at Jehovah’s table and wholesome association with God’s people will help you to strengthen your faith and overcome discouragement or other negative feelings. (Hebrews 10:25) Like Asaph, by staying close to God, you can experience his loving support. Asaph continues: “I am constantly with you; you have taken hold of my right hand. With your counsel you will lead me, and afterward you will take me even to glory.” (Psalm 73:23, 24) One Christian who was abused as a child learned the wisdom of these words. “Keeping in close association with the congregation,” she says, “showed me a different side to life. I saw very clearly that the Christian elders were loving, that they were not policemen but shepherds.” Yes, compassionate Christian elders play a vital role in dispelling damaging emotions.​—Isaiah 32:1, 2; 1 Thessalonians 2:7, 8.
Accept Jehovah’s Counsel
Baruch, the secretary of Jeremiah the prophet, sighed because of the emotional stress of his assignment. However, Jehovah kindly focused Baruch’s attention on reality. “‘As for you, you keep seeking great things for yourself. Do not keep on seeking. For here I am bringing in a calamity upon all flesh,’ is the utterance of Jehovah, ‘and I will give you your soul as a spoil in all the places to which you may go.’”​—Jeremiah 45:2-5.
With forthright language Jehovah explained that Baruch’s own selfish pursuits were the source of his frustration. Baruch could not find joy in his God-given assignment while at the same time seeking great things for himself. You too may find that a really positive step toward overcoming discouragement is to avoid distractions and embrace the peace of mind that comes from godly contentment.​—Philippians 4:6, 7.
Widowed Naomi did not allow distress to immobilize her in Moab when her husband and two sons died. There is indication, however, that for a time she did have bitter feelings with regard to herself and her two daughters-in-law. In sending them away, Naomi said: “It is very bitter to me because of you, that the hand of Jehovah has gone out against me.” Again, when she reached Bethlehem, she insisted: “Do not call me Naomi [“My Pleasantness”]. Call me Mara [“Bitter”], for the Almighty has made it very bitter for me.”​—Ruth 1:13, 20.
Naomi, however, did not isolate herself in tents of bereavement​—away from Jehovah and his people. In Moab she had heard that “Jehovah had turned his attention to his people by giving them bread.” (Ruth 1:6) She understood that the best place for her was with Jehovah’s people. Together with her daughter-in-law Ruth, Naomi thereafter returned to Judah and skillfully guided Ruth as to how she should act toward their kinsman Boaz, her repurchaser.
Similarly today, loyal ones who have lost their mates in death are coping successfully with the emotional stress by keeping busy within the Christian congregation. Like Naomi, they keep applying themselves to spiritual matters, daily reading God’s Word.
Benefits From Applying Godly Wisdom
These Bible accounts provide insight into how one can cope with the effects of negative feelings. Asaph sought help at Jehovah’s sanctuary and patiently waited on Jehovah. Baruch responded to counsel and avoided materialistic distractions. Naomi kept active among Jehovah’s people, preparing the young woman Ruth for her privileges in worship of the true God.​—1 Corinthians 4:7; Galatians 5:26; 6:4.
You can overcome discouragement and other negative feelings by dwelling on the divine victories Jehovah has given his people, individually and collectively. To that end, meditate on Jehovah’s supreme act of love in providing the ransom for you. Appreciate the genuine love of the Christian brotherhood. Focus on your life in God’s new world just ahead. And may you respond like Asaph: “As for me, the drawing near to God is good for me. In the Sovereign Lord Jehovah I have placed my refuge, to declare all your works.”​—Psalm 73:28.

