Riches Can Be Yours!
 1. Why consider regular pioneering?
1 Do you seek greater joy and fulfillment in your life? Do you find pleasure and satisfaction in helping others? Do you desire to increase your service to Jehovah? If you answer yes to any of these questions, then you should consider regular pioneering. Of course, family and other Scriptural responsibilities, as well as health and physical limitations, must be taken into consideration.
 2. Mention some of the spiritual riches that regular pioneers acquire.
2 Solomon’s divinely inspired writings associate the blessing of Jehovah with material riches. (Prov. 10:22) Today, Jehovah’s blessing results primarily in spiritual riches. Such riches overflow for regular pioneers. For instance, they experience the greater happiness of giving to others as they ‘buy out the time’ from personal pursuits. (Col. 4:5; Acts 20:35) Their labors of love are noticed and appreciated by Jehovah. Such “treasures in heaven” will never diminish in value. (Matt. 6:20; Heb. 6:10) Furthermore, as pioneers keep a ‘simple eye’ and trust in Jehovah to provide necessities, their relationship with him grows stronger.​—Matt. 6:22, 25, 32; Heb. 13:5, 6.
 3. What contrast exists between the pursuit of spiritual riches and the pursuit of material riches?
3 The pursuit of material riches often leads to “many senseless and hurtful desires.” (1 Tim. 6:9, 10; Jas. 5:1-3) This is never the case with the blessing of Jehovah. Spending a significant portion of their time in the ministry helps regular pioneers maintain spiritual balance and a clear focus on the more important things. (Phil. 1:10) One brother left his time-consuming career as an engineer to pioneer. He said: “I found my secular work stressful. Not so with pioneering. I now get to help people and teach them the truth. This has been far more fulfilling and challenging.”
 4. How are regular pioneers blessed while bringing blessings to others?
4 Blessings to Others: Today, everyone faces “critical times hard to deal with.” (2 Tim. 3:1) People everywhere desperately need hope. Kingdom proclaimers rejoice at seeing firsthand that the look of despair on people’s faces can change to that of optimism as they respond to the good news. How great that joy is for regular pioneers, who devote more than 800 hours each year to this rescue work!​—1 Tim. 4:16.
5, 6. What may enable you to become a regular pioneer?
5 Have you been giving serious thought to serving as a regular pioneer? It may require “buying out the opportune time” from less important pursuits. (Eph. 5:15, 16) Many have done so and have simplified their lives, enabling them to cut back on secular work in order to devote more time to Kingdom interests. Can you arrange your affairs to join them?
6 Request wisdom from Jehovah to work out a practical schedule. (Jas. 1:5) What blessings can you expect in return? Spiritual riches in abundance! Jehovah will also bless you materially with what you need. (Matt. 6:33) Those who test Jehovah out in this respect will receive “a blessing until there is no more want.”​—Mal. 3:10.

