Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting May 12
Song 134
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the May 1 Watchtower and the May Awake!
15 min: We Can Cope With Any Trial! Talk based on the June 15, 2005, Watchtower, pages 30-1. Invite selected publishers to comment on how Jehovah helped them to cope with a particular trial.
20 min: Can You Auxiliary Pioneer During the Summer? Audience discussion. Review pages 112-13 in the Organized book, outlining the requirements. Invite those who have used vacation from work to auxiliary pioneer to comment on the blessings they enjoyed. Ask those who have auxiliary pioneered during school vacation to comment on how others encouraged and assisted them. How did auxiliary pioneering help them to progress spiritually? What joys did they experience? Encourage all those who qualify to consider pioneering during the summer months.
Song 187
Week Starting May 19
Song 47
10 min: Local announcements. Review Question Box.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Riches Can Be Yours!”a Comment on the qualifications for regular pioneers, found on pages 113-14 of the Organized book. Those who wish to begin pioneering on September 1 should submit their application as soon as possible.
Song 206
Week Starting May 26
Song 103
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for May. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the June 1 Watchtower and the June Awake!
15 min: “Take My Yoke Upon You.”b As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
20 min: Offer the Bible Teach book during June. Talk and demonstrations. Review some of the sample presentations from the January 2006 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Include a two-part demonstration. Show how the book might be offered and then how to make a return visit with the goal of starting a Bible study.
Song 169
Week Starting June 2
Song 221
10 min: Local announcements.
20 min: Those of Faithful Acts Receive Many Blessings. (Prov. 28:20) Talk and audience discussion by the secretary. Outline how Jehovah has blessed the congregation’s efforts to increase its activity during March, April, and May, and give commendation. Announce the number that auxiliary pioneered, how many new Bible studies were started, and other good things accomplished in the ministry. Invite audience to relate experiences in connection with the Memorial and the campaign to distribute invitations. Outstanding field service experiences may be reenacted. Briefly interview two or three publishers regarding the blessings they enjoyed as auxiliary pioneers.
15 min: “Be Ready for Every Good Work.”c Invite audience to relate how and when they prepare for the door-to-door ministry.
Song 44
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

