





Can You See the Invisible God?




“GOD is a Spirit,” invisible to human eyes. (John 4:24) Yet, the Bible reports that some people have, in a sense, seen God. (Hebrews 11:27) How is that possible? Can you really see “the invisible God”?—Colossians 1:15.
Compare our situation to that of a person who is blind from birth. Does his blindness completely prevent him from understanding the world around him? Not entirely. A blind person receives information in various ways that enable him to perceive the people, objects, and activities that surround him. “Vision isn’t in the eyes,” said one blind man. “It’s in the mind.”
In a similar way, although you cannot use your physical eyes to see God, you can use “the eyes of your heart” to see him. (Ephesians 1:18) Consider three ways that you might do so.



“CLEARLY SEEN FROM THE WORLD’S CREATION”

A blind person often has heightened senses of hearing and touch, which he employs to perceive the things he cannot see. Similarly, you can use your physical senses to examine the world around you and to perceive the unseen God who created it. “His invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made.”—Romans 1:20.
For example, think about our home. Earth is uniquely designed for us not merely to eke out an existence but to enjoy life. When we feel a gentle breeze, bask in the warmth of the sun, taste a succulent fruit, or hear the soothing song of birds, we are delighted. Do these gifts not reveal our Creator’s thoughtfulness, tenderness, and generosity?
What can you learn about God from what you see in the physical universe? For one thing, the heavens reveal God’s power. Recent scientific evidence suggests not only that the universe is expanding but also that it is doing so at an ever faster rate! As you look up at the night sky, consider: What is the source of this energy driving the expansion and acceleration of the universe? The Bible tells us that the Creator has “vast dynamic energy.” (Isaiah 40:26) God’s creation shows us that he is “the Almighty”—the One “great in power.”—Job 37:23.



“THE ONE WHO HAS EXPLAINED HIM”

A mother of two visually impaired children says: “Speech is one of the most important aspects of their learning. Tell them everything you see and hear, [and] be prepared to give a running commentary. You are their eyes.” Likewise, although “no man has seen God at any time,” God’s Son, Jesus, “who is at the Father’s side is the one who has explained Him.” (John 1:18) As God’s first creation and only-begotten Son, Jesus became our “eyes” for peering into the heavens. He is the best source of information about the invisible God.
Note a few of the things that Jesus, who spent aeons with his Father, explained about God:
God works tirelessly. “My Father has kept working until now.”—John 5:17.

God knows our needs. “Your Father knows what you need even before you ask him.”—Matthew 6:8.

God graciously provides for us. “Your Father who is in the heavens . . . makes his sun rise on both the wicked and the good and makes it rain on both the righteous and the unrighteous.”—Matthew 5:45.

God values us individually. “Two sparrows sell for a coin of small value, do they not? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father’s knowledge. But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. So have no fear; you are worth more than many sparrows.”—Matthew 10:29-31.





A HUMAN WHO REFLECTED THE INVISIBLE GOD

People who are blind often grasp concepts in ways that are different from those of people with sight. A blind person may perceive a shadow, not as a dark area without sunlight, but as a cool area shielded from the sun’s warmth. Just as a person who is totally blind cannot see shadow or sunlight, we cannot understand Jehovah on our own. Therefore, Jehovah provided a human who perfectly mirrored His qualities and personality.
That human was Jesus. (Philippians 2:7) Jesus not only talked about his Father but also showed us what God is like. Jesus’ disciple Philip asked: “Lord, show us the Father.” In reply, Jesus said: “Whoever has seen me has seen the Father also.” (John 14:8, 9) What can you “see” about the Father through Jesus’ actions?
Jesus was warm, humble, and approachable. (Matthew 11:28-30) His refreshing personality drew people to him. Jesus felt the pain others felt, and he shared their joys. (Luke 10:17, 21; John 11:32-35) As you read or hear Bible accounts about Jesus, engage your senses and make the events come alive in your mind. If you meditate on the way Jesus dealt with people, you will be able to see God’s wonderful personality more clearly and be drawn to Him.



FITTING THE PIECES TOGETHER

Regarding the way a blind person experiences the world, one author states: “He or she receives information in bits and pieces, from several sources (touch, smell, hearing, and so forth), and somehow has to put that information together into a whole.” Similarly, as you observe God’s creative works, read what Jesus said about his Father, and analyze the way Jesus reflected God’s qualities, a beautiful picture of Jehovah will emerge. He will become more real to you.
Job, who lived in ancient times, had that very experience. At first he spoke “without understanding.” (Job 42:3) But after carefully considering God’s marvels of creation, Job was moved to say: “My ears have heard about you, but now I do see you with my eyes.”—Job 42:5.
‘If you search for Jehovah, he will let himself be found by you’

The same can be true for you. “If you search for [Jehovah], he will let himself be found by you.” (1 Chronicles 28:9) Jehovah’s Witnesses will be glad to help you to search for and find the invisible God.



