Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., APRIL 15, 1917 


No. 8 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


Corroborative Evidence that 
" TIMES OF THE GENTILES" HAVE ENDED 
The Watch Tower, from time to time, has set forth the 
proof that the "Times of the Gentiles" have ended; that the 
monarchs of earth have had their day, and that Messiah's 
kingdom i3 at hand! We submit herewith some corroborative 
proof. 

From a legal viewpoint, the period of the Gentile dominion 
ended with October, 1914. Speaking in plain phrase, the 
world there came to an end! True to the words of the great 
Master, "The nations were angry, and thy wrath is come:" 
(Revelation 11:18) At the very end of the Gentile times 
the nations became angry and began to war with each other, 
and the great storm cf destruction has increased in its fury 
even beyond the imaginations of men. The loss of human 
life and earthly treasure lias staggered the world. The war 
still spreads, and without doubt will involve all the nations 
to a greater or less extent. 

Looking down to this very day, the Prophet of the Lord 
said, "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven 
set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and the 
kingdom shall not be left to other people; but it shall break 
in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand 
for ever." (Daniel 2:44) .Gradually, but surely, the present 
kingdoms of earth are being broken into pieces. Each day 
some explosion further weakens the walls of the present order 
of things, and soon the entire structure will fall with a great 
crash; and upon the ruins thereof will be erected the kingdom 
of righteousness, under the supervision of the great Messiah, 
and this kingdom will stand forever. 

REVOLUTION IN BUSSIA 
The Russian monarchy has fallen, no doubt never to rise 
again t With startling * and dramatic rapidity the change 
came — almost in one day. However, we do not understand 
that the revolution in Russia i= a fulfilment of the prophetic 
statement made by our Lord concerning the great revolution 
that is to follow the world war; but it shows , the tendency 
of the people* and their determination no longer to be dominated
 by autocrats, aristocrats or tyrants. When the rulers 
discover that they are losing their power, there will in all 
probability be an effort made to bring about peace, and there 
will probably be some make-shift proposition brought forward 
and adopted. But when all shall say, "Peace and safety, 
then sudden destruction coraeth upon them, and they shall 
not escape." — 1 Thessakmians 5:3. 

Even the worldly-wise see that this must be the inevitableresult
. An editorial writer in one of the leading New York 
dallies says: 

"The revolutions are not going to be confined to Russia. 
Hollweg sees and says that there is a new freedom coming 
for Germany as well as for Russia. 

"France has long had her freedom, but will undoubtedly 
progress further in the direction of Socialism. 

"The revolution :n England will be as complete as 
elsewhere, hut probably not spectacular or violent. The 
English people accomplish their revolutions, as they do 
everything else they undertake, in a stolid, undemonstrative
 way, but they accomplish them just the same. 

"If Russia was an autocracy, England was an aristocracy
. Everything in England has been for the benefit 
of the ruling or aristocratic classes. These aristocratic 
classes had a trust — a control in politics, in land-ownership
, in tax-exemption, in social recognition, in all kinds 
of benefits and privileges, 

"The mass of the people were reduced to the point 
of penury, and were leaving the British Isles in droves 
in order to find elsewhere the opportunity which they 
could not secure at home. 

"This Aristocratic Trust operated according to the 
accepted methods of the trust and absorbed into the 
trust any man who showed exceptional ability or ac* 
cumulated formidable wealth, ennobling him, making him 
a knight or a baron, and so aligning him and his influence 
and power with the aristocracy, instead of with the people
, from whom he came and with whom he should nave 
naturally been in sympathy. 

"Thug the Aristocratic Trust perpetuated its privileges 
and fortified its position. It rode the tna»sfc& ahnost a» 
cruelly as did the French aristocrats in the years that 
preceded the French Revolution. 

"No doubt that situation will be destroyed, and probably
 has been destroyed. The people of England will 
never be content to go back to the conditions that prevailed
 before the war. 


Messiah's Kingtk>m ib at Hand 

"How much further the revolution will go is a question
. If the war continues long enough, and the people 
of the various countries become sufficiently resentful at 
their rulers, we will have revolutions of riot and revolutions
 of repudiation — revolutions which will set up new 
governments and refuse to be bound by the obligations 
which the old governments incurred. 

* There ought to be a revolution in Germany as well 
as in Russia and in England, and there probably will be." 
SEASONS FOB GENEEAL REVOLUTION 
The time will come, and that ere long, when the peoples 
of the warring nations will awaken to the fearful condition 
brought upon them by the war. Soon they must realize that 
the able-bodied, wealth-producing men have been either killed 
or else rendered practically useless by the long and dreadful 
conflict; and the cost of living has greatly increased and is 
likely to go still higher j tnat their opportunities for earning 
money have greatly decreased; and that added to this will 
be the great bur Jen of taxation created by the war. Revolution
, repudiation and destruction are certain to follow. 
TOO LAEQE FOE HUMAN MIND TO GRASP 
The Chicago American recently published, editorially, the 
following figures concerning the debt now upon the nations 
of Europe as a result of the war; viz: — 

"Tlie total debt of the war in Europe is now one 
hundred twenty thousand million dollars ($120,000,000- 
000 ) . This means that in the years to come, barring revolution
 and repudiation of debts, the people of Europe 
already harassed, half starved, killed and wounded in 
millions, must oarry on their backs an appalling debt of 
$120,000,000,000. 

"The interest on this amount, at only o% — and most 
of it was borrowed at a higher rate— ^amounts to six 
thousand millions of dollars every year. 

"The people of the warring nations must pay this six 
thousand millions every year— six times the total national
 debt of the United States at present; and after 
they have paid the six thousand millions of dollars a year 
in interest, they will still owe the one hundred and twenty 
thousand millions." 
These figures represent a condition too enormous for the 
human mind to fully grasp. But by way of aiding the mind 
in this respect* we call attention to the fact that — according 
to the best information obtainable — twenty thousand million 
persons have lived on the earth during the six thousand years 
from Adam's day until now; thus a war debt of $120,000,000,- 
000 is equivalent to $6 per head for every man, woman and 
child that has ever lived. It is hardly necessary to suggest 
that revolution and repudiation of this great debt will naturally
 follow. 

WHO ABE RESPONSIBLE?— KINGS OB CLERGY 7 
The common people have not of their own choice madt? 
this enormous debt. It was not the common people who sought 
the war. Of the millions that have died upon the battle-fields, 
and the millions of widows and orphans that have wept at 
home, not one of them has had a voice in determining whether 
or not the people should go to war. The kings and rulers 
have prepared for war, and have sent their subjects forth to 
war without; even asking their consent. The king3 from time 
immemorial have claimed to rule by divine right, and that 
therefore whatever action they would take, whether for war 
or for peace, would be right. It has long been a part of the 
unwritten laws of these nations that "The king can do no 
wrong." 

But hack of the kings there is another clasB of men who 
are even more responsible, and therefore more reprehensible; 
namely, the clergy class! For more than fifteen centuries 
these, as the spiritual advisers of the kings of Europe, have 
told them that they— the kings — rule by divine right. These 
clergy have supported their kings and rulers without regard 
to whether they were right or wrong. The clergy have shielded 
themselves behind their pious garbs and encouraged, advised 
and abetted the kings in their unrighteous and murderous 
work. The day of retribution is at hand, and God's wrath 
will fall upon 'both kings and clergy. 

THB KINGS VERSUS THE PEOPLE 
Charles Edward Russell, a writer of national fame, through 
the public press, recently said: 

"The kings of the earth conspire to keep monarchy 
still throned. The people of the earth arise and kick 
all. these devices into forgotten fragments. 

"One of the most colossal of these astute plotting* 


(H5-U6) 


[60701 


April 15. 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(116 117) 


went to pieces when the Russian people got tired of the 
fantastic yoke of the king business and cast the thing 
far from them. 

"Ever since that day in July, 1789, when the Bastille 
fell in Paris, there has been a royal trade union to keep 
the kings on their jobs. 

"Whatever their countries might be forced to do, or 
seem to do, after that, all the kings of Europe have been 
bound together by a secret alliance and the ritual of 
their trade union. 

"One way to promote trade interests and keep the 
jobs was to link up the various thrones by carefully made 
marriages. 

"Hence the German rulers, having an over-supply of 
princelings on hand, started in early upon a deliberate, 
fixed policy to Germanize Europe. 

"After a century of that policy the result is seen in 
the fact that every king of Europe is either a German 
or has much German blood in his veins. 

"Wherever an heir to a throne has been sighted as approaching
 the marriageable age a German has been picked 
out for a consort. 

"To mention only a few of the achievements, the 
king of England is a German. For generations German 
has been the household language of the British royal 
family. Queen Victoria^ spoke English with a marked 
German accent; German* was her native tongue. Even 
Edward VII. was not perfectly at home in the language 
of the country he ruled. 

"Three members of the British royal family are now 
bearing arms against Gxeat Britain, because they are 
German princes as well as British, and their German 
allegiance naturally seems first to them. 

"The queen of Belgium is a German. The queen of 
Holland is of German descent and is married to a German. 

"The poor little man just taken by the scruff and lifted 
from the throne of Russia is seven-eighths German. His 
empress, who had to be hidden from the indignant Russian
 populace, was one of the vast army of German 
princesses that have been distributed about fiurope. 

"The king of Italy is largely German. The king of 
Spain is also one of the Hapsburgs. 

"The queen of Greece is the Kaiser's sister. It was 
the German Queen of Greece that ruined that country 
in the interest of Germany. 

"She kept Greece from observing its treaty with Serbia
; kept it from its obvious policy, which was to join 
the allies; and finally drove its king to plunge it into its 
present state of pitiable wreckage. 

'It was the German empress of Russia that led and 
inspired the pro-German party there through the most 
astounding drama of intrigue, treachery and betrayals 
that was ever known among men. 

"All the time that the government of Russia was 
pledging faith to the allies and the soldiers of Russia 
were ostensibly fighting on that side, the real and unseen 
power behind all this was working for Germany. 

"It was the pro^German party that armed the Russian 
troops with sticks and crowbars for guns, provided their 
cannon with ammunition that fitted German artillery, 
but not their own, sent them to destruction or defeat, 
surrendered them by the thousands, and soaked the soil 
of Poland with their blood, needlessly sacrificed. 

"The extent of this colossal treason staggers the 
imagination and makes all the fiction in the world look 
tame. It has greatly prolonged the war, cost hundreds 
of thousands of lives, wasted millions of treasure and 
laid upon the patient people a burden under which they 
will stagger for generations. 

"All for the sake of the Hohenzollerns and the supremacy
 of the kings, 

"Russia has awakened from its monarchial trance. 
A democracy at last, she has now tak«h he* true place 
with the other democracies, fighting the mad dog of 
monarchism, now in its lair. 

"They sang 'The Marseillaise' in the streets of Petrograd
, and at the news all democrats around the world 
sang with them. 

"They had reason to sing. These democrats have left 
Germany and Austria the only autocrats in Europe. 
They have made the issue of this war so clear that no 
longer can either a liar or a coward side-step it. 

"It is to be democracy against autocracy, or the people 
against the thrones. 

"The last great struggle, clean-cut, sure, unmistakable 
— the world for the kings or the world for its people." 


BUND TO MASTER'S PRINCIPLES 

The clergy have a great opportunity at this time (were 
they awake to their privileges) of comforting the people and 
telling them what this trouble means, and of admonishing 
them, in the language of the Lord, to "seek meekness, seek 
righteousness!'^ They have a groat opportunity to point the 
people to Messiah's kingdom and to teach the principles of 
love which he taught. But alas, they are unfaithful to the 
high office which they occupy! 

We quote below the words of some of these to show that 
while they claim to be followers of the Prince of Peace, and 
pose before the people as the teachers of the message of the 
Lord Jesus, their words show that they are blinded to the 
great principles for which he stood. 

The Rev. Dr. Newell Dwight Hillis, Pastor of Plymouth 
Ohurch, Brooklyn, in an address before the Union Branch of 
the Y. M. C. A. in the Bronx, N. Y. City, on March 25. 
according to the public press, said: 

"I am willing to forgive the Germans for their atrocities
 just as soon as they are all shot. If you would give 
me happiness, just give me the sight of the Kaiser, Von 
Hindenberg and Von Tirpitz hanging by a rope. If we 
forgive Germany after the war, I shall* think the whole 
universe has gone wrong." 
The Rev. Dr. Frederick W. Adams, speaking at the 23d 
Street Branch of the Y. M. C. A., N. Y. City, said: 

"If we enter the war we will be fighting for the ideals 
of the Declaration of Independence. It is the Christian 
duty of America to declare war upon Germany." 
EULERS THREATENED BY SOCIALISTS 
The Socialist-democratic party of Russia, in its official 
organ, The, Pravda, published on March 25th a resolution by 
its Central Committee* inciting the soldiers to leave the 
trenches and go over to the enemy. This, they assert, will 
immediately evoke a fraternal response on the part of the 
Germans, and the war among the nations will promptly 
collapse, enabling the army and the people to devote themselves 
to the overthrow of the ruling classes. 

FAMINES AND PESTILENCES TO FOLLOW 
When our Lord Jesus was asked by his disciples what would 
be the proof of the end of the age, and the setting up of his 
kingdom, among other things he said: "Nation shall ri^e 
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall 
be famines and pestilences and earthquakes in divers places." 
We see now a partial fulfillment of this prophetic statement, 
in that practically all the nations of earth are engaged in 
deadly conflict. The available food supply is everywhere decreasing
 and the cost of living increasing, so much so that 
today there are thousands of persons suffering from hunger, 
even in America. For a number of years Germany had been 
able to produce about 35 bushels of wheat per acre. After 
the war began she was unable to bring fertilizers from South 
America, with the result that in the first year of the war the 
land produced less that 25 bushels per acre, and in the second 
year, the average production was only about 14 bushels per 
acre. 

In 1915 Canada produced 270 million bushels of wheat, 
whereas in 1916 only 155 million bushels were produced. 
Food supplies along all other lines, such as potatoes, onions, 
and other necessities are likewise much less than they were 
a few years ago. 

HOW TO KEEP DOWN HIGH COST OP LTyTNG 

This suggests that everywhere the people will be forced to 
practise economy. The day of luxury has passed, so far as 
the present order of things is concerned. Dr. Harvey W. 
Wiley, the well-known food expert, for many years in the 
employ of the U. S. Government, says: 

Whether we remain at peace or adventure on war, 
the Government should take over our food supplies. 

"Every family in the country must be able to buy 
staple foods at fixed prices. 

"Already one-tetitfr of the people of the United States 
are starving. Such starvation is largely due to stupidity, 
"Even today one dollar Bpent on" Indian corn will 
keep a working man well nourished for one month. Five 
dollars will supply four weeks' satisfying food for an 
average family. 

"Plain living? Of course! But you may take it from 
me 7 the war hp<* killM luxury for this generation. 

"Humanity is entering upon such a period of enforced 
economy as the world has never seen. Europe feels this 
today. We may realize it tomorrow. 

THE BALANCED RATION 
"When one dollar can purchase only 50 cents Worth 
of fpod the man who earns and the woman who spends 


£6071] 


(117-122) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


must learn what foods furnish most nourishment before
 they buy. 

"Corn bread, corn mush, any one of a hundred corn 
meal dishes with a baked potato and an apple supply a 
perfectly balanced diet. 

"For children miik is also necessary — one pint of 
milk per child per day. 

HEALTH FOE FOT7B CENTS 

"I will guarantee to keep any child in perfect health, 
growth and enjoyment on a daily ration of one-half pound 
corn meal and one pint of milk a day— cost four cents. 

"That plan steals the threat from food wars or railway
 strikes, and puts the quietus on the question of the 
high cost of living. 

HUNGRY CAN'T WOBK 

"A hungry child cannot be good; neither can it work 
or study properly. 

"My household of four makes four dinners from a 
five-pound roast, changing to a chicken on Sunday. The 
rest of our diet is fruit, potatoes and cereals. We work 
hard and are never ill. 

"My farmer, who earns one- twentieth of my wages, 
spends not less that five times as much per person on food 
for his household. 

PREJUDICE A FACTOR 

"My corn meal mush costs six cents a pound; his 
breakfast cereal sells for 25c a pound. 

"I offered to supply his corn and wheat free. 

,f( Nb thank you/ said he, 'my wife wouldn't stand 
for it. If we ate as you do, all the neighbors would 
make remarks/ 

"There lies the chief reason for the high cost of living
 — prejudice and fashion." 


A WORD TO THE WISE 

In view of the present conditions, we suggest to the friends 
of the truth that it would be well to begin the practise of 
economy along the lines suggested by the above food expert, 
and to lay in a supply of plain foods, such as corn meal. 

The facts coming from every source present a very dark 
picture, if you view it only from the standpoint of the world; 
but when we take the Lord's standpoint, it rejoices our hearts, 
because we see that the present unrighteous institutions of the 
earth are going down in the worst time of trouble the world 
has ever known, and that this marks the hour of deliverance 
for the last members of the body of Christ and the early establishment
 of Messiah's kingdom, which will bring peace and 
comfort, happiness and plenty, health and joy to every one 
who loves righteousness and will do righteously. 

MESSIAH'S KINGDOM IS HERE 

Let us, therefore, who are "children of the day," while we 
yet have opportunity, tell the people the glad tidings of the 
blessings which are 30 near at hand! This is the time for 
God's people to declare the day of his vengeance; that is to say, 
to point out to the world that this great trouble upon mankind
 is God's vengeance upon the selfish and wicked institutions
, and that the fall of "Babylon" and all systems of 
unrighteousness, which soon must take place, will make way 
for the deliverance of the people from the thraldom in which 
they have been held for centuries. This is the time above 
al) times for Christian people to comfort those who mourn 
and who desire to be taught the meaning of present events. 

We urge the dear brethren everywhere, therefore, to be 
zealous and active in the promulgation of the glad tidings 
of great joy. 'Then look up and lift up your heads, for 
your deliverance draweth nigh!" 


JESUS ANOINTED AT BETHANY 

[This article, excepting the first paragraph, was a reprint of that entitled "A Bottle of Spikenard, Very Costly," published in 

issue of April 1, 1899. The first paragraph was a reprint from article entitled "Perfume Very 

Precious," published in issue of April 1, 1905. Please see the articles named.] 


SOMETIME, SOMEWHERE, EACH FINDS GETHSEMANE 


"In golden youth, when seems the earth 
A summer land of songs and mirth, 
And not a shadow lurks in sight, 
We do not know it, but there lies, 
Somewhere, veiled under evening skies, 
A Garden all must sometime see, 

Gethsemane, Gethsemane ! 

Somewhere his own Gethsemane! 

"With joyous steps we go our ways, 
Love lends a halo to the days, 
Light sorrows sail like clouds afar, 
We laugh and say, *How strong we are!' 
We hurry on, and hurrying go 
Close to the border land of woe, 
That waits for you and waits for me ; 

Gethsemane, Gethsemane ! 

Forever waits Gethsemane! 


"Down shadowy lanes, across strange streams, 
Bridged over by our broken dreams, 
Behind the misty cape of years, 
Close to the great salt-font of tears, 
The Garden lies; strive as you may, 
You cannot miss it in your way. 
All paths that have been or shall be 
Pass somewhere through Gethsemane. 

"All those who journey, soon or late, 
Must pass within the Garden's gate, 
Must kneel alone in darkness there 
And battle with some fierce despair. 
God pity those who cannot say, 
'Not mine, but thine,' who only pray, 
'Let this cup pass!' and cannot see 
The purpose in Gethsemane. 

Gethsemane, Gethsemane ! 

God help us through Gethsemane ! " 


JESUS WELCOMED AS KING 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Hosanna in the Highest," published in issue of March 15, 1905, which please see.] 


JESUS THE SERVANT OF ALL 

[This article, with the exception of the paragraphs printed below, was a reprint from article entitled 

Example," published in issue of April 1, 1899, which please see.] 


"I Have Given You An 


The scene of today's lesson was the "Upper Room," and the 
occasion the anniversary celebration of the Jewish Passover 
supper, on the beginning of the 14th day of Niaan — which 
day ended at 6 P. M. on Friday. The preparations had been 
completed during the day for observance of the type, instituted
 the night before Israel's departure from Egypt; and as 
the Master sat down with the twelve to eat the supper, he 
spake, saying, "I have greatly desired to eat this Passover 
with you before I Buffer." — Luke 22:15. 

The Passover lamb typified "the Lamb of God," our Lord 
Jesus, and the eating of it pointed to the fact that the followers
 of our Lord throughout the Gospel age would feed in 
their hearts upon the Lamb of God, thus hy faith appropriating 
to themselves the blessings secured to them through his death ; 
"For even Christ, our Passover, is sacrificed for us; therefore 
let us keep the feast." 

But inasmuch as Jesus was the antitypical Lamb, it was 
appropriate that the type should after this cease to be observed
. Hence it was that Jesus, following this last typical 
supper, established the Memorial supper of unleavened bread 
and fruit of the vine, which symbolized his broken body and 
shed blood. 


[6072] 


April 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(122-124) 


LACK Or HUMILITY CAUSED LOSS OF GREAT BLESSIVCt 

The apostles, doubtless still filled with enthusiasm from the 
remarkable events of the week, were at a loss to understand 
the sadness of our Lord. Had they not witnessed the feast 
in the home of Lazarus, Martha and Mary, and the breaking 
of the alabaster box of costly ointment upon our Lord? Had 
they not witnessed his triumphal entry into Jerusalem amid 
the plaudits of the people, who exclaimed, "Blessed is he that 
cometh in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest"? 
They had heard the Pharisees ask Jesus to put a stop to the 
demonstration, and the Master's reply that if the people should 
hold their peace the very -stones would cry out. (Luke 19:40) 
To fulfil the prophecy (Zechariah 9:9) there must be a shout, 
and there was a great shout. 

Moreover, had not the whole city been in commotion 7 And 
had they not accompanied the Master into the Temple and 
witnessed his driving of the money-changers therefrom? And 
when the Pharisees, Sadducees and others tried to confuse 
Jesus, they had observed how wisely he had turned all their 
arguments upon themselves, so that they dared not ask him 
any more questions, fearing lest their position would appear 
all the more untenable. 

These thoughts, added to the one that the kingdom was 
approaching and that places would be apportioned, were uppermost
 in their minds and were no doubt partly responsible 
for the rivalry which sprang up among them, as a result of 
which, when they came to the upper room, they had not the 
humility of mind to take thought of serving either the Master 
or one another. It was the custom of the well-to-do Jews to 
have a servant to minister to the comfort of the guests; but 
there was no servant present on this occasion, and none of the 
apostles had the humility of mind to offer to be the servant. 
How great a blessing was thus missed by these disciples! 
And what a remarkable opportunity was thus afforded the 
Master to teach a lesson in humility! 

"HAV1HG LOVED HIS OWK, HI! LOVED THEM TJNTO THE 
END" 

Apparently our Lord let the situation progress to the full. 
He waited until supper was being served (not ended, as in 
our Common Version) ; then, arising from the table, he laid 
aside his mantle and secured a basin and a towel. Girding up 
his garments so as not to interfere with his movements, he 
began to wash their feet. 

We can well imagine the surprise of the apostles as they 
watched the procedure, noting the Master go from the feet 
of one to the feet of another, as they extended from the 
couches upon which the apostles reclined. 

The account of today's Study opens up by declaring, "Having
 loved his own which were in the world, he loved them 
unto the end." Truly, as Jesus himself said, "Greater love 
hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for 
his friends"! Again, he said, 'I am the Good Shepherd; the 
Good Shepherd giveth his life for the sheep." The tender care 
he had for his sheep, and the untiring zeal which he manifested
 in their preparation for future service, was fast consuming
 his vitality. On the cross the pouring out of his 
life was fully completed. "He poured out his soul unto 
death"! 


The washing of the disciples' feet by our Lord was a sharp 
reproof for their neglect to wash his feet and the feet of one 
another. Doubtless they were very silent for a time while 
the service proceeded. The lesson was having the designed 
effect; but the Lord's words to Peter, "What I do thou knowest 
not now, but thou shalt know hereafter," clearly show that 
the depth of the lesson could not be fully appreciated at 
that time. 

Nevertheless Peter protested, saying, "Thou shalt never 
wash my feet!" The noble Peter had too much reverence to 
wish the Lord to be his servant. But when Jesus said, "If 
I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me," this thoroughgoing
, whole-hearted disciple urged, "Lord, not my feet only, 
but also my hands and my head!" But the Master explained 
that "He who hath been bathed hath no need except to wash 
his feet."— V. 10. Diaglott. 

The intimation was that as St. Peter had bathed, which 
wa3 in accordance with the Jewish requirement of the putting 
away of all filth at the beginning of the Passover season, 
he now merely needed the rinsing of his feet, the cleansing of 
the members that came into close contact with the dusty 
highways of that time. 

THE HEINOUS SIN OF JUDAS 

The last six words of Verse 10, "Ye are clean, hut not 
all," referring to the foul conspirator Judas, clearly show 
that our Lord also had in mind another cleansing, a much 
higher one, of which thi3 washing of their feet and their 
previous .bath were but the figures — "the washing of water by 
the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious church, 
not having spot or wrinkle or any sueh thing." — Ephesians 
5:26, 27. 

Although our Lord Jesus "knew who should betray him" 
(V, 11), and that Judas had already bargained with the 
chief priests, and was merely waiting for the opportune 
moment to carry out his malevolent design, yet Jesus did 
not pass him by, but washed his feet with the others. 

Ivone but Judas understood the reference to himself, or 
the subsequent words recorded in Verses 18, 26-28 — these, 
however, not being a part of today's Study. Although our 
Lord went so far as to quote the very prophecy which marked 
Judas and his disloyalty — "He that eateth bread with me hath 
lifted up his heel against me" (Psalm 41:9) — none of these 
things moved the arch-betrayer, none appealed to him in such 
a manner as to change his wicked course. 

Thus Jesus explained that it would be one of his own chosen 
twelve who would betray him — one of those who would later 
dip with him in the dish, partaking of the same supper, the 
same bread, the same roasted lamb. All this signified a very 
heinous breach of friendship. It was most sad to contemplate 
that the traitor should be one who had been a bosom friend 
and disciple. 

"'Unto the end!' Thine own? 
dear and blessed Master ! Can it be 

That, nevermore alone, 
Our weary hearts may dwell in peace with thee, 

Knowing that to the end 
Thou wilt be with us, walking by our side, 

Our Guardian, Guide and Friend, 
Until in heaven we shall with thee abide!" 


THE CHRISTIAN'S DUTY IN TIME OF WAR 


Factories and business houses throughout the United 
States are circulating amongst their employees a petition, 
usually in the following form: 

"As an American* faithful to American ideals of 
justice, liberty and humanity, and confident that the 
Government has exerted its most earnest efforts to keep 
us at peace with the world, I hereby declare my absolute 
and unconditional loyalty to the Government of the United 
States and pledge my support to it in protecting American 
rights against unlawful violence upon land and sea, in 
guarding the Nation against hostile attacks, and in upholding
 international rights." 
Numerous Watch Toweb readers are asking advice as to 
the signing of this paper. Our answer is that every resident 
of America should be faithful to the ideals of justice, liberty 
and humanity, and should exert his most earnest efforts to 
keep the peace; and as between the United States and any 
other government on earth, his loyalty should be to the United 
States Government; but when it comes to a Christian pledging 
his unconditional support to the protection of American rights 
on land and sea, that would mean pledging himself to take 
up arms and actively engage in war. The question then arises, 
What is one's duty under such circumstances? 

We answer, There is a difference between the duty that devolves
 upon one who is not a Christian and one who is a 
Christian. In both Catholic and Protestant churches are 
found some Christians. But the mere fact that one belongs 
to some church denomination is not evidence that he is a 
Christian. Many nations claim to be Christian, but there ia 
no Christian nation on earth, for the reason that there is no 
nation in which every person claims to follow Christ. Many 
of those who claim to be Christians disregard the teachings 
of Christ. This applies equally to the clergy and laymen. 
The clergymen throughout the country are urging their parishioners
 to join the army, many of them saying, "It is the 
Christian duty of America to declare war upon Germany.** 

A true Christian is one who believes that Jesus Christ is 
the great Redeemer of mankind, and who then makes a full 
consecration to do God's will; who is accepted by the Lord 
and begotten of the holy Spirit, and thereby becomes a follower
 of Christ Jesus. All such are ambassadors of Messiah, 
the King of Glory (2 Cor. 5:20), to whom the Lord has delivered
 his message of reconciliation for the world. The Lord 
has commissioned, or authorized, all such in the following 
words: "The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath 
anointed me to preach the glad tidings unto the meek ; he hath 
sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to 
the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are 


[6073] 


(124-125) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord and the 
day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn." 
(Isa. 61:1-3) This applies to every true follower of Jesus 
who faithfully walks in his footsteps. — 1 Peter 2:21. 

No Christian could engage in war and remain a Christian; 
for the reason that Jesus did not engage in war. Jesus declared
 that he came not to destroy man's lives, but to save 
them. 

If men of the world desire to engage in war, that is a 
question for them to determine. The Christian well knows 
that God has permitted this great war to come upon the nations
 to develop amongst them conditions that will lead to 
revolution and anarchy, and that every nation that engages 
in this war will ultimately be involved in the greater trouble. 
The only advice that we have to give those who are not 
Christians is that given by the Lord through his prophet 
saying, "Before the day of the Lord's anger come upon you, 
seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth ; seek righteousness
, seek meekness; ifc may be ye shall be hid in the day of the 
Lord's anger." — Zeph. 2; 2, 3. 

Whatever question there might be about the duty of a 
man of the world who does not claim to be a Christian, there 
is no middle ground for the Christian. He can be true to the 
Lord and faithful to his consecration vow only by taking one 
course, viz., a refusal to engage in war. As reasons therefor 
he should, in kindness and in the spirit of love, yet with boldness
, tell those who will hear the meaning of the great trouble 
now upon the earth, and point out to them the nearness of 
Messiah's kingdom and the blessings that will follow its establishment
. Since he is the ambassador of the heavenly 
kingdom he should see to it that his time and strength and 
energy are devoted to peaceful pursuits, and to the declaring 
of the message of the kingdom of Christ. All this is his 
vocation. 

No Christian should resist the Government with force of 
arms. If the laws of the land provide for exemption for 
those who cannot conscientiously engage in war, then the 
Christian should take advantage of that. If it should come 
to the question as to whether or not a Christian would shoot 
his fellowman or be shot, it would be better for him to choose 
the latter rather than the former. He has made a covenant 
with the Lord to be faithful unto death, and no one can take 
his life until God's due time, so long as he is faithful to the 
Lord. It it bring suffering upon him to take this stand, then 
he should remember that the Lord promised that His followers
 must expect to suffer, and that the reward of life 
everlasting on the divine plane is promised to those who suffer 
faithfully with Christ unto the end. — Romans 8:16, 17. 


IN BE MXLITABT SERVICE 

Numerous letters are coining to us, asking advice as to 
what should be done with reference to complying with the 
statutes of the various States which provide for the registration
 of male citizens from 16 to 45 years of age. The statutes 
that are being passed by the various States are similar in many 
respects, and yet it will be necessary for us to have a copy 
of each one of these military Acts in order to give specific 
advice. Where the Act provides that all persons are required 
to give this information, there would be no good reason for 
declining to give the same. Where the Act further provides 
that certain persons are exempt from military service, but 
must file their affidavit within a certain time and with certain 
officers in order to be entitled to exemption, we advise that the 
brethren take advantage of this exemption by preparing and 
filing the affidavit required .by law. It is difficult for us here 
to give a form that will apply to all States, but if the Act is 
read carefully the form beiow can be used in most States, 
changing according to the terms of the law. We therefore 
suggest the following form: 

State of 

County of 


(name of person claiming exemption) being 
duly sworn, on oath says that he is entitled to exemption 
from military service, for the reason that he is a duly 

ordained minister; that since the day of he 

has been fully consecrated to the Lord and His service; 
that he cannot conscientiously engage in war in any form, 
and claims his exemption for the reason stated in this 
affidavit. 


Subscribed and sworn to before 
me this day of 


All persons who are duly elected elders by a vote of the 
eeclesia have received a church ordination, and all persons 
who are fully consecrated to the Lord (Luke 9:23; Rom. 12:1) 
have received the divine ordination as a minister of the Gospel
. — Isa. 61:1-3. 

The duty of a Christian is clearly set forth in the Scriptures
. There is no middle ground. For him to engage in 
war would be to disregard the commission the Lord has given 
him. To refuse military service would perhaps bring persecution
; but to engage in military service would be a violation 
of his covenant with the Lord, and this being true, no one 
would desire to engage in war, and hence should decline to 
enlist in the service of the army. 


PUBLIC INTEREST IN THE TRUTH INCREASING 


That the public is anxious to listen to discourses pertinent 
to the strange times through which the world is now passing 
is evidenced by the increasing attendance at the public meetings 
reported by the pilgrim brethren in the field. And at our 
larger public gatherings there is also a noticeable awakening. 
Recently at Boston four thousand people tried to crowd into 
the leading theater to hear, "Why Do the Nations W 7 ar?" and 
at a public meeting at the New York City Temple on the afternoon
 of Sunday, April 1, about fifteen nundred listened with 
intense interest to a discussion of the following topic: "Universal
 Peace — How Can it be Obtained?" It is reported that 
over eleven hundred were turned away. 

We are now conducting a series of lectures in various 
cities throughout the country. These are opened by a largely 
advertised public meeting by our President, or some other 
brother especially suited to public discourse, and followed by 
other Pilgrim brethren of ability. The results have been very 
gratifying, and the urgent invitations for fresh series are 
coming in so rapidly as to necessitate the extending of Brother 
Rutherford's appointments several months in advance. 


We rejoice that the Lord's blessing is resting upon the 
proclamation of the truth, and to know that there are still 
many hungering and thirsting after righteousness. How glad 
we are to be ambassadors of the One who is able to supply 
that which satisfleth the hungry and thirsty! 

More and more does the truthfulness of the prophetic utterances
 of the words of the Lord impress itself upon our 
hearts as we "behold a famine in the land — not a famine of 
bread nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the 
Lord." (Amos. 8:11) No doubt many more hungry hearts 
will accept the blessed message of the kingdom as we advance
 closer to the time when w no man can work." In view 
of the perilous times before us and the wonderful opportunities
 brought about by the approach of the great cataclysm, it 
behooves all the ambassadors of Christ, the heralds of the fast 
approaching kingdom, to be zealous, to be fully awake and 
doing with their might what their hands find to do, before 
the night fully settles down, remembering that "he that reapeth
, receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal." 


A TIMELY WARNING 


In a recent issue of The Watch Tower we called attention
 to the danger that might result to the brethren by' having 
the names of the Secretaries of the various ecclesias published. 
The following letter, which is a sample of many we are receiving
, proves the wisdom of the warning: 

Washington, D. C, March 30. 
"Dear Brother Rutherford : — Your recent warning 
in The Watch Tower against the publication of the 
of Class Secretaries was well-timed and necessary, Some 
publication erroneously gave my name as such for the 
eeclesia here, and I have been kept busy of late with letters 
from unknown friends who desire me to serve them in 
various ways, but do not even enclose stamps for reply, 


or seem to appreciate the reliability of information or assistance
 furnished by me. I enclose herewith pernicious 
literature received from a pernicious person who must 
have obtained my address in the way mentioned. 

"Your brother in Christ, E. H. T." 

The friends from numerous classes are sending us samples 
of literature which have come to them recently, softie addressed
, "Esteemed Friends," or, "Dear Friends," or "Dear 
Friend in Christ." This literature begins as though it were 
written -by a Bible Student, and winds up by soliciting money 
and urging that contributions be sent to the person named 
on the literature. 

Through the columns of The Watch Tower warnings 


[6074] 


Aran. 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(125-126) 


have been frequently given against various frauds that have 
been attempted upon our readers, and we shall continue to 
give this warning. We suggest to the brethren that when 
they have any doubt about literature that is sent them, they 
write and send it to us. We will be glad to render any assistance
 we can. At the same time be assured, dear brethren, 
that any literature that solicits money, either directly or indirectly
, is not sent by the Society, nor approved by the 
Society, 

Truly the warning that Brother Russell gave in The 


Toweb of November 1st, 1916, under the caption, "The Houb 
of Temptation," was very timely. 

A3 the following words of St. Paul applied to the church of 
Ephesus, so they apply with equal force to the church now: 
"After my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among 
you, not sparing the flock; also of your own selves shall men 
arise speaking perverse things to draw away followers after 
them." We suggest to the friends, therefore, that all literature 
coming to them which speaks unkindly of IJrother Russell 
be consigned to the waste-basket. 


SOME LETTERS 

PEAYEBS AND COOPERATION TO EXTENT OP ABILITY 

Dear Brother Rutherford: — 

Permit me to express my love for and my confidence in 
you. I have a hearty sympathy and love for the harvest 
work, and you shall have my earnest prayer and co-operation 
to the best "of my ability in finishing what dear Brother Russell
 prosecuted so faithfully for so many years. 

There is a little matter I believe I should mention to you. 
T have in the past given away to a few of the friends, and 
in a few instances recommended, eome books of Murray's and 
Fosdick's. As I see it now, T believe I did wrong in doing 
so. I have always acted on the Bible statement, "Despise not 
prophesyings ; prove all things, hold fast that which is good." 
While this is still true, yet our Lord said that in the end 
of the age, he would make his wise and faithful servant 
steward over all his goods, to give his household meat in due 
season; and I believe if we give heed to the Bible itself, and 
to the helps God has provided through that servant, and 
depend upon God to use his holy Spirit to guide ua into all 
truth, as he promised, we shall not want for spiritual instruction
. We will not need anything else, for other teachings 
are always more or less mixed with error. In the future I 
will confine myself to the pure message, and recommend the 
same to others. 

With continued prayer for your success in guiding the work 
of God, and for your own blessing, I am 

Your fellow servant in Him, Daniel Toole. 

Our Reply 
Dear Brothkr Toole: — 

Your letter of the 22d is before us. We thank you very 
much for it. We rejoice with you that you now see that 
such distribution of the books mentioned by you could hardly 
be in harmony with the Lord's will as we understand it, and 
that you appreciate the fact that the Lord has made provision
 for the household of faith in giving "meat in due season
" through his selected "wise and faithful .servant." The 
basis for our faith in the glorious prize set before us is a 
knowledge of the Lord's W T ord, and a clear understanding 
and appreciation of the same and a reliance thereupon. W 7 e 
never understood the plan of God until he was pleased to 
give it to us through the interpretations of his servant — our 
dear Brother Russell. If we would maintain our faith and 
increase it, it would seem absolutely essential that we abide 
by the food the Lord has supplied, and we are certain that 
we can be a greater help to the dear brethren everywhere if 
we confine ourselves to the spiritual food provided of the 
Lord through this channel. To search for spiritual food 
elsewhere is equivalent to saying that the Lord did not provide
 that which is sufficient through his chosen servant, and 
upon careful consideration we know that none of the fully 
consecrated would want to say this. 

We are glad to hear you say, "In the future I will 
confine myself to the pure message, and recommend the same 
to others." Abiding in the Lord, and his message abiding in 
us, we are sure we, can be of greater help to his sheep as we 
strive to minister upon them ae his willing bond-servants. 

We are in a time of great peril, and we all do well to take 
heed to the warning our dear Pastor left us in his last message
 to the church. We may expect, as he stated there, that 
some .will arise seeking to draw followers after them, and 
our duty to His people as representatives of the Lord and of 
the Socibttx, is to encourage them as much- as possible to stay 
close to the Lord's message. In ourselves we can do nothing, 
but we can do all things through Christ Jesus, who strengthened
 us. But to have his strength we must be in harmony 
with His way of doing things. 

We appreciate your words of encouragement and your 
prayers, and assure you that you have ours. May the Lord 
continue to bless you and all of his dear people, and to give 
us all the needed strength in ' this hour, to hold fast that 
which we have gained, ftie blessings of the Lord be with you. 

ANOELOPHONE BLESSINGS— "DEAD, YET SPEAKETH1" 
Dear Friends: — 

I wish to assure you of my continued loyalty to the Lord 


OF INTEREST 

and the Truth, and 1 shall endeavor to co-operate with the 
Society in every way possible in the further smiting of the 
waters of Jordan. My recent experiences since the death of 
our Pastor seem to have been very similar to those of the 
dear friends everywhere, as 1 note from The Watch Tower. 

I was shocked beyond measure at our Pastor's death. I 
went immediately to *my room, and dropping upon my knees, 
told the Lord how sad and bewildered I felt, and that" I could 
hardly understand why our Pastor should be taken so quickly 
and unexpectedly, but assuring the heavenly Father, however
, that I was perfectly resigned to hi 3 will in the matter, 
knowing that he knew best. I told the Lord that I had no 
desire to turn away, but that I would endeavor to go forward 
resolutely and give greater diligence, if possible, to make my 
calling and election sure. I further thanked him for the 
many blessings that I had received through the instrumentality
 of this noble servant, and that while we shall see his 
face no more in the flesh, we still have the precious truths 
from his pen that we may continue to feast upon. 

We read, "By the sadness of the countenance the heart 
is made better," and as we sorrow — "not as others," however — 
may we be drawn closer to the Lord. 

1 wish to relate, further, a recent experience that has been 
such a joy and blessing to us. About the time of our Pastor'3 
death I ordered a cabinet style Angelophone and 50 hymn 
records and some of the song books. 

These reached us in perfect condition only 3 or 4 days 
ago, and oh, what a feast we have already had! I just can't 
express the joy we have experienced in listening to hymns and 
the hymn-talks — especially the latter. 

W^hy, dear friends, we, so to speak, have Pastor Russell 
now in our parlor. Any time we want to have a little sermon, 
we have only to go and put on a record and start the machine, 
and it is just like hearing him in an auditorium, only we 
can't behold his face. I just couldn't help but think of the 
Scripture, "He, being dead, yet speaketh." When we reflect 
that this was one of the last of our Pastor's labors, how glad 
and thankful we are that God has added this blessing also ! 

Please accept our heart-felt sympathy as we realize that 
those of the Society who were so closely associated with our 
dear Brother Russell will doubtless feel the parting more 
keenly than we who are more distant. Asking an interest in 
your prayers, and assuring you that we remember you at 
the Throne of Grace, I remain, 

Yours in the Faith once delivered to the Baints. 

W. H. Burch.— III. 

CLASS EXTENSION WORK ENCOTTBAGED 
Dear Brethren : — 

Remarks in a recent number of The Watch Toweb concerning
 certain brethren offering their services to other 
classes, upon payment of expenses by the classes served, has 
suggested that it might be well to get your opinion concerning
 a certain practise here. 

For a number of years our class has been sending elders 
to nearby classes. This we are doing at the invitation of the 
classes referred to, so that it seems to me that the case here 
is different from the one mentioned in The Tower. However
, we would like to get your opinion as to whether you 
think this a wise practise. Some of the places we serve every 
Sunday, others three times a month and others once a month. 

Yours in Christ, A. L. Seeley.—JU. 

Our Reply 

It is not the purpose of the article in The Watch Tower 
to curtail in the slightest the opportunities of the brethren to 
serve other classes, when the classes invite the brethren to 
come. As we understand it, the .brethren of your Ecclesia 
serve the nearby classes at the request of those classes. 

There has for some time been a growing habit among certain
 brethren deeiring to make a trip through the country to 
write the classes along the way advising them that they would 
serve on certain dates, provided the classes pay their expenses
; in other words, this is a polite way of inviting the 
friends to defray the expenses of a trip, thus indirectly solicit- 


[6075] 


(126-127) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


ing money from the brethren. This is contrary to the policy 
of the Society, and the purpose of putting the notice in The 
Toweb was to advise the friends that the Society does not 
encourage or approve such action. 

The Society has always encouraged the Class Extension 
Work, and will continue to do so, and when a class in any 
community invites a brother to come and serve, it is entirely 
proper that the brother accept. The Society is pleased to see 
all the dear brethren actively engaged in the service. 

PASSED V. D. If. QTTESTTONa OY SECOND TBJJLL 
DEAB BbETHREN: — 

I must write and tell you how my heart is rejoicing over 
the V. D. M. Questions. I have no words to express my appreciation
 that are strong enough to bring out the glory and 
beauty that the V. D. M. Questions have brought to my hungering
 souL God's wonderful plan has never been so bright 
and sublime to me as it is now. I am so thankful to my 
heavenly Father that through the V. D. M. Examination Department
, I failed no my first questions. Truly it was God's 
leading, to wake me up to learn a lesson not to deal with 
God's Holy Word in a haphazard way! 

When the news came to me that I had failed, it grieved 
my heart sorely, in spite of the fact that I was saying all 
the while, "The Lord's will be done, not mine." Then I took 
the whole matter to the Lord in prayer. Truly I can say, 

"All the way my Savior leads me, 
What have I to ask beside? 
Can I doubt his tender mercy, 
Who through life has been my guide?" 

And truly he did guide me. Then I prayed in earnest that 
I might be allowed another trial ; for I felt in my heart it was 
necessary for me to answer those questions if I still stayed 
in the Pastoral Work. After praying and studying and comparing
 those questions, then I realized, more than ever before 
the deep wisdom our dear Pastor had regarding God's holy 
plan, in preparing and sending out those questions for us. 
I surely have derived much benefit from them, and I want to 
thank the heavenly Father and the Committee for giving me 
another chance on the V, D. M. Questions! It certainly did 
cheer my heart; for now I feel worthy to go into the Pastoral
 Work. 

My heart is filled with gratitude and praise and is overflowing
 with love for all of God's little ones, and especially 
those at the Bethel home. 

Dear brethren, forgive me for intruding on your valuable 
and precious time, but my heart was so full of love for the 
whole world, and because of my passing the examination, that 
I had to write you. 

If my testimony is worth using, use it in any way you see 
fit, and my name also. I am not ashamed of failing, for the 
Lord knew it all. May God's blessing rest upon each brother 
and sister wherever they may be, is my prayer. 

'Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my 
heart; for thy loving kindness is before mine eyes. And I 
have walked in thy truth." — Psalm 26:2, 3. 

Your sister in His grace, Maitie Coopeb. — Tex. 

WE THANK GOD FOB HIS MEMORY 
Deab Bethel Co-laborers : — 

We desire to take this opportunity of expressing to the 
dear ones of the Bethel family and Brooklyn Tabernacle our 
love and heart- felt sympathy in the loss of our dear Pastor 
from fellowship and from the field of service. 

We realize that we have lost from our midst one whom we 
recognize as "that servant" (Matt. 24:45), a brother whose 
earnestness and faithfulness will ever be an incentive to us 
who are in the race for the prize of the high calling. In 
him we were given a most noble example of a Christian in 
this our day. By his life he attested a purity of character, 
ever standing firm for that which is right and just in God's 
sight. Daily did he manifest to us the spirit of unselfishness 
and self-sacrifice. His love and zeal, not only toward the 
brethren, but also toward the world, were exemplified in his 
untiring efforts in propounding the Scriptures in their simplicity
 and beauty. 

But, brethren, we would not mourn, for "we sorrow not 
as do others who have no hope." We believe he has gone to 
his reward, there to be associated with our dear Redeemer, 
and in due time to ehare in the uplifting of the world of 
mankind to perfection and righteousness. Precious promises 
God hath given! 'If we suffer with him, we shall reign 
with him, ,, and if faithful, "we shall be like him, and see him 
as he is." 

We rejoice with you and with our dear Pastor, knowing 
that he fought a good fight, and finished his course. We rejoice
 that we have had the privilege of having such a living 
epistle — his labors have ceased, but his works remain with 
us. He has left with us a sweet memory ! how this will stimulate
 our interest, .enliven our hope, and enkindle our zeal to 
so run that we may obtain! We thank God for this memory, 
and for this hope. 

May we each be so strengthened, ever keeping our feet 

upon the sure Rock, Christ Jesus, that we may eventually win 

the prize of the high calling, and hear the "Well done, good 

and faithful servant; enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

Schenectady Ecclesia. — N, Y. 

VOICE WAVES BACK JX TONES MORE MELODIOUS THAJT 
EVER 
Deab Bbethben: — 

We were very thankful for the letter from you, our faithful
 co-workers, telling us that the work of the Watch Toweb 
Bible and Tbact Society would go on, for we had questioned, 
"What now will be done?" We praise the Lord for his continued
 mercies and for the abundant helpers and also for the 
dear pilgrim brethren; and while we 'bow submissively to 
whatever the Lord permits, we pray his rich blessings to 
rest upon every one of you and keep you strong in faith and 
as valiant soldiers as now. 

Our dear "changed" Pastor still speaks, and that voice that 
delighted us so much all these years has reached the other 
shore, and its reverberations, as a holy echo, wave back to 
us, as it were, in tones more melodious than ever, with high 
and higher swelling notes — "I love to tell the story of Jesus 
and his love!" dear brethren, may it be your theme, and 
our theme, in glory, to tell this old story of Jesus' love! 
We are assured that if we live devotedly, we shall die triumphantly
. 

We have so often wanted to tell you of the wonderful 
help the dear pilgrims give us every time they come. We had 
been thinking all along that we were fully awake, but when 
the last one came we found that we were not. You know 
how children try to do things when they are in a kind of somnambulistic
 condition. Well, we are exceeding thankful that 
the dear Brother came and aroused us, and, as it were, opened 
the doors and windows of our humble hearts and let in so 
much more of the precious light and heavenly air than we 
were used to — all because of drowsiness. But when we got 
a good draught of this glory air and present light, we, of 
course, were more awake. And then how we partook of the 
grand, well-prepared food that he served to us! we cannot
 tell you how it did help us, then and ever since! 

So we are praising the Lord with renewed vigor, and 
never want to allow ourselves to do without God's pure air 
and light, now so radiant, even though it is "early in the 
Morning." It is the very hour in which our Master said he 
would "help her" — his church. And oh, so wonderful is the 
help! . We are very grateful for all the good which the Lord 
sends us by any of you dear messengers. Praise his name! 

We are eager to distribute any and all literature you may 
see proper to send to us for distribution. We note all the 
admonitions and warnings in The Toweb, especially the one 
for Nov. 1, 1916. May the Lord guide and keep us all. With 
much appreciation, love and sympathy, we remain, 

Yours to help all we can in this glorious cause of giving 
out the glad tidings of great joy to all people. 

A Wee Band at Mountain Grove. — Mo. 

"THE EABTH TREMBLED — AND FEIX" 

"LIGHTNING FLASHES PBOM THE THBOXE" 
Deab Ones of Bethel: — 

On receiving my Toweb of November 15, how strange it 
looked, to see on the front cover — "Death of Charles T. Russell
," and right under that line — "The Earth Trembled — and 
Fell"; and next, "Lightning Flashes from the Throne!" O 
how marvelously the prophecies are being fulfilled ! 

On hearing of our dearly beloved Pastor's death I was 
filled both with grief and joy; grief in the thought of what 
his sufferings must have been, and joy untold in the full 
realization that he had been ushered with exceeding joy into 
the presence of his glory and had seen his Master, for whom 
he had given his whole life, and had heard his sweet, "Well 
done"! 

Oh, the wonderful spiritual illumination and light that have 
come down to me increasingly from the throne since our 
Pastor's translation is beyond words to express! I am ready 
to witness and do [although not fitted to instruct, along the 
lines of Soriptubb Stcdibs] everywhere I have an opportunity 
about "that servant," who fed the household of faith "meat 
in due season" for 42 years — "The man clothed in linen, with 
the writer's ink horn ty his side." 

Oh, the bright shining, as from the East even unto the 
West, which fills my soul 1 


[6076] 


\miL J5, J917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


027-11-1) 


The glory and splendor revealed recalls to my mind the 
June 15 th To web of 1915, in which was mentioned in an article
 on Solomon's Temple and the Antitype — that the dedication
 took place a month before it was completed. There was 
a suggestion that God's glory might be made manifest to the 
members of Christ's body— the spiritual temple — before it 
was quite completed. 

I have been a constant reader and subscriber to the precious 
Tower since October, 1893. I think you must have my name 
on Vow list, as I sent it to you twice. I could not well have 
kept alive my spiritual life without it, I believe. Enclosed 
find one dollar for 20 Memorial Towers of December 1. 

May God continue to bless and direct you, and may he 
ble^s the memory of our dear Pastor Russell. 

Yours in the Hope, awaiting the glorious kingdom, 

Kannie E. Hazlett. — Pa. 

"HOLDING THE HEAD" 

Dear Bkethrkn : — 

I am writing to you to say that I am dissatisfied with 
seeing so many beginning to compile Brother Russell's writings
, making merchandise out of his work. 

If this should go on, there is no knowing where it might 
end. I don't think that anybody should presume to compile 
Brother Russell's works but the Watch To web Bible and 
Tract Society. They really belong to the Society. Brother 
Woodworth and Sister Seibert did some of this, but they 
turned it over to the Society and it received the benefit of it. 

You will understand my view in the matter. I am in sympathy
 with Headquarters* first, under the Lord; all other 
things come second. 

Yours in Him, Joseph Clarkson.— F a. 

WOEDS Or COMFORT FROM ONE OF THE BETHEL FAMILY 

Dear Brethren : — 

It seems not amiss that a member of Bethel Family should 
write a few words regarding the passing "within the veil" 
of our dearlv beloved Brother Russell. We wish to mingle our 
voice with tne abundant testimonials pouring in to us from all 
over the world, expressing the love, sympathy and loyalty of 
the dear saints of God. 

Surely none realize more the worth of our beloved leader 
than do those of his own dear family! Surely none loved 
him more or feel more deeply his loss ! To us the shock of his 
sudden departure was very keen and severe. 

But I believe that 1 voice the sentiments of all the Bethel 
family, when I say that almost from the very first the unspeakable
 joy of realizing that our beloved one had entered 
into the very presence of our glorious King, and had gained 
his crown of glory, honor, immortality — that he was now forever
 beyond all power of his enemies to touch him or cause 
him further pain — almost made us forget our own deep loss. 

Are we surprised that one so noble, so worthy, so utterly 
unselfish and devoted to God and his service, should have 
enemies? We might be, if our dear Master himself had not 
had enemies, and of the same class which has persecuted our 
own dear Pastor. It is sometimes said that a man is loved for 


the enemies he has. And surely the wrath of our Pastor's 
enemies, and their venomous attacks upon him, which were 
so undeserved, only caused his friends who knew his worth 
to love him all the more. But we are sorry for those who 
now are unwittingly being used as instruments of the adversary
 to blind and bewilder honest souls who might see the 
truth were they not hindered bv these "blind leaders of 
the blind." 

We know that it will not be very long until all the blinded 
eyes will be opened and the deaf ears unstopped. Then how 
ashamed and humiliated these hinderers of the truth will 
be! We can afford to be very patient and pitiful and charitable
 during our brief waiting time. These leaders astray 
are storing' up trouble and sorrow for themselves in the 
near future. But we are glad to hope that many at least of 
our dear Brother Russell's enemies will yet repent and turn 
fully to the Lord. But first their cherished schemes and 
institutions must fall, in the great world-wide cataclysm now 
so near. How helpful it might be to some of this class if they 
would only realize what is coming, and would stop and ask 
themselves the question expressed by the poet in his description
 of the mighty storm so near at hand: 

"The time of trouble nears, it hasteth greatly — 
E'en now its fierce winds stir the world-wide sea; 
O when its waves shall swell to mountains stately, 
Will its resistless billows sweep o'er me?" 

There is a great comfort to the Lord's dear, tried and 
tempted ones in the prophetic words of inspiration given us 
by the Prophet of God: "Your brethren that hated you, that 
cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified
; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be 
ashamed." (Isa. 66:5) Let us" then, be of good courage — 
our deliverance draweth nigh! The rebuke of his people 
God will soon take away from off all the earth. The Lord 
hath spoken it! Nevermore can the shafts of malice and 
envy touch our beloved, glorified Pastor and friend! Is this 
not* cause for great rejoicing, even while we await our 
"change"? 

He will never suffer any more, never again be weary — he 
was often so weary here, though never a complaint or murmur
 did he express. I love to think of the ineffable glory of 
his present wonderful life! I often wonder just what he is 
doing now, what are his thoughts, what marvelous new 
glories are constantly revealing themselves to him. How loving
 of our dear Lord to thus glorify him, to give him such 
a grand and sweet surprise, when he was expecting further 
laborious experiences here, still greater pain, weariness and 
suffering in that dear, tired body — with perhaps at the end 
a death of violence! 

How we rejoice with him and for him, and how earnestly 
we pray for grace and wisdom from above, that we may walk 
faithfully in the Master's footsteps of suffering and selfsacrifice
, until we, too, shall be called home to share with 
our beloved Pastor the glory of our blessed Lord and Head! 

Your loving Bister in Christ, Alice G. Jakes. 


PHOTO-DRAMA POSTCARDS— 450.000 


Brother Russell, shortly before his death, placed an order 
with a firm in France to* supply us with 450,000 Postcards 
containing forty choice selections from the famous slides 
used in the Photo-Prama of Creation. The shipment was 
expected to arrive in Brooklyn before the holidays, but owing 
to the war conditions abroad, it was delayed and did not 
arrive until this week. 


These choice selections of Postcards are put up in packs 
of 40 which will not be broken and are to be sold at 50c per 
pack, postpaid. On the address side of each of the postcards 
to the left, is an explanation of the picture in the words of 
Brother Russell. Bach scene is in appropriate colors; there 
is nothing like them on the market. 


THE LORD'S VOLUNTEER ARMY 


[First appearance of 
Many of the friends have written that they are desirous 
of doing more in the harvest work, and have asked if they may 
not look for further opportunities of service. 

The output of the volunteer matter this year has been progressing
 very rapidly and satisfactorily. The friends have 
been zealous in the work, realizing that in all probability it 
will not be long before the night cometh in which no man can 
work. Others, unable to do much in the distribution of tracts, 
co-operated in other ways, and the Good Hopes have been 
coming in beyond our expectations. We are confident that the 
dear friends will be glad to have this information from Headquarters
, and to learn, further, that in harmony with a resolution
 passed by the shareholders of the Society at the annual 
election of officers at Pittsburgh in January (which annual 
election has been held regularly for many years) the Office 
management at the Tabernacle has been placed upon the greatest
 efficiency hasis possible and operated with less help, notwithstanding
 the fact that the volume of work done and the 


notice in this form.] 
general receipts have been larger during the present fiscal year 
than during the corresponding five months of last year. The 
Lord's blessing is still upon his people and upon his work, and 
everything therefore goes well at the Brooklyn Tabernacle and 
Bethel. 

All this has opened the way for another issue of Volunteer 
matter for this year. We now have it under way, and feel 
sure that all will be pleased with it. It has to do in an important
 sense with present conditions, and is very timely. We 
are hoping it will contribute much toward an awakening to 
an appreciation of the beauties of the truth and of the longpromised
 kingdom of peace, which will be "the desire of all 
nations." 

It is not our thought to interfere with the distribution of 
the last Volunteer literature— "The World on Fire"— but if 
those who have completed their labors will advise us how 
many copies of the new issue they can use, and if those who 
are still working on the former Volunteer matter will at once 


VII— 17 


[6077] 


(114-1M) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Bkookxyn, N. Y. 


advise us how many they can use when their present supply io 
distributed, we will be in a position to estimate the probable 
number needed. 

We believe that all will agree that this is undoubtedly the 
most opportune time in the history of the Gospel age to 
witness to the truth and to the rapid approach of the kingdom, 
and we believe that the new volunteer matter will Jit the 
situation well. 


The Lord's volunteer army is a large one, and, armed 
with the weapon of the truth, is "mighty through God to the 
pulling down of strongholds (of error) and every high thing 
that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God.'* Minute 
men and women are needed at this hour; but the first ammunition
 provided for the year needs to be fully cleared away 
before the battle begins afresh with the new. 

When ordering please mention Vol. 9, No. 5. 


IN RE EMPLOYMENT BY MENA FILM COMPANY 


Many letters are coming to us from brethren all over the 
country enclosing a letter sent to them by the Mena Film 
Company, inviting the friends to accept employment to represent
 said Company. Many of the friends inquire as to what 
they should do, while some write as though they thought the 
letter had been sent out from thi3 office. We take this course 
through The Watch Tower to inform the brethren everywhere 
that the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society had nothing 
whatever to do with sending out such a letter. Furthermore, 
the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society would not employ
 solicitors to solicit money from the friends for any purpose
, and it does not approve of soliciting money from the 
brethren for any purpose whatsoever. Several times we have 
tried to make plain through the columns of The Watch Tower 
that neither the Society nor any officer of the Society nor any 
one connected with the Society's offices has anything to do 


with the Mena Film Company. We also wish to make it plain, 
in answer to these letters received by us, that the brethren 
should not in any sense be influenced to believe that the 
Society is either directly or indirectly furthering this enterprise
. 

The Society takes this occasion also to give notice to all 
that the use of its name or the name of any of its officers 
has been wholly without its knowledge or consent. The Society
 could not advise any one to invest money in anything in 
these perilous times. Appreciating the fact that all that any 
of the consecrated possess belongs to the Lord, we would advise 
that they do with it exactly as they believe the Lord would 
be pleased to have them do. We are very sorry indeed that 
the brethren have been put to so much inconvenience about 
this matter; and we hope that with this further explanation 
the whole matter may be made clear. 

