Why Are We Here?
ACCORDING to the Bible, God, whose name is Jehovah, is supremely intelligent. He is the Source of all cosmic power and the Creator of the universe. (Psalm 83:18; 92:5) The first chapter of the Bible states: “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.” Thereafter, God made man in his “image”—that is to say, with qualities like his own—and God told man to multiply and fill the earth.—Genesis 1:1, 26, 28.
Does this mean that God created the universe, including the earth with its many animals and plants, simply to accommodate humankind? And are we here merely to enjoy life for a few decades, eat, drink, and produce offspring?
Why Did God Create Us?
Jehovah God created mankind as an expression of his love—he wanted to share life and happiness with humans. Doubtless, God experienced great joy in fashioning physical creations of all kinds, so that man would be surrounded by beauty and plenty. Above all, humans were to have a meaningful relationship with their Creator, knowing him and communicating with him. They were created to live forever under perfect, peaceful conditions.—Genesis 3:8, 9; Psalm 37:11, 29.
Jehovah also assigned humans fulfilling and meaningful work to do. God told the first humans: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving upon the earth.” (Genesis 1:28) Yes, the first couple and their offspring were to transform the whole earth into a paradise of pleasure.
Things did not immediately work out as Jehovah purposed.a Nevertheless, God’s original purpose for mankind will be fulfilled.—Isaiah 46:9-11; 55:11.
In the meantime, man’s desire—his need—to know God and to have a relationship with him is manifest in his search for purpose. Man was created as an intelligent creature with the desire to explore and understand. And the Bible says that man will go on accumulating satisfying knowledge of God and his creation forever.
One Bible writer expressed man’s purpose this way: “I have seen the occupation that God has given to the sons of mankind in which to be occupied. Everything he has made pretty in its time. Even time indefinite he has put in their heart, that mankind may never find out the work that the true God has made from the start to the finish. I have come to know that there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and to do good during one’s life; and also that every man should eat and indeed drink and see good for all his hard work. It is the gift of God.” (Ecclesiastes 3:10-13) So there will never be an end to what mankind can find out about God and his creation.
Learn About God
You can get to know Jehovah by examining his creation. One Bible writer said that God’s “invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship.” (Romans 1:20) Yes, much about Jehovah’s love, wisdom, and power is evident in creation.
Another vital source of information about God is the Bible. That inspired book tells us much more about Jehovah—his views, qualities, and purpose—than can be learned from examining his creation.
The Bible states regarding God’s purpose: “As regards the heavens, to Jehovah the heavens belong, but the earth he has given to the sons of men.” (Psalm 115:16) It would seem that the only adequate place in this universe for mankind to live is on the earth, which Jehovah made for this very purpose.
So, what of the boundless cosmos? Are all the stars around us just there to keep our solar system in perfect equilibrium so that life on earth is possible? Are the heavenly bodies just there to make the night sky beautiful? We have to recognize that there are many things we still do not know. But that is a good thing! Why?
Eternity will not suffice for mankind to understand all that God has done and purposed. He wants our future to be one of endless discovery and endless joy. Everlasting life in happiness on earth will give obedient mankind ample opportunity to discover much, much more about the universe.
[Footnote]
For many people, the existence of evil and suffering is an obstacle to belief in a loving Creator. On this topic, please see chapter 11 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Blurb on page 9]
Man was created as an intelligent creature with the desire to explore and understand
[Pictures on page 10]
The Bible indicates that the earth was created primarily for the enjoyment of humankind

