The Bible’s Viewpoint
You Can Satisfy Your Spiritual Need
HUMANS possess a spiritual need that is as fundamental as the need for food. When it comes to nutrition, however, we have many good choices because of the great variety of life-sustaining foods available. Is it the same with spirituality? There are endless cultural and religious practices that are said to provide satisfaction.
Many feel that as long as you do something spiritual, it really does not matter what you choose to believe or what form of worship you engage in. What do you think? Does it matter how you satisfy your spiritual need? What does the Bible say?
What True Spirituality Involves
At Genesis 1:27, the Bible reveals the source of our spiritual capacity: “God proceeded to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him; male and female he created them.” Since Jehovah God is a spirit, this refers, not to any physical likeness, but to a resemblance based on qualities held in common. Like his Creator, the first man, Adam, could value and display such qualities as unselfish love, kindness, compassion, justice, and self-control. He was also endowed with a conscience, an inner moral sense, to guide his use of free will in harmony with God’s laws. These characteristics made him different from the animal creation and uniquely equipped him to carry out his Creator’s will.—Genesis 1:28; Romans 2:14.
The Bible identifies an element essential to human spirituality. At 1 Corinthians 2:12-15, it describes a spiritual person as one who receives the spirit that is from God. This spirit is God’s active force, and its operation is a prerequisite to getting to know spiritual things. A person is thus able to examine and understand issues from a spiritual perspective. By contrast, a person lacking God’s spirit is called a physical man, one who considers spiritual things as foolishness. As a result, his conclusions are limited to what human wisdom alone reveals.
Hence, while our spiritual capacity stems from being made in God’s image, genuine spirituality is not realized through self-awareness, human wisdom, or personal achievement. It requires the influence of God’s holy spirit. In fact, those who refuse to be influenced by God’s spirit, choosing instead to pursue their own desires and ungodly things, are described as not having spirituality. They are driven by fleshly appetites and inclinations.—1 Corinthians 2:14; Jude 18, 19.
Filling the Need
True spiritual fulfillment begins with acknowledging Jehovah as the Creator and recognizing that we owe our existence to him. (Revelation 4:11) We thus realize that our life has meaning only to the extent that we do his will. (Psalm 115:1) Doing God’s will provides purpose in life, an aspect of our spiritual need that is as vital as our physical need for food. That is why Jesus, a man renowned for his spirituality, could say: “My food is for me to do the will of him that sent me.” (John 4:34) Doing God’s will invigorated him, bringing him refreshment and satisfaction.
Since we are created in God’s image, true spiritual satisfaction also depends on our conforming our personality to his. (Colossians 3:10) By so doing, we avoid conduct that demeans us or that damages our relationships with others. (Ephesians 4:24-32) Choosing to live by Jehovah’s standards elevates our lives and contributes to real peace of mind, since we are spared the plague of a guilty conscience.—Romans 2:15.
Jesus revealed another fundamental truth regarding filling our spiritual need when he said: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matthew 4:4) Our spirituality requires constant attention. Through the Bible, Jehovah provides the answers to life’s questions—questions that are common to all people.—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
Source of True Happiness
A person might relieve hunger pangs by eating junk food. Similarly, we could “fill up” on activities or philosophies that seem to satisfy our spiritual appetite. But just as surely as a poor diet leads to malnutrition, disease, or worse, failing to satisfy our spiritual need properly will ultimately result in harm.
If, however, we develop a relationship with Jehovah God, seek to do his will, and follow his guidance, we will find the truth behind the Bible’s words: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.”—Matthew 5:3.
HAVE YOU WONDERED?
▪ Where does your spiritual need come from?—Genesis 1:27.
▪ Can we satisfy our spiritual need on our own?—1 Corinthians 2:12-15.
▪ What must we do to fill our spiritual need?—Matthew 4:4; John 4:34; Colossians 3:10.
[Blurb on page 13]
Failing to satisfy our spiritual need properly will ultimately result in harm

