Attend One of the 1961 Assemblies!
ATTENDANCE at one of the 1961 assemblies is indeed a must for all dedicated Christian witnesses of Jehovah. At present twelve of these have been scheduled for the United States, Canada and Europe. Without doubt every Witness attending one of these assemblies will come away saying: “This certainly was the best assembly ever! I wouldn’t have believed that it could be that good!” Yes, Jehovah through his organization has in store marvelous blessings for all who will be present at the 1961 assemblies!
At these assemblies we shall enjoy “a banquet of well-oiled dishes, a banquet of wine kept on the dregs, of well-oiled dishes filled with marrow, of wine kept on the dregs, filtered,” and that for six days! Apart from the world, in our new system of things, we shall work together joyfully, harmoniously, zealously and unselfishly—a foretaste of Kingdom blessings we shall enjoy in the post-Armageddon paradisaic new world.—Isa. 25:6.
The first of these assemblies will be held at Yankee Stadium, New York city, June 20 to 25. No doubt brothers will be present from all parts of the United States and Canada—there will be room for them!—and on the program will be the zone and branch servants from all the rest of the Americas, making this assembly a Western Hemispheric one.
The following week a similar six-day assembly will be held from June 27 to July 2 at Houston, Texas, where sessions will also be held in Spanish. And the week after that, July 4 to 9, the assembly program will be repeated at Vancouver, B.C., Canada. Would any brother or sister want to stay away? Absolutely not!
During the following four weeks assemblies will be held in Europe, six of them; the first being in Copenhagen, Denmark, July 11 to 16. There we should like to see as many as possible so as to make the Danes, who so studiously have been ignoring the Kingdom message for some time now, sit up and take notice! At this assembly talks will be given simultaneously in five languages: Norwegian, Swedish, Finnish, Danish and English.
Two European assemblies will take place the following week, July 18 to 23. One of these will be in northern Germany, at Hamburg, and the other in Turin (Torino), Italy, in the country’s northwestern part. Those attending the Hamburg assembly can look forward to meeting brothers from all Germany as well as from Austria, Switzerland and Luxembourg.
London, England, will be the location of the next assembly, from July 25 to 30. Present and on the program here will be the zone and branch servants from Europe and the Mediterranean area. Certainly all those coming to this assembly will look forward with joy also to seeing the beautiful new branch building in its paradisaic “Green Belt” setting.
The fourth and final week of European assemblies will see two held, one in Paris, France, and one in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, August 1-6. At Paris talks will also be given in Spanish, as well as in English and French, for the benefit of the many brothers that are expected to be present from Spain. This will furnish a marvelous opportunity for many brothers from Belgium and French-speaking Switzerland and other lands to meet these hard-working soldiers of Christ who are maintaining integrity under such adverse conditions as they find themselves. The Amsterdam assembly will also include the Flemish-speaking folk from Belgium.
Arrangements are being made to hold three post-European assemblies in the United States: on August 8-13 at Oklahoma City, Okla.; August 29—September 3 at San Francisco, Calif.; and, tentatively, August 22-27, at Milwaukee, Wis. So assembly cities are conveniently located for everyone.
While every day sees the old world more confused, distressed and impoverished, joy, peace and prosperity pervade the New World society. Among our choicest blessings certainly are those received at our assemblies. Let us begin right now, if we have not already done so, to think, plan, work and save for these assemblies. Also, let us make the persons of good will with whom we are conducting Bible studies assembly-conscious and arrange, if we can, to help them to attend. The more effort we put forth to attend, the keener our anticipation is and the greater will be our blessings, the realization. In this troubled world, tottering so near the brink of another total war, and Armageddon, who knows when we shall be able to enjoy further such assemblies? So, by all means attend one of the 1961 assemblies!

