Announcements
“PREACH THE WORD” TESTIMONY PERIOD
December, the final month of 1950, has been designated as “Preach the Word” Testimony Period. How could this eventful year be more effectively concluded than by taking the word of God upon your lips and heralding it forth to all who will hear? That is what Jehovah’s witnesses will be doing, in harmony, with Paul’s counsel to Timothy (2 Tim. 4:2, Moffatt), and you are cordially invited to join in with them in this God-approved work. The 320-page book “This Means Everlasting Life” will be offered to those displaying interest in God’s Word, the contribution being 35c. It points out from the Word of God what is required of those who seek life everlasting. That your activity may be included along with that of thousands of others who will be preaching the Word in December, we suggest that you report to us the results of your preaching. We shall be happy to supply you with report cards and any instruction you may require. If there is a company of Jehovah’s witnesses in your community, feel free to call upon them for help.
EVOLUTION VERSUS THE NEW WORLD
Arrogantly the proponents of the theory of evolution have foisted their ideas upon the public. Through the press, schools, clergy and other means their belief has been spread like a blight upon the human race; a blight because it belittles and disputes the Biblical account of creation by an intelligent Creator. Is their case so strong that it defies refutation? Most certainly not! The contradictions of men do not bring to nought the Word of God. Moreover, scientific facts bear out the Bible account of creation, leaving the evolutionists without any tangible support for their mythical theories. A wealth of incontrovertible proof in favor of the Bible record of creation and against the theory of evolution is now collected within the covers of one booklet, Evolution versus The New World. This 64-page, colored-cover brochure will be sent to you, postpaid, for 5c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 10: New Systems of Things, ¶1-20
Week of December 17: New Systems of Things, ¶21-24; and Beginning the New World Society, ¶1-18.

