Use the Remaining Time Wisely
MAKE no mistake about it, “the appointed time has grown very short.” “Look carefully then [keep strict watch, NW] how you walk, not as unwise men but as wise, making the most of the time, because the days are evil.” (1 Cor. 7:29; Eph. 5:15, 16, RS) How much shorter nowadays the remaining time, and how much greater the need to make the most of it!a
Whereas Paul saw things with the eye of faith, today the reality stares us in the face. The consummation of the present system of things has been reached. Bible chronology and fulfilled prophecy—total world wars, famines, pestilent diseases, earthquakes, heart-stopping sorrows and fears—are signs of the times or milestones, notifying men and nations where they are on the stream of time. The thirty-six intervening years since 1914, instead of postponing Armageddon, have only made it nearer than most people think. Do not forget: “This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled.” (Matt. 24:34) Consequently, the important question is: What is the most profitable way in which to use the remaining time? If you are wise you will not dodge or side-step the answer.—Eccl. 8:5.
We are living at the climax of the ages, when the old world is in the throes of death and a bright new world is poised on the horizon about to replace the old. It is therefore vain and foolish to dash after wealth and power and position or spend time and energy storing up earthly possessions that cannot endure. (1 Tim. 6:9, 10; Matt. 6:19) “Behave wisely in relation to the outside world, seizing your opportunities.”
Noah laid hold of his opportunities when the world of that generation stood on the brink of destruction. Wisely he used the remaining time to preach the message of warning and build a boat of safety. “Just as it was in the time of Noah,” so it is now.—Matt. 24:37, AT.
Christ also laid hold of his opportunities. He too used his time in a most profitable way. Instead of climbing the short, unprofitable, worldly “ladder of success” to become a commercial magnate, or an imperial potentate, or a religious pontiff, he entered the full-time service of his God Jehovah, even if it brought upon him great persecution and suffering and in the end cost him his human life. He went after the most profitable thing and obtained it.
The way we use our time is largely determined by habits. It is therefore profitable to cultivate good habits. Guard against loving pleasure more than God. Do not gamble that you will be here tomorrow to do what should be done today. (Matt. 6:27, NW) Time is precious. Do not waste it on unessential, trivial things. Avoid association with the wicked of this world.
It is written: “Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go: keep her; for she is thy life.” (Prov. 4:13) This requires that one diligently study God’s Word, and attend all theocratic meetings. Forsake not the opportunity to assemble with Jehovah’s witnesses at the Watchtower studies and service meetings and to participate in the ministry school.—Heb. 10:25.
Your life and the lives of others depend upon how well you use the knowledge and theocratic instructions gained in study. You must preach what you learn to others, for it is through “the foolishness of preaching” that people will escape destruction. (1 Cor. 1:21) Preaching is therefore the wise and profitable thing to do. When this world-wide witness work is completed and Armageddon has struck, God’s faithful preaching witnesses will gain endless life.
[Footnotes]
See The Watchtower, February 1, 1950.

