Announcements
WILL YOU BE ONE OF THE THOUSANDS THAT HEAR?
August 1 marks the day that the timely discourse “God’s Love to the Rescue in Man’s Crisis” will be given simultaneously in ten cities of the United States, which will be attended by an aggregate attendance of over 50,000. This is the big assembly week end of 1954! Will you be among this great throng if you have not attended one of the earlier assemblies? If you have not planned to attend so far, why not arrange NOW to be at any of the ten cities listed for this week end, earlier in The Watchtower? You will not regret placing other things secondary to being present with true Christians for this important life-giving message of truth. Rooming accommodations may still be obtained. If not received by mail ahead of time, you may pick up accommodations at the rooming department at the assembly when you arrive. The addresses are given in the May 1 Watchtower. The important thing is to be there.
TAKE FLIGHT TO THE MOUNTAINS FOR SAFETY
“A prudent man sees danger and hides himself; but the simple go on, and suffer for it.” (Prov. 27:12, RS) Where can the wise and prudent person flee and hide from the destruction impending this present evil system of things? The only place of refuge is Jehovah’s theocratic arrangement as all of Jehovah’s witnesses know and appreciate. (Matt. 24:15, 16; Luke 21:20, 21) Neighborly love will be shown by all of Jehovah’s witnesses during August by calling at the homes of people in congregation territory and special unassigned territory to point out the way to safety. As an aid to help them understand what God’s Word, the Bible, says concerning these times three bound books together with three booklets, constituting a mine of valuable information, will be offered for a contribution of only $1.50. Do you know of and have understanding concerning the place of safety? Use the information well by helping others to take flight to the mountains.
BIBLE READING MADE EASIER
The original writings of Moses and the prophets were made in the language of the day. They did not use obscure or obsolete terms or words. Likewise the disciples of apostolic times wrote in the language of their day. The reason being, of course, that Bible writing was meant to be understood by the reader. Do you understand the many archaic expressions, terms and words found in older translations of the Bible such as the King James Version? Seeing the great need for an accurate translation of the Bible in the common speech of this twentieth century, the New World Bible Translation Committee has completed thus far from the Hebrew the Bible books Genesis to Ruth and from the Greek, Matthew to Revelation. This translation makes Bible reading easier and enables the reader to have greater understanding. The New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, Volume I, and the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures are available for a contribution of only $1.50 each. De luxe leather-bound editions may be had for $5.00 apiece. For easier and more enjoyable Bible reading obtain your copies now.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of August 29: A People with a Purpose.
Week of September 5: The Purpose of Your Witnessing.

