From Our Readers
Not Anti-Semitic  Thank you for not hiding things that you regret having said. Although I would like to have read an apology for this statement, your this-was-the-context explanation was adequate. Please carry on with your fine work, knowing that your readers appreciate the depth and honesty of Awake!
W. H., United States
The reader refers to statements in the “Declaration of Facts,” a resolution adopted in 1933 at a convention in Berlin, Germany. (See “Jehovah’s Witnesses—Courageous in the Face of Nazi Peril,” in the July 8, 1998, issue of “Awake!”) As the article noted, nothing said in the 1933 declaration was intended to express or condone hostility toward Jews, and we regret it if some statements give that impression today. If anyone back in the 1930’s interpreted the “Declaration of Facts” to mean that Jehovah’s Witnesses were anti-Semitic, this misimpression could easily have been corrected by observing the courageous and compassionate acts of individual Witnesses in behalf of Jews. Moreover, Watch Tower Society publications were among the first to expose and express outrage at the treatment of Jews in Europe.—ED.
Raising Seven Sons  I couldn’t resist taking this opportunity to thank you for the article “The Challenges and Blessings of Raising Seven Sons.” (January 8, 1999) I have found that raising a teenager is quite challenging, especially as a widow. It wasn’t until this article that I realized that it is very possible I will get through this stage in my children’s lives.
A. R., United States
I too come from a family of seven. Up until recently, we had been serving Jehovah unitedly. However, about six months ago, one of my younger sisters was disfellowshipped. When I first saw the article, I did not want to read the story of a successful family. I prayed that I could benefit from the article without feeling envious. I was very much encouraged to learn that there is a family having experiences similar to ours and that Jehovah is concerned about our situation. I want to thank the Dickmans for sharing their story. I am sure that my parents and my younger siblings got much encouragement and comfort from this article.
W. Y., Japan
Facial Marks  Heartfelt thanks for the article “Facial Marks—Nigeria’s Fading ‘Identity Card.’” (January 8, 1999) My husband and I have friends from Africa with facial scars, and we wondered what they were. We received the answer to our question in your article.
M. V., Italy
Lions  Thank you for the article “Lions—Africa’s Majestic Maned Cats.” (January 22, 1999) This article was very important to me, since I have liked lions for years. I admire them very much because they are beautiful and brave. One day I would like to be with “the maned young lion.”—Isaiah 11:6-9.
E. A. S., Brazil
Plants Versus Pollution  The little article “Plants Versus Pollution” (January 22, 1999) really stood out. The information proved beyond a doubt that there has to be a loving, caring, intelligent Creator. It showed how Jehovah created the earth to care for itself, even when threatened by man’s efforts to ruin the earth. The article also sustained my hope of living in the Paradise that Jesus promised at Luke 23:43.
R. J., United States

