The Bible’s Viewpoint
What Makes a Good Citizen?
AFTER World War II, many people in Europe and Japan who considered themselves to be good, law-abiding citizens found themselves tried and convicted for war crimes. Among them were high-ranking military officials, scientists, and other professionals. In an effort to justify their actions, some of these criminals explained that they were simply obeying orders, as would be expected of any good citizen. Their self-proclaimed good citizenship, however, led them to commit terrible crimes against humanity.
On the other hand, there are those who disregard the authority of the State. Some openly reject governmental authority, while others are ready to break the law as long as there is little danger of getting caught. Of course, few would deny that there is need for obedience to authority, for without it there would be anarchy and chaos. However, the question is, How far should the discharge of civic duty and obedience to law go? Consider some basic principles that helped the first-century Christians to have a balanced view of their responsibilities to the State.
Christian Subjection to the Authorities
First-century Christians willingly submitted to the laws and regulations of those who were “superior authorities”—that is, the ruling powers of the day. (Romans 13:1) Christians believed it was right “to be in subjection and be obedient to governments and authorities as rulers.” (Titus 3:1) Although they recognized Christ as their heavenly King, they were also law-abiding subjects of their human rulers and posed no threat to the security of the State. In fact, they were encouraged to “have honor for the king” at all times. (1 Peter 2:17) The apostle Paul even encouraged Christians: “I therefore exhort, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, offerings of thanks, be made concerning all sorts of men, concerning kings and all those who are in high station; in order that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with full godly devotion and seriousness.”—1 Timothy 2:1, 2.
First-century Christians conscientiously paid whatever taxes were demanded of them, even though at times this was an onerous burden. They followed the inspired direction given by the apostle Paul on this matter: “Render to all their dues, to him who calls for the tax, the tax.” (Romans 13:7) In the view of Jesus’ disciples, the Roman government and its officers were ruling by God’s permission and in a sense were serving as “God’s public servants,” in that they provided a measure of peace and stability in society.—Romans 13:6.
“Ready for Every Good Work”
First-century Christians were encouraged to accept civic duties imposed by the State. Jesus Christ himself advised his disciples to be willing at times to do even more than the minimum demanded by the civil authorities. “If someone under authority impresses you into service for a mile,” he said, “go with him two miles.” (Matthew 5:41) In following this advice, Christians showed that they did not wish to take the benefits of living in a civilized society without giving something in return. They were always “ready for every good work.”—Titus 3:1; 1 Peter 2:13-16.
They genuinely loved their neighbors and looked for ways to help them. (Matthew 22:39) Because of this love and their adherence to high moral standards, the first-century Christians were a force for good in their community. Their neighbors had ample reason to be delighted about living next door to a Christian. (Romans 13:8-10) Christians demonstrated their love by more than simply abstaining from badness. They were encouraged to be outgoing and active in the interests of others, to “work what is good [not simply toward fellow believers but] toward all,” just as Jesus Christ had.—Galatians 6:10.
“Obey God as Ruler Rather Than Men”
There were, however, limits to their obedience to secular authorities. They would not do anything that would violate their conscience or damage their relationship with God. For example, when the religious authorities in Jerusalem ordered the apostles to stop preaching about Jesus, they refused to comply. “We must obey God as ruler rather than men,” they declared. (Acts 5:27-29) Christians steadfastly refused to get involved in idolatrous emperor worship. (1 Corinthians 10:14; 1 John 5:21; Revelation 19:10) With what results? “Condemnations followed,” says historian J. M. Roberts, “not for being Christian, but for refusing to do something the law commanded.”—Shorter History of the World.
Why in this instance did they ‘refuse to do something the law commanded’? They recognized that “the superior authorities” wielded power by God’s permission and thus served as “God’s minister” in maintaining law and order. (Romans 13:1, 4) But Christians still viewed God’s law as superior. They remembered that Jesus Christ had established this balancing principle for those who would be his followers: “Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.” (Matthew 22:21) Their obligations to God had to take precedence over Caesar’s demands.
That this was the right course is shown by what resulted when many professed Christians failed to follow these fine principles. Apostate leaders of Christendom, for example, became “pliant men [used] as instruments of civil government, notably in the raising and maintenance of military forces,” says military historian John Keegan. Their followers ended up taking sides in wars that spilled the blood of millions of innocent victims. Says Keegan: “The law of God fell on deaf ears when men’s blood was up.”
The first-century Christians, however, provide a shining example in striking the right balance. They were good citizens. They discharged their civic duties and responsibilities well. But they firmly adhered to clear Bible principles and followed their Bible-trained conscience in all aspects of life.—Isaiah 2:4; Matthew 26:52; Romans 13:5; 1 Peter 3:16.
[Picture on page 26]
“Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar”

