R769 : page 1 



VOL. VI. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., JULY AND AUGUST, 1885. 

NOS. 11 & 12. 



page 1 



ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: 
NO. 40 FEDERAL ST. ALLEGHENY, PA. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does not 
cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing every 
expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from other 
periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS : —Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. You may send by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter, payable to C. T. 
RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 
TAKE NOTICE. 



This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and freely 
we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to 
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat— yea, 
come, buy wine and milk without money and without price." And 
you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? Hearken 
diligently— and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight 
itself in fatness."- ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



page 1 

VOLUME VI. closes with this number. We revise our list every 
August and February, so that we may not continue sending the 
TOWER where it is not wanted. If your subscription commenced 
with the first of the volume, do not neglect, but advise us at once of 
your desires. Should mistakes occur, please advise us. Some from 
whom we have not heard for a long time, will find a blue mark 
opposite this paragraph. 



R770 : page 1 

THE TABERNACLE pamphlet being out of print, this issue will 
hereafter supply its place. As our usual sized paper would not 
contain it complete, we have issued a double number. A thorough 
study of the subjects herein presented, will require not less than two 
months. May these solemn lessons be as strengthening to your 
hearts as to ours. 



R769 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"I will stand upon my watch, and fix my foot upon the Tower, and 
I will watch to see what will be said to me." Habakkuk 2:1. 

Human judgment in its fallen condition is very much inclined to 
take extreme views on whichever side of a question it looks. Like 
the pendulum of a clock, men go from one to an opposite extreme. 
The way to steady and settle our judgment is to conclude that we 
can know only what God has revealed, and come to the Bible as His 
revelation; and leaving our own opinions, make new ones strictly 
and entirely therefrom. 

This disposition to fly to opposite extremes frequently manifests 
itself in those who for years have believed that ninety-nine out of 
every hundred of the human family were en-route to everlasting 
torture. When they come to realize that the love of God would 
sanction no such thing, but that the extreme penalty of sin is 
destruction of being; and that from the destruction (death) which 



came upon the entire race through Adam's sin, a full ransom has 
been made by Jesus, and that a full RESTITUTION of all the 
forfeited rights, privileges and enjoyments of perfect life is to come 
to all in God's DUE TIME-when they see this, they become so 
overjoyed that they go to an opposite extreme and conclude that 
God is so loving that he would never be happy unless ultimately 
every human being shall be everlastingly saved. From the extreme 
view that God was all JUSTICE and without LOVE, they 
unintentionally run to the opposite extreme that He is all LOVE and 
destitute of justice. 

Beloved, let us BALANCE our warped and perverted and 
unbalanced judgments by the testimonies of God's Word. Let us 
remember that EXISTENCE is a boon from heaven, to be forced 
upon none. It is a favor, a blessing, designed only for those who 
shall appreciate it; and who will use it in harmony with the LAW 
OF RIGHT, the law of God; others cannot have it, and must cease 
to exist; not only for their own good, but for the good of all and the 
everlasting purity of God's kingdom in earth and heaven. 

Surely God has stated to us plainly that justice and equity are the 
very foundations of his throne (Psa. 89:14); and not only so, but for 
over four thousand years he illustrated the penalty of sin and the 
unrelenting, positive character of his justice, which not only 
condemned Adam (and all the race as represented in him) to death, 
destruction, but refused to FORGIVE that wilful sin, because God 
could not do so and be JUST. Rom. 3:26. 

Surely such a demonstration of justice, as God manifested in giving 
His Son to be a ransom ["corresponding price"] for all, before that 
sin could be blotted out, evidences a firmness and a justice on God's 
part that is simply sublime. It should not only be an assurance to us 
that those once justified from Adamic guilt have nothing further to 
fear therefrom (1 John 1:9), but should also assure us beyond 
question, that all who are fully released from Adamic penalty and 
guilt when on trial individually, would be dealt with in the same 
inflexibly just manner that Adam was. If obedient, life will be sure, 
as the reward; if disobedient, death [this time a second death], as 
surely as in Adam's case. And the conditions would be the same, in 
that Justice could no more forgive the personal wilful sins which 
invoked the second death, than it did the Adamic sin which invoked 
the first death. 

But, some one inquires: Will God's love every change? And if not, 
will not the same love which planned the ransom through Christ 
and the coming restitution as a result, prompt God to again redeem 
with another ransom those who go into the second death? 

We reply: God is the same yesterday, today and forever, and will 
always pity and love any of His creatures who unwillingly or 
without their own will or choice, are under the penalty of His law; 
but from the very nature of things He can have neither sympathy 
nor pity for those who with a full knowledge of the heinousness of 



sin, a full experience with its penalty, and a full knowledge of what 
it cost for their redemption from it once, and full ability to resist it, 
shall, notwithstanding all this wilfully, and designedly, despise His 
goodness and love, and violate the laws which they know divine 
wisdom enacted for the lasting good of all: with such, God cannot 
be pleased. As God hates sin because it is wrong and works evil, so 
he must "abhor" and be "angry" with such WILFUL sinners as we 
have just described. 

No; another redemption will never take place! Another ransom 
price will never be given! We confidently and strongly state this, 
because supported both by Scripture and reason, as follows: 

It is declared that Christ shall reign until he has subdued all 
enemies. Sinners are enemies through wicked works; and such as 
will not be RECONCILED to God's laws and arrangements must be 
destroyed, as it is written: "All the WICKED [wilfully so] will He 
[God] destroy." (Psa. 145:20.) The wicked shall be [re]turned 
[Heb., Shub, turned back, returned;] into hell [sheol-death; hence 
SECOND DEATH]. (Psa. 9:17.) This agrees also with the 
statements of Revelation regarding the results and termination of 
that Millennial reign: Satan and all who in that time of trial, shall 
willingly and persistently follow his example, and be thereby his 
co-workers in evil (his messengers) shall together be cast into the 
"Lake of fire," symbol of destruction-the second death. Rev. 
20:14,15. 

Nor can any one consistently claim that the second death is to be 
destroyed by a resurrection of its captives out of it, BECAUSE it is 
stated that present death- the first (the death which resulted from 
Adam's sin) is to be destroyed by resurrecting ALL who went into 
it; because redeemed from its power by the precious blood of 
Christ. These two deaths are not the same; hence the first can and 
will be destroyed, while the other everlastingly blots out of 
existence, and thus everlastingly punishes all who go into it. Those 
who cannot see more, should at least recognize the difference by 
the fact that the one is cast into and destroyed in the other. (Rev. 
20:14.) That this destruction of all willful evil doers who, under the 
favorable opportunities of the Millennium refuse to hear [heed] that 
Prophet (Acts 3:23), will take place, is evident, from the statement 
that this is at the close of that reign (Rev. 20:7-9), and that 
immediately following it everything is described as pure, holy and 
happy -no sin, and hence none of its results. Rev. 21:4,22. 

The only one of Jesus' parables which furnishes a clear outline of 
that age (Matt. 25:31-46), shows the same termination of that age, 
in which "the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of his glory" and 
judge the world. It shows that those who at the end of that trial are 
of the "goat" class, having refused to become his sheep, will be 
delivered into everlasting punishment [DEATH being the 
punishment or wages of sin] prepared or designed [only] for the 
Devil and [those who wilfully and persistently follow his precepts 
and example] his angels. 



To claim another redemption and another chance beyond that which 
the Millennium brings, as a result of the ransom given by Christ, is 
not only to add to God's Word, but to contradict it; for it declares 
that those who sin WILFULLY after knowing the truth, show that 
they despise the ransom-sacrifice and do despite to the spirit of 
FAVOR which God therein manifested toward them; and that for 
such, there remaineth no more a sacrifice for sins, but a fearful 
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall 
DEVOUR these adversaries of God and his law. "Christ dieth no 
more"; and even if he did, it is declared that such put themselves in 
such a condition by opposing and despising God's 

R770 : page 1 

once manifested goodness, that it is IMPOSSIBLE TO RENEW 
THEM AGAIN UNTO REPENTANCE. See Heb. 6:4-8; 10:26-31 
and Rom. 6:9. 

The results of the Millennial Age will be so complete and perfect, 
that not one being who appreciates God's favors, and desires to 
please him, will be destroyed in the Second death; and not one will 
escape it who is not, at heart, as well as outwardly, in fullest 
sympathy with God's government and its beneficent laws in support 
of righteousness, peace and love. Christ will do this work so 
thoroughly that when the kingdom is delivered up to God even the 
Father, nothing by way of making it more perfect will remain to be 
done in the successive ages. He must reign until he has put all 
enemies under his feet. He shall not fail nor be discouraged till he 
have ESTABLISHED righteousness in the earth on a lasting basis. 
1 Cor. 15:26, and Isa. 42:4. 

Besides, suppose a case: Suppose a being to have lived through the 
Millennium under the full light and teaching of the Christ, with all 
of its lessons fully impressed upon him, who yet cherished such 
love for evil doing, that when evil is given greater liberty of action 
in the end of that age— as a test of the heart sentiments— he would 
follow that evil willingly, and knowingly and eagerly, and as a 
result of resisting Christ is "cut off from among the people," in the 
second death. (Acts 3:22.) Suppose for the moment, such an one 
resurrected from that Second death and tried again; what assurance 
could there be that with the SAME knowledge and liberty again at 
his command he would not do the same again? And if some one 
suggests that God COULD coerce his will, and thus compel his 
everlasting obedience, we answer, Yes; but God declares that such 
is not his design. He seeketh not such as he can compel, for he 
could compel all; but, "The Father seeketh such to worship Him" as 
"worship Him in spirit and in truth." (John 4:23,24.) Besides, if 
God is going to compel their acquiescence to his laws, why not do 
so at first without having a "second death;" and without marring the 
perfectness and bliss of future ages by trying over and over again to 
get some to consent and worship him in spirit and truth whom in 
the end he must compel? This is unanswerable. 



Again, if such were to be compelled to obedience would it not be 
degrading them below the level of manhood? Is not manhood's 
chief glory his will, his power of moral choice? And would not 
such a change as would deprive him of this freedom of choice, 
deprive him of manhood and make him merely a machine? and if so 
would it not be far more to God's glory to blot out such unworthy 
beings and create such "new machines" as he wanted— if he wants 
mere machines?— which evidently he does not. 

The mistake of those who fall into this error is that they do not fully 
appreciate the opportunities of the Millennial Age, and the 
abundant arrangement there, provided by divine wisdom. They 
think of it as though the sin of disobedience might possibly be one 
act, and it perhaps induced by a measure of ignorance or lack of 
experience or weakness. But no; God's provision has been 
complete: Man will not be suddenly brought to perfection and then 
suddenly exposed to trials which might sweep away his judgment, 
and over-riding his past experiences, sweep him into evil; but he 
will be brought gradually to it during that age, as in a 

R770 : page 2 

school. He will be helped to surmount the weaknesses of the fall, 
and to regain the summit of manhood's estate; helped by the 
Redeemer who purchased for him the right to return to that estate. 
Christ, in restoring to man "that which was lost" (Luke 19:10, and 
Acts 3:21) will do it in such a manner as will do the man most 
good. He will make known to him its advantages and opportunities 
[bring him to "a knowledge of the truth"] while saving him out of 
Adamic death (1 Tim. 2:4). He shall in that schooling learn what 
wilful sin is and the sureness of its punishment, and be fully 
acquainted with the fact that at the close of the age all must be in 
heart, in will, holy, and in harmony with the holy God, else they 
will be condemned to death— destruction everlasting— as wilful 
transgressors unworthy of God's blessings, and unfit for the ages of 
perfectness then to be introduced. 

We cannot suppose, judging from our own feelings, that MANY 
would thus sin WILFULLY and despise God's favors; nevertheless 
the fact that Satan has done so for the past six thousand years, and 
that he will when "loosed," at the end of the next age, be of the 
same disposition, notwithstanding all that he shall have witnessed 
of God's love, etc., (as God's Word positively declares;) proves that 
some are not affected to repentance by a knowledge of God's 
goodness, and reasonably leads us to conclude that there may be 
some of mankind whom it will be as "impossible to renew ...unto 
repentance" as Satan. And this conclusion Scripture sustains by 
positive declarations. 

Out of the billions of the race who have lived and will there have 
trial, it would not be many if ONE MILLION should prove 
incorrigible and be returned to sheol-destroyed in the everlasting 
destruction of the second death; but for the sake of an argument let 



us suppose that only one thousand would be of this incorrigible 
class. Let us suppose the suggested theory of some, that these who 
go into the second death will be redeemed out of it by a "ransom" 
[corresponding price] as all the race were redeemed out of the 
Adamic death. In that case it would be necessary that one thousand 
perfect beings should die to "ransom" this thousand wilful sinners. 
One Saviour could not give a ransom [a corresponding price] for all 
these, as Jesus did for the entire Adamic race numbering millions; 
because this thousand were each one, WILFUL sinners, while in the 
case of the Adamic race, there was but ONE perfect person tried; 
ONE only sinned wilfully; and hence ONE perfect being freely 
offered, was a full ransom— a corresponding price. See Rom. 5:17- 
19 and 11:32. 

But to continue the supposed case and show its further 
inconsistency: Suppose that at the close of the Millennium one 
thousand of the perfected race were to present themselves as 
ransoms for the one thousand incorrigible, what a scene it would 
be— a thousand Calvarys at once. And who would put them to 
death? Not the holy and righteous; they should and could no more 
slay their brethren than could the Apostles have crucified Jesus. 
Then we must suppose to carry out this incredible supposition that 
the ONE THOUSAND INCORRIGIBLES would add this to their 
wilful sins; that they would kill their redeemers: And surely no 
better proof of their incorrigibility could be imagined than a 
willingness to shed innocent blood. Jesus could pray for his 
murderers, "Father forgive them, they know not what they do," 
because they were blinded by the devil, and depraved by the fall; 
but no such prayer could be made for this class— brought to a full 
knowledge of the truth. 

But some may want still further to suppose:— Suppose after all this, 
they come to realize the great sacrifice these redeemers have made 
for them, would it not melt them to love and obedience? We 
answer, No; "it is impossible to renew" SUCH "to repentance." In 
the first place they could not "come to realize it," because if perfect 
and doing it wilfully, they must have realized their offence all 
along. In the second place, if the love and sufferings of Christ did 
not move them, no love and sufferings would; for "GREATER love 
hath no man than this." If with a perfect knowledge of the love of 
God for men, manifested in him who was rich yet for our sakes, 
became poor that we through his poverty might be made rich, if this 
love of Christ does not constrain them nothing would: And it is 
perfectly absurd for us to think of God trying to outdo his own 
superlatively grand exhibition of love. John 15:13. 

So far from mourning for their loss, the balance of the race will be 
so ashamed of them, that they will be relieved by their utter blotting 
out of existence. Yea, all the righteous, from Jehovah to his 
humblest intelligent creature, must rejoice, when after full 
opportunity for reformation, the Universe shall be cleansed of the 



incorrigible. Their destruction will be a mercy to themselves, as 
well as for the lasting happiness of all the righteous. 

Let us balance our judgments by the testimony of God's Word, and 
be careful to make straight paths for our FEET, lest that which is 
lame be turned out of the way-rather let it be healed. 



page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Williamsburg, Ohio. 

MY DEAR BRO.:-It is sometime since I have written you a letter, 
yet I am not forgetful of you. I am busy, preparing and reading a 
series of papers before a considerable congregation. The manner in 
which these meetings are conducted is like this: I spend from 
twenty to thirty minutes in reading an essay; after the reading is 
done each hearer is permitted to present a written query concerning 
the subject. These I answer as best I can at the next meeting. I think 
they will get quite interesting as we proceed. Why evil was 
permitted is our present theme. When we are fully under headway I 
will write you and let you know how we are coming on. I am 
preparing manuscripts from Z.W.T. in the shape of lectures which I 
intend to deliver whenever opportunity presents. I was a little slow 
to accept the doctrines held forth by the TOWER, but I wanted to 
be sure they were correct before I embraced them. I was hungering 
for something like it for some time, and it seemed a mere accident 
that I got possession of it; but I thank God that I have found the 
truth. Here is a dollar to pay for my paper, and to send some back 
numbers if you have any to spare. Send me anything that I can use 
in the lecture field. I will send more for the work by and by. I am 
happy now, since I have the truth, let come what may. 

Your Brother in Christ, . 

R771 : page 2 



London, June 29, 1885. 

DEAR MR. and MRS. RUSSELL: -Although it is so long since I 
wrote to you last, it is not decrease of interest in glad tidings which 
has kept me silent. The Z.W. TOWERS you so kindly sent are a 
source of great refreshment to me and to those to whom I make 
their contents known. Some point which has been exercising me in 
the Scriptures is touched upon in the next number that arrives. One 
of these happened to be the Baptism, about which having only been 
sprinkled and confirmed by the Church of England, I have felt 
dissatisfied in proportion as I have become more enlightened. 
Before separating from the Church of England I saw the error of 
infant baptism and I perceived that it was open to me to decide 
whether I would be immersed or not according to my conscience; 



then I endeavored to find a set of christians who would perform the 
office for me without seeking by enrollment with their special 
tenets, but I did not succeed. I am not satisfied without fulfilling 
this outward symbol, simply because the Lord enjoined it— so hope 
to be given the opportunity very shortly of taking this step together 
with some I have been teaching. 

I am extremely obliged to you for sending all that you have sent, 
but if you knew how many more copies of the "Food" and 
"Tabernacle" I could use you would try to spare me some more; ere 
long I trust you will receive some money from me to pay for your 
supply of them to me and my friends. It is so strange that where 
ever I have lent the books they are almost invariably lost or mislaid 
so long that one would be tempted to think it had been done on 
purpose; on the other hand I have friends craving to read them. On 
two occasions, an opportunity has been given to me to speak of the 
glad tidings; but Satan tried to hinder. At one place, having found a 
quiet earnest body of believers on a retired street— belonging to no 
particular sect, I offered to lay before them all that I myself had 
learned. They received me cordially, and requested me three times 
to meet them, once at a general assembly. Having made a large wall 
copy from your Chart of the Ages I hung it up on the wall and sat 
amidst those earnest thirsty people to tell them the good news, 
inviting them to question me afterwards, which they did; some very 
sharply, and as if to trip me; but let the Lord receive all praise! it 
was given me to answer quietly, and one of the most arrogant of my 
opponents came up afterwards wrung my hand and thanked me 
begging I would return again. But the Salvation Army, it seems had 
begun to influence these christians so that my teachings offering to 
go further than it's teachings made them afraid, I think, to give ear 
beyond the time I was with them. I left a copy of "Food" which 
they promised to meet together and study with the Scriptures; but 
curiously enough so soon as I had left for London —the book was 
lost. However, many men and women have become interested in 
the teachings, to whom I distributed the sample TOWERS. My 
work lies chiefly at the present time among detached individuals; 
and in writing to the absent. Only one, truly enlightened, lives near 
me, a police constable, who is too poor to send the money he 
would, to you, having a large family. He longs for a Diaglott of his 
own: I have lent him mine occasionally. Before long I could buy 
him one I think, and if so, will send the money to you; but can you 
supply him with regular TOWERS and some of the books? he has a 
wide means of working; at present, he has my papers to read and 
that is all. He and I only were able to keep the anniversary of our 
Lord's marvelous sacrifice as units.... 

I am, dear friends, yours affectionately, 
page 2 



Riddlesburg, Pa. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I now enclose my subscription for '85, 
together with a small sum for the Tract Fund. 

I have been a reader of the TOWER for three years and I thank God 
that it was sent to me, as I believe through Divine providence. 
When I first received the paper I was a Class-leader in the 
Methodist Church and also Sunday School superintendent. Since 
that time I have withdrawn from the church (?) and am walking the 
narrow way. I was about to say alone, but, thank God, I am 
accompanied by my Leader and Guide. 

My name has been cast out, and I am no longer an "influential" 
person, but I am doing what I can to bring others to a knowledge of 
the truth as it is in Christ Jesus. The TOWER comes to me monthly 
like a gentle shower to a thirsty land, and I am refreshed and 
invigorated, and am enabled through the grace of Him who loved 
us, to withstand the wiles of the adversary. 

May God bless your efforts to extend the tidings of salvation to all 
men. 

Your brother in the work, . 

R771 : page 2 

Argentine Republic, South America. 

TO EDITOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Respected Sir:— I again write you for a repetition of your favor. I 
previously wrote you from city of Callao, Peru, giving you 
information of how a fragment of your "Food for Hungry 
Christians" accidentally fell into my hands from an Italian sailor, 
and asking you for a complete copy of the same, to which you at 
once made reply by forwarding me the copy and also several copies 
of your WATCH TOWER. Before, however, I had time for the full 
examination I could have wished, my friend, C.W.H., then in 
Callas, carried them off from me, and as I embarked in a ship 
making the round trip to Valparaiso, Lobus Island, and finally to 
England, I lost the run of the book. 

I am much pleased with the annual celebration of the Lord's 
Supper, as noticed in one of the numbers of WATCH TOWER you 
sent me. Now, I want you to send me the September sample number 
of WATCH TOWER, also, "Teachings of the Tabernacle," and one 
other copy of "Food for Christians." 

It is needless for me to inform you how very much interested I am 
in this movement, and to give you my promise of earnest support. 

I now leave you, in the hope of future pleasant correspondence, 
with the good old Spanish parting of "May God be with you." I 
remain, therefore, 

Yours sincerely, 



page 2 



Philadelphia, Pa. 

DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-I cannot sufficiently express my gratitude 
for ZION'S WATCH TOWER. Each paper has created a longing 
for more which seems to increase every time I read it. I have not 
been altogether silent respecting its contents either. The relics of 
early training twine tenaciously about me, but it seems to me they 
are loosening and must finally be cast aside, for the old dogmas 
quake before the simple truth, and some of them shiver to pieces 
and decay before the light that has dawned on my vision. 

Thank God, for the light; it shall shine on and on until the world 
shall see the "castles in the air" -the fabrications of men- lying in 
ruins; the "houses built upon the sand" swept away and the true 
Church having for its foundation "The Rock of Ages," shall raise 
her meek and lowly head above the tumult of falling systems, and 
bid defiance to the storm which shall sweep the world of its 
calumnious teachings and lay waste the fabulous constructions of 
the world's praised ones. 

I remain yours in Christian love, 
R771 : page 2 

Dover, 111. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Since I accidently found your 
paper, "Food for Thinking Christians" more than three years ago, a 
flood of light has been pouring in upon me. How inexpressibly 
grand the whole plan of salvation appears, and yet how plain and 
simple. Strange it is that so few will believe it, and hate those who 
do; but that was the way they treated our Master. I can afford to 
have my name cast out as evil if I can be of the number that shall 
overcome. The more closely I compare the Word of God with the 
present state of the Nominal Church and the world, the more clearly 
I see the truth of your position that the Lord is really present and 
has commenced his harvest work. 

Your brother in Christ. . 



Halifax, England. 

TO THE EDITOR OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER.-Sir:-A 

pamphlet has been lately put into my hands entitled, "Food for 
Thinking Christians." It has greatly instructed and interested me, 
and led me into a new region of biblical teaching, presenting many 
aspects of truth altogether overlooked, the importance and 



scripturalness of which appear to me most clear and well founded. I 
have a strong desire to receive further teaching in the same 
direction; and I find a note appended on the cover which applies 
unmistakably to my case, therefore I eagerly avail myself of the 
suggestion to write to you. I should like to read and study "The 
Tabernacle and its Teachings" in the light which God has given you 
on the matter. 

If ZION'S WATCH TOWER is a periodical publication, I should 
like to see a copy of it, and should be glad to know where it may 
regularly be obtained. I desire also that others also may be made 
acquainted with the like precious truths. 

Yours gratefully and respectfully, 



R770 : page 2 

CONSIDER yourself the guardian of the character of those who 
may be absent, as you would wish others to guard your character in 
your absence. 



LITTLE pains and little annoyances and little discomforts are as 
much a part of our discipline as are the formidable adversities that 
occasionally smite us like hurricanes.— T. L. Cuyler. 



R771 : page 3 



EARTH'S JUBILEE 

FOLLOWS THE 

GREAT DAY OF ATONEMENT. 

Blow ye the trumpet blow 
The gladly solemn sound; 
Let all the nations know, 
To earth's remotest bound: 

The year of Jubilee is come; 
Return ye ransomed sinners home. 
Jesus, our Great High Priest 
Hath full atonement made: 

Ye weary spirits, rest; 
Ye mournful souls, be glad. 
The year of Jubilee is come; 
Return, ye ransomed sinners, home. 

Extol the Lamb of God, 
The all-atoning Lamb; 
Redemption through His blood, 
To all the world proclaim. 



The year of Jubilee is come; 
Return, ye ransomed sinners, home. 
Ye who were sold for naught, 
Whose heritage was lost, 

Shall have it back for naught, 
A gift at Jesus' cost. 
The year of Jubilee is come; 
Return, ye ransomed sinners, home. 

The Seventh Trumpet hear, 
The news of heavenly grace; 
And, saved from death, appear 
Before the Saviour's face. 

The year of Jubilee is come; 
Return, ye ransomed sinners, home. 



page 3 



THE TYPICAL TABERNACLE AND ITS 
TEACHINGS. 



ITS FURNITURE-ITS APARTMENTS-ITS PEOPLE. 

The Tabernacle which God commanded Israel to construct in the 
Wilderness, in connection with which all their religious services 
and ceremonies were instituted, was, Paul assures us, a shadow of 
good things to come. (Heb. 8:5; 10:1; Col. 2:17.) In fact the whole 
nation of Israel, with their laws and their religious services and 
ceremonies, was typical. This being true, our understanding of the 
plan and work of salvation now in progress, as well as their future 
development, cannot fail to be greatly enlightened by a careful 
study of that Jewish shadow, which was repeated year by year 
continually for the edification of the saints during the Christian 
Age. 1 Pet. 1:12. 

It is not simply to gain a historical knowledge of the Jewish forms, 
ceremonies and worship, that we come to the investigation of this 
subject, but that we may be edified by understanding the substance 
from an examination of the shadow, as God designed in arranging 
it. 

We will fail to attach sufficient weight and importance to the 
shadow, unless we realize how carefully God guided and directed 
all of its details: First, He took Moses up into the mount and gave 
him an illustration of just how things were to be made; Secondly, 
He charged him to be very careful-"See, saith He, that thou make 
all things after the pattern showed to thee in the mount." (Heb. 8:5; 
Exod. 25:40.) So too, with all the minutia of the service; every jot 



and tittle must be performed in the type, because it illustrated 
something great and grand coming after. And in order that these 
shadows might all be exactly performed, and that the people might 
not become careless, the usual penalty for any violation was death: 
For instance-2 Sam. 6:6,7; Lev. 10:1,2; Ex. 28:43; Num. 4:15,20; 
and 17:13. 

Realizing God's care in making the "shadow," should not only give 
us confidence in its correctness, that not one jot or tittle of it shall 
fail until all shall be fulfilled (Matt. 5:18.) but, it should also 
awaken in us so great an interest in God's plan, as would lead us to 
examine closely, and search carefully, for the meaning of those 
shadows: And this, with God's promised blessing we now propose 
to do, assured that among those who are truly God's consecrated 
ones- children begotten of the Spirit-"He that seeketh findeth; and 
to him that knocketh, it shall be opened." 

The directions given to Moses for the construction of the 
Tabernacle may be found in Exod. 25 to 27, and the account of the 
performance of the work, in Exod. 35 to 40. Briefly stated, the 
Tabernacle was a house constructed of a series of boards "overlaid" 
or plated with gold, and set on end into sockets of silver, and firmly 
fastened together by bars of the same wood (Shittim) also covered 
with gold. 

This structure was 15 feet wide, 15 feet high, and 45 feet long, open 
at the front or east end. It was covered by a large linen cloth, with 
figures of cherubim woven into it, in blue, purple and scarlet colors. 
The open end, or front of the structure was closed by a curtain of 
similar material to the covering cloth, called the "door," or first vail. 
Another cloth of the same materials and colors, and similarly 
woven with figures of cherubim called the "Vail" (or second vail) 
was hung under the taches, and divided the Tabernacle into two 
apartments. The first or larger apartment 15 feet wide and 30 feet 
long was called "The Holy."* The second or rear-most apartment 
15 feet wide and 15 feet long was called "The Most Holy." Over 
this Tabernacle proper, was a tent to shelter it and protect it from 
the weather. It was made of a covering of cashmere cloth or goat's 
hair, another of ram skins dyed red, and another of seal skins, 
translated badger skins. 

The Tabernacle was surrounded by a yard or "court" toward the rear 
of which, it stood. This court 75 feet wide and 150 feet long was 
formed by a fence of linen curtains suspended from silver hooks, 
set in the tops of wooden posts 7-1/2 feet high, which were set in 
heavy sockets of copper, (translated brass,) and braced like the tent 
with cords and pins. This enclosure was all holy ground, and was 
therefore called the "holy place"— also the "Court of the 
Tabernacle." Its opening, like the door of the Tabernacle, was 
towards the east, and was called the "gate." The "gate" was of linen 
embroidered with blue, purple and scarlet. It will be noticed that the 
three entrance passages, viz: "the gate" to the Court or "holy place"- 



-"the door" to the "Holy" and "the vail" to the "Most Holy" were of 
the same material and colors. 

The furniture of the court consisted of but two pieces: the "Brazen 
Altar" and the "Laver." 

THE BRAZEN ALTAR. 

First on entering the gate and immediately in front of it, stood the 
Brazen Altar. This altar was made of wood and covered with 
copper, it was 7-1/2 feet square, 4-1/2 feet high. It had various 
utensils belonging to its service-fire pans, called Censers, for 
carrying the fire to the Incense Altar; basins to receive the blood; 
flesh-hooks, shovels, etc. 

THE LAVER. 

Next, between the Brazen Altar and the door of the Tabernacle, 
was the Laver. It was made of polished copper and was a receptacle 
for water for the washing of the priests before entering the 
Tabernacle. 

The furniture of the Tabernacle consisted of a Table, a Candlestick 
and an Incense Altar in the Holy, and the Ark of the Testimony in 
the Most Holy. 

THE TABLE OF SHEW BREAD. 

Within the Tabernacle on the right (north) stood the wooden 
"Table" overlaid with gold, and upon it were placed twelve cakes of 
unleavened bread in two rows or piles, with frankincense on top of 
each pile. (Lev. 24:6) The bread was for the priests; it was holy, and 
was renewed on the seventh or Sabbath day. 

THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK. 

Opposite the Table was the "Candlestick" made of pure gold, 
beaten work (hammered out) having seven branches and in each 
branch a lamp. It was the only light in "The Holy," for as we have 
seen, the natural light was obscured by the walls and curtains, and 
there were no windows. 

Further on, close up to "the Vail" stood a small altar of wood, 
covered with gold, called the "Golden Altar" or "Incense Altar." It 
had no fire upon it except as the priests brought it in the censers, 
which they set in the top of this golden altar, and then crumbled the 
incense upon it, giving forth fragrant perfume. 

THE ARK OF THE TESTIMONY. 

Beyond the vail, in the Most Holy, there was but one piece of 
furniture— the Ark. It was a rectangular box made of wood overlaid 
with gold, having a lid or cover of pure gold called the Propitiatory, 
improperly translated "Mercy Seat." Upon it (and of the same 



piece) were two cherubs of gold-beaten work. Within this Ark 
(under the Propitiatory) were placed the golden bowl of manna, and 
Aaron's rod that budded, and the two tables of the law. (Heb. 9:4) 
Upon the Propitiatory, a supernatural light appeared, shining out 
between the cherubim: This was the only light in the Most Holy. 

It is noticeable that everything inside the Tabernacle was of gold, 
while in the court everything was of copper. Wood, which was used 
as the basis, and was covered by these metals was used, we believe, 
to make the articles lighter of weight, than if of solid metal. This 
would be an important consideration when they traveled. The 
vessels of the Temple, representative of the same things were of the 
solid metals. (1 Kings 7:23,48.) These two metals, gold and copper, 
were used, we think, to represent two different natures-copper, 
representing the human nature in its perfection; and gold 
representing the divine nature-much alike in their appearance, yet 
different in quality, as the human is an image of the Divine nature. 

It will be noticed that the arrangement of the structure formed three 
general parts— the 

CAMP, COURT, AND TABERNACLE. 

The Camp represented the condition of the world of mankind in 
sin, typified by all Israel. These were separated from all holy things 
by the curtain of white linen, which to those within represents a 
wall of faith, but to those without, a wall of unbelief which 
hindered their view of, and access to, the holy things within. The 
only way to enter the "Holy Place" or "Court" was to come through 
the "gate"— Jesus. "I am the way.. .no man cometh unto the Father 
but by me." John 14:6. 

The Court represented the condition of Justification, entered 
through faith in Christ, the "gate." Into this court, only Levites 
(typical of justified believers) were allowed to come. These have 
access to the Brazen Altar and Laver, and do service in the Court, 
but have no right as Levites (believers) to go into the Tabernacle; 
no, nor even to look into it. (Num. 4:19,20.) Here in the "Court" all 
things were of copper. 

The Tabernacle represented the condition of all who have changed 
their nature; that is, those who have consecrated their human nature 
to death, and have become partakers of the Divine nature by being 
begotten of the Spirit. And no human being, be he ever so full of 
faith, be he washed from every sin, and in God's sight justified 
freely from all things, reckoned perfect, can have any place or 
privilege in Divine things unless he fully consecrate or sacrifice 
himself. He cannot even look into spiritual things in the sense of 
appreciating them. "The natural man receiveth not the things of the 
Spirit,. ..neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned." 1 Cor. 2:14,12. 

All things in the Tabernacle were of gold representing the Divine 
nature, and only those of the Levites who were consecrated to the 



work of sacrifice (the Priests) had access to the Tabernacle. So only 
those of the household of faith, who are consecrated to sacrifice, 
enter the Divine conditions represented in the Tabernacle. 

The "Court" or justified human condition was entered by faith only; 
but while we must retain the faith that justifies, we must do more, if 
we would change our nature and become "new creatures"— 
partakers of the Divine nature. If we would enter the Tabernacle or 
Divine condition, we must crucify the justified flesh, presenting our 
human wills and bodies a living sacrifice to God; no longer to seek 
for human pleasure, honor, praise, etc., but to be dead to these and 
alive to the heavenly ones. Yet into this condition also, we come 
through Christ Jesus our Lord, who not only opened for us the 
"gate," but also opened to us the "door" into the Tabernacle "a new" 
way of life through and beyond the vail. Heb. 10:20. 

The two apartments of the Tabernacle, the Holy and the Most Holy, 
represented two phases or stages of the Divine life. The "Holy" 
represented the present condition of those begotten of God through 
the Word, these are Divine minded, "new creatures," who though 
still "in the flesh" have their real life and walk with God within the 
vail and beyond the sight of the world, and the unconsecrated 
believers. These enjoy the light of the candlestick, eat of the special 
food, and offer at the golden altar. 

The "Most Holy" represented our perfected condition as new 
creatures, when born from the dead in the resurrection. Then being 
beyond both vails —the fleshly mind and fleshly body, we shall be 
glorious spiritual bodies, as well 



*Frequently this in the English translation is improperly called the 
"holy place;" and in such instances the word place will be found in 
italics, indicating that it has been supplied by the translators, as for 
instance in Exod. 26:33. This error is quite confusing as "the court" 
was properly called "the holy place." When place, is not in italics, 
"the court" is always meant. See Lev. 14:13 and 6:27. In some 
instances "The Holy," is termed "The Tabernacle of the 
congregation" and the "Most Holy," the "Sanctuary" is also 
sometimes called "the Holy place" [place in italics.] instances, Lev. 
16:17,20,33. In our mention of them we will call those apartments 
severally, "The Camp," "The Court," "The Holy," and "Most Holy." 

A lack of appreciation of the necessity of uniform exactness, and of 
our interest in these typical pictures, on the part of the translators of 
Leviticus, must have been the cause of the varied translations which 
have so aided in confusing the student. 

page 4 

as spiritually minded. We shall be like our Leader, our forerunner 
beyond the vail, who, having entered, hath consecrated for us this 
new and living way. The spiritual minded creature in the "Holy," by 
faith looks forward through the rent Vail into the "Most Holy" 



catching glimpses of the glory, honor and immortality beyond the 
flesh; which hope is an anchor entering into that beyond the vail. 
Heb. 6:19; and 10:20. 

We see, then, that justification by faith, brings us into a condition of 
peace with God. Our sins being forgiven, we are a step nearer to 
God, but still human—in the Court. If we would attain to the prize 
of our high calling which is OF GOD in Christ Jesus, and enter in 
through the "Holy" to the "Most Holy," we must follow 

IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF JESUS 

our Leader and Head-"the High Priest of our profession." By faith 
in his ransom we have entered the "gate" to the Court—the Vail of 
unbelief and sin is passed. By renouncing our human will and all 
our human aspiration and hopes, we pass the first vail, or vail of 
human mindedness, counting our human will as dead; henceforth 
not consulting it, but the will of God only. 

We now find ourselves as "new creatures" in the "Holy"-in the first 
of "the Heavenlies" or Holies (Eph. 2:6. -Diaglott); and here we 
are enlightened by the Golden Candlestick, (God's Word) refreshed 
and strengthened daily with the truth as bread lawful only for the 
Priests to eat. (Matt. 12:4.) And thus enlightened and strengthened, 
we are daily offering up sacrifices at the "Golden Altar," acceptable 
to God by Jesus Christ-a sweet perfume to our Father. 1 Pet. 2:5.* 

Thus, all the saints, the consecrated, are in a "heavenly" or "holy" 
condition now— "seated (at rest and communion) with Christ in (the 
first of these) heavenly places," but not yet in the Holiest of all. No; 
another vail must first be passed: As the passing of the preceding 
vail was the death of the human will, so the passing of the second 
vail is the death of the human body; and it requires both to 
complete our sacrifice: Both fleshly mind and fleshly body must 
first be passed before we shall be in the "Holiest of all"-perfected 
as partakers of the Divine nature and conditions. 

With these thoughts as to the three conditions represented by these 
three places-Camp, Court and Tabernacle, let us notice particularly 
the three classes occupying these conditions, viz.: the Unbelieving 
World, Justified Believers and the Saints or Consecrated Believers; 
typified respectively by 

ISRAELITES, LEVITES AND THE PRIESTHOOD. 

In understanding the significance of the Tabernacle service, it is 
necessary not only to get a clear idea of the structure, its furniture 
and their typical signification, but also of the actors and their 
significance as types. 

Israel is used in many instances to typify the Christian Church. For 
instance: When they left Egyptian bondage, they were a type of 
God's children who hear his call to come out from the world and 
engage in his worship. 



The wilderness journey represents the tedious pilgrimage through 
which many pass, seeking the promised Canaan rest —"Come unto 
me and I will give you rest." As in the type, so in reality, the 
promised Canaan of rest is not far off, if God's children had faith 
enough to go up and enter in. God has made abundant provision for 
them: Yet they journey through the wilderness of sin seeking rest 
but finding none, because they lack faith in God's promises. Some 
wander thus a long time; some never enter the Canaan rest because 
of unbelief. But while Israel, according to the flesh, is thus and in 
other ways used to typify the spiritual Israel, yet, it is a totally 
different type, as we are now examining it, in its relation to the 
Tabernacle. Here, Israel unquestionably typifies the whole world of 
mankind. The sin-offerings, sacrifices, atonement, etc., made 
typically for them, (and them only) were typical of better sacrifices 
and atonement, made on behalf of the whole world; for, "He is a 
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins 
of the whole world." 1 John 2:2. 

In a word, Israel, as well as the Tabernacle, Priests, Levites and 
Sacrifices, was a type. And that which was there done in symbol, is, 
since the first advent of Christ, being carried out on a higher plane, 
and on a larger scale; the latter being the reality, of which that was 
the type or shadow. 

As Israel typified the world, so the tribe of Levites typified the 
"Household of faith," or all believers in Jesus and his ransom. The 
Priesthood, one body under one chief or High Priest, was typical of 
the "little flock" who with their "Head" or High Priest are to be 
Kings and Priests to reign on the earth. Rev. 5:10. Thus viewed we 
see Jesus the High Priest not of the Aaronic order which was but 
the type of our profession or order, the real priesthood of which 
others were but figures. Heb. 3:1; 4:14. 

But before these members of the body of Christ, the priesthood, 
shall be united to their Head and begin their reign, they must first 
"suffer with him" in making the sacrifices, as we shall shortly see. 2 
Tim. 2:12. 

Peter shows who were typified by the priests, when, addressing 
those who are sanctified, he says: (1 Pet. 1:2 and 2:5,9.) "Ye 
are.. .an holy priesthood to offer up sacrifices acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ." "Ye are.. .a royal priesthood." 

That the head or chief of this priesthood, this "little flock," is Jesus, 
is repeatedly mentioned by the apostles. We give but one quotation: 
"Holy brethren (the Royal Priesthood) partakers of the Heavenly 
calling, consider the apostle and High Priest of our profession, 
Christ Jesus. Heb. 3:1. 

As we now pass to the consideration of the inauguration of the 
typical priesthood, we notice that the tribe of the Levites (typical of 
believers or the Justified) existed for a long time before the 
Priesthood was instituted. So in the antitype, the "Royal 
Priesthood" began with the anointing of Jesus the High Priest (at 



baptism, Luke 3:22; Acts 10:38.) but believers, justified by faith in 
Christ, had lived long before that. For instance- Abraham believed 
God, and was justified by his faith. (Rom. 4:2,3.) Though even the 
type had not yet come in his day, yet Abraham as a justified 
believer was a member of the "household of faith," typified by the 
Levites. But none of the "Royal Priesthood" were selected until 
after the Chief or High Priest of this order was first initiated and 
installed in office; since then the initiation and installment of the 
under priests has been the special work of this Christian 
dispensation. Thus, the priests now being installed and now 
sacrificing, are being prepared as God's instruments for the blessing 
of the world. 

THE PRIESTHOOD. 

THEIR ANOINTING AND CONSECRATION. 

In this ceremony, as in every other, relating to the ordination and 
work of the priesthood, it will be well to notice that Jesus was the 
first-the Leader, Captain, Forerunner-teaching clearly that none 
preceded him, hence that none of the Patriarchs or Prophets are of 
the "little flock," "the royal priesthood," "the Bride, the Lamb's 
wife. " Though they will be greatly blessed as the Lord's servants, 
their service will not be so grandly high as that of the priests, nor 
their honor so great; though, as represented in the Levites, both 
their service and honor are great. "The narrow way to life" 
(Immortality) was not opened up until Jesus came. He was the first 
to walk in it. He "brought life and immortality to light. " (2 Tim. 
1:10.) And though all believers (Levites) shall become possessors 
of everlasting life, and the world (Israel) also, if they will accept it— 
during the Millennial age; yet, only the priesthood, who overcome 
and follow their Leader in the narrow way to life-sacrificing the 
human-thus seeking Glory, Honor and Immortality, will ever 
become the possessors of that unlimited degree of life called 
Immortality, as yet possessed only by Jehovah and our Lord Jesus. 
(See "Food for Thinking Christians," page 134, "The narrow way to 
life.") 

Under the Law, the ANOINTING was the ceremony by which the 
Priests were installed in God's service. The Priests were anointed to 
their office with a peculiar ointment, called the Holy Anointing Oil, 
used upon none but the Priests, and unlawful for any one else to 
have or to make. (Exod. 30:25-33.) This oil typified the Holy Spirit 
of adoption whereby we the real, "Royal Priesthood" are sealed. 
Only the consecrated ones are ever to be anointed thus. Aaron, the 
typical High Priest, represented Jesus the head, and the church, as 
members of the body of the great High Priest. Being but a sinful 
man like others, he had to be washed in order to fitly represent the 
purity of the antitype. Aaron was then clothed with the holy 
garments of "glory and beauty," (Exod. 28.) and then the anointing 
oil was poured on his head. Each article of this glorious apparel was 



typical of qualities and powers of the Great Deliverer —head and 
body, which Jehovah discerned looking down into the future to the 
time for "the manifestation of the Sons of God," and the fulfillment 
in them of his promises. 

THE HIGH PRIEST IN GARMENTS OF TYPICAL 
"GLORY AND BEAUTY." 

And these are the garments. ..a breastplate, and an ephod, and an 
upper robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre and a girdle. Exod. 28:4. 

The linen "coat" represented the High Priest's purity, while its 
embroidery showed the outgrowth of that character in works. The 
"mitre," a strip of fine linen, (typical of righteousness) worn around 
the forehead, to which was fastened with a blue lacer, the golden 
plate or "crown" shows that the crown is righteously his. Upon the 
golden plate was inscribed, "Holiness to the Lord," thus 
proclaiming: This High Priest is entirely devoted to the 
accomplishment of Jehovah's purposes. The golden crown 
proclaims his royalty: He is to be "a priest upon his throne"-"a 
priest forever after the order of Melchizedek. " (Psa. 1 10:4.) The 
linen "girdle" indicates a righteous servant; linen -righteousness; 
girdle— servitude. 

The "upper robe," of blue, represents his faithfulness. The fringe of 
it was made of golden bells and pomegranates. The pomegranate, 
being a choice fruit, showed that the faithful performance of his 
work of sacrifice had borne rich fruit- the redemption of the 
forfeited life of the human race. The golden bells signified that 
when the High Priest appears in glory and beauty, the fruit of the 
sacrificial work shall be made manifest to all —proclaimed to all the 
world, as in the type, the bells proclaimed it to all Israel. This is 
indicated by the close proximity; the bells drawing attention to the 
fruit. 

The "ephod" was made of a cloth of purple, blue, scarlet, white and 
gold threads; interwoven skillfully and beautifully. It was of two 
parts, one hanging in front and the other over the back. These two 
parts were fastened together by two gold clasps which rested on the 
shoulders. This ephod, we believe, typified two covenants: the 
Abrahamic represented by the front part, and the New Covenant 
represented by the back part, both of which are thus shown to be 
dependent on this High Priest. They are laid on him; if he fails to 
support them they must fall to the ground. But, thank God, they are 
firmly clasped on him by the Gold clasps, (Divine power) as well as 
bound to him by the "Curious Girdle" —a cord made of the same 
materials as the ephod. This girdle seems to say, this is a servant; 
and as this is the girdle of the ephod it tells us that this one is- "The 
messenger (servant) of the Covenant whom ye delight in." Mai. 3:1. 

True the Abrahamic Covenant is partially fulfilled in the person of 
the High Priest-who is the Seed, the spiritual seed, which is to 
bless all. But as we have seen, the Abrahamic covenant has two 



phases; the heavenly, or spiritual seed, and the fleshly seed, the 
literal descendents of Abraham; the latter the only one recognized 
by Abraham, the spiritual being hid. During the Gospel Age the 
spiritual seed develops, becoming members of the body of the High 
Priest; growing up into the head. After this spiritual seed has been 
developed, then that phase of the covenant, understood by Abraham 
and all his descendants to this day, will be fulfilled; its fulfilment 
hangs on the great spiritual High Priest. So says Paul: "As 
concerning the Gospel [the spiritual part of the covenant] they [the 
literal seed] are enemies for your sakes; but as touching the election 
they are [still] beloved for the fathers' sakes. For the gifts and 
callings of God are not things he will repent of. For this is my 
covenant TO THEM. There shall come out of Zion [the spiritual] 
the deliverer, [this great High Priest, the servant of the Covenant - 
Jesus the head and the "little flock" his body] and shall turn away 
ungodliness from Jacob. Rom. 11:26-29. 

So then, after the body of Christ, the spiritual "seed" is complete, 
the Abrahamic covenant must have a fulfillment to the fleshly seed; 
that fleshly seed must become great "as the sand by the sea shore" 
as the heavenly seed is likened to "the stars of heaven." They must 
first be turned to righteousness and truth, and then become an 
agency through which the spiritual seed will operate, to bless all 
mankind with truth and knowledge. 

Thus the earthly phase of the Abrahamic covenant is seen still to 
depend on and to be upheld by the Great High Priest, who is also 
the mediator of the "New Covenant" which Jesus sealed or ratified 
with his own blood, in which sacrifice, the members of his BODY 
have been privileged to join with him; and they will be also 
privileged to share with him in conferring upon mankind the 
blessings of that "New Covenant" when the day of sacrifice is 
ended and the reign of glory begins. (Jer. 31:31; Ezek. 11:19 and 
36:24; Rom. 11:27.) This New Covenant is typified by the back 
part of the ephod. 

The scarlet, blue, purple, etc., which composed the ephod, indicated 
the conditions of the covenant; the scarlet showed how God 
provides redemption from the Adamic curse through the blood of 
the ransom; the white linen indicated the restoration of man to his 
original purity; the blue vouchsafes to him the ability to faithfully 
maintain his righteous character; the purple proclaims the 
restoration of the royalty of earth as possessed by Adam, earth's 
first monarch. All of these blessings are woven together —made 
sure, by the Divine power of the anointed Priest, as shown by the 
interwoven thread of gold. That part of the Abrahamic covenant 
referring to the spiritual seed, is represented as complete in God's 
sight. They all, as God sees them, are born of the Spirit to the 
completeness of the Divine nature, represented in the person of the 
Priest. Thus Jehovah has laid all these covenants upon one who is 
both mighty and willing to execute these glorious covenanted 
blessings-"in due time." 



The Breastplate of Judgment was placed on the front of the ephod. 
It was suspended by a gold chain from the clasps on the shoulder, 
and was fastened to the ephod by a lacer, through golden rings— 
this fastening being so concealed underneath, that to the casual 
observer it might appear to be a part of the ephod. (Exod. 28:26- 
28.) This breast-plate represents beautifully the Law: It was not a 
part of the Abrahamic covenant (Ephod) but "it was added" to it. 
(Gal. 3:19.) As the 



*The word spiritual in this text is omitted by the Sinaitic MS. with 
evident propriety, as not spiritual but human rights, privileges, life, 
etc., are sacrificed. 

page 5 

Israelite regarded them, not seeing the hidden connection, the 
covenant to Abraham and "the law which was 430 years after," 
were all one: But Paul shows us that there are two parts— two seeds- 
-to this covenant: the spiritual, and the natural; and that the 
Covenant and the Law were distinct "to the end that the promise 
might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the Law, 
but to that also which is of the Faith." Rom. 4:16. 

This Law emblem (the Breast-plate) was one of the most beautiful 
of the High Priest's garments; it was made of the same materials as 
the ephod. It had in it, set in gold, twelve precious jewels, in which 
were engraved the names of the twelve tribes. It was bound on his 
heart, indicating that it was precious to him. As a "breast-plate of 
righteousness" it covered him. That which condemned all imperfect 
ones was his pleasure— "I delight to do thy will O my God; yea, thy 
law is within my heart." Psa. 40:8. 

The breast-plate was two spans long and one wide, folded in the 
middle, i.e., a span long and a span wide double. The size, a span, 
indicates that the Law of God is the full measure of a perfect man's 
ability. Jesus, being perfect, was the only one who ever kept it fully, 
while his BODY has his righteousness imputed. 

Its being double, of the same size and measure, represents the letter 
and the spirit of the law. The front part contained the jewels and 
was hung by the gold chain to the gold clasps of the ephod; the 
under part was fastened to the ephod. This latter, tied to the ephod 
(covenant) seems to represent the law in letter as presented to 
fleshly Israel. The former, or front part seems to illustrate the spirit 
of the law fulfilled in us, "who walk not after the flesh but after the 
spirit." (Rom. 8:4.) The two are really ONE when rightly seen, yet 
the front part only, bears the precious jewels. Pure gold being a 
symbol of divine things, the dependence of this part of the Law by a 
gold chain, from the gold clasps, seems to teach that the Law is 
kept by divine power; and so we know, it is by divine strength that 
we walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. It is this phase of the 
Law which bears the "jewels" set in gold representative of the true 



Israel. "They shall be mine in the day that I come to make up my 
jewels." Thus embedded in gold (the divine nature) and upheld by 
the golden chain of divine promises, what wonder that "the 
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us." 

As Aaron stood there clothed in these typically glorious and 
beautiful robes and anointed with the holy oil, his head representing 
Jesus-the head of the priesthood, and his body representing the 
Church complete in him, how impressive his significance, as a type 
of the World's High Priest, undefiled, and clothed with power and 
authority to carry out Jehovah's covenants. We see the BODY again 
typified individually by the under priests who wore bonnets 
covering their own heads to indicate that they were not the head of 
the Priesthood, but members of his body. God gave Jesus "to be the 
head over all things to the church which is his body." Eph. 1:22,23. 

It is for this reason that Paul insists that a woman's head should be 
covered as indicating that she is not the head; the husband and wife 
being typical of Jesus and his Bride-the Church of the first-born. 
These under priests were robed in linen garments, the imputed 
righteousness of Jesus, and girdled, showing that they also were 
servants. 

As Aaron had the Holy Oil poured upon his head, so our Head, 
Jesus, was anointed with the antitypical oil-the Holy Spirit-when 
he was thirty years of age, on the banks of Jordan, at the time of his 
consecration. There he was "anointed with the oil of gladness above 
his fellows"-as head over all the joint-heirs. A measure of the 
Spirit is given to every man who thus consecrates; but Jehovah 
gave "not the Spirit by measure unto Him." (John 3:34.) John saw 
and bare record that our High Priest was thus anointed (John 1:32; 
Luke 4:1), and Peter adds his testimony (Acts 10:38), "How God 
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power." 

The anointing oil was poured only upon the head. The under priests 
were not anointed individually: Since they were recognized as 
members of the High Priest's body, they received their anointing 
through the head. 

The oil "ran down even unto the skirts of his garments" (Psa. 
133:2), thus representing how the members of his body are all to be 
partakers of the same anointing after their head. "The anointing 
which ye have received of him abideth in you." (1 John 2:27.) This 
oil began to reach the body on the day of Pentecost and flows on, 
down through this Gospel Age, anointing all who are truly baptized 
into Christ, to be with their Head, kings and priests unto God; to 
reign a thousand years. Rev. 20:6. 

We thus see that Aaron robed and anointed represented the entire 
Christ- "the seed," in which God is about to bless all the families 
of the earth. But let us not forget that we have been viewing the 
Great Deliverer from God's standpoint, and with him looking down 
to the time of his manifestation- the dawn of the Millennial Day- 
when all the members have come into the body and when the "holy 



oil" has run down "even to the skirts of his garments," anointing 
every member. Then he will begin the work of blessing mankind. 
For the glorious reign of this Kingly Priest, we constantly pray- 
"Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth." 

CONSECRATING THE PRIESTHOOD. 

The consecration of the Priesthood (Lev. 8:14,33), was typical of 
the entire consecration of the human nature of Jesus and his body, 
to the will of Jehovah— Jesus' obedience even unto death, and the 
obedience of the members of his body suffering the same with him. 
The whole body represented by Aaron's sons, as well as the Head 
represented by Aaron himself, are by the antitypical sacrifices being 
made, during the Christian Age, CONSECRATED for their future 
work as kings and priests, to restore and rule and bless mankind. 
When this consecration is made, they have given ALL they had. 
But their extremity is Jehovah's opportunity, and when they have 
consecrated all they had to destruction and become joint- sacrificers 
with Jesus their Redeemer, for the sins of the world, they are 
begotten of God to a new nature- spiritual; and not only so, but to 
the highest order of spiritual existence-the Divine nature; and as 
such they are owned as spiritual sons of God. Gal. 4:4,7, and 2 Pet. 
1:4. 

This type shows these two natures: the higher is represented by 
Aaron and his sons, while the human is represented by a bullock. 
The bullock for the sin offering was brought "and Aaron and his 
sons laid their hands upon the head" of it, thus saying, This 
sacrifice represents us. From that moment all that happened to the 
bullock, represents what was to be done to Jesus and to his body, 
the Church, as human beings. The bullock is delivered up to "the 
Law"— (represented by Moses) to meet its demands. To meet the 
demands of the law, it must be slain —"And Moses slew it." He then 
applied the blood to the horns of the altar. The "finger" of the 
"Law" thus pointed out that the altar of earthly sacrifices was 
acceptable to God by reason of the shed blood (the life given), and 
that all who realize the power of the altar (horns are symbols of 
power) must recognize first the blood which sanctified it. The blood 
poured at the bottom of the altar, shows that through the blood of 
the sacrifice (life given) even the earth was purchased back from 
the curse which sin brought upon it. See Eph. 1:14: "Unto the 
redemption of the purchased possession." 

And Moses took the bullock, his hide, flesh, etc., and burned them 
with fire without the camp. (v. 17.) Thus the humanity of the Christ 
complete— head and body-is made "a sin offering," suffering the 
destruction to which the world was doomed, and from which, by 
this sacrifice, they shall ultimately be delivered. But while the 
human being is destroyed, as a vile thing, as represented by the 
burning of the bullock without the camp, God accepts the heart 
devotion which prompts the sacrifice, which says, "Lo, I come to 
do thy will O God;" "I delight to do thy will, O my God." This is 



represented by the offering on the altar, of the fat and parts of the 
inward life-producing organism, as a "sweet savor" unto the Lord. 

Other features of the same consecration are shown by the two rams 
mentioned in verses 1 8 and 22. The first mentioned is the ram for 
the Burnt-offering. Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon its 
head, thus indicating that it represented them. It was killed; its 
blood sprinkled the altar; and Moses "cut the ram into pieces, and 
washed the inwards and legs in water" and "burnt the head and 
pieces, and the fat." Thus Jesus and his body, the Church, are being 
presented before God on the altar, during the entire Gospel Age. 
The head was laid there first, and since, all who are "dead with 
him," and cleansed, as in the type, by the washing of water- 
through the Word. Its burning on the altar shows how God accepts 
this sacrifice. It is "a sweet smelling savor." 

The second ram, "the ram of consecration," shows what effect the 
sacrifice will have upon us, as the first showed how God received 
it. Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon its head-it represented 
them. And Moses slew it and took its blood (consecrated life) and 
put it upon each separately, thus showing that consecration is an 
individual work. And he put it upon the tip of the right ear, thumb 
of right hand, and great toe of right foot. Thus, by our consecration, 
we are enabled to have the "hearing of faith" and to appreciate 
God's promises as none but the consecrated can. Our hands are 
consecrated, so that whatsoever our hands find to do, we do it with 
our might as unto the Lord. Our feet are consecrated, so that 
henceforth "we walk not as other Gentiles," but "walk in newness 
of life," "walk by faith," "walk in the spirit," "walk in the light," and 
even "as ye received Christ, so walk in him." Vs. 23,24. 

The choice portions of the ram, its "inwards" and "fat," representing 
our best powers, were taken in the hands of the priests and waved; 
passed to and fro, before the Lord, representing the fact that a 
consecrated offering is not given the Lord for the moment, or day, 
or year, but continually we keep our affections and powers uplifted 
before our Father, never ceasing until accepted of him as having 
finished our course. And Moses took them off their hands, God's 
acceptance being shown by fire. So we may not lay down or cease 
to offer our every power in God's service while we have them, and 
until all are consumed in His service. When the love ("fat") of our 
inmost being is laid upon the altar, it helps to increase the fire of 
God's acceptance. The more love there is connected with our 
consecration to God, the more quickly will it be accepted by him. 

Upon this "wave offering," while in their hands, were laid three 
cakes from a basketful. This offering was laid by Moses upon the 
hands of both high and under priests. 

The first unleavened cake, represented the actual purity of Jesus as 
a man, and the imputed purity of the Church as men, as attested by 
the Law (Moses). The second unleavened cake mingled with oil, 
represented the indwelling spirit of God-Sanctification. The third a 



wafer was mingled with honey, and represented our faith in the 
exceeding sweet and precious promises of Glory, Honor and 
Immortality. 

Without these three elements, it is impossible for our consecration 
to be complete, and hence acceptable, viz.: Justification, (purity), 
Sanctification by the Spirit through the belief of the truth, and faith 
in the promised Glorification. 

This consecration is in progress during the entire Gospel Age; even 
when as individuals our offering has been waived and accepted, we 
are to abide in the Tabernacle, eating of the cakes, growing in grace 
and knowledge continually, by partaking of the assurances and 
promises of God's Word-for we shall live by the words (promises) 
which proceed from the mouth of God. 

The anointing oil mingled with the blood of consecration was 
sprinkled over them (vs. 30), showing how we may know that our 
consecration is accepted -the Holy Spirit of God (the oil) blending 
with and witnessing to the spirit of sacrifice in the consecrated man 
(the blood), that he is a son of God. Rom. 8:16. 

The boiling of the flesh of consecration (vs. 31) was no part of the 
sacrifice; it was merely the preparing of the portion which they ate. 
It was all to be disposed of (v. 32), showing how we are to be 
entirely consecrated and none of our time or powers wasted. 

The seven days of consecration (vs. 33 and 35) show again, that we 
are consecrated to God's service, not a part of our time only, but all 
of it. Seven is a complete number in Scripture, and signifies all or 
the whole of whatever it is applied to. ("Seven Seals," "Trumpets," 
"Plagues," etc.) Ver. 36 shows the completion of the work of 
consecration. 

There never was a time when it was more necessary than now, that 
all who are consecrated as priests should see to it that we "be dead 
with him" and our every ability waived before God, that he may 
accept and make use of our talents to his glory. Especially is it of 
interest to those who believe that very soon all the members of the 
body will be accepted with the head, a sweet savor to God, and the 
work of self-sacrifice finished. And if we fail to be among the 
priests now, during the time of consecration, we cannot expect to be 
one of them when they begin their service for the people in the 
"ages to come"— when these same priests (now despised of men but 
a "sweet savor to God,") shall have the title of King added, and with 
their head, Jesus, rule and bless all nations. Do we earnestly desire 
to be among those who will sing to the praise of our great High 
Priest, "Thou hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we 
shall reign on the earth?" If so, let us be fully consecrated now, for 
"If we suffer with him we shall also reign with him." 2 Tim. 2:12. 



THE GREA T "DA Y OF A TONEMENT. " 

LEV. 16:3-33. 

In considering these types we must, to appreciate them, remember 
that each is a picture by itself, of one particular part, of the work of 
the World's High Priest; and so with the various ceremonies of the 
Day of Atonement. To understand it clearly, we must realize that 
while Jesus is our (the Church's) High Priest, yet in the more full 
and complete sense he is the Head and we the members of the body, 
of the World's High Priest, just as Aaron was High Priest or chief of 
the under priests, while in a general sense, the whole priesthood 
was one, designed to minister for Israel who typified the world. 
These Levitical pictures primarily referring to the Head, when fully 
considered refer to the body complete. For instance, the ceremony 
of anointing commenced with the "Head," but the anointing applied 
to all the body during the entire Gospel Age, as we have seen. As 
the consecrating of the priesthood includes all the members of his 
body, and requires all of the Gospel Age to complete it, so also with 
the "Sin-offering" or the sacrifice of Atonement: it commenced 
with the Head, and we the members of his body "fill up the measure 
of the sufferings of Christ which are behind," and this suffering 
requires all of the Gospel Age. The Day of Atonement, which in the 
type, was but a twenty-four hour day, we see then in the antitype, to 
be the entire Gospel Age. And with its close the sacrificing ceases 
and the glory and blessing commences, and the Great High Priest of 
the world (Jesus and His bride, made ONE, Head and members 
complete), shall stand forth crowned a King and Priest after the 
Melchizedek order: King of Peace-a Priest upon his throne. 

There he will stand before the world (manifest, recognized but 
unseen) not only as King and Priest, but also as the Great Prophet- 
" A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 
brethren, like unto me [Moses], ...and it shall come to pass that the 
soul that shall not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among 
the people." When brought to perfect knowledge and ability, perfect 
obedience will be required, and all who will not render it will be cut 
off from life-the second death. Acts 3:22,23. 

page 6 

In the end of the Jewish Age, Jesus offered himself individually to 
Israel as Prophet, Priest and King, typical or illustrative of the 
whole Body. As Prophet, he taught them; as Priest— "he offered up 
Himself," (Heb. 7:27), as King he rode into their city at the close of 
his ministry. But they did not receive him in any of these offices. 
During the Gospel Age, his church or body has acknowledged him 
as "a teacher sent from God"-the great Prophet; as the "High Priest 
of our profession;" and as the rightful King. The Word teaches, 
however, that it is not by the Church only that he is to be accepted, 
but he (together with us, His Body) shall be the Prophet for the 
people, the Priest for all the people, and the King over all people, 



nations and languages; "Lord of all," Priest of all, Prophet or 
teacher of all. 

In the type of the Priest's consecration, we saw Aaron and his sons 
representing Jesus and his body as "new creatures," and a bullock 
representing their humanity; but in the type now to be considered, 
we find Aaron alone representing the entire Anointed One (head 
and body), and two different sacrifices, a bullock and a goat, are 
here used to represent the separateness, yet similarity in suffering of 
the Body and its Head, as the "Sin-offering." The bullock 
represented Jesus at the age of thirty years-the PERFECT MAN 
who gave himself and died on our behalf. The High Priest, as we 
have already seen, represents the "new" nature of Jesus, the 
anointed head, and also all whom God foreknew as members of his 
body. The distinction which is here made between the human and 
the "new creature" should be clearly understood and remembered. 
"The man Christ Jesus who gave himself" at thirty years of age, 
was he who was previously rich (of a higher nature), but who for 
our sakes became poor; that is, became a man, that he might give 
the ransom for men -a perfect man's life. 1 Cor. 15:21. 

Since the penalty of man's sin was death, he must become a man, be 
"made flesh," or he never could redeem man. A man had sinned, 
and the penalty was death, and if Jesus would pay the penalty he 
must be of the same nature, (but undefiled, separate from sin,) and 
die, that mankind might in due time be liberated from death. To do 
this, the man Jesus made sacrifice "of all that he had"— glory as a 
perfect man, honor as a perfect man could claim it, and finally life 
as a man. And this was all he had, (except God's promises of a new 
nature and the hopes which those promises generated) having 
exchanged his spiritual being or existence for the human which he 
made "a Sin-offering" as typified by the bullock. 

But since to be our ransom his humanity must take our place in 
death, that humanity can never again be restored. If it were, we the 
redeemed would again come under the dominion of death. But 
thanks be to God, it remains a sacrifice forever, and we are forever 
free from Adamic guilt and death. If then, the Father would ever 
confer upon Jesus any honor, glory or life as a reward for his 
obedience even unto death, it must be a glory, honor and life on 
some other plane of being than the human, so as not to interfere 
with our ransom. 

Such was the promise of Jehovah to him, viz., that he would highly 
exalt him above the human plane, and above his pre-human 
condition; above all angels, principalities and powers, to his own 
right hand, (condition of chief favor, next to Jehovah,) a partaker of 
immortality -the Divine nature. For these and other joys set before 
him, Jesus endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down 
at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Heb. 1:3. 

The new nature which was received instead of the human, and as a 
reward for its sacrifice, is what is here typified by the Priest. While 



it is true that the sacrifice of the human was not finished until the 
cross, and that the Divine nature was not fully received until the 
resurrection, three days later, yet, in God's reckoning-and as shown 
in this type, the death of Jesus (the bullock) was complete when 
Jesus presented himself a living sacrifice at baptism— the type of his 
covenant of sacrificial death. There he reckoned himself dead— dead 
to all human aims or hopes of human glory, honor or life, in the 
same sense that we are exhorted to reckon ourselves dead indeed to 
the world, but alive as new creatures unto God. Rom. 6:11. 

This acceptance of Jesus by Jehovah at the time of consecration, as 
though dead indeed, was indicated by the anointing with the Holy 
Spirit-the earnest or guarantee of what he should receive when 
death had actually taken place. 

Thus considered, we see that the death of the bullock typifies the 
offering by Jesus of himself when he consecrated himself. This is in 
harmony with Paul's statement, that when Jesus consecrated saying- 
-"Lo I come [as in the volume of the Scriptures it is written of me] 
to do thy will, O God"-to die, and redeem many. There he took 
away the first [or set aside, the typical sacrifices] that he might 
establish [or fulfill] the real sacrifice for sin. (Heb. 10:7,9,14.) Yes, 
there the slaying of the bullock occurred, and the three years of 
Jesus' ministry show that all human will was dead, and the body 
reckoned so, from the moment of consecration. 

Jesus the Anointed-filled with the Spirit, was the new, divine 
creature (though not perfected as divine-until the resurrection) and 
that relationship he always claimed, saying, The works that I do are 
not mine [as a man] but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the 
works; The word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which 
sent me. (John 14:10,24.) Not my will [as a man] but thine [Father- 
the divine] be done, [in and to this earthen vessel consecrated to 
death.] Mark 15:36. 

When the bullock was slain [Jesus consecrated], the work was done 
in "the Court," which we have seen typified the plane of human 
perfection or justification: the condition of faith in and harmony 
with God; the highest attainment of the flesh. Jesus was in this 
condition, a perfect man when he offered himself (the bullock in the 
type) to God. 

Bearing in mind these distinctions, let us examine carefully the 
work of the typical Atonement Day, that we may more clearly 
understand the reality. Aaron was washed, in order to fitly represent 
the sinlessness of the "new creature." ("No one who has been 
begotten of God practices sin; because his seed abides in him and 
he cannot sin, because he has been begotten by God." 1 John 3:9. - 
Diaglott.) The new nature cannot sin, and it keeps a constant watch 
over the old nature reckoned dead lest it come to life again. Aaron 
was clothed for the service of the Day of Atonement not in his 
usual garments of glory and beauty, but in garments of sacrifice, 
with the "linen garments," emblems of purity-the righteousness of 



saints. The robe of linen was an earnest of the glorious robe to 
follow; the "linen girdle" represented him as a servant, though not 
so powerful as when at the close of the Day of Atonement he 
should be girdled with the "curious girdle" of the ephod; the mitre 
of linen being the same as that belonging to the glorious apparel, 
proclaims his perfect righteousness now, as then. 

So the High Priest, the Divine minded, spirit-begotten one, though 
not yet born of the Spirit, is able to accomplish the sacrifice of the 
atonement. Aaron now brings his typical sacrifice as we read: 
"Thus shall Aaron come into the Holy Place [the Most Holy] with a 
young bullock for a sin-offering and a ram for a burnt-offering." 
"And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin-offering which is for 
[represents] himself, and make an atonement for himself [the 
members of his body-the under priests] and for his house" [all 
believers, the entire "household of faith"— the Levites]. "And he 
shall kill the bullock of the sin-offering which is for [represents] 
himself." "And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire 
from off the altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet 
incense beaten small [powdered] and bring it within the vail [the 
first vail or "door"]. "And he shall put the incense upon the fire 
before the Lord, [The censer of coals of fire was set into the top of 
the golden altar in the "Holy" and the incense crumbled over it, 
gradually yielded a smoke of sweet perfume] that the cloud of the 
incense [penetrating beyond the second vail] may cover the mercy 
seat that is upon the testimony [or which covers the Law] that he 
die not." Vs. 3,6,11-13. 

Looking through the type to the antitype, let us now, step by step, 
compare the doings of Jesus with the prophetic picture. When Jesus 
had consecrated, he immediately took the sacrificed human life 
[blood of the bullock] to present it before God as the ransom of 
ours. But first, before entering the "Most Holy" [perfect spiritual 
condition] he must tarry in the "Holy" [spirit begotten condition] 
where the offering of his perfect humanity is acceptable— a sweet 
perfume before Jehovah. The High Priest took with him, along with 
the blood, fire from off the altar, and his two hands full of sweet 
incense to cause the perfume. 

This illustrates how Jesus' fulfillment of his vow of consecration 
during the three and a half years of his ministry, was a sweet and 
acceptable perfume to the Father, attesting at once to the 
completeness of the consecration and the perfection of the sacrifice. 
The sweet incense beaten small, represented the perfection of the 
man Jesus. The fire from the Brazen Altar represented the trials to 
which he was subject; and when the perfections of his being 
(incense) came in contact with the trials of life, he yielded perfect 
obedience to the Divine will— a sweet perfume. Thus is shown his 
temptation in all points, yet without sin. It was all consumed in the 
fire; so he yielded all in obedience. It was his "two hands full" 
which he offered, thus representing his full capacity and ability as 
being tested and required and yielded. 



But while Jesus as a "new creature" was thus within the "Holy," 
enjoying the light of the golden candlestick, fed by the bread of 
truth, and offering acceptable incense to Jehovah, let us look out 
into the "Court," and yet further out, beyond the Camp, and see 
another work progressing simultaneously. We last saw the bullock 
dead, in the Court; now the fat of it has been placed upon the 
Brazen Altar and with it the kidneys and various life -producing 
organs. They are burning furiously, for a bullock has much fat. A 
cloud of smoke, called "a sweet savor to God" rises in the sight of 
all who are in the "Court," viz.: Levites-believers. 

This represents how Jesus' sacrifice appeared to believing men. 
They saw the devotion, the self-sacrifice, the loving zeal (fat) 
ascending to God as a sweet and acceptable sacrifice. They well 
knew that with him God was ever well pleased. They knew from 
what they saw in the "Court" (in the flesh) that he was acceptable, 
though they could not see the sacrifice in its full grandeur and 
perfection as it appeared in Jehovah's sight (in the "Holy") a sweet 
incense on the Golden Altar. 

And while these two fires are burning -in the "Court" the "fat" and 
in the "Holy," the "incense" and their perfumes ascending at the 
same time, there is another fire "outside the camp." There the body 
of flesh is being destroyed. (Ver. 27.) This represents Jesus' work as 
viewed by the world; to them it seemed foolish to spend his life in 
sacrifice. They saw not the spirit of obedience which prompted, as 
the Father saw it; they saw not the loving perfections as the 
believers (in the "Court" condition) saw them. No, nor did they see 
in him their ideal hero and leader; they saw only those elements of 
his character which condemned them, not being in condition to love 
and admire him. To them he was odious— an outcast— despised and 
rejected; they hid their faces from him, as the Israelites turned from 
the burning carcass in the type. 

We see, then, how Jesus' life for three-and-a-half years fills all three 
of these pictures: His sacrifice of perfect manhood was in the sight 
of the world, foolishness and detestable; in the sight of believers, a 
sacrifice acceptable to God; in the sight of Jehovah, "a sweet 
incense." They all ended at once— at the cross. The bullock was 
entirely disposed of, the incense all offered, when Jesus cried, "It is 
finished"-and died. Thus the man Christ Jesus, gave himself a 
ransom for all. 

The incense from the Golden Altar having preceded him and been 
satisfactory, the High Priest passed under the second "Vail" into the 
"Most Holy." So with Jesus; having for three and a half years 
offered acceptable incense, in the Holy or consecrated condition, he 
passed beyond "the Vail, that is to say, his flesh." For three days he 
was under the Vail, in death; then he arose in the perfection of the 
Divine nature beyond the flesh, "the express image of the Father's 
person:" "Put to death in the flesh, but quickened (made alive) in 
Spirit:" "sown a natural (human) body, raised a spiritual body." He 



was then in the "Most Holy," condition; the perfection of spiritual 
being. 

The next step was to present the blood (ver. 14)-the evidence of 
the redemption —for "ye were redeemed... with the precious blood 
(sacrificed life) of Christ." (1 Pet. 1:19.) This going into the 
presence of the Mercy Seat and sprinkling, or presenting the blood, 
was evidently fulfilled by Jesus, when he, after forty days, ascended 
up on high, "there to appear in the presence of God FOR US, 
presenting on our behalf and as the price of our redemption the 
value and merit of the sacrifice just finished. 

We now leave the High Priest before the "Mercy Seat" while we go 
out to "the court" to witness another work. We quote: "And he shall 
take of the congregation of the children of Israel two kids of the 
goats for a sin-offering. And he shall take the two goats and present 
them before the Lord at the "door" of the Tabernacle. And Aaron 
shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Lord and the other 
for the scape-goat. And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the 
Lord's lot fell and offer him for a Sin-offering. But the goat on 
which the lot fell to be the scape-goat, shall be presented alive 
before the Lord to make an atonement with him, to let him go for a 
scape-goat into the wilderness." (Vs. 5-10.) 

These two goats taken from Israel and brought into the "Court," 
typified or represented all who coming from the world and 
accepting of Jesus' redemption consecrate their lives to God's 
service. First, taken from the "Camp" or world condition, they are 
brought into the "Court" or justified condition. There they present 
themselves before the Lord (represented by the goats at the door of 
the Tabernacle) desiring to become dead with Christ as human 
beings, and to enter the heavenly or spiritual conditions as Jesus 
did; first, the spiritual mind, and secondly, the spiritual body; the 
"Holy" and "Most Holy." 

But, as not all who say, Lord! Lord! shall enter the kingdom, so too, 
some of those who say, "Lord, here I consecrate my all" promise 
more than they ever perform. They know not what they promise or 
what it costs of denial of self, to take up the cross daily and follow 
the bullock-to "go to him without the camp [to the utter disregard 
and destruction of the human hopes, etc.,] bearing the reproach with 
him." (Heb. 13:13). In this type, both classes of those who covenant 
to become dead with Christ are represented: those who do really 
follow in his footsteps as he hath set us an example, and those who 
"through fear of [this] death, are all their lifetime subject to 
bondage." (Heb. 2:15). The first class is the "Lord's goat," the 
second the "Scapegoat." Both of these classes [goats] as we shall 
see, will have a part in the atonement work; in bringing the world 
into complete harmony with God and his Law, when this "Day of 
Atonement" the Christian Age is ended. But only the first class (the 
"Lord's goat") who follow the Leader, are a part of the "Sin- 
offering." 



The casting of lots to see which goat would be the "Lord's" and 
which the "Scapegoat," indicates that God has no choice as to 
which of them shall win the prize. It shows that God does not 
arbitrarily select which shall become partakers of the divine nature 
and joint-heirs with Christ our Lord. Every believer who presents 
himself is acceptable, and he who keeps his covenant and performs 
the sacrifice is represented in the 

page 7 

"Lord's goat." Those who draw back are represented in the 
"Scapegoat." 

To return to the High Priest: After having sprinkled the "Mercy 
Seat" [literally, the Propitiatory, or place of satisfaction] with the 
blood of the bullock seven times (perfectly), "Then, shall he kill the 
goat of the sin-offering, that is for the people, and bring his blood 
within the Vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of 
the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the Mercy Seat and before the 
Mercy Seat." (Vss. 14-15.) In a word, that which was done with the 
bullock was repeated with the "Lord's goat." It was killed by the 
same High Priest; its blood sprinkled just the same; its fat, etc., 
burned on the altar in the Court also. [It is worthy of notice that a 
prime bullock is always very fat, while a goat is a very lean animal. 
So Jesus as represented by the bullock had a great abundance of 
zeal and love for his sacrifice, while his followers, represented by 
the goat, are lean in comparison.] The body of the "Lord's goat" 
was burned in like manner as that of the bullock- "without the 
camp." Paul tells us that only those animals which were Sin- 
offerings were burned without (outside) the "Camp" (Heb. 13:11.) 
and then he tells us to go to him without the camp bearing the 
reproach with him. (Heb. 13:13.) Thus is furnished us 
unquestionable evidence not only that the followers of Jesus are 
represented by this "Lord's goat" but also that their sacrifice 
reckoned with that of their Head, Jesus, constitutes part of the Sin- 
offering. "The reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen 
upon me." Psa. 69:9. 

The "Lord's goat" represented all of the "little flock;" they are all 
alike; they all came by the same "narrow way:" so what is true of 
the company as a whole, is true of each one in it. Therefore the 
"Lord's goat" typifies each one and his sacrifice, except that the 
whole must be complete and the sacrifice of all ended, before the 
"blood" of the goat (representative of all the Body) will be 
presented on the Mercy Seat. 

The blood sprinkled on and before the Mercy Seat, was in the 
design of a cross, with the top or head of the cross on the Mercy 
Seat. This is shown by the description: "He shall sprinkle it with his 
finger upon the Mercy Seat eastward (toward the "door") and 
before (across in front of) the Mercy Seat." This is the full end of 
the Sin-offerings for the sins of the world. The bullock, as we have 
seen, was a sin offering for the "Household of faith" (the under 



Priests and Levites), and the goat, was the sin offering "for the 
people," Israel —type of the (at present) unbelieving world. 

Thus we see that this entire Christian Age is an age of suffering and 
death, to those who sacrifice the human nature, to become partakers 
of the divine. Just as soon as the sacrifice of Jesus on behalf of his 
"body" and "house" was complete and presented before the Father, 
came the evidence of its acceptance in the Pentecostal baptism. And 
this anointing (symbolized by the oil) which came upon the church 
continues ever since on all the living members of the High Priest's 
body. This impartation of the divine mind to those consecrated 
ones, was the energy in them which killed each, as the "Lord's 
goat." This coming of the Holy Spirit, the Lord's power or "hand" at 
Pentecost is shown in the type (vs. 15) by the High Priest coming to 
the door of the Tabernacle and laying hands upon the "Lord's goat" 
and killing it. Just as the Spirit of the Father enabled Jesus to kill 
the bullock, so it is the same spirit-the Spirit of God and of Christ 
IN the Lord's goat class, which enables them to crucify themselves 
as men-to kill the goat-in hope of the promised Glory, Honor and 
Immortality of the divine nature. 

It was thus, for instance, that Paul when possessed of this spirit of 
the Leader and Head, could reckon all things but loss and dross that 
he might win [a membership in] Christ and be found in Him. 
Inspired by this hope and spirit he could say: "I (the new creature) 
live, yet, not I" the old creature —the goat— it is being consumed 
with the reproach and contempt of the world outside the camp. His 
earthly affections and powers had all been presented an offering to 
God, a living sacrifice; thereafter it was Christ living in him, the 
hope of glory-Christ's mind, crucifying and keeping under the 
human nature. 

While actually in the world, he was not of it; to such an extent was 
this true that he could say: "The life which I now live, I live by the 
faith of the Son of God." Yes, by faith he had become a partaker of 
the Divine nature, and was in the "Holy," feeding by faith on the 
"holy bread," enlightened continually by the light from the "Golden 
Candlestick." 

Thus furnished with knowledge and strength, he was able to offer 
"Incense" acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, i.e., Paul's sacrifice 
because of Jesus' merit imputed to it was acceptable to God. Thus 
he kept the goat nature always sacrificed. So, too, the same thing 
has been done by the other members of this "Lord's goat" company 
since, though none have been so widely known: Paul's sacrifice sent 
up a very rich perfume. 

As the goat filled up that which was behind of the Sin-offering after 
the bullock, so does the "little flock" following after Jesus "fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ." Col. 1 :24. 

The moment must sometime come when the last member of this 
"Lord's goat" class shall have consecrated, then no more can thus 
consecrate. The moment must also come, when the sacrifice of the 



last one will be consumed and the Sin-offering forever ended. That 
we are now in the close of the "Day of Atonement," and that the last 
members of the Lord's goat are now on the altar we firmly believe 
from evidences elsewhere given. We understand that the door of 
opportunity to consecrate for this sacrifice has closed, though there 
is still time to carry out the consecration already made. Soon, when 
their sacrifice is consumed, the last members of His Body shall pass 
beyond the second Vail-beyond the flesh into the perfection of the 
Divine nature, already commenced in this mortal body. The passing 
of the second Vail means to the body what it meant to the head; it 
means in the presenting of the "blood" of the goat, what it meant in 
the presenting of the blood of the bullock. The body of the Priest 
passing the second Vail, bearing the blood of the Goat represents 
the passing of the Body of Christ entirely beyond human conditions 
into the perfection of the divine nature when we shall be made like 
Christ Jesus who now is the express image of the Father's person. 
Oh blessed hope! "I shall be satisfied when I awake in Thy 
likeness," was spoken prophetically for Jesus; and how sublime the 
promise that "we shall be like Him." If we may but win this prize 
for which we run, then,- 

Perish every fond ambition, 
All we've sought of earth or known; 
Yet how rich is our condition, 
Heavenly prospects now our own. 

The Most Holy reached, the evidence of the sacrifice of the BODY 
for the people will be presented: as typified by the blood of the goat 
sprinkled on the Mercy Seat. 

It will be accepted for "the people" as was that of our glorious 
Leader accepted for Himself [his Body] and house; and then the 
reconciling work is accomplished; sin and condemnation is fully 
covered for all. The sprinkling of all shows that the "blood" is full 
satisfaction, and that the work with the Scape-goat which followed 
was not part of the Sin-offering and was not needful to complete the 
"reconciling." Hence in it we must see some other object and 
significance. We read:- 

"And when he had made an end of reconciling the Holy ["Most 
Holy"] and the Tabernacle of the congregation [the "Holy"] and the 
Altar [in the "Court"] he shall bring the live goat: and Aaron shall 
lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat [Scape-goat] and 
confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel [typical 
of the world], and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting 
them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the 
hand of a fit man [any one convenient] into the wilderness. " (Vs. 
20-22.) 

As before expressed, we understand that this "Scape-goat" which 
presented itself for sacrifice with the other, but failed to perform it, 
and to walk in the steps of the bullock, represents a very large class 
of God's children who have made the same covenant as the others, 



viz.: to become dead to the world, and to sacrifice their justified 
human nature, but have failed to actually do so. 

While this "Scape-goat" class has existed throughout this Gospel 
Age, the one goat and the work done with it, at the close of the 
"Day of Atonement" is representative in a general sense of the 
dealing with each individual of that company during the age, 
though it specially illustrates the scape-goat class in the end of the 
age of sacrifice. 

Let us look first at God's proposed dealing with members of this 
company who will be living when the work of Sin-offering is 
complete— the last members of the scape-goat company; and then 
see how it will apply to the preceding members of the same class. 

But let us remind you that we are now dealing with things future; 
after the "Sin-offering." The Lord's goat is not yet wholly 
consumed, consequently the "little flock," represented by the body 
of the Priest, has not yet gone beyond the second "Vail" into the 
condition of spirit perfection; and the special work with the living 
"Scape-goat" is after this. 

Other scriptures show us (Rev. 7:9,13-17 and 1 Cor. 3:15) that there 
will be a "great company" who during this age have entered the 
race for the grand prize of joint-heirship with Jesus, who fail to "so 
run" as to obtain it; and that they, though "castaways" as regards the 
prize (1 Cor. 9:27), are nevertheless objects of the Lord's affection 
and love, who, by his providences in the circumstances of life will 
cause them to come through "great tribulation" thus accomplishing 
for them "the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in 
the day of the Lord Jesus." (1 Cor. 5:5.) Notice, that they 
consecrated their justified human life, and God accepted of the 
consecration and reckoned them, according to their covenant, dead 
as human beings and alive as new— spiritual —creatures. But, by 
their failure to carry out the contract, they are cut off from the 
Priesthood, from membership in the Body of Christ-"Every branch 
in me that beareth not fruit, he taketh it away." John 15:2. 

These are in a pitiable condition; they have failed to win the prize, 
therefore cannot have the divine nature; nor can they have 
restitution to perfect humanity with the world, for in their 
consecration, all human rights and privileges were exchanged for 
divine hopes, -for the opportunity to run for the divine nature. But 
though not faithful and not overcomers, the Lord loves them, and 
will deliver those who through fear of death, (fear of contempt-fear 
of the reproach borne by the bullock and goat, beyond the Camp-in 
the Wilderness, the separated, or dead condition) were all their life 
time subject to bondage —bondage of fear of men and men's 
traditions and opinions which always bring a snare, and keep back 
from full obedience to God-even unto death. Heb. 2:15. 

Through the favor of the High Priest, this great company are to go 
into "great tribulations" and have the flesh destroyed. This will not 
make of them "overcomers" nor give them membership in the 



Bride-the Body of Christ. It will not give them a place on the 
throne as Kings and Priests, but in a position "before the throne," as 
perfect spiritual beings though not of the highest order of the 
spiritual-the Divine; not possessed of the Crown of life, 
Immortality, yet "like unto the angels." These shall serve God in 
His Temple, though they will not be members of that symbolic 
Temple which is the Christ. Rev. 7:14,15. 

This class will be sent to the Wilderness condition, of separation 
from the world; forced thither by "the man of opportunity "-adverse 
circumstances- there to be buffeted by adversity until they learn 
the vanity, deceitfulness and utter worthlessness of the World's 
approval and until all human hopes and ambitions die, and they are 
ready to say God's will, not mine, be done. The world is ever ready 
to scorn and cast out the chastened and afflicted ones, though they 
earnestly covet its deceiving smile and its empty honors. The body 
of the scape-goat was not burned in the wilderness; only the sin- 
offering (bullock and Lord's goat) were burned. (Heb. 13:11.) The 
burning of the sin-offering represented the steady continuous 
submission of that class to the fiery ordeal of suffering-"faithful 
(willing sacrifices) unto death." Both classes, suffer even unto death 
of the human will and body; but the first class die willingly, 
destroyed by continual crucifying of the flesh as shown in the 
symbol by fire, burning continuously until there is nothing more to 
burn. The second class is simply sent to the wilderness and there 
left to die unwillingly. Their love of the World's approval perishes 
with the World's neglect and scorn and reproach; and their spiritual 
nature ripens and blooms into life. Not only will this be true 
markedly with the last or closing members of this Scape-goat class 
shortly, but the same has been fulfilled to some extent all along; for 
there has always been a class, and a large one, which yielded to 
death only by compulsion; who instead of willingly sacrificing, 
suffered "destruction of the flesh." 1 Cor. 5:5. The classes 
represented by both goats have been developing side by side 
throughout the age. 

When the "little flock" have all gone beyond the Vail, the hand of 
the Lord will set free those bound ones "who, through fear of death 
[to the world], are all their lifetime subject to bondage," by 
overthrowing the many theories, creeds and traditions of men and 
great nominal Church organizations, in and to and by which, they 
are held and hindered from hearing and obeying the Lord's voice. 

Forced into freedom by "Babylon's" fall, while realizing that the 
great prize has been lost, they will then hear the High Priest's voice 
and find themselves forced into the Wilderness condition of 
separation and flesh destruction. At no other time perhaps have 
there been so many consecrated ones bound as at present; but 
through all the age, there have been some. 

All the consecrated ones, of both classes, pass through great trials 
and afflictions, yet by one class they are esteemed light afflictions, 
taken joyfully, which they rejoice to be accounted worthy to suffer; 



a willing sacrifice, like that of the Head. To the other class, they are 
burdensome, great afflictions, almost without joy— an enforced 
destruction of the flesh. And proportionately different are their 
positions and rewards at the end of the race. 

"And Aaron shall come into the Tabernacle of the congregation 
["the Holy"] and shall put off the linen garments which he put on 
when he went into the Holy place ["Most Holy"] and he shall leave 
them there; and he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place 
[the "Court"] and put on his [usual] garments [the garments of glory 
and beauty] and come forth and offer his Burnt-offering and the 
Burnt-offering of the people, and make another illustration of the 
atonement for himself [the body-the church-the "little flock"] and 
for the people. Vss. 23 and 24. 

The Burnt-offerings consisted of two rams (vs. 3 and 5.): one 
representing the Bullock and the other the Lord's goat. These being 
alike, show the harmony and oneness of the sacrifices made by 
Jesus and his footstep-followers; that in God's sight they are all one 
sacrifice. "For both he that sanctifieth [Jesus] and they who are 
sanctified [the little flock] are all one; for which cause he is not 
ashamed to call them brethren." Heb. 2:11. 

This is further shown in the treatment of each of these sacrifices. 
The rams of "burnt offering" were cut in pieces and washed and the 
pieces laid unto the head upon the altar and burned, making sweet 
perfume-a burnt offering of sweet savor unto Jehovah. Since both 
rams were thus treated, it shows that in Jehovah's estimation, they 
are all part of one sacrifice; the members joined to the head, 
acceptable as a whole, as the atonement for the sins of the World— 
thus satisfying the claims of justice and purchasing the whole world 
of sinners. 

page 8 

As the Sin-offerings illustrate the necessary crucifixion and death 
of the Redeemer, so the Burnt-offering illustrates God's manifested 
acceptance of the same sacrifice. Let us not forget that God does 
not manifest his acceptance of the "better sacrifices" than bulls and 
goats, until that Sin-offering is complete and the High Priest is 
robed in the honor and glory of his office represented in the change 
of garments. During the time of making the Sin-offering he wore 
only the white linen garments; afterward and usually he wore the 
glorious garments illustrative of the honor and glory conferred on 
him. During the Christian age the Sin-offerings progress and no 
honor is bestowed upon the Priests, but at its close comes the 
outward manifestation of God's approval and acceptance of it in the 
putting of glory and honor upon the Priests who made the sacrifice, 
and in the blessing of the people for whose sins he atoned. 

The Burnt-offering must be burned on the Altar in "the Court," thus 
teaching that God will manifest His acceptance of the sacrifice of 
the whole body (head and pieces or members) in the sight of all in 
"the Court" condition, viz: all believers. But before this 



manifestation to believers, of God's acceptance of the work, is 
accomplished the "scapegoat company" are sent away, and the 
robes of the Priest changed. As the white robes worn throughout the 
work of sacrifice- which covered the body and represented the 
justification of the body, their purity in God's sight through Christ, 
so now the garments of glory and beauty represent the glories of 
position and work in the future, after the new creatures have been 
perfected-gone beyond the "Vail." The washing with water seems 
to show that though the white garments are laid aside— the body 
now clothed in majesty of power is still pure and that the sins of the 
people for which atonement had been made do not attach to or 
contaminate the purity of the Priest. Thus ends this type of the 
development of the Priesthood and satisfaction of the World's sins. 

We tarry to glance at a few verses of this chapter (Lev. 16) not 
directly connected with the narrative. 

Vs. 17. "There shall be no man in the tabernacle of the 
congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy 
place [Most Holy] until he come out, and have made an atonement 
for himself, and for his household, and for all the congregation of 
Israel. " This limitation applies only to this special day, for the 
Apostle says-"The priests went always into the first tabernacle (the 
"Holy") accomplishing the service, but into the second (tabernacle- 
the "Most Holy,") went the high priest alone, once every year" [on 
this "Day of Atonement," which was repeated annually.] Heb. 9:7. 

The privileges of the Tabernacle are only for those who are priests- 
members of the body of the Head Priest— so that whether as now, in 
the first of these heavenly conditions (spiritual minded, new 
creatures in Christ Jesus); or whether as we hope to be soon, in the 
second or perfected spiritual condition; it will in either or both 
cases be because we are in Christ Jesus, new creatures— no longer 
men. "For ye are not in the flesh [human], but in the spirit [spiritual, 
new creatures], if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you." Rom. 
8:9. 

Vs. 28. "And he that burnetii them [the bullock and goat of sin 
offering] shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and 
afterward he shall come into the camp. " This seems to teach that 
those principally instrumental in reproaching, reviling and 
destroying the humanity both of Jesus [bullock] and his "little 
flock" [goat], will have no special punishment for it, as they did it 
ignorantly-at the same time accomplishing God's plan. "Father, 
forgive them, they know not what they do," was a truthful prayer 
and from one whom the Father heard always. They wash and are 
clean and come into the camp— i.e., come into the same condition as 
the balance of the world, all of whom are sinners, and all of whom 
are ransomed from Adamic depravity and sin. 

Vs. 26. "And he that let go the goat for the Scape-goat, shall wash 
his clothes and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the 
camp. " This teaches the same lesson relative to those who shall be 



instrumental in bringing the trouble, and consequent destruction of 
the flesh, upon the "great company" represented by the Scapegoat. 

In the type, the Day of Atonement thus ended; and typically 
cleansed from sin, Israel was reckoned no longer defiled and 
separated from God, but now made at-one with God. Justice no 
longer condemned, but bade them realize God's reconciled presence 
in their midst, to bless and protect and direct into the Canaan of rest 
and peace. 

THE ANTITYPE. 

In the Antitype, the "Day of Atonement" is this Gospel Age, 
during which, Jesus and his body, the Church, make sacrifice to 
justice, in full satisfaction of the Adamic sin. When the work of 
reconciliation is complete, God will recognize mankind and place 
his sanctuary among men. Then, will be fulfilled that which was 
written: "The Tabernacle of God (the glorified Church) is with men, 
and he will dwell with them, and they shall be [become] his people, 
and God himself shall be with them and be their God. And God 
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more 
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more 
pain, for the former things [reign of Satan, sin and death] are passed 
away. And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all 
things new." Rev. 21:3-5. 

But while all these blessings shall result from the establishment of 
God's residence, or sanctuary among men ["I will make the place of 
my feet glorious" -"Earth is my footstool,"] yet its blessing will be 
a gradual work, requiring the Millennial Age for its full 
accomplishment; i.e., death, pain, and tears will be in process of 
destruction (wiping away), but not completed until the end of the 
Millennial Age. 

The gradual process by which man will be brought into perfection 
of being and fullness of harmony with Jehovah, is well illustrated in 
the typical sacrifices of Israel, made after the Day of Atonement, 
the antitypes of which will be fulfilled during the next age. 

To rightly divide and understand these typical sacrifices, it must be 
recognized, that the present Gospel Age is the day of atonement 
toward God for the general sin of mankind; and that all sacrifices 
coming after the Day of Atonement in type, represents fulfillments 
or antitypes due after the Gospel Age is ended-during the 
Millennial Age- when the world of sinners may become reconciled 
to, or at one with God. 

Thus we may see that at-one-ment has two parts— first, Justice at 
one with, and not any longer condemning and killing Adam and his 
children on account of his sin; and secondly, the sinner being 
brought to at-one-ment with God's righteous laws recognizing them 
and obeying them. The first of these phases of at-one-ment or 
reconciliation is brought about entirely by the Priest's sacrifice in 
the "Day of Atonement sacrifices."* 



The other-The reconciling of the World to God or the bringing of 
them into full at-one-ment and harmony with God, will be 
accomplished during the next age by the "Royal Priesthood" who, 
typified by Moses will be the Great Prophet whom the Lord will 
raise up to teach the people, to whom if they will not give heed, 
they shall be cut off from life-die the second death. Acts 3:23. 

Be it clearly seen that though the saints of Jesus' followers, be 
permitted as represented in the Lord's goat to share in and be 
members of the Sin-offering on behalf of the World, it is not 
because of their being by nature purer or better than the World for 
the entire race of Adam was condemned in him; and of them "There 
is none righteous, no not one" (Rom. 3:10) and none could give 
ransom for his brother. Psa. 4:97. 

They share in the sacrifice for sins as a favor in order that by so 
doing they might share with Jesus the promised Divine nature and 
be his companions and joint heirs. To permit and enable them to 
offer themselves acceptable sacrifices the benefits of Jesus' death 
were applied to these first, justifying or cleansing them, and his 
death blesses the World through his body the Church. 



SUBSEQUENT SACRIFICES. 

Those sacrifices which do not belong to the class we denominate 
the "Day of Atonement sacrifices," illustrate offering and sacrifices 
which belong to the Millennial Age. 

As in the type, the Day of Atonement sacrifices preceded all others, 
and were a basis of general forgiveness and acceptance with God 
for all Israel, but were followed by other sacrifices after that day, 
for individual sins, termed "Sin offering," "Trespass offerings," etc., 
so in the antitype. After the sacrifices of this Gospel Age shall have 
brought the world in a justified condition, there will still be sins and 
trespasses committed, which will require confession and 
reconciliation, making these after sacrifices necessary. 

The Atonement Day sacrifices represent the cancellation of Adamic 
sin by the sacrifice of the Christ, but during the Millennium errors 
will be committed by the not yet perfected world, for which they 
will be in some measure responsible. For such they must make 
some amend, accompanied by repentance, before they can be again 
at harmony with God and Christ. 

And consecration will be in order in the next Age, though owing to 
the changed condition of the world consecration will no longer, as 
now, mean unto death, but on the contrary it will be unto life, for 
with the close of Satan's reign comes the end of pain, sorrow and 
death, except upon evildoers. Consecration must always be a 
voluntary presentation of one's powers, and hence this is 
represented in some of the sacrifices after Atonement Day. 



As the basis of all forgiveness of sins in the next age will be the 
"Day of Atonement sacrifices," it would be appropriate in the type 
for the sinner to bring some sacrifice, which would indicate a 
recognition of those sacrifices, as the ground for forgiveness anew. 
And so we find that all offerings of the people after the Day of 
Atonement, were of a kind which pointed back to, or recognized the 
sacrifices of that day. These offerings might be of cattle, or sheep, 
or fowl (turtle doves or young pigeons), or of fine flour, the article 
offered depending on the ability of the offerer. 

During the Millennial Age all men "will come to a knowledge of 
the truth" and be saved from the curse of Adamic death. (1 Tim. 
2:4.) When we remember that this death includes all the sickness, 
pain and imperfection to which humanity is now subject, we see 
that God's plan includes a full restoration to human perfection; but 
perfection will come gradually, and it will require the co-operation 
of the sinner's WILL to ever reach it. He must do what he can to 
climb up again to perfection, and will have all the assistance 
necessary. This is shown by these sacrifices in general; they were to 
be according to every man's ability. If very much degraded by sin 
and very imperfect, he must, when he comes to a knowledge of the 
truth, present himself to God. If thus poor and degraded he may 
bring a dove, or pigeon; when less degraded a goat; and when 
perfect as man his offering may be a bullock; just as a bullock was 
used to typify the perfect humanity (much fat) of Jesus' sacrifice, 
and as a goat (wayward and lean) was used to represent our 
imperfect human nature in the sacrifices of this Atonement Day, so 
those animals similarly represent the offerers (Israel-the world) in 
their consecrations. 

When the whole world has been brought to perfection there will be 
no longer any who are poor in this sense- all will be perfect men 
and their offerings will be their perfect selves; typified by bullocks. 
David speaking of this says: "Then shalt thou be pleased with the 
sacrifices of righteousness (of right doing), with burnt offering and 
whole burnt offering; then shall they offer bullocks (perfect 
sacrifices) upon thine altar." (Psa. 51:19.) Yet that David's language 
should not be understood to teach the restoration of the literal 
bloody, typical sacrifices, is evident, for in the same connection he 
says, "Thou desirest not sacrifice," (the typical)... "The sacrifices of 
God are a broken spirit; and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not 
despise." All these sacrifices must be of the free will and desire of 
the offerer. Lev. 1:3. 

The completeness of consecration is shown by the death of the 
animal; that is, each member of the race must consecrate his will; 
but it will neither be followed by the destruction of the human 
nature (burning of the flesh outside the camp) nor by the taking of 
the life into a new nature,-into the Most Holy-only the High Priest 
enters there, as shown in the case of the Atonement sacrifices. No; 
when consecrated, they are accepted as human beings, their right to 
life as such having been purchased by the Priesthood. Their 



consecration represents their appreciation of their ransom and their 
acquiescence to the law of God as the condition upon which they 
shall continue to live everlastingly in harmony and favor with Him. 

THEIR BURNT OFFERINGS. 

The burnt offerings of the Priests was to be kept up continually on 
the Altar, and the fire never suffered to die out. "This is the law of 
the Burnt Offering; it is the Burnt Offering because of the burning 
upon the Altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of the Altar 
shall be burning in it.... It shall not be put out, and the Priest shall 
burn wood on it every morning, and lay the burnt offering in order 
upon it.... The fire shall ever be burning upon the Altar; it shall 
never go out." Lev. 6:9,12,13. 

Thus is presented to the mind of each offerer the fact that the Altar 
was already sanctified or set apart, and their offerings acceptable 
because of God's acceptance of the Atonement Day sacrifices. To 
this Altar the Israelite brought his free will offering as narrated in 
Lev. 1. It was made in the usual way; the animal cut in pieces and 
washed, was laid, the pieces to the head, on the altar, and wholly 
burnt, a sacrifice of sweet savor unto the Lord. This would serve to 
typify a thankful prayer to Jehovah-an acknowledgment of His 
Mercy, Wisdom, and Love, as manifested in the broken body of the 
Christ-their ransom. 

THEIR TRESPASS OR SIN OFFERINGS. 

"If a soul (being) commit a trespass and sin through ignorance in 
the holy things of the Lord;. ..if he sin and commit any of these 
things which are forbidden to be done by the Commandments of the 
Lord, though he wist it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his 
iniquity." "And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the 
flock," and money according to the Priest's estimation of the 
trespass, with a FIFTH MORE, and this shall be their offering. And 
the priest shall make an atonement for him. And if any sin 
knowingly and damage or defraud his neighbor, He shall restore it 
in the principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto (twenty per 
cent interest) and give it to the wronged one. And he shall bring a 
ram for the trespass offering unto the Lord. Lev. 5:15-19; and 6:1-7. 

This teaches that for every wrong, restoration must be made with 
interest, and a repentance or asking forgiveness of the Lord through 
the Church (Priesthood); their recognition of their own imperfection 
and the value of their ransom, being shown by the ram presented. 

But notice the difference between the treatment of this Sin-offering 
and the Sin-offerings of the Day of Atonement: The latter were 
offered to God (Justice) in the Holy as the ransom or purchase -price 
of sinners; the former were offered to the Priests who had on the 
Atonement Day purchased the people; the acknowledgement of the 
people was made to their Redeemer. The Priest took a part and 
offered it to the Lord as a memorial, 



*The sacrifices relative to the consecration of the priests and parts 
of two types yet to be considered, we regard of course, as being the 
same sacrifices as those above mentioned as taking place on the 
Day of Atonement— they all being merely different views or 
pictures of the same sacrifices. 

page 9 

or a recognition that the whole plan of redemption as executed on 
the Atonement Day [Gospel Age] was His, appropriating to himself 
(eating) the balance. 

The offerings of the Atonement Day, we have seen, were always 
burned (Lev. 6:30, Heb. 13:1 1), but these Sin-offerings are not to 
be burned, but eaten by the Priests. -"This is the law of the sin 
offering:... The priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it:. ..All the 
males among the priests shall eat thereof." Lev. 6:25-29. 

The whole world, purchased with the precious blood (human life) 
of Christ, will present themselves, for forgiveness of trespass, to the 
Royal Priesthood who paid their ransom price; and their acceptance 
of it will be the forgiveness. To this agree Jesus' words to his 
disciples: "He breathed on them and saith unto them, Receive ye 
the Holy Spirit. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto 
them; and whosesoever sins ye retain [to them] they are retained." 
John 20:23. 

While this "ministry of reconciliation" belongs in its fullest sense in 
the next age, when all the sacrifices of Atonement will have been 
completed, yet even now, any member of the "Royal Priesthood" 
may say to those who believe and repent, "Thy sins are forgiven 
thee"-as did our Head, by faith looking forward to the completion 
of the sacrifice for sins, which sacrifice he had begun. 

THEIR PEACE OFFERINGS. 

This offering must be of the herd or flock, and it might be made in 
fulfillment either of a vow (covenant), or as a willing "thank 
offering." Part of it was to be brought to Jehovah by the offerer- 
"His own hands shall bring the offerings of the Lord made by fire; 
the fat with the breast; it shall he bring," and the priest shall burn 
the fat on the altar, and wave the breast before the Lord. But the 
breast shall be the priest's, also the shoulder. The offerer must eat 
the sacrifice. Lev. 3 and 7:11-18,30-34. 

This seems to show, that if any man would come into a condition of 
full peace and harmony (as all are to do or be cut off in the second 
death), they must eat or fulfill a covenant before God, of entire 
consecration to him. If, after being thus perfected, they again 
become defiled with sin, they must die, (second death) as shown by 
the touching of unclean things. Lev. 7:19-21. 



With this sacrifice there was presented an offering of unleavened 
cakes mingled with oil, and anointed wafers, representing the 
offerer's faith in Christ's character, which he will copy; and 
leavened bread indicating his acknowledgment of his own present 
imperfection at time of consecration— leaven being a type of sin. 
Lev. 7:11-13. 

MEATOFFERINGS. 

These, of fine flour, unleavened cakes, with oil, etc., were 
presented to the Lord through the priest. They probably represent 
praises and worship offered to the Lord by the world, through his 
Church. "Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus 
throughout all ages." (Eph. 3:21.) These were accepted by the 
priests: A sample being offered on the altar shows that it is 
acceptable to Jehovah. 



ANOTHER TYPE OF CHRIST'S SACRIFICES. 

LEVITICUS 9. 

This chapter seems to give a more condensed picture of the work 
and sacrifices of the Day of Atonement than the one already 
examined (16.), and in addition, it furnishes certain features which, 
after the consideration of the sixteenth, will be of interest to us. It is 
another picture of the Atonement. 

"And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord commanded that 
ye should do: and the glory of the Lord shall appear unto you. And 
Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the Altar and offer thy Sin- 
offering and thy Burnt-offering and make an atonement for thyself 
[the members of his body required it] and for the people" [the 
World]. 

This shows how Jesus [the bullock sacrifice for sins] was sufficient 
both to redeem his body, the "little flock," and also the whole world 
of mankind. Our share in the Sin-offering could have been 
dispensed with entirely; we might have been saved from death and 
just as all mankind will be, restored to perfection of human nature. 
But it pleased Jehovah not only to choose Jesus to this great work 
of sacrifice, but also to make him the Captain or Head of his 
"Church which is his Body," who, as well as their Captain, should 
be made perfect as SPIRITUAL beings, by suffering as Sin- 
offerings, in the flesh. 

Paul, referring to our intimate relationship to our Head, says: 
"Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath 
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places [the 
"Holy" and "Most Holy"] in Christ; according as he hath CHOSEN 
US in him before the foundation of the world... to the praise of the 
glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the 
beloved." (Eph. 1:4,6.) God "called you by our gospel to the 



obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ," (2 Thes. 2: 14,) so 
that "if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him." 2 Tim. 
2:12. 

To continue- After offering his own sacrifice once for all, he was to 
"offer the offering of the people [the goat], and make an atonement 
for them as the Lord [Jehovah] commanded. " [The arrangement for 
our having part in the sacrifice of atonement, was a part of our 
Father's original plan as Paul also attests.] 

"Aaron therefore went unto the altar and slew the calf of the Sin- 
offering which was for himself. And the sons of Aaron brought the 
blood unto him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and put it on 
the horns of the altar; but the fat, [etc.] ...he burnt upon the 
altar,. ..and the flesh and the hide he burned with fire without the 
camp. And he slew the Burnt-offering [a ram,] and Aaron's sons 
presented unto him the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon 
the altar. And they presented the Burnt-offering unto him; and he 
did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the Burnt- 
offering on the altar, with the pieces thereof and the head." [Much 
the same account as in the 16th chapter, and having the same 
significance.] 

Thus the Burnt-offering of Jesus has been burning all through the 
Gospel Age, giving evidence to all in the "Court" of God's 
acceptance of him and the acceptance of all the members of the 
body- laid to the head, on the altar. 

"And he brought the people's offering, and took the goat which was 
the Sin-offering for the people [not for the Priests and Levites] and 
slew it and offered it for sin as the first," i.e., treated it exactly as he 
treated the bullock. This goat is the same as the "Lord's goat" in the 
other picture, the scapegoat and the other features being omitted in 
this more general view. It is, however, confirmatory of the teaching, 
that only those who follow the Lord's footsteps are participants in 
the Sin-offering. Who could take exception to this? 

"And he brought the Burnt-offering and offered it according to the 
[usual] manner. And he brought the Meat offering, and took a 
handful of it and offered it upon the altar beside the Burnt-sacrifice 
of the morning." 

"He also slew the bullock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace 
offerings which was for the people." The Peace-offering, as already 
described, represents a vow or covenant. By this peace offering, 
made in connection with the Sin-offering of the High Priest, is 
signified the covenants and promises based on the Sin-offering. In 
the type, the peace was established between Jehovah and Israel 
because their former Adamic sin was typically removed; and they 
were obligated to now live obedient to a covenant based on their 
forgiveness— i.e., they were to keep the Law— that he that doeth 
those things should live by (or as a reward for keeping) them. But 
as our Sin-sacrifices are better than the typical ones, so with the 
Peace-offering or covenant established by those sacrifices; it is a 



better covenant. Thus in this sacrifice of peace or covenant offering, 
the Priest is seen to serve unto the example and shadow of spiritual 
things-the mediator of a better covenant, (Heb. 8:6-13), under 
which all people shall be blessed with RESTITUTION and thus 
enabled to obey the perfect law and live forever. 

"And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people and blessed them 
and came down from offering of the Sin-offering, and the Burnt- 
offering and Peace-offerings." Thus in the type we see illustrated 
the fact that though the blessing is not fully due to come upon the 
people until all sacrifices are finished, yet a measure of blessing 
comes upon mankind from the members of the Priest, even now 
during the age of sacrifice, before we all go into the "Most Holy" or 
perfected spiritual condition. 

"And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the 
congregation, and came out and blessed the people." 

When this DAY of sacrifice is over, the Priest (head and body) 
appears before God, giving evidence of having met all the claims of 
the Law against the people (world). Moses' going in also, seems to 
say, The Law was fully satisfied and its righteousness vindicated in 
the sacrifice of Christ. The Law (represented in the type by Moses) 
will testify on behalf of the world that it is justified to life through 
the sacrifices of the Priest who "offered up himself." 

When presented, the sacrifices were "holy, acceptable to God," and 
Moses and Aaron came out, and together they blessed the people. 
So in the incoming age, the Christ will bless all the families of the 
earth (Gal. 3:8,16,29; Gen. 12:3), yet not by setting aside or 
ignoring the Law of God and excusing sin, but by restoring men to 
the perfection of humanity, in which condition they will be able to 
keep the perfect Law of God, and be blessed by it. Now, by reason 
of our inherited imperfection, though the Law says, "He that doeth 
these things (obeys) shall live by them," (shall have a right to 
continuous life) yet none of the imperfect race can now have this 
everlasting life, because of inability to keep the Law. But, then, 
blessed by the Priest, made perfect and able to keep the Law, its 
condition of "do and live" will be a great blessing to all men; for 
whosoever will, may then obey and live forever in happiness and 
communion with Jehovah. 

"And the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the people. " As the 
blessing progresses (restoring and elevating the race mentally and 
physically) the results will become manifest. The people-the world 
in general— will recognize God's gracious love, more and more each 
day. Thus it will be, that "the GLORY of the Lord will be revealed, 
and all flesh shall see it together." (Isa. 40:5.) They will come to see 
gradually, the length and breadth, and height and depth of the love 
of God which surpasseth all understanding. 

It is worthy of note that the blessing here mentioned was not a 
blessing to the under-priests; no; they were represented in the 
blesser— in Aaron. The blessing came on all the people, who, as we 



have seen, represented the world. It is this blessing of the world by 
the "SEED"- the entire Christ, after all the afflictions are filled up 
by the Body, (Col. 1:24) that Paul refers to, saying, that "The whole 
creation [humanity] groaneth and travaileth in pain 
together... waiting for the manifestation of the Sons of God" before 
they can experience deliverance from the bondage of corruption 
and restoration to the liberty of sons of God, as enjoyed by God's 
first human son, Adam. Luke 3:38. 

It is doubtless this same blessing of all the people— salvation from 
death and its sting, sin, that Paul refers to, saying: "UNTO THEM 
THAT LOOK FOR HIM SHALL HE APPEAR THE SECOND 
TIME WITHOUT [a Sin-offering], unto salvation." (Heb. 9:28.) 
The world has seen the Priest-head and body-suffer as a Sin- 
offering during this age: Jesus was manifested to the Jews in the 
flesh (as a Sin-offering); and, as Paul could say, so can all the 
followers in his footsteps, viz.: "Christ is manifest in our mortal 
flesh." (2 Cor. 4:11.) As the whole Christ has thus been manifest 
and suffered in the flesh, so they shall also be "glorified together" 
before the world; for the glory [and Blessing and Salvation] of the 
Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together." When he 
shall appear, we also shall appear with him in glory. Col. 3:4. 

But this great High Priest of the world, will be recognized only by 
them that look for him. If he were to appear in the flesh -or appear 
in the sky, it would be an appearance to all, whether looking for 
him or not; but we have already seen that the Scriptures teach that 
the Head has been perfected as a spiritual being, and that his "little 
flock" shall be made "like him." We have seen that the way in 
which the world will see the glorified Church will be by mental 
perception, in the same sense that a blind person may properly be 
said to see. In the same sense we now see the prize, the "crown of 
life," while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the 
things which are unseen [by physical sight]; for the things which 
are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. 
(2 Cor. 4:18.) It is in this way that the entire Church of this age has 
been "looking unto Jesus"; thus "we see Jesus," Heb. 2:9 and 12:2. 

This is the only way in which the human can see or recognize 
things on the spiritual plane. Jesus expresses this same idea to the 
disciples-they who recognized his spirit or mind and thus knew 
him, would be acquainted with the Father also in the same way. "If 
ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also; and from 
henceforth ye know him and have seen him." This is the only sense 
in which the world will ever see God, for "no man hath seen God at 
any time," ["whom no man hath seen nor can see"]-"the only 
begotten Son he hath DECLARED him." (1 Tim. 6:16; John 1:18.) 
Jesus revealed or caused the disciples to see him by making known 
his character— revealing him as a God of Love. 

It was in the same way that the Papal system was shown by Luther 
and others, and seen by many as the ANTI-CHRIST, or as Paul had 
foretold, that wicked system —the man of sin, was then revealed. 



Thus it is, that Jesus the head (now present to gather the Jewels) is 
being now revealed to the living members of the "little flock," 
though others continue to plant, build, etc., and know not of his 
presence. Luke 17:26-30. 

Thus also it will be in the Millennial Day, when the complete 
Christ-the Priest— is revealed; it will be only to those that look for 
him— only those shall see him. They will see him, not by organic 
sight, but as we now see all spiritual things— Jesus, the Father, the 
prize, etc.-by faith. Men will not see the Christ by physical sight, 
for the same reason that they will never see Jehovah; because on a 
different plane of being-one spirit, the other flesh. But we (the 
little flock) shall see him as he is, for we shall be like him. 1 John 
3:2. 

But, though only those who look shall be able to recognize the 
Christ as the deliverer who will save them from the dominion of 
death; yet this will embrace all the world, for the manner of 
revelation will be such that ultimately all must see. Every eye shall 
see him; and all in their graves, being raised to life-they that 
pierced him will realize that they crucified the Lord of Glory. He 
shall be revealed (In the sky? No;) in flaming fire, (judgments) 
taking vengeance on those that know (recognize) not God, and obey 
not (accept not) the gospel (good news— the deliverance). It will not 
take long for all mankind to recognize him under such 
circumstances. Now the good suffer; then shall ye discern between 
him that serveth the Lord, and him that serveth him not; for in that 
day the distinction will be manifested. (Mai. 3:15-18.) Then all, 
seeing clearly, may accept of him and have everlasting life; for "We 
trust in the Living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially 
those that believe." 1 Tim. 4:10. 

This the types illustrate- "And as it is appointed unto men [Aaron 
and his successors who were only types of the High Priest of the 
new creation] once to die [typically, as represented in the animals 
slain] and after this, [following as a result of those sacrifices] the 
judgment [of God; manifesting approval or disapproval of the 
sacrifice.] So Christ [head and body, the true, the Royal Priesthood] 
was once offered [never will it be repeated] to bear the sins 

page 10 

of many ["every man"] and unto them that look for HIM, he shall 
appear the second time, without sin [not as a Sin-offering] unto 
salvation." (Not again to be sacrificed for the sins of the people, but 
to bless them.) Heb. 9:27,28. 

Every time a Priest went into the Most Holy on the Atonement Day 
he risked his life; for if his sacrifice had been imperfect he would 
have died as he passed the Second Vail, and he would neither have 
been accepted into the Most Holy himself, nor would his imperfect 
sacrifice have been acceptable as an atonement for the sins of the 
people. Hence any failure meant his death and the continuance of 
the people in sin and death whose sins he attempted to cover or 



propitiate. This was the "judgment. " Jesus our Priest passed this 
"judgment" successfully; his sacrifice was acceptable, as evidenced 
in his sending the blessing at Pentecost, which was a guarantee or 
assurance that ultimately He [and we in him] would come forth to 
bless the people —the world, for whose sins He has acceptably 
atoned. 

Many have been looking in an indefinite way for a good time to 
come, and the removal in some way of the curse, of whom Paul 
says: "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together 
until now, waiting for the MANIFESTATIONS of the SONS OF 
GOD"- Jesus the Head or Chief, and all the BODY complete in 
him. Rom. 8:19,22. 

"And there came a fire out from before the Lord, and consumed 
upon the altar the Burnt-offering and the fat, which, when all the 
people saw, they shouted and fell on their faces "-worshiped. This 
is the same thought expressed in another form. The fire symbolizes 
God's acceptance; its recognition by the people, shows that the 
world will realize the sacrifice and its value in God's estimation as 
the price of their liberty from death and the grave; and when they 
realize it, they will worship Jehovah and His representative— the 
Priest. 

How beautifully these types teach of a restitution, and a full ransom 
for all the people, and a blessing to come upon all. Nothing in the 
types seems to make a distinction between the living and the dead, 
and some may be inclined to infer that when the sacrifices of the 
High Priest are over, and the blessing commences, those who are 
then living will be greatly benefited and not the dead. But we 
answer, nay, in God's estimation the living and dead are alike; He 
speaks of them all as dead; all died in Adam, and all the little spark 
of life which any man possesses is really but one stage of dying. It 
is a dead race because of the sin of Adam, and it will be a race 
justified to the same life he enjoyed and forfeited; and all who will, 
may have it back, whether they have gone all the way down into 
death, or whether they still linger on the brink- in "the valley of the 
shadow of death." 

This is the object of the sin-offerings to release mankind from the 
dominion of death, to the perfection of being which is essential to 
perfect happiness and atonement with his Creator. This is the 
blessing which comes to all the families of the earth through The 
Seed of Abraham. This is the good news which was preached to 
Abraham, as we read: "God foreseeing that he would justify the 
heathen (all mankind-Gentiles) through faith, preached before the 
gospel [good tidings] to Abraham, saying, In thee, and in thy seed 
shall all nations be blessed [justified]... which Seed is Christ 
[primarily the head, and secondarily the body] for if ye be Christ's 
[members] then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the 
promises," referred to— viz.: that we may bless all the families of the 
earth. (Gal. 3:16,19.) But the Seed must be complete before the 
blessing comes, as shown in the type just considered: -The Sin- 



offerings must be ended before all the blessings resulting can flow 
out. 

While the sacrifices of the people (Israel -the world) belong to the 
next age, and will then be presented to the Priests, yet in a certain 
sense this has a very slight beginning now. Thus it is, that the 
worldly man possessed of wealth, is in that sense a steward of 
God's things, and can use that "mammon" and with it make for 
himself friends; that when this age of Satan's rule is ended, and the 
reign of Christ commences, in which he shall no longer be a 
Steward, then, those whom he thus favored will bless him. If the 
worldly Stewards of wealth (the mammon or God of this age) were 
wise, they would use their means thus. For whosoever shall give a 
cup of cold water even, unto one of the least of these (Priests) shall 
by no means lose his reward when the kingdom of Christ is 
organized and its rule begins. Luke 16:1-8, and Matt. 10:42. 

It should be remembered that the restriction that the High Priest 
alone, went into the Most Holy once a year to make an atonement, 
should not be misunderstood to mean that he and the underpriests 
never went in thither during succeeding days-after the Atonement 
Day had made full reconciliation for sins. 

On the contrary, the High Priest went in there often in after days. It 
was into the Most Holy that the High Priest went whenever he 
would inquire for Israel, using the breast-plate of Judgment and 
Urim and Thumim. Again, whenever they broke camp, which was 
often, the Priests went in and took down the Vails and wrapped up 
the Ark, and all the holy vessels, before the Levites could carry 
them. Num. 4:5-16. 

Again, whenever an Israelite offered a sin offering unto the priests 
(after the "Day of Atonement" sacrifices were (over) they all ate it 
in the Most Holy. (Num. 18:10.) So with the antitype, after the 
present "Day of Atonement", is over the "Royal Priesthood" shall 
be in the Most Holy or perfect spiritual condition, and there accept 
(eat) the sacrifices for sin, brought by the world for their own 
transgressions— not the Adamic sins which were canceled on the 
Day of Atonement. There in the perfect spiritual condition, the 
priesthood shall instruct in every matter represented in the Urim 
and Thumim. 



OTHER SIGNIFICANT TYPES. 

In the preceding description we have purposely omitted an 
explanation of some interesting details which can now be better 
understood by those who have, through careful study, obtained a 
clear understanding of the general plan of the Tabernacle, its 
services, and their typical signification. 

THE POSTS which stood in the court and held up the white 
curtains, represent justified believers. They are in the "Court," the 



proper place for such, as we have already seen. They are of wood, a 
corruptible material. This shows that they are not actually perfect as 
human beings; for since human perfection is represented by copper, 
those posts should either be made of copper, or covered with copper 
to represent actually perfect human beings. They were made of 
wood, but were set into sockets of copper, which teaches us that, 
though actually imperfect, their standing is that of perfect human 
beings. It would be impossible to more clearly represent 
Justification by faith. 

THE WHITE CURTAIN, well illustrates the same justification or 
purity. These justified ones should continually hold up to the view 
of the world (the camp) the pure linen representing Christ's 
righteousness, as their covering. 

THE SILVER HOOKS by which the posts hold up the curtain, are 
symbolic of TRUTH; (Silver is a general symbol of truth.) they can 
really and truthfully claim that Christ's righteousness covers all 
their imperfections. (Lev. 27:1 1-17.) and it is only by the aid of the 
TRUTH that they are able to hold to their justification. 

The Posts at the entrance of the Tabernacle -at the "door" of the 
Holy— were covered by the first vail. They were totally different 
from the posts in the court, and represent the consecrated saints. 
The difference between these and the posts in the "Court" shows the 
difference between the justified and sanctified conditions. The 
consecration to death of a justified man, we have seen to be the way 
into the "Holy"-passing through, the death of the human will, the 
fleshly mind, the first vail. Hence these posts should illustrate this 
change; and so they do; they were covered with gold, symbol of the 
divine nature. Being set in sockets of copper, represents how "we 
have this treasure (divine nature) in earthen vessels" (2 Cor. 4:7) - 
i.e., our new nature is still based upon and rests in, our justified 
humanity. This, it will be remembered, corresponds exactly with 
what we found the "Holy" to symbolize, viz.: our place or standing 
as new creatures, not yet perfected. Exod. 26:37. 

THE POSTS in the "Most Holy," were just inside the second vail, 
and represent those who pass beyond the flesh (Vail) entirely, into 
the perfection of the spiritual condition. These posts were so 
constructed as to fully illustrate this— covered with gold, 
representing divine nature, but no longer set in sockets of brass-no 
longer dependent on any human condition; they were set in sockets 
of silver (reality and truth), which seems to say to us: When you 
come inside this vail you will be perfect —really and fully New 
Creatures. Exod. 26:32. 

THE GOLDEN TABLE bearing the shew bread, represents the 
church as a whole, including Jesus and the Apostles -all "Holding 
forth the word of life." (Phil. 2:16.) The great work of the true 
church during this age, is to feed and strengthen and enlighten all 
who enter the covenanted spiritual condition -The bride of Christ is 
to make herself ready. (Rev. 19:7.) The witnessing to the WORLD 



during the present age is quite secondary and incidental. The full 
BLESSING of the World will follow in God's "DUE TIME." 

THE GOLDEN CANDLESTICK was all of one piece, hammered 
out; there was one central shaft with a lamp on top, and three 
branches on each side of it, each bearing a lamp, making seven 
lamps in all-a perfect or complete number. Does not this represent 
the complete Church from the Head, Jesus, to and including the last 
member of the "little flock," He is taking out from among men, to 
be partakers of the divine (gold) nature? Jesus says, "The seven 
candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches." Rev. 1:20. 
Yes, that candlestick represented the entire Church of the first-born. 
Not the nominal but the true Church is here meant however- the 
Royal Priesthood. 

The form of workmanship was beautiful —a fruit and a flower, a 
fruit and a flower following successively, shows us that the true 
church ["whose names are written in heaven"] is both beautiful and 
fruitful from first to last. The lamp part on top of each branch was 
shaped like an almond, the significance of which we will see when 
considering Aaron's rod. 

The oil for this lamp was Olive oil- beaten or refined; and the 
lamps were kept lighted always. Oil is a symbol of the Holy Spirit. 
It was for the benefit of the priest class only, and represents the 
spirit or mind of God given to enlighten the church, in the deep 
things of God, which are entirely hidden from the natural man (1 
Cor. 2:14), even though he be a believer-a justified man (a Levite). 
None were permitted to go, or even to see, into this deeper light, 
hidden in the "Holy," but the true church, the consecrated ones-the 
Royal Priesthood. These always had access to the "Holy;" it was 
their right and privilege; it was intended for them. (Heb. 9:6.) The 
Levites could not see in, because of the vail of human-mindedness 
which came between them and the Sacred things; and the only way 
to set it aside was to consecrate and sacrifice wholly the human 
nature. 

The lights were to be trimmed and replenished every morning and 
evening, by the High Priest-Aaron and his sons who succeeded 
him in office. (Exod. 27:20-21; and 30:8.) So our High Priest, is 
daily filling us more and more with the mind of Christ, and 
trimming off the dross of the old nature. 

Are we sometimes puzzled to know why some who are in the 
church cannot see any but natural things-cannot discern the deeper 
spiritual truths of the Word? They can see Restitution for natural 
men, but cannot see our heavenly calling. These Tabernacle lessons 
show us why this is: They are brethren, of the household of faith, 
but Levites-in the Court; they never consecrated as priests, 
consequently cannot enter the "Holy," nor see the things prepared 
for the priests only. The natural "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard- 
neither have entered into the heart of man the things which God 
hath prepared for them that love Him. But God hath revealed them 



unto us who through consecration have become 'partakers of the 
divine nature' by His Spirit [light of the lamp], for the Spirit 
searcheth [revealeth] all things -yea, the deep [hidden] things of 
God." 1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

The church nominal has always included both the justified and 
sanctified classes-Levites and Priests. In Paul's letters certain parts 
were addressed to the justified class (Levites), who had not 
consecrated. Thus, after exhorting in Gal. 5, he winds up by 
assuring them, that the things he complains of, are evidences that 
they do not belong to the body of Christ, the Priesthood: for, he 
says, "They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the 
affections and lusts." Verse 24. 

In the same way he addresses the Romans (Ch. 12:1): "I beseech 
you therefore brethren [believers— justified by faith in Christ- 
Levites], by the mercies of God [manifest through Christ in our 
justification], that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice; [that 
you consecrate wholly— thus becoming Priests] holy, acceptable 
unto God." Being justified freely by faith in Jesus, God reckons you 
as sinless or holy; and He has agreed to accept every such sacrifice- 
- "With such sacrifice he is ever well pleased." By so doing, you 
become Priests-members in particular of the High Priest's body. 

The succeeding verse tells them what will result from so 
consecrating-viz. ; The transformation of their minds. Their wills 
being renewed, they will be priests —new creatures possessing the 
spirit of Christ. The fact that at this time they have not the spirit of 
sacrifice is an evidence that they were not members of Christ— for 
"if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of His." (Rom. 
8:9) and it seems evident to us, that by far the larger proportion of 
the early churches (much more so of the modern worldly mixture, 
the confused "Babylon" of the present day) were not 
CONSECRATED, consequently not Priests, but merely Levites, 
doing the SERVICE of the Sanctuary, but not sacrificing. 

Looking back at the type in the Law, we find that there were 8,580 
Levites appointed in the shadowy SERVICE, while only five 
Priests were appointed for the shadowy SACRIFICING. (Num. 
4:36,40,44,48; Ex. 28:1.) It may be that this, as much as the other 
features of that shadow, was designed to illustrate the proportion of 
justified believers to self-sacrificing, consecrated ones. Though 
now the nominal church numbers millions, yet when a fair 
allowance is made for hypocrites and one in every seventeen 
hundred of the balance supposed to be living sacrifices, (a correct 
proportion according to the type,) it seems quite evident that the 
Lord did not make a mis-statement when He said, that they who 
would receive the kingdom (the Royal Priesthood) would be a 
"little flock." Luke 12:32. 

The fact that we see believers who are trying to put away their sins, 
is not of itself evidence of their being Priests, for Levites, as well as 
Priests, should practice "CIRCUMCISION" of the heart -"putting 



away the filth (sins) of the flesh." Nor is a spirit of meekness, 
gentleness, benevolence and morality, always a result of 
consecration to God. These qualities belong to a perfect natural 
man- (the image of God), and occasionally partially survive the 
wreck of the "Fall." But such people when in the nominal church, 
not unfrequently pass for the cream of Christianity. 

Nor yet, when we see believers practicing self-denial in some good 
work of political or moral reform, is that an evidence of 
consecration to God, though it is an evidence of consecration to a 
WORK. Consecration to God says, any work, any where; Lo, "I 
delight to do THY will, O, God"-THY will in THY way be done. 
CONSECRATION TO GOD, THEN, WILL INSURE A 
SEARCHING OF HIS REVEALED PLAN IN HIS WORD, that 
we 

page 11 

may be able to spend and be spent, for Him and in His service 
according to His arranged plan. 

Marvel not, then, that so few have ever seen the glorious beauties 
within the Tabernacle; only Priests can see them. The Levites may 
know of them only as they hear them described. They have never 
seen the hidden light and beauty; never eaten of the "bread of 
presence;" never offered the acceptable incense at the Golden Altar. 
No; for these, they must pass the Vail-in entire consecration to 
God in sacrifice during the Atonement Day. 

THE GOLDEN ALTAR seems also to represent the entire 
(consecrated) church in the present sacrificing condition. From this 
altar ascends the sweet incense, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 
Here is offered to God the willing services of the Priests; their 
praises, their willing obedience; all things whatsoever they do, to 
the glory of God. Those who thus offer incense acceptable to God 
by Jesus Christ (1 Pet. 2:5), come very close to their Father— close 
up to the Vail; and if they have requests to make they may be 
presented with the incense "much Incense with the prayer of 
saints." (Rev. 8:3.) The prayers of such Priests of God are effectual. 
Jesus kept the incense continually burning and could say, "I knew 
that thou hearest me always." (John 11:42.) So we will be heard 
always, if we continually offer the incense of obedience to God: 
and none should expect to have requests recognized who do not 
thus keep their covenant-"If ye abide in me and my words 
[teachings] abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will and it shall be 
done unto you."* John 15:7. 

We have learned through types previously considered, something of 
the glory of the "Most Holy" (the perfect, divine condition) which 
no man can approach unto (1 Tim. 6:16), but to which the "NEW 
creatures" in Christ Jesus— partakers of the Divine nature, will 
finally come, when the incense offering on the part of the BODY is 
finished and the cloud of perfume goes before us to Jehovah's 



presence that we may live beyond the vail acceptable to God by 
Jesus Christ our Lord. 

THE ARK. We would now endeavor to learn what God designed to 
symbolize by the "Ark of the Testimony," the only article of 
furniture in the "Most Holy. " Its name suggests that it illustrates the 
embodiment of Jehovah's plan, which he had purposed in himself, 
before even the head of the Christ had been created the beginning 
of the creation of God, or the minutest development of his plan 
taken place. It represented the purpose of God to develop a little 
flock, to be partakers of the Divine nature and to be imbued with 
power and great glory-the prize of our high-calling; the joy set 
before our Lord, and all the members of his body. 

As before stated, it was a rectangular box overlaid with gold which 
represents the Divine nature. It contained the Law showing how the 
Christ should meet in full, all the requirements of God's perfect 
Law, and also that legal authority should be vested in him as the 
Law executor. 

The righteousness of the Law was actually fulfilled in our head, and 
it is also fulfilled actually in us as new creatures who walk not after 
the flesh, but after the Spirit; that is, who walk in obedience to the 
new mind. The infirmities of the old nature which we are daily 
crucifying, are not charged to us as new creatures. 

When it is written that "the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in 
us"— the end of our race— perfection— is reckoned to us, because we 
are walking toward, or after the spiritual perfection, which, when 
we reach the Ark condition in the "Most Holy" will be complete. 

AARON'S ROD that budded, shows the elect character of all the 
body of Christ, as members of the royal priesthood. By reading 
Num. 17, the meaning of the budded rod will be seen to be 
Jehovah's acceptance of Aaron and his sons-the head and 
underpriests-as the only ones who might perform the priest's office 
of Mediator. That rod, therefore represented the acceptableness of 
the "Royal Priesthood" -the Christ, Head and Body. The rod 
budded and brought forth almonds. A peculiarity about the almond 
tree, is, that the fruit appears before the leaves; so with the "royal 
priesthood;" they sacrifice or bring forth fruit, before the leaves, or 
professions are made. 

THE GOLDEN POT OF MANNA represents Immortality as being 
one of the possessions of the Christ of God. Jesus doubtless refers 
to this, when he says: "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of 
the hidden manna." (Rev. 2:17.) Manna was the bread which came 
down from heaven-a life sustainer; so God through Christ provides 
life for all Israel (the world) that they may live forever -continually 
eating of it; but he offers to those who become joint heirs, members 
of the Anointed Body, that they shall have a peculiar sort of manna, 
or life principal, the "hidden manna." One peculiarity of this pot of 
manna was, that it was incorruptible; hence, it well illustrates the 
immortal and incorruptible condition promised to all members of 



the "Seed" -which is Christ. The manna fed to Israel was not 
incorruptible and must be gathered daily. So all except the "little 
flock" of Priests will be provided with life everlasting, but 
conditional, while the little flock who under present unfavorable 
conditions are faithful overcomers, will be given incorruptible life, 
Immortality. See "FOOD" page 134. 

Here then in the golden Ark, is represented the glory to be revealed 
in the Divine Christ; in the budded rod, God's chosen priesthood; in 
the tables of the Law, the righteous Judge; in the incorruptible 
manna in the golden bowl, Immortality in divinity. 

Above this Ark, and constituting a lid, or head over it, was the 
Mercy Seat —a slab of solid gold, on the two ends of which, and of 
the same piece of metal, were formed two cherubim, with wings 
uplifted as if ready to fly-their faces looking inward toward the 
centre of the plate on which they stood. Here, between the 
cherubim on the Mercy Seat, a bright light, indicated Jehovah's 
presence. 

To our understanding that Mercy Seat, Glory-light, and Cherubim, 
together represented Jehovah God. As with the Christ, so with 
Jehovah, He is here represented by things which illustrate attributes 
of his character. The light reminds us of Paul's words: (1 Tim. 6:16) 
God "only hath immortality, dwelling in light, which no man can 
approach unto." Humanity cannot enter his presence; hence, the 
priesthood, head and body, represented by Aaron, must become 
new creatures, "partakers of the divine nature" (having crucified 
and buried the human) before they can appear before that excellent 
glory. 

The slab of gold called the Mercy Seat, or more properly the 
Propitiatory, because on it the Priests offered the blood of the 
sacrifices which propitiated or satisfied God's just demands, 
represents the underlying principle of Jehovah's character - 
JUSTICE. His throne is established upon JUSTICE. "Judgment and 
justice are the habitation of thy throne." Psa. 89:14; Rev. 15:3; Job 
36:17 and 37:23; Isa. 56:1. 

The TWO CHERUBIM represent two elements of our Father's 
character as revealed in his Word, viz.: Love and Power. These 
attributes, Justice the foundation principle and Love, and Power of 
the same quality and lifted up out of it, are in perfect harmony with 
each other. They are all made of one piece; they are thoroughly one. 
Neither Love nor Power can be exercised until Justice is fully 
satisfied: Then they fly to help, to lift up and to bless. They were on 
the wing ready but waiting; looking inward toward the Mercy Seat, 
toward Justice, to know when to act. 

See the High Priest as he approaches with the blood of the 
Atonement sacrifices. Will he put it upon the Cherubim? No, 
neither the Power nor the Love of God independently require the 
sacrifice; he need not, therefore, sprinkle the Cherubim. It is the 
Justice of God that will by no means clear the guilty— It was Justice 



that said: The wages of sin is death. When, therefore, the High 
Priest would give a ransom for sinners, it is to Justice that it must 
be paid. Hence the appropriateness of the ceremony of sprinkling 
the blood upon the Mercy Seat-upon the PROPITIATORY. 

Love led to the whole redemptive plan. It was because God so 
loved the world that he sent his only begotten Son to redeem it, by 
paying to Justice the ransom. So Love has been active, preparing 
for the redemption ever since sin entered-yes "from before the 
foundation of the world." 1 Pet. 1:20. 

"Love first contrived the way 
To save rebellious man." 

When the Atonement Day sacrifices (bullock and goat) are 
complete, Love tarries to see the results of its plan. As the blood is 
sprinkled, JUSTICE cries, it is enough. It is finished. Then comes 
the moment when Love and Power may act and swift they wing 
their flight to bless the ransomed race. When Justice is satisfied, 
Power starts upon his errand which is co-extensive with that of 
Love, using the same agency— Christ. 

The relationship and oneness of that divine family the Son and 
Bride, represented by the Ark in harmony and oneness with the 
Father represented by the Cover, is shown in the fact that the Mercy 
Seat was the lid of the Ark, and hence a part-the top or head of it. 
As the head of the Church is Christ Jesus, so the head of the entire 
Christ is God. (1 Cor. 11:3.) This is the oneness for which Jesus 
prayed, saying: Father "I pray not for the world, but for those thou 
hast given me"-"that they all may be one; as thou Father art in me, 
and I in thee, that they also may be in us-that the world may [then] 
believe." John 17:9,21. 

UNBLEMISHED. 

It is significant also, that any member of the priesthood that had a 
blemish of eye, hand, nose, foot, or in any way, could not fill the 
office of Priest [High Priest]; neither any man having any 
superfluity, such as an extra finger, or toe. This seems to teach us of 
the perfection of every member of that body— they are all 
"overcomers:" and furthermore, it shows that when the body of 
Christ is complete, there will be no additions permitted-no 
superfluity. If then, we are called, if we here heard the invitation to 
become members in particular of his Body, and have accepted it, let 
us seek to make our calling and election (as members of that "little 
flock") sure, by so running as to obtain the prize. If we miss the 
prize some one else will win in our place, for the body will be 
complete; not one member lacking, not one superfluous. Take heed 
"that no man take thy crown." Rev. 3:11. 

It has been a matter of surprise to some that the glories and beauty 
of the Tabernacle-its golden walls, its golden and beautifully 
engraved furniture, and vails of curious work were so completely 
covered and hidden from view of the people; no sunlight from 



without even, to illuminate its glorious beauty. But this is all in 
keeping with the lessons we have received from its services. As 
God covered the type and hid its beauty under curtains and rough 
unsightly skins so the glories and beauties of spiritual things are 
seen only when within, by those who enter-the Royal Priesthood. 
These, too, enter a hidden glory which the world and all outside fail 
to appreciate. Their glory and also their standing as new creatures 
are hidden from their fellowmen. 

Ah, these are of a royal line, 
All children of a King, 
Heirs of immortal crowns divine, 
And lo, for joy they sing! 

Why do they, then, appear so mean? 
And why so much despised? 
Because of their rich robes unseen 
The world is not apprised." 



:,: The importance of a clear apprehension of Christ's teachings as a 
guide to our requests and expectations; that we may not "ask amiss" 
and out of harmony with that teaching of God's plan; is clearly 
shown by this Scripture— but seldom noticed. 



WALL CHARTS.-We have no more. 



R747 :page 11 

GOD gives to his children blessings without measure, but their 
trials he measures carefully. Every burden which he permits to rest 
on any of his loved ones is weighed with exactness. It is just 
enough to do its needful work. No portion of it could be spared. 



R772:page 11 

THE "LITTLE FLOCK" AND THE "GREAT 
COMPANY." 

Two distinct companies of spiritual children of God have been 
developing side by side throughout the Christian Age. One class is 
designated a "little flock," and the other "a great multitude." (Luke 
12:32; Rev. 7:9.) Not that one is called to be a member of the little 
flock, and another a member of the great company, but all are 
called to be of the little flock to whom it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give the kingdom, and to be joined in heirship with 
Jesus Christ, as his Bride. As Paul declares, "Ye are all called in 
one hope of your calling." Eph. 4:4. 



All these start on the same narrow way, and being fully consecrated 
to God are begotten of the Spirit through the word of truth. Hence 
all are "new creatures" -spiritual-their old nature (the human) 
being doomed to certain destruction by their own free will and 
covenant. Therefore if these ever develop it must be as spiritual 
beings. The human perfection, physical, mental, and moral, to 
which the world may attain in the next age, is now out of the 
question to these consecrated ones; that having been presented by 
them and accepted by God as their sacrifice. If these fail to develop 
as "new creatures"-spiritual-there is no other hope for them: Death 
is the only alternative. 

To be developed as new creatures, the old nature with all its hopes, 
ambitions, etc., must die. But to steadily put it to death, of our own 
continuous free will, is no light task, and this becomes more and 
more difficult, as the way narrows down to its end. Only a minority 
of all who in good faith make the consecration, run with patience to 
the end-in all only a "little flock." With many, courage begins to 
fail, and they need to be spurred onward by the chastening rod of 
him who has become our surety (Heb. 7:22) to guarantee that we 
fulfill our covenant, though our own efforts should fail; otherwise, 
the end of such must be death. In love, therefore, special afflictions 
are sent upon the consecrated, when needed, to wean the affections 
from earthly things, and to draw the heart again into closer 
sympathy and communion with God in fulfillment of its covenant 
of sacrifice. A few only run patiently in the way of sacrifice, 
rejoicing at the privilege of winning so great a prize at such small 
comparative cost. The great company, we read, come up through 
great tribulation, which the "little flock" escapes (Rev. 7:14; Luke 
21:36), and yet some in each company may have come through the 
very same experiences. To one it is great tribulation because he 
looks at the things that are behind, and weighs their value in the 
scales of this world; to the other it is but a light and easy yoke, 
because forgetting the things that are behind, he presses toward the 
prize of our high calling. 

"To him that overcometh," rendering a cheerful and willing 
sacrifice, even unto death, our Lord says, "will I grant to sit with 
me in my throne" (Rev. 3:21). And of the "great company" also 
beloved of the Lord, and rightly exercised by his chastening rod, it 
is said, "Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him 
day and night in his temple." 

Both companies are developed as spiritual beings, but the little 
flock to the highest order of spiritual being-the divine nature. Let 
us, therefore, seek to render unto the Lord that which is well 
pleasing to him, a cheerful, constant, willing sacrifice. "God loveth 
a cheerful giver." "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with 
thy might." Would the bridegroom want for his bride one who 
would come with any other spirit? No, faithfulness under 
difficulties is the test of her love and devotedness. 



At first sight Heb. 12:5,8, may appear to be out of harmony with 
this thought, but the Greek words "paideuo" and "paideias" in the 
King James translation rendered chastened and chastening, signify, 
to discipline, to instruct, to teach, to chasten. But chastening 
becomes a part of discipline only when the subject is an unwilling 
one. The Diaglott very clearly expresses the Apostle's thought. It 
reads, "My son, slight not the discipline of the Lord, neither be 
discouraged when reproved by him; for 

R772 : page 12 

whom the Lord loves he disciplines, and he scourges every son 
whom he receives. If you endure discipline, God deals with you as 
with sons; for is there any son whom a father does not discipline? 
But if you are without discipline of which all have become 
partakers, then truly you are spurious and not sons. Have we then 
received discipline from our natural father, and we reverenced 
them; shall we not much rather be submissive to the Father of 
spirits and live? For they indeed for a few days disciplined us 
according as it seemed right to them; but he for our advantage in 
order that we may partake of his holiness. 

Yes, we all need the disciplining, training and scourgings to which 
our heavenly Father is now subjecting all his spiritual sons, that we 
may be prepared for the responsible positions to which we shall 
shortly be assigned. If we never have received, and know nothing 
of, this discipline, this training, then we may be sure we are not 
sons. Even Jesus, the perfect man, received it, shall we then hope to 
escape it? Not unless we despise it, refuse to receive it, and turn our 
backs upon it, ignoring our covenant entirely, which open rebellion 
verse 9 implies and Heb. 10:26,27, clearly states, must end in death. 

The discipline which all the spiritual sons receive is the same which 
Jesus received —the buffetings of the world, the neglect, the cold 
indifference, the misunderstanding, the unbelief, being despised, 
persecuted, and cast out as evil, even by some or all of those of our 
own household; Lawful and proper human desires which conflict 
with our covenant, as well as all sinful besetments which must be 
constantly curbed and crucified, however they may clamor with our 
new nature for their rights, are all elements of our discipline. Then 
again the peculiar and subtle temptations of the Adversary which 
must be met and overcome through faith in the divine promises, 
which must be diligently searched for, and stored in mind, as the 
defense against sudden and unlooked-for attacks. Such trials of 
faithfulness Jesus endured, and overcame, and we, by his aid, "in 
every time of need," may also overcome; though not like him, 
perfect, yet his grace is sufficient for us, and we can overcome as 
he overcame the world and its spirit (influence); yea, we can do all 
tilings through Christ's strength freely given unto us for the seeking. 
Phil. 4:13. 

All discipline is severe and painful, yet necessary, both as training 
for our future office as Priests unto God, and as filling up the 



measure of the afflictions of Christ now. It was experienced by our 
Head unto the bitter end-death, and that without a murmur. He was 
oppressed and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is 
brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her 
shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. Isa. 53:7. 

He was led, not driven to death. He willingly permitted the sick and 
afflicted to partake of his vitality, his strength, and himself bore 
their infirmities to the extent necessary for their healing. In 
Gethsemane, knowing that his hour was come, he gave himself into 
the hands of his betrayers. He willingly endured the disapproval of 
men and denied himself the blessing of men that he might spend his 
time and talents according to his Father's will, esteeming it his meat 
and drink to do that will at any cost. All his sacrifice from the 
beginning to the end was rendered cheerfully, without a murmur, 
and even with delight. Why? Because he looked not at the things 
behind, which he had given up, but to the things before. He never 
even mentioned the things behind, but he had much to say of the 
things to come. 

To follow in his footsteps then is to sacrifice ourselves as he did, 
with the same uncomplaining cheerful submission, delighting to do 
the Father's will. To obey grudgingly, reluctantly, with slow and 
halting step, with much complaining and frequent lookings back to 
lament over the loss of the things behind, holding back, loving the 
world, its ways and its things, and driven forward mainly by the 
scourge of tribulation and fear, are marks of those developing for 
the "great company," and to such there is danger of not only being 
"cast away" from the anointed body, but also of not even gaining a 
position in the "great company." To gain a position in the latter 
even, they must give heed to the discipline, and in it, must wash 
their robes and make them white. The robe given to each saint is at 
first pure and spotless-Christ's righteousness is imputed to them. 
Those who fail to overcome and to keep their garments unspotted 
from the world must have the tribulation of washing them, and must 
rightly appreciate and use it, else they are unfit for either company. 

In the case of Jesus and all who joyfully surrender themselves, it is 
called "SACRIFICE" of the flesh or human nature, and such are 
called "OVERCOMERS." In the case of those who hold back and 
wait for tribulation before rendering obedience, it is called 
"DESTRUCTION of the flesh" or human nature. The one class of 
which Jesus is the head, overcome the world; the other is overcome 
by the world, but finally delivered by the Lord through tribulations. 
And the rewards of these two classes, as stated by the Lord, will 
differ. The "overcomers," a "little flock," as members of His body, 
will sit with him in the throne, and be members of the spiritual 
temple, and wear the crown. The others-a "great company" will 
serve God in or 

R773 : page 12 



through his temple (the Body of Christ) and praise him before his 
throne and have "palms" of victory at last, though they failed to win 
the crowns. 

In what a precarious situation we stand. O that all may be fully 
awake to the solemn responsibilities and issues of this, the 
Judgment Day of the Church -of all who have put on the name of 
Christ. All discipline indeed, as it respects the present, seems not to 
be of joy, but of grief; yet afterwards it returns the peaceful fruit of 
righteousness to those who have been trained by it. Hold fast. Let 
no man take thy crown. Do not let the gratification of the present 
moment rob you of the great prize of our high calling which God 
desires to bestow upon you. Lay aside every weight and hindrance 
and count present sacrifices all joy, and by cheerful, prompt 
sacrifice, work out, make your calling and election sure; work out 
your salvation while God by his truth and his providence shall work 
in you. 

"Therefore brace up the wearied hands and the enfeebled knees," 
make a desperate and continuous effort to render such a sacrifice as 
will be acceptable and well pleasing to God through Jesus; and 
"Make level paths for your feet"— i.e., arrange your circumstances, 
etc., as far as possible, so as to help and not hinder you, "lest that 
which is lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed" 
(Heb. 12:13.)-lameness or likings for certain things which as 
consecrated ones we have no right to. Make your circumstances 
favor self-denial in this way as much as possible, that you may not 
be severely tempted on this weak or lame point of your character. 

What great advantage accrues to the willing sacrificers— the little 
flock? They run with joy, realizing the Father's approval, and 
inspired by the glory of the prize kept constantly in view, while the 
great company of consecrated ones limp painfully along, many of 
them through the very same outward experiences, harassed by 
fears, worried by doubts, saddened by the loss of the things behind 
which they cannot now enjoy, yet failing to clearly discern the 
glory before, and driven by circumstances, fear, etc., to the 
fulfillment of their covenant. 

And then this great company shall not be esteemed worthy to be of 
the Bride of Christ. That intimate relationship and communion is 
reserved only for those who have proved their devotedness by 
prompt, cheerful, willing sacrifices, even unto death. But the great 
company chastened, refined, purified shall be beloved and honored 
also with the next most favored position, because they were rightly 
exercised by the chastening rod. 

In view of the momentous issues of this time of trial, let our efforts 
be constantly supplemented by our prayers that the Lord may give 
us grace to let him work in us, to will and to do his good pleasure, 
for unaided by divine grace none of us can make our election sure. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R773 : page 12 

"CRY OUT AND SHOUT." 

DEAR BRETHREN: We read, "Cry out and shout thou inhabitant 
of Zion, for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee." 
Hallelujah— yes he has come! "The Holy One of Israel" is now 
present. Those in "Zion" know of his personal presence; having 
heard his voice, and opened the door, they are now feasting with 
him. Blessed feast! "Wines on the lees." The marrow and fatness of 
gospel truth. New dispensational truth. "Meat in due season. " Again 
we say hallelujah! We cannot help it. The very stones would cry out 
if we held our peace. Our hearts are full of gladness, our mouths 
with praise, and eyes with tears of joy, as we read the last 
"TOWER," so full of gospel truth. Yes, beloved— as you so 
truthfully say -"the whole armor is needed now more than ever in 
this day of battle for God's truth." 

What joy to the faithful virgin Bride to know that her Lord has 
come! What joy to her holy Bridegroom to reveal himself to his 
waiting, watching, faithful ones! "Unto them that look for him, 
shall he appear the second time." 

Long years ago "witnesses chosen of God" (Acts 10:41) saw him 
ascend in "a cloud." Silent and still his departure, unknown alike to 
the world and the worldly- lukewarm Church. Having received the 
kingdom, "in like manner" has he returned, "sitting on the white 
cloud" (Rev. 14:14), unknown alike to the world and the lukewarm, 
or Laodicean Church. 

But "witnesses chosen of God," by faithfully taking heed to the 
"more sure word of prophecy," whose eager eyes of faith, piercing 
through the white cloud, behold the King of Glory, with his golden 
crown and sharp sickle; a sure indication of harvest work. "The 
harvest is the end of the age." 

The seven churches of Asia seem clearly to represent the seven 
successive steps or stages in the development of the nominal gospel 
church, from the ascension to the second advent of Christ. He did 
not say, "Behold, I stand and knock," to any of the seven, except to 
the last, or Laodicean Church. To the others he said, "Behold, I 
come quickly." A dear friend, living in a distant State, writes me: "I 
am coming to you quickly." Has he come? No; but I am looking for 
him very soon. Again a message comes: "Behold! (see!) I stand at 
the door and knock. " Has he not come? Is he not present? 

Why does Christ accuse the seventh or Laodicean Church with 
blindness, unless because he is personally present and they fail to 
see— recognize— his presence? To none of the seven except the last 
does he say: "Anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou mayest 
see." See what-who? Evidently the "Holy One of Israel," who is 
now "in the midst of Zion." "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they 



shall see God." "Without holiness no man shall see the Lord." The 
greatest joy of our hearts is to know that "all nations shall come and 
worship, in his presence." Your brother laborer in the harvest-field. 



R773 : page 12 

YOUR STANDING. 

We publish the following letter and its answer, as they may be of 
assistance to others of similar mind. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, Dear Sir:-I write to solicit two copies of 
"The Tabernacle and its Teachings," as I have just found where 
they are needed. I regret that I am unable to send a mite for the tract 
fund with this note. I am only a sinner, but I take great interest in 
this work. I do what lies in my power to propagate these truths, but 
few seem to have any curiosity, and still less the patience to 
investigate, yet occasionally we find one who is willing and 
anxious to search and find. 

I have always ridiculed orthodoxy, but have believed in the divinity 
of Christ. The WATCH TOWER has made the Bible very plain to 
me, and although I often feel myself a castaway, it is a great 
comfort to know that such a glorious future is soon to dawn upon 
this dying world. In reading the letters and articles of the WATCH 
TOWER I see that some are drinking the cup of which he drank, 
and are being baptized into his death. It seems to me impossible 
that any who have been so enlightened by the Spirit and exalted to 
such fellowship with God should falter or suffer any influence of 
evil in to any measure separate them from the love they have in 
him. 

If in early years I had known what I now know, I might have been 
among your number, but doubtless it is well. 

Yours very truly, 



DEAR BROTHER:-I presume you will be somewhat surprised 
that I address you as brother when you do not seem to reckon 
yourself a child of God. But of one thing I feel quite sure, that if 
you are not a brother of the anointed company, you are a brother of 
the household of faith-a sinner SAVED BY GRACE-and 
therefore not now a sinner. The weaknesses of our flesh which will 
not permit our perfect conformity to the will of God, are not 
imputed to us. They are not reckoned as our sins. Our sins were all 
laid upon Jesus who bore their penalty for us. Please read in the 
TOWER of March, 1884, the article entitled, "Lost and Saved," and 
I think you will see that I am right in calling you brother. 

But it may be that even in a higher sense you are a brother, yet not 
fully discerning your high relationship to God and his anointed. 



May it not be with you as it has been with many others, that you 
have at some time in the past given yourself to the Lord fully and in 
all sincerity, yet because of surrounding temptations, and only a 
vague indefinite knowledge of our Father's will and plan, you had 
grown cold and even forgetful of your covenant? If so, the truth 
now made so clear to your mind should be regarded as a special 
incentive urging you to fulfill your covenant, and thus make your 
calling and election sure. It is our Father's good pleasure to give us 
the kingdom, hence the special incentives now made so manifest in 
this special time of need. The restitution, or restoration to human 
perfection, which is to be the portion of the mass of mankind, will 
indeed be a glorious portion; but those who have once presented 
themselves as living sacrifices, holy, (justified) and therefore 
acceptable to God, can never be developed to human perfection 
(restitution); such are "new creatures in Christ" (spiritual) and as 
new creatures they must be developed. The human once given up 
and accepted of God, cannot be taken back. 

Think well, dear brother, and in the light of God's truth determine 
what is your position and calling, and then run with patience the 
race set before you, whether it be for human or for spiritual 
perfection. 

May the Lord richly bless you and lead you to a yet fuller and 
clearer apprehension of his glorious plan and his will concerning 
you. 


