From Our Readers
Losing Weight  When I first saw the article in the May 22, 1989, issue on losing weight, I put off reading it for several weeks. You see, I have been overweight most of my life. Well, I have just read it and am very much encouraged, even eager, to put into practice the fine, loving suggestions. Your empathy, understanding, and loving concern are very much appreciated.
L. B., United States
Thank you so much for the article on overweight. (May 22, 1989) I am not a glutton but have a number of metabolic problems that have caused me to be overweight. I feel like a freak most of the time. I don’t need thin people prejudging me, assuming all I do is eat, eat, eat. Thank you for pointing out that all fat people aren’t gluttons. I know that Jehovah loves and understands me and accepts me despite my appearance. I just wish humans could be more loving and understanding.
P. R., United States
Since reading your article, I have begun a program of exercise and am putting forth effort not to eat so much late at night. I have already lost seven or eight pounds and feel wonderful. Thanks a million!
G. V., Federal Republic of Germany
Not all experience quick results. For some individuals, losing weight is a hard battle requiring much effort, determination, and support​—not criticism.​—ED.
Worse Than Aids  I was deeply touched by the article “Something Worse Than Aids.” (April 22, 1989) The article reminded me of my situation. I too have done some things that are very detestable to Jehovah God. As I read it, my eyes filled with tears. I began to realize that without Jehovah, it is like living on some other planet without water! I will now put forth more effort to do what is pleasing in the eyes of God.
I. A., United States
Choosing Careers  Many thanks for the article “What Career Should I Choose?” (May 8, 1989) I had wanted to go to a university but had to give up my dream because of various problems. In the meantime I began studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Your article helped me very much indeed. I no longer have any regrets. I have a part-time job and serve as a full-time evangelizer. I do not think any career could be more satisfying.
A. P., Italy
Miracles and Visions  I am a frequent reader of Awake! However, I feel you overlooked a number of points regarding Lourdes. (March 8, 1989) I have been visiting Lourdes for 18 years, and while I have seen no miracles or visions, there are other benefits. For many it is an awakening, and for many more it has provided a source of direction in their lives. A visit to Lourdes is not about searching for a miracle. It is a coming to a realization of Jesus’ command: “Love one another.” Any place that can bring so many people to an understanding of this cannot be evil.
R. K., Britain
The shrines at such places as Lourdes and Fátima are very dear to the hearts of many sincere Catholics, and we can well appreciate their feelings. Our article showed, however, that the veneration of such sites is rooted in falsehood and contrary to Scripture. And though such sites may have great emotional appeal, we must remember that Jesus Christ said that “true worshipers” do not venerate any particular site but “worship the Father with spirit and truth.”​—John 4:21-23.​—ED.

