How Firm Is Your Trust in God?
“Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom.”—MATTHEW 6:33.
1, 2. What step as to employment did a young man take, and why?
A YOUNG man wanted to be more useful in his congregation. The problem was that his secular work interfered with his regular meeting attendance. How did he address the situation? He simplified his life, resigned from his job, and in time found employment that did not interfere with his Christian activities. Today, he earns much less than before, but he still cares for his family’s needs and is much better able to support the congregation.
2 Do you understand why that young man took such a step? Can you see yourself taking a similar step if you were in circumstances like his? Commendably, many Christians have, and their actions demonstrate their confidence in Jesus’ promise: “Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.” (Matthew 6:33) They trust in Jehovah for security rather than in the secular world.—Proverbs 3:23, 26.
 3. Why may some wonder whether it is practical today to put God’s Kingdom first?
3 In view of the difficult times we are living in, some may wonder whether that young man made a wise decision. Today, one section of humanity lives in the deepest poverty while another enjoys the highest standard of living in history. Most in poor lands would eagerly seize any opportunity to make their life a little easier. On the other hand, many in wealthier lands feel the pressure of maintaining their standard of living in the face of faltering economies, changing job markets, and ever more demanding employers. In view of the pressure involved in making a living, some may wonder, ‘Is it still practical to seek the Kingdom first?’ To help answer that question, consider the audience that Jesus was addressing.
“Stop Being Anxious”
4, 5. How did Jesus illustrate that it was reasonable for God’s people not to be overly anxious about everyday concerns?
4 Jesus was in Galilee, speaking to a large crowd of people from many places. (Matthew 4:25) Few if any of those people were wealthy. Likely, most were poor. Yet, Jesus urged them to give priority, not to the gaining of material wealth, but to the storing up of something far more valuable—spiritual treasure. (Matthew 6:19-21, 24) He said: “Stop being anxious about your souls as to what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies as to what you will wear. Does not the soul mean more than food and the body than clothing?”—Matthew 6:25.
5 To many of those listening, Jesus’ words might have sounded impractical. They knew that if they did not work hard, their families would suffer. However, Jesus reminded them about the birds. Birds live from one day to the next, yet Jehovah cares for them. Jesus also pointed to the way Jehovah provides for wildflowers, the beauty of which surpasses that of Solomon in all his glory. If Jehovah cares for birds and flowers, how much more so will he care for us? (Matthew 6:26-30) As Jesus said, our lives (souls) and bodies are far more important than the food we buy to sustain our lives and the clothing we obtain to cover our bodies. If we devote all our efforts merely to feed and cover ourselves, with nothing substantial left for serving Jehovah, we miss the very purpose of living.—Ecclesiastes 12:13.
A Balanced Viewpoint
 6. (a) For what are Christians responsible? (b) Where do Christians place their complete trust?
6 Of course, Jesus did not encourage his listeners to stop working and wait for God somehow to provide for their families. Even the birds have to search for food for themselves and their young. Thus, Christians had to work if they wanted to eat. They had to care for family responsibilities. Christian servants and slaves had to work diligently for their masters. (2 Thessalonians 3:10-12; 1 Timothy 5:8; 1 Peter 2:18) The apostle Paul often worked as a tentmaker to support himself. (Acts 18:1-4; 1 Thessalonians 2:9) Still, those Christians did not look to secular work for security. They trusted in Jehovah. As a result, they enjoyed an inner peace unknown to others. The psalmist said: “Those trusting in Jehovah are like Mount Zion, which cannot be made to totter, but dwells even to time indefinite.”—Psalm 125:1.
 7. What might be the viewpoint of one who does not trust firmly in Jehovah?
7 Anyone who does not trust firmly in Jehovah might think differently. The majority of humans view material wealth as a major key to security. Hence, parents have encouraged their offspring to invest much of their young adulthood in higher education, hoping that it will prepare them for well-paying careers. Sadly, some Christian families have found the cost of such an investment to be very high, as their children have lost their spiritual focus and turned to pursuing materialistic goals.
 8. What balance do Christians maintain?
8 Hence, wise Christians realize that Jesus’ counsel applies as much today as it did in the first century, and they try to keep a balance. Even if they have to spend long hours in secular work in order to care for Scriptural responsibilities, they never allow the need to earn money to blind them to the more important spiritual matters.—Ecclesiastes 7:12.
“Never Be Anxious”
 9. How does Jesus reassure those who fully trust in Jehovah?
9 In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus urged his listeners: “Never be anxious and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to put on?’ For all these are the things the nations are eagerly pursuing. For your heavenly Father knows you need all these things.” (Matthew 6:31, 32) What encouraging words! If we trust fully in Jehovah, he will always be there to support us. However, Jesus’ words are also sobering. They remind us that if we “eagerly” pursue material things, our thinking is like that of “the nations,” people who are not true Christians.
10. When a young man approached Jesus for counsel, how did Jesus reveal what the young man loved most?
10 On one occasion, a very wealthy young man asked Jesus what he should do to gain everlasting life. Jesus reminded him of the requirements of the Law, which was still in operation at the time. The young man assured Jesus: “I have kept all these; what yet am I lacking?” Jesus’ reply might have sounded impractical to many. He said: “If you want to be perfect, go sell your belongings and give to the poor and you will have treasure in heaven, and come be my follower.” (Matthew 19:16-21) The young man went away sad, unable to contemplate losing his wealth. However much he loved Jehovah, he loved his possessions more.
11, 12. (a) What sobering words did Jesus utter regarding wealth? (b) How can possessions be a barrier to serving Jehovah?
11 That event led Jesus to say something unexpected: “It will be a difficult thing for a rich man to get into the kingdom of the heavens. . . . It is easier for a camel to get through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to get into the kingdom of God.” (Matthew 19:23, 24) Did Jesus mean that no wealthy person will inherit the Kingdom? No, for he went on to say: “With God all things are possible.” (Matthew 19:25, 26) Indeed, with Jehovah’s help some wealthy people back then did become anointed Christians. (1 Timothy 6:17) Nevertheless, Jesus said those surprising words for good reason. He was giving a warning.
12 If a person becomes attached to his possessions as that wealthy young man did, they could become a barrier to his serving Jehovah wholeheartedly. That could be true both of one who is already wealthy and of one who is “determined to be rich.” (1 Timothy 6:9, 10) Trusting too much in material things can lead a person to be less ‘conscious of his spiritual need.’ (Matthew 5:3) As a result, he might not feel the same need for Jehovah’s support. (Deuteronomy 6:10-12) He might come to expect special treatment in the congregation. (James 2:1-4) And he could spend most of his time enjoying his wealth rather than serving Jehovah.
Cultivate the Right Viewpoint
13. What wrong viewpoint did the Laodiceans have?
13 One group with a wrong view of possessions was the first-century congregation in Laodicea. Jesus said to them: “You say: ‘I am rich and have acquired riches and do not need anything at all,’ but you do not know you are miserable and pitiable and poor and blind and naked.” It was not their wealth that brought the Laodiceans to such a pitiable spiritual situation. It was the fact that they trusted in wealth rather than in Jehovah. As a result, they were spiritually lukewarm, near to being ‘vomited out of’ Jesus’ mouth.—Revelation 3:14-17.
14. Why did the Hebrew Christians merit Paul’s commendation?
14 On the other hand, Paul commended the Hebrew Christians for their attitude during an earlier time of persecution. He said: “You both expressed sympathy for those in prison and joyfully took the plundering of your belongings, knowing you yourselves have a better and an abiding possession.” (Hebrews 10:34) Those Christians were not devastated by the loss of their possessions. They retained their joy because they kept hold of their most valuable possession, their “better and . . . abiding possession.” Like the merchant of Jesus’ parable who sacrificed everything for one valuable pearl, they were determined not to loosen their grip on the Kingdom hope, whatever the cost. (Matthew 13:45, 46) What a fine attitude!
15. How did a Christian woman in Liberia put Kingdom interests first?
15 Many today have cultivated a similar fine attitude. In Liberia, for example, a young Christian woman was offered the opportunity to study at the university. In that country, such an offer is viewed as a way to a secure future. However, she was a pioneer, a full-time evangelizer, and had received an invitation to serve as a temporary special pioneer. She chose to seek first the Kingdom and remain in full-time service. She went to her assignment and started 21 Bible studies in three months. This young sister and thousands like her seek first the Kingdom, even at the cost of possible material advantages. How do they maintain such an attitude in this materialistic world? They have cultivated a number of fine qualities. Let us discuss some of these.
16, 17. (a) Why is modesty important if we are to trust in Jehovah? (b) Why should we cultivate confidence in God’s promises?
16 Modesty: The Bible says: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight. Do not become wise in your own eyes.” (Proverbs 3:5-7) Sometimes, a certain course might seem practical from a secular point of view. (Jeremiah 17:9) Still, a sincere Christian looks to Jehovah for guidance. (Psalm 48:14) ‘In all his ways’—in congregation matters, education or secular work, relaxation, or anything else—he modestly seeks Jehovah’s counsel.—Psalm 73:24.
17 Confidence in Jehovah’s promises: Paul said: “He that approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.” (Hebrews 11:6) If we doubt that Jehovah will fulfill his promises, it might seem logical to ‘use this world to the full.’ (1 Corinthians 7:31) On the other hand, if our belief is strong, we will be determined to seek the Kingdom first. How can a strong belief be developed? By drawing close to Jehovah in constant, heartfelt prayer and through regular personal study. (Psalm 1:1-3; Philippians 4:6, 7; James 4:8) Like King David, we can pray: “In you I have put my trust, O Jehovah. I have said: ‘You are my God.’ How abundant your goodness is!”—Psalm 31:14, 19.
18, 19. (a) How does industriousness strengthen our trust in Jehovah? (b) Why should a Christian be willing to make sacrifices?
18 Diligence in Jehovah’s service: Paul linked confidence in Jehovah’s promises with industriousness when he wrote: “We desire each one of you to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end.” (Hebrews 6:11) If we are busy in Jehovah’s service, he will support us. Each time we experience that support, our trust in him gets stronger, we become “steadfast, unmovable.” (1 Corinthians 15:58) Our faith is renewed, and our hope confirmed.—Ephesians 3:16-19.
19 Willingness to make sacrifices: Paul sacrificed a promising career in order to follow Jesus. He clearly made the right choice, although his life was sometimes hard from a material standpoint. (1 Corinthians 4:11-13) Jehovah does not promise a life of luxury, and sometimes his servants endure hardships. Our willingness to simplify our lifestyle and make sacrifices proves the strength of our determination to serve Jehovah.—1 Timothy 6:6-8.
20. Why is patience vital for one who puts Kingdom interests first?
20 Patience: The disciple James urged fellow Christians: “Exercise patience, therefore, brothers, until the presence of the Lord.” (James 5:7) In this fast-moving world, it is difficult to be patient. We want things to happen quickly. But Paul urges us to imitate those who “through faith and patience inherit the promises.” (Hebrews 6:12) Be willing to wait on Jehovah. Everlasting life on a paradise earth—surely that is worth waiting for!
21. (a) What do we demonstrate when we put Kingdom interests first? (b) What will be discussed in the following article?
21 Yes, Jesus’ counsel to seek first the Kingdom is practical. When we do so, we demonstrate that we really trust in Jehovah and choose the only safe way for a Christian to live. However, Jesus also counseled us to keep on “seeking first . . . [God’s] righteousness.” In the following article, we will see why that encouragement is especially needed today.
Can You Explain?
• With regard to material things, what balance did Jesus encourage us to have?
• What do we learn from Jesus’ illustration of the camel and the needle’s eye?
• What Christian qualities help us to seek first God’s Kingdom?
[Picture on page 21]
Many who heard Jesus’ words were poor
[Picture on page 23]
The merchant in Jesus’ parable sacrificed everything for one valuable pearl
[Picture on page 23]
The wealthy young man loved his possessions more than he loved God
[Picture on page 24]
If we are busy in Jehovah’s service, he will support us

