From Our Readers
Pollution Illness
I enjoyed your coverage of the problem of ecologically induced illness. (June 8, 1983) I was pleased to see a balanced view of the problem and appropriate emphasis given to what people can do other than simply cleaning up the external environment. The internal environment​—that is, the human body—​is an important factor and can be strengthened and made more resistant to the effects of poisons and allergens if it is in a state of nutritional balance.
S. M. B., M.D., Connecticut
The Mighty Grizzly
Your article on “The Mighty Grizzly” (July 22, 1983) was very disturbing. I agree that the news media greatly blows out of proportion any man-bear confrontation, but please don’t mislead visitors to my state. These animals are dangerous, they will defend to the death their food and their family, and they will attack if pressed beyond their critical space. And they are not merely vegetarians. Please come and enjoy Alaska’s wild and wonderful wildlife, but don’t ever believe that bears are harmless. They are very dangerous.
S. S., Alaska
We surely did not intend to give the impression that grizzly bears are harmless, but we thought that we showed they were both dangerous and unpredictable. At the same time, we wanted to show that the number of deaths from grizzly bears is low in comparison to other death causes in the same area and that such are often the result of humans not understanding how dangerous grizzly bears are and not exercising proper caution. We are pleased to emphasize the need for caution.​—ED.
Ballet Dancing
Many thanks for your article ‘Ballet​—The Beauty and the Beast of It.’ (February 8, 1983) I’ve been dancing for 25 years and I can truthfully say that the pain never stops. My back is a wreck; my toes, well, I don’t have to tell you; and my knees have had it. My moral life was perverted. But where was your article years ago when I could have pulled away and still had the use of my body? Yet, better late than never.
T. S., Pennsylvania
One of my best friends showed me your article on ‘Ballet​—The Beauty and the Beast of It.’ I’ve always known the truth about the overkill practices and broken, bloody toes, the hypnotic trance just to live, eat and dance, dance, dance. And for what? I’m not yet 40 and already my body has broken down. I can’t do anything about my body; it’s too late. But it’s not too late for our precious little daughters. Maybe they will see the physical, moral and emotional hurt that is definitely sure to come. Thanks for saying all the things I’ve always wanted to say. I am now going to take a deeper look into your religion.
W. S., Pennsylvania

