Cassava Leaves—Daily Food for Millions
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
IT ALL started about the year 1600, when the Portuguese brought cassava, or manioc, from South America to Africa. Cassava is believed to be native to Brazil because the word “manioc” originated with the Tupian tribes of Brazil in the Amazon Valley.
The roots are highly appreciated by the people of Africa, but what about the dark-green leaves? Some use them as medication on open wounds or to treat chicken pox. However, for millions in the Central African Republic and several other African countries, the leaves are daily food, as they can be turned into a lovely meal. In fact, one of the first words that new Watch Tower missionaries learn here is ngunza. This is a delicious stew made from cassava leaves and is the national dish of the Central African Republic—a dish that a visitor to central Africa must by all means try.
Most Europeans living in Africa will never touch a meal made from these leaves, as they consider it to be food for the natives, not for foreigners. But what are the facts? In countries like the Central African Republic, Sierra Leone, and Zaire, these leaves are a daily staple food for many families.
When flying over or traveling through the Central African Republic, you see a beautiful green country—trees, bushes, grasslands, and, in between, small fields of cassava with their peculiar dark-green leaves. Every little village is surrounded by cassava plots. People grow it next to their homes, and even in the capital, Bangui, you will find cassava on very small pieces of land and strips of earth next to a villa or the main road. Certainly, it is an important food item in this part of the world.
Try Some Ngunza
On arrival, new missionaries are soon invited by their friends to come over for a little ngunza. This is a meal that includes the famous dish made from manioc leaves. Native women know how to prepare it in a delicious manner. Every woman seems to have her own recipe. One of the first things little girls learn from their mothers about cooking is how to prepare ngunza.
They are proud to explain what it is and how they prepare it. The women are happy if you show interest in this native dish. First of all, they will tell you that the cassava leaves are inexpensive and in abundant supply and that you can pick them in both the rainy season and the dry season. In times of economic crises and inflation, cassava leaves play an important role in feeding a family. And please remember that African families are often large. There are many mouths to feed and many stomachs to fill. The preparation of ngunza takes several hours. Leaves have to give up their bitter flavor before they are eaten. They are detoxified by traditional preparation, which involves grinding and constant boiling.
The oil the African women prefer to use in preparing ngunza is palm oil. The locally made dark-red oil is a must. Ngunza with a little peanut butter and maybe some onion and garlic is a daily meal for a family. But what if you are expecting guests? Then the ngunza must be something special, something they will remember. So the host will add her favorite ingredient—smoked fish or smoked chunks of beef—plus lots of garlic and onions along with a large amount of fresh, homemade peanut butter. All of this goes into one big pot. The rest is patience and a lot of boiling.
Today our hostess will serve ngunza with rice. A heap of rice with one or two ladles of hot ngunza poured over it is a delight for Africans and many foreigners too. Add a little hot pepper, and now you know what ngunza is. Enjoyed with the meal, a glass of red wine will bring out the flavor fully.
How About Some Ngukassa or Kanda?
Traveling from east to west in the country, you will find that people prepare ngunza in a variety of ways. And what about ngukassa? On a cold rainy day, ngukassa, a broth or stew cooked with everything in the garden or field, may be the right thing for you. Palm oil, plantains, peanuts, sweet potatoes, corn (maize), and, of course, some cassava leaves are all cooked together, but no salt is added—not one single grain of salt. That’s the secret! The result is delicious and nutritious. And if you go on a long trip, take some kanda along. This is made of cassava leaves pounded together with smoked fish or meat. Kanda is prepared by wrapping this mixture up in leaves and smoking it over a fire for several hours until hard and dry. It keeps for days and can be enjoyed along with a piece of bread. It is perfect for travelers.
If you visit Africa anytime, why not ask for cassava? Try it, and join the millions who enjoy it!

