From Our Readers
Living Forever  Thank you for the series “Why Is Life So Short?—Will It Ever Be Different?” (October 22, 1995) These articles not only helped me to understand better the prospect of being a perfect human on a paradise earth but also helped me out in science class. At the very time these articles came out, we were having a test on the cell—its parts and functions. How clearly you described it! Thanks for the good grade and for the spiritual food at the right time.
B. M., United States
Glass  Thank you for the article “Glass—Its First Makers Lived Long, Long Ago.” (November 22, 1995) My dad works with glass, so we have a lot of it in our house. I can’t help but say how beautifully written this article was. I had no idea how many different cultures were involved in glassmaking. Thanks again.
M. B., United States
Hungary’s Vineyards  For several months I have been working in the wine section of a supermarket in Luxembourg. So it was with great interest that I read the article “Come With Us to Hungary’s Vineyards!” (September 8, 1995) One of my supervisors observed, however, that while the article was accurate, you seemed to suggest that the mold that grows on grapes (Botrytis cinerea) is the same mold that grows in wine cellars. He says that the latter mold is actually something called Cladosporium cellare.
B. P., France
Your supervisor is correct, and we thank him for this clarification.—ED.
God’s Friend  I just want to tell you how moved I was by the article “Young People Ask . . . Will Being God’s Friend Help Me?” (November 22, 1995) For much of this year, I have been walking in the valley of deep shadow, with depression destroying what remained of my self-respect. I didn’t even have the strength to pray or to study the Bible. The encouragement offered by my Christian brothers just did not get through to me. When reading the article, I sensed the first ray of sunshine for quite some time.
S. K., Germany
It is comforting to know how much interest and love Jehovah has for youths. In my short life, I’ve experienced rape, drug abuse, miscarriage, and emotional and verbal abuse. I even tried to commit suicide once. Finally, though, I began attending Christian meetings again. With perseverance in prayer and by approaching Jehovah once again, I was reinstated in his organization. Jehovah’s Word has brought me more peace of mind than any drug.
W. B., United States
Competition  The article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Is Competition in Sports Wrong?” (December 8, 1995) offered comfort to my ten-year-old son. Some older boys invited him to play ball. He was teased so badly that he became quite depressed. We read the article and found comfort, knowing that Christians should maintain a balanced view of sports and that sports should be refreshing, not depressing. I hope all our young ones will read this article because some sports have become very violent.
S. H., United States
The article really assisted me in making up my mind regarding getting involved in a sports team at school. The scriptures expressed in the article were really straightforward. Getting involved with this particular team would have been very competitive, since the coaches usually tell you to play hard and win. Thank you for the enlightening article, and I hope it will help other youths to make a good decision.
L. M., United States

