The Bible’s Viewpoint
UFO’s—Messengers From God?
AS THE 20th century winds down and conditions on earth steadily deteriorate, belief in unidentified flying objects (UFO’s) and their passengers, extraterrestrial beings, continues to spread. Are UFO’s just fiction, a deception, a hoax perpetrated by people who like to laugh at the public’s gullibility?
Those who claim to have seen UFO’s or their extraterrestrial passengers include seemingly normal, trustworthy people; in fact, those who believe in these visitors from other planets include well-educated professors and scientists. They are convinced that extraterrestrials are observing humans and, at times, communicating with them. So-called extraterrestrial support groups are available to assist people who claim they have made contact with space visitors.a
Alien Survival Plan
In Aliens Among Us, Ruth Montgomery interviews some of a growing number of people who are convinced that they are extraterrestrial visitors residing in human bodies. Some of these who claim to be humanized extraterrestrials foretell that in the year 2000, there will be “a cosmic event that the hierarchies of angels and masters have been preparing for.” Some people believe that extraterrestrials are using UFO’s to collect and preserve plant and animal specimens or that UFO’s will be used as rescue ships to transfer millions of humans away from impending desolation of the earth. After the great destruction, humans are to be returned to begin “the New Age and the New Order” of spiritual awareness. One young man from Colorado, U.S.A., a member of a group who call themselves “Alien Youth,” told Awake! in all seriousness: “My friends and I are waiting for our alien ancestors to beam us up.”
A few of those who assert that they are extraterrestrials claim that they are led by God, and others claim that they speak freely with him for advice in assisting humanity. Is God working through visitors from other planets to save mankind from an upcoming world catastrophe?
God’s Communications With Mankind
Early in man’s history, God communicated with humans. The Bible record describes divine conversations with Adam and Eve, Noah, Abraham, and others.b (Genesis 3:8-10; 6:13; 15:1) Dreams, voices, and visions were used to communicate God’s will and to produce the Bible. However, after the Bible was completed, was there a need for direct heavenly communication with mankind? No, since the Bible states that the Holy Scriptures make “the man of God . . . fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.” (2 Timothy 3:17) According to the Bible, guidance for these troubled times is to come from the written Word of God. Nevertheless, is there any reason to believe that we would receive communication or special instructions directly from God through an extraterrestrial spokesman? No, for the apostle Paul stated: “Even if we or an angel out of heaven were to declare to you as good news something beyond what we declared to you as good news, let him be accursed.”—Galatians 1:8.
Although the assertions of supposed extraterrestrial beings seem to agree with Bible prophecies that the earth is soon to undergo major cataclysmic changes, they offer a method of survival that relies on creatures. The Bible does not urge men to flee to the supposed security of alien spacecraft or any other place. Rather, it tells us to seek protection in a dedicated relationship with God, which dedication is symbolized by water baptism. (1 Peter 3:21; compare Psalm 91:7; Matthew 28:19, 20; John 17:3.) And Jesus said that “he that has endured to the end is the one that will be saved.”—Matthew 24:13.
Do not these scriptures emphasize a spiritual relationship with God for survival rather than a physical location of refuge? Therefore, instead of assisting mankind to survive, stories about ‘nonhuman beings’ divert people’s attention away from what God actually requires for their everlasting welfare.
Who may try to steer mankind away from God’s means of survival, yet claim to represent God? Ed Conroy, in his book Report on Communion, states that “serious ufologists [those who study UFO’s] with training in the psychological and social sciences” include comparative studies of “‘bedroom visitors,’ ghosts, poltergeists, apparitions, religious visions, and what have been regarded as demons.” Many ufologists and those who claim to be extraterrestrials in human form state that using spaceships to travel is mostly unnecessary. They say that these beings can travel invisibly and materialize anywhere on earth without arriving in spacecraft.
The Bible warns that Satan and his demons are intent on misleading mankind. They take advantage of mankind’s despair and hopelessness to offer attractive, but false, solutions. (2 Corinthians 11:14) Hence, the Bible warning: “In later periods of time some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to misleading inspired utterances and teachings of demons.”—1 Timothy 4:1.
In like manner today, any supposed visits and seemingly beneficial guidance from such beings should be rejected, whatever form they may take. Those who would rather follow the advice of “extraterrestrials” than God’s Word are bound to be misled—a terrible mistake to make in these critical times.
[Footnotes]
For a discussion of UFO’s and extraterrestrial life, see the April 8, 1990, and November 8, 1990, issues of Awake!
The Bible writer Ezekiel witnessed what some have interpreted as a UFO. (Ezekiel, chapter 1) However, this was one of many symbolic visions described by Ezekiel and other prophets, not an actual physical sighting as claimed in modern times.

