Announcements
◆ Literature offer for August: God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached, with a booklet, for 50c. For September: Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation?, for 25c. For October: Awake! subscription, with three booklets, for $1.50.
◆ The October 8 Awake! and October Watchtower will be special issues. Be sure to order early the extra copies you will need.
◆ Each congregation will receive two Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature at the end of August. Please do not include cash items such as Aid, book, large-print Bible, Concordance, etc., in value of campaign literature in stock. Please fill out the forms and return the original to us no later than September 6. Keep the duplicate copy.
◆ The elders in each congregation should arrange to meet together early in September. Any recommendations for new appointments should then be sent to the Society, using the S-2 form. The presiding overseer will send in his report for the service year on the S-10 form at the same time. Also, the S-9 form regarding elders to attend Kingdom Ministry School should be sent in. All of these forms are being sent to congregations with the July literature statement.
◆ It is requested that on the next literature order for the congregation, presiding overseers order 12 monthly congregation report cards, 12 report cards for each regular pioneer, report desk envelopes and other forms needed for the 1976 service year.
◆ The congregation’s permanent addresses for receiving literature, magazines and the Society’s mail should not be changed to correspond with the the presiding overseer.
◆ With the September Kingdom Ministry the Society plans to provide details concerning a special series of four public talks to be given in the congregations during November. To the extent possible, we recommend that they be scheduled on consecutive weeks until they have all been heard.
◆ New Publications Available:
True Peace and Security​—From What Source?​—Afrikaans. Greek, Kikongo, Swahili, Tagalog
◆ Available Again in U.S.A.:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Hungarian, Lingala, Papiamento, Vietnamese
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained​—Chinese, Ukrainian
◆ It is suggested that the booklet “Look! I Am Making All Things New” be included among the three free booklets offered with new subscriptions during October. Be sure there is a supply on hand.
◆ Each individual who receives a copy of Kingdom Ministry should get the insert that is provided with this issue. We encourage everyone, particularly the elders, to read it carefully. But it will not be discussed on the service meeting program.

