Can You Share More Fully?
1 Many indeed are the affairs of life competing for our time and energy. (Eccl. 3:1-8) As life in this present system of things becomes busier, with increased time demands placed upon us, we feel greater pressure. At the same time, never has there been a time when it was more vital to share in the field service, helping those living in the shadow of death to learn of Jehovah’s provision for life. Sharing fully in this work is also vital to our personal spirituality.​—Acts 20:26, 27.
2 Can we personally schedule more time for field service? Having the right view of our circumstances will aid us. Not all of us can do the same amount. But does the way we use our time each day show that we share God’s view of matters, that we earnestly desire “all sorts of men” to gain salvation? (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Of course, we need some time for recreation, but we also need to keep in mind that the way we arrange our affairs and that to which we devote our time are seen by God as evidence of the extent of our devotion and loyalty to him.​—Ps. 119:168.
3 The best way to ensure giving field service high priority is to schedule a definite, set time for it, just as we have a definite schedule for our meetings, secular work, etc. Perhaps Saturday, Sunday or midweek is a good time for you, or maybe you can share regularly on several days each week. Why not make it a fixed part of your schedule. Likely you will have other unscheduled opportunities too, but keep these set times.
4 The elders will assist by making definite group arrangements for field service during the week and on weekends. It is also appreciated when elders and ministerial servants make definite arrangements for well-experienced publishers to assist newer ones by accompanying them in the field service, whether during the week or on the weekend. Such definite arrangements for meetings for service and practical training can make it easier to increase our share in this important work.
5 Of great refreshment and stimulation also is working with the circuit overseer or his wife. Make known to the elders your desire to go along with him during the week of his visit. Reports indicate that his afternoons are often not fully scheduled to work with publishers, so why not arrange some afternoon return visits or a study, asking that he accompany you. Mutual benefits and joy will result.​—Prov. 27:17.
6 Preaching and teaching are part of the service that Paul indicated we have “according to the mercy that was shown us,” and so “we do not give up.” (2 Cor. 4:1) Rather, we are grateful for this undeserved kindness, and, if possible, in the little time remaining we want to increase our share in field service, looking confidently to Jehovah and the rapidly approaching fulfillment of all the things we now preach.​—2 Pet. 3:13.

