Endure Family Opposition with Understanding and Wisdom
1 Ridicule, physical assault, imprisonment, bans on field witnessing, prohibition of Christian meetings and association, confiscation of Bibles and literature​—these are things we usually associate with the persecution of our brothers in oppressive lands. But do we realize that many in the congregations with which we associate are right now experiencing similar conditions because of opposition from unbelieving mates?
2 Of course, not all with unbelieving mates face such extreme difficulties, but they do experience real tests of their faith. (John 15:20; 1 Cor. 7:12-16) By our encouragement and help, they will be greatly strengthened to endure. (Heb. 10:24, 25) Elders especially should be a source of refreshment and guidance.​—Isa. 32:1, 2.
WHY MATES OPPOSE AND WHAT CAN BE DONE
3 Even if the unbelieving mate seems ‘hardened’ in his opposition, the situation should not be viewed as hopeless. (1 Cor. 13:7) In proof of this we need only to take note of the many now serving Jehovah who formerly opposed their mates. Opposition, anger and even violence are frequently outward signs of inward frustrations and undefined fears. Rather than simply disliking the truth, a husband, for example, may fear that his wife’s Christian activities will alienate her from him, taking up too much of her time and interest and disturbing their relationship and the family arrangement. He may resent the possibility that he will not be given the attention he received formerly, and perhaps also may fear social embarrassment. In addition to trying to understand the reasons for opposition, what else can you as the believing mate do so as to act wisely?
4 Understanding the reasons may make it easier for you to demonstrate the fruitage of God’s spirit. (Gal. 5:22, 23) While choosing appropriate times to speak about your faith, remember that respectful silence coupled with real Christian conduct may often be more effective. In this way one will not irritate the opposer by continually bringing the Bible into every conversation. (1 Pet. 3:1-6) By your spending time with your mate, accommodating him within the bounds of a Christian conscience and showing industriousness around the home, it will become apparent to the opposer that one’s being a Christian, rather than resulting in neglect of family and home, makes one a better husband or wife and contributes to a rich, warm family atmosphere.
5 Where possible, introduce unbelieving ones to some of the brothers and sisters as opportunity affords. Sometimes those outside the family circle can accomplish more than the believing mate, perhaps even being able to arrange for a Bible study. Many former opposers have been influenced to start studying as they became acquainted with others in the congregation and grew to respect their Christian way of life.
6 While we as Christians must obey God as ruler rather than even close family relatives or mates, those who experience opposition should do all that is possible to cultivate a warm and happy family atmosphere, setting a fine example in word and conduct and thus honoring God.​—Acts 5:29; 1 Cor. 7:16.

