Presenting the Good News​—“In the Very Street”
1 “True wisdom itself keeps crying aloud in the very street.” (Prov. 1:20; 8:1-3) Jesus Christ taught in the streets, and so can we. August is a month characterized by warm, mild weather in many parts of the country and thus would be a fine time to have an increased share in street witnessing.
2 How can we most effectively share in street work? By taking the initiative, going up to someone who is waiting for a bus, window shopping, sitting in a car, or walking along. You might tactfully get the person’s attention by saying something like this: “Pardon me, but I would like to share this important information with you.” Select a point of interest from the magazine or book being offered and then offer him his copy on a contribution basis, wishing him a pleasant day in parting.
3 Some have even established “routes” on the street by being in a certain location regularly. Those who took magazines from them in the past look for them again to obtain the current issues. Not a few of those now serving Jehovah were introduced to the truth ‘by means of such a brief encounter on the street. Smaller towns might not appear to present such opportunities, but when walking from one call to another, why not endeavor to talk to anyone you meet on the street? Remember, we are looking for people wherever they are.
4 Where it is difficult to gain entrance to large apartment buildings, being on hand early in the morning when residents leave for work, or in the evening when they return, puts us in position to contact those who otherwise might not hear the Kingdom message. Others can be reached by working from car to car in large shopping centers.
5 Publishers and pioneers will find street work a fine avenue of service for them at times when it is not advantageous to engage in regular house-to-house work, such as early in the morning and at noon when the streets are full as office workers and others enjoy time away from their jobs. Those for whom much walking is difficult, for physical reasons, may find street work advantageous because it allows them to meet many people with little moving about.
6 Yes, we have the “foremost things . . . truth itself” to share, and so we desire to reach people wherever they are, that they might gain wisdom and the fear of Jehovah that means life.​—Prov. 8:6, 7.
[Blurb on page 8]
Have You Tried Street Witnessing?

