Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 10
12 min: Song 81. “Ready for Every Good Work.” Talk based on May 15, 1975, Watchtower. Apply Scriptural counsel to local needs.
18 min: “Appreciating God’s Ownership of Us.” Discuss with audience, stressing scriptures. Allow time for some to relate adjustments they have made to share more fully in God’s service.
17 min: “Presenting the Good News​—‘In the Very Street.’” Question-and-answer discussion, with short demonstrations showing how to approach people tactfully.
13 min: Concluding comments. Cover Question Box. Encourage street witnessing and use of magazines at every opportunity. Song 79.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 17
12 min: Song 96. After song, there will remain about 8 minutes for brief comments on Theocratic News and an appropriate item or two from “Insight on the News” in recent Watchtowers. Highlight importance of proclaiming the good news of the Kingdom.
15 min: “Do You Let Others Stumble You?” Talk based on February 15, 1975, Watchtower. Invite audience to read and discuss scriptures.
18 min: “Endure Family Opposition with Understanding and Wisdom.” Question-and-answer discussion. Allow time for local experiences on how ones formerly opposed were won over and what helped them.
15 min: Concluding comments. Cover accounts report, also points in Branch Letter. Song 95.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 24
“Be at It Urgently”
25 min: Song 51. Preach the Good News. Read 2 Timothy 4:2; this applies particularly within congregation but is pattern of what we should do in the field. Suggest all open Aid to page 1331 to consider material under “Preacher, Preaching.” (1) What are some of the thoughts connected with the words translated “preach” and other related words in the Bible? (Pars. 1-3) (2) Use scriptures to show the manner and nature of preaching recorded in the Hebrew Scriptures. (P. 1331, par. 4 under subject, to p. 1332, par. 1) (3) What future preaching activity was pointed forward to by the Hebrew Scriptures? (P. 1332, par. 2) (4) Since Jesus did more than merely preach, what also is the work of Jesus’ disciples? (P. 1332, par. 4) (5) How vital is preaching activity to the worship of true Christians? Explain your answer Scripturally. (P. 1332, par. 6) (6) What is necessary in order to qualify one as a Christian preacher? (P. 1332, pars. 7, 8) (7) Thoroughly discuss why we are motivated to preach God’s good news and what results to expect. (P. 1332, par. 10, to p. 1333, par. 2)
Conclude briefly with encouragement to value highly our privilege and opportunities as preachers of God’s good news.
22 min: “Can You Share More Fully?” Questions and answers. Allow 5 to 10 minutes for interviewing some who have increased their field service. How? Why? Benefits?
13 min: Concluding comments. Before this meeting, field overseer will review field service arrangements for congregation and make advisable adjustments midweek and weekend group witnessing. Announce arrangements and stress importance of being at preaching work with urgency, in line with the principle at 2 Timothy 4:2. Song 57.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 31
22 min: Song 118. Educating People for Life. Encouraging talk. 1975 Yearbook, p. 190, par. 5, through p. 210, par. 2. Make the story live, though you cannot cover every detail. Emphasize that Jehovah always provides excellent spiritual things for his people, and we should take full advantage of the life-giving education he makes possible through his Word, spirit and organization. Draw out brief comments on: (1) What important issue was clarified at the Theocratic Assembly in 1941? (Pp. 191, 192) (2) How were children given special attention at that memorable convention? (Pp. 192, 193) (3) On what kind of program has added emphasis been placed by the Society since 1942? (Pp. 196, 197) (4) How did the Theocratic Ministry School originate? Through it, what has Jehovah done for his people? (Pp. 197-199) (5) Why pray to God when scheduled to give a Bible talk? (Pp. 199, 200) (6) Jehovah provided for a worldwide witness by means of what theocratic educational institution? Its students receive what kind of instruction, and chiefly for what purpose? (Pp. 200-202) (7) The Kingdom Ministry School has played what part in connection with education for life? (P. 202) (8) At the New World Theocratic Assembly of 1942, what showed that there was much work ahead for Jehovah’s servants? (Pp. 202-204) (9)  How did Jehovah’s witnesses in prison in the United States make good use of time spent there? (Speaker might point out that we can do similar things, such as meditating on the Scriptures and preaching, if we suffer imprisonment for righteousness’ sake.) (Pp. 205, 206) (10) How can the cases of Brother Jones and Brother King encourage others who may be incarcerated? (Pp. 208, 209) (11) As shown after World War II, for example, how do Jehovah’s witnesses feel about aiding fellow believers? (Mention that all of Jehovah’s people can endeavor to aid their brothers and sisters spiritually and otherwise, especially in times of stress and persecution. Such an attitude will benefit us during the “great tribulation.”) (Pp. 209, 210)
Highlight that Jehovah constantly makes rich spiritual provisions. By fully availing ourselves of these, we can withstand persecution continue pursuing a course that leads to eternal life, and enjoy the deep satisfaction of upholding Jehovah’s name and sovereignty.
25 min: Presenting the Evolution Book.
(2 min.) Chairman briefly encourages audience to participate freely as congregation prepares together suggested presentations, so all will be equipped to use them. (If there is little interest in discussing evolution in your area, focus upon latter part of the book, dealing with wickedness and the hope for the future.)
(21 min.) Develop with audience these presentations:
Have someone demonstrate brief presentation: Introduce self and say. ‘Possibly you have been concerned by increased crime and violence and have wondered. “Why has wickedness been permitted?”’ Let householder express self. Open book to chapter 13 and state that question is answered in chapter. Turn to page 185 and point out conditions promised by God for the future. If advisable and convenient, ask householder to hold the book while you use your Bible to read and discuss with householder Psalm 37:10, 11, 29. ‘We would like you to read this book. This is your copy for 25c.’
Analyze presentation with audience. What was done to get householder (1) to reason on material considered, and (2) to express self? Ask for other suggestions as to how we can get on friendly terms with householder and get him to thinking. Stress that this is a simple presentation using just one scripture from the Bible, which can be in our hand along with the Evolution book when we go to the door.
Have someone demonstrate the following and thereafter analyze presentation with audience, asking same questions, as on other presentation.
Introduce self and say: ‘I am calling because of the widespread lack of interest in reading the Bible. Perhaps you have found it difficult to find answers in the Bible to questions you have.’ After hearing his response, say: ‘Many have asked this question on page 150. “Why has wickedness been permitted so long?”’ Call attention to the subheading on p. 151, there is “a set time.” Ask: ‘A set time for what? For ending all forms of wickedness.’ Read and discuss from your Bible 2 Peter 3:9, 15. You might conclude by saying. ‘This Bible study aid explains, not only why wickedness has been permitted, but what the future holds. It also shows that man did not evolve but was created by God. You may have this copy for 25c.’
(2 min.) Encourage all to use the presentations, practicing them at home and at meetings for service, also to help new and less-experienced ones to use their Bible in field service. Parents can aid younger publishers to prepare presentations for use with their schoolmates, teachers. This will aid all to feel comfortable and confident in presenting the Evolution book.
13 min: Concluding comments. Summer over, school soon to start, community as a whole returns to regular schedule. Those returning to school may find that many teachers and classmates will be interested in the Evolution book. (Experience, yb75, p. 239, par. 3) It might be well for some to call on the teachers in the schools, if they have the opportunity to do so, before school starts in the morning or at noon to see if some would be interested in having the Evolution book. Encourage publishers to resume regular personal field service schedule, revive Bible studies that may have been stopped due to summer activity, review records of literature placed where studies could be started. Referrals have been fine means of starting many new studies. Song 119.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 7
Service meeting will be planned locally. It may include Kingdom Ministry parts missed due to attending district assembly, etc.

