VOL. XIV. NOVEMBER 1 & 15, 1893. NOS. 21 & 22. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

ECHOES FROM THE WORLD'S GREAT PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS. 



THE World's Parliament of Religions, recently 

convened in the city of Chicago, is justly 

regarded as one of the wonders of this remarkable 

time in which we live; and while all Christendom, 

and indeed the whole world, regard it, 

from their standpoint of observation, as a wonderful 

achievement for truth and righteousness, 

the questions in the minds of the Lord's consecrated 

"little flock" should be, How does 

it appear in the light of divine prophecy? has 

it a place in the divine plan of the ages? do 

the watchmen on the Towers of Zion view it 

in the same light as do those in the rank and 

file of the World's religions? 

It would indeed be strange if for this once 
the spirit of Christ and the spirit of the world 
should be in harmony, that those filled with 
the opposite spirits should see eye to eye. 
But such is not the case. It is still true that 
the spirit of the world is enmity to God (James 4:4); 
that its theories and philosophies are 



vain and foolish; and that the one divine revelation 
contained in the inspired Scriptures of 
the apostles and prophets is the only divinely 
inspired truth. 

Said the Chicago Herald, commenting favorably 
upon the proceedings of the Parliament, 

"Never since the confusion at Babel have so 
many religions, so many creeds, stood side by 
side, hand in hand, and almost heart to heart, 
as in that great amphitheater last night. 
Never since written history began has varied 
mankind been so bound about with Love's 
golden chain. The nations of the earth, the 
creeds of Christendom, Buddhist and Baptist, 
Mohammedan and Methodist, Catholic and 
Confucian, Brahmin and Unitarian, Shinto 
and Episcopalian, Presbyterian and Pantheist, 
Monotheist and Polytheist, representing all 
shades of thought and conditions of men, have 
at last met together in the common bonds of 
sympathy, humanity and respect." 

How significant to us is the fact that the 
mind of even this enthusiastic approver of the 
great Parliament should be carried away back 
to the memorable confusion of tongues at 
Babel! Was it not, indeed, that instinctively 
he recognized in the Parliament a remarkable 
antitype? 

One of the stated objects of the Parliament, 
according to its president, Mr. Bonney, was 
to bring together the world's religions in an 
assembly "in which their common aims and 
common grounds of union may be set forth, 
and the marvelous religious progress of the 
nineteenth century be reviewed." And the 
stated object of that review was, fraternization 
and religious union. The spirit of doubt and 
perplexity, and of compromise and general 
faithlessness, on the part of Protestant Christians, 
and a spirit of counsel and authority on 
the part of all other religions, were the most 
prominent features of the great Parliament. 
Its first session was opened with the prayer of 
a Roman Catholic— Cardinal Gibbons— and 
its last session was closed with the benediction 
of a Roman Catholic— Bishop Keane. And 
during the last session a Shinto priest of Japan 

R1592: page 324 

invoked upon the motley assembly the blessing 
of eight million deities. 

The leading spirit of the great assembly was 
the Rev. John Henry Barrows, D.D., of the 
Presbyterian church. For two years previous 
he had been in correspondence with the representative 



heathen of other lands, inviting them 
to come over and have a share in the work of 
the proposed Parliament. That the call should 
thus issue representatively from the Presbyterian 
church, which for three years past has 
been undergoing a fiery ordeal of judgment, 
is also a fact significant of the confusion and 
unrest which prevails in the denomination, but 
which has also spread to all Christendom. 
And therefore all Christendom was ready for 
the great convocation. 

For seventeen days representative Christians 
of every denomination sat together in counsel 
with the representatives of all the various 
heathen religions, who were repeatedly referred 
to in a complimentary way by the Christian 
orators as "wise men from the east"— borrowing 
the expression from the Scriptures, where 
it was applied to a very different class— to a 
few devout believers in the God of Israel and 
in the prophets of Israel who foretold the advent 
of the Lord's Anointed, and who were 
patiently waiting and watching for his coming, 
and giving no heed to the seducing spirits of 
worldly wisdom which knew not God. To 
such truly wise ones, humble-minded though 
they were, God revealed his blessed message 
of peace and hope. 

In viewing the proceedings of the great 
Parliament our attention was forcibly drawn 
to several remarkable features:— (1) To the 
doubting and compromising spirit and attitude 
of nominal Christianity, with the exceptions of 
the Roman and Greek Catholic churches. (2) 
To the confident and assertive attitude of all 
other religions. (3) To the clean cut distinctions 
observed by the heathen sages, between 
the Christianity taught in the Bible and that 
taught by the Christian missionaries of the 
various sects of Christendom, who, along with 
the Bible, carried their absurd and conflicting 
creeds to foreign lands. (4) To the heathen 
estimate of missionary effort and of its effects 
and its future prospects in foreign lands. (5) 
To the influence of the Bible upon many in 
foreign lands, notwithstanding its mis-interpretations 
by those who carried it abroad. (6) 
To the present influence and probable results 
of the great Parliament whose sessions have so 
recently terminated. And (7) to its general 
aspect as viewed from the prophetic standpoint. 

COMPROMISING THE TRUTH. 



The great religious Parliament was called 
together by Christians— Protestant Christians; 
was held in a professedly Protestant Christian 
land; and was under the leading and direction 
of Protestant Christians, so that Protestants 
may be considered as largely responsible 
for its proceedings. Be it observed, then, 
that the spirit of Protestantism is plainly that 
of compromise. This Parliament was willing 
to compromise Christ and his gospel for the 
sake of the friendship of antichrist and heathendom. 
It gave the honors of both opening 
and closing its deliberations to representatives 
of the great Papal system. Cardinal Gibbons 
opened the Congress on September 11, while 
the benediction with which its sessions closed 
on September 27th was pronounced by Bishop 
Keane. And it is a notable fact that, while 
the faiths of the various heathen nations were 
elaborately set forth by their representatives, 
there was no similar systematic presentation of 
Christianity in any of its phases, although various 
themes were discoursed upon by Christians. 
In these discourses Roman Catholics 
had by far the largest showing, being represented 
no less than sixteen times in the sessions 
of the Parliament. But how strange it 
seems that, in all the gathering of those whom 
we may well presume represented the most talented, 
learned and popular of the clergy of 
Christendom, not one attempted to set before 
the representative heathen there assembled an 
orderly, systematic presentation of the gospel 
of Christ. 

And not only so, but there were those there 
professing Christianity, who earnestly busied 
themselves in tearing down its fundamental 
doctrines— who told the representative heathen 
of their doubts as to the inerrancy of the Christian 

R1592 : page 325 

Scriptures; that the Bible accounts must 
be received with a large degree of allowance 
for fallibility; and that their teachings must be 
supplemented with human reason and philosophy, 
and only accepted to the extent that 
they accord with these. There were those 
there, professing to be orthodox Christians, who 
repudiated the doctrine of the ransom, which 
is the only foundation of true Christian faith, 
and, denying the fall of man, proclaimed the 
opposite theory of evolution;— that man never 
was created perfect, that he never fell, and 
that consequently he needed no Redeemer; 
that since his creation in some very low condition, 



far removed from the "image of God," 
he has been gradually coming up, and is still 
in the process of an evolution whose law is the 
survival of the fittest. And this, the very opposite 
of the Bible doctrine of ransom and restitution, 
was the most popular view. 

Below we give a few brief extracts indicating 
the compromising spirit of Protestant Christianity 
both in its attitude toward that great 
antichristian system, the Church of Rome, and 
also in its attitude toward the non-Christian 
faiths. 

Said Dr. Briggs, who was introduced by the 
President, Dr. Barrows, as "one whose learning, 
courage and faithfulness to his convictions 
have given him a high place in the church 
universal," and who was received with loud 
applause:— 

"All that we can claim for the Bible is inspiration 
and accuracy for that which suggests 
the religious lessons to be imparted. God is 
true, he cannot lie; he cannot mislead or deceive 
his creatures. But when the infinite God 
speaks to finite man, must he speak words 
which are not error? [How absurd the question. 
Of course he speaks the truth, or else 
he is not true.— EDITOR.] This depends not 
only upon God's speaking, but on man's hearing, 
and also on the means of communication 
between God and man. It is necessary to 
show the capacity of man to receive the word, 
before we can be sure that he transmitted it 
correctly. [This "learned and reverend" theological 
professor should bear in mind that God 
was able to choose proper instruments for conveying 
his truth, as well as to express it to 
them; and that he did so is very manifest to 
every sincere student of his Word. Such an 
argument to undermine the validity of the sacred 
Scriptures is a mere subterfuge; and is an 
insult to the intelligence of an enlightened 
audience.] The inspiration of the holy Scriptures 
does not carry with it inerrancy in every 
particular. 

"The errors of the holy Scriptures are not 
errors of falsehood or deceit, but of ignorance, 
inadvertence, partial and inadequate knowledge, 
and of incapacity to express the whole 
truth of God which belonged to man.... 
We are obliged to admit that there are scientific 
errors in the Bible. ...Science ["falsely 
so-called"] goes on, confident that every 
form of religion which resists this criticism will 
ere long crumble into dust... There are 
historical mistakes in the Bible which cannot 
be removed by any proper method of interpretation. 



...The divine command to Abraham 

to offer up his son as a burnt-offering and 

other incidents seem unsuited to divine revelation. 

...What pleasure could God take 

in smoking altars? how could the true God 

prescribe such puerilities?" 

Said the Rev. Theodore Munger of New 
Haven:— 

"Christ is more than a Judean slain on Calvary. 
Christ is humanity as it is evolving under 
the power and grace of God, and any book 
touched by the inspiration of this fact [not 
that Jesus was the anointed Son of God, but 
that the evolved humanity as a whole constitutes 
the Christ, the Anointed] belongs to 
Christian literature." 

He instances Dante, Shakespeare, Goethe, 
Shelley, Matthew Arnold, Emerson and others, 
and then adds:— 

"Literature with few exceptions— all inspired 
literature— stands squarely upon humanity, 
and insists upon it on ethical grounds and 
for ethical ends, and this is essential Christianity 
[-with Christ left out. -EDITOR.]... 
A theology that insists on a transcendent God, 
who sits above the world and spins the thread 
of its affairs, does not command the assent of 
those minds which express themselves in literature: 
the poet, the man of genius, the broad 
and universal thinker pass it by; they stand 
too near God to be deceived by such renderings 
of his truth." 

Said the Rev. Dr. Rexford of Boston 
(Universalis!) :— 

"I would that we might all confess that a 
sincere worship, anywhere and everywhere in 
the world, is a true worship.... The unwritten, 
but dominant creed of this hour I assume 
to be that, whatever worshiper in all the world 
bends before The Best he knows, and walks true 

R1592: page 326 

to the purest light that shines for him, has access 
to the highest blessings of heaven." 
[And he surely did strike the key-note of the 
present dominant religious sentiment, especially 
as expressed in the great Parliament. 
But the Apostle Paul did not so address the 
worshipers of The Unknown God on Mars 
Hill; nor did Elijah thus defend the priests 
of Baal. Paul declares that the only access 
to God is through faith in Christ's sacrifice 
for our sins. -Acts 17:23-31; 1 Kings 18:21,22. 
-EDITOR.] 
Said the Rev. Lyman Abbott 



(Congregationalist):— 

"We do not think that God has spoken only 
in Palestine, and to the few in that narrow 
province. We do not think he has been vocal 
in Christendom and dumb everywhere else. 
No ! we believe that he is a speaking God in 
all times and in all ages." [But how did he 
speak to the prophets of Baal? He has not 
revealed himself except to his chosen people- 
to fleshly Israel in the Jewish age, and to 
spiritual Israel in the Gospel age— "You only 
have I known of all the families of the earth." 
See also Amos 3:2; 1 Cor. 2:6-10.-EDITOR.] 

A letter from Mrs. Isabel Somerset (Church 
of England), read with complimentary introduction 
by President Dr. Barrows, contained 
the following:— 

"I am in sympathy with every effort by 
which men may be induced to think together 
along the lines of their agreement, rather than 
of their antagonism. ...The only way to 
unite is never to mention subjects on which we 
are irrevocably opposed. Perhaps the chief of 
these is the historic episcopate, but the fact 
that he believes in this while I do not, would 
not hinder that great and good prelate, Archbishop 
Ireland, from giving his hearty help to 
me, not as a Protestant woman, but as a 
temperance worker. The same was true in 
England of that lamented leader, Cardinal 
Manning, and is true to-day of Mgr. Nugent 
of Liverpool, a priest of the people, universally 
revered and loved. A consensus of opinion 
on the practical outline of the golden rule, declared 
negatively by Confucius and positively 
by Christ, will bring us all into one camp.... 
This, I am persuaded, will be attained by the 
great conclave soon to assemble in the white 
city of the west." 

The doctrine of a vicarious atonement was 
seldom referred to, and by many was freely 
set aside as a relic of the past and unworthy 
of this enlightened nineteenth century. Only 
a few voices were raised in its defense, and 
these were not only a very small minority in 
the Parliament, but their views were evidently 
at a discount. Rev. Joseph Cook was one 
of this small minority, and his remarks were 
afterward criticised and roundly denounced 
from a Chicago pulpit. The Rev. Jenkin L. 
Jones, in a sermon preached before his congregation 
in All Soul's Church, replied to Joseph 
Cook's defense of the doctrine of a vicarious 
atonement before the Parliament of Religions, 
in which the Boston preacher had said that the 
Christian was the only true religion, and the 



acceptance of it the only means of securing 
happiness after death. In his address Mr. 
Cook said:— 

"Here is Lady Macbeth. See how she rubs 
her hands. What religion can wash Lady 
Macbeth's red right hand? That is the question 
I propose to the four continents and the 
isles of the sea. Unless you can answer that, 
you have not come with a serious purpose to 
the parliament of religions. I speak now to 
the branch of those skeptics who are not represented 
here; and their silence or their responses 
are as inefficient as a fishing-rod would 
be to span this vast lake or the Atlantic. I 
turn to Mohammedanism. Can you wash 
our red right hand? I turn to Confucianism 
and Buddhism. Can you wash our red right 
hand?" 

In reply Mr. Jones said in part:— 

"For the last fifteen years or more Joseph 
Cook, in his rhetorical climaxes, has escorted 
the red-handed queen of Shakespeare's great 
drama before American audiences, and has 
challenged, now Unitarianism, now philosophy, 
and again the nonchristian religions of the 
world, to clean that lady's murderous hand and 
to bring to her soul a peace as though the foul 
deed had not been done. With swift and 
vehement rhetoric he rushes into two immense 
assumptions, viz.: That all the above-named 
forces are powerless in this emergency; second, 
that Christianity, meaning, of course, his 
special kind of Christianity, can wash clean 
the stain. By some supernatural power he assumes 
that it can remove the blot and give to 
the soul again its sweetness and its purity. 

"His favorite word is to 'wash,' and by 
word and gesture he enforces the thought of a 
miraculous change, a supernatural and vicarious 
atonement, brought about by the shedding 
of another's innocent blood on Calvary. How 
this is done even the philosopher Joseph Cook 

R1592: page 327 

does not pretend to explain, but that it is 
done he asserts with all the dogmatic power 
of his ponderous eloquence. The other day, 
on the platform of the Parliament of Religions, 
he made his challenge again, a challenge that 
has been made so frequently that it might be 
called an orthodox classic. And it is a challenge 
that carries much weight to many minds. 
The frequent repetition of it seems to carry 
with it convincing power to so many that I 
deem it my duty, as a teacher of morals and 



religion, to give it some attention in this presence 
this morning— not for controversial purposes, 
but for truth's sake, for morality's sake. 
In the name of common sense and common 
decency I protest against this juggling with 
the eternal laws of right and wrong. 

"If Christianity has any short cut by which 
murderers, perjurers, defaulters and workers 
of mischief of every kind can slip unscathed 
into heaven as though they had wrought no 
mischief, then it is a rebel religion, and Jesus 
is an insurrectionist come into the world to 
defy the benign order of the universe, teaching 
men how to escape their just debts by virtue 
of a bankrupt act which does not hold in any 
court save his own. It is hard to tell just 
what Joseph Cook means, but it is perfectly 
clear that he expects that Lady Macbeth can 
take advantage of some transaction that happened 
in far-off Palestine that can transfer her 
guilt to the suffering one who was lifted on 
the cross of Calvary. And because he suffered 
she may escape the consequences of her deeds. 

"In order that we may discover the immorality 
of the vicarious atonement— this "look-to-Jesus-and-be-saved" 
kind of a scheme with 
which the great Boston orator undertook to 
browbeat out of countenance the representatives 
of other faiths and forms of thought at 
the parliament— let us study closely the character 
of the deed, the temper of the woman to 
whom he promised such swift immunity if she 
would only "look on the cross." This champion 
of orthodoxy indignantly flung into the 
faces of the representatives of all the religions 
of the world the assertion that it is "impossible 
in the very nature of things for one to 
enter into the kingdom of heaven except he 
be born again" through this Christ atonement, 
this supernatural vicariousness that washes her 
red hand white and makes the murderess a 
saint. All I have to say to such Christianity 
is this: that I am glad I do not believe in it; 
and I call upon all lovers of morality, all 
friends of justice, all believers in an infinite 
God whose will is rectitude, whose providence 
makes for righteousness, to deny it. Such a 
"scheme of salvation" is not only unreasonable 
but it is immoral. It is demoralizing, it 
is a delusion and a snare in this world, however 
it may be in the next. 

"I know not whom Mr. Cook meant by the 
'skeptics not represented here,' of whom he 
made his first demand that they should wash 
Lady Macbeth's hand clean, but if he meant 
those represented by Darwin, Spencer or Emerson, 



those who trust science and reason, who 

believe in progress and search for the foundations 

of religion in the soul itself, they would 

say, as I understand them: 'Who dares clean 

the hand of blood that has not yet completed 

its mission?' The stain remains; the smell 

abides for the saving of the soul. They are a 

part of the redemption processes of the God 

of nature, and if Christianity pretends to interfere 

with that holy law, to sneer at that 

blessed schoolmaster of the spirit, so much the 

worse for Christianity. 

"All representatives of all religions will join 
with Joseph Cook in turning glad faces toward 
Jesus and will recognize in him a representative 
of those great types of humanity who, in 
the gladness of goodness, have encouraged 
souls to fight the good fight with weakness and 
temptation, to learn the hard though holy lesson 
that "whatsoever ye sow that shall ye also 
reap," that "by their fruits ye shall know 
them." I turn from Calvary if my vision 
there leaves me selfish enough to ask for a salvation 
that leaves Prince Sidartha outside of a 
heaven in which Lady Macbeth or any other 
red-handed soul is eternally included. I ask 
you to join with me in this slow, long but sure 
struggle of humanity toward truth, righteousness 
and love. Let us struggle for it, reach 
for it, pray and labor for it, so that we may 
merit the sweet benediction of the old man in 
the play: "God's benison go with you, and 
with those that would make good of bad and 
friends of foes." 

Subsequently an "oriental platform meeting" 
was held in this same church, when this 
same reverend (?) gentleman read select sayings 
from Zoroaster, Moses, Confucius, Buddha, 
Socrates and Christ, all tending to show the 
universality of religion, which was followed by 
the address of an Armenian Catholic. After 
this address, says the Press reporter:— 

"Mr. Jones said that he had had the temerity 
to ask Bishop Keane, of the Catholic University 
of Washington, if he would attend this 
meeting and stand on such a radical platform. 
The bishop had replied with a smile that he 
would be in Dubuque or he might be tempted 
to come. I then asked him,' said Mr. Jones, 

R1592: page 328 

'if he could suggest any one.' The bishop replied: 
'You must not be in too much of a hurry. 
We are getting along very fast. It may not be 
a long time before I shall be able to do so.'" 



'"The Roman Catholic Church,' continued 
Mr. Jones, 'under the leadership of such men 
as Cardinal Gibbons, Archbishop Ireland and 
Bishop Spalding, is getting along, and these 
men are forcing the laggards to work. People 
tell us that we have given up the parliament 
of religions to the Catholics on one hand and 
the Pagans on the other. We will hear from 
our Pagan friends now. That word pagan 
does not have the same meaning as it did, and 
I thank God for it.'" 

Prof. Henry Drummond, author of "Natural 
Law in the Spiritual World," was on the 
program for an address on "Christianity and 
Evolution." He failed to arrive, however, and 
his paper, which was sent in advance, was read 
by Dr. Bristol. The following extract from it 
shows how far Prof. Drummond's faith has departed 
from the one true foundation laid in the 
Scriptures. He said:— 

"The theory of evolution fills a gap at the 
very beginning of our religion, and if science 
is satisfied in a general way with its theory of 
evolution as the method of creation, assent is 
a cold word with which those whose business 
it is to know and love the ways of God should 
welcome it. [This was greeted with loud applause.] 
As to its harmony with the theory 
about the book of Genesis [as to its authority], 
it may be that theology and science have been 
brought into perfect harmony, but the era of 
the reconcilers is past. Genesis is not a scientific, 
but a religious book. Its object was 
purely religious, the point being, not how certain 
things were made, which is a question for 
science, but that God made them. [If that be 
the only object of the book of Genesis, then 
why does it attempt more than the simple 
statement that God made all things? Boasted 
science comes very far short of common sense, 
as well as of the divine revelation.— EDITOR.] 
There is only one theory of creation in the 
field, and that is evolution. 

"Under the new view the question of revelation 
is undergoing expansion. The whole 
order and scheme of nature are seen to be only 
part of the manifold revelation of God. As to 
the specific revelations, the Old and New Testaments, 
evolution has already given to the 
world what amounts to a new Bible. [Yea, verily; 
for it could never harmonize with the old 
Bible, the divinely inspired Word of truth.— 
EDITOR.] The suggestion has been made that 
sin is probably a relic of the animal caste, the 
undestroyed residuum of the animal. ...If 
science can help us in any way to know how 



sin came into the world, it may help us better 
to know how to get it out. [Applause.] A better 
understanding of its genesis and nature may 
modify, at least, some of the attempts made to 
get rid of it. ['Professing themselves wise, they 
became fools'— foolish indeed in discarding 
the Bible account of the fall of man and the 
Bible plan of salvation through faith in the 
precious blood of Christ our Redeemer, who 
alone has power to eliminate sin and to restore 
the sinner to the divine image in which he 
was first created.— EDITOR.]" 

A FEW DEFENDERS OF THE FAITH. 



In the midst of this compromising spirit, so 
bold and outspoken, it was indeed refreshing 
to find a very few representatives of Protestant 
Christianity who had the moral courage, in the 
face of so much opposition, both latent and expressed, 
to defend the faith once delivered to 
the saints; though even these show signs of 
perplexity, because they do not see the plan 
of the ages and the important relationship of 
the fundamental doctrines of Christianity to 
the whole marvelous system of divine truth. 
We append below some extracts from these 
commendable discourses, praying that the faithfulness 
of these witnesses thus far may continue, 
and that it may lead them to the clearer 
knowledge of the truth now due to the faithful. 

Prof. W. C. Wilkinson, of the Chicago 
University, spoke on The Attitude of Christianity 
toward other Religions. He directed 
his hearers to the Scriptures of the Old and 
New Testaments for an exposition of Christianity, 
to the hostile attitude of Christianity 
toward all other religions, which must 
of necessity be false if it be true, and to our 
Lord's exclusive claim of power to save, as 
manifested in such expressions as:— 

"No man cometh unto the Father [that is, 
no man can be saved] but by me." 

"I am the bread of life." 

"If any man thirst, let him come unto me 
and drink." 

"I am the light of the world." 

"I am the door of the sheep." 

"All that came before me are thieves and 
robbers." 

R1592: page 329 

"I am the door; by me if any man enter 



in, he shall be saved." 

"Such," said he, "are a few specimens of 
the expressions from Jesus' own lips of sole, 
exclusive claim to be himself alone the savior 
of man. 

"It may be answered, 'But Jesus also said, 
I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me; 
and we are thence warranted in believing, of 
many souls involved in alien religions, that, 
drawn consciously or unconsciously to Jesus, 
they are saved, notwithstanding the misfortune 
of their religious environment. 

"To this, of course, I agree. I am grateful 
that such seems indeed to be the teaching 
of Christianity. [But this hope flows from a 
generous heart rather than from a knowledge 
of the divine plan of the ages. He does 
not yet see that the drawing of the world 
to Christ belongs to the Millennial age, and 
that only the drawing of the Church is now 
in progress; and that knowledge of the Lord, 
the drawing power now, will be the power then. 
"The knowledge of the Lord shall [then] 
fill the earth, as the waters cover the deep."— 
EDITOR.] I simply ask to have it borne steadily 
in mind that it is not at all the extension 
of the benefits flowing from the exclusive power 
of Jesus to save that we are at present discussing, 
but strictly this question: Does Christianity 
recognize any share of saving efficacy 
as inherent in the non-Christian religions? 
In other words, is it anywhere in Scripture 
represented that Jesus exerts his saving power, 
in some degree, greater or less, through religions 
not his own? If there is any hint, any 
shadow of hint, in the Bible, Old Testament 
or New, looking in the direction of the answer 
yes to that question, why, I confess I never 
have found it. Hints far from shadowy I have 
found, and in abundance, to the contrary. 

"I feel the need of begging you to observe 
that what I say in this paper is not to be misunderstood 
as undertaking on behalf of Christianity 
to derogate anything whatever from the 
merit of individual men among the nations, 
who have risen to great ethical heights without 
aid from historic Christianity in either its 
New Testament or its Old Testament form. 
But it is not of persons, either the mass or the 
exceptions, that I task myself here to speak. 
I am leading you to consider only the attitude 
assumed by Christianity toward the non-Christian 
religions. 

"Let us advance from weighing the immediate 
utterances of Jesus to take some account 
of those upon whom, as his representatives, 



Jesus, according to the New Testament, conferred 
the right to speak with an authority 
equal to his own. Speaking of the adherents 
generally of the Gentile religions, he uses this 
language: 'Professing themselves to be wise, 
they became fools, and changed the glory of 
the incorruptible God for the likeness of an 
image of corruptible man, and of birds, and 
four-footed beasts, and creeping things.' 

"Man, bird, beast, reptile— these four specifications 
in their ladder of descent seem to 
indicate every different form of Gentile religion 
with which Christianity, ancient or modern, 
came into historic contact. The consequences 
penally visited by the offended jealous 
God of Hebrew and of Christian, for such degradation 
of the innate worshiping instinct, 
such profanation of the idea, once pure in human 
hearts, of God the incorruptible, are described 
by Paul in words whose mordant, flagrant, 
caustic, branding power has made them 
famous and familiar: 'Wherefore God gave 
them up to the lusts of their hearts, unto uncleanliness, 
that their bodies should be dishonored 
among themselves; for that they exchanged 
the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped 
and served the creature rather than the 
Creator, who is blessed forever.' 

"I arrest the quotation unfinished. The remainder 
of the passage descends into particulars 
of blame, well known, and well known to be 
truly charged against the ancient pagan world. 
No hint of exceptions here in favor of points 
defectively good, or at least not so bad, in the 
religions condemned; no qualification, no mitigation 
of sentence suggested. Everywhere 
heavy shotted, point blank denunciation. No 
idea submitted of there being in some cases 
true and acceptable worship hidden away, disguised 
and unconscious, under false forms. 
No possibility glanced at of there being a 
silent distinction made by some idolaters, if 
made only by a very few discerning among 
them, between the idol server and the one incorruptible 
jealous God as meant by such exceptional 
idolaters to be merely symbolized in 
the idol ostensibly worshiped by them. Reserve 
none on behalf of certain initiated, 
illuminated souls seeking and finding purer 
religion in esoteric "mysteries" that were shut 
out from the profane vulgar. Christianity 
leaves no loophole of escape for the judged 
and reprobate anti-Christian religions with 
which it comes in contact. It shows instead 
only indiscriminate damnation [condemnation] 
leaping out like forked lightning from 



the glory of his power upon those incorrigibly 
guilty of the sin referred to, the sin of worship 
paid to gods other than God. 

R1592: page 330 

"There is no pleasing alleviation anywhere 
introduced in the way of assurance, or even of 
possible hope, that a benign God will graciously 
receive into his ear the ascriptions formally 
given to another as virtually, though misconceivingly, 
intended for himself. That idea, 
whether just or not, is not scriptural. It is, indeed, 
anti-scriptural, therefore anti-Christian. 
Christianity does not deserve the praise of any 
such liberality. As concerns the sole, the exclusive, 
the incommunicable prerogatives of 
God, Christianity is, let it be frankly admitted, 
a narrow, a strict, a severe, a jealous religion. 
Socrates, dying, may have been forgiven his 
proposal of a cock to be offered in sacrifice to 
Aesculapius; but Christianity, the Christianity 
of the Bible, gives us no shadow of reason for 
supposing that such idolatrous act on his part 
was translated by God into worship acceptable 
to himself. 

"Peter said, 'Of a truth I perceive that God 
is no respecter of persons, but in every nation 
he that feareth him and worketh righteousness 
is acceptable to him.' 

"To fear God first, and then also to work 
righteousness, these are the traits characterizing 
ever and everywhere the man acceptable 
to God. But evidently to fear is not, in the 
idea of Christianity, to worship another than 
he. It will accordingly be in degree as a man 
escapes the ethnic religion dominant about 
him, and rises— not by means of it, but in 
spite of it— into the transcending element of 
the true divine worship, that he will be acceptable 
to God. 

"Of any ethnic religion, therefore, can it 
be said that it is a true religion, only not perfect? 
Christianity says no. Christianity speaks 
words of undefined, unlimited hope concerning 
those, some of those, who shall never have 
heard of Christ. These words Christians, of 
course, will hold and cherish according to 
their inestimable value. But let us not mistake 
them as intended to bear any relation 
whatever to the erring religions of mankind. 
Those religions the Bible nowhere represents 
as pathetic and partly successful gropings after 
God. They are one and all represented as 
groping downward, not groping upward. According 
to Christianity they hinder, they do 



not help. Their adherents' hold on them is 
like the blind grasping of drowning men on 
roots and rocks that only tend to keep them 
to the bottom of the river. The truth that is 
in the false religion may help, but it will be 
the truth, not the false religion. 

"According to Christianity the false religion 
exerts all its force to choke and to kill the 
truth that is in it. Hence the historic degeneration 
represented in the first chapter of Romans 
as effecting false religions in general. 
If they were upward Teachings they would 
grow better and better. If, as Paul teaches, 
they in fact grow worse and worse, it must be 
because they are downward Teachings. The 
indestructible instinct to worship, that is in 
itself a saving power. Carefully guarded, carefully 
cultivated, it may even save. But the 
worshiping instinct, misused or disused, that 
is depraved to idolatry or extinguished in atheism 
—'held down,' as Paul graphically expresses 
it— is in swift process of becoming an 
irresistible destroying power. The light that 
is in the soul turns swiftly into darkness. The 
instinct to worship lifts Godward. The issue 
of that instinct, its abuse in idolatry, its disuse 
in atheism, is evil, only evil, and that 
continually. 

"The attitude, therefore, of Christianity toward 
religions other than itself is an attitude 
of universal, absolute, eternal, unappeasable 
hostility, while toward all men everywhere, the 
adherents of false religions by no means excepted, 
its attitude is an attitude of grace, 
mercy, peace for whosoever will. How many 
may be found that will, is a problem which 
Christianity leaves unsolved." 

The Rev. Jas. Devine of New York City also 
spoke on the message of Christianity to other 
religions, clearly presenting the doctrine of 
redemption through the precious blood of 
Christ. He said:— 

"We are brought now to another fundamental 
truth in Christian teaching— the mysterious 
doctrine of atonement. Sin is a fact 
which is indisputable. It is universally recognized 
and acknowledged. It is its own evidence. 
It is, moreover, a barrier between man 
and his God. The divine holiness and sin, 
with its loathsomeness, its rebellion, its horrid 
degradation and its hopeless ruin, cannot 
coalesce in any system of moral government. 
God cannot tolerate sin or temporize with it 
or make a place for it in his presence. He 
cannot parley with it; he must punish it. He 
cannot treat with it; he must try it at the bar. 



He cannot overlook it; he must overcome it. 
He cannot give it a moral status; he must 
visit it with the condemnation it deserves. 

"Atonement is God's marvelous method of 
vindicating, once for all, before the universe, 
his eternal attitude toward sin, by the voluntary 
self-assumption, in the spirit of sacrifice 
of its penalty. This he does in the person of 
Jesus Christ. The facts of Christ's birth, life, 

R1592: page 331 

death and resurrection take their place in the 
realm of veritable history, and the moral value 
and propitiatory efficacy of his perfect obedience 
and sacrificial death in a representative 
capacity become a mysterious element of limitless 
worth in the process of re-adjusting the 
relation of the sinner to his God. 

"Christ is recognized by God as a substitute. 
The merit of his obedience and the exalted 
dignity of his sacrifice are both available 
to faith. The sinner, humble, penitent and 
conscious of unworthiness, accepts Christ as 
his redeemer, his intercessor, his savior, and 
simply believes in him, trusting in his assurances 
and promises, based as they are upon his 
atoning intervention, and receives from God, 
as the gift of sovereign love, all the benefits 
of Christ's mediatorial work. This is God's 
way of reaching the goal of pardon and reconciliation. 
It is his way of being himself just 
and yet accomplishing the justification of the 
sinner. Here again we have the mystery of 
wisdom in its most august exemplification. 

"This is the heart of the gospel. It throbs 
with mysterious love; it pulsates with ineffable 
throes of divine feeling; it bears a vital relation 
to the whole scheme of government; it 
is in its hidden activities beyond the scrutiny 
of human reason; but it sends the life-blood 
coursing through history and it gives to Christianity 
its superb vitality and its undying vigor. 
It is because Christianity eliminates sin from 
the problem that its solution is complete and 
final. 

"Christianity must speak in the name of 
God. To him it owes its existence, and the 
deep secret of its dignity and power is that it 
reveals him. It would be effrontery for it to 
speak simply upon its own responsibility or 
even in the name of reason. It has no philosophy 
of evolution to propound. It has a message 
from God to deliver. It is not itself a 
philosophy; it is a religion. It is not earth-born; 
it is God-wrought. It comes not from 



man, but from God, and is intensely alive with 
his power, alert with his love, benign with his 
goodness, radiant with his light, charged with 
his truth, sent with his message, inspired with 
his energy, pregnant with his wisdom, instinct 
with the gift of spiritual healing and mighty 
with supreme authority. 

"It has a mission among men, whenever or 
wherever it finds them, which is as sublime as 
creation, as marvelous as spiritual existence 
and as full of mysterious meaning as eternity. 
It finds its focus, and as well its radiating center, 
in the personality of its great revealer and 
teacher, to whom, before his advent, all the 
fingers of light pointed, and from whom, since 
his incarnation, all the brightness of the day 
has shown. 

"Its spirit is full of simple sincerity, exalted 
dignity and sweet unselfishness. It aims to 
impart a blessing, rather than to challenge a 
comparison. It is not so anxious to vindicate 
itself as to confer its benefits. It is not so solicitous 
to secure supreme honor for itself as to 
win its way to the heart. It does not seek to 
taunt, to disparage or humiliate its rival, but 
rather to subdue by love, attract by its own 
excellence and supplant by virtue of its own 
incomparable superiority. It is itself incapable 
of a spirit of rivalry, because of its own indisputable 
right to reign. It has no use for a 
sneer, it can dispense with contempt, it carries 
no weapons of violence, it is not given to argument, 
it is incapable of trickery or deceit, and 
it repudiates cant. It relies ever upon its own 
intrinsic merit, and bases all its claims on its 
right to be heard and honored. 

"Its miraculous evidence is rather an exception 
than a rule. It was a sign to help weak 
faith. It was a concession made in the spirit 
of condescension. Miracles suggest mercy quite 
as much as they announce majesty. When we 
consider the unlimited sources of divine power, 
and the ease with which signs and wonders 
might have been multiplied in bewildering variety 
and impressiveness, we are conscious of 
a rigid conservation of power and a distinct 
repudiation of the spectacular. The mystery 
of Christian history is the sparing way in which 
Christianity has used its resources. It is a tax 
upon faith, which is often painfully severe, to 
note the apparent lack of energy and dash and 
resistless force in the seemingly slow advances 
of our holy religion. [But it is no longer so to 
those who understand God's plan of the ages. 
-EDITOR.] 

"Doubtless God had his reasons, but in the 



meantime we cannot but recognize in Christianity 
a spirit of mysterious reserve, of marvelous 
patience, of subdued undertone, of purposeful 
restraint. It does not 'cry, nor lift 
up, nor cause its voice to be heard in the street.' 
Centuries come and go and Christianity touches 
only portions of the earth, but wherever it 
touches it transfigures. It seems to despise material 
adjuncts, and counts only those victories 
worth having which are won through spiritual 
contact with the individual soul. Its relation 
to other religions has been characterized by 
singular reserve, and its progress has been 
marked by an unostentatious dignity which is 
in harmony with the majestic attitude of God, 
its author, to all false gods who have claimed 

R1592 : page 332 

divine honors and sought to usurp the place 
which was his alone. 

"We are right, then, in speaking of the spirit 
of this message as wholly free from the commonplace 
sentiment of rivalry, entirely above 
the use of spectacular or meretricious methods, 
infinitely removed from all mere devices or 
dramatic effect, wholly free from cant or double 
facedness, with no anxiety for alliance with 
worldly power or social eclat, caring more for 
a place of influence in a humble heart than for 
a seat of power on a royal throne, wholly intent 
on claiming the loving allegiance of the 
soul and securing the moral transformation of 
character, in order that its own spirit and principles 
may sway the spiritual life of men. 

"It speaks, then, to other religions with 
unqualified frankness and plainness, based 
upon its own incontrovertible claim to a hearing. 
It has nothing to conceal, but rather invites 
to inquiry and investigation. It recognizes 
promptly and cordially whatever is worthy 
of respect in other religious systems; it acknowledges 
the undoubted sincerity of personal 
conviction and the intense earnestness of moral 
struggle in the case of many serious souls who, 
like the Athenians of old, 'worship in ignorance'; 
it warns, and persuades, and commands, 
as is its right; it speaks as Paul did in 
the presence of cultured heathenism on Mars 
hill, of that appointed day in which the world 
must be judged, and of 'that man' by whom 
it is to be judged; it echoes and re-echoes its 
invariable and inflexible call to repentance; it 
requires acceptance of its moral standards; it 
exacts submission, loyalty, reverence and 
humility. 



"All this it does with a superb and unwavering 
tone of quiet insistence. It often presses 
its claim with argument, appeal and tender 
urgency; yet in it all and through it all would 
be recognized a clear, resonant, predominant 
tone of uncompromising insistence, revealing 
that supreme personal will which originated 
Christianity, and in whose name it ever speaks. 
It delivers its message with an air of untroubled 
confidence and quiet mastery. There is no 
anxiety about precedence, no undue care for 
externals, no possibility of being patronized, 
no undignified spirit of competition. It speaks, 
rather, with the consciousness of that simple, 
natural, incomparable, measureless supremacy 
which quickly disarms rivalry, and in the end 
challenges the admiration and compels the submission 
of hearts free from malice and guile." 

It gives us great pleasure to thus find a few 
earnest voices raised in defence of the cross 
and of the Bible. 

Among these noble utterances in defence 
of the truth was also that of Count Bernstorff, 
of Germany. He said:— 

"I trust that nobody is here who thinks 
light of his own religion [though he certainly 
learned to the contrary before the Parliament 
closed. This was said at its beginning.] I for 
myself declare that I am here as an individual 
evangelical Christian, and that I should never 
have set my foot in this parliament if I thought 
that it signified anything like a consent that 
all religions are equal, and that it is only necessary 
to be sincere and upright. I can consent 
to nothing of this kind. I believe only the 
Bible to be true, and Protestant Christianity 
the only true religion. I wish no compromise 
of any kind. 

"We cannot deny that we who meet in this 
Parliament are separated by great and important 
principles. We admit that these differences 
cannot be bridged over; but we meet, believing 
everybody has the right to his faith. 
You invite everybody to come here as a sincere 
defender of his own faith. I, for my part, 
stand before you with the same wish that 
prompted Paul when he stood before the representatives 
of the Roman Congress and 
Agrippa, the Jewish king. 'I would to God that 
all that hear me to-day were both almost, and 
altogether, such as I am.' I cannot say, 'except 
these bonds.' I thank God I am free; except 
for all these faults and deficiencies which are 
in me and which prevent me embracing my 
creed as I should like to do. 

"But what do we then meet for, if we cannot 



show tolerance. Well, the word tolerance 

is used in different ways. If the words of King 

Frederick, of Prussia— In my country everybody 

can go to heaven after his own fashion'— 

are used as a maxim of statesmanship, we cannot 

approve of it too highly. What bloodshed, 

what cruelty would have been spared in the 

world if it had been adopted. But if it is the 

expression of the religious indifference prevalent 

during this last century and at the court 

of the monarch who was the friend of Voltaire, 

then we must not accept it. 

"St. Paul, in his epistle to the Galatians, 
rejects every other doctrine, even if it were 
taught by an angel from heaven. We Christians 
are servants of our Master, the living 
Savior. We have no right to compromise the 
truth he intrusted to us; either to think lightly 
of it, or to withhold the message he has given 
us for humanity. But we meet together, each 
one wishing to gain the others to his own creed. 
Will this not be a parliament of war instead of 

R1592: page 333 

peace? Will it take us further from, instead of 
bringing us nearer to, each other? I think not, 
if we hold fast our truths that these great vital 
doctrines can only be defended and propagated 
by spiritual means. An honest fight with 
spiritual weapons need not estrange the combatants; 
on the contrary, it often brings them 
nearer. 

"I think this conference will have done 
enough to engrave its memory forever on the 
leaves of history if this great principle [religious 
liberty] finds general adoption. One light 
is dawning in every heart, and the nineteenth 
century has brought us much progress in this 
respect; yet we risk to enter the twentieth century 
before the great principle of religious liberty 
has found universal acceptance." 

In marked contrast also with the general 
spirit of the Parliament, was the discourse of 
Mr. Grant of Canada. He said:— 

"It seems to me that we should begin this 
Parliament of Religions, not with a consciousness 
that we are doing a great thing, but with 
an humble and lowly confession of sin and 
failure. Why have not the inhabitants of the 
world fallen before the truth? The fault 
is ours. The Apostle Paul, looking back on 
centuries of marvelous God-guided history, 
saw as the key to all its maxims this: that 
Jehovah had stretched out his hands all day 
long to a disobedient and gainsaying people; 



that, although there was always a remnant of 
the righteous, Israel as a nation did not understand 
Jehovah, and therefore failed to understand 
her own marvelous mission. 

"If St. Paul were here to-day would he not 
utter the same sad confession with regard to 
the nineteenth century of Christendom? Would 
he not have to say that we have been proud of 
our Christianity, instead of allowing our Christianity 
to humble and crucify us; that we have 
boasted of Christianity as something we possessed, 
instead of allowing it to possess us; 
that we have divorced it from the moral and 
spiritual order of the world instead of seeing 
that it is that which interpenetrates, interprets, 
completes and verifies that order; and that so 
we have hidden its glories and obscured its 
power. All day long our Savior has been saying, 
I have stretched out my hands to a disobedient 
and gainsaying people.' But the 
only one indispensable condition of success is 
that we recognize the cause of our failure, that 
we confess it with humble, lowly, penitent and 
obedient minds, and that with quenchless 
western courage and faith we now go forth and 
do otherwise." 

Would to God that these sentiments had 
found an echo in the great Parliament; but 
they did not. On the other hand it was characterized 
by great boastfulness as to the "marvelous 
religious progress of this nineteenth 
century; and Count Bernstorffs first impression, 
that it meant a bold compromise of Christian 
principles and doctrine, was the correct 
one, as the subsequent sessions of the Parliament 
proved. 

While Christendom stood representatively 
before the representative heathen world, boastful 
of its religious progress, and knowing 
not that it is "poor and blind and miserable 
and naked" (Rev. 3:17), the contrast of an 
evident feeling after God on the part of some 
in heathen lands was very marked. 

HEATHEN REFORMERS FEELING AFTER GOD. 



In two able addresses by representative Hindoos, 
we have set before us a remarkable movement 
in India which gives evidence that the 
Bible, which the missionaries carried there, 
has been doing a work which the conflicting 
creeds that accompanied it, and claimed to interpret 
it, have only hindered. From Japan 
also we hear of similar conditions. Below we 



append some extracts from three addresses remarkable 

for their evident sincerity, thought, 

and clear expression, and showing the very 

serious attitude of heathen reformers who are 

feeling after God if haply they may find him. 

A VOICE FROM NEW INDIA. 

Mr. Mozoomdar was greeted with loud applause. 
His address was as follows:— 

"MR. PRESIDENT, REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONS 
AND RELIGIONS:-I told you the other 
day that India is the mother of religion; the 
land of evolution. I am going this morning 
to demonstrate the truth of what I said. The 
Brahmo-Somaj of India, which I have the honor 
to represent, is a new society; our religion 
is a new religion, but it comes from far, far 
antiquity, from the very roots of our national 
life, hundreds of centuries ago. 

"Sixty-three years ago the whole land of 
India was full of a mighty clamor. The great 
jarring noise of a heterogeneous polytheism rent 
the stillness of the sky. The cry of widow; 
nay, far more lamentable, the cry of those 
miserable women who had to be burned on 

R1592: page 334 

the funeral pyres of their dead husbands, desecrated 

the holiness of God's earth. We had 

the Buddhist, goddess of the country, the 

mother of the people, ten handed, holding in 

each hand the weapons for the defense of her 

children. We had the white goddess of learning, 

playing on her Vena, a stringed instrument 

of music, the strings of wisdom. The 

goddess of good fortune, holding in her arms, 

not the horn, but the basket of plenty, blessing 

the nations of India, was there, and the 

god with the head of an elephant, and the god 

who rides on a peacock— martial men are always 

fashionable, you know— and the thirty-three 

millions of gods and goddesses besides. 

I have my theory about the mythology of Hindooism, 

but this is not the time to take it up. 

"Amid the din and clash of this polytheism 
and so-called evil, amid all the darkness of the 
times, there arose a man, a Brahman, pure bred 
and pure born, whose name was Raja Ram 
Dohan Roy. Before he became a man he wrote 
a book proving the falsehood of all polytheism 
and the truth of the existence of the living 
God. This brought upon his head persecution. 
In 1830 this man founded a society 
known as the Brahmo-Somaj— the society of 



the worshipers of the one living God. While 

on the one hand he established the Brahmo-Somaj, 

on the other hand he co-operated with 

the British government to abolish the barbarous 

custom of suttee, or the burning of widows 

with their dead husbands. 

"The Brahmo-Somaj founded this monotheism 
upon the inspiration of the old Hindoo 
Scriptures, the Vedas and the Upanishads. 

"In the course of time, as the movement 
grew, the members began to doubt whether the 
Hindoo scriptures were really infallible. In 
their souls they thought they heard a voice 
which here and there, at first in feeble accents, 
contradicted the deliverances of the Vedas and 
the Upanishads. What shall be our theological 
principles? Upon what principles shall 
our religion stand? The small accents in which 
the question first was asked became louder and 
louder and were more and more echoed in the 
rising religious society until it became the most 
practical of all problems— upon what book shall 
true religion stand? 

"Briefly they found that it was impossible 
that the Hindoo scriptures should be the only 
records of true religion. They found that although 
there were truths in the Hindoo scriptures, 
they could not recognize them as the 
only infallible standard of spiritual reality. 
So twenty-one years after the foundation of the 
Brahmo-Somaj the doctrine of the infallibility 
of the Hindoo scriptures was given up. Then 
a further question came. Are there not other 
scriptures also? Did I not tell you the other 
day that on the imperial throne of India Christianity 
now sat with the Gospel of Peace in 
one hand and the scepter of civilization in the 
other? The Bible had penetrated into India. 
The Bible is the book which mankind shall 
not ignore. Recognizing, therefore, on the 
one hand, the great inspiration of the Hindoo 
scriptures, we could not but on the other hand 
recognize the inspiration and the authority of 
the Bible. And in 1861 we published a book 
in which extracts from all scriptures were given 
as the book which was to be read in the course 
of our devotions. It was not the Christian 
missionary that drew our attention to the Bible; 
it was not the Mohammedan priests who 
showed us the excellent passages in the Koran; 
it was no Zoroastrian who preached to us the 
greatness of his Zend-Avesta; but there was 
in our hearts the God of infinite reality, the 
source of inspiration of all the books, of the 
Bible, of the Koran, of the Zend-Avesta, who 
drew our attention to his excellencies as revealed 



in the record of holy experience everywhere. 
By his leading and by his light it was 
that we recognized these facts, and upon the 
rock of everlasting and eternal reality our 
theological basis was laid. 

"Was it theology without morality? What 
is the inspiration of this book or the authority 
of that prophet without personal holiness— the 
cleanliness of this God-made temple. Soon 
after we had got through our theology, the 
question stared us in the face that we were not 
good men, pure minded, holy men, and that 
there were innumerable evils about us, in our 
houses, in our national usages, in the organization 
of our society. The Brahmo-Somaj, therefore, 
next laid its hand upon the reformation 
of society. In 1851 the first intermarriage was 
celebrated. Intermarriage in India means the 
marriage of persons belonging to different 
castes. Caste is a sort of Chinese wall that 
surrounds every household and every little 
community, and beyond the limits of which no 
audacious man or woman shall stray. In the 
Brahmo-Somaj we asked 'Shall this Chinese 
wall disgrace the freedom of God's children 
forever?' Break it down; down with it, and 
away. 

"Next, my honored leader and friend, Keshub 
Chunder Sen, so arranged that marriage 
between different castes should take place. 
The Brahmans were offended. Wiseacres shook 
their heads; even leaders of the Brahmo-Somaj 
shrugged up their shoulders and put 

R1592: page 335 

their hands into their pockets. 'These young 
firebrands,' they said, 'are going to set fire to 
the whole of society.' But intermarriage took 
place, and widow-marriage took place. 

"Do you know what the widows of India 
are? A little girl of ten or twelve years happens 
to lose her husband before she knows 
his features very well, and from that tender 
age to her dying day she shall go through 
penances and austerities and miseries and loneliness 
and disgrace which you tremble to hear 
of. I do not approve of or understand the 
conduct of a woman who marries a first time 
and then a second time and then a third time 
and a fourth time— who marries as many times 
as there are seasons in the year. I do not 
understand the conduct of such men and 
women. But I think that, when a little child of 
eleven loses what men call her husband, to 
put her to the wretchedness of a lifelong widowhood 



and inflict upon her miseries which 

would disgrace a criminal, is a piece of inhumanity 

which cannot too soon be done away 

with. Hence intermarriages and widow marriages. 

Our hands were thus laid upon the 

problem of social and domestic improvement, 

and the result of that was that very soon a 

rupture took place in the Brahmo-Somaj. We 

young men had to go— we, with all our social 

reform— and shift for ourselves as we best 

might. When these social reforms were partially 

completed there came another question. 

"We had married the widow; we had prevented 
the burning of widows; what about her 
personal purity, the sanctification of our own 
consciences, the regeneration of our own souls? 
What about our acceptance before the awful 
tribunal of the God of infinite justice? Social 
reform and the doing of public good is itself 
only legitimate when it develops into the all-embracing 
principle of personal purity and the 
holiness of the soul. 

"My friends, I am often afraid, I confess, 
when I contemplate the condition of European 
and American society, when your activities 
are so manifold, your work is so extensive that 
you are drowned in it, and you have little time 
to consider the great questions of regeneration, 
of personal sanctification, of trial and 
judgment and of acceptance before God. That 
is the question of all questions. A right theological 
basis may lead to social reform, but a 
right line of public activity and the doing of 
good is bound to lead to the salvation of the 
doer's soul and the regeneration of public men. 

"After the end of the work of our social reform 
we were therefore led into the great subject, 
How shall this unregenerate nature be 
regenerated; this defiled temple, what waters 
shall wash it into a new and pure condition? 
All these motives and desires and evil impulses, 
the animal inspirations, what will put an end 
to them all, and make man what he was, the 
immaculate child of God, as Christ was, as all 
regenerated men were? Theological principle 
first, moral principle next; and in the third 
place the spiritual of the Brahmo-Somaj— 
devotions, repentance, prayer, praise, faith; 
throwing ourselves entirely and absolutely 
upon the spirit of God and upon his saving 
love. [This heathen philosopher sees to 
only a partial extent what sin is, as is indicated 
by his expression, "an immaculate child 
of God.. .as all regenerated men were." 
He does not see that even the holiest of the 
fallen race are far from being actually spotless, 



immaculate, perfect; hence that they all need 

the merit of Christ's perfection and sin sacrifice 

to justify them. He speaks of prayers, 

etc., and the mercy of God; but he has not yet 

learned that justice is the foundation underlying 

all of God's dealings; and that only 

through the merit of Christ's sacrifice can God 

be just, and yet the justifier of sinners believing 

into Christ, and thus covered by his 

great atonement for sin, made eighteen centuries 

ago,— once for all— to be testified to all 

in due time.-EDITOR.] 

"Moral aspirations do not mean holiness; 
a desire of being good does not mean to be 
good. The bullock that carries on his back 
hundredweights of sugar does not taste a 
grain of sweetness because of its unbearable 
load. And all our aspirations, and all our fine 
wishes, and all our fine dreams, and fine sermons, 
either hearing or speaking them— going 
to sleep over them or listening to them intently 
—these will never make a life perfect. Devotion 
only, prayer, direct perception of God's 
spirit, communion with him, absolute self-abasement 
before his majesty; devotional fervor, 
devotional excitement, spiritual absorption, 
living and moving in God— that is the 
secret of personal holiness. And in the third 
stage of our career, therefore, spiritual excitement, 
long devotions, intense fervor, contemplation, 
endless self abasement, not merely 
before God but before man, became the rule 
of our lives. God is unseen; it does not harm 
anybody or make him appear less respectable 
if he says to God: I am a sinner; forgive 
me.' But to make your confessions before 
man, to abase yourselves before your brothers 
and sisters, to take the dust off the feet of holy 
men, to feel that you are a miserable, wretched 
object in God's holy congregation— that requires 

R1592 : page 336 

a little self humiliation, a little moral 
courage. Our devotional life, therefore, is two-fold, 
bearing reverence and trust for God and 
reverence and trust for man, and in our infant 
and apostolical church we have, therefore, 
often immersed ourselves into spiritual practices 
which would seem absurd to you if I were 
to relate them in your hearing. 

"The last principle I have to take up is the 
progressiveness of the Brahmo-Somaj. Theology 
is good; moral resolutions are good; devotional 
fervor is good. The problem is, how 
shall we go on ever and ever in an onward way, 



in the upper path of progress and approach toward 
divine perfection? 

"Christianity declares the glory of God; 
Hindooism speaks about his infinite and eternal 
excellence: Mohammedanism, with fire 
and sword, proves the almightiness of his will; 
Buddhism says how joyful and peaceful he is. 
He is the God of all religions, of all denominations, 
of all lands, of all scriptures, and our 
progress lay in harmonizing these various systems, 
these various prophecies and developments 
into one great system. Hence the new 
system of religion in the Brahmo-Somaj is 
called the New Dispensation. The Christian 
speaks in terms of admiration of Christianity; 
so does the Hebrew of Judaism; so does the 
Mohammedan of the Koran; so does the Zoroastrian 
of the Zend-Avesta. The Christian admires 
his principles of spiritual culture; the 
Hindoo does the same; the Mohammedan does 
the same. 

"But the Brahmo-Somaj accepts and harmonizes 
all these precepts, systems, principles, 
teachings and disciplines and makes them into 
one system, and that is his religion. For a 
whole decade, my friend, Keshub Chunder 
Sen, myself and other apostles of the Brahmo-Somaj 
have traveled from village to village, 
from province to province, from continent to 
continent, declaring this new dispensation and 
the harmony of all religious prophecies and 
systems unto the glory of the one true, living 
God. But we are a subject race; we are uneducated; 
we are incapable; we have not the 
resources of money to get men to listen to our 
message. In the fulness of time you have 
called this august parliament of religions, and 
the message that we could not propagate you 
have taken into your hands to propagate. We 
have made that the gospel of our lives, the 
ideal of our being. 

"I do not come to the sessions of this parliament 
as a mere student, not as one who has 
to justify his own system. I come as a disciple, 
as a follower, as a brother. May your labors 
be blessed with prosperity, and not only 
shall your Christianity and your America be 
exalted, but the Brahmo-Somaj will feel most 
exalted; and this poor man who has come such 
a long distance to crave your sympathy and 
your kindness shall feel himself amply 
rewarded. 

"May the spread of the New Dispensation 
rest with you and make you our brothers and 
sisters. Representatives of all religions, may 
all your religions merge into the Fatherhood 



of God and the brotherhood of man, that 
Christ's prophecy may be fulfilled, the world's 
hope may be fulfilled, and mankind may become 
one kingdom with God, our Father." 

A VOICE FROM JAPAN. 

When Kinza Ringe M. Harai, the learned 
Japanese Buddhist, read his paper on "The 
Real Position of Japan Toward Christianity" 
the brows of some of the Christian missionaries 
on the platform contracted and their 
heads shook in disapproval. But the Buddhist 
directed his stinging rebukes at the false Christians 
who have done so much to impede the 
work of spreading the gospel in Japan. The 
paper follows: 

"There are very few countries in the world 
so misunderstood as Japan. Among the innumerable 
unfair judgments, the religious thought 
of my countrymen is especially misrepresented, 
and the whole nation is condemned as heathen. 
Be they heathen, pagan, or something else, it 
is a fact that from the beginning of our history 
Japan has received all teachings with open 
mind; and also that the instructions which 
came from outside have commingled with the 
native religion in entire harmony, as is seen 
by so many temples built in the name of truth 
with a mixed appellation of Buddhism and 
Shintoism: as is seen by the affinity among 
the teachers of Confucianism and Taoism, or 
other isms, and the Buddhists and Shinto priests; 
as is seen by the individual Japanese, who pays 
his other respects to all teachings mentioned 
above; as is seen by the peculiar construction 
of the Japanese houses, which have generally 
two rooms, one for a miniature Buddhist temple 
and the other for a small Shinto shrine, before 
which the family study the respective scriptures 
of the two religions. In reality Synthetic 
religion, or Entitsim, is the Japanese speciality, 
and I will not hesitate to call it Japanism. 

"But you will protest and say: 'Why, then, 
is Christianity not so warmly accepted by your 
nation as other religions?' This is the point 
which I wish especially to present before you. 

R1592: page 337 

There are two causes why Christianity is not 

so cordially received. This great religion was 

widely spread in our country, but in 1637 the 

Christian missionaries, combined with the converts, 

caused a tragic and bloody rebellion 

against the country, and it was understood that 



those missionaries intended to subjugate Japan 
to their own mother country. This shocked 
Japan, and it took the government of the Shogun 
a year to suppress this terrible and intrusive 
commotion. To those who accuse us that 
our mother country prohibited Christianity, 
not now, but in a past age, I will reply that it 
was not from religious or racial antipathy, but 
to prevent such another insurrection; and to 
protect our independence we were obliged to 
prohibit the promulgation of the gospels. 

"If our history had had no such record of 
foreign devastation under the disguise of religion, 
and if our people had had no hereditary 
horror and prejudice against the name of 
Christianity, it might have been eagerly embraced 
by the whole nation. But this incident 
has passed and we may forget it. Yet it 
is not entirely unreasonable that the terrified 
suspicion, or you may say superstition, that 
Christianity is the instrument of depredation, 
should have been avoidably or unavoidably 
aroused in the oriental mind, when it is an admitted 
fact that some of the powerful nations 
of Christendom are gradually encroaching upon 
the Orient, and when the following circumstance 
is daily impressed upon our mind, reviving 
a vivid memory of the past historical 
occurrence. The circumstance of which I am 
about to speak is the present experience of 
ourselves, to which I especially call the attention 
of this Parliament, and not only this 
Parliament, but also the whole of Christendom. 

"Since 1853, when Commodore Perry came 
to Japan as the ambassador of the President 
of the United States of America, our country 
began to be better known by all western nations 
and the new ports were widely opened 
and the prohibition of the gospels was abolished, 
as it was before the Christian rebellion. 
By the convention at Yeddo, now Tokio, in 
1858, the treaty was stipulated between America 
and Japan and also with the European 
powers. It was the time when our country 
was yet under the feudal government; and on 
account of our having been secluded for over 
two centuries since the Christian rebellion of 
1637, diplomacy was quite a new experience 
to the feudal officers, who put their full confidence 
upon western nations, and, without 
any alteration, accepted every article of the 
treaty presented from the foreign governments. 
According to the treaty we are in a very disadvantageous 
situation; and amongst the others 
there are two prominent articles, which deprive 
us of our rights and advantages. One is the 



exterritoriality of western nations in Japan, 
by which all cases in regard to right, whether 
of property or person, arising between the 
subjects of the western nations in my country 
as well as between them and the Japanese are 
subjected to the jurisdiction of the authorities 
of the western nations. Another regards the 
tariff, which, with the exception of 5 per cent 
ad valorem, we have no right to impose where 
it might properly be done. 

"It is also stipulated that either of the contracting 
parties to this treaty, on giving one 
year's previous notice to the other, may demand 
a revision thereof on or after the 1st of 
July, 1872. Therefore in 1871 our government 
demanded a revision, and since then we 
have been constantly requesting it, but foreign 
governments have simply ignored our requests, 
making many excuses. One part of the treaty 
between the United States of America and 
Japan concerning the tariff was annulled, for 
which we thank with sincere gratitude the 
kind-hearted American nation; but I am sorry 
to say that, as no European power has followed 
in the wake of America in this respect, our 
tariff right remains in the same condition as 
it was before. 

"We have no judicial power over the foreigners 
in Japan, and as a natural consequence 
we are receiving injuries, legal and moral, the 
accounts of which are seen constantly in our 
native newspapers. As the western people 
live far from us, they do not know the exact 
circumstances. Probably they hear now and 
then the reports from the missionaries and their 
friends in Japan. I do not deny that their 
reports are true; but if any person wants to 
obtain any unmistakable information in regard 
to his friend he ought to hear the opinions 
about him from many sides. If you closely 
examine with your unbiased mind what injuries 
we receive, you will be astonished. 
Among many kinds of wrongs there are some 
which were utterly unknown before and entirely 
new to us 'heathen,' none of whom 
would dare to speak of them even in private 
conversation. 

"One of the excuses offered by foreign nations 
is that our country is not yet civilized. 
Is it the principle of civilized law that the 
rights and profits of the so-called uncivilized 
or the weaker should be sacrificed? As I 
understand it, the spirit and the necessity of 
law is to protect the rights and welfare of the 

R1592: page 338 



weaker against the aggression of the stronger; 
but I have never learned in my shallow studies 
of law that the weaker should be sacrificed for 
the stronger. Another kind of apology comes 
from the religious source, and the claim is 
made that the Japanese are idolaters and 
heathen. Whether our people are idolaters or 
not you will know at once if you will investigate 
our religious views without prejudice from 
authentic Japanese sources. 

"But admitting, for the sake of argument, 
that we are idolaters and heathen, is it Christian 
morality to trample upon the rights and 
advantages of a non-christian nation, coloring 
all their natural happiness with the dark stain 
of injustice? I read in the Bible, 'Whosoever 
shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to 
him the other also;' but I cannot discover 
there any passage which says, 'Whosoever shall 
demand justice of thee smite his right cheek, 
and when he turns smite the other also.' Again, 
I read in the Bible, 'If any man will sue thee 
at law, and take away thy coat, let him have 
thy cloak also;' but I cannot discover there 
any passage which says, 'If thou shalt sue any 
man at the law, and take away his coat, let 
him give thee his cloak also.' 

"You send your missionaries to Japan, and 
they advise us to be moral and believe Christianity. 
We like to be moral, we know that 
Christianity is good, and we are very thankful 
for this kindness. But at the same time our 
people are rather perplexed and very much in 
doubt about this advice when we think that 
the treaty stipulated in the time of feudalism, 
when we were yet in our youth, is still clung to 
by the powerful nations of Christendom; when 
we find that every year a good many western 
vessels engaged in the seal fishery are smuggled 
into our seas; when legal cases are always decided 
by the foreign authorities in Japan unfavorably 
to us; when some years ago a Japanese 
was not allowed to enter a university on the 
Pacific coast of America because of his being 
of a different race; when a few months ago the 
school board in San Francisco enacted a regulation 
that no Japanese should be allowed to 
enter the public school there; when last year 
the Japanese were driven out in wholesale from 
one of the territories of the United States of 
America; when our business men in San Francisco 
were compelled by some union not to 
employ the Japanese assistants or laborers, but 
the Americans; when there are some in the 
same city who speak on the platforms against 



those of us who are already here; when there 
are many men who go in processions hoisting 
lanterns marked 'Jap must go;' when the Japanese 
in the Hawaiian islands are deprived of 
their suffrage; when we see some western people 
in Japan who erect before the entrance of 
their houses a special post upon which is the 
notice, 'No Japanese is allowed to enter here,' 
just like a board upon which is written, 'No 
dogs allowed;' when we are in such a situation 
is it unreasonable— notwithstanding the kindness 
of the western nations, from one point of 
view, who send their missionaries to us— for 
us intelligent 'heathen' to be embarrassed and 
hesitate to swallow the sweet and warm liquid 
of the heaven of Christianity? If such be the 
Christian ethics, well, we are perfectly satisfied 
to be heathen. 

"If any person should claim that there are 
many people in Japan who speak and write 
against Christianity, I am not a hypocrite and 
I will frankly state that I was the first in my 
country who ever publicly attacked Christianity- 
no, not real Christianity, but false Christianity, 
the wrongs done toward us by the people 
of Christendom. If any reprove the Japanese 
because they have had strong anti-Christian 
societies, I will honestly declare that I 
was the first in Japan who ever organized a society 
against Christianity— no, not against real 
Christianity, but to protect ourselves from false 
Christianity, and the injustice which we receive 
from the people of Christendom. Do 
not think that I took such a stand on account 
of my being a Buddhist, for this was my position 
many years before I entered the Buddhist 
Temple. But at the same time I will proudly 
state that if any one discussed the affinity of 
all religions before the public, under the title 
of Synthetic Religion, it was I. I say this to 
you because I do not wish to be understood as 
a bigoted Buddhist sectarian. 

"Really there is no sectarian in my country. 
Our people well know what abstract truth is in 
Christianity, and we, or at least I, do not care 
about the names if I speak from the point of 
teaching. Whether Buddhism is called Christianity 
or Christianity is named Buddhism, 
whether we are called Confucianists or Shintoists, 
we are not particular; but we are very 
particular about the truth taught and its consistent 
application. Whether Christ saves us or 
drives us into hell, whether Gautama Buddha 
was a real person or there never was such a 
man, it is not a matter of consideration to us, 
but the consistency of doctrine and conduct is 



the point on which we put the greater importance. 

Therefore unless the inconsistency which 

we observe is renounced, and especially the unjust 

treaty by which we are entailed is revised 

upon an equitable basis, our people will never 

R1592: page 339 

cast away their prejudice about Christianity, 
in spite of the eloquent orator who speaks its 
truth from the pulpit. We are very often 
called barbarians, and I have heard and read 
that Japanese are stubborn and cannot understand 
the truth of the Bible. I will admit that 
this is true in some sense, for, though they admire 
the eloquence of the orator and wonder 
at his courage, though they approve his logical 
argument, yet they are very stubborn and will 
not join Christianity as long as they think it is 
a western morality to preach one thing and 
practice another. 

"But I know this is not the morality of the 
civilized west, and I have the firm belief in 
the highest humanity and noblest generosity 
of the Occidental nations toward us. Especially 
as to the American nation, I know their 
sympathy and integrity. I know their sympathy 
by their emancipation of the colored people 
from slavery. I know their integrity by 
the patriotic spirit which established the independence 
of the United States of America. 
And I feel sure that the circumstances which 
made the American people declare independence 
are in some sense comparable to the present 
state of my country. I cannot refrain my 
thrilling emotion and sympathetic tears whenever 
I read the Declaration of Independence. 
You, citizens of this glorious, free United States, 
who struck when the right time came, struck 
for 'Liberty or Death;' you, who waded through 
blood that you might fasten to the mast your 
banner of the stripes and stars upon the land 
and sea; you, who enjoy the fruition of your 
Liberty through your struggle for it; you, I say, 
may understand somewhat our position, and, as 
you asked for justice from your mother country, 
we ask justice from these foreign powers. 

"If any religion teaches injustice to humanity, 
I will oppose it, as I ever have opposed it, 
with my blood and soul. I will be the bitterest 
dissenter from Christianity, or I will be the 
warmest admirer of its gospel. To the Promoters 
of the Parliament and the ladies and 
gentlemen of the world who are assembled here, 
I pronounce that your aim is the realization 
of the Religious Union, not nominally, but 



practically. We, the forty million souls of 
Japan, standing firmly and persistently upon 
the basis of international justice, await still 
further manifestations as to the morality of 
Christianity." 

A YOUNG MAN'S VOICE FROM THE ORIENT. 

A voice from the young men of the Orient 
was sounded by Herant M. Kiretchjian, of 
Constantinople, as follows:— 

"Brethren from the Sun-rising of all lands: 
—I stand here to represent the young men of 
the Orient, in particular from the land of the 
pyramids to the icefields of Siberia, and in 
general, from the shores of the Aegean to the 
waters of Japan. But on this wonderful platform 
of the Parliament of Religions, where I 
find myself with the sons of the Orient facing 
the American public, my first thought is to tell 
you that you have unwittingly called together 
a council of your creditors. We have not 
come to wind up your affairs, but to unwind 
your hearts. Turn to your books and see if 
our claim is not right. We have given you 
science, philosophy, theology, music and poetry, 
and have made history for you at tremendous 
expense. And moreover, out of the light 
that shone upon our lands from heaven, there 
have gone forth those who shall forever be 
your cloud of witnesses and your inspiration 
—saints, apostles, prophets, martyrs. And 
with that rich capital you have amassed a stupendous 
fortune, so that your assets hide away 
from your eyes your liabilities. We do not 
want to share your wealth, but it is right that 
we should have our dividend, and, as usual, it 
is a young man presents the vouchers. 

"You cannot pay this dividend with money. 
Your gold you want yourselves. Your silver 
has fallen from grace. We want you to give us 
a rich dividend in the full sympathy of your 
hearts. And, like the artisan who, judging by 
their weight, throws into his crucible nuggets 
of different shape and color, and, after fire and 
flux have done their work, pours it out and 
behold, it flows pure gold, so, having called 
together the children of men from the ends of 
the earth, and having them here before you 
in the crucible of earnest thought and honest 
search after truth, you find, when this parliament 
is over, that out of prejudice of race and 
dogma, and out of the variety of custom and 
worship, there flows out before your eyes nothing 
but the pure gold of humanity; and henceforth 
you think of us, not as strangers in foreign 



lands, but as your brothers, in China, and 
Japan and India, your sisters in the Isles of 
Greece and the hills and valleys of Armenia, 
you shall have paid us such a dividend out of 
your hearts and received yourselves withal such 
a blessing that this will be a Beulah land of 
prophecy for future times, and send forth the 
echo of that sweet song that once was heard 
in our land of "Peace on earth and good 
will to man." 

"There has been so much spoken to you 
here, by men of wisdom and experience of the 
religious life of the great east, that you would 

R1592: page 340 

not expect me to add anything thereto. Nor 
would I have stood here presuming to give you 
any more information about the religions of 
the world. But there is a new race of men 
that have risen up out of all the great past 
whose influence will undoubtedly be a most 
important factor in the work of humanity in 
the coming century. They are the result of all 
the past, coming in contact with the new life 
of the present— I mean the young men of the 
Orient: they who are preparing to take possession 
of the earth with their brothers of the 
great west. 

"I bring you a philosophy from the shores 
of the Bosphorus and a religion from the city 
of Constantine. All my firm convictions and 
deductions that have grown up within me for 
years past have, under the influence of this 
parliament, been shaken to their roots. But 
I find to-day those roots yet deeper in my 
heart and the branches reaching higher into 
the skies. I cannot presume to bring you anything 
new, but if all the deductions appear to 
you to be logical from premises which human 
intelligence can accept, then I feel confident 
that you will give us credit of honest purpose 
and allow us the right as intelligent beings to 
hold fast to that which I present before you. 

"When the young men of to-day were children, 
they heard and saw every day of their 
lives nothing but enmity and separation between 
men of different religions and nationalities. 
I need not stop to tell you of the influence 
of such a life upon the lives of young 
men who found themselves separated and in 
camps pitched for battle against their brother 
men with whom they had to come in contact 
in the daily avocations of life. And as the 
light of education and ideas of liberty began 
to spread over the whole Orient with the latter 



part of this century, this yoke became more 
galling upon the necks of the young men of 
the Orient and the burden too heavy to bear. 

"Young men of all the nationalities I have 
mentioned, who for the past thirty years have 
received their education in the universities of 
Paris, Heidelberg, Berlin, and other cities of 
Europe, as well as the Imperial Lyceum of Constantinople, 
have been consciously or unconsciously, 
passively or aggressively, weaving the 
fabric of their religion, so that to the thousand 
young men, for whom their voice is an 
oracle, it has come like a boon, and enlisted 
their heart and mind. 

"They find their brothers in large numbers 
in all the cities of the Orient where European 
civilization has found the least entrance, and 
there is scarcely any city that will not have 
felt their influence before the end of the century. 
Their religion is the newest of all 
religions, and I should not have brought it 
upon this platform were it not for the fact it 
is one of the most potent influences acting in 
the Orient and with which we religious young 
men of the east have to cope efficiently, if we 
are to have the least influence with the peoples 
of our respective lands. 

"For, remember, these are men of intelligence, 
men of excellent parts, men who, with 
all the young men of the Orient, have proved 
that in all arts and science, in the marts of the 
civilized world, in the armies of the nations 
and at the right hand of kings they are the 
equal of any race of men, from the rising of 
the sun to the setting thereof. They are men, 
moreover, for the most part, of the best intentions 
and the most sincere convictions, and, 
when you hear their opinion of religion and 
think of the position they hold, you cannot, I 
am sure, as members of the religious parliament, 
feel anything but the greatest concern 
for them and the lands in which they dwell. 

"I represent, personally, the religious young 
men of the Orient; but let me, by proxy, for 
the young men of the newest religion, speak 
before you to the apostles of all religions: 
'You come to us in the name of religion to 
bring to us what we already have. We believe 
that man is sufficient unto himself, if, as you 
say, a perfect God has created him. If you 
will let him alone he will be all that he should 
be. Educate him, train him, don't bind him 
hand and foot, and he will be a perfect man, 
worthy to be the brother of any other man. 
Nature has sufficiently endowed man, and you 
should use all that is given you in your intelligence 



before you trouble God to give you 

more. Moreover, no one has found God. 

We have all the inspiration we want in sweet 

poetry and enchanting music, and in the companionship 

of refined and cultured men and 

women. If we are to listen to it, we would like 

Handel to tell us of the Messiah, and if the 

heavens resound, it is enough to have Beethoven's 

interpretation. 

'"We have nothing against you, but really, 
as to all religions, we must say that you have 
done the greatest possible harm to humanity 
by raising men against men and nation against 
nation. And now to make a bad thing worse 
in this day of superlative common sense you 
come to fill the minds of men with impossible 
things and burden their brains with endless 
discussions of a thousand sects. For there are 
many I have heard before you and I know how 
many could follow. We consider you the one 

R1592: page 341 

of all men to be avoided, for your philosophy 
and your doctrines are breeding pessimism 
over the land.' 

"Then with a religious instinct and innate 
respect that all orientals have, I have to say 
suddenly: 'But, see here, we are not infidels 
or atheists or skeptics. We simply have no 
time for such things. We are full of the inspiration 
for the highest life, and desire freedom 
for all young men of the world. We have a 
religion that unites all men of all lands, and 
fills the earth with gladness. It supplies every 
human need, and, therefore, we know that it 
is the true religion, especially because it produces 
peace and the greatest harmony. So, we 
do not want any of your 'isms' nor any other 
system or doctrine. We are not materialists, 
socialists, rationalists or pessimists, and we are 
not idealists. Our religion is the first that 
was, and it is also the newest of the new— we 
are gentlemen. In the name of peace and humanity, 
can you not let us alone? If you invite 
us again in the name of religion, we shall 
have a previous engagement, and if you call 
again to preach, we are not at home.' 

"This is the oriental young man, like the 
green bay tree. And where one passes away, 
so that you do not find him in his place, there 
are twenty to fill the gap. Believe me, I have 
not exaggerated; for word for word, and ten 
times more than this, I have heard from intelligent 
men of the army and navy, men in commerce 
and men of the bars of justice in earnest 



conversation and deep argument, in the 
streets of Constantinople, in the boats of the 
Golden Horn and the Bosphorus, in Roumania 
and Bulgaria, as well as in Paris and New 
York and the Auditorium of Chicago, from 
Turk and Armenian, from Greek and Hebrew, 
as well as Bulgarian and Servian, and I can 
tell you that this newest substitute of religion, 
keeping the gates of commerce and literature, 
science and law, through Europe and the Orient, 
is a most potent force in shaping the destinies 
of the nations of the east, and has to be 
accounted for intelligently in thinking of the 
future of religion, and has to be met with an 
armament as powerful in the eyes of the young 
men of the Orient as that which science and 
literature have put in the hands of these men 
of the great army of the new gentlemen class. 
"There is another class of young men in the 
Orient who call themselves the religious young 
men and who hold to the ancient faith of their 
fathers. Allow me to claim for these young 
men, also, honesty of purpose, intelligence of 
mind, as well as a firm persuasion. For them 
also I come to speak to you, and in speaking 
for them I speak also for myself. You will 
naturally see that we have to be from earliest 
days in contact with the new religion; so let 
me call it for convenience. We have to be in 
colleges and universities with those same young 
men. We have to go hand in hand with them 
in all science and history, literature, music 
and poetry, and naturally with them we share 
in the firm belief in all scientific deduction 
and hold fast to every principle of human 
liberty. 

THE DIGNITY OF MAN. 

"First, all the young men of the Orient, 
who have the deepest religious convictions, 
stand for the dignity of man. I regret that I 
should have to commence here; but, out of 
the combined voices and arguments of philosophies 
and theologies, there comes before us 
such an unavoidable inference of an imperfect 
humanity that we have to come out before we 
can speak on any religion for ourselves and 
say: 'We believe that we are men.' For us it 
is a libel on humanity, and an impeachment 
of the God who created man, to say that man 
is not sufficient within himself, and that he 
needs religion to come and make him perfect. 

[Note how the natural man accuses and excuses 
himself in the same breath. Imperfection 
cannot be denied; but power to make ourselves 



perfect in time is claimed, and thus the 

necessity for "the precious blood" of the "sin-offering 

which God has provided, is ignored 

by the heathen as it is now being denied by the 

worldly-wise of Christendom.— EDITOR.] 

"It is libeling humanity to look upon this or 
that family of man and to say that they show 
conceptions of goodness and truth and high 
ideals and a life above simple animal desires, 
because they have had religious teaching by 
this or that man, or a revelation from heaven. 
We believe that if man is man he has it all in 
himself, just as he has all his bodily capacities. 
Will you tell me that a cauliflower that I plant 
in the fields grows up in beauty and perfection 
of its convolutions, and that my brain, which 
the same God has created a hundred thousand 
times more delicate and perfect, cannot develop 
its convolutions and do the work that 
God intended I should do and have the highest 
conceptions that he intended I should have; 
that a helpless pollywog will develop, and become 
a frog with perfect, elastic limbs and a 
heaving chest, and that frogs will keep together 
in contentment and croak in unity, and 
that men need religion and help from outside 
in order that they may develop into the perfection 

R1592: page 342 

of men in body and soul and recognize the 
brotherhood of man and live upon God's earth 
in peace? I say it is an impeachment of God, 
who created man, to promulgate and acquiesce 
in any such doctrine. 

"Nor do we accept the unwarranted conclusions 
of science. We have nothing to do 
with the monkeys. If they want to speak to 
us they will have to come up to us. There is 
a western spirit of creating difficulties which we 
cannot understand. One of my first experiences 
in the United States was taking part in a meeting 
of young ladies and gentlemen in the City 
of Philadelphia for a quiet evening, of which 
there are quite a number there. The subject 
of the evening was whether animals had souls, 
and the cat came out prominently. Very serious 
and erudite papers were read. But the 
conclusion was that, not knowing just what a 
cat is and what a soul is, they could not decide 
the matter, but still was it a serious matter 
bearing upon religion. Now suppose an Armenian 
girl should ask her mother if cats had 
souls. She would settle the question in parenthesis 
and say, for example: 'My sweet one, 
you must go down and see if the water is boiling 



(What put the question into your head? 
Of course cats have souls. Cats have cats' souls 
and men have men's souls.) Now go down.' 
And the child would go down rejoicing in her 
humanity. And if my Armenian lady should 
one day be confronted with the missing link 
of which we hear so much, still her equanimity 
would remain unperturbed and she would 
still glory in her humanity by informing you 
that the missing link had the soul of a missing 
link and man had the soul of a man. 

"So far we come with the young men of the 
gentlemen class, hand in hand, upon the common 
plane of humanity. But here is a corner 
where we part, and take widely diverging paths. 
We cry, 'Let us alone, and we will expand and 
rise up to the height of our destiny;' and, behold, 
we find an invisible power that will not 
let us alone. We find that we can do almost 
everything in the ways of science and art. But 
when it comes to following our conception of 
that which is high and noble, that which is 
right and necessary for our development, 
we are wanting in strength and power to advance 
toward it. I put this in the simplest 
form, for I cannot enlarge upon it here. But 
the fact for us is as real as that of the dignity 
of man, that there is a power which diverts 
men and women from the path of rectitude and 
honor, in which they know they must walk. 
You cannot say it is inherent in man, for we 
feel it does not belong to us. And if it did 
not belong to us, and it was the right conception 
of man to go down into degradation and 
misery, rapacity, and the desire of crushing 
down his fellow man, we would say, 'Let him 
alone, and let him do that which God meant 
that he should do.' 

"So, briefly, I say to anyone here who is 
preparing to boil down his creed, put this in 
it before you reach the boiling point: And I 
believe in the devil, the arch-enemy of God, 
the accuser of God to man.' One devil for 
the whole universe? We care not. A legion 
of demons besieging each soul? It matters 
not to us. We know this; that there is a 
power outside of man which draws him aside 
mightily. And no power on earth can resist it. 

"And so, here comes our religion. If you 
have a religion to bring to the young men of 
the Orient, it must come with a power that 
will balance, yea, counterbalance the power of 
evil in the world. Then will man be free to 
grow up and be that which God intended he 
should be. We want God. We want the spirit 
of God. And the religion that comes to us in 



any name or form, must bring that, or else, for 
us, it is no religion. And we believe in God, 
not the God of protoplasms, that hides between 
molecules of matter, but God whose 
children we are. 

"So we place as the third item of our philosophy 
and protest the dignity of God. Is chivalry 
dead? Has all conception of a high and 
noble life, of sterling integrity, departed from 
the hearts of men that we cannot aspire to 
knighthood and princeship in the courts of our 
God? We know we are his children, for we 
are doing his works and thinking his thoughts. 
What we want to do is to be like him. Oh, is 
it true that I can cross land and sea and reach 
the heart of my mother, and feel her arms clasping 
me, but that I, a child of God, standing 
helpless in the universe, against a power that I 
cannot overcome, cannot lift up my hands to 
him, and cry to him, that I may have his spirit 
in my soul and feel his everlasting arms supporting 
me in my weakness? 

"And here comes the preacher from ancient 
days, and the modern church, and tells us of 
one who did overcome the world, and that 
he came down from above. We need not to be 
told that he came from above, for no man born 
of woman did any such thing. But we are persuaded 
that by the means of grace and the 
path which he shows us to walk in, the spirit 
of God does come into the hearts of men, and 
that I can feel it in my heart fighting with me 
against sin and strengthening my heart to hold 
resolutely to that which I know to be right by 

R1592: page 343 

the divine in me. We do not know whether 
the spirit of God proceedeth from the Father 
or from the Son, but we know that it proceedeth 
into the heart of man and that sufficeth 
unto us. 

"And so with a trembling hand but firm 
conviction, with much sadness with humanity, 
but joy of eternal triumph, I come with you all 
to the golden gates of the twentieth century, 
where the elders of the coming commonwealth 
of humanity are sitting to pass judgment upon 
the religion that shall enter those gates to the 
support of the human heart. I place there by 
the side of ancient Oriental Confucianism and 
modern theosophy, ancient Oriental Buddhism 
and modern spiritualism, and every faith of ancient 
days and modern materialism, rationalism 
and idealism— there I place ancient Oriental 
Christianity with its Christ, the power of God 



and the wisdom of God, and its cross, still radiant 
in the love of God, 

"'Towering o'er the wrecks of time.'" 

The thoughtful observer cannot read the 
noble sentiments of some of these who are feeling 
after God and aspiring toward righteousness, 
without marking the contrast between 
their serious sincerity and their noble purpose 
and effort to lift up before their fellow-men 
the highest standards of righteousness they can 
discern, and the compromising attitude of so 
many Christians who have been more highly 
favored by birth and environment with a knowledge 
of the truth, who are now anxious to sell 
it at the immense sacrifice of its noble principles, 
merely to gain the present popular favor. 
To whom much has been given much will be 
required by the Lord, who is now weighing 
them all in the balances. 

But while a few of the foreign representatives 
call out our admiration and respect, the great 
majority of them were rejoicing in their privilege 
of parading and recommending their 
superstitions to such a representative assembly 
of the civilized and enlightened nations. Buddhism, 
Shintoism, Brahminism, Confucianism 
and Mohammedanism were repeatedly set forth 
with great boldness, and the Mohammedan 
apostle even had the audacity to recommend 
polygamy. This was almost too much for the 
audience, but their manifestations of disapproval 
were quickly silenced by the chairman, 
Dr. Barrows, who reminded them of the object 
of the Parliament— to give all a fair hearing 
without dispute. So all had an abundant 
hearing and freely argued their points before 
the already unsettled minds of thousands of 
professed Christians, and they have had much 
reason to expect converts to their religions 
here in America. The same privileges were 
also enjoyed by many of the anti-christian 
movements, such as Christian Science, Theosophy, 
Swedenborgianism, etc. 

CLOSING SENTIMENTS OF THE GREAT 
PARLIAMENT. 



As to the probable outcome of this great convocation, 
which has already made Babylon's 
confusion worse confounded, we may judge 
somewhat by the farewell remarks of the different 
representatives on the last evening of the 
Parliament, from which we quote a few brief 
extracts. 



Suamie Vive Kananda (priest of Bombay, 
India) said:— 

"Much has been said of the common ground 
of religious unity. I am not going just now to 
venture my own theory; but if any one here 
hopes that this unity would come by the triumph 
of any one of these religions and the destruction 
of the others, to him I say, Brother, 
yours is an impossible hope. Do I wish that 
the Christian would become Hindoo? God 
forbid. Do I wish that the Hindoo or Buddhist 
would become Christian? God forbid. 
The Christian is not to become a Hindoo or a 
Buddhist, nor a Hindoo or a Buddhist to become 
a Christian. Learn to think without prejudice. 
...If theology and dogma stand in 
your way in the search of truth, put them aside. 
Be earnest, and work out your own salvation 
with diligence, and the fruits of holiness will 
be yours." 

Vichand Ghandi (Jainist of India) said:— 

"If you will permit a 'heathen' to deliver 
his message of peace and love, I shall only ask 
you to look at the multifarious ideas presented 
to you, in a liberal spirit, and not with superstition 
and bigotry. ...I entreat you to examine 
the various religious systems from all 
standpoints." 

The Right Rev. Shabita, high priest of the 
Shinto religion in Japan, said:— 

"What I wish to do is to assist you in 
carrying out the plan of forming the universal 
brotherhood under the one roof of truth. You 
know unity is power. [But not when God is 

R1592: page 344 

on the opposite side of such union. See Isa. 8:9.] 
Now I pray that the eight million deities 
protecting the beautiful cherry tree country 
of Japan may protect you and your government 
forever, and with this I bid you good-by." 

H. Dharmapala of Ceylon said:— 

"I, on behalf of four hundred and seventy-five 
millions of my co-religionists, followers of 
the gentle Lord Buddha Gautauma, tender my 
affectionate regards to you.... You have 
learned from your brothers of the far east their 
presentation of the respective religious systems 
they follow;. ..you have listened with commendable 
patience to the teachings of the all-merciful 
Buddha through his humble followers." 

Bishop Keane (Roman Catholic) said:— 

"When the invitation to this parliament 
was sent to the old Catholic church, people said, 
'Will she come?' And the old Catholic church 



said, 'Who has as good a right to come to a 
parliament of all the religions of the world as 
the old Catholic universal church?'. ..Even 
if she has to stand alone on that platform she 
will stand on it. And the old church has 
come and is rejoiced to meet her fellow-men, 
her fellow-believers, her fellow-lovers of every 
shade of humanity and every shade of creed, 
been planted here a seed that will grow to 
union wide and perfect. If it were not better 
for us to be one than to be divided, our Lord 
would not have prayed that we might all be 
one as he and the Father are one." [But they 
are not praying for such a union as exists between 
the Father and the Son: the proposed 
union is a vastly different one.] 

The sentiments thus expressed found fullest 
acceptance in the Parliament from Protestant 
representatives. Thus, for instance, Rev. Dr. 
Candlin, missionary to China, said:— 

"The conventional idea of religion which 
obtains among Christians the world over is 
that Christianity is true, all other religions false; 
that Christianity is of God, while other religions 
are of the devil; or else, with a little spice 
of moderation, that Christianity is a revelation 
from heaven, while other religions are manufactures 
of men. You know better [mark that], 
and with clear light and strong assurance can 
testify that there may be friendship instead of 
antagonism between religion and religion, that 
so surely as God is our common father, our 
hearts alike have yearned for him and our souls 
in devoutest moods have caught whispers of 
grace dropped from his throne. Then this is 
Pentecost, and behind is the conversion of the 
world." 

The Rev. Dr. Bristol, of the Methodist 
church, said:— 

"Infinite good and only good will come 
from this parliament. To all who have come 
from afar we are profoundly and eternally indebted. 
Some of them represent civilization 
that was old when Romulus was founding 
Rome; whose philosophies and songs were ripe 
in wisdom and rich in rhythm before Homer 
sang his Iliads to the Greeks; and they have 
enlarged our ideas of our common humanity. 
They have brought to us fragrant flowers from 
the gardens of eastern faiths, rich gems from 
the old mines of great philosophies, and we 
are richer to-night from their contributions of 
thought and particularly from our contact with 
them in spirit. 

"Never was there such a bright and hopeful 
day for our common humanity along the 



lines of tolerance and universal brotherhood. 

And we shall find that by the words that these 

visitors have brought to us and by the influence 

they have exerted they will be richly 

rewarded in the consciousness of having contributed 

to the mighty movement which holds 

in itself the promise of one faith, one Lord, 

one Father, one brotherhood. 

"The blessings of our God and our Father 
be with you, brethren from the east; the 
blessings of our Savior, our elder brother, the 
teacher of the brotherhood of man, be with 
you and your peoples forever." 

Rev. Augusta Chapin said:— 

"We who welcomed now speed the parting 
guests. We are glad you came, O wise men 
of the east. With your wise words, your large 
toleration and your gentle ways we have been 
glad to sit at your feet and learn of you in these 
things. We are glad to have seen you face to 
face, and we shall count you henceforth more 
than ever our friends and coworkers in the 
great things of religion. 

And we are glad, now that you are going to 
your far away homes, to tell the story of all 
that has been said and done here in this great 
parliament, and that you will thus bring the 
Orient into nearer relations with the Occident, 
and make plain the sympathy which exists 
among all religions. We are glad for the 
words that have been spoken by the wise men 
and women of the west, who have come and 
have given us their grains of gold after the 
washing. What I said in the beginning I will 
repeat now at the ending of this parliament. 
It has been the greatest gathering in the name 
of religion ever held on the face of this earth." 

Rev. Jenkin Lloyd Jones said: 

"I bid you, the parting guests, the godspeed 

R1592 : page 345 

that comes out of a soul that is glad to recognize 
its kinship with all lands and with all religions; 
and when you go, you go leaving behind 
you in our hearts not only more hospitable 
thoughts for the faiths you represent but 
also warm and loving ties that bind you into 
the union that will be our joy and our life 
forevermore." 
Dr. Barrows (chairman) said:— 
"Our hopes have been more than realized. 
The sentiment which has inspired this parliament 
has held us together. The principles in 
accord with which this historic convention has 
proceeded have been put to the test, and even 



strained at times, but they have not been inadequate. 

Toleration, brotherly kindness, 

trust in each other's sincerity, a candid and 

earnest seeking after the unities of religion, 

the honest purpose of each to set forth his own 

faith without compromise and without unfriendly 

criticism— these principles, thanks to 

your loyalty and courage, have not been found 

wanting. 

"Men of Asia and Europe, we have been 
made glad by your coming, and have been 
made wiser. I am happy that you have enjoyed 
our hospitalities," etc. 

The remarks of President Bonney were very 
similar; and then, with a prayer by a Jewish 
rabbi and a benediction by a Roman Catholic 
bishop, the great Parliament came to a close; 
and five thousand voices joined in repeating 
the angel's message of "Peace on earth and 
good will towards men." 

THE OUTLOOK. 



But Oh! at what sacrifice of principles and 
truth, and of loyalty to God, is such an announcement 
made to the world; and that, too, 
on the very threshold of a divinely predicted 
time of trouble such as never was since there 
was a nation, a trouble which all thinking 
people begin to realize, and the crisis and outcome 
of which they greatly fear. And it is 
this fear that is driving this heterogeneous mass 
together for mutual protection and co-operation. 
It is merely a stroke of human policy 
to try to quiet the fears of the world by crying, 
Peace! Peace! when there is no peace. 
(Jer. 6:14.) The time is coming when the 
Lord himself will speak peace unto the heathen 
(Zech. 9:10); but it will not be until he has 
first made known his presence in the whirlwind 
of revolution and in the storm of trouble. 
-Nah. 1:3. 

Those who are posted in history know something 
of the character of that great antichristian 
power with which affiliation is so earnestly 
sought— the church of Rome; and those who 
are keeping open eyes on her present operations 
know that her heart and character are 
still unchanged. And only recently tidings 
came from southern Russia of fierce persecution, 
not only of Jews, but also of Christians 
who are awakening from the blindness and 
superstition of the Greek church and who are 
seeking and finding God and the truth through 



the study of his Word. The persecution incited 

by the priests and the police are of the 

most cruel and revolting nature. But, nevertheless, 

union and co-operation with both these 

systems is most earnestly sought, as also with 

all the forms of heathen superstition and 

ignorance. 

Of the gross darkness of heathenism with 
which co-operation and sympathy is even now 
craved by Christians, we may gain some idea 
from the following indignant retort of Dr. 
Pentecost against the critical tone which some 
of the foreigners assumed toward Christianity 
and Christian missions. He said:— 

"I think it is a pity that anything should 
tend to degenerate the discussions of this parliament 
into a series of criminations and recriminations; 
nevertheless, we Christians have 
been sitting patiently and listening to a series 
of criticisms upon the results of Christianity 
from certain representatives of the eastern religions. 
For instance, the slums of Chicago 
and New York, the nameless wickednesses palpable 
to the eye even of the strangers who are 
our guests; the licentiousness, the drunkenness, 
the brawls, the murders, and the crimes of the 
criminal classes have been scored up against us. 
The shortcomings of Congress and government 
both in England and America have been 
charged to Christianity. The opium trade, the 
rum traffic, the breach of treaties, the inhuman 
and barbarous laws against the Chinaman, etc., 
have all been charged upon the Christian 
church. [Aye, but if Christians claim that 
these are Christian nations, can they reasonably 
blame these heathen representatives for 
thinking and judging them accordingly?— 
EDITOR.] 

"Now it seems almost needless to say that 
all these things, the immoralities, drunkenness, 
crimes, unbrotherliness, and selfish greed of 
these various destructive traffics which have 
been carried from our countries to the Orient, 
lie outside the pale of Christianity. The Church 
of Christ is laboring night and day to correct 
and abolish these crimes. The unanimous 
voice of the Christian Church condemns the 
opium traffic, the liquor traffic, the Chinese 

R1592: page 346 

acts of oppression, and all forms of vice and 
greed of which our friends from the East 
complain. 

"We are willing to be criticised; but when 
I recall the fact that these criticisms are in 



part from gentlemen who represent a system 
of religion whose temples, manned by the 
highest castes of Brahmanical priesthood, are 
the authorized and appointed cloisters of a 
system of immorality and debauchery the parallel 
of which is not known in any Western 
country, I feel that silence gives consent. I 
could take you to ten thousand temples, more 
or less— more rather than less— in every part 
of India, to which are attached from two to 
four hundred priestesses, whose lives are not 
all they should be. 

"I have seen this with my own eyes, and 
nobody denies it in India. If you talk to the 
Brahmans about it, they will say it is a part of 
their system for the common people. Bear in 
mind this system is the authorized institution 
of the Hindoo religion. One needs only to 
look at the abominable carvings upon the 
temples, both of the Hindoos and Buddhists, 
the hideous symbols of the ancient Phallic 
systems, which are the most popular objects 
worshiped in India, to be impressed with the 
corruption of the religion. Bear in mind, these 
are not only tolerated but instituted, directed, 
and controlled by the priests of religion. Only 
the shameless paintings and portraiture of ancient 
Pompeii equal in obscenity the things 
that are openly seen in and about the entrance 
to the temples of India. 

"It seems a little hard that we should bear 
the criticism which these representatives of 
Hindooism make upon the Godless portion of 
Western countries, when they are living in such 
enormous glass houses as these, every one of 
them erected, protected and defended by the 
leaders of their own religion. 

"We have heard a good deal about the 
'fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of 
man,' as being one of the essential doctrines 
of the religions of the East. As a matter of 
fact, I have never been able to find— and I 
have challenged the production of them all 
over India— a single text in any of the Hindoo 
sacred literature that justifies or even suggests 
the doctrine of the 'fatherhood of God and 
the brotherhood of man.' This is a pure plagiarism 
from Christianity. We rejoice that they 
have adopted and incorporated it. How can a 
Brahman, who looks upon all low-caste men, 
and especially upon the poor pariahs, with a 
spirit of loathing, and regards them as a different 
order of beings, sprung from monkeys and 
devils, presume to tell us that he believes in the 
fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man? 
If a Brahman believes in the brotherhood of 



man, why will he refuse the social amenities 
and common hospitalities to men of other castes, 
as well as to his Western brethren, whom he so 
beautifully enfolds in the condescending arms 
of his newly found doctrine of the fatherhood 
of God and the brotherhood of man? 

"If there is any brotherhood of man in India 
the most careless observer need not hesitate 
to say that there is no sisterhood recognized 
by them. Let the nameless horrors of 
which the Hindoo women of India are the subjects 
answer to this statement. 

"Until the English government put down 
with a strong hand the ancient religious Hindoo 
institution of Sutte, hundreds of Hindoo 
widows every year gladly flew to the funeral 
pyres of their dead husbands, thus embracing 
the flames that burned their bodies rather than 
deliver themselves to the nameless horrors and 
living hell of Hindoo widowhood. Let our 
Hindoo friends tell us what their religion has 
done for the Hindoo widow, and especially 
the child widow, with her head shaved like a 
criminal, stripped of her ornaments, clothed 
in rags, reduced to a position of slavery worse 
than we can conceive, made the common 
drudge and scavenger of the family, and not 
infrequently put to even worse and nameless 
uses. To this state and condition the poor 
widow is reduced under the sanction of Hindooism. 
Only two years ago the British government 
was appealed to pass a new and 
stringent law 'raising the age of consent' to 
twelve years, at which it was lawful for the 
Hindoo to consummate the marriage relation 
with his child wife. The Christian hospitals, 
filled with abused little girls barely out of their 
babyhood, became so outrageous a fact that 
the government had to step in and stop these 
crimes, which were perpetrated in the name of 
religion. So great was the excitement in India 
over this that it was feared that a religious revolution 
which would almost lead to a new 
mutiny was imminent. 

"We have been criticised by our Oriental 
friends forjudging with an ignorant and prejudiced 
judgment, because at a recent challenge 
in the early part of this parliament only 
five persons were able to say that they had read 
the Bible of Buddha; so it was taken for 
granted that our judgment was ignorant and 
unjust. The same challenge might have been 
made in Burmah or Ceylon, and outside of the 
priesthood it is almost fair to say that not so 
many would have been able to say they had 



R1592 : page 347 

read their own scriptures. The Badas of the 
Hindoos are objects of worship. None but a 
Brahman may teach, much less read them. Before 
the Christian missionary went to India, 
the Sanskrit was practically a dead language. 
If the Indian Scriptures have at last been translated 
into the vernacular or given to the Western 
nations, it is because the Christian missionary 
and Western scholars have rediscovered 
them, unearthed them, translated them, and 
brought them forth to the light of day. The 
amount of the Sanskrit Scriptures known by 
the ordinary Indian who has secured a Western 
education is only those portions which have 
been translated into English or the vernacular 
by European or Western scholars. The common 
people, ninety-nine one-hundredths of all, 
know only tradition. Let us contrast this dead 
exclusiveness on the part of these Indian religions 
with the fact that the Christian has translated 
his Bible into more than three hundred 
languages and dialects, and has sent it broadcast 
by hundreds of millions among all the nations 
and tongues and peoples of the earth. 
We court the light, but it would seem that the 
Bibles of the East love the darkness rather than 
light, because they will not bear the light of 
universal publication. 

"The new and better Hindooism of to-day 
is a development under the influence of a Christian 
environment, but it has not yet attained 
to that ethical standard which gives it right to 
read the Christian Church a lesson in morals. 
Until India purges her temples of worse than 
Augean filth, and her pundits and priests disown 
and denounce the awful acts and deeds 
done in the name of religion, let her be modest 
in proclaiming morals to other nations and 
people." 

RESULTS OF THE GREAT PARLIAMENT. 



Viewed from its own standpoint, the Parliament 
was pronounced a grand success, and 
the unthinking world responds, Amen! and 
America, and especially Chicago, and President 
Bonney and Chairman Dr. Barrows come 
in for a large share of the honors of the occasion 
so great in the eyes of men. It is looked 
upon by them as the harbinger of universal 
peace. The whole world is to be bound up 
in one universal bond of religious unity and 



brotherhood, and yet all are to think and act 
and grope along in the darkness of ignorance 
and superstition just as they have always done, 
refusing "the light that shines in the face of 
Jesus Christ," which is the only true light. 
And Christians are rejoicing in this prospect, 
and hailing such an event as the most glorious 
event in history; and they are promising the 
world a universal and everlasting peace on 
this hypothesis; and they think they can bring 
about arbitration instead of war for the settlement 
of national disputes. 

To accomplish this it was even proposed and 
argued at the Congress that the Pope of Rome 
is the most suitable person in the world to be 
the arbitrator of nations. 

But while the general impression created by 
the great Parliament is that it is the first step, 
and a long one, towards a realization of the 
angel's message at the birth of Christ, of peace 
on earth and good will toward men, we view 
it far otherwise— as another manifestation of 
the faithlessness of Christendom. Surely, as 
saith the prophet, "The wisdom of their wise 
men shall perish, and the understanding of 
their prudent men shall be hid." (Isa. 29:14.) 
And again we hear him say, "Associate yourselves, 
O ye people, and ye shall be broken in 
pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: 
gird yourselves and ye shall be broken in 
pieces. Take counsel together and it shall 
come to naught; speak the word and it shall 
not stand. "-Isa. 8:9,10. 

With the Psalmist we would again propound 
the question, "Why do the people imagine a 
vain thing?— Why do they cry, Peace! Peace! 
when there is no peace? The kings of the 
earth [civil and ecclesiastical] set themselves, 
and the rulers take counsel together, against 
the Lord and against his Anointed, saying, Let 
us break their bands asunder and cast away 
their cords from us. He that sitteth in the 
heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them 
in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in 
his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure," 
and the great time of trouble will come. 
-Psa. 2:1-5. 

When God's chosen people— spiritual Israel 
now, like fleshly Israel anciently— abandon 
his Word and his leading, and seek to ally 
themselves with the nations that know not God, 
and to blend divine truth with the world's 
philosophies, they take such steps at a peril 
which they do not realize; and they would do 
well indeed to mark God's recompenses to his 
ancient people, and take warning. 



Several very unfavorable results are, we 
think, clearly discernible:— 

(1) It has introduced to the already unsettled 
minds of Christians the various heathen 
philosophies, and that in their most favorable 
aspects, and doubtless the impression already 
made upon many minds is that there are no 
religious certainties. Such a condition was 
even hinted at by one of the delegates from 

R1592: page 348 

Syria— Christophore Jibara. He said:— 

"My Brothers and Sisters in the worship of 
God:— All the religions now in this general 
and religious congress are parallel to each 
other in the sight of the whole world. Every 
one of these religions has supporters who realize 
and prefer their own to other religions, and 
they might bring some arguments or reasons 
to convince others of the value and truth of 
their own form of religion. From such discussions 
a change may come: perhaps even 
doubts about all religions; or a supposition 
that all of them are identical faiths. And, 
therefore, the esteem of every religion may fall 
or decrease; doubt may be produced against 
all the inspired books, or a general neglect 
may happen, and no one will remain to hold a 
certain religion, and many may entirely neglect 
the duties of religion, for the reason of 
restlessness in their hearts and the opinion 
which prevails in one form of religion, just as 
is going on among many millions in Europe 
and America. Therefore, I think that a committee 
should be selected from the great religions, 
to investigate the dogmas and to make a 
full and perfect comparison, approving the true 
one, and announcing it to the people." 

(2) It has made special friendship between 
Babylon the great, the mother of harlots (the 
church of Rome), and her many daughters 

(the various Protestant sects), who glory in their 
shame, and are proud to own the relationship, 
all unmindful of the disreputable character 
ascribed to her in the divine revelation and 
abundantly verified in her history even to the 
present day. 

(3) It has taken a long step, which will 
doubtless be followed by others— already proposed 
—towards the affiliation, in some sense, 

of all religions; toward a yet closer union of 
the church (nominal) and the world. It was 
publicly announced by the President at the 
last session of the Parliament that "a proclamation 
of fraternity will be issued to promote 



the continuation in all parts of the world of 
the great work in which the congresses of 1893 
have been engaged." 

(4) It has practically said to the heathen 
that there is really no necessity for Christian 
missions; that Christians are themselves uncertain 
of their religion; that their own religions 

are good enough, if followed sincerely; 

and that Christianity, to say the least, can 

only be received with a large measure of incredulity. 

It is a cause of astonishment to 

note how the heathen representatives have 

measured nominal Christianity; how clearly 

they have made distinctions between the Christianity 

of "Christendom," and the Christianity 

of the Bible; and how keenly their rebukes 

were often administered. 

(5) It has said to distracted Christendom, 
Peace! Peace! when there is no peace, instead 
of sounding an alarm, as saith the Prophet 
(Joel 2:1): "Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and 
sound an alarm in my holy mountain;... 

for the day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at 
hand," and calling upon all to humble themselves 
under the mighty hand of God. 

(6) It was evidently a measure of policy, originating 
in the fears of the leaders in "Christendom," 

as they discerned the approaching 
trouble of this day of the Lord. Mark! it had 
its beginning in the distracted and perplexed 
Presbyterian church. The cry of Peace! Peace! 
in the very midst of the rising storm of this 
day of the Lord, reminds us of the prophecy— 
"When they shall say, Peace and safety, then 
sudden destruction cometh upon them."— 
1 Thes. 5:3. 

Let not the children of God be deluded by 
Babylon's false prognostications. In God only 
can we find a safe retreat. (Psa. 91.) Let us 
rally closer round the cross of Christ, which 
is our only hope. Let the universal brotherhood 
of false religions and apostate Christianity 
prove the value of that relationship; but 
let us recognize only the brotherhood in Christ 
—the brotherhood of all who trust in him alone 
for salvation, through faith in his precious 
blood. Other men are not children of God, 
and will not be until they come unto him by 
faith in Christ as their Redeemer, their substitute. 
They are the "children of wrath," even 
as were we before we came into Christ (Eph. 2:3); 
and some are the children of the wicked 
one, whose works they do. When God condemned 
Adam and his posterity to death, on 
account of sin, he no longer owned and treated 
them as sons. And only as men come into 



Christ by faith in his precious blood are they 
reinstated in that blessed relationship to God. 
Consequently, if we are no longer the children 
of wrath, but are owned of God as his sons 
through Christ, other men, not so recognized 
of God, are not in any sense our brethren. 

Several propositions have already been publicly 
made for another similar world's congress, 
to convene in the year 1900; and New York, 
Jerusalem and Benares, India, have been suggested 
as suitable places. A great "Eucharistic 
Congress" was held in May under the direction 
of Roman Catholics, the object of which 
seemed to be to advance the cause of union 
between the various branches of the Catholic 
church, particularly the largest two bodies, 

R1592 : page 349 

the Greek and Roman branches. 

Let all the children of light watch and be 
sober (1 Thes. 5:5,6); let the soldiers of the 
cross be valiant for the truth, and receive no 
other gospel, though it be declared by an angel 
from heaven (Gal. 1:8); and let them consummate 
no union with any class save the 
"little flock" of consecrated and faithful followers 

R1593 : page 349 

of the Lamb of God, which taketh away 
the sin of the world. 



R1593 : page 349 

NOMINAL CHURCH PECULIARITIES. 



CANTON, Ohio, has some peculiar people. A 
Congregational Church there, after getting 
behind financially, decided by a vote— in which 
the pastor joined— that they would unite with 
any denomination that would purchase their 
meeting house. The Methodists were their 
purchasers— purchasing people and pastor as 
well as real estate— and now it is a Methodist 
Episcopal church; and the minister has been 
installed a M.E. Church pastor at Zanesville, O. 
How evident that principles and doctrines have 
perished with the masses of Protestants! 

Following the example of his Baptist fellow-minister 
of Long Island City, who gave the 
use of his church to the Catholics of that city 



after their own building had been burned, the 
Rev. Mr. Preyer, of the Knox Presbyterian 
Church, of Harrison, N.J., has offered the use 
of his church to the Catholics who are about 
to organize a church in the town. Father 
Kernan, the priest, who is in charge of the 
organization, has declined the offer with thanks, 
as he had made other arrangements before the 
offer was made. —New York Tribune. 



page 349 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1593 : page 349 

THE GRACE OF LIBERALITY. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VII., NOV. 12, 2 COR. 8:1-12. 

Golden Text— "He became poor, that we through his 
poverty might be rich."— 2 Cor. 8:9. 

At the council held by the apostles at 
Jerusalem, A.D. 50, which determined that 
the Jewish law was not binding upon those 
converts to Christianity, from among the 
Gentiles, Paul promised to take up collections 
among the congregations of the Gentiles 
for the poor at Jerusalem. He had already 
taken collections in Macedonia and Greece 
and Asia Minor; and in the words of this 
lesson he appeals to the Church at Corinth. 

There was great need for such a collection. 
(1) The converts to Christianity were mostly 
from the poorer classes. (2) The turbulent 
state of the times had driven many 
people from the surrounding country into 
the City of Jerusalem for greater security, 
and many were thus thrown upon the charity 
of their fellows. (3) Christians were unpopular, 
and could expect no outside aid. 



The appeal of this lesson was made A.D. 
57, about twelve years before the destruction 
of Jerusalem. Concerning the distress 
of Jerusalem at that time, Canon Cook says, 
—"The abnormal condition of the labor 
market is illustrated by the fact that Agrippa 
II. was compelled to resort to artificial 
means, such as paving the streets of Jerusalem 
with white marble— after having declined 
a proposal to destroy and rebuild 
'Solomon's porch'— in order to supply with 
work and wages 1 8,000 workmen who had 
been employed in repairing the temple. 
Life and property were rendered painfully 
insecure by the terrible atrocities of the 
Sicarii, at once assassins and robbers." 

Charity at that time was not a public 
affair, as it is at present in civilized countries, 
where County or Parish homes and 
other aids for the indigent are liberally 
supported by a general tax, and supplied 
regardless of religious professions. Nevertheless, 
we are to remember that the forty 
years' day of wrath upon the Jewish nation, 
which began with our Lord's ministry, A.D. 
30, and ended with the destruction of Jerusalem, 
A.D. 70, was a pattern or type of the 
present day of wrath upon nominal "Christendom, 

R1593 : page 350 

which, having begun with the year 

A.D. 1875, will end with the beginning of 

A.D. 1915. And while there are better provisions 

now for the poor, we may reasonably 

expect that coming disturbances of 

society may disarrange these systematic 

charities, and that there will be opportunities 

for doing good unto all men— especially 

toward the household of faith. At all 

events, there will always be opportunities 

for those who may desire, and who have 

this world's goods, to spend it for spiritual 

food for the famishing ones fleeing out of 

Babylon. Babylon spends millions annually 

upon her own literature and institutions, 

and "knows not that she is wretched and 

miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." 

(Rev. 3:17.) And God's children in her need 

help from those whose eyes have been 

anointed with the eye-salve of present 

truth. It is not our financial help that they 

need, but our spiritual help; and yet financial 

ability is necessary to the holding forth 

of the Word of life. Let each one possessing 

the gift of wealth exercise it according 



to his judgment of the Master's will— in 
"doing good unto all men [temporally or 
spiritually, especially spiritually] as he has 
opportunity, especially to the household of 
faith."-Gal. 6:10. 

The Apostle's experience proved to him 
the truth of the saying, "The liberal soul 
shall be made fat." (Prov. 11:25.) He 
had noted the fact that those individuals 
and congregations which exercised themselves 
most in this grace of liberality (under 
the guidance of reason and justice, of course) 
were the most blessed in spiritual health 
and wealth. He, therefore, longed to see 
all Christians appreciating and using this 
grace. 

The congregation of the Lord at Corinth, 
while, in many respects, highly favored 
with instruction and knowledge, had not 
made the proper progress in spiritual development, 
and hence was greatly in danger 
of losing the truths received but never 
properly put into practice. (1 Cor. 1:4-6,11-13; 
3:1-3.) They, too, had evidently 
been appealed to with reference to contributions 
for the poor of the congregation at 
Jerusalem; but, seemingly, they had not 
responded,— or, at least, not according to 
their means. Paul now, therefore, while 
patiently correcting their errors, deflections 
and stumblings, suggests to them that the 
exercise of the grace of benevolence is an 
important factor in spiritual life. In proof 
of this he points them to the congregations 
of Macedonia, which, although themselves 
sorely pressed by a great trial and by deep 
poverty (no doubt results of the famine 
which occurred in the reign of the Emperor 

R1594 : page 350 

Claudius), had been very liberal in their donations 
to the yet poorer ones at Jerusalem. 
The giving, says Paul, did not stop with 
the money, but extended even to the giving 
of themselves in any way to serve the cause 
of God, and thus it brought them great 
spiritual blessings.— Verse 5. 

In view of this spiritual blessing upon 
the Macedonian Christians, the Apostle 
urged upon Titus the importance of bringing 
the subject to the careful notice of the 
troubled and distracted Christians at Corinth, 
believing that if they would begin to 
practice the spirit of Christianity— love, benevolence 
—they would speedily receive a 



blessing, and come to see more clearly the 
doctrines of Christ, which, because of failure 
to practice, they were in danger and losing. 

Benevolence, unselfishness, the Apostle 
suggests, is a test or proof of the sincerity 
of our love. If any one claim to have died 
to the carnal mind of selfishness, and to have 
been begotten to the new mind of love, the 
opportunities for the exercise of benevolence 
will prove it— or to what extent the new 
mind is ruling in us and conquering the 
old. (Verse 8.) As an illustration of the 
true spirit of love in unselfish benevolence, 
the Apostle cites our Lord Jesus.— Verse 9. 

VERSES 10,1 1 show that they were dilatory 
about doing what they had purposed. 
And then (verse 12), lest some who had a 
proper, benevolent will in the matter might 
feel that their gifts were too insignificant, 
this noble teacher assures them (in harmony 
with our Lord's teachings— Mark 12:42-44) 
that God accepts our hearts, our wills; and 
if our gifts to his service be actually small, 
they are accepted in proportion to what we 
have— in proportion to what the gifts cost 
us in the way of self-denials. 

At the Religious Parliament recently held 
in Chicago the greatest evidence of spiritual 
development among converts in heathen 
lands came from Japan. We hope to publish 
extracts from the report there given, by a Japanese 
convert, showing the status of Christianity 
in Japan. In this connection we 
merely notice his report that the average 
donations for the support of Christianity, by 
native Japanese converts, was $6.72 each 

R1594: page 351 

in 1882; $2.15 each in 1888, and $1.95 each in 
1892. What an excellent showing this is for 
people coming out of heathenism;— people, 
too, who have never yet heard the real good 
tidings, but merely the human perversion! 
What might be expected of such earnest 
souls if once the eyes of their understandings 
were opened to behold the full light of 
the gospel of Christ. We notice, however, 
a steady decline in the past ten years, indicating, 
possibly, a loss of zeal and first love; 
and so also the report declares that a 
lethargy and spiritual decline is at present 
spreading over the Christians of Japan. 
"The liberal soul shall be made fat"— 
spiritually. Do not our individual experiences 
corroborate this? 



R1594: page 351 
IMITATION OF CHRIST. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON VIII., NOV. 19, EPH. 4:20-32. 

Golden Text— "And be ye kind one to another, tender 
hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for 
Christ's sake hath forgiven you."— Eph. 4:32. 

If the relationship of this lesson to the 
preceding portion of the Apostle's letter be 
observed, it will be seen to be at utter variance 
with what is now popularly considered 
broad and liberal Christianity;— the Christianity 
which makes little or no distinction 
between the Church and the world, which 
calls all men brethren, and has large charity 
for every heathen religion and every apostasy 
from Christianity, if only the worshipers 
be sincere; that is, if they have succeeded 
in deceiving themselves, and are 
earnestly going about deceiving others. 

Let the student carefully observe the 
Apostle's teaching: (1) That God has predestinated 
the selection of a chosen few, 
on certain conditions, that he might train 
and afterward exalt them for a special purpose. 
—Chap. 1:5. (2) That that purpose 
is, ultimately, in his own appointed time, 
to lift up and bless the remainder of humanity 
through this trained, exalted and 
empowered few. (Eph. 1:10; 3:10.) (3) 
That he declares the rest of the world to be 
"children of wrath," as we also were until 
brought nigh to God by the blood of Christ. 
(Chap. 2:3,13.) (4) That now we are no 
longer strangers and foreigners [like the 
rest of the world, who are not recognized 
as sons of God, and who, therefore, should 
not be recognized as our "brethren"— since 
we are no longer in Adam, but now in 
Christ] but fellow-citizens with the saints, 
and of the household of God.— Chap. 2: 19. 

In chapter fourth the Apostle exhorts all 
of this class— not the world, but the saints, 
the few who have come into Christ— to endeavor 
to keep the unity of the spirit in 
the bond of peace (verse 3), and to grow 
up as one harmonious body into the likeness 
of Christ, all recognizing the one Lord; 
holding the one faith of divine revelation 
through the apostles and prophets, and accepting 



no other though it be preached by 
an angel from heaven; and being baptized 
with the same baptism of complete subjection 
to the will of Christ— Verses 4-13. 

And this whole compact body of Christ, 
thus apart from the world and its spirit, is to 
be separate from the world and not in affiliation 
or alliance with it. Since they have 
received the spirit of Christ, they must not 
walk, as other Gentiles walk.— Verses 16-19. 

VERSES 20-24. Such have not so learned 
Christ as to observe no difference between 
themselves and the world. They have put 
off the old man, the old sinful dispositions 
inherited from Adam, which constituted 
their former selves, and have put on the 
new man: they have become new creatures 
in Christ Jesus, the second Adam, created 
in righteousness and true holiness. 

VERSES 25-32 are worthy of the careful 
pondering of all such new creatures in 
Christ; for, though renewed in the spirit of 
their mind, they still have "to keep the 
body under," to "crucify the flesh" and to 
"war a good warfare," "against the world, 
the flesh and the devil," that they may grow 
up into Christ, and finally be received into 
the full privileges of worthy sons of God. 
Though these verses need little comment, 
they need much careful pondering in the 
spirit of humility and prayer. 

R1594: page 351 

THE CHRISTIAN HOME. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON IX., NOV. 26, COL. 3:12-25. 

Golden Text— "I will walk within my house with a 
perfect heart."— Psa. 101:2. 

The counsel of this chapter is addressed 
to those who are risen with Christ— not of 
course actually, but reckonedly— to those who 
are counting themselves dead indeed unto 
sin, and alive unto God through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. (Verse 1; Rom. 6:11.) When 
actually risen with Christ, we shall be in his 
likeness in the fullest sense; but our present 
reckoned condition is one in which we 
are seeking mentally and spiritually to appropriate 

R1594 : page 352 



the perfect likeness which by and 
by we hope to fully realize. 

This, of course, necessitates the putting 
away of sin; the living of clean, pure lives 
(verse 5); that all our conduct with our 
fellow-men should be characterized by sincerity 
and truth (verses 9,10); that we should 
exercise a spirit of forbearance and of forgiveness 
toward the erring (verse 13), covering 
all the world, and especially the saints, 
with an abundant mantle of charity (verse 14), 
and allowing the peace of God to rule 
our hearts and to sway all our actions.— 
Verse 15. 

Such a condition of heart and mind can 
only be secured by letting the word of Christ 
dwell in us richly (verse 16); by bearing in 
mind his teachings and endeavoring to apply 
them in our daily life; and, being filled 
thus with his spirit, doing all things with 
an eye single to his glory, out of love and 
gratitude. 

It will also regulate all the affairs of domestic 
life showing to husbands and wives, 
parents and children and servants all their 
respective relationships and duties. (Verses 18-22.) 
See our issue of July. 

If we faithfully walk in the path of duty, 
doing all as unto the Lord, and not unto 
men, we are assured of an abundant reward 
from the Anointed Lord, whose we are and 
whom we serve. (Verse 24.) But if, after 
having been enlightened by the truth, and 
thus enabled to discern clearly the path of 
righteousness, we forsake it, and walk not 
in it, we are also forewarned of a just recompense 
for such a course, with the assurance 
that "there is no respect of persons 
with God."— Verse 25. 

Therefore, let all the children of light 
walk worthy of the grace of God through 
Christ, and of the knowledge of his Word. 

R1595 : page 352 

GRATEFUL OBEDIENCE. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON X., DEC. 3, JAMES 1:16-27. 

Golden Text— "We love him because he first loved 
us."-l John 4:19. 

This epistle, unlike all the other apostolic 
epistles, is addressed to the twelve tribes of 



Israel scattered abroad. While to a large 
extent its teachings are applicable to various 
times and peoples, it will be specially 
applicable to converted Hebrews in the 
present and in the immediate future— in the 
dawn of the Millennial age, when their 
blindness is turned away, and when they 
turn to the Lord as "a kind of firstfruits of 
his creatures"— not the very first fruits, 
which is the Church, but the first fruits from 
among the nations of the earth. It also 
contains many valuable lessons for all beginners 
in the Christian life, as well as for 
those to whom it is specially addressed. 

VERSE 18 teaches that the agency which 
will accomplish the turning away of Israel's 
blindness, and their begetting as new creatures 
in Christ, will be "the Word of truth." 
The great time of trouble will so thoroughly 
prepare the soil of their hearts, that the 
truth, then so clearly enunciated, emphasized 
and illustrated in the risen prophets and 
ancient worthies, will find such ready acceptance 
that "a nation [the nation of Israel] 
shall be born at once" (Isa. 66:8-14), a 
kind of firstfruits of God's creatures, begotten 
by the Word of truth. 

VERSES 19-22 are timely words of counsel 
to the newly converted then, and are of 
equal force to all such at any time, either 
now or in the future. And all the children 
of God who have not yet outgrown the necessity 
for such counsel would do well to 
lay it to heart, and to apply themselves diligently 
to the building up of a worthy 
Christian character. 

VERSES 22-25 give an apt illustration of 
a listless disposition, which contents itself 
with its faith in Christ, but makes no effort 
to bring the life into conformity with his 
teachings. There is no blessing in store for 
such listless hearers— not doers of the Word. 
The blessing of the Lord is for the earnest 
and faithful soul who applies his heart unto 
instruction— "This man shall be blessed in 
his deed." 

VERSE 26 declares that religion vain 
which does not bridle the tongue. O, how 
many there are whose religion is vain, when 
judged by this inspired rule— who freely 
indulge that unruly member to the detriment 
of others and of their own highest interests, 
even after they have learned the more 
excellent way. 

VERSE 27 defines pure religion or piety 
to consist in abstaining from sin and in doing 



good works. This, of course, is the 
religion of the natural, justified man, such 
as those to whom this epistle is addressed; 
but the religion of the Gospel Church goes 
further and devotes the life to self-sacrifice, 
even unto death, looking for the reward of 
joint-heirship with Christ in his divine 
nature and Kingdom. 



page 354 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1595 : page 354 

ABRAHAM'S AGE ON ENTERING CANAAN. 



We are in receipt of a number of letters, 
calling attention to what seems to the writers 
an error in the Chronology given in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II., relative to the date of 
Abraham's birth, his entrance into Canaan, 
etc. For the sake of these, as well as others who 
may have the same difficulty, we here enlarge 
upon what is stated in VOL. II., pages 44-47. 

Gen. 1 1:32 says that at his death Terah's 
age was two hundred and five years; Acts 7:4 
says that then Abraham removed into Canaan; 
and Gen. 12:4 states that Abraham was seventy -five 
years old when he left Haran. Hence 
Terah's age at Abraham's birth must have been 



one hundred and thirty years. 

But is not this out of harmony with Gen. 1 1:26, 
which says: "And Terah lived seventy 
years, and begat Abram, Nahor and Haran"? 
We answer, No. The point of confusion is in 
the fact that Haran, the eldest, is mentioned 
last, while Abram, the youngest, is mentioned 
first— possibly because of his greater prominence 
in the narrative, or, possibly, as a little 
stumbling-block to hinder us from seeing the 
facts except as guided by the Lord, in his due 
time. 

That Haran was the eldest of the sons of 
Terah is quite evident from the recorded facts. 
His son Lot was old enough to be the companion 
of his uncle Abraham. Lot and Abraham 
were probably nearly of the same age, as 
each had his own flocks and herds and herdsmen. 
When Sodom was destroyed Lot had 
two daughters of marriageable age and others 
already married. This was before Isaac was 
born, Abraham being then ninety-nine years 
old.-Gen. 17:24; 18:1,16; 19:8,14. 

Again, notice the likelihood of Haran's being 
much the eldest of Terah's sons, and Nahor 
the second, thus,— Nahor married one of his 
brother Haran's daughters (Milcah— See Gen. 24:15), 
whose grand-daughter, Rebecca, became 
the wife of Abraham's son, Isaac— Gen. 24:67. 

Our reckoning as given in the DAWN is 
therefore sustained by all the known facts, as 
well as by the exact statements of Scripture. 

page 354 

THE TOWER FOR 1894 TO THE LORD'S POOR. 



We would remind the dear friends who receive 
the WATCH TOWER free, because poor 
through misfortune or infirmity, that we expect 
them, as well as paying subscribers, to 
renew their subscriptions yearly. A postal 
card will serve the purpose, if on it you repeat 
your request to have the TOWER continue its 
visits. If still unable to pay, state the fact, 
and it will be cheerfully continued. We like 
to hear from all at this season of the year. 
Those who can pay later, but to whom it is 
not convenient just now, will please so state 
themselves. A + indicates Lord's Poor. 

In our Terms, above, it will be noticed that 
we request such responses sometime during the 
month of December;— this because we have 
your names and addresses in type, and the 



labor and expense of distributing thousands 
of addresses and then, later, resetting many 
of them, is considerable. 

R1599 : page 354 

MILLENNIAL DAWN IN SWEDISH. 



The Swedish translation of the first volume 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN is now ready, and waiting 
orders have been filled. It can be supplied 
in both cloth and paper bindings, at same 
prices as the English edition. 

Friends of the truth who have knowledge of the 
subject, are requested to let us know of Swedish 
settlements— giving some idea of the population 
of such colonies; also of colonies of Danes and 
of Norwegians; for we hope to have the Dano-Norwegian 
translation ready about March next. 
We shall soon have some tracts in these languages, 
and shall be pleased to send freely 
whatever quantity you will use judiciously. 



R1595 : page 355 
