Announcements
PRAISING THE NEW WORLD’S SOVEREIGN EACH DAY
Those whom God has called into his wonderful light desire, in accord with Psalm 145:2, to declare abroad his excellencies each day. Jehovah’s witnesses will continue doing this during October by talking to others about God’s purposes and presenting to them aids to understand both the Word of God and world events. Awake! magazine serves such a purpose. A year’s subscription for this very fine magazine will be offered for $1. To each new subscriber will be given three Bible booklets. If you are not associated with a congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses and would like to be, contact the closest Kingdom Hall or write this office.
GROUNDS FOR BELIEVING
Belief based on unsubstantial grounds, no matter how well meant or believed, is certain to bring disappointment. True belief and faith must have a good, solid foundation, a rocklike and firm basis. Hoping for a better world, and all of us do, we must base our belief on a sure foundation. Is God’s Word, the Bible, the source of accurate and true information concerning the new world? If you have any doubts now as to the Bible’s being the great storehouse of truth, your doubts will vanish after reading the 64-page booklet Basis for Belief in a New World. You are invited to obtain one copy for 5c or seven for 25c. Write for them today.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society holds its annual meeting on October 1 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. During 1954, October 1 falls on Friday, on which day the meeting will be held at 10 o’clock in the forenoon. At that time the annual meeting will be held in the newly constructed Kingdom Hall and registered office of the Society, which is located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, corner of Parkman Avenue, in Pittsburgh.
The members of the corporation will receive the usual letter of notice advising them of the meeting and sending them proxy forms. We should like to have all of the proxies returned to the office of the secretary of the Society not later than the 15th of September. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not. Those who are members of the corporation should be certain that the secretary’s office has their proper mailing address so that the notice of the annual meeting will be certain to reach them.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 10: True Love Is Practical, ¶1-19.
Week of October 17: True Love Is Practical, ¶20-40.

