Make Wise Use of the Remaining Time
IT IS God who sets the time for all things. He has a set “time to every purpose under the heaven.” The time limit for this old world ran out A.D. 1914. It now exists on borrowed time, which is fast running out. How long the remaining time is can be determined from the Word of God, which says: “The great day of Jehovah is near, it is near and hasteth greatly.” Jesus declared that “this generation will by no means pass away until all these things occur.” And his apostle Paul added: “The time left is reduced.” Time to prepare for survival of this old world is short indeed!—Eccl. 3:1; Zeph. 1:14, AS; Matt. 24:34; 1 Cor. 7:29, NW.
This is not the time to be deceived by the boastful prophesyings and foundationless promises of imperfect men facing destruction at this world’s end. Nor is this a time to be caught napping or living as does the perishing old world. The remaining time is too short to take chances with our life. The new world is upon us, bringing the old world to its terrible end. “For the time that has passed by,” said Peter, “is sufficient for you to have worked out the will of the nations when you proceeded in deeds of loose conduct, lusts, excesses with wine, revelries, drinking matches, and idolatries that are without legal restraint. . . . But the complete end of all things has drawn close. Be sound in mind, therefore, and be vigilant with a view to prayers. Above all things, have intense love for one another.”—1 Pet. 4:3-8, NW.
Now is the time to redeem or buy out time by casting aside all the nonessential things for New World living. All professing Christians must now prove whether they are living for this old world or for the righteous new world of endless success. It is ruinous for Christians today to be careless with their time. Time is precious; with it we can save or lose lives. Our talents, our time, our opportunities are all perishable and passing. Time to take in knowledge of Jehovah and Christ, which means everlasting life, is also passing. Satan’s world is passing. The remaining time, therefore, is extremely valuable. Jehovah has provided it for man’s good, for man to study his Word, for man to see the foretold visible sign of Christ’s second presence and conform himself to the requirements of the Kingdom. But Satan opposes this wise use of time. He drives frustrated masses into various ways to escape from the reality of these perilous times. But “a wise man’s heart discerneth both time and judgment” and is not ensnared.—Eccl. 8:5.
How foolish it would be for us to spend our lives accumulating wealth and power as the old world does. A lifetime spent amassing wealth is a lifetime wasted. Jesus wisely reasoned: “For what benefit will it be to a man if he gains the whole world but forfeits his soul? or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?” Wealthy King Solomon spent much of his time acquiring homes, gardens, provinces and all sorts of luxury and he concluded that “it is a vain, futile business.”—Matt. 16:26, NW; Eccl. 1:14, Mo.
No more time should be spent in the old world today than is absolutely essential to provide for the necessities of life. To spend any more time is to turn the mind away from the more important things to be done. The brief season that remains for the old world is not that we might follow its pursuits. No; but the short spell remaining is that God’s will be done, that people of good will of all nations might learn of him and gain life. This interval has been set aside for the preaching of the good news of the Kingdom. Therefore, preaching the Kingdom is the most profitable manner in which we could possibly spend our time.
MAKING THE MOST OF OUR TIME
To improve our abilities as ministers of God through study is to spend time profitably. Such time is never lost. No Christian should allow himself to think that he is too busy to study. To preach successfully to others the wells of truth must be kept filled and flowing. The clergy, who waste their time on philosophy and the writings of men instead of studying God’s Word, are referred to in the Bible as wells without water. We might become dried-out wells, unless the waters of truth are replenished. Being concerned with how we spend time, knowing that it is more precious than rubies, silver or gold, we should desire to become efficient, organized and regular as Bible students and as theocratic ministers. These qualities are timesavers and lifesavers.
To be efficient concentrate on one thing at a time. Do not try to listen to a radio program, or watch television, or try to carry on a conversation and study the Bible at the same time. Do one or the other. The Bible to be digested must receive the student’s undivided attention. Otherwise he wastes his time. Learn to make efficient use of the Watch Tower Society’s publications. They will save many tedious hours. Learn to use the subject indexes, scripture indexes, concordances, etc. Seek knowledge of God as you would silver, and search for wisdom and understanding as for hidden treasures. Then you will understand the fear of Jehovah and find the knowledge of God. “For Jehovah giveth wisdom; out of his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding.” Do not be content to take just anything for an answer. But do as the Beroeans who “received the word with the greatest readiness of mind, carefully examining the Scriptures daily as to whether these things were so.”—Prov. 2:6, AS; Acts 17:11, NW.
Do not thrust your burden of study on any man. Bear your own burden if at all possible. Do not say, “I will ask Brother So-and-So; he always knows the answers.” Or, “What I will do is write to the Society; they will answer me.” Before inquiring of your brother or the Society, do as Jesus suggested at Matthew 7:7-11 (NW). Ask and keep on asking Jehovah for an answer; keep on searching his Word for a reply; knock or work for an understanding of his Word, “and it will be opened to you.” Letter writing requires time. Reading letters requires time. And answering letters requires time. And it is a waste of time of many brothers if the answer could be had by putting forth a little effort consulting the Society’s publications. Save time, your time and your brothers’ time, by being time-conscious. When writing be brief, clear and to the point. Remember, time is precious. It means life.
Jehovah’s organization is a timesaver, because it is efficiently organized. Its ministers and congregations reflect such efficiency. Instruction imparted at Christian meetings such as conducted by Jehovah’s witnesses saves time. The congregation learn from one another. “Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.” Regular attendance at studies of The Watchtower and the service and other meetings is a profitable way to spend time. Time spent in company with men and women whose minds and hearts are set upon serving Jehovah is exhilarating, refreshing, lifesaving. But time spent in the old world is demoralizing, depressing and increasingly hazardous. So why waste time to your hurt? Why gamble with your life and time?—Prov. 27:17.
WAYS TO WASTE TIME
Whether we waste time or not largely depends upon our habits. If we have formed good habits we are making good use of our time, and, if not, we are most likely wasting valuable time. Long hours watching television deprives one of wholesome conversation, study time and preaching time. Used with wise limitations, television, gatherings, good music, etc., can provide relaxation for Christians and should be used in moderation. The remaining time can be utilized to a better purpose if one is wise. To waste time is to waste Jehovah’s patience and mercy. It is wasting a priceless opportunity for endless life in a new world. The dedicated servant of Jehovah God has no life to squander. His life is no longer his own to waste. He was “bought with a price.” Therefore, his time, yes, his very life, belongs to Jehovah God.—1 Cor. 7:23, NW.
Consider what a tremendous amount of time is wasted daily through worry alone! Worry accomplishes nothing. We cannot lengthen or shorten the remaining time by worrying. The best we can do is to share in comforting others with the good news of the Kingdom. If Christians keep worrying over or fleeing from the old-world fears, certainly they will have time for nothing else. “The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold as a lion.” Lionlike Christians devote their time to profitable pursuits.—Prov. 28:1.
Another waster is irregularity in the preaching work. When one stops he loses the swing of house-to-house preaching, becomes rusty in his use of the Bible, new habits crowd in and take the place of the former good ones. So, not only is the time lost that is not spent in praising Jehovah, but time is also consumed in regaining past efficiency. The remaining time is too short to permit such losses. Now is the time to be awake, active and consistent in Jehovah’s service.
WASTING TIME OVER TRIVIALITIES
Often trivial things not worth mentioning consume a tremendous amount of time if we are not careful. Little misunderstandings, oversights, can cause no end of headaches, heartaches, if we let them. These differences are bound to arise as long as men are imperfect. The Devil will see to it. He is greedy for our time. It is a refreshing contrast to consider what a great amount of time, mental concern and productive effort can be saved when the Scriptural rule at Matthew 18:15-17 is followed. Try it. We are too busy today to listen to trivial matters. We have less time to repeat them. Time can be much more profitably spent examining our own mistakes which we are in position to correct than in being concerned about another’s shortcomings which we cannot change. (Matt. 7:3, 4) Nip waywardness and time wasting in their beginnings by keeping the mind in check, harnessing it for profitable work, directing it in righteous ways.
Arguments over inconsequential matters, long-winded discussions on hypothetical situations and personal theories, these, too, claim valuable time from any who are foolish enough to allow it. “Further, turn down foolish and speculative questionings, knowing they produce fights.” (2 Tim. 2:23, NW) Wasteful hours might be spent with those wise in their own conceit, who desire only to make a show of their own wisdom and pet theories. Usually these have no time to listen to the good news of God’s kingdom. The servant of Jehovah who is concerned with his time will not spend unnecessary time with those who are willfully ignorant of God’s purposes. At Matthew 7:6 is recorded some good advice for the faithful servant. There are too many people of good will with whom time can be profitably spent, who are more anxious to listen and learn than hear themselves talk. It is with such meek ones that the preacher can profitably spend his time. Jehovah promises that “the meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way.”—Ps. 25:9.
SEIZING HOLD OF OPPORTUNITIES
But what has been done or what we have failed to do in the past cannot be changed. Wasted time cannot be bought back. That time is gone forever. It cannot be regained or used again, no matter how we try. But the present time and the future time offer opportunities. These opportunities may present themselves in various ways. But however they come, sensible man will make the most of them, buying them out and putting them to good use so that they will not be wasted. For some it will mean an opportunity to pioneer, for others an opportunity to go to Gilead and for still others a priceless opportunity to serve at the Society’s headquarters or its foreign branches. Look for these opportunities. Make way for them. Time cannot be spent more wisely than in full-time ministry. That is how Jesus spent his perfect life. The best we can do is to copy him.
A life spent in Jehovah’s service is never wasted. It is one sure way to store up “treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consume, and where thieves do not break in and steal.” Never “give up in doing what is right,” urged Paul, “for in due season we shall reap by not giving out.” Even now we see the results of our labors, men hearing and turning to obey the commandments of Jehovah God, an ever-increasing crowd of gospel-preachers profitably using the remaining time. We likewise see and experience evidence of Jehovah’s approval upon our actions, his assurance of a work well done. If he is patient enough to allow men a little more time to heed and turn from their time-wasting, life-wasting course, surely we should exercise the same patience.—Matt. 6:19, 20; Gal. 6:9, NW.
Armageddon will come on time. We can keep close in mind that day by being busily engaged in Kingdom service. For those praising Jehovah time does not drag; it flies by. Do not just count or mark time, but make your time count and work for you. Study about Jehovah’s kingdom. Proclaim his name and Word. Buy out opportunities. Make greater room in your life for New World living. Spend the remaining time to Jehovah’s praise and vindication. In this way you will make wise use of the remaining time and with it attain the prize that comes with faithful service—everlasting life!
So keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, buying out the opportune time for yourselves, because the days are wicked.—Eph. 5:15, 16, NW.

