Learn the Truth That Leads to Eternal Life
HAVE you learned in Sunday school about God’s marvelous purpose to make the earth a Paradise? It is not likely, for one of the most glaring proofs of failure is the fact that Sunday-school courses devote very little time to Bible prophecy.
Yet, the Bible contains a great deal about prophecy, about what the future holds. These prophecies were written for the guidance of God’s people. Amos 3:7 says: “For the Lord Jehovah will not do a thing unless he has revealed his confidential matter to his servants the prophets.”
If the leaders in the church systems were God’s true servants, would their Sunday-school textbooks have so little to say about what the future holds and about how God will solve the horrible conditions of today?
If your Sunday school follows the International Sunday School Lesson series, note how the Annual waters down the subject of Bible prophecy in a veiled reference to the work of Jehovah’s witnesses who do study and teach Bible prophecy. It says:
“The second coming of Christ is an important theme in the New Testament. . . . Who among us has not seen the slogan, ‘Millions now living will never die’? These people make such statements because they believe that Christ will come back soon, that time will draw to an end, and that the final judgment will occur in the near future . . . While not denying an ultimate return at the end of time, this writing stresses the truth that in the Holy Spirit, whom God will send into men’s hearts, Jesus himself will once again indwell in the lives of his followers. This too is a coming again.”​—Page 101.
Bible a Book of Prophecy
From such Sunday-school teaching, how would you know whether we are living in the “last days” or not? (2 Tim. 3:1) Jesus himself, and many Bible writers, gave enough details to mark clearly the generation that would see the end of this wicked system. These details fill many chapters in the Bible. See, for instance, the following Bible chapters: Matthew 24, Mark 13, Luke 21, 2 Timothy 3, Revelation 6.
Bible prophecies such as these were recorded under the inspiration of God’s holy spirit. The Creator had this information put into his Word so that Christians would be aware that they were nearing the time of “great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.” (Matt. 24:21) If we are nearing such a time, then surely you will want to know about it. Why? Because the life or death of every person on earth hangs in the balance.
However, today’s Sunday schools do not make known such Bible knowledge. Does this mean that nobody is making known these things? Not at all. Throughout the world, in more than 200 lands today, over a million Bible teachers, Jehovah’s witnesses, declare clearly and boldly that mankind is indeed nearing the end of this present wicked system of things. In the most extensive Bible teaching program in history, they call to the attention of all lovers of righteousness that God will soon usher in his new order of peace, happiness and eternal life.
Jehovah’s witnesses see these approaching realities through the abundant fulfillment of Bible prophecy. This knowledge they share with others, freely giving of their time, studying the Bible with people in over a million households world wide.
One of the Bible study aids they use to do this is the 192-page book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. This outstanding Bible study aid helps focus attention on the Bible answers to such key questions as these: Who is God? Why do we grow old and die? Where are the dead? Why has God permitted wickedness until our time? How do we know we are living near the end of this system of things? How can we identify the true religion? These, and many other questions you no doubt have wondered about are answered from God’s Word.
Learn Bible’s Truths
You too can take advantage of the opportunity to learn what the Bible teaches. Jehovah’s witnesses will be happy to demonstrate to you how you can get the most out of the Bible. For one hour or so a week, over a period of six months, they will come to your home to assist you free of charge.
If you, or your children, have attended Sunday school, studying the Bible with Jehovah’s witnesses will give you a fine opportunity to make a comparison. You will be able to compare what you have learned at Sunday school with what you learn at your home Bible study with Jehovah’s witnesses. Then you can determine for yourself which method really teaches you the truth about God’s purposes and requirements.
Jehovah’s witnesses likely maintain in your area a Kingdom Hall, or meeting place for worship. You can contact them there, or write to the publishers of this magazine, and a qualified minister will be sent to your home. He will show you how you can get the accurate knowledge of God from your own Bible.
The choice of whether to take in accurate knowledge of God’s Word is yours. But at this time of increasing world trouble, the choice we encourage you to make is that which was noted at Psalm 119:142, 144, where the psalmist said to God: “Your law is truth. . . . Make me understand, that I may keep living.”
Jesus recognized the vital need to do this, for he said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”​—John 17:3.
By learning and living in harmony with the truth about God and his Son, you will be choosing life. That is how, even through the end of this wicked system of things, you may keep alive, you and your children.​—Deut. 30:19.

