Vol. XXXIX 


PITTSBURGH, PA., NOVEMBER 15, 1918 


No. 22 


SELF^DENIAl^-ITS PURPOSE AND ITS IMPORTANCE 


"Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that 
Denying one's self is self- denial. In considering what 
is meant by the phrase, "denying one's self," we, must distinguish
 as to what self is and what are the self -rights. Upon 
mature reflection we perceive that our personality, our ego, 
is represented by our will. Evidently, then, our Lord requires 
that every one who becomes his disciple shall surrender his 
own will — "all that he hath"; for elsewhere the Master says: 
"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, take 
up his cross and follow me." (Matthew 16:24) Whether 
our will be good or bad, strong or weak, it must be given up 
when we consecrate ourselves to do the will of God; and when 
once we have surrendered our own will to do the divine will, 
it follows that henceforth we are to do God's will to the best 
of our ability in every matter. 

After our consecration to do the will of God, and the subsequent
 acceptance on the part of our heavenly Father through 
Jesus Christ our Lord, we were begotten of the holy Spirit as 
sons of God, new creatures in Christ. This transaction meant 
that we gave up self-will and accepted God's will instead of 
our own on all subjects. This matter of giving up one's 
own will in order to do the will of anothsr is a moat radical 
proposition. Indeed, the yielding up of the will to any one 
except the heavenly Father is the most dangerous thing we 
can do. Very grave mistakes have been made in this way. 
In various cults, in denominational bodies and in political 
circles the surrender of the individual will, the failure to 
maintain a personal responsibility, has resulted in many 
serious mistakes and in much evil practise. 

THE STABT OF THE HEW 0KMTXO1T 
In the case of those who have surrendered their will to 
God the matter is altogether different, however. God has 
given our Lord Jesus Christ to be the Head over the church 
which is his body, and of which the consecrated, spirit-hegotten
 children of God are the members in particular. No 
one could properly be a member of the body of Christ if he 
retained his own individual human will. This fact is well 
illustrated in the human 'body, every member of which is 
fully under the control of the head, unless the body is seriously
 diseased. The hands, the feet, etc., have no volition of their 
own, but respond to the will of the brain. And bo it is with 
the members of the body of Christ; they are subject to the 
will of the Head, our Lord Jesus. 

At first the new creature seems to have been nothing but 
a wilL Originally as a human being he 'had a body, a mind, 
and a will which represented his personality, his ego, his 
being. But while he was still a natural man a proposition 
came to him: If he would heartily comply with certain 
terms and conditions, God would give him a change of nature 
from human to spirit. This change evidently would mean a 
new body, a new mind and a new will, in order that the new 
creature could adapt himself to his new environment. But 
in the divine arrangement for the Gospel age those who accepted
 this proposition received neither a new body nor a new 
mind first, but a new will, with the promise that the other 
two requirements would be given in the resurrection, as a result
 of cheerful compliance with all the terms of the covenant 
entered into with God at the time of consecration. 

Thus the first step on the part of those who accepted the 
divine proposition to become members of the new creation 
was that of giving up the human will. Whoever took this 
step contracted to become dead as a human being—not that 
his human body or his human brain died, not that he lost 
the power to think, but that he promised to forgo his human 
personality and experience in order to be ruled thereafter 
by a new will, the will of God. Those who have taken this 
step of full consecration are accepted of the Father through 
our Lord Jesus Christ, and have been begotten of the holy 
Spirit as new creatures in Christ, 

NEW WILL THE NEW CBEATTJRE 
At the present time this new will is all that there is of 
the new creature. At the time of his spirit^begetting this 
new will had not yet attained control of the mind or of the 
body; but it is expected to conquer them, to bring them into 
obedience to the new standard of living. The new will should 
control the brain as to what things may be proper subjects 
of thought and what things may not be so considered. This 
new creature is exhorted to put away from his mind all selfish 
lines of thought, and to put far away from him all anger, 
wrath, malice, hatred, strife, works of the flesh, and to put 
on meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness and love. 
From the Word of God the new creature learns that the 
former spirit, mind or disposition of anger, malice, hatred, 


he hath, cannot be my disciple." — Luke 14:33. 
is of the flesh and of the devil, but that the spirit of meekness
, gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness, love, is the 
spirit, mind or disposition of Christ, and is in accord with 
God. He also learns that since he has heen begotten of the 
holy Spirit of God, his human will must be kept dead, that 
his new will is to be God's will, and that it must not operate 
except in line with the divine arrangements. As the new 
creature develops, he gains more and more control over the 
mind, the body, the acts, the thoughts. It is the new will 
which is thus gaining control of the human body — the will of 
the new creature. This divine new will is entirely upon 
God's side, and hopes to receive some day the things promised 
in the Word of God to the overcomers of the Gospel age. 
When we characterize this new will as being divine, we do 
not mean to imply that there is no individuality about the 
new creature, however; for our Lord Jesus still maintains his 
individuality, and it is written that the church, the new 
creation, shall be like him. — 1 John 3:1, 2; 2 Peter 1:4; 
Philippians 2:8-11. 

The holy Spirit i3 the same disposition or mind, whether 
the Father or the Son or the church possesses it. When at 
the moment of spirit-begetting we received the impartation 
of this holy Spirit, we began to take on the divine spirit, or 
disposition. In other words, we have been making the divine
 mind ,ours. As the Apostle Paul intimates, we are being 
transformed, formed over, by the renewing of our minds, in 
order that we may prove more and more the good, the acceptable
, the perfect will of God. (Romans 12:1, 2) As 
gradually our minds expand to grasp that will, we are enabled
 more and more to appreciate the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the divine mind; and we say to 
ourselves: "This is what I am aiming to reach." Thus our 
will is endeavoring continually to do the divine will, the diTinfe
 purpose; for we have taken over to ourselves the mind 
of Christ, who delighted to do the Father's will. 

DESIBE TO DO BIGHT NOT SUFFICIENT 
"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself 
and take up his cross," setting aside his own will, disposing 
of it forever. If at any future time a will which is contrary 
to God's will should develop, then the whole transaction would 
be at an end; for the covenant o£ sacrifice into which we 
entered at consecration involves the death of the old mind 
and the old will. The new creature must never permit the 
will of the flesh to come into control again. So it is the new 
will that is^ working out the victory for the new creature; 
and every victory won over the flesh leads to the consummation
, the death of the human nature. 

In Philippians 2:12 the Apostle Paul exhorts the new 
creature in Christ to work out his own salvation with fear 
and trembling. How necessary it is for us to battle against 
the adverse conditions of the human body, as well as against 
those of the world and of the devil! God has started his 
spirit-begotten children in this narrow way of giving up their 
own will and taking the divine will instead, of determining 
to live in harmony with God's will. # VVe are to do his will 
even to the extent of sacrificing the" human body. God is 
looking on to see whether or not we are overcoming self in 
this respect; for only the more than overcomers shall receive
 the promised glory, honor and immortality — the divine 
nature. 

It is God who is working in us, the Apostle declares, as 
new creatures. He began that work when he drew us to 
himself through the knowledge of his provision through Christ 
Jesus for our salvation, and when he accepted us in the Beloved
 and begat us of his holy Spirit, Continually he gives 
us fresh beauties in his Word. But while God is working 
upon our wilte, we must see to it that we go further than 
merely having the desire to do right. We must make strenuous
 efforts to put our desire into operation. 

OTO WILLS NOT OUB THOUGHTS 
We must make sure that we do not mistake our thoughts 
for our will. The will ia the decision, the determination of 
the majority of those faculties of the brain which constitute 
the mentality. The will of the flesh actually dies at the moment
 of consecration; and we receive the will of God instead, 
thenceforth to be our will. But we retain our human bodies, 
with the old brain, which has the same tendencies after consecration
 as before. When we accepted the will of God instead 
of our own will we did not fully understand that new will; 
but as time went on, the divine will became more and more 
apparent to us. 

This determination to accept the will of God as our will 


(339-340) 


{6362] 


November 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(340-341) 


was not made for a day or a week or even a year, but for 
eternity. We are resolved to have no other will than that 
which God gives, that which he approves, that which is in 
harmony with him. Yet as we go on from day to day, new 
scenes arise before us. Sometimes our earthly senses seem 
to sidetrack us, and in many things we may feel that we are 
at liberty to ehoose what we shall do. But as we progress, we 
may learn that God has expressed himself in these very 
matters about which we had thought we might exercise our 
own preference. 

If, for instance, we should say: "It is God's will that I 
should be his ambassador. What kind of coat shall I wear? 
What style of tie would be appropriate?" we have come to 
realize that the interests of God and of his cause are linked 
up with ours. Thus we have new thoughts upon the matter 
of our personal appearance. As soon as we perceive this 
point, we say to ourselves: "I bad thought that my former 
course was the right one; but now I see that the divine interests
 are linked up with this matter; and God's will must 
rule in all the affairs of my life." 

Each new circumstance surrounding us "is a test of our 
loyalty to God. Therefore just as surely as we are loyal to 
him we shall choose his way; and the promptness with which 
we do whatever we see to be the Father's will becomes a test 
of our loyalty to him. On the other hand, we might hold 
to a thing that was contrary to the divipe will, saying, "What 
difference will it make to the Father whether I do this thing 
or that?" Thus every circumstance of life forms a test 
of our devotion to God and to tlie principles of righteousness. 
We can have only one will. It we have truly presented ourselves
 to God in consecration and have been accepted by him 
and begotten as new creatures in Christ, then old things have 
passed away and all things have become new. 
HYPNOTIC INPHTBNCB OF SIN 

As a matter of fact, however, the only thing that has 
actually become new is the will; for although we have new 
hopes, new aims, new aspirations, new desires, they are only 
the outworkings of that new will. If at any time we should 
return to a love of sin intentionally, wilfully, this act on our 
part would mean that the new will had died, had ceased to 
be, and that a human will had come into existence. Since the 
Father does not purpose to beget any one of the holy Spirit 
the second time, whoever had become an old creature again 
would have no opportunity of ever getting out of that state. 
He would be ""twice dead, plucked up by the roots," as the 
Apostle declares. — Jude 12, 13. 

But there are those who, while possessing the new will 
and still clinging to it, are brought into subjection to the 
flesh in some measure. For a time such might seem to be 
willing to do wrong and to have changed their will from a 
right one to a wrong one; whereas in reality they may not 
have done so at all. On the contrary they have been temporarily
 overcome by the fleshly appetites and desires common
 to the natural man. As new creatures in Christ God's 
people wish to bring every thought into captivity to the divine
 will. This ia the earnest endeavor of the new will, the 
new creature. But sometimes the flesh advances such plausible
 theories, such false reasonings, that the new will seems 
to be beguiled (2 Corinthians 11:3) by the fleshly mind, just 
as a little bird 13 said to be hypnotized by a serpent. While 
every now and then the bird might try to fly away from the 
serpent, yet the latter watches it, allures it, draws it nearer 
and nearer, until finally it loses all power to get away. 

This illustration well represents the overpowering effects 
of sin. (Hebrews 3:12, 13) Under the influence of the flesh, 
the new will may 'become more or less hypnotized, more or 
less under a spell. For this reason the Scriptures urge all 
new creatures to make no provision for the flesh. We are 
ever to remember that the. flesli wars against the spirit continually
. Therefore we are to be circumspect, to look aH 
around us, and to note what conditions are about us. Before
 we undertake any project, we should ask ourselves: 
"Did I ever get into trouble by following this course heretofore
? Am I in danger of 'being misled by such a course?" 
And so the Apostle urges new creatures to make straight 
paths for their feet, lest that which in themselves has been 
blemished by sin should turn them away from righteousness. 
— Heb. 12:11-15. 

We are to do our very best to make our path as smooth 
as possible. But if despite our earnest efforts we get into 
a quagmire, we are not to be overwhelmed with discouragement
; for the promise is that God will not suffer his loyalhearted
 children to be tempted above that which they are able 
to bear, but with every trial will provide a way of escape. 
(1 Corinthians 10:13) " In every circumstance of life we are 
to look to our heavenly Father' knowing that he is the one 


to help us. If we find ourselves involved in difficulties, ■ we 
are to endeavor to extricate ourselves from them, remembering
 that God has made provision for our escape from what 
otherwise might prove to be too much for us. This course 
on our part implies that the new creature does not consent 
to the deeds of the flesh, but is seeking to take another course, 
is striving for the right way, even though for the time being 
it may have been hypnotized, lulled to sleep, on* guard. 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN MIND AND WILL 
Of necessity the mind and the will are very closely related. 
Yet they are evidently not the same; for the mind can entertain
, consider and discuss a variety of contradictory propositions
, while the will is the determination in respect to a certain
 clearly defined course. The will may, however, direct 
the mind to discuss both sides of any proposition. In thus 
calling upon the faculties of the mind to consider any subject 
and to set forth the reasons pro and con, the new will has to 
do with the mind of the fallen flesh. From experience along 
this line the new will becomes conscious of the fact that it 
is dealing with a treacherous opponent, that certain elements 
of the mind are sure to be hostile to the new will. Consequently
 the new will should always restrict the mind as to 
the nature of the subjects to be considered and as to how 
far the discussion should be permitted to proceed. 

From this we see that the new will must limit the operation
 of the mind, and that consequently various complications
 may result. If the will is weak, if it lacks experience, 
it may not be critical enough; and those faculties of the mind 
which are not in harmony with the new will may come forward
 with their strong arguments on the wrong side of the 
subject under consideration. Thus the whole being might be 
led into a wrong attitude, or even into actual sin of word, 
deed or thought. The new will has accepted the divine standard
, which is superior to the fleshly brain which the new 
creature must use. This divine standard, which is the highest 
possible, and which cannot be changed, is revealed to us in 
the words of our Lord and the apostles. It is not to be 
swayed by the prejudices of the fallen flesh, but is to rule 
both body and mind. Hence the battle waged by the new 
creature is a conflict between the fleshly mind and the new will. 
The two are contrary. 

But since the new creature has accepted the will of God, 
the mind of God, the purpose of God, he must rule his mortal 
body according to that standard, until finally the experiences 
which he undergoes in the school of Christ shall have developed
 him and prepared him for the new foody which is to 
be given him in the resurrection. 

A soul, a sentient being, is the result of the union of the 
life principle with an organism. (Genesis 2:7) When an 
organism and the life principle are united they produce a 
soul. Such are the human souls all about us. In the case 
of the church of Christ, to each one of us individually there 
came A time when we ceased to be human souls, and became
 new creatures In Christ. (2 Corinthians 5; 17) But 
while we reckon ourselves dead indeed as human beings, yet 
we have only the human body in which to operate, as the 
Apostle declares. — Romans 6:3-8, 16-19; Ool. 3:1-3. 
HOW TO BECOME AN OVERCOMES 
St. Paul also tells us that the power of God is able to 
quicken the mortal body in which the new creature sojourns, 
and that these new souls will not be without proper opportunity
 for service. More and more the fleshly body is to be 
brought into subjection to the new will; for the new creature 
dwells in an earthly tabernacle. If faithful, he will be by 
and by given a new body, a spiritual body. This combination 
of the new life imparted at spirit-begetting and the human 
body is the soul which God counts as a new creature. But 
it is not a perfect new creature, and will not be until God's 
properly arranged time. 

From the foregoing argument we perceive that the value 
which we attach to words has. much to do with our understanding
 of a^y matter. There is more or less of a philosophy 
about all oUi* conversation; Taking man as the Bible does — 
in his fallen, sinful condition — and inquiring about the human
 will, we find that under present unfavorable conditions 
it is selfish, self-seeking. In all fallen beings there is more 
or less of selfishness, of the desire to look out for one's own 
interests, to please self and to take whatever course one prefers
. This condition may continue for years. Thus the person
 may have heard of God's great proposition that whoever 
will set aside his own will and take the will of God instead 
shall in the resurrection have a change of nature from human 
to spiritual. This full consecration to do the will of God 
means the making void the human will in order to do the divine
 will. Those believers in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus 
Christ who accepted this proposition were accepted of the 


[6353] 


(342-343) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


Father through our Lord Jesus, and begotten of t the holy 
Spirit. Thus they were started in the narrow way of life 
eternal. Immediately they entered the school of Christ, there 
to .be fitted for the high position to which they were called. 

In this school our Lord's true followers have made progress 
toward the full overcoming of the spirit of the world. This 
progress can be achieved only by faith, by that implicit confidence
 in the Master's teaching and training which will keep 
them continually as earnest, diligent pupils under his guidance
 and instruction. "This is the victory which overcometh 
the world, even our faith." (1 John 5:4) This text is very 


suggestive of what it is to be an overcomer, to be one of those 
to whom pertain all the great and precious promises of the 
Word of God. The suggestion is simply this: Day by day 
we are to heed attentively and carry out patiently the instructions
 of our infallible Teacher and Guide in full, unquestioning
 faith in hia wisdom and his love, no matter how 
heavy the daily cross may be or how severe the discipline. 

The process is indeed tedious; but the end will be glorious. 
Even the daily discipline will, if borne patiently and meekly,, 
bring the present reward of conscious progress in the great 
work of attaining the goal of ripened Christian character. 


INCORRUPTION AND IMMORTALITY— DISTINCTION BETWEEN 

THESE TERMS 

"This corruption must put on incorrupVion, and this mortal must put on immortality" — 1 Corinthians 15:53. 


Through his word God declares that those who become 
his people during this Gospel age, become new creatures in 
Christ, to whom old things pass away and all things become 
new. {2 Corinthians 5:17) To those who are spirituallyminded
 there is very great evidence indeed that this is true; 
and yet this doctrine of spirit-begetting might be unrecognized 
by those who have not taken the step of full consecration to 
God. "Here a little and there a little" is the method we must 
pursue in order to see the deep things of God's Word; for this 
seems to be the one general principle upon which these "deep 
things" were recorded; and they will be revealed only in this 
manner. Those who study the Bible superficially overlook 
everything of importance; and as a result they find only a 
part of the truth. But those who search the Scriptures diligently
 axe enabled to discern a wonderful plan whieh others 
have failed to perceive; for those who are not of the right 
class cannot see the truth in its clearness, beauty and harmonv
 ' IMMORTALITY AKB INOORRUFTION 

Those who have the right spirit will desire to know what 
the Lord ha3 in reservation for his people; and this desire 
gives opportunity for the operation of the spirit of truth, and 
leads them to come together for Bible study. Thus, as they 
are searching to know the divine plan, the Lord reveals it 
more and more to them, "here a little and there a little"; and 
these littles make a great aggregate. In this way many doctrines
 long lost eight of have been brought to light. Among 
these is that of the resurrection of the dead. 

The words "mortar' and "immortal" are not generally understood
. The ordinary definition of mortal is dying, and of 
immortal, everlasting. Both of these definitions are wrong. 
Bible students have learned that in the study of God's Word 
confusion is unavoidable unless the true meaning of these 
words is clearly recognized. Mortal is a word which means 
liable to death; mortality, a state or condition in which death 
is possible, but not necessarily a dying condition unless a 
death sentence has been incurred. Immortal means not liable 
to death; immortality signifies the state or condition in which 
death is an impossibility- — a death -proof condition. 

To those who think that the Bible contains many such 
phrases as "immortal soul," "never-dying soul," etc., we can 
do nothing better than suggest that they take a Bible concordance
 and look for such expressions. They will find none; 
and thus those who are really seeking to know the truth on 
these subjects will readily perceive that Christian people in 
general have for centuries been mentally adding to the Word 
of God, much to their own confusion. 

According to the Scriptures the angels have life everlasting
, but are mortal; that is, their life continues everlastingly
 not because they are immortal, or death-proof, and so 
could not be developed by their Creator, but because he purposes
 that they shall live as long as they will use their lives 
in harmony with his just and loving arrangement. That this 
is true is demonstrated by the fact that Satan is eventually 
to be destroyed. — Hebrews 2:14; Psalm 145:20; 2 Thessalonians
 1 :9. 

Before Adam's disobedience, his life condition was similar 
to that now enjoyed by the holy angels. He had life in full 
measure — lasting life — which he might have retained forever 
if he had remained obedient to God. But because Adam was 
not death-proof, because he did not have "life in himself," because
 he was dependent upon conditions subject to his Creator
's pleasure, therefore God's warning that disobedience 
would result in death meant something. {Genesis 2:17; 
Ezekiel 18:4, 20; Romans 6:23) It meant the loss of the 
spark of life given Adam when he was created — "the breath 
of life." without which his body would moulder into dust, and 
the living soul, the sentient being, would cease to exist. If 


father Adam had been immortal, death-proof, God's sentence 
would have been an empty threat, as Satan has made it appear 
to be through hia lie to mother Eve. — Genesis 3:1-5; 2 Corinthians
 11:3; Revelation 20 : 2. 

But while the Scriptures speak of man's mortality, and indeed
 in nearly all particulars confine themselves to man's 
relationship to God, yet they no less positively teach in another
 way the mortality of angels; for they declare that Christ 
"only hath immortality" (1 Timothy 6:16) — the Father, as 
always, excepted. (I Corinthians 15:27) Immortality is a 
quality of the divine nature, and was given to our Lord after 
his resurrection as a reward for his faithful obedience to the 
Father's will even to the extent of self-sacrifice. This exaltation
 raised him, as the Apostle declares, far above angels, 
principalities and powers, and every name that is named in 
heaven and in earth. — Philippians " 2 : 9 ; Epheaians 1:21; 1 
John 3:2; 2 Peter 1:4. 

RESURRECTION THE ONLY HOPE OF THE WORLD 

As the result of Adam's trial in Eden, the death sentence 
passed upon him, and by the laws of heredity has -been inherited
 by all his posterity. But as the result of the ransom
 price laid down at Calvary, the opportunity for a new 
trial is to be granted in due time to each member of the 
human family; and only a favored minority get such opportunity
 and trial during this Gospel age, appointed for the 
church class. This means the rolling back of the original 
sentence of death, and the bringing of all mankind into a 
condition of judgment, or trial, for everlasting life, on the 
basis of their individual obedience or disobedience. This fact 
necessitates the awakening of the dead. Therefore we find 
that the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead has a very 
prominent place in the Scriptures. — Acta 24:14-16; 26:6-8; 
John 5:25, 28, 29. 

The Scriptures teach that at the proper time all mankind 
will be granted a full trial, or judgment, to determine their 
worthiness or unworthiness of life everlasting. Not only 
those living at that time will be granted this opportunity, 
but those who have gone into the tomb will be awakened from 
the death sleep to be judged. This judgment day for all mankind
 is located in the Millennial age, even as the Gospel age 
is the day of judgment for the church. In ita highest and 
ultimate sense restitution will be the bringing of mankind not 
only out of the tomb, but out of the various degrees of death, 
represented in sickness and imperfection, up, up, up, to lasting
 life, such as father Adam enjoyed before his disobedience. 
Full opportunity to attain this blessing of life everlasting will 
be granted to all who are willing and obedient under the 
reasonable terms of the New Covenant which is to be made 
with Israel in due time. — Jeremiah 31:31-34. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE CHURCH 

The phrase "first resurrection" is applied in Scripture to 
the resurrection of our Lord Jesus and the church which is 
his body. (Revelation 20:4-6; Philippians 3:10) This expression
 has the thought of chief resurrection, resurrection to 
the highest, chief position. All who share in it will have divine
 nature — glory, honor and immortality. But if we were 
to mention time and order in connection with it, we would 
speak of our Lord's resurrection as the Head of the Christ 
nineteen centuries ago — in the year 33 A. D. — and the resurrection
 of the church in 1878. Since then, each member of the 
church receives his resurrection "change" as he passes beyond
 the vail. Hence we believe that the first resurrection 
is still in progress, 

St. Paul mentions his intense desire to be made a sharer 
in our Lord's resurrection — the great first resurrection, the 
resurrection to the spirit plane — a partaker of the divine 
nature. In order to attain this distinction, he was anxious 


[6354] 


November 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(343-344) 


to make his calling and election sure by being made conformable
 unto our Lord's death, by being a, living sacrifice; for he 
realized that only thus could he attain membership in the 
glorified body of Christ. 

TWO CLASSES IN THE BESTJSBECTION 

In the context from which our text is taken, the Apostle 
is discussing this first resurrection. He says, "Behold, I 
show you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all 
bo changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the 
last trump; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall 
be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this 
corruption must put on incorruption, and this mortal must 
put on immortality." Here he mentions two classes — those 
who had died in Clirist during the Gospel age and those who 
remained alive at his second coming. These classes are also 
pointed out in 1 Thes&alonians 4:13-17. 

In this connection the Apostle seems to use the words 
mortal and immortality, corruptible and incorruption, in 
such a way as to imply a distinction between them. Apparently
 he applies the words corruptible and incorruption 
when he speaks of those who would have gone into the tomb, 
and mortal and immortality when he mentions those who 
would not yet have passed into death when our Lord returns. 
Those who had gone into the tomb, into corruption, would 
put on incorruption ; but those who were still alive would 
put on immortality. Those who are mortal are liable to 
death; those of the church who remained alive at the time of 
the second advent would in their resurrection "change" receive
 the body that is not liable to death. The terms corruptible
 and incorruption seemingly refer to those o«f the body 
of Christ who were dead at the time of our Lord's return, and 
the words mortal and immortality to those who remained alive 
at that time onward until the last member had experienced 
his resurrection "change/* 

PRESENT CONDITION OF THE OHUBOH IN THE FLESH 

Addressing the new creatures in Christ, and informing 
us that we are spirit-begotten, the Apostle tells ub that this 
new creature has its residence in the old human body. (2 
Corinthians 4:7; 5:1) We are no longer old creatures, because
 the old will is gone. The new will has come in, and 
taken possession of what was once the old person. The "old 
man" and his works are cast off; and the "new man" begins 
to use the mortal body in the service of God. The Apostle 
Peter speaks of us aa in times past having done the will of 
the flesh, and reminds us that henceforth we are to serve the 
will of God, the will of Christ. (1 Peter 4:1-5) This new 
will has no body of its own as yet, and for the time being 
uses the old body. 

In discussing this subject, St. Paul declares that the new 
creature is to put off forever those things which are associated 
with the fallen flesh — the works of the flesh and the devil; 
such as anger, wrath, malice, hatred, strife, etc. Some have 
by nature more of these weaknesses than have others; but 
all have some of them. As a result, the new creature has a 
continual work of putting off the things pertaining to the 
fallen flesh. Meanwhile, the flesh is not counted the new 
creature; but it is his body in the sense that he owns or controls
 it. In other words, it is his property, and he is responsible
 'for it. 

The new body of the new creature is to-be a spirit body. 
The Lord has promised that if we are faithful while we have 
the treasure of the new mind in these earthen vessels he will 
give us a new body of the kind which he has arranged for 
us. This will be a spirit body of the divine nature, and will 
have the quality of life in itself — immortality. But as long 
as the new creature has the old body, there will be a constant
 conflict between the new will and the flesh; for the new 
will seeks to control it. Nevertheless, we as new creatures 
are to maintain a good fight, recognizing that the things of 
the spirit are contrary to the things of the flesh. The two 
are contrary, irreconcilable; they can never come into harmony
. Therefore the new creature is to maintain a severe 
attack of opposition until Anally he shall have won a complete
 victory and the flesh shall be entirely overthrown. — 
Romans 8:13, 14; Galatians 5:15-25. 

The conquest of the fallen human nature will not be fully 
accomplished until the flesh is fully dead. While the body is 
counted dead at consecration, yet it is not actually dead until 
it parts with life. The new creature uses this old body, but 


is promised a new one at the resurrection of the just* This 
change will be instantaneous, not gradual; as the Apostle declares
, "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye." — 1 Corinthians
 15:52. 

RESURRECTION BEGUN IN THE SAINTLY 

The development of the new creature is a work of time. 
It is a matter of the soul, the mind and the will, coming into 
harmony with God and losing all harmony with sin. After 
both mind and will have been tested and fully developed, the 
new creature will be accounted worthy of the resurrection. 
The Apostle tells us that it is sown in weakness, raised in 
power; it 13 sown in dishonor, raised in glory; it is sown an 
animal body; raised a spiritual body. We do not understand 
this to mean that the body is sown, and that the body is 
raised; but that what is sown is the ego, the individual, the 
person who was once a fleshly or earthly being, but who has 
become a new creature. 

In this same connection the Apostle declares in our text 
that this mortal must put on immortality. He seems to be 
speaking of those who would be alive when our Lord returned. 
He says that while we shall not all fall asleep in death, nevertheless
 we shall all experience a change — from the earthly to 
the heavenly nature; and that we who are in a mortal condition
 will put on immortality. In other words, the resurrection
 change of the church will complete the work which has 
been going on for years. This work began when at our consecration
 our wills were buried or immersed into the will of 
Christ, immediately after which we were begotten of the holy 
Spirit as new creatures in Christ, and raised to walk in newness
 of life. But unless this resurection continues, we shall 
not be ready for the consummation of the resurrection in the 
end of the age, "at the last trump." 

Meantime the faithful overcomers are continually putting 
off the deeds of the old nature — anger, malice, hatred — and 
putting on meekness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness
, love. Whoever is growing in truth is growing in all 
these fruits and graces of the holy Spirit; and as he puts on 
these qualities, he becomes strong as a new creature. Finally 
he completes the matter by putting on his new body; for at 
the time of bis "change" he ceases to have further use for 
his human organism, and then he receives the spirit body 
which God has promised. When this has been received, he 
will have been perfected as a new creature in Christ. 

Elseiwhere in this same chapter from which our text is 
taken, the Apostle indicates that in the resurrection there 
will be different orders, or classes of those who come forth 
from the tomb. (Verses 22, 23) First will come the church 
of Christ, in the first resurrection. Next in order will be the 
great company, those spirit-begotten ones who have failed to 
make their calling and election sure. While this class, or 
order, will have a glorious portion upon the spirit plane, yet 
it will not be so high as that attained by the church, the 
body of Christ. Another order to come forth in the resurrection
 will be the ancient worthies, who have the testimony 
that during their lifetime they had pleased God. (Hebrews 
11:39-40) As to the orders to follow, we have no Scriptural 
information. 

Here it may be well to point out that the title "Church of 
the Firstborn" (Hebrews 12:23) was evidently designed to 
include all who would be born of the Spirit — not only the 
little flock who attain the chief resurrection, but also the 
great company who come up out of the great tribulation. In 
the type the entire tribe of Levi was taken as representative 
of all the firstborns of Israel, those who were spared when 
the firstborns of Egypt perished. (Exodus 12:12, 13; Numbers
 3:40-45) This tribe consisted of the priestly family, 
high priest and under priests representing the little flock, 
and the Levites representing the great company. 

In a general way the Scriptures seem to pass by the great 
company class, whatever is stated of them being done in an 
inferential manner. If the Lord had made special promises 
to them, it would imply that they had been called to occupy 
that position; whereas the Scriptures plainly state that all 
of the church are called in the one nope of their calling. 
(Ephesians 4:4) -God did not call any one to the great company
. Those who are finally assigned to that position receive 
it as a kind" of secondary reward, inferior to that which was 
originally offered them. 


THE BINDING OF THE STRONG MAN 

"And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent which is the devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years" 

— Revelation 20:2. 
[Reprint of article published in issue of May I, 1910, which please see.] 

[6S55] 


JOSEPH MADE RULER OF EGYPT 

[The first ten paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "In the School of Adversity," published in 
issue of October 1, 1901. Paragraphs 11 to 18 were reprinted from article entitled, "Far God Was With Him/' published 
in the same issue. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Them That Honor Me I Will Honor," published in 
issue of April 15, 1907. Please see the articles named,] 


A PRAYER OF THANKSGIVING 


We thank thee, Father, for this day; 

We thank thee for the narrow way, 

For love and joy and peace of heart, 

Foiling the tempter's cunning art. 

We thank thee for the mind to do 

Thy sovereign will the whole day through, 

To take each moment as a gift 

Divinely sent us, to uplift 

Some fellow pilgrim on the way, 

Or check the thought that fain would stray 

Afar from thee and speed its way 

To earth's dull care or revels gay. 


We thank thee for a mind intent 
On counting tests as blessings sent 
Straight from the courts of heavenly love 
To bind our souls to things above. 
We thank thee for faith's anchorage, 
That doth our every power engage 
To reach that land where 5s no night, 
Where d.wells the Lamb, thereof the Light. 
With grateful hearts thy love we own; 
We thank thee for the gracious loan, 
Through Christ, of merit for each hour 
Till we shall waken, "raised in power." 


JOSEPH FORGIVES HIS BROTHERS 

{The first fifteen paragraphs and the last paragraph of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Blessed are the 
Merciful," published in issue of April 15, 1907. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Joseph the Merciful/' 
published in issue of October 15, 1901. Please see the articles named.] 

OUR LORD JESUS' PRE-HUMAN EXISTENCE 

Question. — Before his consecration, had Jesus any knowledge
 of his pre-human existence! 

Answer. — There is nothing in the Scriptures to the effect 
that up to the time when Jesus made his consecration and 
was begotten of the holy Spirit he had a definite knowledge 
respecting his pre-human existence. The fact that nothing of 
that kind is stated, however, would not prove that hti.did not 
have some information regarding the matter. We read that 
as a boy he grew in wisdom, in -stature and in favor with God 
and men. We know that in boyhood he was studying the 
Word of God, the prophecies, the law. Even as a child he 
had come to a sufficiency of knowledge to enable him to think 
out quite clearly the meaning of some of the prophecies, to 
see that he had a great work to do, and to conjecture as to 
the nature of that work. 

This is shown in his meeting with the doctors of the law 
at the age of twelve, hearing them and asking them questions 
respecting the prophecies, seeking to know to what extent he 
might be eligible for some kind of service to God as a boy, 
or what would be the starting point at which he would begin 
his ministery. Having ascertained that he could not begin his 
work until he reached the age of thirty, he returned home, 
content to wait until that time. There is no indication of any 
special knowledge or impartation of the Spirit of God until 
he consecrated himself and was baptized at Jordan. 

From his mother Jesus must have gained some knowledge 
of his origin — of how he came into the world. His mother 
did not know of his pre-human existence; but she had been, 
informed by the angel that her son would not be born after 
the manner of men. He had said to Mary: "The holy Spirit 
shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall 


overshadow thee; therefore that holy thing which shall he 
born of thee shall be called the Son of God." And to Joseph 
the angel said: "That which is conceived in her is of the holy 
Spirit. So Mary undoubtedly told her son that he had not a 
human father, but that hi<s Father was God. All our knowledge
 of our Lord's pre-existent condition comes to us from 
Scriptures written later, and from the Master's own words 
after he was begotten of the holy Spirit. 

Just how and when Jesus came to know of his pre-existence 
with the Father we do not know. It seems doubtful that he 
knew <xf this before his spirit-begetting. After he was begotten
 of the Spirit, the deep things of God were opened up 
to him. He then saw from the Scriptures of the Old Testament
 that he was to be the slain lamb; that he would later be 
restored to the heavenly plane of life, and that he was to be 
honored of the Father after his sacrificial work for man. 

We know that his pre-existence was made very plain and 
clear to Jesua; for he declared this on various occasions. 
He said: "What and if the Son of Man shall ascend up where 
he was before?" Again, "Before Abraham was, I am." (John 
6r62; 8:58) In his last prayer with his disciples before 
his crucifixion, he prayed : "And now, Father, glorify thou 
me with the glory which I had with thee before the world 
was; Thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world." 
He spoke of himself as the "bread which cometh down from 
heaven." Again he said: 'The bread of God is he which 
cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world." 
St. John calls him the Word, the Logos, which was "in the 
beginning with the God," and declares that "all things were 
made by him, and without him was nothing made that was 
made." — John 1:1-3. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


BESOLVED TO * 'ABIDE IN THE SHIP" 
Dear Brethren: — 

I desire to express my continued appreciation of The 
Watch Tower, and my complete confidence that the same 
loving Providence which guided our Pastor in founding the 
Tower (Z '16, page 173) continues to guide and direct the 
Editorial Committee in their labors of love through its 
columns. How short is the memory which forgete the oft 
repeated assurances of Brother Russell that The Watch 
Tower is the Lord's channel for the truth and that he was 
its servant? What a loyal "faithful servant" he proved himself
 to be, even to the very last! And now, though passed 
from the busy scenes of his earthly labors, he still ministers; 
for his "works do follow" him. 

The Word says that "hope deferred maketh the heart 
sick." The spring of 1918, like the fall of 1914, brought disappointment
 to many hearts. Nevertheless we can, and do, 
look up and lift up our heads as we behold the multiplied 
evidences of "the effect of every vision." As in the past, 
so now each disappointment brings its trials and siftinga ; 
but when the clouds have gone, greatest opportunities come 
for service. (Z '16, page 170) "They that wait upon the 
Lord shall renew their strength," and we have found it bo. 
I am glad that according to the will of God I am still here 
and pressing toward the mark for the prize. 


But it is sad to note that many once loyal and obedient 
no longer walk with us, some even opposing the way of the 
truth. Can it be that such were heedless of repeated warnings
 to "resist everything akin to occultism," and have given 
ear to evil suggestions, have become victims of abbreviation 
and so have made shipwreck of their faith? Such foolish 
and subversive suggestions as: "The Watch Tower is no 
longer the channel," 'The manna ceased at Passover," "The 
present executive committee are usurpers," etc., are finding 
free circulation in some quarters. Are these brethren going 
Mind? Even a superficial examination of Brother Russell's 
writings would reveal the folly of such suggestions. In the 
Tower of 1909, page 234, the Pastor says: "Truth tests 
character." Yet these brethren argue that error has crept 
into its columns to teat the church. Whither are they drifting
? A careful reading of the Tower for 1909, top of page 
287; that of 1910, page 391; and that of 191S, page 85, may 
serve to open the eyes of some to their danger. See also 
Proverbs 26:17-28. 

I fully ibelieve that the Lord is still at the helm, guiding
 the Society's affairs as of old, even as he promised: 
"Awake, O sword . . . against the man that is my fellow, 
. . . and I will turn my hand over the little [humble] 
ones." As far as I am concerned, through the grace of him 
that never faileth, I am resolved to "abide in the ship." 


(346-350) 


[6356] 


November 15, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(350-351) 


The Pastor's words are true: "Whatever may 'be the difficulties
 of the Lord's children in the near future, there will 
be special comfort in remembering that the Lord i<s able to 
make full provision for all his truehearted ones, and that 
he will do so. Ho will continue to use these agencies; and 
there will be the strengthening of his people to the end of the 
way. If there be any who will not be thus led, it must be 
because there is something wrong in themselves," — Z 1915, 
page 370. 

If I read my Bible aright and understand the Pastor's 
thought, much remains to be done before the kingdom of 
Christ assumes full control; and surely ;the faithful, loyal 
disciples will be honored, as in the past, with further opportunities
 for service. Yes; the church will emerge from its 
"dungeon." (Jeremiah 38) May we all be found faithful! 

YVith assurances of love toward the Bethel family, and 
praying the Lord's rich blessing upon you in your new quarters
, I am 

Your fellow servant, W. A. B. — Oregon. 

GREETINGS FROM AFAB 
Dear Brethren: — 

The Rockdale church of the I. B. S. A. all unite in sending 
love and greetings to all their brethren in Chri-st. We realize 
that all the ways of God are good; yea, all the paths of the 
Lord are mercy and truth unto such as love him. The Lord 
deals graciously with his people. Though he puts them into 
the furnace, he will not suffer it to be heated one degree more 
than is needful. He presides over it himself. In the midst 
of all their trials, he never leaves nor forsakes them. It ia 
delightful to consider that the sufferings which the footstep followers
 of our Master are now called upon to endure are the only 
sufferings which they shall ever experience. God is a sovereign 
good and wise. Who can harm us if we be followers of that 
which is good? Suffering we may endure, but real injury we 
shall not sustain; for Sternal Truth has declared that ajl 
things shall work together for good to them that love God, 
to the called according to his purpose. 

May we all make the glory of God our first and chief 
concern : If Jesus be precious to us, and all else esteemed 
as nothing when compared with him, we shall be able to walk 
before God with a perfect heart, upright and sincere, setting 
the Lord always before us and doing all things to the glory 
of his name. Let our whole desire be that Christ may be 
magnified in our bodies, whether it be by life or death. 

The church here numbers about thirty, and was formed 
about twenty months ago, the Lord having sent his messenger, 
Brother Gates, to this district, to sow this field. We are in 
full accord with the studies in the scriptures; and the 
watoh towebs are much appreciated by all and are eagerly 
read and, being "meat in due season," bring comfort and 
hope, and give us greater zeal in our Master's work. 

Praying that God will bless and sustain you all in every 
trial, and at the end grant you victory through our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and with the assurance of our deepest love and constant
 prayers, we are 

Your brethren in Christ, 

The Rockdale Church. — N. S. W. 
BLESSED ONES THAT DIE IK THE LOBJD 
Mr. Walter Thomas, Vandergrift, Pa. 
Dear Sir: — 

I presume you have doubtless received the sad news of your 
brother, Marks R. Thomas' death; but I am writing to assure 
that he was prepared fully to meet his Master. 

I had a few minutes conversation with him just about one 
hour before he passed away, and he impressed me as being 
the sweetest character I have ever met in the Army in my 
seventeen years of service. He remarked that if he should 
pass away he would show the men around him "how easy a 
Christian could die"; and it was reported that his death was 
a happv one, if such could he. 

I wish to extend to you my sincere sympathy in your 
bereavement, and hope you will nave strength to bear the sad 
news. Faithfully yours, 

S. J. "Smith, Major-Chaplain, Field Artillery, 

Fort Leavenworth, KansaB. 
FINDS GREAT PLEASURE IK BIBLE STUDY 
Deab Bkethren: — 

Grace and peace be unto you! We note the return of the 
Society to its birthplace as of the Lord; and the hope of still 
sharing in the service on behalf of the multitude yet to be 
drawn into contact with the truth is thrilling. If we read the 
signs of the times correctly in conjunction with the prophecies, 
we can see a gigantic federation of religious and civil interests
 soon. At any rate, present conditions are causing an 
immense amount of thinking and of investigation leading to 
causes. On the other hand Jewish themes are threading the 


shuttle for a new garment as the nations approach the nnaie 
of the present conflict. 

1 wish also to say that the study of the Ezekiel Temple is 
surely a fruitful theme to Bible students. How wonderful is 
the thought of restitution for every wrong done, with the 
addition of 20 per cent interest, to" be rendered by all who 
come forth from the tomb! Again, how marvelous it is that 
the east gate is to be closed forever when the church has 
entered it; and that the ancient -worthies will guard the entrance
 all through the Millennium. Also, how just is the 
Jewish system of weights and measures and of symbolism of 
numbers ! 

Some signs and Scriptures indicate that the watch tower 
will continue right through the time of trouble, and that 
through it the divine power will be exhibited in preserving 
the fruits of our Pastor's great labors. Be this as it may, we 
look for a move to the glory of the Lord shortly, through 
the watch TOWEE, using the treasures laid up by our Pastor. 
We would be glad to hear more about the prophecies of Jeremiah
, as they seem so full of interest at this time, especially 
to the church. 

The Lord bless and keep you all, loving and faithfully doing
 his will. 

Yours in the most loving of bonds, J. (J. — Colp. 

LOVING GBEETINGS FROM THE NORTHWEST 
Deab BKETHREX: — 

Greetings in the name of God our Father and of our Lord 
Jesu3 Christ. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you. The 
Everett Church have voted to send their Christian love and 
support to you all in this our time of special trial and of trying
 experiences. Do not forget to keep us on the list when 
Pilgrims are routed this way. 

There seem to be some who have taken a stand against 
the watch tower because of certain articles published therein
. They say that the tower is not used of the Lord any 
more. Yet some of the articles thus criticized were from the 
pen of our beloved Pastor. Here we know that we have 
arrived at a time when every one must stand for himself, or 
in other words, "when every tub must stand on its own bottom
/' Let every one read prayerfully and carefully Romans 
14:4, 22, 23. 

We have learned well the lesson that there are two tables: 
one, the table of Babylon, full of error and uncleanness; the 
other, the table of the Lord, spread with heavenly bounties, 
a feast of fat things. (Psalm 23:5) We also know that 
God has used the watch tower ever since its dedication, 
to proclaim our Lord's presence and to do the harvest work. 
Then why should he cast it off at this time above all others, 
just when we need its help as never before? We remember 
his promise that he will never leave nor forsake us. We also 
believe that through the tower the Lord is fulfilling the statement
 of Isaiah 21:5: "Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower
, eat, drink; arise, ye princes, anoint the shield." 

Have not our prayers been answered as we have asked 
God's guidance of the dear brethren at the Watch Tower 
office? Dear ones, let us keep together, provoking one another
 unto love and good works, building each other up in 
the most holy faith. Laying aside all malice and jealousy, 
let us pray for one another always, remembering our standard
, the mark of the prize — perfect love. God bless the 
watch toweb! 

With much Christian love and prayer, 

The Everett Ecclesia. — Wash. 
"NATIONS SHALL COME TO THY LIGHT*' 

Gentlemen : — 

By accident I got the loan of a copy of one of the publications
 of your Society. I read the most of it carefully and, 
I must admit, was very favorably impressed. I am an Episcopalian
, but have not attended services to any great extent
. The many quotations and your interpretations from the 
Bible have led me to doubt my position as a believer in the 
doctrines of that church. Now, there is one important point 
that must be clearly and satisfactorily answered before I 
separate from the Episcopalian Society: In your Finale of 
this book in question I read thus: "Are you aware that he or 
she who denies or denounces the sayings of this little booklet 
is not denouncing the compiler, but the Word of God?" By 
this, I presume, you hold the Bible as your only authority. 
In other words the Bible, and the Bible only, is your guide 
and the guide of every teacher in your church. 

Now I have long -been doubtful as to the confidence I should 
possess before taking the Bible as the Word of God. If. the 
Bible is your guide, and your only guide, satisfy me that it is 
indeed the Word of God; and I will become a member of 
your church immediately. I am sincere in this matter, but 
need convincing. Do not presume that I am a prayer less 


[6357] 


(351-35S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


man. On the contrary I have been praying for light, and 1 
think my prayers have been heard; for I feel that there is 
something in your church worth while considering. 

I beg to remain moat sincerely yours, E. B. — Md. 

FAITH IJT GOD'S OVERRULING PROVIDENCE 
Dearly Beloved Brethren in Chbist: — 

Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father and 
from the Lord Jesus Christ. The church at Dallas has voted 
to extend to you our love and sympathy in this hour of final 
trial and testing, and to assure you of our prayers and cooperation
. We believe the Lord will uphold and guide you 
in your efforts at service as long as there is any work for 
the angel of Revelation 8:3 j and for this we pray daily. We 
appreciate your services to us, and we rejoice in the blessings 
that each issue of the watch tower ibrings. 

We do not know just what awaits us; but we do know 
that "all things work together for good to them that love 
God, to them who are the called according to his purpose"; 
and that no weapon formed against hia children can prosper 
in the sense of injuring them as new creatures. 

Remembering you daily at the throne of grace, and with 
much Christian love, we are 

Your brethren in Christ, The Dallas Ecclesia. — Texas. 
THE EXPRESSION OF A NOBLE HEART 
Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings in the Lord's name; and may grace and peace 
be multiplied unto you. I am writing you at this time to 
advise you of my regret at having taken any part in causing 
to be circulated a certain letter in which surprise was expressed
 re articles on pages 152, 168 and 174 of the 1918 
watch toweb. 

Because of certain conditions that have arisen in local 
classes, the conviction has been growing in my mind that 
perhaps, after all, the above mentioned articles were right, 
and that I along with a number of others was wrong. So I 
determined to reread them with a mind as unbiased as possible
. This I did last night and again this morning; and, 
thank God! I can say from the bottom of my heart: "I find 
no fault with them." I found that I could unreservedly 
accept them for what they say, but not for what others think 
they say. So I haste to write you my apology for having 
opposed in any sense the words which have come forth from 
the channel the Lord has so abundantly used in the past. 

Your brother in the one hope, J. T. B. — B. C. 

"THERE IS NO SCHISM IN THE BODY" 
Deab BRETHRFlN in the LOBD:— 

We would like the dear Bethel family to know that they 


are daily remembered in our prayers. We are grateful for 
the continued help given us through the towers, which are 
still coming through regularly. We ask the Lord's guidance 
and help for you in these times of difficulty, knowing that we 
shall be heard, as we believe he will continue to use you as 
he has done in the past if you remain steadfast and faithful 
unto the end. 

With fervent love in our dear Redeemer, 

Sec'y London Tabernacle. — Eng. 
DAILY PRAYERS FOE HEAVENLY WISDOM 
Beloved Brethben: — 

The Associated - Bible Students of Bristol and vicinity held 
a two-days' convention here Sept. 21, 22, in which the spirit 
of the Lord was manifested in a most noticeable manner by 
all who attended; and we were blest beyond measure. Praise 
his name! 

A motion was made, which carried unanimously, to draft 
a resolution to send to you, which read substantially: 

"Resolved, That we conventioners here assembled at Bristol, 
Tenn., hereby repledge our loyalty and* undivided support to 
our brethren at the headquarters* of the Watch Tower Bible 
& Tract Society, and most especially to those in direct charge 
of the work; that our prayers continue to ascend daily for 
them to exercise the spirit of a sound mind at all times and 
to be guided by the unerring counsel of the Lord, until our 
heavenly Father is pleased to place his everlasting arms about 
us and welcome us to the Great Convention, our eternal 
home." 

Bristol, Tenn., Convention. 

SECOND THOUGHTS ABE BEST 
Bear Brethren: — 

I am writing this letter to make clear my attitude toward 
the Society. When I read Brother Johnson's paper, "Harvest 
Sittings Reviewed," last November, I was so moved to sympathy
 for him that I resigned from my position at the Tabernacle
 office force. 

Two months later, however, I wrote that I had made a mistake
, that I had had the opportunity of thinking the entire 
matter over calmly, and that I realized that I had permitted 
my sympathies to get the better of me. Ever since that time 
my heart has been with the Society; and I am happy to say 
that, at the present time, in spite of the many influences that 
have been exercised to swerve me from my position, I find 
myself in fullest harmony with the Society. 

With much Christian love, 

Yours in the Crucified One N. Y. 

