VOL. XIV. JULY 1 & 15, 1893--DOUBLE NUMBER. NO. 13 & 14. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



"Take counsel together, and it shall come to 
naught; speak the word, and it shall not stand: 
for God is with us."— Isa. 8:10-16. 

IT is becoming more and more evident to the 
religious leaders of Christendom, that the 
various sectarian creeds will not much longer 
serve to hold together the membership of their 
several organizations. Hence new schemes 
are being formed to take the places long held 
by doctrines true and false, to unite the 
people, behind denominational fences, on other 
than doctrinal lines. The opening of the 
eyes of men's understandings is progressing 
at a marvelous pace, and the unreasonableness, 
and deformity and absurdity of the various 
creeds are becoming apparent to the most obtuse. 
What once passed for truth without a 
question, because promulgated by clerics or 
councils is now boldly challenged for reasonable 
and Scriptural authority. A prominent 
Presbyterian clergyman, Rev. T. DeWitt Talmage, 
is reported to have said:— 



"I would that this unfortunate controversy 
about the confession of faith had not been 
forced upon the church; but now, since it is 
on, I say, Away with it, and let us have a new 
creed." 

Another, Rev. Sawin, of Troy, N. Y., said 
recently:— 

"I do not like the idea of Calvinism: Calvin 
was a murderer and a scoundrel. He said 
many good things and those I accept, but the 
Church should be an exponent of the gospel, 
and not of Calvinism." 

Indeed one cannot read the daily press without 
realizing that the great nominal church, of 
all denominations, is being shaken from center 
to circumference. The strife of tongues among 
both the clergy and the laity is sending consternation 
throughout all Christendom. 

In this extremity of Ecclesiasticism a happy 
thought struck some one, and it has found an 
echo throughout the length and breadth of 
Christendom. It was to send the Macedonian 
cry around the world, to all its heathen priests 
and apostles, to "Come over and help us." 
And the heathen have heard and heeded the 
cry; and Christian ministers are looking forward 
with high hopes to this grand ecumenical 
council of all the religions of the world, 
to be held in Chicago next September, confessedly 
for suggestions as to how they may 
get up a new religion that will be acceptable, 
if possible, to the whole world. 

A prominent New England Congregational 
minister, Rev. J. G. Johnson, is reported to 
have said with reference to it:— 

"For seventeen days these various religions 
will have the opportunity to assert themselves, 
learn something ourselves. In every religion 
there is some trace of God; and what are the 
false religions but the broken and distorted 
echoes of the voice of Jehovah?" 

The Rev. Mr. Barrows, of Chicago, spoke 
enthusiastically of the friendly relations manifested 
among Protestant ministers, Catholic 
priests, Jewish rabbis, and, in fact, the thinking 
heads of all religions extant, by the correspondence 
in reference to the great Chicago 
parliament. He says:— 

R1546 : page 196 

"The old idea that the religion to which I 
belong is the only true one, is out of date. 
There is something to be learned from all religions, 
and no man is worthy of the religion 
he represents unless he is willing to grasp any 



man by the hand as his brother. Some one 
has said that the time is now ripe for the best 
religion to come to the front. The time for a 
man to put on any airs of superiority about his 
particular religion is past. Here will meet the 
wise man, the scholar and the prince of the 
East in friendly relation with the archbishop, 
the rabbi, the missionary, the preacher and the 
priest. They will sit together in congress for 
the first time. This, it is hoped, will help to 
break down the barriers of creed. All religions 
are but the imperfect rays shining from 
our Father." 

The Rev. T. Chalmers, of the Disciples 
Church, says:— 

"This first Parliament of Religions seems to 
be the harbinger of a still larger religious fraternity 
—a fraternity that will combine into one 
world religion what is best, not in one alone, 
but in all of the great historic faiths. It may 
be that, under the guidance of this larger hope, 
we shall need to revise our phraseology and 
speak more of religious unity, than of Christian 
unity. I rejoice that all the great cults are 
to be brought into touch with each other, and 
that Jesus will take his place in the companionship 
of Gautama, Confucius and Zoroaster." 

The New York Sun, in an editorial on this 
subject, recently said:— 

"We cannot make out exactly what the 
Parliament proposes to accomplish.... 
It is possible, however, that the Chicago scheme 
is to get up some sort of a new and compound 

R1547 : page 196 

religion, which shall include and satisfy every 

variety of religious and irreligious opinion [we 

would add— of note or influence]. It is a big 

job to get up a new and eclectic religion satisfactory 

all around; but Chicago is confident 

that it can finish up the business on the 27th 

of next September." 

The various religions of Earth will set forth 
their claims as to points of superiority until 
Sept. 26th, when as per announcement a conclusion 
will be sought, the theme for that day 
being, "The religious union of the whole human 
family." On the next and last day, the 
Parliament will consider "The elements of perfect 
religion as recognized and set forth in the 
different faiths," with a view to determining 
"the characteristics of the ultimate religion," 
and "the center of the coming religious unity of 
mankind." Is it possible that thus, by their 
own confession, Christian (?) ministers are 



unable, at this late day, to determine what 
should be the center of religious unity, or the 
characteristics of perfect religion? Are they 
indeed so anxious for a "world religion" that 
they are willing to sacrifice any or all the principles 
of true Christianity, and even the name 
"Christian," if necessary, to obtain it? Even 
so, they confess. "Out of thine own mouth 
will I judge thee, thou wicked and slothful 
servant," saith the Lord. The preceding days 
of the conference will be devoted to the setting 
forth of the various religions by their 
respective representatives. 

The scheme is a bold and hazardous one, 
but it should open the eyes of every true child 
of God to several facts that are manifest. (1) 
That the nominal Christian church has reached 
its last extremity of hope in its ability to stand, 
under the searching judgments of this day 
when "the Lord hath a controversy with his 
[professed] people"— nominal spiritual Israel. 
(Micah 6:1,2.) (2) That instead of repenting of 
their back-slidings and lack of faith and zeal 
and godliness, and thus seeking a return of divine 
favor, they are endeavoring, by a certain 
kind of union and co-operation, to support one 
another, and to call in the aid of the heathen 
world to help them to withstand the judgments 
of the Lord in exposing the errors of their human 
creeds and their misrepresentations of his 
worthy character. (3) This willingness to compromise 
Christ and his gospel, for the sake of 
gaining the friendship of the world and its 
emoluments of power and influence, should be 
evident to every thinking person. (4) Their 
blindness is such that they are unable to distinguish 
truth from error, or the spirit of the 
truth from the spirit of the world, and they have 
already lost sight of the doctrines of Christ. 

Doubtless temporary aid will come from the 
source whence it is so enthusiastically sought; 
but it will be only a preparatory step which 
will involve the whole world in the impending 
doom of Babylon, causing the kings and merchants 
and traders of the whole earth to mourn 
and lament for this great city.— Rev. 18:9,1 1,17. 

R1547 : page 197 

THE NEXT RELIGIOUS CONFERENCE AT 
JERUSALEM. 

Another movement, having the same general 
end in view, has already been proposed, and 
doubtless took practical shape, at the celebration 
of the Fourth of July in the city of Philadelphia. 



The proposition, as clipped from the 
Philadelphia Inquirer, is as follows:— 

THE PROPOSED UNION OF SECTS. 

"Independence Hall on the day of the celebration 
will be the scene of a meeting of representatives 
of the different sects in this city, 
at which resolutions will be adopted setting 
forth the scope of the proposed celebration of 
the advent of the twentieth century of Christianity 
by an international gathering at Jerusalem 
six years hence. The preliminary steps 
were taken yesterday in historic Carpenter's 
Hall. The idea, it is said, seems to take all 
over the United States. All seem to think that 
it is appropriate, and that it comes appropriately 
from America. It is proposed to send 
the resolutions to the World's Fair Commission 
and have them notify the representatives 
of all nations, governments and provinces there 
assembled of this glorious conception. 

"Dr. McCook spoke of the difficulties in the 
way. 'The differences,' he said, 'were sentimental 
and conscientious. If Israelites, Mohammedans 
and all others can thus meet, it 
will be an auspicious opening for the twentieth 
century. They say, We want to get the Anglicans, 
Russians, Germans, Roman Catholics, 
Greek Orientals, Nestorians, and all others. 
There is no objection in regard to sect or denomination 
in such a meeting. It simply brings 
the human family together.' 

"A committee which shall have power to 
enlarge its numbers was appointed to push the 
movement. The idea is to have the proposed 
resolutions prepared by the different sects and 
read at the meeting in Independence Hall on 
July 4 before they are sent to Chicago." 

This movement will doubtless supplement 
and further confirm the results of the great 
Chicago Parliament, the design of which is the 
"religious unity of the race," no matter what 
the character of the religion may be; for, as 
some of the projectors affirm, they think the 
present is no time for Christians to put on any 
airs of superiority about their particular kind 
of religion. This is the day of compromises 
demanded by "the exigencies of these times" 
of Babylon's judgment. And the compromises, 
they realize, must be made, or the whole 
structure of "Christendom"— i.e., "Babylon," 
must hopelessly perish. 

We cannot afford, say the various denominations 
of Protestantism, to ignore and disfellowship 
that great branch of Christendom, the 



Church of Rome ["Babylon the great, the 
mother of harlots"]. All are now in haste to 
erase from their creeds those articles referring 
to Papacy as the Antichrist; and they say, We 
must secure Roman Catholic co-operation and 
assistance at any cost, while the Papacy only 
holds back for the privilege of dictating the 
terms of co-operation— which will be hers or 
none at all. The same compromising spirit is 
also manifest in the desire and effort to unite 
the various sects of Protestantism. In the 
more honest moods of former times Christians 
drifted apart because of their honest conceptions 
or misconceptions of divine truth; but 
now, too ignoble to confess their errors, yet 
anxious for union, they are ready to compromise 
their views of truth and their consciences 
for the sake of unity. 

This was very noticeable in the late Presbyterian 
Assembly at Washington, D.C., in their 
consideration of the overtures of the Protestant 
Episcopal church for unity and co-operation. 
When one gentleman, Dr. Hollifield, ventured 
to remind the assembly of its duty of honest 
consistency and fidelity to conscientious convictions, 
he was speedily silenced, and his unpopular 
utterances were frowned upon and denounced 
as uncharitable and unchristian, because 
against the present clerical policy of 
union and compromise. 

Dr. Hollifield said he thought the committee 
on church unity made a mistake when it proposed 
to shift the discussion from the differences 
between the two great ecclesiastical bodies 
named, to those in which they were in harmony. 
He was aware that the propositions were made 
with the best intentions in view; but he did 
not believe the unity hoped for could be secured 
by the means proposed. It was these 
differences, and not those points on which they 
were in accord, that had produced their alienation. 
The causes of the alienation should first 
be removed. The differences were not of minor 

R1547 : page 198 

importance: they were of a serious character. 
One obstacle was the Romish doctrines and 
practices of many (and a constantly increasing 
number) of the Protestant Episcopal churches. 
Many of them were so high— or, he would say, 
so low— that a stranger visiting one of them 
might mistake it for a Roman Catholic church. 
The Episcopal high church, he said, was nothing 
more nor less than a back door to Rome. This 
state of affairs was a barrier to Christian unity 



in its full sense, for they could not afford to 
enter into relations with a church whose trend 
was Romeward, if they were to be true to a pure 
gospel. This fidelity to a sacred trust, he said, 
is all the more imperative at the present, when 
Rome is finding a firmer foothold on our shores. 
But this earnest exhortation found no response 
in the hearts of other members of the 
assembly, and even this gentleman, in remaining 
in the organization, must submit his conscience 
in the matter to its majority decision, 
and thus become a partaker of their sins. His 
only proper course under these convictions 
would be to step out.— Rev. 18:4,5. 

"RELIGIOUS RIOTS ARE ABROAD." 

There is something very significant in the 
reported advice of Mr. Talmage to his congregation 
recently. He raised the question, What 
position shall we take with regard to the religious 
controversies now distracting the church? 
and then replied:— 

"Stay out of it. While these religious riots 
are abroad, stay at home and attend to business. 
Why, how do you expect a man only 
five or six feet high to wade through an ocean 
a thousand feet deep? I have not given two 
minutes in thirty years to studying the controversial 
points of religion; and if I live thirty 
years more I shall not give one-thirtieth of a 
second to them. The world is now being creeded 
to death. The young men now entering the 
ministry are being launched into the thickest fog 
that ever beset a coast." 

What confession! and what advice from a 
professed minister of the gospel of Christ! He 
sees the churches floundering about in a dense 
fog of ignorance and superstition, with dangerous 
rocks upon which their barks may be dashed 
at any moment; yet, by his own confession, 
he has not spent two minutes in thirty years in 
"earnestly contending for the faith once delivered 
to the saints," nor in studying to show 
himself "a workman approved unto God, rightly 
dividing the word of truth;" but has contented 

R1548 : page 198 

himself with delivering eloquent addresses to 
please the itching ears of an admiring public, 
instead of using his talents as a wise and faithful 
steward of his Master's goods. Such the 
Lord seems to denominate "wicked and slothful 
servants." 
But it is becoming more and more impossible 



to stay out of these controversies as he advises, 
and to remain neutral in the midst of the 
judgments of this Day of the Lord. The fire 
of this day will try every man's work, of what 
sort it is (1 Cor. 3:13); and if his faith is built 
with the stubble of error it will surely perish. 

The only safe way for any child of God to 
do is to ignore the advice of all such time-serving 
shepherds, and to see to it that his 
faith is securely founded upon the Rock, Christ 
Jesus, our Redeemer and Lord; and that its 
superstructure is built only with the gold and 
silver of inspired truth. But to do this, he 
would best take the advice of the Lord and the 
apostles in preference to that of Mr. Talmage 
or others.— "Search the Scriptures," and believe 
their testimony, rejecting all that is contrary 
to them. "To the law and to the testimony: 
if they speak not according to this 
word, it is because there is no light in them." 
-Isa. 8:20. 

What, indeed, may we expect to be the character 
of the "new," "electic" "world religion" 
which is to be evolved out of the present disorder 
and confusion— out of the present "thick 
fogs," "religious riots," and "ecclesiastical 
hysterics," as the present unrest is variously 
designated by prominent clergymen; when the 
leaders of Christendom have lost their landmarks 
and see nothing in Christianity whereof 
to boast over the superstitions of heathenism? 
Consistency would call in their missionaries. 

The church of Rome is determined that the 
character of the coming "world religion" shall 
be Papal, and is making every possible effort 
to that end. It is reported that within the 
last year Pope Leo XIII. , in negotiations with 
the Greek Catholic church, has practically 
brought within view the reunion of the long 

R1548 : page 199 

separated Greek and Roman Catholic churches. 
And every intelligent observer of the times 
knows of his policy and its progress here. 

The spectacle of Christendom to-day is indeed 
unique. On the one hand the power of 
the disintegrating elements is strikingly conspicuous, 
while on the other, the tendency to 
unity is very pronounced. The spirit of liberty 
and independence of thought and action, 
the increase of knowledge and general intelligence, 
and the awakening faculties and sensibilities 
of all classes, is rapidly tending to disintegration 
of the old creeds and of the great 
systems built upon them. The daily press reports 



a recent split, even in the Roman Catholic 
church in France, which is significant of 
the disintegrating work, even in the strongest 
holds of superstition. Thus men are being 
shaken apart and made to stand alone upon 
their own convictions. 

Such is the natural tendency of the present 
times in accordance with the Lord's design. 
The tendency to unity is, on the contrary, an 
artificial one and the efforts in that direction are 
made for policy's sake by those whose financial 
and social interests are bound up with the 
old tottering systems. The clergy are making 
use of their office to withstand the inevitable 
current of the present natural tendency; and 
they will doubtless succeed for a time, but only 
to make the final outcome more appalling. 

The one thing most desired by the clergy, 
whose craft and reputation and honors are in 
danger, and which they, as a class, are most 
earnestly striving for, is Union at any cost; 
because in union there is strength. But thus 
saith the Lord of hosts by the mouth of the 
Prophet Isaiah (Isa. 8:9,10), "Associate yourselves, 
O ye people, and ye shall be broken in 
pieces; and give ear, all ye [heathen] of far 
countries; gird yourselves and ye shall be 
broken in pieces. Take counsel together and 
it shall come to naught; speak the word and 
it shall not stand." 

"SHE SHALL NOT BE MOVED." 

But, while assuring us that the nominal 
church will be utterly broken to pieces in this 
her judgment day, after, by her own strife of 
tongues, she has confessed her own blindness 
to truth and reason, her own nakedness, so far 
as the robe of Christ's righteousness, and her 
own unfaithfulness to her espoused Lord, God 
assures us it shall not be so with his true 
Church. Hidden for centuries in the great 
mass of tares of the nominal systems, the true 
Church as represented by its living members 
will now be manifested; although the world 
which knew not her Lord and Head will not 
recognize her worth or beauty. But the Lord 
knoweth them that are his, and will be gathering 
his elect ones out of the various divisions 
of Babylon, and will bless and feed them, 
while Babylon is falling. Hence now the cry, 
"Come out of her [Babylon] my people, that 
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) The 
peaceful keeping of his true Zion, by the Lord, 
throughout this stormy day, of judgments upon 



civil, religious, social and financial systems, is 
shown in prophetic symbology in Psalm 46. 



R1559 :page 199 
REST IN THE LORD. 

Just to let thy Father do 

What he will; 
Just to know that he is true, 

And be still. 

Just to follow, hour by hour, 

As he leadeth; 
Just to draw the moment's power 

As it needeth. 

Just to trust him: this is all! 

Then the day will surely be 
Peaceful, whatsoe'er befall, 

Bright and blessed, calm and free. 

Just to recognize its light, 

All-enfolding; 
Just to claim its present might, 

All-upholding. 

Just to know it as thine own, 
That no power can take away: 

Is not this enough alone 

For the gladness of the day? 

Just to let him take the care 

Sorely pressing, 
Finding all we let him bear 

Changed to blessing. 

This is all! and yet the way 

Marked by him who loves the best: 
Secret of a happy day, 

Secret of his promised rest. —Selected. 



R1548 : page 200 

MAN AND WOMAN IN GOD'S ORDER. 



[We devote considerable space in this issue to the 
consideration of woman's sphere, as viewed from the Bible 
standpoint; especially in the light of the Apostle Paul's 
teachings. A very general misunderstanding of the Apostle's 



words has fostered a spirit of doubt as to his divine 
inspiration, and thus proved a steppingstone to Infidelity. 
Such doubts having once gotten control of the mind are apt 
to lead to the very extreme of so-called Woman's Rights 
—forcing some to an extreme on that side of the question 
as others have gone to an extreme on the opposite side: 
making women mere slaves, drudges or entertainers for 
men— erroneously supposing that the apostles so taught. 
These articles may therefore be considered as supplemental 
to our defense of the apostolic authority and inerrancy, 
presented in our issue of May 1st, and are called forth in 
response to many inquiries.] 

WHILE we recognize the fact that, as spiritual 
new creatures in Christ Jesus, we 
are not esteemed of God on account of pedigree, 
station or sex; that, in his estimation 
of worthiness for the heirship of the coming 
Kingdom, "there is neither Jew nor Greek, 
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither 
male nor female, for we are all one in Christ 
Jesus" (Gal. 3:28), and are "all called in one 
hope of our calling" (Eph. 4:4), it is nevertheless 
true that we are still in the flesh and 
that we have to do with earthly conditions; 
and, further, that upon our proper attitude in 
the various relationships of life, and our faithful 
observance of the teachings of the Scriptures 
with reference to them, our worthiness or 
unworthiness of divine favor is judged. While 
every question of moral rights and obligations 
is pushed to the front in this "day of preparation" 
(Nahum 2:3), this subject is coming 
forward for consideration and ventilation, as 
many Infidels and even Christians are claiming 
that the Bible teaches domestic slavery. 

It will therefore be our endeavor to present 
as briefly as possible what we believe to be the 
Scriptural view of this subject, assured that, 
whatever may be the human prejudices of various 
individuals, God's Word is the only safe 
guide to the truth. His Word is by no means 
silent with reference to it; and an examination 
of all its testimony on the subject will, we believe, 
entirely silence in the estimation of all 
fair minded Christians the above mentioned 
charge against the Bible. 

The first testimony of the Bible on this subject, 
aside from the statement that the man 
was made first and the woman subsequently as 
his capable helper and suitable companion, is 
found in God's statement to the woman after 
the eating of the forbidden fruit— "Thy desire 
shall be unto thy husband, and he shall rule 
over thee." While authority to rule is naturally 
implied in the headship of the man (1 Cor. 11; 



1 Tim. 2:13), yet, it is not difficult to see that 
the Lord referred to something more than this; 
for its mention is in connection with the penalty 
put upon woman, because of her share in 
the original sin. The implication is that her 
husband's rule would be tyrannical, and that 
she would suffer injustice under it, which she 
would not have suffered otherwise. And such 
has been the case: the rule or headship of the 
husband, which in perfection would have been 
a rule for the protection and in the interest of 
all the members of his family— a rule of love, 
a guidance rather— has in a majority of cases 
become, through the fall, a rule of selfishness, 
and fear, and general imposition. Indeed some 
men will use this very Scripture as a justification 
of their course of selfish tyranny. 

But while facts fully corroborate the Lord's 
testimony on this subject, it is a great mistake 
to suppose that God's will is done by those 
who thus misuse their natural headship. On 
the contrary, we should see in the expression 
God's prophecy of the evil that would come 
upon womankind by reason of the fall of man 
from his original likeness of God. And, be it 
noted, the more degraded the man the more 
unfeeling will be his treatment of the one whom 
he should love and cherish as his own body. 

Man's sphere in the world is pretty clearly 
defined as the head or chief of the creation, 
while the woman's sphere as a help, meet for 
him, is a much more debatable one. The 
question is, "To what extent may she help 
him?" While we believe that, according to 
the Bible teaching, she may help him to the 
extent of her ability and opportunity— in the 
home, the church and the world— we hear 

R1549 : page 201 

many dissenting voices in favor of very considerably 

circumscribing her influence, if not 

in the home, at least in the church and in the 

world. Let us hear, therefore, first, What 

saith the Scripture concerning— 

WOMAN'S PLACE IN THE CHURCH. 



Peter, addressing the whole Church, without 
respect to sex, says, "Ye are a chosen generation, 
a royal priesthood, a holy nation,... 
that ye [all— male and female] should show 
forth the praises of him who hath called you 
out of darkness into his marvelous light." 



(1 Pet. 2:9.) And again we read (Isa. 61:1), 

"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because 

he hath anointed me to preach," etc. 

See also Luke 4:18-20, where our Lord quotes 

and applies only a part of this prophecy to 

himself, leaving another portion of the commission 

which was not due in his day for the 

body of Christ— male and female— to declare. 

The word "because" shows that the anointing 

is for the very purpose of fitting those so anointed 

—whether male or female— to preach the 

good tidings. Therefore all of the anointed, 

male or female, Jew or Greek, bond or free, 

are anointed to preach. 

In Heb. 5:12 Paul upbraids the Church, 
making no distinction of sex, for inability to 
teach on account of neglect of opportunities to 
fit themselves for the work, saying, "For when 
for the time [spent] ye ought to be teachers, 
ye have need that one teach you again which 
be the first principles of the oracles of God; 
and are become such as have need of milk and 
not of strong meat." Again we read (1 Pet. 4: 10), 
"As each one [male or female] has received 
a free gift, so minister the same one to 
another as good stewards of the manifold grace 
of God." "Moreover," says Paul (1 Cor. 4:2), 
"it is required in stewards that they be found 
faithful." There is no distinction of sex here: 
each one, male or female, who possesses a talent 
or gift, becomes a steward of the same; and in 
the reckoning day the Lord will require each 
steward to give an account of his stewardship. 
Faithfulness is required of all in the use of 
all talents possessed. -Matt. 25:14-30. 

In harmony with the teaching of these scriptures, 
that women, as well as men, are accountable 
to God for the use of their talents in the 
Church, be they many or few, and also with 
the teaching of Paul, that the activity of every 
member of the body of Christ is necessary to 
the general health of the whole body, we have 
numerous precedents established in the Scriptures. 
Thus (1) the women who were the first 
at the sepulcher on the morning of the resurrection 
were sent by the Lord to bear the first 
message of his resurrection to the apostles. 
(2) The woman of Samaria with whom the 
Lord conversed, and to whom he was pleased 
to reveal himself as the Messiah, was not forbidden 
to go into the city and declare the 
news to many— which she did at once, leaving 
her water-pots and going in haste. And the 
result was that many believed through her testimony, 
however she may have declared it.— 
John 4:28-30,39. 



We find, too, that women, as well as men, 
shared the gift of prophecy, which the Apostle 
Paul (1 Cor. 14:3,4) defines to be "speaking 
to edification, exhortation and comfort"— i.e., 
teaching or exhorting according to the measure 
of the gift of God. (See also 1 Cor. 12:31.) 
And in 1 Cor. 11, Paul admits the propriety 
of women publicly praying and prophesying, 
provided they do so with becoming 
modesty, of which the covering of the head 
was in those times a special mark, particularly 
among the Greeks, here addressed. To ignore 
such a custom, as some seemed inclined to do 
when they began to realize the liberty of the 
gospel, would have brought reproach upon the 
cause of Christ, and also upon "the angels," 
messengers or ministers of the Christian faith 
—the apostles and others. 

We have some examples of prophesying, by 
women,— for instance, Anna (Luke 2:36-38); 
Philip's four daughters (Acts 21:8,9); Miriam 
(Micah 6:1-4); Huldah (2 Chron. 34:21-28) 
and Deborah (Judges 4:4-24). And, further, 
we have the remarkable prophecy of Joel 2:28,29, 
of which Peter claimed there was at 
least a partial fulfilment on the day of Pentecost, 
when the holy Spirit descended in power 
upon all present. (Acts 2:17,18.) Paul also 
mentions with evident appreciation the activity 

R1549 : page 202 

of certain females in the early Church- 
notably Priscilla, Tryphena, Tryphosa, the 
mother of Rufus and Julia, the sister of Nereus. 
(Rom. 16; also Phil. 4:3.) And in every instance, 
except 1 Cor. 16:19, where Priscilla 
and her husband Aquila are mentioned, Priscilla 
is mentioned first, as if she were the more 
prominent and active of the two. (See Rom. 16:3; 
2 Tim. 4:19; Acts 18:18,26 R.V.) She 
and her husband also accompanied Paul on 
one of his journeys from Corinth to Ephesus, 
where they met Apollos and were both diligent 
in instructing him more perfectly in the truth. 
(Acts 18:18-26.) Although the Scriptures are 
not addressed to the world, they utter no voice 
and establish no precedent contrary to female 
activity in the various legitimate pursuits of 
life for which nature and education have 
fitted her. And though in times past female 
education was at a very low ebb, and women 
were seldom fitted for other than domestic 
pursuits, we have a worthy example of one efficient 
female Judge in Israel— Deborah, the 
wife of Lapidoth (Judges 4:4-24; 5:1-31) who 



was also a prophetess and evidently a woman 
of great ability and influence. Huldah, the 
wife of Shallum (2 Kings 22:14-20), was also 
a prophetess to whom the king of Israel sent. 

From all these indications we gather that 
God, who is no respecter of persons, requires 
faithfulness on the part of female as well as 
male stewards in the use of all their talents, 
with no other restrictions than that they do so 
with that modesty which is specially becoming 
to their sex; and that, if God gives to any female 
member of the body of Christ a talent 
or special ability for teaching or prophesying, 
as she has done in the past, it is her privilege, 
and not only so, but her duty, to earnestly cultivate 
and use that talent as a wise and faithful 
stewardess. This the Apostle Paul also clearly 
teaches in 1 Cor. 12:28-31, when, after 
naming teaching as one of the best gifts, he 
urges all, without distinction of sex, to "covet 
earnestly the best gifts." 

WOMAN'S RELATIONSHIP TO MAN. 



Let us next note what some consider a direct 
contradiction of the foregoing Scriptural 
findings in the words of the Apostle Paul (1 Tim. 2:12) 
—"I suffer not a woman to teach, 
nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be 
in silence" [hesuchia, quietness]. But the 
Apostle proceeds to give his reason for the restriction; 
and in doing so he refers us back to 
the original relationship of Adam and Eve in 
the garden of Eden, saying, "For Adam was 
first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not 
deceived, but the woman, being deceived, became 
a transgressor." Turning to Genesis (2:16-18) 
we see that, before Eve was created, 
"God commanded the man, saying, "Of every 
tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat: but 
of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil 
thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day that 
thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." 

It is plain, then, that the Lord did not communicate 
directly with Eve, but with Adam, 
and that Eve received this warning from 
God through Adam. Thus Adam, under God, 
was the teacher, and Eve the learner. And 
it was right and proper, in this instance at 
least, that the woman should "learn in silence 
with all subjection," as the Apostle counsels in 
1 Tim. 2:11. What right had she to object? 
God had taught her husband, and in giving her 
to him had imposed upon him the duties of a 



husband (a care-taker and provider for her), 
and in fulfilling this obligation Adam had 
communicated to Eve this knowledge which 
was necessary to her preservation and her harmony 
with God. Thus God taught the headship 
of man, which the Apostle would have the 
Corinthian Church distinctly understand.— 
ICor. 11:3. 

In addressing himself to Eve the Adversary 
tempted her to disregard the warning of God 
through her husband. This she did, and that 
without even consulting Adam as to the propriety 
of heeding this new and strange instructor, 
who was evidently out of harmony 
with God. In acting thus, independent both 
of God and of the natural protector which God 
had provided, the woman became a transgressor; 
and since she thus ignored God, she was 
left to her own judgment entirely, and was deceived; 
not, however, as to the unrighteousness 
of her course, but as to the result of that 

R1549 : page 203 

course, which she presumed would lead to 
greater blessing (knowledge), instead of to 
death. And not only did she thus ignore 
Adam and the instruction of God through 
Adam, and act entirely upon her own judgment, 
but she further assumed to lead or teach Adam 
her new doctrine, thus reversing the divine 
order of headship. And in following this reversed 
order of headship, Adam, though not 
deceived, also became a transgressor. 

It is for this reason, says the Apostle, that I 
suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority 
over the man. But how to harmonize 
this restriction with the seemingly contrary 
scriptures already referred to still remains a difficult 
question to many; one, however, to which 
there surely must be some solution. First, we 
would inquire, Does this order of headship inhere 
in mankind as a class, distinct from woman-kind? 
or does it apply merely in the relationship 
of husband and wife? That the former 
is true, is, we think, quite evident from 1 Cor. 11:3, 
which reads, "I would have you know 
that the head of every man is Christ; and the 
head of the woman is the man; and the head 
of Christ is God." 

What, then, we would inquire, is implied in 
this office of headship? The figure, we see, is 
drawn from that important member of the human 
body, the head, which is the chief member— the 
member in which inheres the right of leadership 
and authority. And this interpretation is borne 



out by the perfect illustration of headship in 

R1550 : page 203 

the relationship of Jehovah to Christ. In the 
one inheres the legislative, in the other a delegated 
executive power. In accordance with 
the illustration, therefore, the relationship of 
man to Christ and of woman to man should be 
that of subserviency; and if men and women 
were perfect the beautiful harmony of such a 
relationship would yield perfect satisfaction to 
both. Man would be in harmony with Christ, 
woman in harmony with man, and all in harmony 
with Jehovah. Thus the divine order of 
headship would unify all in the bonds of mutual 
love and peace. 

But the question arises, How is this idea of 
headship compatible with the idea of individual 
liberty— the glorious liberty of the sons of 
God? Is the illustration of head and body to 
be pressed to its utmost limit here? The human 
body in health never performs an act except 
by the authority and consent of the head; 
and the mystical body of Christ (the Church), 
in health always delights to know and to do 
the will of Christ; and Christ has ever sought 
to know and do the Father's will. And so 
likewise if the human family were unimpaired 
by sin woman would enjoy her station and 
man would not misuse his strength, mental or 
physical, tyrannically. Looking again at the 
perfect illustration of this relationship between 
Jehovah and Christ, we see that the order of 
headship, rightly exercised, is entirely compatible 
with the glorious liberty of sons of God. 
For although Jehovah is the head of Christ we 
see him delighting to honor his Son, making 
him in turn the head of all principality and 
power (Col. 2:10; 1:16; Eph. l:10-Diaglott), 
and calling upon all men to "honor the 
Son, even as they honor the Father" [for he is 
the Father's representative and the express image 
of his person]. We see him also committing 
all judgment unto the Son. He first 
proved him and found him worthy of confidence; 
and then, having made known his plans 
to him, he committed to him their execution. 
And so we read, "The Father judgeth no man, 
but hath committed all judgment unto the 
Son" (John 5:22), and, again, that "all power 
in heaven and in earth" is given unto him.— 
Matt. 28:18. 

Surely there is no semblance of bondage in 
this relationship of Christ to Jehovah; but under 
Jehovah's supreme headship there is the 



fullest liberty and the widest scope for the development 

and use of all Christ's noble powers. 

And Christ, on his part, as subject to Jehovah, 

his head, is in all his works subject to those 

principles of action and that plan of work 

which the wisdom and goodness of Jehovah 

have decreed. Within these metes and bounds 

of Jehovah's headship, then, is the glorious 

liberty of the only begotten Son of God. 

Thus should man also be subject to his head, 

which is Christ, whose supervision, like that of 

Jehovah, is also sufficiently generous to admit 

of the widest range and development of all his 

R1550 : page 204 

manly powers. And thus, also, should the 
headship of man be exercised toward woman— 
not to degrade and dwarf her powers under the 
bondage of tyranny, but to elevate and ennoble 
her; granting to her, under his leadership and 
encouragement, the fullest liberty for the legitimate 
use of all her powers. 

But to return to Paul's statement, "I suffer 
not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority 
over a man," we see that, in harmony with the 
reason given for the restriction, and also with 
the fact that they did teach on numerous occasions 
mentioned in the Scriptures, we must 
interpret the former clause of this statement in 
the light of the latter, viz., that the woman is 
not to usurp the natural position of the man as 
leader and teacher, and, disregarding his headship, 
to take that attitude herself— an attitude 
contrary to nature, incompatible with womanly 
grace, and unlovely in the eyes of all right-thinking 
people. With this interpretation of 
the Apostle's language here, his teaching elsewhere, 
for instance in 1 Cor. 11:5, is in entire 
harmony. 

The idea is not to debar woman from her 
privilege and duty of making good use of all 
her talents as a wise stewardess, and as one 
who must give an account of her stewardship, 
nor to prohibit her from teaching the truth to 
others, but rather to point out to her the excellent 
and most effective ways for the use of 
her influence in life. Nature would, doubtless, 
generally indicate to both men and women 
their proper spheres for usefulness; but alas! 
none can be found in a natural condition:— 
all are fallen, mentally, physically and morally; 
and some more than others and in different 
ways. No womanly woman takes as her ideal 
a noisy declaimer, an assertive debater, an obtrusive 
public speaker, nor an ambitious leader. 



And yet, on fitting occasions, where the interests 
of the truth require it, she may, in a 
womanly way and without the least assuming 
the manly prerogatives of headship, declare the 
good tidings of great joy to as many as will 
hear her, whether male or female; and on some 
occasions the interests of the truth may necessitate 
her debating a question, which can often 
be just as effectively done in a suggestive, as 
in an assertive, way; and generally much more 
so, as some men, as well as women, have 
learned. Those who understand human nature 
best, know that frequently more can be done 
in the way of disarming prejudice and establishing 
the truth by the latter, than by the 
former method. 

A woman may thus, in the full exercise of 
her liberty as a child of God, bring forth all 
her strong reasons before as many as desire to 
hear, and may clearly state her own convictions 
of the truth, but always with that moderation 
and candor which, acknowledging the 
natural headship of man, would avoid even the 
appearance of dictation or usurping of authority; 
and if there be a man present who can and 
will relieve her of the responsibility of so prominent 
a position, her natural modesty should 
decline the undertaking. The "silence" or 
quietness enjoined by the Apostle in the above 
text, is not to be understood in an absolute 
sense, but rather in that relative sense which 
would harmonize with his admission of woman's 
right to pray, or prophesy, or explain the 
truth, as they evidently did in the apostles' 
days, when they had ability and opportunity. 
In 1 Thes. 4:10,11 the Apostle similarly exhorts 
the brethren to quietness saying, "We beseech 
you, brethren,... that ye study to be 
quiet and to mind your own affairs, and to 
work with your hands as we commanded you." 
The same word is also used in 1 Tim. 2:2. 

The expression of the Apostle Paul in 1 Cor. 14:34,35, 
we need to remember, was addressed 
to a class of Greek converts to Christianity 
whose habits were altogether different from the 
civilization of to-day, as well as from those of 
the Hebrew and Roman civilizations of that 
day. While Greece was the center of learning 
in its day, the women of Greece were very degraded 
and ignorant, so that it was necessary 
to speak to some of them with a degree of 
force which the Apostle never used in speaking 
to either Hebrew or Roman Christian women. 
From this epistle, we see that the Church 
at Corinth was in a very disorderly condition, 
and that their assemblies were often confused 



and unprofitable. The Apostle, in this chapter, 
is laying down some very necessary rules and 

R1550 : page 205 

regulations, so that all things might be done 
"decently and in order" (verse 40); and the 
disorderly women as well as men (verses 28,30,33; 
chap. 11:17-22,31-34; 6:5-11; 5:1-13; 
3:1-3) came in for their share of the needed 
reproof. It was a shame for those women to 
speak in the Church, first, because any publicity 
of their women was so regarded there and 
then; and, secondly, because they were unfitted 
to do so intelligently, and so it was better 
that they should listen in silence at the 
meetings of the Church, and inquire further of 
their husbands [literally, men] at home. To 
force the application of this instruction upon 
the whole Church during the entire age, would 
do violence to the general tenor of Scripture 
teaching with reference to woman's sphere of 
action and responsibility of service as man's 
worthy and suitable help-mate, which the Lord 
pronounced her to be. As well might we bind 
upon the entire Church the obligations of literally 
washing one another's feet and greeting 
one another with a holy kiss, which are repeatedly 
enjoined (See Rom. 16:15,16; 1 Cor. 16:20; 
1 Thes. 5:26; 1 Pet. 5:14), but which 
we instinctively recognize in spirit, but not in 
letter; the courtesies and civilities of our times 
being somewhat different from the customs of 
that day, although equally hospitable. 

In order that all may see clearly the conditions 
which necessitated the Apostle's seemingly 
harsh language to the women of the 
Corinthian Church, we make a few brief quotations 
from noted authors, showing the state 
of society in Corinth, Ephesus and the principal 
cities of the Greek civilization of that time. 

In the Contemporary Review, Vol. 34, March 
1879, page 700, in an article on "The Position 
and Influence of Women in Ancient Athens," 
Prof. Donaldson of St. Andrews University, 
Scotland, says:— 

"In Athens we find two classes of women 
who were not slaves. There was one class who 
could scarcely move one step from their own 
rooms, and who were watched and restricted 
in every possible way. There was another class 
on whom no restrictions whatever were laid, 
who could move about and do whatever seemed 
good in their own eyes. The citizen women 
[the wives] had apartments assigned to them, 
generally in the upper story. They were forbidden 



to be present at any banquet. The men 

preferred to dine with themselves rather than 

expose their wives to their neighbor's gaze. 

Seemingly the education of girls was confined 

to the merest elements. It is scarcely possible 

to conceive that such a marvelous crop of remarkable 

men, renounced in literature and art, 

could have arisen if all the Athenian mothers 

were ordinary housewives. [But they were not: 

multitudes of the mothers were not wives, but 

were of the educated though dissolute class, 

above mentioned, who were granted every 

R1551 : page 205 

liberty.] But though there never was in the 
history of the world such a numerous race of 
great thinkers, poets, sculptors, painters and 
architects in one city at one time, as in Athens, 
not one virtuous Athenian woman ever attained 
the slightest distinction in any one department 
of literature, art or science. 

"We pass from the citizen women [the wives] 
of Athens to the other class of free women— 
the strangers or courtesans. These stranger 
women could not marry. They might do any 
thing else they liked. The citizen women were 
confined to the house and did not dine with 
the men; but the men refused to limit their associations 
with women to the house. Accordingly 
they selected these stranger women as 
their companions; and 'Hetairai,' or companions, 
was the name by which the whole class 
was designated. The citizen women had to 
be mothers and wives, nothing more. The 
stranger women had to discharge the duties 
of companions, but to remain outside the pale 
of the marriageable class. They were the only 
educated women in Athens. Almost every one 
of the great men in Athens had such a companion, 
and these women seemed to have 
sympathized with them in their high imaginations 
and profound meditations. 

"But the Athenian women, even the citizens, 
had no political standing. They were always 
minors. Such, however, was the force of character 
of these 'Hetairai,' or such their hold on 
powerful men, that not infrequently their sons 
were recognized (by special decree) as citizens. 
The names of virtuous wives are not to be found 
in history; but the influence of the 'Hetairai' 
comes more and more into play. They cultivated 
all the graces of life; they dressed with 
exquisite taste; they were witty. But it must 
not be forgotten that hundreds and thousands 
of these unprotected women were employed as 



the tools of the basest passions, seeking only, 
under the form of affection, to ruin men and 
send them in misery to an early grave." 

Every statement here quoted from Prof. Donaldson 
is amply supported by citations from 

R1551 : page 206 

Greek authors in the writings of Prof. Becker, 
of Germany, who is quoted by all recent writers 
as unquestioned authority upon ancient 
Greek and Roman life. In his "Charicles," 
page 463, he says:— 

"At this time, and in the very focus of civilization, 
the women were regarded as a lower 
order of beings; naturally prone to evil, and 
fitted only for propagating the species and 
gratifying the sensual appetites of man. There 
were no educational institutions for girls, nor 
any private teachers at home. They were excluded 
from intercourse, not only with strangers, 
but also with their own nearest relations, 
and they saw but little even of their fathers 
and husbands. The maidens, especially, lived 
in the greatest seclusion until their marriage, 
and, so to speak, regularly under lock and 
key." Page 287— "At Athens it was a thing 
unheard of for any free woman to make purchases 
in the market." 

In a work on "Old Greek Education," by 
Prof. J. P. Mahaffy, of Trinity College, Dublin 
—page 1 1 —he mentions the frequency with 
which children were exposed or left to die of 
starvation and neglect, and says:— 

"We cannot really doubt that the exposing 
of new-born infants was not only sanctioned 
by the public feeling, but actually practiced 
throughout Greece. Plato practiced infanticide 
under certain circumstances in his ideal 
state. Nowhere does the agony of the mother's 
heart reach us through their literature, 
save where Socrates compares the anger of his 
pupils when first confuted out of their opinions, 
to the fury of a young mother deprived 
of her first infant. There is something horrible 
in the allusion, as if, in after life, Attic 
mothers became hardened to this kind of treatment. 
The exposing of female infants was not 
uncommon." 

The bearing of this general condition of woman 
under the Greek civilization upon the language 
of the Apostle Paul to some of them, is 
still more clearly seen when we consider that 
Corinth was one of the worst of the Grecian 
cities. Prof. Becker says:— 

"Corinth seems to have surpassed all other 



cities in the number of its Hetairai, to whom 
the wealth and splendor of the place, as well 
as the crowd of wealthy merchants, held out 
the prospects of a rich harvest." 

From these observations it is clear that when 
Corinthian men became Christians, and, disregarding 
the prevailing public sentiment, 
brought their wives with them to meetings of 
the Church, the women were very ignorant and 
lacking in essential decorum and were inclined 
to disturb the meetings by asking unprofitable 
questions, which the Apostle instructed them 
to inquire of at home of their husbands, who 
could give them the simple instruction which 
they needed; for it was an improper thing for 
those women to speak in the Church and to 
disturb its proper, orderly worship, etc. We 
must remember, too, that Christianity then, as 
now, did not generally make its converts among 
the great men and philosophers, but among 
the poorer classes— the common people. 

This condition of the Corinthian women also 
makes very clear the necessity of the Apostle's 
instructions in 1 Cor. 11, about the covering 
of the head, which among that people 
specially was an indication of modesty. To 
have suddenly disregarded the custom, when 
they began to see the liberty of the gospel, 
would have been misunderstood, and would 
probably have cultivated in them, in their ignorance, 
a disposition to ignore the headship 
of man, and to become self-conscious and 
self-assertive. 

When we note the very different conditions 
of the Roman and Hebrew women, we can account 
for the absence of any such instruction 
in the epistles to the Roman and Hebrew 
Christians. 

Dr. Smith, in his Greek and Roman Antiquities, 
says:— 

"The position of a Roman woman after marriage 
was very different from that of a Greek 
woman. The Roman wife presided over the 
whole household, and shared the honor and 
respect shown to her husband." 

And Prof. Becker says:— 

"The Roman housewife always appears as 
the mistress of the whole household economy, 
instructress of the children, guardian of the 
honor of the house, and equally esteemed with 
her husband, both in and out of the house. 
The women frequented public theaters, as well 
as the men, and took their places with them 
at public banquets." 

The freedom of women in Hebrew society 
is so manifest from the Scriptures as to need 



no further proof. They freely conversed with 

the Lord and the apostles, and other male disciples, 

R1551 : page 207 

attended the meetings of the Church 

and Synagogues, and went about with entire 

freedom. Consequently, when Christianity took 

hold of them, it found them ready for Christian 

work without being hampered by the restraints 

of hereditary custom, which among 

other peoples must be measurably adhered to 

until a gradual reconstruction of public sentiment 

could be brought about, lest otherwise 

reproach be brought upon the cause of Christ. 

WOMAN A HELP, MEET FOR MAN. 



"And Jehovah said, It is not good that the man should 
be alone: I will make him a help suitable for him.... 
And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl 
of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam 
there was not found a help suitable for him. ...And 
the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made 
he a woman, and brought her unto the man. And Adam 
said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. 
She shall be called woman [ishah], because she was 
taken out of man [ish]."— Gen. 2:18,20,22,23. 

In pursuing our study of woman's appointed 
place in the divine economy of creation, we 
turn to the above brief account of her first introduction 
to the earth and to man; for the 
Apostle says, "the woman was created for the 
man." (1 Cor. 11:9.) As the account indicates, 
the object of woman's creation was that 
she might be a suitable help for man. That 
man needed just such a help is indicated, not 
only by the Lord's statement that it was "not 
good" for him to be "alone," but also by the 
statement that among all the animals there was 
none found to be "a suitable help." True, 
they were all in perfect subjection to him as 
their lord and master, and perfectly obedient 
in rendering all the service required. Many 
of them were strong to bear his burdens, some 
fleet to run his errands; some gratified his love 
of the beautiful in form and proportions, and 
some in plumage; some charmed his ear with 
strains of music; and all manifested more or 
less of intelligence and affection; yet in all 
there was a lack. The perfect man did not 
crave a burden-bearer, nor an errand-runner, 
nor a gay butterfly to please the sight, nor a 



charming musician: what he craved was an intelligent 
sympathetic companion; and this lack, 
the "suitable help," which God subsequently 
provided, exactly supplied. 

When God had created her and brought her 
to the man, Adam named her woman. That 
the word was not used to specially indicate the 
power of motherhood, is manifest from the fact 
that when God said that she should become a 
mother, Adam changed her name to Eve, because 
she was to be the mother of all living. 
(Gen. 3:20.) We also read (Gen. 5:2) that 

R1552 : page 207 

"God called their name Adam in the day 
when they were created." Thus both God and 
the man recognized this new creature as of the 
same nature as the man, and yet differing from 
him both physically and intellectually. She 
was not another man, but another human being, 
the counterpart of the man, and therefore 
a suitable helper for him. 

She was a help in that she was a companion 
for him. Before she came, Adam, though surrounded 
by a host of the lower animals, was 
"alone," and in need of the help of companionship 
which they could not supply. That 
the help needed was not merely in the work of 
propagating the species is clear, from the fact 
that she was recognized and accepted as the 
suitable and desired help from the very beginning, 
and before the propagating of the race 
was mentioned— which did not begin until after 
the fall. This was a merciful providence, in 
order that, as Paul shows, every member of the 
race might share the blessings of redemption 
through Christ. -Rom. 5:12; 11:32,33. 

We thus see that man found in the woman 
an intellectual companion, one capable of sharing 
and appreciating all his joys (he had 
no sorrows) and of participating with him in 
all his interests. Had she come short of such 
capacity she would not have been a suitable 
companion or help, and Adam would still have 
been to some extent alone. As the sons and 
daughters of men have multiplied, the same 
characteristics as in the beginning continue to 
distinguish the two sexes, with the exception 
that both have suffered from the fall; hence 
the two sexes still stand similarly related to 
each other— man the "head" of the earthly 
creation, and woman a "suitable help" for him. 
And this, as the Apostle shows (1 Cor. 11:3), is 
regardless of the marriage relation. Man, in 
the image and glory of God, was created the 



R1552 : page 208 

sovereign of the earth; and woman, "the 

glory of man" in all the natural relationships 

of life, but especially that of wifehood, is his 

worthy companion and joint heir, his queen. 

And in this sense, God gave to them both, originally, 

the earthly dominion— over the fish, 

fowl, beasts of the field, etc.— Gen. 1:27,28; 

Psa. 8:6-8. 

It is therefore fitting that this natural relationship 
of the sexes should always be observed; 
that woman should remember that she is not 
the head, the chief, the leader, in the world's 
affairs, though there is ample scope for the use 
of all her powers under a proper and generous 
exercise of the headship of man. And it is 
equally necessary and proper that man should 
fully recognize, appreciate and accept of the 
help which woman is capable of rendering in 
all the affairs of life where such capability is 
manifest. If God has given to her talents, they 
were given her for cultivation and use, in order 
that she might be a more efficient help for man; 
and it would not be right, nor can man afford, 
to refuse such help and seek to dwarf such 
talents. Let the "help" help as much as possible, 
even though in the present imperfect 
condition, as is sometimes the case, the help 
may outstrip the head in ability, either natural 
or acquired. So long as the woman's work is 
done in a modest, womanly way— with no disposition 
to lord it over the divinely appointed 
head or king of earth— let her do with her 
might what her hands find to do. 

As a general thing, however, woman's special 
helpfulness is in the sphere to which her special 
work of necessity usually confines her— as wife, 
mother, sister, friend— in the home, the schoolroom, 
and in the duties which naturally fall 
to her in religious and in social life, and occasionally 
in business life. Let woman bring into 
all these relationships her highest moral 
and intellectual attainments, the finest touches 
of art, and the most noble physique which nature 
and cultivation can give, and she will the 
most truly answer the ends of her existence as 
a worthy and suitable help to earth's intended 
king— man. True, man and woman have lost 
the dominion of the earth originally bestowed 
upon them as king and joint-heir; but still, 
though under the burden of the curse, woman 
can be a help, meet for man, in the struggle 
upward toward perfection; and no true man 
will despise such helpfulness when tendered in 



a spirit of sisterly interest. 
WOMAN AS A WIFE. 



Having seen that the natural attitude of women 
in general to men in general is that of 
suitable helps, and not of heads, let us now 
consider the Scriptural position respecting woman 
as a wife. In alas too many cases, this, the 
dearest relationship of earth, is degraded to a 
domestic slavery. And the slave-holding tyrants 
too often pervert or misinterpret the 
teachings of the apostles to the support of their 
course— some unwittingly. It is therefore our 
purpose to examine such scriptures as are frequently 
urged in the interest of domestic tyranny 
and in the dwarfing and degrading of 
woman in her noblest sphere on the natural 
plane,— as a true wife. 

We are free to assert in the outstart that the 
Scriptures, rightly interpreted, teach no such 
thing; and one of the best evidences that they 
do not, is seen in the fact that the Lord has 
chosen this relationship as a type of the relationship 
between himself and the glorified 
Church— a consummation so glorious, that it 
is held out as a prize to the faithful children of 
God all through the Gospel age; a prize worthy 
of the sacrifice of every temporal interest, even 
unto death. The type of such a relationship 
ought, indeed, in some sense, to manifest that 
coming glory. 

We have already seen that in the relationship 
of head and body, to which the Apostle 
compares husband and wife, and which is gloriously 
illustrated in the relationship of Jehovah 
to Christ Jesus, and between our Lord Jesus 
and the Church, there is nothing incompatible 
with "the glorious liberty of the sons of God," 
and hence that the other headship of man over 
woman, rightly exercised, is likewise compatible 
with a similarly glorious liberty. 

We have also seen that the headship of man 
is not designed to debar woman from the privilege 
and duty of making the fullest use of her 
talents as a wise stewardess in the service of the 

R1552 : page 209 

Lord; but rather to increase her usefulness by 
putting her powers and energies in co-operation 
with a still stronger power. 

As an illustration of the apostolic teaching 
presumed to imply a servile subjection of the 



wife to the husband, we are sometimes referred 
to Eph. 5:22-24— "Wives, submit yourselves 
unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord; for 
the husband is the head of the wife, even as 
Christ is the head of the Church; he is the 
preserver of the body. Therefore, as the Church 
is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be subject 
to their own husbands in every thing." 

If the office of the head inheres in men in 
general, and should be observed by women in 
general, the argument gathers force in the 
special relationship of husband and wife; for 
the reverence which woman naturally feels for 
the opposite sex, ought indeed to be intensified 
in the case of the man she has accepted as her 
husband. The manner in which the wife is 
counselled to submit herself to her husband is 
clearly set forth by the Apostle to be— "as the 
Church is subject unto Christ." It behooves us, 
therefore, to note just how the Church is subject 
unto Christ. We see that the subjection 
of the Church to Christ is a willing subjection, 
and that it is inspired by love, veneration, gratitude 
and implicit confidence and trust in the 
Lord's love and care for us, and in his superior 
wisdom to do better for us than we could 
do for ourselves. And so perfectly did the 
Apostle himself take this attitude toward Christ, 
that it was his effort, he said, to bring every 
thought into subjection to him. (2 Cor. 10:5.) 
That such an attitude on the part of the wife 
toward her earthly head is not always possible, 
he also admits, when he says to the husbands 
(Eph. 5:33), "Let each one of you, individually, 
so love his own wife as himself, in order 
that [hina, so rendered in Eph. 3:10, Diaglott] 
the wife may reverence her husband." 

Only true love and true nobility of character 
can command such reverence; otherwise it 
would be impossible for the wife to submit herself 
to her husband as the Church is subject 
unto Christ. Nor would it be right either to 
reverence or to submit to that which is ignoble 
and unholy. But both the reverence and the 
submission are possible, as well as natural, notwithstanding 
the fallibility of the earthly head, 
where there is that nobility of character on the 
part of the man which, humbly acknowledging 
its fallibility, is amenable to the voice of God 
in the Scriptures, and to reason. 

It will be noticed, further, in the apostolic 
counsel to husbands (verses 25-29), that the 
stated object of Christ's supervision of the 
Church, and of her submission to him, is not 
the clipping of her spiritual or intellectual 
opinions, nor the dwarfing or degrading of her 



powers, nor to attain any ignoble or selfish 

ends; but, on the contrary, it is for the more 

complete sanctification and cleansing of the 

Church with the washing of water by the Word, 

that she might be holy and without blemish, 

not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. 

And this disposition on the part of Christ toward 

the Church is made manifest to her by 

the self-sacrificing spirit of him who loved the 

Church and gave himself for it. And, says the 

Apostle, "So ought men to love their wives, as 

their own bodies," that thus they may command 

the reverence and loving submission of 

the wife, "in every thing"— not, of course, 

in every thing unholy, impure and selfish, but 

in every thing tending to holiness and purity 

and that true nobility of character whose principles 

are set forth in the Word of God. We 

have a very marked example of the Lord's displeasure 

against the improper submission of a 

wife to a husband, in the case of Sapphira, the 

wife of Ananias.— Acts 5:7-10. 

It would indeed be a blessed and happy condition 
of affairs if all the husbands and all the 
wives were students of the example of Christ 

R1553 : page 209 

and the Church; but the lamentable fact remains 
that but few apply their hearts unto the 
instruction here furnished; and many husbands, 
forgetting to observe Paul's instructions to 
follow the model, imagine they have a right to 
arbitrary and selfish authority, against which 
the wives feel a righteous indignation and an 
opposition which is far from submission; and, 
failing to understand the Scriptures on the subject, 
they claim and think that the Bible 
teaches domestic tyranny and slavery; and thus 
the way is paved to doubt and infidelity. 

R1553 : page 210 

But what shall I do? says the Christian wife 
whose husband is not guided by Christian 
principles, except to the extent of claiming his 
presumed right to rule in selfishness. Well 
that would depend on circumstances: it would 
have been better if in your youth you had remembered 
the Apostle's counsel to marry only 
in the Lord; and you must now pay some penalty 
for your error. But in the first place you 
should remember not to violate conscience in 
order to please any one; for Peter says, "We 
ought to obey God rather than men." (Acts 5:29; 
4: 19,20.) But where conscience does 



not interpose its dictum, the Apostle gives to 

such wives the same counsel that he gives to 

servants who have unreasonable masters. (1 Pet. 2:18-23; 

3:1,2.) To the servants he says, 

"Servants, be subject to your masters with all 

fear [i.e., with caution, lest you offend]; not 

only to the good and gentle, but also to the 

froward;" this because it is better to suffer 

wrongfully than to be contentious, even for 

our rights. "For this is well-pleasing, if a 

man for conscience toward God endure grief, 

suffering wrongfully; for what glory is it, if 

when ye be buffeted for your faults ye shall 

take it patiently? But if when ye do well and 

suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable 

with God." Then he points to the example 

of Christ in carrying out the same principle, 

saying (verse 21), "For even hereunto were 

ye called, because Christ also died for you, 

leaving you an example that ye should follow 

his steps;" and "the servant is not above his 

Lord." (Matt. 10:24.) Then he adds, "Likewise, 

ye wives [ye who have froward husbands], 

be in subjection to your own husbands, that if 

any obey not the Word, they may without the 

Word be won by the conduct of the wives, 

while they behold your chaste conduct coupled 

with fear [with carefulness to avoid giving 

offence]"— thus manifesting a spirit of loving 

forbearance, rather than of contention. 

And while the wife is here specially counselled 
to imitate Christ's humility, the husband 
is urged to imitate Christ's generosity— "Likewise, 
ye husbands, dwell with them [your wives] 
according to knowledge [wisely and generously], 
giving honor unto the wife [taking pleasure 
in her progress and in all her noble attainments 
and achievements], as unto the weaker 
vessel [using your strength for her support and 
encouragement, and not for her oppression], 
and as being heirs together of the grace [the 
favors and blessings] of life." 

The same spirit of submission, rather than 
of contention, is likewise enjoined upon the 
whole Church in its relationship to the civil 
ordinances of men. Thus Peter says, "Submit 
yourselves to every ordinance of man, for 
the Lord's sake"— i.e., so that his spirit or 
disposition may be manifest in you— "For so 
is the will of God, that with well-doing ye 
may put to silence the ignorance of foolish 
men." (1 Pet. 2:13-17.) And Paul says, "Let 
every soul be subject unto the higher powers," 
etc. (Rom. 13:1,5); and to Titus (3:1) he 
writes: "Put them in mind to be subject to 
principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, 



to be ready to every good work." 

This duty of submission (specially enjoined 
upon the wife in the domestic relation) is also 
enjoined upon the whole Church individually, 
in their relationship one to another. Thus the 
Apostle Peter says, "The elders which are among 
you I exhort:... Feed the flock of God. 
...Neither as being lords over God's heritage, 
but being ensamples to the flock [ensamples 
of humility, brotherly love, patience 
and faithfulness]. Likewise, ye younger, submit 
yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all of you 
be subject one to another, and be clothed with 
humility; for God resisteth the proud, and giveth 
grace to the humble. Humble yourselves, 
therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that 
he may exalt you in due time."— 1 Pet. 5:1-6; 
Eph. 5:21. 

Doubtless if there were one perfect man in 
the Church the counsel to the remainder of its 
membership would be to submit to his leading 
and instruction. But, instead of an infallible 
man in the Church, we have the infallible 
written Word, by which we are each and all 
counselled to prove all things. And, therefore, 
the first duty of submission is to the written 
Word, and afterward to each other in that 
secondary sense which first proves all things by 
the Word; and lastly in the sense that our 

R1553 : page 211 

manner and language should be tempered with 
moderation and brotherly and sisterly kindness 
and candor, that this spirit of submission or 
humility might always be manifest in all. 

In a similar, but in a stronger sense, the 
Apostle presents the duty of submission on the 
part of the wife in the domestic relation. It is 
a submission which savors of love, reverence, 
trust and humility; and which is also compatible 
with "the glorious liberty of the children 
of God" (Rom. 8:21), which always exists 
wherever the spirit of the Lord is (2 Cor. 3:17), 
and in which the Apostle Paul urges us to 
"stand fast."— Gal. 5:1. 

We are referred by Peter to Sarah, Abraham's 
wife, as a proper example of a wife's submission. 
But notice that, while she did reverence 
Abraham, as indicated by her calling him lord 
(Gen. 18:12), and while she, no doubt cheerfully, 
left her native land and friends and, in 
obedience to the command of God to her husband, 
accompanied him in his sojournings to 
the land of promise, with him walking by faith, 
we see that her submission was not a blind submission 



which refrained from expressing a 
thought which differed from Abraham's; nor 
was there anything in Abraham's conduct toward 
her which indicated such expectation on 
his part. She was evidently a thinking woman: 
she believed the promise of God that they should 
have a son through whom the blessing of the 
world should come; and when nature seemed 
to fail she suggested a way in which the promise 
might be fulfilled. And when Hagar became 
boastful and despised her mistress, she complained 
to Abraham and claimed that the fault 
was partly his. She wanted no division of his 
heart with her servant. Abraham's reply assured 
her that there was no such division, that her 
maid was still under her control. And her 
subsequent course with Hagar was a discipline 
to correct her boastfulness and improper attitude 
toward her mistress. And when Hagar 
fled from her, the angel of the Lord met her 
and told her to return and submit herself to 
her mistress, which she did, and was evidently 
received and restored by Sarah.— Gen. 16. 

On another occasion, after Isaac was born 
and the two boys were growing up together, 
the rivalry of Hagar again cropped out in Ishmael, 
who persecuted Isaac, Sarah's son. (Gen. 21:9; 
Gal. 4:29.) And again Sarah was grieved 
and appealed to Abraham to cast out the bond 
woman and her son; for she feared Abraham 
would make him heir with her son, which would 
not have been in accordance with the promise 
of God. (Gen. 21:10-12; 15:4; 17:17-19.) 
This, Abraham was not inclined to do, and as 
Sarah urged her claim, we read that "the thing 
was very grievous in Abraham's sight because 
of his son," Ishmael, until God indicated his 
will in the matter. 

This is further shown in this case to which 
Peter refers us for example, saying (to those who 
are similarly subject, to their husbands) "whose 
daughters ye are, doing good, and not fearing 
any terror"— any evil results. (1 Pet. 3:6.) 
The submission counselled by the apostles is a 
reasonable submission, compatible with a moderate, 
modest expression of the wife's sentiments 
and a proper consideration of the same by the 
husband, as in the case of faithful Abraham, 
who was by no means led about by the whims 
of a foolish wife, but who, in a reasonable consideration 
of his wife's sentiments and trials, 
waited to know the will of the Lord before 
granting her wishes. 

From the above considerations it is obvious 
that the human relationship of husband and 
wife, which the Lord points out as an illustration 



of the beautiful relationship of Himself and 

the Church, is by no means an occasion for the 

exhibition of either tyranny or servility on the 

part of either party. And wherever such conditions 

do exist, they are out of the divine order. 

The Lord set his seal of approval upon marriage 

when he instituted the relationship and 

blessed the union of the first pair in Eden; and 

when, as king and queen— head and help-mate— 

he made them joint-inheritors of the earthly dominion 

(Gen. 1:27,28); and later, when he 

commanded children to honor and obey both 

parents.— Exod. 20:12; Eph. 6:1,2. 

The curse of sin has rested heavily upon 
woman, as well as upon man; but the Christian 
man who would seek to bind the curse upon 
his wife, instead of endeavoring to lighten it 
and to help her bear it, sadly lacks the spirit of 

R1553 : page 212 

the heavenly Bridegroom. And so also the 
Christian wife: if she in selfishness demands of 
her husband an undue measure of the sweat of 
face entailed by the curse, instead of seeking to 
lighten his toil and share his cares, she sadly lacks 
that spirit which characterizes the true bride of 
Christ. It was sin that entailed the curse upon 
our race; but, as we strive against sin and aspire 
toward righteousness and God-likeness, we mitigate 
the evils of the curse for each other. And, 
thank God, the time is now fast approaching 
when "there shall be no more curse," and 
when, "the throne of God and of the Lamb" 
being established in the earth, the spirit of love, 

R1554: page 212 

so beautifully exemplified between Christ and 

the exalted Church, will be gloriously reproduced 

on the earthly plane also; when, the 

curse being entirely lifted, woman will find her 

natural and honored position at the side of her 

noble husband, as his worthy helper and companion 

—"the glory of the man," as Paul describes 

her, and an "heir together with him of 

the grace of life," as he also appoints her, and 

as beautifully foreshown in the typical restitution 

of Job (Job 42:15), when he gave his 

daughters inheritance among their brethren. 

In conclusion, then, the marriage relationship 
is an honorable and blessed one when viewed in 
the Scriptural light; yet it is one of the earthly 
blessings which the Apostle shows the saints 
are privileged to forego in many cases for the 
still higher privilege of serving the interests of 



the coming kingdom of God without distraction. 
(1 Cor. 7:32-35.) And when the sacrificing 
Church beholds the King in his beauty, and is 
recognized by him as his worthy bride and joint-heir, 
the blessedness of that companionship will 
have in it no savor of either tyranny or servility, 
but, instead, a blessed harmony of love and 
appreciation which will be ineffable bliss. 



R1554: page 212 

"BE NOT UNEQUALLY YOKED. 



TO the consecrated who are not yoked— who 

are unmarried— the Apostle Paul gives the 

advice that, for the full accomplishment of their 

consecration vow to the Lord, such have a position 

of very superior advantage. (2 Cor. 6:14; 

1 Cor. 7:25-40.) But the advice to remain unmarried, 

he would have us understand, is not 

imperative. (1 Cor. 7:35,36.) None are forbidden 

to marry; and false teachers who have 

since arisen, forbidding to marry, are condemned 

as seriously out of order. (1 Tim. 4:1-3.) This 

prohibition by Papacy upon its priesthood has 

brought upon it one of the foulest stains that 

have blackened its baneful history. Marriage 

is still honorable (Heb. 13:4) when the relationship 

is sustained in purity and holiness, as 

God designed; when two are equally yoked, 

and their hearts beat to the music of a single 

high and holy purpose; whether that purpose 

be on the natural plane to increase the race 

and to bring up posterity in the nurture and admonition 

of the Lord (Gen. 1:28; Eph. 6:4), 

or, on the spiritual plane, to toil together as true 

yoke-fellows for the spiritual family of God. 

Yet, with very rare exceptions, the consecrated 
can best fulfil their covenant by walking alone 
with God, having only his preferences to consult 
in every matter, and entirely untrammeled 
by domestic cares. Such was Paul's judgment; 
and such has been the testimony of thousands, 
who forgot to remember their Creator in the 
days of their youth, and to commit their way 
unto the Lord before they became entangled in 
multiplied cares and hampered by the outcome 
of their own misguided course.— Eccl. 12:1; 
Psa. 37:5; Prov. 3:5,6. 

The words of 1 Tim. 5:14 were not respecting 
the young sisters who were consecrated to 
the Lord, but in harmony with the context 



(verses 3-16) were spoken with reference to 
young widows of the Church in general who 
should not be made financial burdens to the 
Church. Any such, not of those consecrated 
as living sacrificers, but yet believers, of the 
household of faith, let them marry, etc. Thus 
seen, this scripture is in harmony with the 
general teaching of the New Testament. 

Of God's consecrated children, whom alone 
we address, only a small minority are yet in 
youth, and disentangled from the cares of this 
life. But to all such we have no other advice 
to commend than that of the inspired Apostle 

R1554: page 213 

cited above. We would only add, Be not unmindful 
of your privileges; make good use of 
your stewardship; run with patience the race 
set before you, looking unto Jesus, our glorious 
Bridegroom, for all needed grace and fellowship; 
and be faithful unto death and in due 
time ye shall reap a glorious reward, if ye faint 
not. "Forget also thine own people and thy 
father's house [earthly fellowships]: so shall the 
King greatly desire thy beauty [of character]; 
for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him."— 
Psa. 45:10,11. 

These remarks, however, do not apply to the 
world, nor are they imperative upon the saints. 
The recommendation is one of expediency— to 
facilitate both individual progress and the progress 
of the general work of the Lord, and is parallel 
to the Lord's teaching in Matt. 19:12. Let 
those of the world marry, and fill the honorable 
positions in the world of faithful, devoted husbands 
and wives and parents; and let the influence 
of prosperous and happy homes reach 
as far as possible toward ameliorating the unhappy 
conditions of the wretched and homeless. 
The special advice of the Apostle is only for 
those consecrated to be living sacrifices, wholly 
devoted to the Master's use, and awaiting his 
exceeding great reward. 

But to those of the consecrated who already 
are unequally yoked, and hampered by many 
cares, and vexed with many perplexing problems, 
we would say, Take courage! he who called you 
out of darkness into his marvelous light, and 
thus directed your steps into the narrow way 
that leads to glory, honor and immortality, 
knew how difficult that way would be to you 
under your present circumstances; and his call 
implies his willingness to accept you, as well 
as your ability to make your calling and election 
sure, through his abounding grace. Nevertheless, 



as the Apostle forewarned, such shall 
have trouble in the flesh.— 1 Cor. 7:28. 

Remembering the Apostle's teaching that the 
believing husband is not to put away his unbelieving 
wife, nor the believing wife to leave 
the unbelieving husband, but rather to seek 
to establish peace (1 Cor. 7:10-16; also Matt. 19:3-10. 
— Diaglott), we see with what carefulness 
the consecrated believer must walk before 
God and before the unequally yoked life-companion. 
What humility it will require, and 
what patient endurance of many trials. But 
yet, beloved ones, so tried, let patience have 
her perfect work, and in due time you shall 
come out of the furnace purified. Study to let 
the beauty of holiness be manifest; and if it 
does not convert the companion, it will at least 
be a testimony against him or her, and the 
sanctifying effect will not be lost on children 
and neighbors; and the praise will be to God. 

Let such a wife carefully perform the duties 
of a wife and respect the relationship of a husband, 
even if she is forced to lose a large 
measure of respect for her husband; and let 
such a husband carefully perform the duties of 
a husband, even if the treadmill of domestic 
life has become a painful one. It may be, O 
man, that thou mayst save thy wife; or, wife, 
that thou mayst save thy husband. "But if 
the unbelieving depart, let him [or her] depart. 
A brother or sister is not under bondage in such 
cases."— 1 Cor. 7:15. 

But one cause is mentioned in the Scriptures 
as a proper ground for the dissolution of the 
marriage bond. (Matt. 19:3-10.) And the 
disciples, hearing these our Master's words, 
were as much surprised as the Pharisees, and 
said that if the case stood thus— i.e., if the marriage 
covenant was so binding and indissoluble, 
it would be better not to marry— it would 
be too great a risk to run, (Verse 10.) But this 
is just the way the Lord would have us view 
the relationship. The marriage contract is one 
that should stand until death makes the separation, 
unless the one cause referred to releases the 
innocent from the guilty and faithless. The 
twain bound for life by mutual contract, are 
thereafter no longer twain, but one flesh; and 
all their future happiness and prosperity in the 
present life depend upon their loyalty, generosity, 
love and consideration one for the other. 

The marriage relation, both in its duration 
and in its character, was designed to be a type 
of the lasting, faithful and blessed union of 
Christ and the Church. He will never leave 
her nor forsake her; and she will never withdraw 



her allegiance and faithfulness to him. 

But as Christ permits those who choose, to forsake 

R1554: page 214 

him, so if the unbeliever depart from the 
believer, let him or her depart. The believing 
one if once deserted by the unbeliever would 
not be bound to receive the deserter back again 
to marriage fellowship— although upon evidence 
of proper reform it might be well to be reconciled 
—but he or she would be bound not to 
marry another so long as the first companion 
lives. (1 Cor. 7:11.) Unfaithfulness to marriage 
vows would include, on the husband's 
part, a failure to provide, so far as possible, for 
his wife's necessities, and would be desertion, 
even though he should desire to stay with her 
and have her support him. Of course in a 
case of the husband's sickness, and inability 
to provide, the wife's duty according to the 
marriage covenant would be to spend herself 
to the last, in his support. 

Whatever may be the world's ideas with reference 
to the privileges and obligations of the 
marriage relationship (and alas! they are far 
from purity and righteousness, making it very 
generally but "an occasion to the flesh"), those 
who are united in the Lord should remember the 
Apostle's counsel, "Walk in the spirit [or mind 
of Christ], and ye shall not fulfil the desires of 
the flesh; for the desires of the flesh are contrary 
to the spirit, and the spirit contrary to 
the flesh."-Gal. 5:16,17. 

But all the married saints are not married in 
the Lord, and hence many are obliged to consider 
the human aspect of that relationship, and 
to devote themselves measurably to its earthly 
objects and aims, viz., the increase of posterity, 
and their care and training; such obligation 
being implied in the marriage contract, from 
which a subsequent consecration to the Lord 
grants no release. Mutual obligations are accepted 

R1555 : page 214 

in marriage from which there can be no 

departure except by mutual consent. The Apostle's 

advice on this subject is very clear, and in 

perfect accord with what we have just seen respecting 

the mutual obligations of the married 

(1 Cor. 7:1-9); and the due benevolence and 

continence counseled on the part of both should 

obviate any necessity for domestic imposition 

and consequent discord, and should insure harmony 

on the firm foundation of mutual love 



and respect. But blessed are those who are 
able and willing to keep the fleshly desire under 
full control, and to walk in the spirit. "He 
that is able [both from his own disposition and 
from his circumstances] to receive [this teaching], 
let him receive it."— Matt. 19:12. 

As some of the Lord's dear people come thus 
to view and consider the sacredness of the contract 
into which so many of them have entered, 
perhaps they will begin to see how they can 
glorify God more in their domestic life than they 
have hitherto thought possible. Indeed, it will 
be strange if all cannot see wherein they can 
improve upon the past. Is it not the case sometimes 
that brethren and sisters whose souls have 
been refreshed by the truth have zealously borne 
it to others, and have taken for granted that 
husband or wife would not be interested? 

Some husbands think of their wives as too 
busy with domestic cares to be interested in the 
Truth; or too worldly, or too fearful of the reproaches 
of the world, to have anything to do 
with it: and so leave them, and bear the truth to 
others. But is this doing a husband's part? A 
true husband is a provider, and his care should 
include provision of spiritual as well as natural 
food and raiment for his wife and family. 
Hence on learning the truth his first endeavor 
should be to serve it also to his help-mate. 
Should he come home in the evening and find 
her occupied with family cares— preparing and 
clearing away the evening meal, looking after 
the little ones and arranging for the necessities 
of the coming day, etc.— long after the hours of 
his working day are past, and leave her to bear 
these domestic cares alone, and to feel neglected 
and underrated, a mere household accommodation, 
instead of a worthy and honored companion, 
while he seeks a quiet nook to read, or 
goes out alone to bear the message of salvation 
and joy to neighbors or others? 

Ah, no! Let charity begin at home. If an 
unwise course in the past has overwhelmed the 
wife with family cares too numerous for her to 
bear with easy grace, see that no more are added, 
but, instead, "put your shoulder to the wheel" 
and help her with them as much as possible. 
What if tending the babies and washing the 
dishes is woman's work! if she has too much of 
it to do to admit of an hour's leisure with you, 

R1555 : page 215 

or with the Lord, or with the study of his Truth 
for herself— or if, under the pressure of constant 
duties, she has lost all relish for intellectual 



culture, and much of her faith in spiritual realities 
—it will do you good to share these tasks 
with her, until you have tied the last knot of 
the day's duties, and can then sit down together 
to study the Truth. 

As gradually she comes to realize your love 
and interest she will have the more respect for 
you and for the doctrines whose fruit she sees 
exemplified in your daily life. At first, if this 
is a new thing, she may regard it as only a little 
unusual freak; but, by and by, constancy 
will increase confidence, and a responsive chord 
will be found in her heart; and the soil, thus 
carefully plowed and prepared, will be mellow 
and ready for the seeds of truth, and you 
and she and the home will be blessed. Try it 
brethren— any of you who find you have been 
to any extent remiss in these matters in the past. 
And in writing to the WATCH TOWER office 
mention your wife or your husband, if interested 
in the Truth. 

Sometimes it is the wife who first catches a 
glimpse of the Millennial dawn, and she should 
value her opportunities for bearing to her husband 
the favors of which she has been made a 
partaker, although the outlook for his conversation 
to it may not seem very hopeful. Often, 
when the husband learns of his wife's departure 
from the beaten track of so-called orthodoxy, 
he forthwith concludes it is some new fanaticism; 
and seals up his heart and closes his ears 
to it. What should she do in such a case? 
Force it on him? No: that might only arouse 
antagonism. She should first of all let him 
read it in the living epistle of her daily life. 
Let him see the good effects of the truth in 
your carefulness to make home pleasant; let 
him realize your sympathy with his trials and 
vexations, your helpfulness to the extent of ability, 
and your appreciation of all his kindness. 

It may sometimes require long and patient 
preaching of this kind before the husband is 
attracted to the plan of the ages; but let the 
light of a holy life and of a consistent walk and 
conversation continue to shine, while you in 
various ways hold forth to him the word of life, 
and in due time a response will be manifest. 
Let not such wives make the mistake of ignoring 
the headship of the husband (even though 
they be better informed concerning the divine 
plan), in appropriating the home of which he 
is the acknowledged head to the service of the 
Lord for the assemblies of the saints, if he is 
opposed to so using it, or in other ways. Even 
if the home is the wife's property a deference 
is due to the husband's wishes as the head of 



the house, so long as the relationship is recognized; 
his responsibility is to God, whether 
he recognizes that responsibility or not. But 
a wife is not bound to continue to supply a 
home; and should cease to do so if she be denied 
reasonable privileges in it, since in so doing 
she would be encouraging a wrong. As before 
shown, if a husband possesses the health, etc., 
necessary to the support of his wife and family 
and fails to provide for them, he has proved 
unfaithful to his marriage vow, which was to 
nourish and care for his companion; and in 
the eyes of the civil law he has committed 
"constructive desertion." A wife so circumstanced 
may, if she choose, consider herself as 
literally deserted, and may refuse to entertain 
and support such deserter. But desertion 
would not grant the right to either party to 
remarry so long as the other lives. 

As the head of the domestic arrangement it is 
the duty of the Christian husband to say, "As 
for me and my house [as far as lies in the power 
of my influence], we will serve the Lord." And 
the Christian wife, recognizing this responsibility 
on his part, will gladly co-operate, in so 
far as she can conscientiously do so; and will 
put no stumbling block in his way, although 
she may view his methods differently. She 
may carefully endeavor to convince him of the 
truth, but she may not interfere with his conscience 
or his responsibility to God. Nor 
should the husband's course with the wife be 
arbitrary and unreasoning. He should not disregard 
her conscience, to hinder the full and 
free exercise of all her talents in God's service; 
but should grant her as great latitude in the 
use of the home as his conscience and responsibility 
as the head of the family will permit; 
for they are "heirs together of the grace of life." 

R1555 : page 216 

If he sees differently he should bring forth his 
strong reasons for her consideration and possible 
approval, and patiently hear her different 
views, in hope of final harmony. But if harmony 
cannot be reached, the responsibility for 
the home and its influence rests with the husband, 
who, by divine appointment, is its head. 

HONOR TO WHOM HONOR IS DUE. 

In viewing this whole subject we are forcibly 
reminded of the Apostle's counsel to the entire 
Church in their individual relationship to the 
powers that be, which are ordained of God— 



"Render therefore to all their dues; tribute to 
whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, 
fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Owe 
no man anything, but to love one another."— 
Rom. 13:7,8. 

Peter's counsel is to the same effect— "Honor 
all men; love the brotherhood; fear God; 
honor the king."— 1 Pet. 2:17. 

Kings are not always personally worthy of 
honor; but honor is always due to the office, 
which is "ordained of God." (Rom. 13:1. See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. L, chap, xiii., for the 
sense and purpose of their ordination.) Many 
of the magistrates ruling Judea in the days of 
the Lord and the Apostles were personally very 
unworthy of honor, yet the Lord and the apostles 
left us, not only their precepts, but also 
their example of submission to the authority 
thus represented: they were all respectful and 
law-abiding.-Matt. 17:27; Acts 25:8,10,11. 

So also in the domestic relation, the office 
of the husband and father, as the head of the 
family, is worthy of honor, both from wife and 
children, and also from the stranger within the 
gates, enjoying the protection and hospitality 
of the home. Even if the one so situated be 
personally unworthy of the honor, it is nevertheless 
due to his office, on the same principle 
that honor is due to unworthy civil magistrates. 

The Apostle puts these duties of love and 
honor and custom, etc., in the light of obligations 
—as debts that should be promptly paid; 
saying, Owe no man anything but love. While 
love would be the ruling principle if all were 
perfect, yet in the fallen state selfishness is the 
common disease which devours and blights the 
happiness of home and family and business. 
True nobility would prompt every man in health 
to consideration not only toward the weaker 
sex but toward the aged and infirm of his own 
sex, in the crowd, in the car, and in any 
neighborly service; much more in the home 
and toward the life-companion will consideration 
be manifested, in the bearing of the cares 
and burdens of life. And the truly noble man 
or woman, whether at home or abroad, will be 
disinclined to disturb or inconvenience anyone; 
and if such accept a kindness it will 
be as a favor, and will be amply and graciously 
acknowledged. 

The fall has developed in all selfishness instead 
of generosity; so that those who desire 
to be generous, finding selfish ingratitude their 

R1556 : page 216 



principal reward, are often discouraged and 

consider few if any worthy of it. But Christian 

men and women are to remember the unselfish 

example of their great Redeemer, that selfishness 

lies at the bottom of every sin, and that 

in striving against sin they must of necessity 

strive against selfishness, and endeavor to cultivate 

love. It is as a help to the right course 

that the Apostle points to justice as a consideration 

for rendering honor, respect and service 

—honor to whom honor is due, etc. 

How beautiful is God's order, and how conducive 
to lasting peace and happiness to all 
who faithfully adhere to it! Let us thus carefully 
distinguish and mark the principles which 
God has laid down in the Scriptures for our 
guidance, and his approval will be our exceeding 
great reward; and his wisdom will by and 
by be manifest. 



R1556 : page 216 

OUR CONVENTION AT CHICAGO. 



AS already announced, it is purposed to have 
a Convention at Chicago, this Summer, of 
those deeply interested in the truths of God's 
Word as presented in ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
and MILLENNIAL DAWN. The time fixed upon 
as most suitable is August 20th to 24th, inclusive, 
the last day to be specially devoted to the 
interests of the Colporteur work;— arranging 

R1556 : page 217 

for future fields of service, and instructing the 
less successful and beginners as to methods, etc. 

The main object of the gathering is to permit 
as large a number as possible to enjoy a 
spiritual feast of personal communion— one 
with the other, and all with the Lord, who 
serves the feast, and who for some years past 
has been so richly fulfilling his promise to his 
people in this respect. (Luke 12:37.) A secondary 
object will be to meet and encourage 
and instruct in the work colporteurs and intending 
colporteurs. Opportunity will also be 
afforded for symbolizing (in water) baptism 
into Christ's death. Many find no proper 
means of thus following the Lord's command 
in this (see our last issue) without disobeying 
his counsel by joining some sectarian system 



of men. Arrangements will be made and robes 
provided for serving such who may attend the 
meetings. 

The date fixed is in view of the fact that the 
lowest Railroad Excursion Rates may be expected 
about that time. We are not asking 
or expecting special rates, but believe that by 
that time general competition will have brought 
fares down to about one half the present rates, 
or one fourth the usual rates. Such terms will 
prevail very generally, we believe; but if no 
cheaper rates are granted than at present, it 
will be much cheaper than usual, and afford an 
opportunity for many to attend whom we could 
not other wise hope to meet in the flesh. 

As the opening day will be Sunday, it will have 
three meetings or practically be an all-day meeting, 
commencing at 10 A.M. Subsequent sessions 
will also open at 10 A.M., and close about 
3 P.M., with an hour's intermission for dinner. 
This arrangement will not over-weary with 
sitting and thinking those of the truth-hungry 
who are in ordinary health, and it will afford 
an excellent opportunity, from 3 P.M. to 9 P.M. 
each day, for those who desire to learn, from 
visits to the Columbian Exposition, some very 
valuable lessons on the progress of our times— 
on the evidences that we are in "the day of 
his [God's] preparation," in which arrangements 
are being perfected for the great work 
of blessing and lifting up again the fallen race 
to opportunities for life everlasting by their 
great Redeemer. The rest of the meetings, 
and the knowledge of the divine plan, will 
thus prepare for an appreciation of the greatest 
exhibit the world has ever seen; and the exercise 
of mind and body in studying the 
wonders of the exhibit will but refresh and 
quicken mind and heart for communion with 
God and study of his great Plan of the Ages, 
of which the cross of Christ is the center. 

We well know that the item of expense will 
be a particular one to almost all of the "household" 
(for not many rich or great hath God 
chosen, but the poor of this world, rich in 
faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom). Hence we 
must make arrangements which will be economical. 
We have not as yet concluded any 
arrangements; but can promise the following 
very reasonable terms, viz.:— 

A comfortable bed and three substantial 
meals for One Dollar per day for each person. 
Those who desire to visit the Exposition should 
count on about One Dollar per day extra, for 
car-fare and entrance fee. 



WHO ARE INVITED. 

All MILLENNIAL DAWN and WATCH TOWER 

readers, who are trusting in our Lord Jesus as 
their Redeemer— their corresponding price, 
their substitute— and especially all such who are 
fully consecrated, body, soul and spirit, to the 
Redeemer's service, are cordially invited to 
come. 

Any such who anticipate being able to attend 
are requested to send us their full names and 
addresses at once, stating the facts. After arrangements 
have been fully perfected, particular 
directions will be mailed to such as thus 
apply;— for something may yet make a change 
of date necessary: but notice will be sent in 
good season for you to reach the lodgings on 
the day preceding the Convention. 

Colporteurs (and all who think of becoming 
colporteurs) are specially urged to attend this 
convention, as valuable instructions respecting 
the best methods of work will be given, which 
we trust will more than double the results with 
many. Bring with you full data respecting 
routes and towns already worked, as changes 
of routes, etc., may be necessary. 



page 218 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF 

OUR READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1556 : page 218 
PAUL AT PHILIPPI. 



III. QUAR., LESSON II., JULY 9, ACTS 16:19-34. 

Golden Text— "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
thou shalt be saved."— Acts 16:31. 

The house of Lydia became the center of 
Christian work in the city of Philippi; and 



here, under the instruction of the Apostle 
Paul, a company of believers gathered, of 
whom he subsequently speaks in terms of 
strong commendation for their faithfulness 
and zeal. Paul and his companions had not 
been long in Philippi before the Lord gave 
a very marked manifestation of his power, 
working through them in casting out an evil 
spirit from one whose affliction was a source 
of gain to her owners. 

But the testimony thus borne brought upon 
the devoted heads of the Lord's messengers 
a storm of persecution. They were 
hurried to the market place, falsely accused 
before the magistrates and, apparently without 
even an opportunity to assert their innocence 
or to appeal for their rights as 
Roman citizens, they were quickly sentenced 
and immediately punished with stripes and 
imprisonment; and their ultimate fate was 
yet to be learned.— Verses 19-24. 

VERSE 25. In a prison dungeon, with 
lacerated flesh, and feet made fast in the 
stocks, these brethren found cause for rejoicing. 
They rejoiced in that they were 
counted worthy to suffer for the name of 
Christ, and so spent the night in praise and 
prayer to God. And do not forget that it 
is in view of such trials that the Apostle's 
exhortation should be read— "Rejoice in the 
Lord always, and in every thing give thanks." 

VERSE 26. It is not always that God interferes 
to liberate his persecuted saints: 
there is a glorious end in view in permitting 
them to endure hardness as good soldiers. 
Our Lord was not spared the agonies of the 
cross; Stephen was not spared the stoning 
that crushed out his life; other martyrs were 
not spared the fire and fagot, the guillotine 
and the rack; and the apostles were not 
spared the torture of the rod, the stocks and 
dungeon miseries. But, says the great 
Apostle, who bore a large share of these 
sufferings, "They are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory that shall be revealed 
in us." When that glory shall appear the 
present privilege of enduring hardness as 
good soldiers will be manifest, though the 
opportunity for so doing will then be past. 
By faith only can the privilege now be duly 
appreciated. 

But God had yet a further use for Paul 
and Silas, and therefore, though from a human 
standpoint their release seemed hopeless, 
it was quickly and wonderfully accomplished 
when God saw fit to manifest his 



power. Just so it will be when God's time 
has fully come for breaking down all the 
barriers which men have set up against the 
establishment of his kingdom. What are 
thrones and empires and armies to withstand 
his might? Surely they are as nothing. 

VERSES 27,28. There was no vindictiveness 
in these abused servants: they were 
ready immediately to bless their persecutors. 

VERSE 29. This manifestation of the spirit 
of forgiving love was the best sermon 
they could have preached to the jailer; and 
it quickly brought forth its fruit in his repentance 
and conversion. 

VERSES 30-34. His conduct indicated 
genuine repentance. He sought to reward 
them for their generosity in saving his life; 
and then inquired what he must do to be 
saved. Saved from what? from any penalty 
of the Roman law? No: his prisoners 
had not escaped: they were all there. He 
meant, What should he do to be saved with 
the great salvation which Paul and Silas 
preached. Then Paul preached the great 
salvation through faith in Christ, both to 
the jailor and to all that were in the house, 
showing that it is free to all who accept 

R1557 : page 218 

it, not only to the jailor but to all the rest of 
them on the terms of simple, obedient faith. 
It is not at all strange that the preaching 
under such circumstances brought forth fruit 
in the conversion of all that heard. 

R1557 : page 218 

PAUL AT ATHENS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON III., JULY 16, ACTS 17:22-31. 

Golden Text— "God is a spirit, and they that worship 
him must worship him in spirit and in truth."— John 4:24. 

Having been by divine providence delivered 
and honorably discharged from the 

R1557 : page 219 

prison at Philippi, the zealous and undaunted 
Apostle to the Gentiles was again about 
his Master's business; and the interim between 
the account of our last lesson and that 



of this lesson shows him (1) giving his 
parting counsel and encouragement to the 
Philippian Church at the house of Lydia; 
(2) thence departing for Thessalonica, where 
he again boldly declared the truth and made 
many converts, and again brought upon himself 
the wrath of many enemies; (3) and 
when persecuted in that city and no longer 
permitted to preach Christ, we find him 
escaping by night to Berea, where similar 
success and similar persecution awaited him. 
His work there accomplished, we next find 
him in Athens, whither he had fled alone 
without his companions, Silas and Timothy, 
who were to follow him. 

While here awaiting the arrival of the 
brethren, he first quietly took observation 
of the religious conditions of this great city, 
far famed for its literary and artistic genius 
—the city where Homer sung, where Socrates, 
Plato and Aristotle philosophised, 
where Solon promulgated his famous code 
of laws, and where Demosthenes held his 
audiences spell-bound with his eloquence. 
But Paul was stirred with holy zeal when, 
notwithstanding its marvelous crop of wise 
men and philosophers and all its learning 
and accomplishments, he beheld this famous 
city wholly given over to idolatry.— 
Verse 16. 

With characteristic zeal he began at once 
to present the profounder philosophy of divine 
truth, both in the synagogues of the 
Jews, and daily to the multitudes in the 
market-places. This new philosophy soon 
attracted the inquiring minds of many of the 
two most distinguished schools of Greek 
philosophy— the Stoics and the Epicureans. 
As they listened to the eloquent logic of the 
Apostle in the market-places they said 
among themselves, This is no place for such 
profound discourse; and they led the Christian 
orator to the Areopagus, or Mars' Hill, 
where the supreme court of Athens convened 
and where Demosthenes and other 
eloquent orators had spoken. From this 
notable place many of the learned and wise, 
in the wisdom of this world, heard for the 
first time the heavenly wisdom, the new divine 
philosophy which far outshines the 
wisdom of the world. 

VERSES 22,23. The courteous address of 
the Apostle to the cultured audience before 
him is made to appear rather rude by our 
common translation— a rudeness quite incompatible, 
too, with the Apostle's own culture 



and refinement, and with his tact in 
presenting truth. The Revised Version is 
an improvement, and shows the Apostle to 
have been complimentary rather than rude: 
"Ye men of Athens [the address usual with 
all Greek orators], in all things I perceive 
that ye are somewhat religious; for as I 
passed along and observed the objects of 
your worship, I found also an altar with 
this inscription-TO THE UNKNOWN GOD.' 
What therefore [by your own confession] 
ye worship in ignorance, this set I forth unto 
you." 

This exhibition of tact in the presentation 
of the truth is worthy of the imitation 
of all who are seeking to declare the 
good tidings with effect. It is not wise to 
begin with a rude attempt to batter down 
prejudices, but rather we should begin with 
that which is already known or conceded, 
and then proceed by logical and Scriptural 
reasonings from the known to establish that 
which is as yet unknown to the hearer. 

VERSES 24,25. The one true God, hitherto 
unknown to the Athenians, as the author 
and sustainer of all life, and hence incomparably 
greater than the gods they had 
hitherto worshiped, instead of needing gifts, 
is himself the giver of every good and perfect 
gift. 

VERSE 26 declares the brotherhood of all 
the world of mankind (aside from the 
Church), and the earth to be their dwelling 
place; and that God has fixed times and 
seasons in working out his great plan respecting 
them. 

VERSES 27,28. God is near to all who 
seek him, even though it be a blind feeling 
after him as an unknown God. As certain 
of their own poets had said, and so had 
come very near the truth, We are his offspring 
—the offspring of his creative power. 

VERSE 29. The logic which would trace 
the existence of living intelligent creatures 
to a source so unworthy that man could imitate 
it in silver and gold, is evidently faulty 
and untrue. 

VERSE 30. God is not holding man accountable 
for this ignorance of him and his 
ways; but when the truth is presented, it 
should be regarded as a call from God to 
repentance, and the knowledge brings a 
responsibility. 

VERSE 3 1 declares an appointed time for 
the world's judgment and Christ Jesus as 



R1557 : page 220 

the Judge of all the earth; and that this, 
God's declared purpose, is corroborated by 
the resurrection of Christ from the dead. 

VERSES 32-34 show the usual results of 
the preaching of the truth. Like a magnet 
it attracts those who have an affinity for it, 
and others will not have it. Some mocked, 
and others desired to hear him further; but 
the real lovers of truth were evidently few. 
Worldly wisdom is not of itself sufficient 
to find out God; and, except when accompanied 
by humility and sincerity, it proves 
an obstacle rather than an aid to the attainment 
of that heavenly wisdom whose price 
is far above rubies. 

R1557 : page 220 

PAUL AT CORINTH. 



III. QUAR., LESSON IV., JULY 23, ACTS 18:1-11. 

Golden Text— "The preaching of the cross is to them 
that perish, foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is 
the power of God."— 1 Cor. 1:18. 

After his work in Athens, the intellectual 
metropolis of the world, Paul's next point 
was Corinth, the great commercial center of 
Greece, its cosmopolitan population and commercial 
business making it a specially good 
field from whence the influences of Christianity 
might extend far and near. It was 
a desperately wicked city, its very name at 
that time being a popular synonym of vice 
and profligacy. But its wickedness was not 
Paul's reason for carrying the gospel there; 
and he did not seek its degraded and profligate 
class. He knew that the gospel was 
for the meek, the lovers of righteousness, 
and that only such were counted worthy of 
it (Isa. 61:1; Psa. 97:11); and the Lord assured 
him (verse 10) that even in that wicked 
city were many of this class, and therefore 
counselled his remaining there. 

VERSES 1-3. Having arrived at Corinth, 
the Apostle first found two worthy Israelites, 
Aquila and Priscilla, who, with other 
Jews, had been exiled from Rome. These 
were of one mind and heart with the Apostle, 
and being of the same craft— tent-makers 
—he abode with them and wrought. 



VERSES 4-8. Observing the Lord's order 
—"To the Jew first, and afterward to the 
Gentile"— the Apostle improved the opportunities 
of the Sabbath in the Jewish 
synagogues. This was, of course, the seventh, 
not the first day of the week; and Paul 
made use of it, not as a Jew under the law, 
but as a Christian free from the law, and 
who therefore esteemed every day alike 
(Rom. 14:5; Col. 2:16), all the days of the 
week being consecrated to the service of the 
Lord, and all the labors of the week— 
whether of preaching the gospel or making 
tents— being done with an eye single to his 
glory. The Jewish Sabbath and the privileges 
of the synagogue afforded special opportunities 
for the promulgation of the truth 
(any person of ability being permitted to 
speak to the people in attendance); and of 
these the Apostle availed himself. 

Here Paul was refreshed by the arrival 
of Silas and Timothy. And doubtless he 
needed their encouragement; for the majority 
of his Jewish hearers opposed him and 
blasphemed his doctrine. When they thus 
proved their unworthiness of the truth, Paul 
shook his raiment and said unto them, 
"Your blood be upon your own heads [The 
reference here is to the second death, toward 
which such a course of wilful opposition 
surely tends. The statement does not imply 
that they were already doomed to it, but 
rather that, from their present attitude and 
course, they were in great danger of it. 
The expression is of similar import to that 
of our Lord recorded in Matt. 23:33. See 
also Matt. 12:31.]; I am clean [I have done 
my duty toward you, and the responsibility 
is now with yourselves only]: from henceforth 
I will go unto the Gentiles." 

Nevertheless, though such was the general 
attitude of the Jews toward the truth, 
some, both of Jews and Greeks, believed, 
and the house of Justus, a Jewish proselyte 
—"one that worshiped God"— living next 
door to the synagogue, furnished a suitable 
place for further discoursing the truth. 

VERSES 9-11. The Lord specially encouraged 
the Apostle's continued efforts in 
this place by a vision. Thus reassured of the 
Lord's personal care and supervision, Paul 
was prepared for any trial, and in his weakness 

R1558 : page 220 

was made strong. And these things 



were written for our learning, that we might 
always realize the Lord at the helm, and 
trust and follow him in the footsteps of this 
the noblest of all the noble apostles. 

R1558 : page 220 

PAUL ATEPHESUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON V., JULY 30, ACTS 19:1-12. 

Golden Text— "When the spirit of truth is come, he 
will guide you into all truth."— John 16:13. 

This lesson shows Paul a second time at 
Ephesus since leaving Corinth. In the interim 
(chap. 18: 18-23) he had first spent a 

R1558 : page 221 

brief time here, where he was accompanied 

by Aquila and Priscilla, and then visited 

Jerusalem, Antioch and the churches of Galatia 

and Phrygia, strengthening the disciples. 

Now he has returned to find a pleasant 

surprise: A cultured and eloquent Alexandrian 

Jew, a convert to Christianity, has 

been here in his absence, mightily convincing 

the Jews, and that publicly, that Jesus 

is the Christ, and many have believed and 

are ready and anxious for further instruction. 

Apollos himself knew only the baptism 
of John— the baptism unto repentance (the 
same now taught by the Disciples or Christian 
denomination-See last TOWER- Acts 18:25; 
19:4), and they had been so baptized. 
Aquila and Priscilla heard him speak, and, 
perceiving his imperfect knowledge, took 
him home and instructed him more perfectly, 
so that when he went away from Ephesus 
to Achaia, he went better equipped for the 
work. The coming of the Apostle was just 
in time to encourage the infant Church and 
to correct the mistakes of the zealous and 
beloved Apollos. His inquiry and their reply, 
with reference to receiving the holy 
spirit, showed their entire ignorance of the 
privileges of believers— of entire consecration 
and adoption as sons of God into the 
divine family, implied in the ordinance of 
baptism into Christ. This subject of the 
high calling of believers, of the gospel age, 
Paul opened up to them, probably in quite 
extended discourse, of which verse 4 must 



be understood as a mere synopsis. This 
clearer understanding was at once acted 
upon, and they were again baptized— not 
this time with the significance of John's 
baptism (unto repentance), but of Christ's 
baptism (of entire consecration and full submission 
to the will of God). 

Then followed the evidence of their acceptance 
with God, granted to all the early 
Christians through the laying on of the Apostles' 
hands (never otherwise communicated, 
except at the beginning): the power of the 
holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke 
with tongues and prophesied. (Verse 6.) 
These gifts were necessary to the Church then 
in its incipient stage, both for their own full 
assurance of faith, and also for the world's 
recognition of them as specially owned of 
God; but they were not intended to be continued 
beyond the days of the Apostles.— 
1 Cor. 13:8. 

VERSES 8-10. Paul continued his reasonings 
with the Jews in the synagogues three 
months, when, as usual, his advanced and 
clear teachings produced a division among 
the Jews, for and against the truth— the opposition 
of the unbelievers being very pronounced. 
He therefore, with the believers, 
withdrew, and thereafter taught in the school 
or lecture room of one Tyrannus. Here Jews 
and Greeks were alike welcome, and from this 
place the truth spread over all Asia Minor. 

The lesson taught by the Apostle's course 
in thus ceasing to intrude upon the unbelieving 
Jews, who were no longer willing 
to give the truth a hearing in their synagogue, 
is one that all believers should note 
and follow. What communion hath light 
with darkness, or truth with error? After 
using such privileges as are freely accorded, 
if the truth has no effect, its servants are 
not justified by any Scripture in intruding 
upon the rights of others. 

R1558 : page 221 

PAUL AT MILETUS. 



III. QUAR., LESSON VI., AUG. 6, ACTS 20:22-35. 

Golden Text— "Remember your leaders, those who 
spoke to you the Word of God; and viewing attentively 
the result of their conduct, imitate their faith."— Heb. 13:7. 
-Diaglott. 



We stand in awe before such an example 
of moral heroism as we find in the Apostle 
Paul: and the passage chosen for this lesson 
makes it specially manifest. As we follow 
him from city to city and mark his faithful 
labor and care, his patient endurance of persecution, 
his untiring devotion and zeal for 
the truth, his patience in instructing and 
bearing with the weak and ignorant, and all 
his sufferings for Christ's sake, and then 
hear him say, "None of these things move 
me," we feel that we are indeed contemplating 
a sublime character. 

To say that Paul was a remarkable man, 
a wonderful man, a grand man, gives no 
adequate conception of his character. See 
how in every city, bonds and afflictions 
awaited him: mobs and stripes and imprisonment 
were his constant expectation. Then 
read his epistles and mark his fervency of 
spirit, his deep insight into the things of 
God, his care for the churches and his deep 
solicitude for their spiritual welfare, his 
earnest exhortations and his living example. 
Read till you are filled with the inspiration 
of his noble example and behold in him a 
miracle of divine grace. 

No ordinary hopes and ambitions could 
inspire such a life. His eye of faith was 
fixed on the things as yet not seen. He was 

R1558 : page 222 

a man of superior advantages and blessings, 
as well as of peculiar and almost unprecedented 
trials. "Like one born before the 
time" (1 Cor. 15:8), he had seen the Lord in 
his glory and heard his gracious voice saying 
to him, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest 
thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against 
the pricks." It was unto him as Ananias 
said,— "The God of our fathers hath chosen 
thee, that thou shouldst know his will, and 
see that Just One, and shouldst hear the 
voice of his mouth; for thou shalt be his 
witness unto all men of what thou hast seen 
and heard." (Acts 22:14,15.) In mental 
vision he had been "caught away to the 
third heaven" (to the Millennial reign of 
Christ), and had been granted a glimpse of 
the glory and blessedness of that reign of 
righteousness. Again and again he received 
special, individual encouragement from the 
Lord. In Corinth the Lord spoke to him 
by a vision, saying, "Be not afraid, but 



speak and hold not thy peace; for I am 
with thee, and no man shall set on thee to 
hurt thee; for I have much people in this 
city." (Acts 18:9,10.) Again, in the midst 
of fierce persecution "the Lord stood by him, 
and said, Be of good cheer, Paul; for as thou 
hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must 
thou bear witness also at Rome. " (Acts 23 : 1 1 .) 
And again, when in imminent danger 
of shipwreck, the angel of the Lord stood 
by him, saying, Fear not, Paul, thou must be 
brought before Caesar: and lo, God hath given 
thee all them that sail with thee." (Acts 27:23,24.) 
And the Lord constantly witnessed 
with him to the truth of the gospel, by miracles 
and signs which mightily convinced the 
people.-Acts 19:11,12; 20:9-12; 28:3-6,8,9. 

In view of these things, do we not truly 
say that Paul was a miracle of grace? He 
himself said, "I can do all things through 
Christ who strengtheneth me" (Phil. 4:13); 
and that it was the power of Christ that 
rested on him. (2 Cor. 12:9,10.) The grace 
given was indeed sufficient for the heavy 
labors and incessant toil of this beloved 
witness of the Lord unto us Gentiles. And 
as we look upon his shining course we see 
Christ in him; and reason says, If one who 
thus saw the Lord and heard his gracious 
voice, and who lived in such close and constant 
fellowship with him, was so inspired 
with hope and joy, and so nerved to cheerful 
endurance of hardship, pain and loss of 
every earthly treasure, the reward itself must 
indeed be glorious. 

Beloved, let us mark the noble examples 
of the Lord and of Paul, and let us run with 
patience the race set before us, looking unto 
Jesus, as did Paul, for all needed strength 
and consolation. 

With these thoughts, returning to the lesson, 
we see, in the parting of the beloved 
Apostle with the elders of the church at 
Ephesus, who had come to bid him farewell 
before he set sail for Jerusalem, and to receive 
his parting counsel, another reminder 
of his faithfulness and a worthy example for 
our imitation. 

VERSES 25-27. He said to them, "I know 
that ye shall see my face no more. Wherefore, 
I take you to record this day, that I am 
pure from the blood of all men [He was 
bearing in mind his personal responsibility 
as a steward of the Lord and the solemn significance 
of it as indicated by the Prophet 
Ezekiel— 33:7-9]; for I have not shunned 



to declare unto you all the counsel of God." 
On the part of Paul there was no compromise 
of the truth, no mixing of it with human 
philosophies to make it more palatable 
to either Jews or Gentiles, or to avoid thus 
any measure of the otherwise inevitable 
persecution. The Christian teacher who can 
truly bear such testimony under such circumstances 
is indeed a soldier of the cross. 

VERSES 28-31. Note his fatherly counsel 
to these elders to continue to supplement 
the Apostle's labors with their own; and 
with the same zeal and carefulness in which 
he had set them an example. Note also his 
faithful warning against false teachers, who 
would surely develop in their midst; against 

R1559 : page 222 

wolves in sheep's clothing, who would not 
spare the flock while selfishly seeking their 
own temporal advantage. The Apostle did 
not counsel the handling of these wolves 
very gently, as some teachers of to-day advise. 
He did not say, you must call them 
all brethren, and tell them they are probably 
as near the truth as you are, and that 
you have a broad charity for all sorts of vain 
philosophies, etc., etc. No, Paul was not the 
man for such compromises.— Rom. 16:17,18; 
2Thes. 3:6,14; 2 Cor. 6:14-18; 
2 Tim. 2:15-19. 

VERSES 32-35 are touching words— the 
eloquence of noble deeds, the exhortation of a 
living example, the benedictions of a loving 
heart, the incense of a devoted and holy life. 

VERSES 36-38. Since the fervent prayer 
of a righteous man availeth much, we cannot 
doubt that all their hearts were refreshed 

R1559 : page 223 

and comforted with a blessed sense of divine 
grace for this and every time of need, though 
their tears flowed freely at the thought of 
parting, to meet no more until the blessed 
day of final recompense. 

The golden text is well chosen, though 
the common translation gives a significance 
at variance with the teachings of the Lord 
and the Apostles. (See Matt. 20:25-28; 2 Cor. 1:24; 
1 Pet. 5:1-3. The Lord does not 
raise up rulers from among our brethren in 
the body of Christ; but he does raise up 
faithful leaders, to whom earnest heed should 
be given, and whose faith and example 



should be imitated. 
R1559 : page 223 
PAUL AT JERUSALEM. 



III. QUAR., LESSON VII., AUG. 13, ACTS 21:27-39. 

Golden Text— "For unto you it is given in the behalf 
of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for 
his sake. "-Phil. 1:29. 

Leaving Miletus, the scene of our last lesson, 
Paul pursued his journey toward Jerusalem, 
making several brief visits on the 
way— at Tyre seven days, at Ptolemais one 
day, and at Caesarea many days. And although 
forewarned of persecution at Jerusalem, 
he was persuaded that the Lord would 
have him go; and against all the entreaties 
of the brethren he was therefore invincible, 
saying, "What mean ye to weep and to 
break mine heart? for I am ready not to be 
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for 
the name of the Lord Jesus." When he 
would not be dissuaded from his purpose, 
the brethren submitted, saying, "The will 
of the Lord be done" (Acts 21:1-14), and 
some of them went with him from Caesarea. 
This was his fifth visit to Jerusalem since 
his conversion, twenty years before. The 
day after his arrival he made a report of his 
missionary work to the brethren, of whom 
James, the Lord's brother, was chief. 

In the eight years since Paul had visited 
the brethren at Jerusalem (Acts 18:21,22) 
he had (1) made two long missionary tours; 
(2) revisited and strengthened the churches 
in Asia Minor; (3) carried the gospel into 
Europe; (4) founded churches in Philippi, 
Corinth, Thessalonica and Ephesus; and (5) 
had widely extended the gospel and made 
many converts to Christianity, whose genuine 
faith and zeal for the cause of Christ 
was expressed in their contributions, sent by 
Paul, for the poor saints at Jerusalem. 

At the previous conference, eight years 
prior to this, the elders at Jerusalem had concurred 
with Paul's judgment and previous 
practice, that it was not necessary to put 
the yoke of Judaism upon Gentile converts. 
He had taught that the Mosaic law was no 
longer in force; that its forms and ceremonies 
could not save any one, not even a Jew; 



and that faith in the Lord Jesus was the 

only way of salvation. He had taught, 

further, that the chief promises of God were 

to the spiritual seed of Abraham, of which 

seed are all who are Christ's by faith and consecration, 

whether Jews or Gentiles. At the 

same time he himself, being a Hebrew, properly 

observed certain features of the Jewish 

law; not, however, as a condition of salvation, 

but rather as a justifiable expediency— 

a concession to his Jewish brethren who had 

not yet fully comprehended their liberty in 

Christ, that so his liberty might not become 

an occasion of stumbling to them.— See May 

1st TOWER, page 142. 

The narrative of this lesson needs no special 
comment, but is another illustration of 
the dauntless courage and holy enthusiasm 
of this noble soldier of the cross, a noteworthy 
instance of which is seen in his request 
to the chief captain to suffer him to 
speak to the people,— as soon as they had 
left off beating him. (Verses 37-40.) And 
the noble address which followed (chap. 22) 
was a model of skill, logic and eloquence; 
and a fair reflection of the worthy character 
of the Lord's chosen Apostle. May its inspiration 
fire our hearts to the furtherance 
of the Lord's work. The Apostle's course 
was a practical exemplification of his teaching 
in the golden text of this lesson. 



page 223 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am again in 
the harvest field. What a privilege not only to 
feast ourselves upon the fat things, but to feed 
others as well. When we take Brother Paul's 
advice, and present our bodies living sacrifices to 
God and his service, there seems to be a change 
in our being. We continually grow in love to 
God, in heart, mind, soul and strength, and 
to love our neighbor as ourselves. It seems 
to me, dear Brother, that we sometimes realize 
in our own hearts, to some extent at least (notwithstanding 
our weakness under the Adamic 

page 224 

fall), the wonderful sympathy and love our 



dear Savior manifested toward the city of Jerusalem, 
when, but a few days before he suffered, 
he wept over the city, and, again, as they 
pierced him on the cross, he uttered that 
wonderful prayer, "Father, forgive them." I 
used to read those things with deep interest, 
and could hardly realize such great love; but 
now I not only realize it, but see my own privilege 
to share that same love, and to sacrifice 
for the sake of others. 
Yours in the service of the Master, 
J. S. BOTT. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just finished 
this week's work, and wish you to know 
that I am still fighting away, and still trusting 
in our dear Redeemer, who died that we might 
live. And I do thank our Heavenly Father 
that I am so privileged to be used of him in 
spreading the "glad tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people." 

I met a dear brother to-day, who seemed to 
be thoroughly consecrated to God's service. 
He has some truth, and I hope DAWN will help 
him to more. He had only to look at it a moment 
to see that it was something good. Perhaps you 
do not just realize how good it makes me feel 
to meet anyone I can grasp by the hand and 
call "brother." When we meet so much error 
everywhere, it is such a delightful contrast to 
meet one of like precious faith— one who is on 
the Rock. I took one hundred and forty orders 
this week; and owe many thanks to Brother 
Rogers for his helping hand, enabling me to 
do so much better than previously. 

Your brother in Christ, WM. Mc ALPINE. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We received 
the three Bibles, etc., in good condition, and 
are well pleased with them. I also received 
your kind letter of May 30. It encourages me 
to press on. I am heavy laden with cares, but 
strength is graciously supplied to me; and I 
trust that I shall never become overcharged. 
I surely can see the hand of the Lord leading 
me on. All my ways, my thoughts, my words 
and desires, are known to him; and I desire to 
keep that thought always before me: it is a 
safeguard against the many snares of the devil. 

I have received and read the June 1st TOWER. 
The article, "The Lord's Sheep," is good. 
How glad I am that I ever heard the Good 



Shepherd's voice! I will endeavor to follow 
wherever he leads, for the path is safe, and 
will end in glory. The knowledge of the good 
Shepherd, who he is, what he has done for his 
sheep and what he is still doing for us, has 
drawn out my love for him; and I desire to 
follow him because I love him. Dear Shepherd, 
keep me ever near thee, is my prayer. Amen. 

The article, "The Relative Claims of Love 
and Justice," has opened my eyes as never before. 
I have read it twice, carefully, and I 
want to keep it before me continually. I never 
saw so much injustice before. I see that justice 
is what is needed in this world more than 
anything else. I see now that justice is righteousness; 
and there can be no peace on earth 
until justice is established in it; but we have 
the "sure word of prophecy" pointing out a 
time when the "people shall be all righteous," 
and inherit the land for ever.— Isa. 60:21. 

Your brother in Christ, N. BARRETT, SR. 



DEAR FRIENDS :-How the WATCH TOWER 

grows on one! It breathes the Spirit of Truth. 
I look upon the letters from friends and workers 
published in the TOWER as one of its strong 
features, and take great pleasure in reading 
them all— they are so clean and honest and 
straight-forward. 
With best wishes, I remain Yours truly, 
A. R. PEARSON. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am digging 
down into the three volumes of DAWN, trying 
my best to get its treasures; for I find that all 
the truth does not lie on the surface. Each 
time I read them through I grasp the truth more 
firmly. 

Please send me the TOWER for April 15th, 
and the one treating the first chapter of John. 
Never before did anything open up so beautifully 
to my mind. 

Yours in love and truth, R. P. PHELPS. 



DEAR FRIENDS:-I failed to receive the 
TOWER of April 15th. If you have one I would 
be glad to have it. I feel it a great loss to 
miss a single number. Would be pleased to receive 
a few tracts for distribution. 

A few of us, here, are endeavoring to walk 



in the strait, narrow way of self-denial, trusting 
in the ransom sacrifice of our blessed Redeemer, 
and endeavoring to walk in his footsteps. 
Oh, how wonderful that we are invited 
to be heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus 
Christ, our Lord. Amazing grace! 

We are circulating a few DAWNS and other 
publications of the Tract Society in our thinly 
settled section, though there are but few that 
have the hearing ear. Yet how clear and refreshing 
is the truth to the household of faith! 
I feel I have but a little while to stay in the 
flesh. I have passed the seventieth mile-post, 
and hope soon to be like my Lord, and see 
him as he is. Yours in hope, G. S. PERRY. 



page 226 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



OUR CHICAGO CONVENTION:-- 

Full particulars (so far as yet arranged) were 
given in our last issue, except to note that the 
entertainment offered includes pure water from 
artesian wells. 

Responses so far received indicate that we 
will have a good attendance. Colporteurs, and 
those proposing to enter that work, should 
sacrifice something in order to attend. We expect 
a blessing and a fresh impetus to the general 
work. Let all the consecrated pray for 
themselves, and especially for all who shall attend 
the Convention, that selfishness and pride 
may be swallowed up in love and humility— 
that the blessing may be general. 

R1559 : page 226 

BROTHER RABINOWITCH IN ALLEGHENY. 



Joseph Rabinowitch, of Kishenev, Russia, is 
well known to our readers as by birth a Hebrew, 
but a convert to our Lord Jesus, who is laboring 
for the conversion of the Jews. He is 
stopping with the editor for a couple of days, 
resting. Mr. Moody was instrumental in bringing 
him to Chicago, with a view of having him 
aid in work for the Jews in that city. 

Brother Rabinowitch addressed a meeting of 
about 500 Jews at Warszawiak's Mission in 
New York. (Hermann Warszawiak is a converted 
Russian Jew who is preaching Jesus to 
his country-men here.) In Chicago he several 
times addressed above 200 Jews, and on his 
way back he is to address about 600 Jews at 
Gaebelein's Mission in New York. We were 
agreeably surprised to learn of so many Hebrews 
in this country interested in Jesus as the Messiah 
—even though all are not converted to him. 

When asked his opinion of the work being 
done for the Hebrews in the United States, 
Brother Rabinowitch said: "I am pleased with 
what I have seen; but it is rather raw yet. It 
needs more system, and a better system. My 
theory and plan are somewhat different; and 
I think better for reaching the heart of the Jew. 
I do not introduce the Jews into any denomination 
of Christians, nor to any creed of Christendom. 
Rather I introduce them to Jesus as 
the King of the Jews— their own brother, their 
own lineage. I show the fulfilment of prophecy 
in him; and seek to have them accept him 
as Redeemer and Messiah. I leave out all 
those special doctrinal features which separate 
the denominations of Christendom, and preach 
Christ Jesus the Jew, crucified as our Redeemer 
and resurrected to be our King, our Deliverer 
from sin and death, in God's due time." 

We were forcibly struck with the fact that Bro. 
Rabinowitch's gospel to the Jews is so much in 
correspondence with our message to Christians. 

R1563 : page 226 

PROSPERITY IN JERUSALEM 

The price of land about Jerusalem is something 
surprising when we consider that the 
place has almost no manufactures, very little 
foreign commerce, and that the city contains 
a multitude of poor people. Two acres that 
were sold in 1890 for $250 per acre sold in 
1891 for $750; twelve acres sold in 1890 
for $435 per acre sold in 1892 for $2,178; 
seven acres sold in 1886 for $363 per acre sold 



in 1892 for $6,534; two acres sold in 1886 for 
$1,200 per acre sold in 1892 for $3,000; half 
an acre sold in 1871 for $200 sold in 1892 for 
$3,700, that is, for the half acre; one acre sold 
in 1872 for $40 sold in 1892 for $12,000; two-thirds 
of an acre sold in 1886 for $100 sold in 
1891 for $3,600; one acre sold in 1865 for 
$1,000 sold in 1891 for $24,000. These are 
not in one section or locality, but in different 
directions about the city, varying from one-fourth 
of a mile to one mile distant from the 
town.— Scribner's. 

"A correspondent in Jerusalem informs us 
that the Sultan's government has again licensed 
Jewish real estate brokers and purchasers to 
acquire landed property in Palestine without 
being Mussulmen, and secures to all settlers the 
protection of the high porte and equal rights 
with the natives of the land. This opens that 
country to foreign immigration and will attract 
thousands from Roumania, Russia and 
Morocco." —American Israelite. 



R1560 : page 227 
