From Our Readers
World War I
I have taught American history in high school for eight years. I found your three articles about World War I the most concise and informative I have ever read. (September 8, 1983; September 22, 1983; October 8, 1983) All the classic reasons for the war were explained as was the terrible suffering and the tremendous number of deaths. This was tied in splendidly with Jesus’ prediction of the time of the end.
N. H., Indiana
World Economy
I would like to thank you for the article “The World Economy​—Where Is It Heading?” (April 22, 1983) It helps all of us, especially us Brazilians who have suffered so much from it, to understand the economic crisis in all its aspects. At the moment I am studying in the Faculty of Economic Sciences, and the article was of great assistance to me. I cannot wait until it comes in the Portuguese edition so that I may share the information with my colleagues.
P. P. S., Brazil
Safeguarding Hearing
I’m just writing briefly with a minor point of criticism of the otherwise good article “Safeguard Your Gift of Hearing.” (August 22, 1983) On page 27 of the article you imply that rock music causes hearing loss. Surely this is not the fault of rock music in itself. Rather it is the fault of the person who should turn the volume down. The fact is that any kind of music, whether it is country, classical, polka or big-band swing, can cause the same hearing damage when played at unreasonable volume.
T. A., Canada
We agree that it is the volume that causes the damage. But rock music especially doesn’t easily lend itself to keeping the volume low​—at least the temptation is to keep it high. In commenting on the potential danger of stereo headphones, the article stated: “Keeping the volume low might therefore save your hearing!” But at rock concerts the listener has no control over the volume, and unwary listeners are often exposed to dangerously high decibel levels.​—ED.
Creation or Evolution
Thank you for the fine scientific articles that you have been publishing, such as “Creationism​—Is It Scientific?” and “Evolution, Creation, or Creationism​—Which Do You Believe?” in Portuguese. (March 8, 1983; March 22, 1983, in English) My husband and I work at the government’s research institute, which enables us to see at close range the intelligence and wisdom of the Creator in the minute things of creation, including microorganisms. With the aid of these articles, we have been able to awaken the interest of some agnostics, even conducting studies with some we work with here at the institute.
F. and R. L., Brazil
Battery Warning
Thank you for the item in “Watching the World” on “Battery Warning.” (August 8, 1983) Today one of our sons swallowed a small watch battery. I wouldn’t have known it was a cause for concern if it hadn’t been for your timely item.
T. O., Washington

