VOL. XIV. DECEMBER 1, 1893. NO. 23. 

THE APOSTLE PETER'S EXHORTATION. 



"Wherefore, gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and 
hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you 
at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient children, 
not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts 
in your ignorance: but as he who hath called you 
is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; 
because it is written, Be ye holy, 
for I am holy. "-1 Pet. 1:13-16. 

TO fully appreciate the apostolic exhortations 
we need to become well acquainted with 
their several characters, to note their circumstances, 
to mark their zeal and faithfulness, 
and to remember that every word of exhortation 
addressed to the Church has the substantial 
backing of their worthy examples. They 
endured hardness as good soldiers, and suffered 
much for the privilege of declaring the truth. 
In their writings are blended a high degree of 
the powers of logic, eloquence, pathos and an 
inspiring enthusiasm which must awaken in 



every student of their teachings a measure at 
least of the same sacred flame. 

Though written so long ago the above words 
of exhortation lose none of their force to us. 
They were penned for the instruction of the 
whole Church, down to the end of the age. 
The introductory, "Wherefore," refers us to 
the glorious hope of our high calling, and of 
the necessarily severe measures required to fit 
us for our exalted inheritance, as mentioned 
in the preceding verses. Peter would have us 
appreciate what it is to be called with such a 
high calling— to an inheritance incorruptible 
and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved 
in heaven for those who are kept by the 
power of God through faith. (Verse 4.) He 
would have us know that, if faithful, we are to 
be made "partakers even of the divine nature," 
and that we are to be joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ, of all things.— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

As the spirit of God draws our hearts into 
closer fellowship and sympathy with the divine 
mind, the value of these "exceeding great and 
precious promises" is more and more fully 
realized, until there glows in our hearts the same 
holy enthusiasm that so filled the hearts of the 
apostles. And only when our hearts are thus 
warmed and our minds thus awakened, are we 
prepared to understand the Apostle's "Wherefore," 
upon the inspiring comprehension of 
which depends our ability to heed the earnest 
exhortation which follows. 

If our hearts are not duly inspired with this 
hope— if we have begun to lightly esteem it, or 
to forget it, or to think of it as an idle tale— 
to heed the counsel of Peter, here given, will 
be impossible. If, therefore, we realize that 
a spiritual lethargy has to any extent been 
creeping over us, imperceptibly benumbing our 
spiritual senses, so that the truth is losing its 
inspiring power upon us, our first duty is to 
betake ourselves to prayer and to communion 
with God through his Word, that its sanctifying 
power may be realized. 

"Wherefore," then, you that discern the 
prize of your high calling, and who are endeavoring 
to press along the line toward it, 
"gird up the loins of your mind"— as in the 
illustration, strengthen and fortify your purposes 
and efforts, renew your determination, 
redouble your diligence, cast aside the weights 
of unnecessary worldly cares, increase your 

R1595 : page 356 

zeal; and, as the Apostle Paul also urges, run 



with patience the race set before you. Run, 
not like one who is merely beating the air, but 
like one who has a purpose in view, and who, 
in desperate earnest, is determined to make his 
calling and election sure. 

Having thus "girded up the loins of your 
mind" for a long, steady and determined effort, 
he further counsels,— "Be sober:" do not 
allow yourself to become excited and, under 
the spur of excitement, to exhaust all your 
spiritual vitality in a very short time, and then 
to suffer a relapse into coldness or discouragement; 
but thoughtfully consider and prepare 
for a long and patient endurance of all the discipline 
and trial of faith and patience necessary 
to prove an overcomer and worthy of the 
blessed reward promised "to him that overcometh." 
The race before us is not one to be 
run by fits and starts, but by "patient continuance 
in well doing." Soberly, thoughtfully, 
we are to weigh and endeavor to realize the import 
of the exceeding great and precious promises 
and to gather from them their invigorating 
inspiration; earnestly we must apply our minds 
and hearts to the instruction of the inspired 
Word of God, availing ourselves also of such 
helps— of "pastors and teachers" and their 
literary productions which prove harmonious 
with, and helpful to, the study of the Scriptures; 
diligently and patiently we must submit 
ourselves to all the transforming influences of 
divine grace and truth; and then loyally and 
faithfully we must devote our consecrated talents, 
however few or many, to the great work 
of preaching this gospel of the Kingdom to all 
who will hear. 

Such a sober view of the situation fortifies 
the mind against discouragement, and enables 
us, as the Apostle suggests, to "hope to the 
end for the grace to be brought unto us at the 
revelation of Jesus Christ." Such a sober view 
keeps Reason on the throne of our minds. 
And Reason says, The divine call to joint-heirship 
with Christ clearly implies eligibility 
to the exalted office; the divine promise 
clearly insures divine grace to enable us to 
fulfil the conditions; the divine provision 
for my justification, by faith in the precious 
blood of Christ, releases me from the condemnation 
to death; and the righteousness of 
Christ, imputed to me by faith, fully supplements 
all my weaknesses, so that before God 
I stand approved in him. Sober Reason also 
says, the directions given in the Scriptures to 
those who would run the race are clear and explicit, 
and make plain every step of the way 



to those who are truly and fully consecrated to 
the Lord. The examples of the Lord and the 
Apostles on the pathway shine with a moral 
luster and glory that cannot lead us astray. 
If we walk in their foot-prints we will assuredly 
reach the same goal. 

Therefore, in this sober view of our high 
calling and privileges, and the abundant resources 
of divine grace, let us not be discouraged 
or overcome in any way, but let us hope 
to the end for the grace (favor) that is to be 
brought unto us at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ— at his second advent. The Church 
has enjoyed much of the divine favor all through 
the age of her probation and trial; but the 
grace to be revealed at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ— when he comes to reign in power and 
great glory— is her exaltation with him to sit 
with him in his throne. This glorious consummation, 
the Church all through the age 
must steadily keep in view: but how glorious 
is the privilege of those of its members living 
in this end of the age, when already, even before 
our change into his glorious likeness— in 
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye— we begin 
to enter the joys of our Lord. 

Those who are still sober and faithful, and 
who have not cast away their confidence, have 
been led into the secret of the Master's presence; 
and they have been made to sit down to 
meat, and the Master himself has come forth 
and served them. Yes, our hearts have been 
made to burn within us while he has opened 
up the Scriptures and made us understand, 
from the testimony of the law and the prophets 
and the apostles, that the time is fulfilled— 
that the end of the age is now here, and that 
the Lord of the harvest is present to direct 
and supervise the great work of reaping the 
fruit of precious seed long ago sown in tears, 
and now to be gathered with joy and singing; 

R1595 : page 357 

while he has opened up to us the treasures of 
divine wisdom and grace displayed in the plan 
of the ages, which God purposed before the 
foundation of the world, which he has been 
gradually working out in the ages past, and which 
is now nearing its glorious consummation. 

Oh! what feasting, what rejoicing there has 
been around the table of the Lord, as one after 
another the treasures of divine grace have been 
opened to us, revealing the glories of the new 
heavens and the new earth and the blessedness 
of all the obedient subjects of him who sitteth 



on the throne to reign in righteousness; how 

all tears shall be wiped away from off all 

faces, and how the reproach of God's people is to be 

taken away. Well indeed did Daniel prophesy, 

saying, "O the blessedness of him that 

waiteth and cometh to the thousand, three 

hundred, thirty and five days"— the days of 

the Lord's second presence, when all that is 

written to be accomplished by his glorious reign 

shall begin to come to pass. 

Seeing then that such are our privileges and 
hopes, "what manner of persons ought we to 
be in all holy conversation and god-likeness." 
(2 Pet. 3:11.) Being purified by this hope, 
ought we not, as the Apostle exhorts, to fashion 
ourselves, not according to the former 
lusts (desires and ambitions, which we had) in 
our ignorance, but as he who has called us is 
holy, should not we also be holy in all manner 
of conversation— in all our words and 
ways? Since it is written, "Be ye holy; for 
I [the Lord] am holy" (1 Pet. 1:15,16), should 
not we who are called to be partakers of his 
own nature and glory be holy also? 

Some Christians have the erroneous idea 
that God does all the fashioning, and that his 
children are to be merely passive in his hand; 
but Peter does not so express it. He exhorts 
us to fashion ourselves according to the divine 
instructions. There is a work to be done in 
us and about us, and those who are not up and 
doing, but who passively sit and wait for the 
Lord to work miracles in their behalf, are 
greatly deceived, and are giving the enemy 
great advantage over them, which he will certainly 
use to bind them hand and foot and cast 
them into outer darkness, unless they bestir 
themselves to work out their salvation with 
fear and trembling, while God, co-operating 
with their earnest effort, works in them, to will 
and to do his good pleasure. (Phil. 2:12,13.) 
"Watch and pray," beloved, lest any of these 
snares of the enemy entrap you and beguile you 
of your reward. 



R1595 : page 357 
DISCIPLES OF CHRIST. 



"Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If 
ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; 
and ye shall know the truth, and the truth 



shall make you free."— John 8:31,32. 

THE Lord's preaching always produced two 
opposite effects upon the promiscuous 
multitudes that heard him. It attracted one 
class and repelled another. Those who were 
full of pride and conceit, and who preferred 
darkness to light because their deeds were evil, 
and because they realized that if they admitted 
the light of truth they must of necessity conform 
their characters to it,— all such were repelled 
by the teachings of Christ. And if the 
Lord had undertaken the work of the ministry 
according to the methods pursued to-day, depending 
for support on the good will and contributions 
of the people, that support would 
often have been very meagre, or at least very 
fluctuating. On some occasions multitudes 
received his testimony, and later deserted him 
and walked no more with him, as he continued 
to enforce the lessons of divine truth. 
(Luke 4:14,15,22,28,29.) Sometimes the 
multitudes hung upon his words, wondering 
at the gracious words that proceeded out of 
his mouth; and again and again they forsook 
him, while only the merest handful remained. 
(John 6:60,66-69.) What consternation 
would follow in the various churches of to-day, 
if the professed ministers of the gospel 
would follow the Master's example in similarly 
declaring the whole counsel of God. How 
quickly they would become unpopular, and be 
charged with breaking up the church. Why, 
the great congregations that now throng the 

R1595 : page 358 

temples of fashion dedicated to the service of 
God and the teachings of Christ would not 
stand it. They go there to be entertained 
with pleasing and eloquent discourses from 
titled gentlemen who presumably know their 
tastes and ideas, and who will preach to please 
them. They are quite willing to pay their 
money for what they want, but they do not 
want the truth. 

Those who followed the Lord only for a 
little season and then forsook him, of course 
ceased then to be his disciples and were no 
longer so recognized; nor did they presume 
longer to claim to be his disciples. A disciple 
is a pupil, a learner; and when any man ceases 
to be a student and pupil of Christ, the great 
Teacher, he is no longer a disciple of Christ. 
This was very manifest when the Lord was 
present, and when his name was one of reproach 



among men; but later, when his presence 

was withdrawn, and when his doctrines 

were unscrupulously mixed with human philosophies 

to such an extent as to divest them of 

their reproach, and to really make them void, 

then men began to claim to be his disciples 

long after they had utterly repudiated his 

doctrines. 

The Lord's expression— "disciples indeed" 
—implies a distinction between real and merely 
nominal disciples. And since we desire to 
continue to be his real, sincere disciples, let 
us mark the expressed condition: "If ye continue 
in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed." 
The hypocrisy of merely nominal discipleship 
is an abomination to the Lord. 

It is a blessed thing to take the first step in 
the Christian life— that of belief in and acceptance 
of Christ as our Redeemer and Lord; 
but the reward of this step depends entirely 
upon our continuance in his Word, in the attitude 
of true disciples. It is not difficult to do 
this, yet the disposition of human pride is to 
wander away from the simplicity of divine 
truth and to seek out new theories and philosophies 
of our own, or to pry into those of other 
men, who desire to be considered wise and 
great according to this world's estimate. 

The reward of continued discipleship is, "Ye 
shall know the truth"— not that we shall be 
"ever seeking and never coming to a knowledge 
of the truth." (2 Tim. 3:7.) Here is 
the mistake that many make: failing to continue 
in the Word of the Lord, they delve into 
various human philosophies which ignore 
or pervert the Word of the Lord and set up 
opposing theories. There is no promise, to 
those who seek for truth among these, that they 
shall ever find it. And they never do. Divine 
truth is never found except in the divinely appointed 
channels: and those channels are the 
Lord and the apostles and prophets. To continue 
in the doctrine set forth in their inspired 
writings, to study and meditate upon them, to 
trust implicitly in them, and to faithfully conform 
our characters to them, is what is implied 
in continuing in the Word of the Lord. 

But the idea is entirely compatible with that 
of heeding all the helps which the Lord from 
time to time raises up from among our brethren 
in the body of Christ, as enumerated by 
the Apostle Paul. (Eph. 4:11-15; 1 Cor. 12:13,14.) 
The Lord always has raised up, and 
will to the end raise up, such helps for the 
edification of the body of Christ; but it is the 
duty of every member to carefully prove their 



teaching by the infallible Word. 

If we thus continue in the Word of the Lord, 
as earnest and sincere disciples, we shall indeed 
"know the truth," be "established in the 
present truth" [the truth due], and be "rooted 
and grounded in the truth;" we shall be "firm 
in the faith," and "able to give a reason for 
the hope that is in us," to "earnestly contend 
for the faith once delivered to the saints," to 
"war a good warfare," to "witness a good 
confession," and to firmly "endure hardship 
as good soldiers of Jesus Christ," even unto 
the end of our course. We will not come into 
the knowledge of the truth at a single 
bound; but gradually, step by step, we will be 
led into the truth. Every step will be one of 
sure and certain progress and each one leading 
to a higher vantage ground for further attainments 
both in knowledge and in its blessed 
fruits of established character. 

The truth thus acquired, step by step, becomes 
a sanctifying power bringing forth in 
our lives its blessed fruits of righteousness, 

R1595 : page 359 

peace, joy in the holy Spirit, love, meekness, 
faith, patience and every virtue and every 
grace, which time and cultivation will ripen 
to a glorious maturity. 

And not only shall the true disciple thus 
know the truth and be sanctified by it, but the 
Lord also said, "The truth shall make you 
free." Those who have received the truth 
know by blessed experience something of its 
liberating power. As soon as any measure of 
it is received into a good and honest heart, it 
begins to strike off the fetters of sin, of ignorance 
and superstition, and of fear. It throws 
its health-restoring beams into the darkest recesses 
of our hearts and minds, and thus invigorates 
the whole being. Sin cannot endure 
its light; and those who continue to live in sin 
when a sufficiency of light has been received 
to manifest its deformity must inevitably lose 
the light because they are unworthy of it. 

Ignorance and superstition must vanish before 
the light of truth. And what a blessed 
realization it is to be thus liberated! Millions 
are still under this galling yoke. Under its 
delusions they fear and reverence some of the 
basest tools of Satan for their oppression and 
degradation, because they hypocritically claim 
divine appointment; and they have been made 
to fear God as a vengeful tyrant consigning 
the vast majority of his creatures to an eternity 



of torment. Thank God, we who have received 
the truth have escaped that terrible 
nightmare, and the bondage of Satan over us 
is broken. 

We are made free, too, from the fear that 
we now see coming upon the whole world as 
the great civil and ecclesiastical systems that 
have so long ruled the world are being terribly 
shaken. All thinking people are in dread of 
the possible outcome of anarchy and terror. 
And the alarm of all will increase as we near 
the awful crisis toward which we are rapidly 
hastening, and as the danger becomes more 
and more visible. Yet, in the midst of it all, 
and with the fullest assurance of the infallible 
Word of God of the terrors of the conflict 
through which the world will have to pass 
within a few years, the true disciples of Christ 
who abide in his Word are not afraid, but rejoice, 
because they know that God's object in 
permitting the storm is to clear the moral atmosphere 
of the world, and that, after the 
storm, there shall come, by his providence, an 
abiding peace. Instructed in the truth, they 
realize the necessities of the situation, and have 
confidence in the divine providence that can 
make even the wrath of man to praise him. 

Blessed promise!— "If ye continue in my 
Word, then are ye my disciples indeed, and 
ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall 
make you free." Dearly beloved, having received 
this favor from the Lord, shall we not 
continue in it, giving no heed to seducing 
doctrines? And shall we not be faithful to it 
under all circumstances, defending it against 
every assault, and with it bearing its reproach? 
Let us prove our appreciation of it by our 
loyalty and faithfulness to it. 



R2232 : page 359 

HEALING FOR BROKEN HEARTS. 

-HELEN WATTS McVEY.- 

Grieving and worn, discouraged, 

Sick of the day-long strife, 
Bruised by the restless tossing 

Over the sea of life; 
Hurt by the hands I trusted, 

Yearning for rest and home, 
Famishing, faint and doubting, 

Unto the Book I come. 



One of the sweet, old chapters— 

Sometimes a verse or two- 
Falls on my troubled spirit 

Like to a healing dew. 
Soothing the fevered pulses, 

Comforts the soul's despair; 
Lifts from my path the shadows; 

Banishes clouds and care. 

"Ye that are heavy-laden," 

Burdened with woe and grief, 
"Knock and the door shall open;" 

Here you will find relief. 
"Let not your hearts be troubled;" 

"Only believe and trust:" 
Thus do the healing waters 

Flow o'er Life's desert dust. 



R1595 : page 360 

A GLIMPSE OF CHRISTIANITY IN JAPAN. 

FROM TWO JAPANESE CHRISTIANS AT THE 
LATE WORLD'S PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS. 



MR. Nobuta Kishimoto, in his interesting address 
on "The Future of Religion in 
Japan," expressed his hope for the ultimate 
triumph of Christianity, although he showed 
that the religious impulses of the people are 
divided between Shintoism, Confucianism and 
Buddhism. He said:— 

"The prevailing attitude of the educated 
classes toward any religion is one of cold indifference, 
if not strong antagonism. Among 
them the agnosticism of Spencer, the materialism 
of Comte and the pessimism of Schoppenhauer 
and Hartmann are most influential. 
To them, God is either the product of our 
own imagination or, at most, unknowable. 
To them, religion is nothing but superstition; 
to them, the universe is a chancework and has 
no end or meaning. Again, to them, men are 
nothing but lower animals in disguise, without 
the image of God in them and without a 
bright future before them." 

He reports a Christian population of 100,000, 
of which the Roman Catholic is the 
strongest in membership; then the Protestant, 
which is represented by thirty-one different 
denominations; and, finally, the Greek Catholic. 
But which is to triumph? That is the 



question, to which he replies:— 

"We do not want Catholic Christianity, nor 
do we want Protestant Christianity. We want 
the Christianity of the Bible. ...We do 
not want the Christianity of England, nor the 
Christianity of America: we want the Christianity 
of Japan.... We Japanese want the 
Christianity of the Christ. We want the truth 
of Christianity; nay, we want the truth, pure 
and simple. We want the spirit of the Bible, 
at least in spirit, if not in form. But we Japanese 
Christians are hoping more: we are ambitious 
to present to the world one new and 
unique interpretation of Christianity as it is 
in our Bible, which knows no sectarian controversy 
and which knows no heresy hunting. 
Indeed, the time is coming, and ought to come, 
when God shall be worshiped, not by rites 
and ceremonies, but in spirit and in truth." 

Mr. Harmchi Kozaki, president of Doshisha 
University, Japan, presented a paper on "Christianity 
in Japan; Its Present Condition and 
Future Prospects," in which he said:— 

"The progress of Christianity in Japan is 
quite remarkable. It is only thirty-four years 
since the first Protestant missionary put his 
foot on its shore. And it is scarcely twenty 
years since the first Protestant church was organized 
in Japan. Yet now there are more 
Christians there than in Turkey, where missionaries 
have been working more than seventy 
years; and there are more self-supporting 
churches there than in China, where a double 
or triple number of missionaries have been 
working nearly a century. In Japan, Christian 
papers and magazines are all edited by the 
natives, not only in name but in reality. 
Christian books, which have been most influential, 
have nearly all been written or translated 

R1596 : page 360 

by them, while in other countries it is 

very rare to find the native Christians writing 

Christian books or editing papers. Only recently 

The Christian, the most influential 

Christian paper in Japan, had a Symposium to 

name fifteen books which are most useful in 

leading men to Christianity, instructing Christians 

and giving good counsel to young people; 

and it is interesting to see that most of 

the books named are those written or translated 

by Japanese Christians. 

"Christianity in Japan has already reached 
a stage that no other missionary fields have 
ever attained. Their native Christians not 



only take part in all discussions, but they are 
in fact leading all kinds of discussion, theological 
as well as practical. They are leading, 
not only all kinds of Christian work, literary 
and evangelistic, educational and charitable, 
but they are also leading Christian thought in 
Japan. Let me relate one or two instances. 
"Some six or seven years ago, when we 
were contemplating the union of the Itochi 
and Kumiai denominations, the two most 
powerful Christian bodies in Japan, among 
twenty members of a joint committee appointed 
by the Synod of one and the General Council 
of the other, there were only four missionaries. 
When, a few years ago, the Kumiai denomination 
adopted a new confession of faith, the 
missionaries took almost no part. This confession 
was drawn up by a committee, consisting 
entirely of Japanese, and adopted in the General 
Council, in which missionaries took very 
little or no part. In Japan, missionaries are 
really "helpers," and I should say to their 
credit they, in most cases, willingly take secondary 
positions in all Christian works. All 
this, I say, is not to disparage the work of 

R1596 : page 361 

missionaries, but only to show the progress 
of Christianity among the natives of Japan. 

"There are many peculiar features in Japanese 
Christianity which are seldom seen in 
other countries. ...For instance, while 
in most of the churches in this country female 
members are almost two to one in proportion 
to male members, it is quite otherwise in Japan. 
There female members in relation to male 
members are nearly three to four. This is almost 
in inverse ratio to their proportions in 
the United States. Another is the predominance 
of young people in our churches. You 
may step into any of our churches in any city 
or village and you will be struck by the great 
preponderance of young faces. We have not 
yet taken statistics of members as to their age, 
but any one who has experience in Christian 
work there notes this peculiarity.... 

"One more point is the predominance of the 
Shizoku or military class. They have been 
and still are the very brains of the Japanese 
people. Though they are not usually well off 
in material wealth, they are superior intellectually 
and morally. Christians in other missionary 
fields are usually from the lower classes. 
In India the Brahmins rarely become Christians, 
neither do the literary class in China. But in 



Japan the Shizoku class take a lead. 

"These peculiarities in the constituency of 
the membership of Christian churches in Japan 
may be accounted for by the simple fact that 
the males, the young and the Shizoku classes 
are most accessible. The Shizoku class, as 
a body, has had hitherto almost no religion, 
and they have been mostly Confucianists. By 
the last revolution they lost their profession as 
well as their means of support, and thus they 
are all unsettled in life, and so accessible to 
every kind of new influence and truth. Young 
people have also no settled opinions and are 
open to new influences and thus accessible to 
new truth. And so it is with men as compared 
with women. They are generally more progressive, 
and hence more accessible.... 

"As the Japanese Christian population is of 
such a constituency, the native Christians are 
more progressive, more active, more able to 
stand on their own feet, and more capable of 
establishing self-supporting churches. But this 
strength is also their weakness. They are more 
liable to be drifted, more apt to be changed 
and more disposed to be flippant. 

"The next peculiar feature of Japanese Christianity 
is lack of sectarian or denominational 
spirit. About thirty different denominations 
of Protestant churches, represented by about 
an equal number of missionary boards, are on 
the field, each teaching its own peculiar tenets. 
But they are making very little impression on 
our Christians. ...We have been having, 
at first annually, but lately once in three 
years, what was called "Dai Shin Baku Kwai," 
which was afterward changed into the Evangelical 
Alliance, the meeting of all Christians 
in Japan, irrespective of denominations or 
churches— the most popular and interesting we 
have. Again, Japanese Christians did not 
know any distinction of denominations or 
churches. But when they found out that there 
are many different folds, and that one belongs 
to his denomination, not by his own choice, 
but simply by chance or circumstance which 
could in no way be controlled, there is no 
wonder that these Christians begin to ask: 
Why should not we, all Christians, unite in 
one church? 

"The union movement in Japan rose at first 
in some such way. Though we have now lost 
much of this simple spirit, still, Japanese 
Christians are essentially undenominational. 
You may see that the church which adopted 
Presbyterian forms of government refused to 
be called 'Presbyterians' or 'Reformed,' and 



adopted the broad name 'Itschi,' the 'United;' 
but, not content even with this broad name, 
it has recently changed it to a still broader 
name, 'Nippon Kinisuto Kio Kwai,'— 'The 
Church of Christ in Japan.' 

"The church which has adopted an Episcopal 
form of government lately dropped the 
name Episcopacy and adopted instead the name 
of The Holy Church of Japan.' Kumiai 
churches for a long time had no name except 
this: 'A Church of Christ' When it was 
found out that it was necessary to adopt some 
name to distinguish itself from other churches, 
its Christians reluctantly adopted the name of 
'Kumiai,' which means 'associated;' for at 
that time they happened to form an association 
of churches which were until then independent 
of each other. They always refused to be 
called the 'Congregational churches,' although 
they have adopted mostly Congregational policy 
of church government. 

"The third distinctive feature of Japanese 
Christianity is the prevalence of a liberal spirit 
in doctrinal matters. While missionaries are 
both preaching and teaching the orthodox doctrines, 
Japanese Christians are eagerly studying 
the most liberal theology. Not only are they 
studying, but they are diffusing these liberal 
thoughts with zeal and diligence, and so I believe 
that, with a small exception, most of 
Japanese pastors and evangelists are more or 
less liberal in their theology.... 

R1596 : page 362 

"While the American Board of Foreign Missions 
is strenuously on the watch to send no 
missionary who has any inclination toward the 
Andover Theology, the pastors and evangelists 
of the Kumiai churches, which are in close 
connection with the same board, are advocating 
and preaching theology perhaps more 
liberal than the Andover Theology. Just to illustrate: 
Some years ago, in one of our councils, 
when we were going to install a pastor, 
he expressed the orthodox belief on future life, 
which was a great surprise to all. Then members 
of the council pressed hard questions to 
him so as to force him to adopt the doctrine 
of future probation, as though it were the only 
doctrine which is tenable. 

"Only recently, when a bishop of a certain 
church was visiting Japan, he was surprised to 
find that a young Japanese professor in the 
seminary connected with his own church was 
teaching quite a liberal theology, and he gave 



him a strong warning. 

"As to the creeds: when 'The Church of 
Christ in Japan' was organized, it adopted the 
Presbyterian and the Reformed standards; 
namely, the Westminster Shorter Catechism, 
the Canon of Dort and the Heidelberger Confession 
of Faith. But Christians of the same 
church found them too stiff, one-sided and 
conservative, and thus they have lately dropped 
these standards as their creed altogether. They 
have now the 'Apostles' Creed' with a short 
preface attached to it. 

"When the Kumiai church was first organized, 
it adopted the Nine Articles of the Basis 
of the Evangelical Alliance as its creed. But 
Christians of the same denomination became 
soon dissatisfied with its narrowness, and so in 
1890 they made their own creed, which is far 
simpler and broader. But even this creed is 
not understood as binding to all, but only as 
a common expression of religious belief prevailing 
among them in general. 

"Though Japanese Christians are largely on 
the side of liberal theology, they are not in any 
way in favor of Unitarianism or even Universalism. 
...The most of our educated classes 
have no religion. Though they favor certain 
kinds of Christian ethical teachings, they have 
no faith in any religion or supernatural truth. 
Christ, and are all to be characterized as 
evangelical.... 

"There was a time when Christianity was 
making such a stride in its progress that, in 
one year, it gained 40 or 50 per cent increase. 
This was between 1882 and 1888. These years 
may be regarded as a flowery era in the annals 
of Japan. It was in 1883 that, when we were 
having the 'Dai Shin Boku Kwai' in Tokyo, 
perhaps the most interesting meeting in its 
history, one of the delegates expressed his firm 
belief that in ten years Japan would become 
a Christian country. This excited quite an 
applause; and no one felt it as too extravagant 
to cherish such a hope, for such was the firm 
belief at that time. Since then, progress in our 
churches has not been such as was expected. 
Not only have members not increased in such 
a proportion as in years before, but in some 
cases there can be seen a decline of religious 

R1597 : page 362 

zeal and of the self-sacrificing spirit. And so 

in these last few years the cry heard most frequently 

among our churches has been 'Awake, 

awake as in the days past!' 



"To show the decline of that religious enthusiasm, 
I may take an illustration from statistics 
of the Kumiai churches as to its amount 
of contribution. In 1882 this amount was 
$6.72 per Christian; in 1888 this amount ran 
down to $2.15, and in the last year there has 
been still more decline, coming down to $1.95. 
In amount of increase of membership there has 
been a proportional decline. Why there was 
such a decline is not hard to see. Among various 
causes I may mention three principal ones. 

"Public sentiment in Japan has been always 
fluctuating from one side to another. 
It is like a pendulum, now going to one extreme 
and then to another. This movement 
of public sentiment, within the last fifteen or 
twenty years, can easily be pointed out. From 
1877 to 1882 I may regard as a period of reaction 
that of revival of the antiforeign spirit. 
During this period the cry, 'Repel foreigners,' 
which was on the lips of every Japanese at the 
time of the revolution, and since then unheard, 
was again heard. It was at this time that 
Confucial teaching was revived in all the public 
schools; and the Emperor issued a proclamation 
that the western ethical principles were 
not suitable to the Japanese, and were not to 
be taught in our public schools. 

"Then the pendulum went to the other side. 
And now another era came in. This was a 
period of western ideas, which covers the years 
between 1882 and 1888. This was the age of 
great interest in everything that came from 
abroad. Not only was English eagerly taught, 
but all sorts of foreign manners and customs 
were busily introduced. Foreign costumes, 
not only of gentlemen but of ladies, foreign 
diet, as well as foreign liquors, became most 
popular among all classes. Every newspaper, 
almost without exception, advocated the adoption 
of everything foreign, so that Japan 

R1597 : page 363 

seemed as if it would be no longer an oriental 
nation, but would become occidentalized. It 
was at this time that such a paper as Jiji Shimpo 
advocated adoption of Christianity as the 
national religion of Japan. It was no wonder 
that people poured into Christian churches, 
and that the latter made unprecedented strides 
in progress. 

"But the pendulum swung to its extreme, 
and now another movement came in. The 
sign of reactionary and antiforeign spirit might 
be seen in everything— in costumes, in sentiments, 



as well as in opinions. Then the cry 
'Japan for the Japanese' became heard in all 
corners of the empire. Everything that has 
flavor of foreign countries has been stigmatized 
as unworthy of adoption by the Japanese, and, 
instead of it, everything native is praised as 
superior or worthy of preservation. Buddhism, 
which has been regarded for years as a religion 
of the ignorant and inferior classes, is now 
praised as a superior religion, much superior 
to Christianity; and many who once favored 
adoption of Christianity as the national religion 
are seen publicly in Buddhistic ceremonies. 
Christianity is denounced as antagonistic to 
the growth of our national spirit, in conflict 
with our best morality, and also as against the 
intent of the imperial edict which was issued 
two years ago as the code of morals in all our 
schools. Conflict between Christianity and 
national education has become the most popular 
theme among certain classes of the people. 
Strong sense of national feeling has been 
aroused among all classes of people, and now 
it is not strange that Christians also feel its 
influence. 

"And thus the doors to Christianity seem to 
have been closed, and we have a great decline 
in its growth. But now, again, the pendulum 
has reached another end, and there are signs that 
another era is ushering in. 'Every movement 
has rhythm,' says Herbert Spencer, and this is 
true in the progress of Christianity in Japan. 

"One word as to the prospect in the future. 
That Japan will not become a Christian nation 
in a few years is a plain fact. But that it will 
become one in the course of time is almost 
above doubt, and it is only a question of time. 
Still, 'Rome was not built in a day,' and so 
it will take time to Christianize Japan. That 
there are strong obstacles and great hindrances 
can easily be seen. It may be easy to show 
the reasonableness of Christianity, but to instil 
true Christian spirit into the heart of the 
people is not an easy task. We can show them 
more easily the folly of other religions, but to 
build up a true Christian church requires a 
long time. ...I am not at all anxious about 
the future of Christianity in Japan, as far as its 
final victory is concerned. But there are many 
difficult problems pressing us hard for their 
solution. I shall here simply state these problems 
in a few words. 

(1) "The first problem that comes under 
our notice is that of relation between Christianity 
and our nationality, namely, our national 
habit and spirit. Professor Inonge and 



others have been raising their voices against 

Christianity, claiming it is in conflict with our 

national spirit. And this cry against Christianity 

has become so popular among Buddhists, 

Shintoists and Reactionists that they make it 

the only weapon of their attack against Christianity. 

But in my belief this problem is not 

so hard as it looks. What outsiders think to 

be the real conflict seems to us only shadow 

and vapor. 

(2) "Relation between missionaries and 
native Christians is another problem. How 
must they be related? In other countries, such 
as India or China, such a question, perhaps, 
may never arise; but in Japan it is entirely 
different. Japanese Christians will never be 
satisfied under missionary auspices. To be 
useful to our country the missionaries must 
either co-operate with or join native churches 
and become like one of the native workers. 

(3) "Problem of denominations and church 
government is another difficulty. Of course 

we shall not entirely dispense with denominations 

and sects. But it seems rather foolish 

to have all denominations, which are peculiar 

to some countries and which have certain peculiar 

histories attached to them, introduced 

into Japan where no such history exists and 

where circumstances are entirely different. 

And so we think we can reduce the number 

of denominations. But how to begin is a hard 

problem. 

"So also with the form of church government. 
It is needless to say that we need not, 
or ought not, to copy in any way the exact 
forms of church governments which are in 
vogue in the United States or in any other 
countries. But to formulate a form of government 
that suits our country the best, and at 
the same time works well elsewhere, is quite a 
difficult task. 

(4) "Whether we need any written creed, 
and, if so, what kind of creed is best to have, 

is also a question. In all teachings of missionaries 
and others there is always more or 
less of husks mixed with genuine truth. And 
at the same time every form of Christianity 
has some excellent truth in it. And it is hard 

R1597 : page 364 

to make distinction between essentials and non-essentials, 
between creed and husks. This is a 
hard problem for Japanese theologians to solve. 
[DAWN will solve it for you as it has for others!] 
"Japanese Christians must solve all these 



problems by themselves. I believe there is a 
grand mission for Japanese Christians. I believe 
that it is our mission to solve all these 
problems which have been, and are still, stumbling 
blocks in all lands; and it is also our 
mission to give to all the oriental nations and 
the rest of the world a guide to true progress 
and a realization of the glorious Gospel which 
is in Jesus Christ.. ..Our prayer is and always 
must be: 'Thy Kingdom come, thy will 
be done, as in heaven, so in earth.'" 



R1597 : page 364 

TRUE CHRISTIAN LIBERALITY. 



LIBERALITY, generosity, is essentially a 
Christian grace. God is love, and all who 
partake of his spirit must be proportionately 
loving and generous. But as we are instructed 
not to be wise in our own conceits, 
nor to be wise above what is written in 
God's Word, so likewise it is well for all 
true children of God to beware of assuming 
to have a greater, wider or deeper love than 
that clearly set forth in God's Word as the 
only real and true standard. God's people 
are to set up a standard neither for God 
nor for themselves; but as obedient children 
they should not fashion their minds and 
faith after their own defective conceptions, 
but according as the Lord has revealed. 

Some err on one side of this question and 
some on the other; but the remedy for both 
errors is the same— submit your heads and 
your hearts unto the direction of the Lord 
through his inspired Word. 

That Word nowhere teaches that everlasting 
torment is the wages of sin, but that 
the wages of sin is death. Every plain 
(non-symbolic) statement of the Scriptures 
agrees that "the soul that sinneth, it shall 
die." Surely, then, no one is justified in 
maligning, yea, blaspheming God's character 
and plan by teaching directly or indirectly 
the contrary— that he will keep the 
sinner's soul alive to all eternity in order to 
torment it. There would be neither love 
nor justice in such a course. 

On the other hand the Word nowhere 
teaches Universalism,— that the entire human 



R1598 : page 364 

family will be everlastingly saved to 

divine favor and blessing. And those who 

rash from the one extreme of faith in an almost 

universal torment, to the other extreme 

of belief in Universalism are carried from 

one human error to another human error. 

However, the finding of the one error to 

have been the result of a too careless handling 

of God's Word and a leaning to perverted 

human reason and judgment should 

put all upon their guard thereafter: but frequently 

it does not, as we see; and, getting 

filled with the thought of God's love, they 

seem to forget that God has more than one 

attribute of character and that these must 

all be co-ordinated in any plan that is his— 

that his Wisdom and his Justice each join 

with his Love in his plan for man's salvation 

from sin and its penalty, death. 

The Scriptures do, indeed, teach that the 
great ransom-sacrifice given by our Redeemer 
will sooner or later bring to every 
member of the human family fullest opportunity 
for the recovery of all that he lost 
in Adam. But they forget that although 
Adam had life, its everlasting continuance 
was not assured: for this he was on trial 
when he wilfully sinned and thus cut short 
his trial and brought upon himself, and upon 
us in his loins, the sentence of death. 

It is what was lost, and all that was lost that 
our Lord came to save. The salvation made 
possible by his ransom-sacrifice is a new trial 
for life everlasting, the results of which are 
expressed in John 3:36; Rev. 21:7,8. 

It is sufficient that God should grant a universal, 
impartial trial to all; that those who, 
under the favorable conditions of the New 
Covenant, will fully submit themselves to 
God may have life, and that others may be 
manifested and, as cumberers of the ground, 
may be destroyed in the Second Death. 
Love, Wisdom and Justice could never agree 
to let a wilful sinner live to mar the peace of 
the holy; nor could they consent that such 
should be deprived of their own wills in 
order to their everlasting existence, for their 
companionship is not sufficiently desirable; 
nor could they consent that they should be 
kept alive, and that their wills should be 
kept under divine restraints to all eternity. 
Such lives and such companionship are undesirable: 
the remainder of God's universe 
would be blessed by their destruction in 



the Second Death. Let us not be more 

R1598 : page 365 

wise, more loving, or more just than the 
only living and true God who dwells in a 
light which no man can approach unto, and 
whose mind is communicated to us through 
his Word.-l Tim. 6:16; 1 John 5:9,10. 

Let us practice the grace of liberality according 
to, and not outside of, the boundaries 
laid down in the Lord's Word. 



page 365 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1598 : page 365 

THE HEAVENLY INHERITANCE. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XL, DEC. 10, 1 PET. 1:1-12. 

Golden Text— "Giving thanks unto the Father, which 
hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of 
the saints in light."— Col. 1:12. 

Out of a heart inspired with the glorious 
hope set before the consecrated saints of the 
Gospel dispensation flows the impassioned 
and eloquent greeting of the Apostle Peter 
to others of like precious faith. To "the 
elect according to the foreknowledge of God, 
And every line of his epistle, even 
the words of greeting, are full of instruction. 

VERSE 2 shows that the election referred 
to was not an arbitrary election, but that 
it was conditioned upon three things— (1) 
the sanctification or full consecration of the 
believer; (2) his implicit obedience to the 
divine discipline and teaching; and (3) his 
full reliance upon the precious blood of 



Christ for cleansing and salvation from sin 
and death. 

VERSE 3 gratefully and joyfully points to 
the resurrection of Christ as the assurance 
of our final triumph through him. 

VERSES 4,5 declare that the glorious inheritance 
of the saints was not for immediate 
possession at the instant of death, but 
that it was reserved, and that it would be 
revealed in the last time— at the second 
advent of the Lord. So the Apostle Paul 
also taught, saying, when he was about to 
die, "Henceforth, there is laid up for me a 
crown which the Lord, the righteous Judge, 
will give me at that day; and not to me 
only, but to all them also that love his appearing." 
-2 Tim. 4:7,8. 

VERSES 6-9 are precious reminders of the 
joys of faith, to attain the full fruition of 
which, the endurance of present afflictions 
are causes for thanksgiving, because their 
discipline is necessary to prepare us for the 
glorious inheritance of the saints in light. 

VERSES 10-12 declare that the revelations 
of divine truth concerning the glorious inheritance 
of the saints of the Gospel age 
were never made known in former ages, 
even to the faithful prophets, nor to the 
angels who earnestly desired to know, and 
who diligently searched and sought to discover 
the deep significance of the prophecies 
of these things, which are now made 
known to us by the holy Spirit which inspired 
the apostles and through them instructs 
the Church. 

And this high calling of "the elect" 
"Church of the First Born, whose names 
are written in heaven," is still a blessed secret 
among the saints, which "none of the 
princes of this world [the great ones of the 
world— "the princes," either ecclesiastical 
or civil] knew." (1 Cor. 2:6-10.) Nor do 
they yet know of the glory to be revealed 
in the saints. The religious princes of all 
the religions of the world, which from the 
four corners of the earth recently assembled 
in Chicago, only verified and emphasized 
this fact, and proved their utter ignorance 
of this secret of the Lord, in which his 
humble, faithful ones are rejoicing to-day 
with joy unspeakable and full of glory. 
"Howbeit, we speak wisdom among them 
that are perfect [that are of a perfect heart, 
disposition or intention, the humble and 
obedient, the truly wise— Dan. 12:10]; yet 
not the wisdom of this world, nor of the 



princes of this world that come to nought. 

But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, 

even the hidden wisdom which God 

ordained before the world for our glory; 

which none of the princes of this world 

knew. ...Eye hath not seen, nor ear 

heard; neither have entered into the heart 

of man, the things which God hath prepared 

for them that love him. But God hath revealed 

them to us by his Spirit"— through 

his holy apostles and prophets in whose 

divine inspiration we have the fullest confidence, 

R1598 : page 366 

notwithstanding the efforts of the 
princes of this world to shake it. God be 
praised for the abundant testimony of his 
inspired, holy Word! 

R1598 : page 366 

THE GLORIFIED SAVIOR. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XII., DEC. 17, REV. 1:9-20. 

Golden Text— "Wherefore, God also hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name which is above every 
name."— Phil. 2:9. 

VERSE 9. John, who received this vision, 
and was commissioned to convey it to the 
Church, so far from being puffed up by this 
privilege, humbly reminds us that the vision 
was from God, and that he who received it 
made no claims of superior sanctity or worthiness, 
and that he was simply their brother 
and companion in tribulation, a member with 
them of the embryo Kingdom of Heaven, 
which now suffers violence (Matt. 11:12), 
but nevertheless in patient waiting for its 
glorious triumph at the second advent of 
Jesus Christ. 

Because of his faithfulness in believing and 
teaching the Word of God and the testimony 
of Jesus Christ, John had been banished to 
the lonely and sterile isle of Patmos; but 
the place of his exile was made glorious 
with the presence of the Lord and the 
manifestations of his grace, not only to his 
faithful Apostle, but also to all of the Church 
through him. 

VERSE 10. The expression, "I was in 
the spirit on the Lord's day," we understand 



to mean that on that day (the first day of 

the week) John was specially filled with 

the holy Spirit of love and adoration and 

joy in God as to be mentally lifted above 

his surroundings and out of the thoughts 

and feelings of the old nature; so that, forgetting 

for the time the things of time and 

sense, there came to his soul an overwhelming 

sense of the divine presence and favor. 

To such a condition his circumstances were 

peculiarly favorable, isolated as he was from 

all human intercourse, and alone with God. 

His was not a sickly sentimentalism causing 

him to shirk the duties and responsibilities 

of active life and impelling him to that 

of a recluse. No; far from it. He had been 

active, faithful and loyal to God and zealous 

for his cause; and when the enforced 

seclusion came as a penalty for such faithfulness, 

he rejoiced also in this "tribulation," 

—this privilege of enduring hardness 

as a good soldier; and from his sense of the 

divine approval, both of his faithfulness in 

activity and of his patience in this enforced 

inactivity and seclusion, sprang the joy 

which only those know who have endured 

something for Christ's sake and experienced 

the fellowship of his sufferings. 

In such times of tribulation the Lord's 
presence and comfort are most precious to his 
saints, and they begin to learn what it means 
to live "in the spirit"— above the world, 
and hence to a great extent unaffected by 
its conditions and circumstances. 

Thus, as the Apostle drew near to the 
Lord, the Lord drew near to him; and on 

R1599 : page 366 

this occasion, as there was a special message 
to be conveyed to the Church, this beloved 
and faithful disciple, being in the proper 
attitude of mind and heart— "a broken and 
emptied vessel," fit for the Master's use— was 
the chosen and honored instrument. And, 
therefore, he was permitted to see and hear, 
in symbolic visions, the wonderful things 
which God had to reveal to his Church. 

He heard "behind" him [from some unseen 
source] "a great voice as of a trumpet" 
—indicative of an important proclamation. 

VERSE 1 1 . The first announcement identifies 
the speaker as our Lord and Redeemer, 
the beginning and the ending of Jehovah's 
direct creation— "the only begotten Son of 
God"— the alpha and the omega, the first 



and the last. See verses 8,17,18; John 1:2,3; 
Col. 1:15-17; Rev. 3:14; also WATCH 
TOWER, April 15, '93. 

Then followed the instructions to write 
what he was about to see, and to send the 
book to the seven churches mentioned. The 
number seven, being a symbol of completeness, 
meant here not merely the churches 
named, but the complete nominal Gospel 
church of the entire age;— the special addresses 
to each of these being specially applicable 
to the several stages of the Gospel 
Church which they represent: Ephesus representing 
the Church in apostolic times, 
Laodicea representing the church of the 
present time. 

VERSES 12,13. When the Apostle turned 
to see the speaker, he saw an appearance 
like unto a son of man— representing our 
Lord Jesus (not really the Lord, but a vision, 
an appearance)— standing in the midst 
of seven golden candlesticks, which represented 
the above seven phases of the church. 

Gold being a symbol of the divine nature, 
the seven golden candlesticks indicate that 
the divine institution of the Church is for 
the enlightening of the world, the same symbol 

R1599 : page 367 

used in the Jewish Tabernacle and later 
in the Temple, indicating the same thing. 

VERSES 13-16. The Son of man is seen 
"clothed in a garment down to the foot"— 
a long, full flowing robe such as was worn 
by kings and priests; not the dress of the 
common people. And he was girded about 
the paps (not about the loins as one about 
to toil or run, but about the paps as of one 
in the repose and dignity of sovereignty) 
with a golden girdle. 

The whiteness of the hair indicate both 
age and purity; the brightness of the eyes 
symbolize acute discernment; the polished 
and glowing feet indicate power; the voice 
as the sound of many waters indicate the 
universality of his authority and power; and 
the shining countenance— as the brightness 
of the sun in his strength— marks the glory 
and power and blessing of his presence and 
Kingdom. The seven stars— the angels or 
ministers of the Church, those whom the 
Lord recognizes as teachers in the Church 
(verse 20)— are held in his right hand, showing 
that the teaching, power and authority 
are vested in Christ, the head of the Church, 



and that the human teachers are only instruments 
in his hands, and accountable to him. 
And the two-edged sword out of his mouth 
symbolizes the mission of his truth and its 
final victory. The sword of the spirit— 
the Word of God. 

VERSE 17. The vision had an overpowering 
effect upon the Apostle's physical 
frame; and from excitement and fear, like 
Saul of Tarsus and like Daniel, the Prophet, 
he fell as one dead, until a kindly hand imparted 
new strength, and an assuring voice 
said, "Fear not; I am the first and the last 
[the only begotten Son of God]; I am he 
that liveth and was dead; and, behold, I am 
alive forevermore, Amen; and have the 
keys of hell [hades, the grave] and of death" 
—the power to open the graves and to loose 
the bands of death and set the captives free. 

VERSE 19 commands the writing of the 
vision of the things past, present and future 
that the Church to whom the message is 
sent may ponder its deeply significant 
symbolisms. 

The Golden Text is aptly chosen, pointing 
as it does, to the humiliation and vicarious 
sacrifice of Christ as the cause of his 
present exaltation and glory and power— 
"Wherefore God also hath highly exalted 
him," etc.-Phil. 2:8,9. 



page 367 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You will 
find enclosed Money Order, which you can 
place in the Tract Fund, or as your judgment 
may direct. 

I think the most important matter which 
now concerns us is the dissemination of the 
truth. Error is abroad in the land: we meet 
it on every hand, and it seems to be the 
most difficult matter to get people interested 
in the plain and simple teachings of the 
Bible. I trust that the TOWER and other 
helps may continue to a far greater extent 
to present the truth in its wonderful power 
and purity, and that the Editor and his associates 
may be blessed of the Lord abundantly, 
in the great work which has already 
carried light and gladness to so many hearts, 



now rejoicing in the truth. 
Yours in the service, G. M. TURNER. 



R1599 : page 367 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have not 
for some time tried to sell or to distribute 
any DAWNS, as I was in doubt about some 
of their teachings. I have since, however, 
by a great deal of study, found that I was 
in error. This is indeed an evil day, full of 
snares and pitfalls, and none shall be able 
to stand, who do not humbly accept God's 
Word as their only and all-sufficient ground 
of faith and practice, in opposition to all 
church-creeds and church-authority; for 
even those churches, which claim to have 
no creed, claim to have, by divine right, the 
power to make teachers, and if they fail to 
teach according to their liking, they have 
the same divine authority to unmake them. 

Respectfully yours, J. L. KING. 

REPLY. Your letter is at hand, and I am 
glad it reveals you as again rejoicing in the 
truth, and, I trust, this time more firmly established 
therein. Severe tests come to all, 
in proportion to the measure of light possessed; 
and having, by the Lord's grace, 
overcome in this one instance, I trust you 
will be on the lookout when future trials 
come, and better ready to resist the temptations 
of the Adversary. But, be assured, 
you will not entirely escape temptation in 

R1599 : page 368 

future; yet if you make the Lord your refuge, 
you will not be overcome, but find in 
him constant strength and protection. See 
Psalm 91. 

I do not quite coincide with you in the 
opinion that the nominal churches have 
no right to unmake teachers. True, they 
have no authority to make representatives 
of the Lord, and each follower of the Lord 
should recognize no other commission than 
that given in God's Word; yet so far as the 
systems are concerned, they have as much 
right to authorize individuals to teach their 
doctrines as an individual has to appoint 
another as his representative, or as any secular 
institution has to control its representatives. 
The ability to use and make a representative 
implies the ability to withdraw 



consent at pleasure, unless bound by contract. 
And any one preaching by the authority 
of any part of Babylon, and supposed 
to teach its particular theories, should first 
dissolve his contract with such system before 
preaching or teaching contrary to its 
standards; and if he does not voluntarily do 
so, it is certainly the privilege of the institution 
to withdraw its sanction and support, 
and to give them to other individuals who 
will abide by their contracts. 

It is a blessed thing, however, to be free 
in Christ from bondage to earthly, ecclesiastical 
rule and human creeds, and subject 
only to the one Lord and Head of the 
Church, and to the one infallible guide of 
faith. We are admonished to maintain a 
clear conscience, and to labor diligently to 
learn and to teach all that he is pleased to 
reveal through it— his Word. 

May you, as free, become more and more 
the bond-servant of Christ.— EDITOR. 

page 368 

BRETHREN:— Find enclosed the amount 
of my subscription to the "Good Hope" 
fund, for the last quarter. How thankful I 
am that I am counted worthy to be admitted 
to the "household of faith," to the race for 
the prize of the high calling, and to the 
inspiring truths set forth in your publications. 
How surely the truth drives error 
from the mind; and how much more satisfying 
is a faith in a doctrine that harmonizes 
the whole Word of God, than the conflicting 
creeds of men! How much greater is 
the reward promised "To them who by 
patient continuance in well doing seek for 
glory, and honor and immortality." (Rom. 2:7.) 
How satisfying the thought that the 
words, "Ye brethren, are not in darkness 
that that day should overtake you as a thief," 
were addressed to us who are on the "Watch 
Tower," and by the light of his Word are 
proclaiming his presence. 

Surely the struggle is now commencing, 
the "strong man" is being bound and hope 
is increasing in the hearts of the Lord's 
longing children, while dismay fills the 
hearts of the unfaithful and disbelieving. 

Yours in the love of the truth, 
C. C. FIFIELD. 



DEAR SIRS:— I herewith remit amount 
of my quarterly "Good Hopes." Your 
publications have done me a world of good, 
in clearing up dark points in modern religious 
teachings. They are too potent for 
good not to receive the help I can give. 

Please send me a copy of the TOWER for 
October 1892. I wish my file complete. 

Sincerely yours, E. L. McEWEN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We had very 

good success in M , considering the 

hard times. We sold over one hundred books 

there, and I believe we could have sold as 

many more, if the people had not been disappointed 

in getting their pay. It is a 

railroad and mining town, and the laboring 

class have had considerable trouble lately 

in getting their money, as they are paid in 

store-orders instead of money; so on that account 

we could reach only the wealthier 

class. However, we feel very thankful for 

the privilege of putting out as many DAWNS 

as we did. 

I feel more encouraged than ever to press 
forward in the narrow way, and the dear 
Lord and his saints seem nearer and dearer 
to me since our last Convention than ever 
before. I can truthfully say that now is my 
salvation nearer than when I first believed. 
Praise the Lord for his loving kindness ! 
Pray for me that I may prove faithful to the 
end; for I realize that only those that are 
faithful even unto death shall hear the 
"Well done, thou good and faithful servant, 
enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

MRS. L. P. BEELER. 



page 370 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



BIBLES AND BIBLE-STUDY HELPS. 

Our readers received from our office, some 
months ago, a tract entitled "Bible Study and 
Needful Helps Thereto." In the back part of 
said tract we gave descriptions and prices of 
various styles of Bibles, etc., which we supply 
at the wholesale rates in any quantity. Please 
note the reductions in the wholesale prices of 
the following numbers: 

Bagster Bible, No. 8215, reduced 25 cents, now, $2.00 
" " 8315, " 48 " " 2.00 

Holman " " C, " 50 " " 2.00 
" " D, " 17 " " 3.00 

Oxford reprint, " 707, " 25 " " 1.50 
" " 713, " 25 " " 2.00 

CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 

WALL ROLLS. We have secured three styles 
of Wall Rolls. They are to hang upon the 
wall, and can be read at a distance. There are 
thirty-one leaves to each roll: one leaf for 
each day of the month; size 13x20 inches. 
We will supply these at 50 cents each (postage 
10 cents extra). The usual prices are 75 and 
85 cents each. All excellent, the Picture Roll 
is especially suitable where there are small 
children. 

(1) THE BIBLE PICTURE ROLL. Thirty-one 
illustrations of familiar passages of the Bible, 
with texts. 



(2) STRENGTH and SUNSHINE Wall Roll. A 
collection, aptly named, of Scripture texts and 
choice cullings from other writers. 

(3) DAILY COMFORT IN FOUR-FOLD LINKS 
Wall Roll. On each leaf four Scripture passages, 
representing prayer, promise, precept and praise. 

WALL MOTTOES. We still have these, similar 
to those supplied last year to many of our 
readers. They are of two general kinds: 

(1) Mottoes on dark green and dark red 
heavy card-board, stamped in silver. These 
are of various shapes and sizes, and the mottoes 
are various— all good. Prices 10 cents, 15 
cents, 20 cents and 25 cents each, post-paid. 

(2) Mottoes on white cards, illuminated, 
with colored flowers, etc., interspersed with the 
texts. Various styles, four mottoes for 25 cents, 
post-paid. 

"GOOD HOPES" SUPPLEMENT. 

All disposed to suggest what they desire and 
hope to be able to give to the Watch Tower 
Tract Society's fund, for 1894, for the spread 
of the doctrines inculcated by the WATCH 
TOWER publications, will find a printed supplement 
with this issue. After being filled out, it 
should be torn in two, and the one half kept 
as your memorandum, while the other half 
should be sent to the Secretary of the Watch 
Tower Tract Society at Allegheny. 

RENEWALS FOR 1894. 

As will be seen by our terms, above, ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER desires to visit regularly all who 
desire its visits. The terms are so liberal that 
none need be without it— for all can command 
at least a postal card for a request to have it as 
one of the Lord's poor. We desire, however, 
to hear from all if they desire to have these 
semi-monthly calls; for we do not wish to send 
it where it is unwelcome or merely tolerated. 

We, therefore, ask to hear from all readers 
as promptly as possible. If the money for 
1894 is not convenient to you now, say so. If 
too poor to afford it, state that. Do so before 
your name is taken off our lists. Expect tag 
on January 15th TOWER to show credits sent 
us up to December 3 1 . 

MEMENTOES OF JERUSALEM. 

The Tract Fund still has some of the Jerusalem 
mementoes presented to it by Brother 
Russell; viz., olive-wood paper-weights and 



flower cards made from the wild flowers and 
grasses of Jerusalem and its vicinity. 

We will send two paper-weights and six 
flower-cards for 50 cents; or one paper-weight 
and two flower-cards for 25 cents. To those 
on the TOWER list as "the Lord's Poor" a 
flower-card will be sent free, on request. 



R1600 : page 371 
