Announcements
SHARE WITH JEHOVAH, NOT WITH DEMONS—1 Cor. 10:21, NW.
Who would want to be on intimate terms with demons and “eat” at the same table? Few would knowingly, yet many do so ignorantly. How may one make sure that he does not do this? By obtaining accurate Bible knowledge! Such accurate Bible knowledge is published in the Watchtower magazine. By use of this magazine hundreds of thousands of persons have learned the truth and now enjoy the privilege of serving Jehovah with spirit and truth, having been set free from the table of demons. Appreciating fully the beneficial food contained in The Watchtower, all of Jehovah’s witnesses this month will continue offering to all God-loving people a year’s subscription for $1, giving to all obtainers free a copy of the 96-page booklet What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? Join in the worship of Jehovah by sharing in this service and become a source of blessing to honest-hearted people who love Bible truth.
EXPAND YOUR CHRISTIAN ABILITIES
Do you long to magnify God’s goodness to you? That is the desire of all true Christians. But do you feel inadequate in spiritual training and ability? You need not! Qualified to Be Ministers is a 384-page book designed to equip young and old alike to speak clearly and forcefully in behalf of the faith. It contains simple and practical training in composition and in preparing and delivering talks. It provides helpful suggestions on private and group Bible study, explains the difference between true worship and false worship and highlights the modern history of a rapidly expanding society of qualified ministers. Share these blessings daily by sending 50c at once for your copy. Expand your Christian opportunities as you develop your Christian abilities.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
May 5: Guard Your Christian Trust, ¶1-19. Page 204.
May 12: Guard Your Christian Trust, ¶20-26, and The Christian’s Responsibility Toward Others, ¶1-9. Page 210.
May 19: The Christian’s Responsibility Toward Others, ¶10-22. Page 216.

