The Christian’s Responsibility Toward Others
 1. What should every Christian do?
TIMOTHY was one of Paul’s most constant companions in the ministry. Together they engaged in extensive missionary activity. It was while they were visiting Corinth that Paul dispatched his letter to the Christians at Rome. Among other things he told them that “we . . . who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of those not strong, and not to be pleasing ourselves. Let each of us please his neighbor in what is good for his upbuilding. For even Christ did not please himself.” Paul shouldered his part of Christian responsibility toward others, and through example and exhortation impressed upon other dedicated persons that they ought to do the same. The same sentiment is echoed in the letter of Paul (and Timothy) to the Philippians: “Have the same love, being joined together in soul, holding the one thought in mind, doing nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism, but with lowliness of mind considering that the others are superior to you, keeping an eye, not in personal interest upon just your own matters, but also in personal interest upon those of the others.” True Christianity is practiced only when the interests of others are embraced and the fellow servants near to us are built up in godly service. Even as Christ did not please himself, so we must be loving extroverts to prove ourselves his followers.—Rom. 15:1-3; Phil. 2:2-4; John 13:34, 35, NW.
 2. Did Jehovah have any arrangement for helping others before the time of Christ?
2 This godly action of looking out for the interests of others in the worship of God was not new even then. Long before the time of Christ Jehovah gave a service to the sons of Levi as a sacred trust. Aaron and the others in his family were responsible for more than their own personal worshiping of Jehovah. They served in the interests of all Israel in building up and maintaining pure worship of Jehovah and had to answer to Jehovah for how everything was done.—Numbers 18.
 3. Is it Christian to isolate oneself from others?
3 Worshipers of Jehovah God do not isolate themselves in monastic perches high in the mountains. They associate together regularly in congregational worship and in organized preaching of the good news of the Kingdom for the benefit of others. In this way they are able to bear the weaknesses of one another and not just please themselves. Christian association is practical and meets with the blessing of the King, who said: “Where there are two or three met together in my name, there I am in their midst.” It is practical because each one can help the other keep strong and ward off the attacks of the enemy. And if one should stumble the other stands ready to lift him up.—Matt. 18:20, NW; Eccl. 4:9-12.
 4. What does the Christian do with the things he learns, and how does this produce fruit?
4 The truth is Jehovah’s. It is given to us as a trust to be used for the benefit of others, and an account must be rendered to the Owner of the truth, the Source of all truth in the heavens, Jehovah. The truth is to be shared. This applies to all who know something about the truth, whether little or much. We must pass on what we know. The Christian is under obligation to be teaching others what he has learned. Others must be built up in the ministry; as Paul wrote Timothy: “The things you heard from me with the support of many witnesses, these things commit to faithful men who in turn will be adequately qualified to teach others.” Once he has started, the Christian must go on teaching these things and giving these exhortations. This is Jehovah’s arrangement for building up world-wide praise in these last days of Satan’s rule and for announcement of the good news of the Kingdom. When anyone learns the truth, Jehovah expects him to train up others in the way of true worship. Each one helps one or more and so the theocratic organization, the New World society, flourishes everywhere. This is how in the last ten years over half a million new witnesses of Jehovah have been added to the ranks of the New World society, and this is pleasing to Jehovah.—2 Tim. 2:2, NW.
 5. How do meetings fit in with the Christian responsibility toward others?
5 Congregations of Jehovah’s witnesses now number 16,240 throughout the world, an increase of more than 1,500 in one year. These congregations hold regular Bible studies and meetings to discuss Christian service. Through these assemblies the truth is committed to individuals who become adequately qualified to teach others. In a spiritual sense Christ Jesus is in their midst. This is Jehovah’s provision for the continual building up of his servants and each one should fully appreciate his need to be present. All can learn, and at the same time each one can help one by holding “fast the public declaration of our hope without wavering, . . . And let us consider one another to incite to love and right works, not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.” Every gathering is edifying. Occasionally one may be found who has an independent feeling and who makes excuses for not participating in a meeting. Paul said some have the custom. Pride is sometimes in the way, one thinking he is too advanced to participate. But this is selfishness, for each one is to help one, and when anyone knows much he should be ready to bear the weaknesses of those not so strong and not just please himself. It is the occasion to incite to love and right works. A man may resent being given counsel in the theocratic ministry school and may absent himself, but instead of setting himself apart in the eyes of others as an advanced veteran of many years of preaching, as he would like it to appear, he demonstrates lack of maturity, and, beyond that, shows an indifference and lack of love for the whole association of brothers. He does not want to take on his share of the responsibility of a Christian toward others.—Heb. 10:23-25, NW.
 6. What proves one a right kind of minister?
6 Outside of the congregational meetings there are many opportunities for building up others too. Those stronger can aid the less mature ones in preparation of their study lessons or ministry school assignments before congregational meetings. There are occasions when Christians may visit each other socially and find opportunities to discuss spiritual things in preference to gossip and unprofitable talk. The truth constitutes healthful words, but things that are misleading, harmful or untrue avoid. Especially when some fall away from the faith and bring in misleading utterances, the mature Christian is under obligation to prepare himself thoroughly to refute any false teachings and bolster up the spiritual strength of those not so strong who might yield unsuspectingly to the error. We can help our fellow Christians by discussing with them the upbuilding things of God’s Word of truth. The Scriptures contain the best advice in the world. “By giving these advices to the brothers you will be a right kind of minister of Christ Jesus, one nourished with the words of the faith and of the right teaching which you have followed closely.” Do not think it is only the overseers in the congregations who give the advice, but be ready yourself to bear some of the weaknesses of others and give good advice, but be sure it is from the Scriptures.—Eph. 4:29; 1 Tim. 4:1, 6, NW.
 7. In association with others what kind of discussions should be avoided?
7 As the minister is equipped to help others stick to right doctrine, he will, like Timothy, be able to tell “certain ones not to teach different doctrine, nor to pay attention to false stories and to genealogies which end up in nothing, but which furnish questions for research rather than a dispensing of anything by God in connection with faith.” It is impractical for groups of Jehovah’s witnesses to allow themselves to be drawn into profitless discussions or speculations. Good examples are the racial and nationalistic questions that are so easily fanned into flames of dissension throughout the world. The commission of the Christian minister is not to straighten out the world’s problems and, in fact, he cannot by all his preaching solve the racial problem in any part of the world. Nor may he try to prove that one nation is better than another, perhaps being drawn into political conflicts. It is clear to all thinking persons that all nations are part of Satan’s domain and that the only solution for mankind’s problems lies in the new world of Jehovah’s creation. By preaching the good news of the kingdom of God the minister does the practical act and accomplishes the most good. He helps people to grow in faith and see a clear picture of Jehovah’s purposes, at the same time avoiding many difficulties for himself. By training himself in godly devotion and learning right doctrine, the minister guards his trust and does not become embroiled in any “fight about words, a thing of no usefulness at all because it overturns those listening.”—1 Tim. 1:3, 4; 2 Tim. 2:14, NW.
TRAINING ONE ANOTHER
 8. How has Jehovah provided for the training of his ministers?
8 Maintaining right doctrine is but one responsibility toward others. Our principal work is the ministry. In this field we are called upon to exert ourselves most strenuously. Each one of us is constantly seeking to accomplish his ministry thoroughly. To do that we need the help Jehovah provides. Now, as never before in modern times, he has provided the world-wide training program, wherein all ministers associated with a congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses give help to one another. It is the responsibility of all, not merely the overseers, lovingly to aid their neighbors to advance to maturity in God’s service. This is accomplished in an organized way. In the early Christian times it was more than just the apostles who trained ministers. Christ “gave some as apostles, some as prophets, some as missionaries, some as shepherds and teachers, with a view to the training of the holy ones for ministerial work.” All were used in the training work, making a unity in faith and in organization acceptable to Jehovah. Unity gets results. Some may prefer to be always alone, purposely arranging to hold Bible studies Sunday mornings or whenever groups are working together. But there is no Scriptural precedent to support them. Paul the apostle and Timothy the missionary worked hard to train others. Every Christian ought thus to bear the weaknesses of others and not just please himself. Build up every one in the congregation.—1 Cor. 14:12; Eph. 4:11, 12; 1 Thess. 5:11, NW.
 9. (a) What program that Jesus began is now being conducted world-wide? (b) Why should every minister take advantage of it?
9 Jesus sent out some of the early ministers by twos. Obviously it was not done merely for sociability or to keep each other company. They had need of more experience in house-to-house and village-to-village preaching and each one could help the other. They did not balk at Jesus’ arrangement in assigning them two by two, but were thankful for the provision so lovingly made. Surely no one then objected to a work of helpful counsel on meeting the people or tactfully overcoming the objections to the good work. Now just because Jesus is not on the earth directing the work where we can see him, but in the heavens where we do not see him, is no reason for taking a different viewpoint of the work. Every preacher of the good news now needs and benefits by the counsel of others. The circuit servants in the theocratic organization regularly visit the congregations for the purpose of assisting all to become more capable ministers, working with them from house to house. Before they depart to visit another congregation they make arrangements for members of the congregations to assist one another in the field service. Since this program of training was instituted in 1953, great advances have been made in capable use of the Bible in delivering sermons at the doors. It is a part of every Christian’s responsibility toward others to share in this training program for the common good of the New World society. What are you doing in this training program? Would you permit Paul or Timothy to give you helpful counsel if they were on earth today?—Luke 10:1.
CONGREGATIONS’ RESPONSIBILITIES
10. Who are given added responsibilities, and how are they appointed?
10 Many organizational matters required the attention of willing minister Timothy besides his enforcing right doctrine and seeing that the brothers received proper training. The mature minister willingly takes on organizational responsibilities. In order to serve the theocratic organization well Timothy had to keep abreast with the latest instructions from the governing body. Under Paul’s direction Timothy participated in the laying on of hands. This meant making theocratic appointments, as the Society now does. Only the right kind of ministers were to be appointed in the congregation. That required careful consideration: “Never lay your hands hastily upon any man.” Before one could be appointed as a servant in the congregation he had to meet the requirements. These requirements Paul outlined at 1 Timothy 3:1-13, and to this day they govern the appointment of servants in the congregations, as the Society discharges its responsibility in this respect. Every appointed servant ought to be thoroughly familiar with them. Today the Society delegates authority to some ministers, such as branch servants, to make appointments in the theocratic organization, and these are always made in accord with the advice of the Scriptures, never hastily. And those making the appointments must be examples of those who meet the qualifications of servants, just as Timothy was.—1 Tim. 5:22, NW.
11, 12. (a) How and why do the servants keep the organization clean? (b) What co-operation is to be expected from all associated therewith?
11 Timothy’s responsibilities did not end there. The clean organization is what pleases God. A guard had to be maintained so the organization would not become corrupt. Wrongdoing could not be winked at or overlooked. The overseer must “reprove before all onlookers persons who practice sin, that the rest also may have fear.” Surely it was unpleasant to encounter sin in any congregation and to have to give reproof, but the responsibility could not be side-stepped by God’s minister. The reproof was given after having a hearing, as Paul instructed: “Do not admit an accusation against an older man, except only on the evidence of two or three witnesses.” Even though a close friendship may have been built up over the years or the offender might have been a member of the family, the overseer was obliged to see that Jehovah’s law was honored, “doing nothing according to a biased leaning.” No servant or any Christian may shield a wrongdoer from deserved punishment and expect Jehovah’s blessing. It is not a question of butting into the personal business of another, but when any uncleanness is permitted in a congregation or country the work does not prosper. Remember Achan had to be cleaned out of Israel before prosperity was restored and victory won. So for the sake of the organization and for the salvation of one who may have started going in the wrong way, never shield a wrongdoer, even though he be a close friend or member of the family. It is part of the Christian responsibility to keep the organization clean.—1 Tim. 5:19-21; Josh. 7:25, NW.
12 In dealing with organizational matters the minister may run up against individuals who do not wish to follow theocratic instruction from Almighty God. The minister must keep his faculties under control and deal tactfully and kindly, with patience, long-suffering and the art of teaching. “A slave of the Lord does not need to fight, but needs to be tactful toward all, qualified to teach, keeping himself restrained under evil, instructing with mildness those not favorably disposed.” It is not easy to deal with troublemakers, but ministers must take on this load of responsibility also when called upon by Jehovah to do so.—2 Tim. 2:24, NW.
13. The example of Timothy demonstrates what proper attitude for Christians serving in the theocratic organization today?
13 Timothy was a young man made wise by the Word of God given to him through Paul. In the congregation he encountered many older brothers. The older ones in the congregation are worthy of the respect of everyone. Many have literally worn themselves out physically in the service of Jehovah. In their older years they merit the respect of the youths, especially so those who are taking a good lead in the service. “Let the older men who preside in a right way be reckoned worthy of double honor, especially those who work hard in speaking and teaching. Do not severely criticize an older man. To the contrary, entreat him as a father, younger men as brothers, older women as mothers, younger women as sisters with all chasteness.” These words increased Timothy’s understanding. The youth who now associate with the New World society must learn respect for the theocratic organization and respect for the older brothers and sisters in the organization. And the association of all should be above reproach, without hypocrisy, with genuine Christian love.—1 Tim. 5:1, 2, 17, NW.
14. What is another example of Timothy’s accepting theocratic responsibility?
14 Another duty in the Christian congregation fell upon Timothy, and that was to clarify the position of woman in the congregation and see that proper organization was maintained. He was also to look after the interests of the widows in the congregation and see that provision was made for them. He was to decide which ones were worthy of the help of the congregation. Likewise, ministers in modern times must maintain proper congregational organization. Any worthy ones who are destitute or sick will be visited and given attention by the congregation and such responsibility must not be side-stepped by the publishers.—1 Tim. 2:11; 5:5, NW.
MISSIONARY ASPECTS
15. (a) Is the individual’s service record the important thing? (b) How must we regard our natural abilities and use them to help others?
15 Among Jehovah’s witnesses a record is kept of the amount of time devoted to field service. The individual field record is important to each publisher of the good news, but this does not mean that he will shirk responsibility toward his brothers merely for the sake of making a strong personal showing, in which he might chance to take pride publicly. Even though full-time ministers are given a minimum hour quota they are expected to do more than merely their personal field service. Many duties and obligations fall upon the individual Christian that do not come within the scope of field service. Visiting the sick members of the congregation is one. Comforting those in tribulation is one. Attending meetings is another. But there is also much preparation to be made for the benefit of others. One may be assigned to deliver a public talk or take part in a service meeting. While he may not report time spent on this, it should be just as important to him as any other assignment and should be done well. In some lands the education of the people is very limited and many do not read. When these become interested in the truth someone has to pay special attention to them and try to aid them to become literate. So it is that Jehovah’s witnesses in many lands hold literacy classes, and these have had the blessing of Jehovah. Some who at one time could not read are now full-time servants. Anyone who will put forth the effort can learn to read the Bible and write notes of his own at the meetings, but it takes time, patience and someone to help. If ten others can be helped by one to become mature enough to share in the service the eleven together will do much more praising of Jehovah than only one, and that is why it is important to consider others and not just ourselves. The organization must be considered. For example, we may be able to aid our brothers with legal matters when they are arrested for the sake of the truth. If we have natural abilities we are obligated to use them in Jehovah’s service and to help our brothers rather than gaining something for ourselves. It should not make us want to appear better than the others, but rather we ought to view natural abilities, whatever they may be, as with respect to God only a trust, we being required to use all we may possess in his service.—1 Thess. 3:2, 3, NW.
16. (a) How is Timothy’s disposition an outstanding example for us? (b) What did Paul put up with for the sake of the congregations?
16 Helping others usually means giving of our time, our energy, our strength, ourselves. Again we turn to devoted Timothy as one example. Of him Paul told the Philippians: “I am hoping in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you shortly, that I may be a cheerful soul when I get to know about the things pertaining to you. For I have no one else of a disposition like his who will genuinely care for the things pertaining to you. For all the others are seeking their own interests, not those of Christ Jesus. But you know the proof he gave of himself, that like a child with a father he slaved with me in furtherance of the good news.” Paul could have used more men with this disposition, for they are always required by the theocratic organization. Timothy’s frequent cases of stomach trouble must have been the result of his missionary travels, sometimes taking contaminated water and insufficient or irregular meals; but the missionary work was the assignment he had received and he offered himself willingly for the sake of others and in the interests of the organization as a whole. And Paul even more so, saying: “I five times received forty strokes less one, three times I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, three times I experienced shipwreck, a night and a day I have spent in the deep; in travels often, in dangers from rivers, in dangers from highwaymen, in dangers from my own race, in dangers from the nations, in dangers in the city, in dangers in the wilderness, in dangers at sea, in dangers among false brothers, in labor and toil, in sleepless nights often, in hunger and thirst, in abstinence from food many times, in cold and nakedness. Besides those things of an external kind, there is what rushes in on me from day to day, the anxiety for all the congregations.” This was not done out of the spirit of adventure, but Paul put up with them all for the sake of those to whom he ministered. And even when he might have become centered in self on account of his suffering or privations, his great concern was for all the congregations, to strengthen them and keep them from stumbling. He was devoted to his brothers for the sake of Jehovah’s honor and the ministry. Jehovah blessed him richly for this love.—Acts 19:22; 1 Cor. 4:17; Phil. 2:19-22; 1 Tim. 5:23; 2 Cor. 11:24-28, NW.
17. How are many full-time servants in the modern-day organization of Christians showing the same missionary disposition as Paul and Timothy?
17 Have you, for the sake of being of service to other Christians and people of good will, suffered even one of the things Paul did? Do you have the true missionary spirit of love that would make you willing to do so? Perhaps you have not individually put up with all of this, but fellow Christians throughout the world have. Missionaries have been graduated from the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead with one goal in view, and that is to undertake the ministry in distant lands, often under strange and primitive conditions. Many circuit and district servants have also served with hazards. They have risked health many times through working in lands without necessary sanitary standards and have suffered from tropical diseases, even to loss of life itself. Some have lived amidst riots and violence, even being forcibly evacuated from territories because of war. They have gone without sleep and without proper food and safe drinking water, contracting stomach disorders, like Timothy. They have slept in native jungle huts and were bitten by fever-bearing insects. Some have been arrested or deported when opposition to the ministry arose. Others persevere in Arctic weather, carrying the truth to scattered northern peoples, without drawing back on account of cold or danger. And even to this day many suffer from the effects of their years in missionary service, but they have not complained and will not withdraw any more than Paul and Timothy did. They have the same spirit of Jehovah upon them and the same regard for the needs of others; so they receive the same kind of rich blessing from Jehovah. Such faithful missionary workers deserve the encouragement of others, which can come by letters sent from fellow Christians in lands they have left behind. Missionaries are busy and may not always have time to answer such letters, but a word of joy and relating a few experiences in a letter will always be appreciated and can be provided out of love, without expecting a return. The missionaries have learned that the joy of giving is greater than that of receiving and any who encourage them will experience the same joy.—Phil. 2:17; 4:10-16; Acts 20:34, 35; 1 Cor. 16:10, 11; Heb. 13:12, NW.
LOYAL AND UNASHAMED
18. Why does the true Christian take part in suffering and reproaches?
18 In these final days of the existence of Satan’s system of things, whether one is a missionary or working near his home, great reproach comes upon those in the ministry of Christ Jesus. It is as much a part of our ministry as it was Paul’s, who exclaimed: “On this account I go on enduring all things for the sake of the chosen ones, that they, too, may obtain the salvation that is in union with Christ Jesus . . . if we go on enduring, we shall also rule together as kings.” We too should be willing to suffer for the sake of serving others. Many of our brothers are imprisoned for their integrity, just as the apostle Paul was when he wrote Second Timothy. It is a great honor to be associated with faithful brothers who stand for the principles of God’s Word, for righteousness, even though they are reproached by godless communistic persecutors, religious leaders or evil men. Satan would like to discourage us in the ministry, inducing us to avoid the reproach that comes through being connected with the persecuted brothers. But we are not going to bow before this satanic snare. “For God gave us not a spirit of cowardice, but that of power and of love and of soundness of mind. Therefore do not become ashamed of the witness about our Lord, neither of me a prisoner for his sake, but take your part in suffering evil for the good news according to the power of God.” We are not ashamed to be Jehovah’s witnesses in times of persecution and do not withdraw from the association of our brothers to avoid reproach. Our standing with Jehovah, not men, is what counts. If we must go to prison for our faith we can continue preaching among prisoners. After release we shall resume serving our brothers, as Timothy set the good example. We are proud to be associates of the persecuted Christ Jesus, the apostle Paul, the thousands of our brothers imprisoned throughout the world in these evil days. We too should guard our Christianity and ministry and be determined to do so through whatever reproach or imprisonment may come our way, by the help of Jehovah.—2 Tim. 2:10, 12; 1:7, 8, 12, 16; Heb. 13:23, NW.
19. How does the example of Paul guide us now in times of persecution or betrayal in dictatorial lands?
19 Undaunted and undiscouraged we will be, even if some quit the ministry under persecution. We will go on. Paul told Timothy some “men have deviated from the truth.” “All the men in the province of Asia have turned away from me.” Paul knew what it was to be injured through false brothers, yet it did not shatter his faith and trust in Jehovah, nor did it slow him down in his service of Jehovah. There in prison at Rome he might easily have become depressed when many that he had associated with him in more favorable times left the faith. He knew he always had our true Friend on his side: “They all went to forsaking me—may it not be put to their account—but the Lord stood near me and infused power into me, that through me the preaching might be completely accomplished and all the nations might hear it.” While some fall away, the great work of preaching the good news is accomplished. Paul had Timothy, Onesiphorus, Prisca, Aquila, Luke, Titus, Crescens and many others still at unity with him in the service, and he rejoiced. How we rejoice that many thousands have been added to the New World society in this day! While a few may prove to be false brothers and betrayers, as in Russia, Czechoslovakia and Poland, many others are faithful. And in such lands, even if the work is disrupted momentarily, or for six months, the faithful ministers continue true to their dedication and keep on telling the good news until they can again reorganize their meetings and resume communications with others in the New World society. It is our responsibility to keep on going, remembering that, though at Jesus’ death there was a short period of disruption in preaching, Jehovah’s spirit at Pentecost showed the way and it does so in our day also. We rejoice and give thanks to Jehovah that he has given us so many loyal, happy companions in the ministry.—2 Tim. 2:18; 1:15; 4:11, 16, 17, 19, 20, NW.
20. Considering the records of Paul and Timothy in taking on ministerial responsibilities is of what benefit to us?
20 The records concerning the ministerial responsibilities and service to others rendered by Paul and Timothy as followers of Christ Jesus should make all of us today appreciate the ministry all the more. It is a precious treasure. We are guarding this trust world-wide today in the presence of our God as a group of his servants dedicated to his service. The dedication that each one has made is real and lasting. Now we must be serious about it, willing, ready to do all we are called upon to perform under the trust, just as Paul and Timothy were. Place the highest value on every opportunity of theocratic service that comes your way. Jehovah expects us to do something with the treasure he has entrusted to us.—2 Cor. 4:5-7, NW.
21. With the New World society growing rapidly now, what responsibility falls on every dedicated servant of Jehovah?
21 Under the King Christ Jesus each of us has been given a responsibility. We have a close and intimate relationship with Christ and God as stewards of Jehovah’s goods. We are expected to increase what is committed to us. As we do, more privileges and responsibilities are added, and they are gladly accepted. We are part of a vast world-wide organization of praisers of Jehovah, the New World society. This New World society is growing very quickly now. From every land and every class of people come forth thousands of new praisers each month. They need someone more mature than they are to aid them. What are we doing about it? Are we equipped to give them spiritual advice and comfort? Do we minister to them, putting our own desires aside? Do we give our full support to the New World society, setting a fine example for our new brothers and sisters? Now as never before in the history of Jehovah’s servants there is a need for mature brothers and sisters who will take the lead in the ministry and assist others in the way of true worship. The “other sheep” are coming in like flocks of doves. Who is going to help them? There is one answer: We are, under the direction of the King. There is a great work to be done and we have been given the trust. Let us show we are stewards worthy of it. Our actions will speak, telling what we are doing. “Let a man so appraise us as being subordinates of Christ and stewards of sacred secrets of God. . . . what is looked for in stewards is for a man to be found faithful.”—Luke 19:13, 25, 26; 1 Cor. 4:1, 2; Col. 1:24-29, NW.
22. What is the best way to demonstrate our appreciation for the trust Jehovah has given?
22 We do not deserve what Jehovah has given us. There is much for which to thank him humbly. “He saved us . . . not by reason of our works, but by reason of his own purpose and undeserved kindness. This was given us in connection with Christ Jesus before times long lasting.” As we are today, let us always be grateful for the undeserved kindness toward us and the beautiful trust committed into our hands. Let us show appreciation for the confidence and honor Jehovah has placed in us, considering us trustworthy by assigning us to the ministry. It is the time not to please just ourselves but to keep active in the ministry. Not as compelled, but willingly, out of love and consideration, eagerly accept responsibility and cast aside all things that do not build one another up. “All things are lawful; but not all things build up. Let each one keep seeking, not his own advantage, but that of the other person.”—2 Tim. 1:9; 1 Pet. 5:2, 3; 1 Cor. 10:23, 24, NW.
Likewise keep on exhorting the younger men to be sound in mind, in all things showing yourself an example of right works, showing uncorruptness in your teaching, seriousness, wholesome speech which cannot be condemned, so that the man on the opposing side may get ashamed, having nothing vile to say about us.—Titus 2:6-8, NW.

