Announcements
● Literature offer for January: New World Translation and “Let Your Kingdom Come” for a contribution of $3.75 if 1981 edition of Bible used. (English only.) February: “Let Your Kingdom Come” for a contribution of 75c. March: Any one of the older 192-page books for a contribution of 75c.
● Prepare for special talk and Memorial: Please order special talk handbills and Memorial invitations now so that your congregation will receive them well in advance of the special talk to be held on Sunday, on or during the week following March 28, 1982, and the Memorial celebration on Thursday, April 8, 1982. The special talk handbill should be ordered on the yellow Special Talk Handbill Order. Memorial invitations may be ordered in lots of 250, 500 and 1,000, using the special blue Memorial Invitation Order Form. Two copies of each form are being sent to the congregations with the December statement. The special talk will be on the subject: “The Only Cure for Sick Mankind.” PLEASE DO NOT REMIT WITH YOUR ORDER. The handbills and invitations will be charged to your congregation’s literature account. Payment for these should be included with the amount of money remitted for literature. Please do not list payment for handbills and invitations separately on the remittance form.
● A new Memorial talk outline has been prepared and two copies are being sent to each congregation with the January statements. This outline should be used by all Memorial speakers.
● Presiding overseer should arrange to have new MEDICAL ALERT cards distributed at beginning of first service meeting in January. Brother handling announcements can give brief reminders concerning its use as expressed in letter dated July 20, 1980. Post letter on information board for a week or two and then return it to congregation file for future reference. Brothers are encouraged to fill out card promptly, having it properly signed, witnessed and dated.
● The district overseer’s new talk will be “Surviving a Generation of Darkness.” The circuit overseer’s new talk beginning March 1 will be “A World Without War—How and When?”
● New Publications Available:
Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation?—Hungarian
Happiness—How to Find It—Japanese, Korean
“Let Your Kingdom Come”—Japanese
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts”—Japanese
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
Our Incoming World Government—God’s Kingdom—French
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts” (Deluxe Edition)—English
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
My Book of Bible Stories (four cassettes in album)—English
(Congregation and public: $8.00; pioneers: $6.00)
The Good News According to Matthew (set of three cassettes)—Dutch
(set of two cassettes)—Italian
The Good News According to Mark (set of two cassettes)—Italian
Acts of Apostles (set of two cassettes)—Italian
The First to the Corinthians (single cassette)—Spanish
The Second to the Corinthians and To The Galatians (single cassette)—Spanish

