Branch Letter
Dear Brothers:
How we rejoiced over the article on ‘God’s Ministers’ in the March 15, 1981, issue of The Watchtower! As stated on page 18: “All dedicated and baptized Christians, regardless of sex or age, can be proclaimers, preachers, ministers, . . . provided they give proof thereof by their conduct and their witnessing.” As the apostle Paul did, we, too, desire to ‘glorify our ministry.’ Is that not the way you feel about it? In harmony with the information recently published on this subject, it is most appropriate that the title of this publication now appears as Our Kingdom Ministry.
Have you noticed also the new feature appearing for the first time in the January 8, 1982, issue of the Awake! magazine? Awake! will now be carrying articles designed to appeal to those in their teens and early twenties. These articles will discuss questions that are on the minds of young people and can thus be featured in talking with young people in the field. In the January issues the articles are “Is Anything Worth Believing In?” and “Does God Really Care About Me?” Be sure to attend the service meeting the week of January 3 when the use of these articles will be discussed.
There were over 41,000 traveling overseers and elders throughout the country who benefited from the Kingdom Ministry School during the past three months. No doubt this should have a stimulating effect on the work during the coming year.
The field service report for the 1981 service year gives clear evidence of Jehovah’s blessing on our united activity to his praise. On the average, each month there were 19,995 more publishers in the field than during the preceding service year—an increase of 3.7 percent. And there was a new peak of 588,503 publishers during the month of August! It is also encouraging to see that 18,816 arranged their affairs to share in the regular pioneer service, 1,888 more than last year. We spent 5.6 million more hours in the field than last year, placed 2.8 million more magazines and 81,000 more subscriptions. We made 1.9 million more return visits and on the average each month conducted 19,848 more home Bible studies. There were 28,496 baptized, 685 more than last year. And in April there were 1,463,070 who attended the Memorial, 101,458 more than the previous year. Truly, it was a wonderful year to Jehovah’s praise!
With you we appreciate the reminder of our year’s text that we be steadfast and unmovable in our worship of Jehovah. We have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord” and pray that Jehovah’s continued blessing will go with us all as we share fully in the work of Kingdom-preaching during the coming year.—1 Cor. 15:58.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

