Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 3
Song 84
 7 min: Local announcements and Announcements. Briefly review instructions in July 20, 1980 letter regarding use of MEDICAL ALERT card. Request that all bring “Kingdom Come” book next week.
10 min: Branch Letter. Elder discusses with audience.
16 min: “Let Your Kingdom Come.” Questions and answers. When considering paragraph 4, ask audience to comment on talking points they have found effective in presenting the book and Bible offer. Also, have a young publisher demonstrate a simple presentation featuring the “Kingdom Come” book.
12 min: Announce arrangements for second Saturday magazine activity. Encourage all to share in this work. Draw attention to article in 1/8/82 Awake!, “Is Anything Worth Believing In?” It has been written to answer questions of young people, particularly those in their teens and early twenties. Encourage all to read the article and offer it to young persons they meet in the field. Young people can often best talk to other young people. Have a young publisher demonstrate presentation of article to another young person. As time permits, invite comments from audience as to how they will present the article.
Song 90 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 10
Song 108
 7 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: “Have Love Among Yourselves.” Questions and answers. Read appropriate paragraphs and scriptures as time permits.
23 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Starting Studies in the ‘Kingdom Come’ Book.” Read paragraphs 2 to 5 and discuss material with audience, highlighting simple and positive approaches. Include well-rehearsed demonstration. Encourage brothers to start studies with aid of “Kingdom Come” book.
Song 86 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 17
Song 42
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Young Christian Ministers—Imitate David.” Questions and answers. Read paragraphs and scriptures as time permits.
15 min: Talk by well-prepared elder on the Bible view of flag salute and national anthems taken from “Questions from Readers” in The Watchtower, January 15, 1974, pages 62 and 63. (See also June 15, 1964 issue, pages 378-380.)
10 min: Interview young brothers and sisters who share regularly in field service and who are setting a good example. Ask about problems they have faced at school regarding neutrality. Ask how they have strengthened their resolve to be faithful to Jehovah, to share regularly in the field service and to improve their abilities as ministers of the good news. Ask for expressions on how they feel about David’s example and the need to be firm for pure worship. (If there are no youths in the congregation, older members may be interviewed concerning their experiences and expressions on these matters.) Conclude by encouraging all to share in Saturday magazine activity and to present the article “Does God Really Care About Me?” to young people they meet.
Song 112 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 24
Song 61
 8 min: Local announcements and “Benefit from the Circuit Assembly.”
15 min: Use in harmony with local needs or consider article in 9/1/81 Watchtower, “A Day in the Life of a Missionary.” Brief talk on article. Then, encourage congregation to consider benefits of orderly life enjoyed by missionaries. Do you enjoy a daily discussion of the day’s text? Use money wisely? Help with household chores? Study as a family? Contribute to the happiness of other members of the family? Our primary purpose is to teach the good news and make disciples.
12 min: Getting to Know One Another. Interview publisher or a couple. Consider how they came into the truth, what attracted them, obstacles overcome, blessings they have enjoyed in Jehovah’s service.
10 min: The Offer for February. Encourage audience to comment on points in “Kingdom Come” book that they have found effective in making presentation. Encourage all to have full share in field service this weekend.
Song 107 and prayer.

