Presenting the Good News—By Starting Studies in the Kingdom Come Book
1 Jehovah God’s “Kingdom comes to ‘bring to ruin those ruining the earth,’ to provide for the resurrection of the dead, to remove the enemy death and to make our globe a happy, peaceful home for mankind’s habitation.” (Rev. 11:15, 18; 21:1, 3, 4) (“Kingdom Come” book, page 21, par. 1) Our heartfelt desire is to help those who have received a copy of this book to gain knowledge and appreciation of the Kingdom—the primary theme of the Holy Scriptures. To accomplish this a Bible study usually is needed.
2 Many brothers who have had success in starting studies say a very simple approach is best. After a friendly greeting, tell the householder you will be brief, but that you wish to demonstrate how he can get the most from the publication. Kindly suggest that he get his book. Turn to the illustration at the beginning of chapter 1 and ask what he finds attractive or appealing in it. (Allow householder to make observations.) Invite him to read the first paragraph, which provides a word description of the illustration. If he declines, you may read it. Thereafter, ask question 1 and allow householder to comment. Have paragraphs 2 and 3 read, followed by the question and discussion, and then proceed with paragraphs 4 and 5. You could also have him read the material in the box on page 7. Ask him if he would like to know what the Kingdom really is and tell him that you will be happy to return next week and consider the matter further with him. When you return, consider the next two pages, which answer the question.
3 Another fine way to get into the “Kingdom Come” book and start a study is by stating that since childhood most of us have repeated the Lord’s Prayer. You could then repeat the first portion of it asking, “‘Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done,’ where?” (Allow householder to answer.) If he hesitates or is unable to answer you could continue by stating, “The prayer goes on to say, ‘on earth as it is in heaven.’” Then ask the householder what he thinks the earth will be like when God’s will is done on earth. (Allow for comments.) Turn to the illustration in chapter 1 and discuss the conditions God’s kingdom will bring to the earth. Have paragraph 1 read, ask the question and discuss. Consider a few paragraphs in this manner and make arrangements to return for further discussion.
4 Another suggestion is: since so many millions of people pray for the kingdom of God to come, a logical question that many ask is: “What is the Kingdom?” Ask the householder what he thinks about the matter. Then tell him that his book gives the answer. Ask him to get his copy of the book and turn to page 8. Read the subheading and invite the householder to read paragraph 6. Ask the question and discuss. Then have paragraphs 7 and 8 read and discuss. Review what has been learned—that the Kingdom is truly a government. Ask the householder to take time to read the next three pages and assure him that you would be pleased to return on another occasion to consider these matters further with him.
5 The “Kingdom Come” book is designed for study and we hope you will be successful in starting many new studies with its aid. It should also be used now, along with the Truth book, as the two books to be studied with new Bible students. May Jehovah bless your sincere effort to use it well to his praise.

