Young Christian Ministers—Imitate David
1 The Bible account in 1 Samuel chapter 17 helps us to appreciate the confidence that David had in Jehovah even in his youth. His love of Jehovah and his faith were so strong that he was willing to face Goliath. Can you imagine how Jehovah’s heart rejoiced to observe this young man take such a firm stand for true worship?—1 Sam. 17:31-37.
2 Youths today face the challenge of standing fast for pure worship, too. As a Christian youth, you can make Jehovah’s heart glad by imitating David. Your course can give Jehovah a further basis to answer the one taunting him.—Prov. 27:11.
3 While David took the initiative, offering himself in Jehovah’s service, it is important to note that he placed his confidence in Jehovah, not in himself. When approaching Goliath, he said clearly: “I am coming . . . with the name of Jehovah . . . This day Jehovah will surrender you into my hand.” (1 Sam. 17:45, 46) To serve successfully as a young Christian minister, you, too, will need to rely on Jehovah rather than yourself.
WHAT WILL YOU DO?
4 David said of his Lord: “You have your company of young men just like dewdrops.” (Ps. 110:3) Is it not thrilling to realize that there are hundreds of thousands of young men, “like dewdrops,” who are carrying the refreshing message of truth to others, and there are hundreds of thousands of young women in a ‘large army telling the good news.’? (Ps. 68:11) Yes, it is a thrill and an honor that should always be cherished.
5 From personal experience you younger ones know that it requires firm determination on your part to share regularly in the door-to-door ministry. You have no doubt also observed that most people put forth the effort to do what they want to do. So, what will you do when it is time for field service? Will you show that you stand on Jehovah’s side? Will you put forth the effort? Will you show your determination and overcome whatever obstacles are present? You have the ability. If you wanted to share in some other activity, you would do so. So, when it comes to the field service, make necessary adjustments, dress appropriately and share regularly in the work.
6 Remember, also, that our faithful participation in field service goes further than merely placing magazines or turning in a monthly report. It should give evidence of our devotion to Jehovah and our love for our neighbor, as well as our firm belief in the good news. Do you really believe that God’s kingdom will bring an end to this system shortly and bless all mankind under its righteous rule? Then, show that you believe it by sharing in the ministry and endeavoring to make progress in presenting the message effectively. As you do, you can be sure that Jehovah’s blessing will go with you.

