“Have Love Among Yourselves”
1 Most of us are well acquainted with Jesus’ words, “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.” In fact, many of us were attracted to the truth because of the love that was shown to us as well as the love we observed being shown among Jehovah’s people.—John 13:35.
2 As dedicated Christians we have many responsibilities that include keeping ourselves and our families well fed spiritually and sharing fully in the preaching work. However, we also have a responsibility to assist our brothers in harmony with their needs.—Gal. 6:10.
JEHOVAH’S VIEW
3 You will remember Jesus’ parable of the man with a hundred sheep who lost one, searched for it until he found it and then rejoiced greatly that the one lost sheep was found. Jesus said that there is even greater joy in heaven when the one who has strayed is helped to return, than over the 99 that needed no repentance. This illustration helps us to appreciate how Jehovah views matters and the concern he has for those who may have strayed.—Luke 15:3-7.
4 Are there some in your congregation who once were active in preaching the good news but who are no longer doing so? Reports indicate that on an average there were three or four in each congregation who became inactive in Jehovah’s service last year. There were also some who were assisted to renew their attendance at meetings and share again in the work of public preaching. Do you know of any who still need such assistance?
WHAT CAN BE DONE?
5 If a member of your family or someone else with whom you are acquainted needs assistance and encouragement, it may be that you can be of help. It is always appropriate to encourage one another to study regularly, attend meetings and share in field service. Perhaps a kind word or an invitation that you go to the meetings together or your offering assistance in the service will be just what is needed. Is there a need to remind the person that we must never forget our personal responsibility to live up to our dedication? At times you may locate individuals in your territory who once associated with the congregation and who appreciate the concern we have for them. If so, by all means let one of the elders know about this so assistance can be provided.
6 The elders have the responsibility to shepherd the flock, doing so out of love for their brothers. They are especially concerned about those who have become inactive. Brothers who are strong should be helping, in a loving way, those who need to strengthen their resolve to live up to their dedication to Jehovah. Many will respond to such loving concern.—John 21:15-17; Rom. 13:8; 15:1, 2.
7 The secretary and the service overseer are interested in doing all they can to arrange for help to be given to inactive ones. They may arrange to visit such ones or invite others in the congregation to do so. It may be that some inactive ones would appreciate having a Bible study conducted with them again. These elders may suggest subjects or the publication that would be most helpful to the individual. They might also determine who would be in the best position to help. Perhaps the inactive one may respond more quickly if the study is conducted by the one who originally helped him. Where an entire family needs help, it may be best for an elder to study with them as a group. An inactive sister may be helped by another sister who is capable and experienced. Younger ones may respond to assistance from a young ministerial servant or capable pioneer. Go to the inactive one and have a friendly conversation. It may take several visits before a study can be started.
8 The ones privileged to conduct such studies will take a real interest in these individuals, helping them to regain their spiritual strength. Encouragement can be given to help such ones to attend the meetings.—Heb. 10:23-25.
9 Each publisher who conducts such a study may count the time, the return visit and the study until one of the Society’s publications has been completed. Publishers can only report studies and field service time assisting dedicated persons when they have been specifically asked to do so as outlined above, or as described on page 3 in both the February 1977 and August 1981 issues of Our Kingdom Service.
10 The service overseer will certainly be interested in the progress of such studies, giving encouragement and making adjustments as necessary. Such progress can be considered by the elders when they come together at their quarterly meetings.
11 We are all very much interested in those who have associated with us in the past but who have become inactive in Jehovah’s service. By arranging to study with some of these individuals, we can demonstrate our love and desire to help them again share with us in Jehovah’s service.

