“Let Your Kingdom Come”
1 We have all prayed “Let your kingdom come.” What do these words from the Lord’s Prayer mean to you? (Matt. 6:10) Most of us immediately think of things that will affect us personally, such as an end to sickness, death, pollution, or we think of the coming of a paradise earth. (Rev. 21:4; Isa. 65:17) Are there any other reasons why we should want the Kingdom to come?
2 The coming of God’s kingdom will also mean a perfect government by the King of kings. Jehovah’s sovereignty will be upheld and Satan’s rule ended. A new world society will flourish earth wide. All human endeavors will reflect love of God and neighbor. It will mean the resurrection of billions into a new earth and the waiting arms of their loved ones. (Acts 24:15) That will be a time when the radiant joy of the 144,000 corulers with Christ will be reflected in the billions of Kingdom subjects on earth who are then advancing toward perfection.
3 In appreciation for this bright hope and with an interest in the welfare of others, Jehovah’s people offer “a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips.” (Heb. 13:15) We are moved to carry on our house-to-house work with joy and earnestness as we seek those who are “sighing and groaning” over the detestable conditions that prevail in the earth. (Ezek. 9:4) When we find them, we see the need to go out of our way, even forgoing personal pleasures if necessary, to help them learn the Kingdom hope and make the necessary changes to become subjects of that government.
4 During the month of December we encouraged interested persons to obtain copies of the “Kingdom Come” book and the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. Did you meet an interested person who was glad that you called and who accepted the offer? As we continue to make the same offer in January, it may be that you can do so more easily and effectively now that you have had some experience. Can you help members of your family or others in the congregation to have a share in the work during January? We encourage you to try.
5 In addition to the house-to-house work, there are other occasions when we can talk to people about the Kingdom. Have you ever engaged a person in conversation during your lunch break or on another occasion and used the opportunity to speak about the Kingdom? Some have had good success in approaching people on the street. (Acts 17:17) If convenient, why not carry a copy of the “Kingdom Come” book with you. Take the initiative to engage others in conversation when this is appropriate. Many people have learned the truth through these methods of preaching the good news of the Kingdom.
RETURN VISITS
6 If you have already been successful in placing the offer with an interested person, do not forget the seeds that have been planted but go back and water them so they will grow. (1 Cor. 3:6) What will you talk about on the return visit? Many fine subjects can be found in the back of the new Bible under Bible Topics for Discussion. We encourage you to use these as a basis for Scriptural discussions. Call attention to this fine aid so the householder can follow along. This may help him to find answers to other questions he may have. A discussion of the scriptures under the heading “Kingdom” might lead you right into a Bible study in the “Kingdom Come” book.
7 There is a “necessity” for all of us to share fully in this Kingdom-preaching work. (1 Cor. 9:16) It is important that people in our territory hear the good news of God’s Kingdom government. (Matt. 24:14) As we preach this message with enthusiasm and a proper sense of urgency, Jehovah will continue to add his blessing.

