Love​—The Key to a Fruitful Ministry
1 “Come to me, . . . and I will refresh you.” (Matt. 11:28) Such winsome words reflected Jesus’ deep-seated love for people. As Christian ministers, we desire to imitate Jesus in demonstrating our love for people who are worn down by a loveless world. How can we do so as we share the good news?
2 In Word: Love for people moved Jesus to take advantage of every opportunity to share the good news. (John 4:7-14) Love will help us to overcome hesitancy to witness informally. A six-year-old girl gave a fine witness to a woman sitting beside her in a medical waiting room. What prompted her to do so? She explained, “The lady looked like she needed to know about Jehovah.”
3 We can convey our interest in people with a sincere, warm smile and a friendly tone of voice. Listening carefully to the comments of others, acknowledging their concerns, and reflecting genuine personal interest likewise demonstrate love. (Prov. 15:23) In imitation of Jesus, we should emphasize the positive Kingdom message and Jehovah’s loving compassion for people.​—Matt. 24:14; Luke 4:18.
4 In Deed: Jesus was sensitive to the needs of others in practical, tangible ways. (Matt. 15:32) We too may have opportunities to perform acts of loving-kindness while in the ministry. One sister observed a woman struggling to comprehend an important telephone call. Our sister volunteered to help by translating the caller’s words. This loving act opened the way for a Scriptural discussion that helped the woman accept a Bible study. In another case a brother making a return visit found the householder exasperated, having wedged a heavy piece of furniture in the doorway. After providing neighborly assistance, the brother was soon sitting on the couch that he had helped move, starting a Bible study with the appreciative man.
5 As we share in the ministry, we demonstrate our love for God and our love for neighbor. (Matt. 22:36-40) Such demonstration in word and deed helps honesthearted ones realize that we have the truth.

