Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting January 8
Song 12
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage everyone to view the video No Blood​—Medicine Meets the Challenge in preparation for the discussion that will be held at the Service Meeting the week of January 22. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the January 15 Watchtower and the January Awake! In one of the demonstrations, show how to handle the potential conversation stopper “I’m busy.”​—See Reasoning book, pp. 19-20.
15 min: Benefit From Examining the Scriptures Daily. Talk and audience discussion based on the foreword of Examining the Scriptures Daily​—2007. Discuss the need for all to take a few minutes each day to consider the Scripture text and comments. Arrange in advance for one or two to comment on their routine for considering the text and how they have benefited. Conclude with a brief discussion of the yeartext for 2007.
20 min: Reach Everyone With the Good News. Talk and audience discussion based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, page 92 to the subheading on page 102.
Song 165 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 15
Song 93
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: Is Something Holding You Back? A talk by an elder based on the April 1, 2002, issue of The Watchtower, pages 13-15.
20 min: “I’m Not Interested.”a When discussing paragraph 4, ask the audience what issues are of interest in the local territory. Have two brief demonstrations showing how to overcome the potential conversation stopper “I’m not interested.”​—See Reasoning book, p. 16.
Song 135 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 22
Song 224
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the February 1 Watchtower and the February Awake! In one of the presentations, demonstrate making a return visit on a magazine-route call.
10 min: Local needs.
25 min: “The Highest Quality of Medical Care​—What Is It?” To be handled by an elder. Get right into a discussion of the No Blood video with the audience, using the questions that are provided in the article. Conclude by reading the last paragraph and encouraging all to review carefully the cited Watchtower articles.
Song 188 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting January 29
Song 55
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for January. Mention the literature offer for February, and have one presentation demonstrated.
20 min: “Are You Prepared for a Natural Disaster?”b To be handled by an elder. Include comments on the November 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 3.
15 min: If You Promise to Return, Return. Talk and audience discussion based on the September 15, 1999, Watchtower, page 11. Invite audience to relate experiences that show how they were blessed by returning as promised.
Song 137 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 5
Song 3
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: This Is Who I Am! Talk and audience discussion. Some youths are reluctant to identify themselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses because they feel their peers may ridicule them. However, there are good reasons to identify who you are. Teachers who know your beliefs are more likely to respect them and not insist that you participate in something inappropriate. Unprincipled youths will not be so quick to invite you to share with them in misconduct. Others will more readily understand your decisions regarding matters such as dating or engaging in school sports and other extracurricular activities. You will also feel less apprehensive about witnessing in school or meeting a classmate while preaching in the territory. (g02 3/22 p. 12) Invite publishers to comment on how they benefited by identifying themselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses in school. One or two comments may be arranged in advance.
20 min: “Love​—The Key to a Fruitful Ministry.”c Include comments on the February 1, 2003, Watchtower, page 23, paragraphs 16-17.
Song 83 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

