The Highest Quality of Medical Care​—What Is It?
“Any patient who receives bloodless medicine is, in essence, the recipient of the highest quality surgery that is possible.” So said Dr. Michael Rose, medical director and anesthesiologist. What procedures and transfusion alternatives may be included in “bloodless medicine”? You need to know in order to make informed decisions involving medical treatment and surgery. Watch the video No Blood​—Medicine Meets the Challenge. Afterward, test your understanding with the questions that follow.​—Note: Because the video includes brief surgical scenes, parents should use discretion in viewing the video with young children.
(1) What is the main reason why Jehovah’s Witnesses refuse blood transfusions? (2) When it comes to medical care, what do Jehovah’s Witnesses desire? (3) What basic right do patients have? (4) Why is it rational and responsible to choose transfusion alternatives? (5) When severe blood loss occurs, what two urgent priorities do doctors have? (6) What are the four principles of transfusion-alternative strategies? (7) How may doctors (a) minimize blood loss, (b) conserve red blood cells, (c) stimulate blood production, and (d) recover lost blood? (8) Describe the procedures known as (a) hemodilution and (b) cell salvage. (9) What should you want to be informed about regarding any transfusion alternative? (10) Can serious and complicated surgeries be performed without the use of blood transfusions? (11) What positive development is taking place within the medical community?
Acceptance of some of the treatments featured in the video is a matter for private decision in accord with each one’s Bible-trained conscience. Have you decided which transfusion alternatives you are willing to accept for yourself and your children? Non-Witness family members should also be fully informed of your decisions and the reasons for them.​—See “Questions From Readers” in the June 15, 2004, and October 15, 2000, issues of The Watchtower.

