Announcements
GOD’S WAY IS LOVE
Everything Jehovah God does is prompted by love. (1 John 4:16, Knox) Our very existence is an expression of his love. Everything in nature, being made for man’s pleasure, reflects God’s love. In these critical times God is displaying his love toward humankind by giving warning of his coming wrath against wickedness in the earth, so that men who love him may escape. The preaching of the good news concerning God’s provision for salvation increases daily; and those who love God show appreciation for this manifestation of his great love by taking part in preaching the good news to others. To this end, May will be a month for the distribution of booklets: 10 booklets for 15c; 5 booklets for 10c; or 2 booklets for 5c, depending on available supply. A booklet ought to be left in every home where possible. All persons of good will are invited to participate in this booklet distribution. Additionally, if you would like a small tract to prove to others that God’s way is love,’ send for 200 of the tract Hope for the Dead. The cost is only 25c for 200.
A LIBRARY IN MINIATURE
To keep informed on matters of religious worship is the wise course for every person. This is far more important than keeping up with the progress of political affairs, social developments or financial trends, for the matter of worship has a direct bearing on the eternal destiny of every living person today. To aid you in gaining vital information and making right decisions, we invite you to send for the following booklets, which, in fact, compose a miniature library. These are the titles:
Hope
God’s Way Is Love
Religion Reaps the Whirlwind
Evolution versus The New World
Can You Live Forever in Happiness on Earth?
All five booklets will be sent to you, postpaid, for only 10 cents. Should we run short of any particular booklet, a substitution will be made. Simply ask for the packet of five booklets.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 24: The Exclusive God.
Week of May 31: Jehovah: Husband, Father and Teacher.

