Specialists in Organization
EFFICIENCY! Speed! Results! Those words portray Jehovah’s witnesses in action, especially during convention times. Worldly officials speak in awesome terms when observing the order and smoothness with which the organization operates, and are amazed at the ease with which monumental problems are overcome. It is no simple undertaking to move, house and feed an army of seventy-five to a hundred thousand people, many of these women and little children; but Jehovah’s witnesses have done it, and they are prepared to do it again come July 19-26, 1953, the date set for their next world assembly at Yankee Stadium, in New York city. In fact, the wheels of organization are already being set in motion. Transportation departments are being notified. Railroad, airline, boat, bus and other travel agencies throughout the world are being alerted. Come July, hundreds of information booths with the familiar “JW” stamp will be situated at all key points. Guides will be on hand to direct weary travelers to their rooms. Hundreds more will volunteer to provide the convention with its necessary departments and working facilities. The construction crew alone during the 1950 assembly utilized about 150 workers. The trucking department kept thirty trucks in constant use; in a single night handled 40,000 pounds of groceries three different times. Sanitation department (350 men) moved some fifty truckloads of trash. Over 5,000 attendants managed the largest crowds in Yankee Stadium’s history. The First Aid was staffed with more than twenty doctors of every kind and handled approximately 1,000 patients a day. Carpenters used some 150,000 feet of lumber, while electricians, plumbers, steam-fitters and welders laid sewer, electrical and water lines. A kitchen with twenty-three steam kettles, batteries of ovens, frialators and a number of 15-horsepower meatcutters was installed. This within a minimum of time. No wonder men marveled. Many of these are planning to be at the coming assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses. Are you?

