Announcements
▪ Literature offer for November: What Does God Require of Us? or Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. December: Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life with the New World Translation. January: Any 192-page book published prior to 1986 that the congregation may have in stock. Congregations that do not have a supply of such books may offer Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? or You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. February: The Secret of Family Happiness.
▪ Congregations should begin requesting the 2000 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses with their November literature request. The Yearbook will be available in Arabic, Chinese, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Slovak, Spanish, and Swedish. Until the Yearbook is available and shipments are made, it will appear as “Pending” on congregation packing lists. Yearbooks are special-request items.
▪ The presiding overseer should telephone the Society if he does not receive the congregation’s supply of Our Kingdom Ministry by the 20th of the month preceding the issue date.
▪ New Publications Available:
Is There a Creator Who Cares About You?​—Persian
Jehovah​—Who Is He? (Tract No. 23)​—Chinese, Iloko, Persian, Tagalog, Thai
Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life​—Faeroese
Life in a Peaceful New World (Tract No. 15)​—Slovak
Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!​—Tigrinya
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—East Armenian
The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived​—Hebrew
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986-1995​—Swedish
What Does God Require of Us?​—East Armenian
What Happens to Us When We Die?​—Albanian, Indonesian, Slovak
Why You Can Trust the Bible (Tract No. 13)​—Zande
▪ New Audiocassettes Available:
Families​—Make Daily Bible Reading Your Way of Life! (Drama, single cassette)​—Polish
The Secret of Family Happiness (four cassettes in an album)​—Croatian
When Someone You Love Dies (single cassette)​—English
Why Respect Theocratic Arrangements? (Drama, single cassette)​—Croatian, Polish
▪ New Videocassettes Available:
The Bible​—Its Power in Your Life—​French

