Question Box
▪ Who is responsible for cleaning the Kingdom Hall?
A Kingdom Hall that is clean and attractive reflects favorably on the message that we preach. (Compare 1 Peter 2:12.) Keeping the hall neat and tidy is essential, and everyone can have a share in its upkeep. We should not expect just a few people to bear the whole load. Usually, cleaning is arranged according to Congregation Book Study groups, with the study conductor or his assistant taking the lead. In halls where more than one congregation meets, the elders will organize matters so that all the congregations share in the upkeep.
How can we best care for this responsibility? The Kingdom Hall should be cleaned according to a regular schedule. Supplies and equipment should be on hand for use in cleaning. A list of things that need to be done should be posted where the workers can consult it for direction. There may be two different lists, one for a general light cleaning after each meeting and another for a more thorough weekly cleaning. The book study conductor should schedule the thorough cleaning for a day and time that is convenient for all assigned. Regular attention should also be given to the lawn, flowers, and shrubbery. The sidewalks and the parking areas should be kept free of litter. Each year a spring-cleaning ought to be done, perhaps just before the Memorial. This might include washing the windows and walls, shampooing the carpet, and cleaning the draperies.
Of course, all of us can lighten the load by not dropping chewing gum or litter inside or outside the hall. We can tidy up the rest room after each use, leaving it clean for the next person. Be careful to avoid breaking equipment or damaging the furnishings. Take notice of carpet stains, damaged chairs, plumbing problems, burned-out light bulbs, and so forth, and promptly report these matters to the brother in charge of Kingdom Hall maintenance.
Let all of us be willing to do our part. This makes for a pleasing house of worship and distinguishes us as a clean people that honors Jehovah God.​—1 Pet. 1:16.

