What Will You Say to a Muslim?
1 Have you had the experience of witnessing to a Muslim? If so, you probably learned that Muslims have a fervent belief in God. However, they know little about the coming Paradise on earth as foretold by Jehovah’s prophets, and we would like to share that hope with them. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) The following information should help you give a good witness.
2 Muslims believe in Allah, or God, and they believe that Muḥammad is God’s prophet. Their holy book is the Koran, and their religion is called Islam, which means “submission.” The Koran states that lying and the worship of idols are wrong, that God is one, and that he is no part of a Trinity. Also, it teaches the immortality of the soul, hellfire, and a heavenly paradise. Muslims accept the Bible as God’s Word but believe that it has been changed, while the Koran, still in its original language, has been kept pure.
3 Be Friendly, Tactful, and Discerning: When engaging a Muslim in conversation, be friendly and tactful. (Prov. 25:15) Bear in mind that Muslim beliefs are firmly entrenched and that most of them have been learned by rote. Thus, reasoning on religious teachings and proving to themselves what God’s will is has not been a part of their spiritual development. (Rom. 12:2) To help Muslims, patience and understanding are vital.​—1 Cor. 9:19-23.
4 Avoid using expressions that would in a Muslim person’s mind link you with Christendom. Make it clear that you are no part of either Catholic or Protestant religion, that you are different. Refer to the Bible as the Book of God. Since Muslims have an aversion to the term “Son of God,” it is usually best not to use it or to discuss this subject until spiritual progress has been made. However, you can speak about Jesus, referring to him as a prophet or messenger. Avoid arguing. If you observe that anger begins to surface, politely take your leave immediately.
5 It is best to speak with just one person and not with a group. Usually, it is advisable for women to witness to women, and men, to men. Obviously, there are exceptions to this, but good judgment should be used. Also, many Muslims are sensitive about what they consider to be immodest dress and grooming by women. Sisters need to be aware of this.​—1 Cor. 10:31-33.
6 Things to Talk About: Speak frankly about the greatness of God and his love. Do not hesitate to state that you are a true believer, that God is one (not a Trinity), and that idol worship is wrong. Speak about the wickedness in the world today​—wars, civil unrest, racial hatred, and the hypocrisy that is evident among so many religious people.
7 The brochure The Guidance of God​—Our Way to Paradise will give you further insight into topics that can be used to open conversations with Muslims. It is designed to appeal to Muslims who live in an environment where they may feel free to study the Bible.
8 As a presentation, you might say:
▪ “I am making a special effort to speak to Muslims. I have been reading about your religion and believe that I am right in saying that Muslims believe in one true God and in all the prophets. [Allow for response.] I would like to talk with you about an ancient prophecy that foretells the transformation of the earth into a paradise. May I read to you what the prophet wrote? [Read Isaiah 11:6-9.] This prophecy makes me think of a quotation from the Koran that is found in this brochure.” Turn to page 9 in the Guidance of God brochure, and read the quotation in bold print, which refers to righteous ones’ inheriting the earth. If interest is shown, continue the conversation by discussing paragraphs 7 to 9 on the opposite page. Leave the brochure, and arrange for a return visit.​—For another presentation, see the February 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 6, paragraph 27.
9 When inviting someone to consider the Guidance of God brochure, it is best to call it a discussion, not a Bible study. When you complete the brochure, the student should be ready to study the Require brochure or the Knowledge book. Other publications that are especially designed for Muslims are the tract How to Find the Road to Paradise and the booklet The Time for True Submission to God.
10 With this knowledge of Islamic beliefs and sensitivities, we can be discerning in our selection of literature that we offer to Muslims and in the way that we witness to them. May Jehovah continue to bless our efforts to assist people of all sorts to call on his name and be saved.​—Acts 2:21.

