Who Might Accept a Bible Study?
1 The prophet Amos declared that there would be a famine in the land of Israel, “a famine, not for bread, and a thirst, not for water, but for hearing the words of Jehovah.” (Amos 8:11) For the benefit of those who hunger and thirst spiritually, Jehovah’s organization is distributing an enormous amount of Bible literature worldwide.
2 Thus far, we have printed 70 million Knowledge books and 91 million Require brochures. In teaching the truth, we appreciate the simplicity and effectiveness of these publications. However, literally multitudes of people who have received our literature have not yet studied the Bible with us. What can we do about this?
3 Each Placement Means a Potential Study! Consider the experience of a publisher who offered a study to a woman the first time he spoke to her at the door. She immediately accepted. Later she told him, “You are the first person who has ever offered to study the Bible with me.” In your territory, how many people who already possess our literature might say the same thing? Each placement provides an opportunity for return visits and a home Bible study.
4 Since we often encounter people who already have our publications, how can we stimulate their interest in learning what our literature contains? One Witness directly asked a householder if she had any Bible questions, only to have her say, “No.” The sister persisted, “Surely you have some.” The woman did, and a study developed. Why not ask the householder if he would like to learn the Bible’s viewpoint on a question or a matter that concerns him? Be prepared to raise a question of interest if he cannot think of something. Such discussions may pave the way for a regular study of basic Bible truths.
5 Bible study activity is the heart of our ministry. Since we never know who might accept a study, do not hesitate to offer one to everyone you meet. Take the matter to Jehovah in prayer, and work in harmony with your prayers. You may soon find that someone to whom you offer a study will accept it!​—1 John 5:14, 15.

