VOL. XXVIII JULY 1 No. 13 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Is Prosperity Waning? 195 

Methodist Teachings Curios 196 

Infidelity in High Places 196 

Remarkable Wesleyan Sermon 197 

War Feared; No World's Fair in 1913 197 

Berean Bible Study in Tabernacle Shadows 198 

Types in Saul, David and Solomon 198 

Adam and Eve— Christ and the Church: A 

Contrast 199 

Our Obligations Toward Others 199 

"Your Father Knoweth" (Poem) 203 

"Keep Yourselves from Idols" 203 

Some Interesting Questions Answered 206 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



"SCRIPTURE STUDIES "--INDIA EDITION 



We repeat that orders are placed, for the past year, for all 
the volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES to be printed on India paper 
and bound in leather, with gold edges. It requires a long 
time to import paper, and our publishers were disappointed 
as to the quality of the first lot of it (afterward used in the 
"Karatol" bound edition). They hope for the new lot of best 
India paper soon, and lead us to hope that we will have all 
the volumes about Christmas next. 

Meantime we are not "suffering" seriously, having the 
regular cloth edition and the regular leather edition, besides 
the first volume in Karatol and in magazine form. 

"MANNA" AND "KARATOL" ORDERS 



Orders for the Karatol edition of STUDIES, Vol. I., have 
been filled. If yours failed to arrive advise us. 

Orders for the new edition of HEAVENLY MANNA have all 
been filled. Some who sent for the old edition have credits 
with us and will please advise if they desire a less number of 
the new edition— as the price is higher, as indicated below: 

NEW MANNA PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL 

The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and 
others at 50 cents each (60c when gotten by mail or prepaid 
express). The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, 
are as follows— cash with order: 

1 copy, postpaid, each 35 cents 

10 copies or more, by express, prepaid 30 " 

10 " " " at your charges. 20 " 
30 " " by freight 20 " 

THE TABERNACLE AND THE PRIESTS 



These two beautiful chromos, considerably delayed, are 
now in good supply and should be in all of our homes— to remind 
us of their glorious antitypes, of which we have been 
studying for some time past in our "Berean Lessons." 

By getting them out in large quantities we can supply 
them at 30c per pair, or 4 pairs for $1.00, post or express prepaid 
by us. They are very handsome and easily worth several 
times the price. We merely aim to meet the cost. 

All orders have now been filled. If you did not get yours 
let us know particulars at once. To some who ordered 3 for 
$1.00 we sent four and to others we sent three and a copy of 



TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 

They are mounted with metal and have hangers and are 
packed in tubes. 



BRITISH PILGRIMAGE OF BRO. A. E. WILLIAMSON 



Note change of dates 






Carlow, 


Ire. July 10 Worcester, 


Eng. 


July 22 


Warrington, 


Eng. " 12 Tewkesbury. 


" 


23 


Liverpool, 


"13,14 Cardiff, 


Wales 


" 24,25 


East Kirkby, 


" 15, 16 Plymouth, 


Eng. 


26 


Nottingham, 


" 17, 18 Bristol, 


" 


" 27,28 


Atherstone, 


" 19 Bournemouth, 


" 


29 


Leicester, 


" 20, 21 Oxford, 




30,31 



R4016 :page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
IS PROSPERITY WANING? 



THE QUESTION whether a period of hard times 
is approaching is one upon which the experts 
are unable to agree. Mr. Jacob H. Schiff has 
predicted an era of great suffering among the poor. 
Mr. August Belmont told the assembled capitalists and 
workmen at Mr. Carnegie's industrial peace conference 
that we were about to have a halt in industry, which 
might not be altogether undesirable. Mr. James J. 
Hill, who has often seemed pessimistic in his views, 
denies that he has predicted a collapse of industry, but 
thinks that there will be a not unhealthy slackening. 
The view that trade has been going ahead too fast, and 
that it will have to slow down to give capital a chance 
to catch up, is pretty generally expressed. On the 
other hand, Chairman Gary, of the United States Steel 
Corporation, can see nothing but bright skies ahead, 
and a number of foreign observers take the same view. 

Upon the theory of periodical crises it is not yet 
time for a great industrial depression. We had such 
disasters beginning in 1819, in 1837, in 1857, in 1873, 
and in 1893. The normal interval between them is 
twenty years. The shortest hitherto has been sixteen 
years, between 1857 and 1873, and the effects of the 
Civil War furnished ample explanation of the curtailment 
in that case. According to experience we should 
not expect another severe crisis until sometime between 



1909 and 1913. There has usually been a mild 
reaction from the prevailing prosperity about half-way 
between two great panics. We had one in 1884, a little 
over half-way from 1873 to 1893. The corresponding 
break in the present period of good times came in 
1903, just ten years after the panic of 1893. According 
to precedent that ought to last us for nine or ten years 
longer. 

In the United States prosperity is largely dependent 
upon the state of the crops. The Baring panic of 
1890 would have brought on our panic of 1893 two years 
ahead of time if the disaster had not been stayed by 
the bonanza harvests of 1891. The present crop prospects, 
therefore, are of vast importance in estimating 
the prospects for 1907. 

If the extraordinary succession of good crops with 
which this continent has been favored can be continued 
for another year, there will be a pretty good assurance 
of another year of prosperity. The next three months 
will tell most of the story.— Collier's Weekly. 



We are glad that the present prosperous times are 
being made use of by many of the dear Truth friends as 
a special opportunity for spreading the good tidings 
of great joy. The "Harvest" work is the most important 
of all. It is "the King's business"— the Father's 
business. The numbers entering the Colporteur work 
lead us to surmise that this year may even exceed last 
year in its phenomenal output of DAWN-STUDIES. 

A NOTABLE PREACHER'S VIEWS 



"I have been twenty-five years in the ministry; and 
I regret to say it, but it is my honest conviction that 
there is more real brotherhood in the lodges than you 
find in the churches, and that there is infinitely more 
charity, sympathy and kindness in those outside of the 
Church than you will find in Mr. Lordly and Milady 
and their coterie who are running the churches as private 
clubs." 



With the above explanation Rev. M. C. Peters 
withdrew from the pastorate of one of the most prominent 
New York City churches. Apparently the "wheat" 
class is getting scarce in all denominations. 

An exchange says:— 

"Rev. Madson C. Peters, pastor of one of the leading 
Baptist churches of New York City, is reported as 
saying that, with an investment of $5,000,000, and an 
expenditure last year of $400,000, the seventy Baptist 



churches in that city had a net increase during that 
time of only nine members. 

"He says also that the other churches of the city 
did little better. What is wrong?" 

POWER OF THE CHURCHES 



"A timely illustration of the tremendous and effective 
power which may be wielded by the churches when 
they unite is afforded by the closing of the gambling 

R4016 :page 196 

dens at Saratoga, a result brought about by the action 
of the Church federation of Saratoga county. Thus a 
condition which has been a notorious scandal and disgrace 
to the State for years, which has hitherto successfully 
defied all efforts at reform, and had come to be 
regarded as practically hopeless, has been effectively 
remedied by the joint action of the churches. What 
has been done at Saratoga can be done elsewhere in a 
similar way. The case is also an example of the practical 
usefulness of Church federations, local, state and 
national, and a good reason why the federation movement 
should receive the cordial support of all good citizens. 
Many public evils other than gambling come 
within the scope of Church federation activities, and 
no organizations existing in the country, of any name 
or nature, have the equipment, the power, and the 
special advantages for effective service such as these 
federations possess. We hope the time is not far distant 
when the churches throughout the entire country 
will be brought into the federation movement. A more 
promising work than this for the good of the world has 
not appeared among the religious activities of modern 
times."— Leslie's Weekly. 



R4017 :page 196 

Sometimes this power may be used for a worthy 
purpose, in which all could rejoice; but, especially 
when the still greater power of the general Church Federation 
comes, there will be naturally a temptation to 
use it to put down whatever the majority disapproves, 
however moral or good. This the Scriptures show will 
be the result: religious persecution. 

METHODIST TEACHINGS CURIOS 



"God save us from theological definitions! The 



doctrines of the Methodist Church are the curios of a 
time that has passed and ought to be put on the shelf. 
God save us from doctrines and help us into a larger 
understanding of Christian fellowship." 

This was the thunderbolt Rev. Davis W. Clark, retiring 
President of the Methodist Ministers' Association, 
hurled into the meeting of his brother divines at 
Wiley Chapel.— Cincinnati Post. 



Poor "Babylon" is catching it on all sides. Bible 
students object to her creeds because they are not sufficiently 
loyal to God's Word: because she has incorporated 
too much of the traditions of men which make 
void the Word of God. We, however, recognize what 
these creeds have of divine truth. 

On the other hand, the speaker above quoted is 
angry because, as a Higher Critic and New Theology 
man, he is not allowed to tear from the Bible the story 
of the Fall, the Redemption and the coming 
Restitution. 

INFIDELITY IN HIGH PLACES 



"In a railway coach recently sat three ministers in 
conversation— one a German Evangelical, one a Methodist, 
and the third an American Reformed. In their 
conversation the M.E. minister stated that among the 
professors of the Garrett Biblical Institute at Evanston, 
Illinois, no two of them believed just alike. He was 
asked if they all believed that Adam was the first man. 
He answered, 'Not one of them.' Another minister inquired, 
'What is their view?' The reply was something 
about 'Prehistoric ages and periods.'" 

The above is an extract from a letter received from 
a brother in the Truth— his personal experience. It 
shows what we have heretofore pointed out, that ministers 
of all denominations are rapidly losing their 
faith in the Bible, and are becoming instead leaders of 
the people into infidelity. If they do not believe in 
Adam as the head of the race, and that by his disobedience 
condemnation passed upon all (Rom. 5:12), how 
can they believe, either, in the redemption accomplished 
by our Lord Jesus once for all for Adam and 
his posterity? "Alas! when the Son of man cometh 
shall he find the faith on the earth?" Assuredly, he 
does not so find it, but increasingly disbelief. Those 
whose eyes of understanding have been opened to a 
precious appreciation of the divine plan cannot too 
highly esteem the favor of God which they enjoy, nor 
too surely realize that in this way the Lord is keeping 
them from falling, according to the promise in his 
Word, "A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand 



at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh 
thee." 

A BAPTIST PREACHER'S OPINION ENDORSED 



"From Indianapolis, a city of which every American 
should be proud because of its evident Americanism 
in the best sense of the term, comes this fine bit, 
which originated, it is said, with a Hoosier Baptist 
preacher by the name of Taylor. It's worth cutting 
out, says the Philadelphia North American:— 

'"What America needs more than railway extension, 
and Western irrigation, and a low tariff, and a 
bigger wheat crop, and a merchant marine, and a new 
navy, is a revival of piety, the kind mother and father 
used to have— piety that counted it good business to 
stop for daily family prayers before breakfast, right in 
the middle of harvest; that quit field work a half hour 
early Thursday night, so as to get the chores done and 
go to prayer meeting. That's what we need now to 
clean this country of the filth of graft, and of greed, 
petty and big; of worship of fine houses and big lands 
and high office and grand social functions. What is 
this thing we are worshiping but a vain repetition of 
what decayed nations fell down and worshiped just 
before their light went out? Great wealth never made 
a nation substantial nor honorable. There is nothing 
on earth that looks good that is so dangerous for a 
man or a nation to handle as quick, easy, big money. 
It takes greater and finer heroism to dare to be poor in 
America than to charge an earthworks in Manchuria.'" 

INFLUENCE OF THE BIBLE 

AND OF "MILLENNIAL DAWN" 



"One hundred delegates, representing Church clubs 
in almost all of the large Eastern cities, met in Washington 
last week, and problems of universal interest were 
discussed by prominent Church men. The speech that 
probably provoked the most discussion and called forth 
much comment was made by Bishop Satterlee. 

"He began his speech by calling attention to the 

R4017 :page 197 

fact that, although the country was progressing materially 
and commercially at a wonderful rate, its moral 
progress was not so evident. He did not say that there 
was not a corresponding moral development, but that 
he was unable to see it in the churches. He thought 
the influence of the Church was decreasing, but that 



the influence of Jesus Christ was steadily increasing, 
due not so much to the churches as to the wholesale 
publication of the Bible, which was easily put into the 
hands of the masses." 



We would have appreciated the Bishop's sentiment 
still more had he mentioned that a growingly better 
understanding of the Bible, both by the clergy and the 
laity, has to do with the Bible's influence for good; and 
that this is largely the result of the wide circulation of 
"Bible Keys"-MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

REMARKABLE WESLEY AN SERMON 



Dr. R. P. Downes preached a sermon at the Wesleyan 
Church at Stoke-on-Trent on Sunday night which 
has occasioned much controversy in the town. Taking 
for his text, "God is Love," the preacher declared his 
firm belief that human destiny is not fixed at death. 
He told his congregation that this was a view which 
for some time he had held secretly, and he knew others 
similarly situated, but the time had come when men 
must speak out. The popular doctrine of Christianity 
at this point was being strongly assailed by the sceptic, 
who demanded to know whether the God that was 
preached by the Christian Church, who could damn to 
eternal perdition the overwhelming majority of the 
human race, millions of whom had not had sufficient 
light or probation or privilege on which to base the 
stupendousness of an eternal destiny, could be the God 
of Love so often preached. He himself had heard this 
view expressed by Charles Bradlaugh twenty-five years 
ago at Rochdale, and such irrefutable logic could not 
be escaped from. 

If (said Dr. Downes) I were to withhold the great 
revelation which has come to my soul, I should be like 
the man in the lighthouse who gave to the cottagers 
round the place the oil which was intended for the 
mighty lanterns of the sea. God is Love, which means 
that no man will be damned eternally without a chance, 
no man will be lost until he has had the revelation of 
Christ's body and of Christ's atonement... He 
knew that the general idea had been, and he himself 
had thought it for many years, that man's destiny was 
fixed at death, and that if a man died in a slum area, 
polluted and unworthy, having sinned, he was condemned 
guilty, damned for ever, and had no chance— 
his destiny was fixed. It was not true. 

In John Wesley's fifty-first sermon there was a 
passage which read, "Some have imagined that human 
destiny is fixed at death. There is no passage in the 
Scriptures that confirms any such thing." Passing 



from John Wesley to Dr. W. E. Pope, the greatest, he 

said, of all Methodist theologians and one of the greatest 

theologians the world had ever known, he found 

Dr. Pope saying, "The fixed and unalterable state of 

man is always associated with the day of judgment 

and its issues, and not with the day of death. We 

must not antedate these issues or interfere with the 

full work of probation." "Exactly," said the preacher, 

"the absoluteness of Christianity, the only way of salvation, 

demanded that no human being should be adjudged 

until Christ should be made accessible and 

brought home to him, whether that took place in this 

life or the life after death. This is my view, and I 

mean before I die to drag it before the Methodist 

Church."— English Journal. 

JEWISH LANDOWNERS 

IN EUROPE THEY HOLD 248 TIMES AS MUCH AS THEY DID 
40 YEARS AGO. 



The anti-Jew faction in Russia declares that even 
with the present restrictions the Jews have managed to 
acquire a large portion of land, for which the following 
figures are quoted in the Jewish magazine, the 
Menorah: 

"Within the pale the real estate of the Jews advanced 
from 16,000 dessiatins in 1860 to 148,000 in 1870, 
370,000 in 1880, 537,000 in 1890, and to 1,265,000 in 1900. 

R4018 :page 197 

"In European Russia outside the pale Jewish landholding 
is said to have increased 248 times in forty 
years in the following proportion: In 1860, 3,000 dessiatins; 
in 1870, 18,000 dessiatins; in 1880, 96,000 dessiatins; 
in 1890, 262,000 dessiatins, and in 1900, 745,000 
dessiatins." 

According to these statistics the total holdings of 
the Jews throughout the Russian Empire, which only 
amounted to 70,000 dessiatins in 1860, reached in 1900 
the high figure of 2,381,057 dessiatins. 



It is reported on apparently good authority that 
much of the trouble and bloodshed of the past few 
months in Russia is engendered by the fact that so 
many of the landlords are Jews: the poor, who rent 
their little farms at very high rentals, rarely see their 
landowners; but knowing them to be Jews they hate 
and injure the poorer Jews, their neighbors— as representatives 
of the rich absentees. The love of money is 
a root of all evil. 



WAR FEARED; NO WORLD'S FAIR IN 1913 



Berlin.— Opposition of Kaiser William is expected 
to cause the abandonment of the proposal to hold an 
international exposition in Berlin in 1913. Most significant, 
however, is the reason on which the German 
war lord bases his objection. 

The emperor believes the possibility of Germany 
being drawn into a European war before the time set 
for the exposition is too great for the nation to take 
the risk involved in arranging an international 
exposition. 

The statement that Kaiser Wilhelm opposes the 
proposed exposition on such grounds has caused a 
great sensation. It is argued that the government 
fears that the peace of the world is in constant jeopardy, 
and great uneasiness has been caused among the 
people, who feel that they do not know all the complications 
of the international situation.— Toledo 
News-Bee. 



page 198 
BEREAN BIBLE STUDY IN TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
"AND AFTER DEATH THE JUDGMENT" 
AUGUST 4 

1. What "judgment" is here referred to as following 
death? Heb. 9:27,28; T.87, par. 1. 

2. How is this passage generally understood by Christians? 
and is their idea Scriptural? 2 Pet. 2:9; 

Rev. 11:15,18; Rev. 20:11-13; Psa. 96:10-13. 

3. What was risked by the High Priest in the type 
whenever he entered the "Most Holy" on the Day 
of Atonement? Lev. 16:13,14; T.87, par. 2. 

4. Was the eternal existence of our Lord endangered 
during his earthly career? See Acts 17:31; Heb. 5:7,8; 
T.88, par. 1. 

AUGUST 1 1 

5. What positive evidence have we that the life and 
sacrifice of our Lord was perfect and acceptable 

to the Father? Jno. 20:1-17; Acts 2:1-4; T.88, 
par. 2. 

6. How will the Father's acceptance of the sacrifice of 
the Body of Christ be manifested? Joel 2:28; T.88, 
par. 2. 

7. For what is the "groaning creation" waiting? Rom. 8:19-22 



(see Diaglott); T.88, par. 4. 

8. Are the worthy saints of the Patriarchal and Jewish 
ages also waiting for this manifestation? 

Heb. 11:39,40; A.288, par. 2; 293, par. 2. 

AUGUST 18 

9. Must each member of the Body of Christ pass the 
same "judgment" as our Head? and, if so, how 

can we be acceptable unless we, like him, live perfect 
lives? Rev. 3:21; Col. 2:9,10; Isa. 61:10; 
T.89, par. 1. 

10. How is the acceptance by God of the sacrifice of 
the Church shown in the type? Lev. 9:22-24; 

T.89, par. 2. 

1 1 . Will the world then appreciate the great sacrifice of 
the Christ? and how is this shown in the type? 

Isa. 40:5; 25:9; Rev. 15:3,4, Diaglott; T.89, par. 2. 

12. What must intervene between now and the time 
when "the people will shout and fall upon their 
faces" before the great High Priest in glory? 

Acts 15:13-17; Dan. 12:1; T.89, par. 3. 

AUGUST 25 

13. Will those now dead, as well as the living nations, 
be participants in this great blessing? Heb. 2:9; 

I Tim. 2:5,6; Rom. 14:9; Hos. 13:14; Ezek. 16:44-68, 
etc.;T.90, par. 1,2,3. 

14. How was the "good news"— the Gospel— "preached 
before to Abraham"? Gal. 3:8,16,29; T.91, par. 1. 

15. What is the date of the beginning of the blessing 
to the world? and why can it not come before? 

Lev. 9:15,23,24; Rom. 8:19,21, Diaglott; T.91, 
par. 1, last half. 

16. What was the typical significance of the High 
Priest's going alone into the "Most Holy" once a 
year— on the Day of Atonement? 

17. Did the High Priest and under priests enter the 
"Most Holy" after the Day of Atonement? T.91, 
par. 2. And what was thus typified? Num. 18:10; 
T.91, par. 3. 



R4018 :page 198 

TYPES IN SAUL, DAVID AND SOLOMON 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

May I suggest for your consideration whether there 
are not some lessons to be gleaned from the thought 
that in some respects the forty years of Saul's reign 
were typical of the harvest of the Jewish Age, the forty 
years of David's reign typical of the harvest of the 
Gospel Age, and the forty years of Solomon's reign 



typical of the harvest of the Millennial Age? 

Take, for example, the first seven years of David's 
reign, in Hebron (meaning "ford" or "company"). 
Might they not in some sense represent the years from 
1874 to 1881, before the full establishment of the Kingdom 
in the "New Jerusalem"? 

Again: We know that the 7,000 years rest of Jehovah 
will terminate in the year 2874, so that it seems 
proper to think of the forty years harvest of the Millennial 
Age as the time when the Christ will be at rest 
from all its enemies, in a special sense, as in the days 
of Solomon. 

In the case of Saul: It does not seem perfectly 
clear to me whether the act of presumption which led 
to his rejection and the rejection of his posterity followed 
the second anniversary of his elevation to the 
kingship, or whether it followed the third anniversary. 
(I Sam. 13:1.) But it is noteworthy that his rejection 
was due to his failure to properly recognize his typical 
mediator, Samuel, and this surely was the cause of 
Fleshly Israel's rejection, 3-1/2 years after a share in the 
Kingdom was offered to them. 

If there is any apparent value to you in the above 
suggestion, I respectfully inquire whether you see anything 
in the end of David's reign to illustrate the close 
of the present harvest time? I will not presume to do 
more than suggest a line of inquiry. David virtually 
abdicated in favor of Solomon, Solomon's power gradually 
increasing while his own strength was gradually 
failing. "He must increase but I must decrease." 
Please note the seven years of famine in 2 Sam. 24:13, 
mentioned as three years in I Chron. 21:12. (The 
characters "7" and "3" resemble each other closely, so 
that one of these is probably incorrect.) In your consideration 
of the subject I venture to call attention to 
the seven years famine in the days of Elisha.— 
2 Kings 8:1. 

TYPES IN THE BOOK ESTHER 

Permit me to suggest that Ahasuerus, meaning 
"King," is a type of the "Sun," Christ; that Vashti 
typifies those that were bidden to the feast and would 
not come; that Esther, meaning "The Planet Venus," 
typifies the Bride of Christ (Venus is the most glorious 
of all our planets, reflecting more of the rays of the sun); 
that Mordecai the Jew, meaning "Dedicated to Mars," 
typifies the Ancient Worthies (Mars is, I believe, nearer 
to the earth than any other planet, and is between it 
and the sun); and lastly that Haman, the Agagite, 
the last Amalekite mentioned in the Scriptures (see 
last sentence of Young's Concordance, article "Amalekite"), 
typifies the class that tries to take the power out 
of the hands of the Ancient Worthies in the end of the 
Millennial Age. Please take a mental review of the 



R4018 :page 199 

story of Esther, and see how well this picture fits. If 
this application is correct, the meaning of the word 
Mordecai would be one more suggestion in line with 
your present thought that the Ancient Worthies may, 
after the close of the Millennial Age, attain heavenly 
honors and stations. 
Your brother in Christ, 

CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 



R4018 :page 199 

ADAM AND EVE--CHRIST AND THE CHURCH: A CONTRAST 

BRO. JOHN EDGAR, M.D., of Scotland, sends us 
the following, saying: "I am sending you a 
parallel between Adam and Eve and Christ 
and the Church, and would like your criticism of it." 
Our only criticism is that it might perhaps better be 
termed a contrast rather than a parallel: 

ADAM AND EVE 

Adam by his disobedience 
sold the whole human 
race into sin and death. 

Adam's disobedience 
consisted in exaltation of 
self. He ate of the fruit 
forbidden by God. 

The result was humiliation, 
sorrow and death. 

The humiliation was 
from the perfect human 
plane to that of human imperfection, 
the lowest plane 
of existence in the likeness 
of God. 

Adam's children were 
begotten after his humiliation. 
Through the law of 
heredity they have been 
"born in sin and shapen in 
iniquity," and accordingly 
under condemnation to 
death.— Rom. 5:12. 

Eve was the child of God 
and was formed from 



Adam's body. Adam was 
put to sleep for this 
purpose. 

Eve came into being before 
the fall. As Adam's 
bride she shared first his 
glory, joy and life, and 
afterwards his humiliation, 
sorrow and death. She 
shared the loss of the first 
dominion, and access to 
the tree of life was barred 
against both. 

Eve was disobedient 
first, and then Adam. 

Adam was not deceived 
(I Tim. 2:14). He wilfully 
transgressed God's law, 
knowing the result would 
be everlasting death. 

All the blame is placed 
upon Adam. 

Eve shared Adam's 
transgression of God's will 
but her responsibility was 
less. (I Tim. 2:14.) Accordingly, 
she received the 
same penalty as Adam, not 
on her own account, and 
not through heredity like 
other members of the human 
race, but because she 
was Adam's bride and 
shared in his transgression. 
This one-ness is expressed 
in the name "Adam" 
given to both.— 
Gen. 5:2. 

CHRIST AND THE CHURCH 

Christ by his obedience 
bought the whole human 
race for righteousness and 
life. 

Christ's obedience consisted 
in humiliation of 
self. He drank of the cup 
permitted by God. 



The result was exaltation, 
joy and the crown of 
life (immortality).— John 5:26; 
Rom. 6:9. 

The exaltation was from 
the perfect human plane 
to that of the divine nature, 
the highest plane of existence 
in the likeness of 
God. 

Christ's children will be 
begotten after his exaltation. 
The law of heredity 
will cease (Jer. 31:29), and 
each will be given the opportunity 
of justification 
unto life.— Rom. 5:18. 

The Church-members are 
children of God and are 
formed from Christ's body. 
Christ was put to sleep 
(death) for this purpose. 

The Church came into 
being after the exaltation. 
As Christ's Bride she 
shares first his humiliation, 
sorrow and death, and afterwards 
will share his 

glory, honor and immortality. 
She will share the 
gaining of the first dominion 
(Micah 4:8), and both 
will be permitted to eat of 
the tree of life (Rev. 2:7). 

Christ was obedient first, 
and then the Church. 

"By his knowledge shall 
my righteous servant justify 
many." (Isa. 53:11.) He 
voluntarily kept God's law, 
knowing the result would 
be death and afterwards a 
resurrection from the dead 
to immortality. 

All the merit is placed 
upon Christ. 

The Church has shared 
Christ's obedience to God's 



will, but her responsibility 
is less. Accordingly, she 
will receive the same reward 
as Christ, not on her 
own account (Eph. 1:6), 
and not through heredity, 
but because she is Christ's 
Bride and has shared in his 
obedience unto death. 
(Rom. 6:3). This one-ness 
is expressed in the name 
"Christ," given to both. 



R4019 :page 199 

OUR OBLIGATIONS TOWARD OTHERS 

--EXODUS 20:12-17. -JULY 21.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself."— Lev. 19:18. 

WE CONTINUE our examination of the Decalogue, 
whose first three commands, we have seen, referred 
to Israel's obligations to God. The remaining 
seven pertain to their relationship to each other and to all 
men. The fourth only is a kind of connecting link, being 
applicable to both God and man. Here again we do well 
to remember that not to Spiritual Israel but to Natural 
Israel these commands were given. It would be impossible 
for us to think of God as giving to his Spirit-begotten children 
the commands not to kill, not to steal, etc., for we 
know that the spirit of murder and the spirit of theft could 
not be in any one possessing the Spirit of God, the holy 
Spirit, the spirit of love. 

Whoever, then, has been begotten of the holy Spirit, 
and is a Spiritual Israelite indeed, cannot apply the Father's 
voice in these commandments to himself; but he can through 
these commands given to the natural man gain more and 
more clear conceptions of right and wrong on any subject 
relating to his fellow-creatures. Begotten of the spirit of 
love toward all, he can in the study of these commandments 
learn by antithesis how to exercise his loving disposition 
toward others more and more effectively. By the Lord's 
grace let us seek to appropriate profitable instructions from 
these commands, that we may be more fully conformed to 
the perfect standard in our hearts, and so far as possible in 
our outward conduct toward all. 

R4019 : page 200 

THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT 

In this commandment to honor father and mother we 



have the very foundation of society, because whoever learns 

to respect his forbears will proportionately have consideration 

for others; while those disobedient to parents and without 

natural affection are prepared to be covenant-breakers 

and anarchists when conditions shall favor such procedures. 

Growth of disrespect to parents is one of the notable features 

of our day, and one that the Apostle called attention 

to as marking the day of trouble in the end of this age. 

(Rom. 1:29-31.) He associates it with headiness and highmindedness, 

and we are not to forget that these condemned 

qualities are being inculcated and fostered by all the higher 

teachings of the worldly wise. 

If our forefathers but a little while back were monkeys 
—as all the colleges and seminaries of the world are instructing 
the youth— why should we have much honor or 
respect for them? And why should not each member of the 
rising generation feel heady and highminded, self-conceited, 
puffed up with the thought that he is further from the 
monkey than his parents and nearer to the ideal set before 
him by his instructors? The great increase of knowledge 
along all lines in our day seems to corroborate this teaching 
of the worldly wise, and only those who have the instruction 
of the Word of God can realize that present progress is due 
to another cause than evolution— that it is the result of the 
development of the divine plan, in preparation for the glorious 
Millennial day already dawning. Let not those who have 
been blessed with a knowledge of Present Truth therein 
pride themselves either, but rather let them remember the 
Apostle's words, that we should humble ourselves, and recognize 
that all of these blessings are from the mighty hand 
of God and not of ourselves, and that we have nothing except 
what we have received from him. 

What about Spiritual Israelites in respect to this command? 
Have we not a father and a mother as New Creatures? 
Yea, verily! The Apostle tells us that the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten us as New 
Creatures. Our Lord confirms this thought, saying, "I 
ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your 
God." "After this manner pray ye, Our Father which art in 
heaven, hallowed be thy name." The spirit of loyalty to 
the heavenly Father, of obedience to him, should be continually 
with us and prevent any spirit of selfishness or self-seeking 
or boastfulness. The proper spirit of reverence for 
the Father is expressed by our Redeemer in the words, "I 
delight to do thy will, O my God. Thy law is written in my 
heart." The Spirit of God is the law of love, and with that 
in our hearts and abounding more and more we will delight 
to honor the One from whom has come to us every good and 
perfect gift. 

But who is the mother of the New Creature? The 
Apostle tells us: He points out that as the Jew corresponds 
to Ishmael, the son of Hagar, so the Spiritual Israelite corresponds 
to Isaac, the son of Sarah, and that Sarah represents 
God's original covenant with Abraham; and that in 
this sense of the word the heavenly Jerusalem, the heavenly 
promises of the heavenly Kingdom, is the mother of us all. 



We are begotten and nourished of a good hope, a living 
faith. We must respect this faith, this promise, this hope, 
through which we are begotten, as well as respect the heavenly 
Father, by whose gracious provision we are begotten. If 
we thus honor the Father, the God of all grace, and thus 
honor his covenant and the faith which has been begotten 
in us, it will make us loyal in thought and, so far as possible, 
also in word and deed. And as there was a special 
promise of long life to the obedient Jew, so there is a blessing 
of a promise of eternal life, even of immortality, to the 
faithful Spiritual Israelite. 

"THOU SHALT DO NO MURDER" 

This commandment to the Jewish people did not signify 
that they might not kill animals for food or for sacrifice to 
the Lord, nor that they should not kill beasts destructive to 
man's interests. Nor did it mean that they should not put 
to death those who had been judicially sentenced to death 
as injurious to the interests of their fellows— for all these 
things the Israelites did under and in harmony with that 
Law. To them this commandment meant that no individual 
had a right to take human life, that only a legal process of 
the divine sanction could do this. 

The lesson from this command to the New Creature is 
a much broader and deeper one than the Jew or any other 
natural man, not begotten of the holy Spirit, would be able 
to appreciate. To the New Creature the higher statement of 
the Law, "Thou shalt love," has a much more deep and 
searching signification than could be understood to be attached 
to this command, "Do not murder." While the New 
Creature would not think of committing murder, taking the 
life of another, he needs to be still more deeply instructed— 
namely, that any wicked thought or sentiment in his heart 
against his brother, any malice or hatred or anger, is of the 
murder-spirit, which is contrary to his new standard and 
must be thoroughly eradicated. The Lord enunciated this 
when he said, "He that hateth his brother is a murderer"— 
he has the spirit or disposition which, under aggravation or 
excitement or removal of restraint, would imply that he 
would do injury to his brother; and the desire to injure at 
all, to wound, to maim, is the desire to that limited extent 
to murder him, to take away his blessings, to destroy his 
interests. 

THE LETTER AND THE SPIRIT 

The spirit of this commandment, its scope, would lead 
the followers of Christ to be careful of the lives and limbs 
of their employes or whoever might be under their charge 
or care. True, in our day we have laws made for such protection 
of laborers, mechanics, children, etc., and we are glad 
that it is so. We are not, however, to conclude that this signifies 
always a larger amount of the Spirit of the Lord, the 
spirit of justice, on the part of employers. Rather, as a rule, 
we may feel sure that they are a result of a growth of 



knowledge on the part of the masses, and that few laws of 
this kind are enacted that have not first been demanded. 
But Christians, those begotten of the Spirit of the Lord, 
should be forehanded in all such matters— not waiting for 
compulsion of law, but rather thoughtful of the needs of 
others, seeking their good, recognizing their responsibilities, 
and seeking to live up to them. Ah, yes! those who belong 
to the Body of Christ and are taught of God and actuated by 

R4020 : page 201 

his holy Spirit not only ought to be but are peculiar people, 
zealous of good works, zealous for righteousness, justice and 
loving interest in their fellow-creatures. 

What we thus see to be true in our relationship to 
others in the world is, if possible, intensified in the Church 
—between the various members of the Body of Christ. If 
we would properly be careful for the welfare of the world, 
how much more interest we should feel in all whom we 
recognize as brethren in God's family, traveling with us 
against the course of the world and the flesh and the Adversary, 
endeavoring with us to stem the tide of imperfection 
in ourselves and in all with whom we have contact, and live 
according to the divine ideals? What sympathy, what love 
for the brethren we must feel, how careful we must be not to 
kill them. As the Apostle says, Should I permit my meat to 
destroy one for whom Christ died? Should I exercise my 
liberties to that extent, and be careless of the welfare of a 
brother? How could I, if actuated by the Father's Spirit, 
the Spirit of Christ, the spirit of love? Hence, as the Apostle 
points out, no one should be recognized as a leader in the 
Church of Christ, whatever his qualifications, if he be a 
striker, a wounder of the brethren. 

Let us learn to appreciate the Spirit of the Lord as we 
find it amongst his brethren, and let us each be more and 
more zealous for its cultivation, that so far from doing injury 
or wounding any of them it would be our joy to minister to 
them, to serve them, to bind up their wounds, and to assist 
them in every manner within our power. Indeed there are 
some who, while very generous, very well-meaning, very 
self-sacrificing in the Lord's cause, are forgetful of the spirit 
of love toward the brethren and open to this rebuke of 
being wounders. On the other hand, of course, all who are 
the Lord's should seek not to be easily wounded or easily 
hurt, but, on the contrary, to be strong in the Lord, and so 
covered with the armor of the Lord that harsh words or 
harsh deeds, either from the brethren or from the world or 
from the Adversary, would take no effect because of the covering 
of grace and truth in the armor. 

"THOU SHALT NOT COMMIT ADULTERY" 

This seventh commandment was designed to be the protection 
of the home and the family, and we may be sure that 
to the Jew it included fornication and uncleanness in general. 
Obedience to this command is recognized the world 



over, even amongst those who have little or no knowledge of 
God, as being essential to the welfare and happiness of the 
individual, the home and the community— as affecting not 
only the moral interests and health, but also the physical. 
Whoever disregards this law brings upon himself most assuredly 
injurious consequences as respects the present life, and 
a degradation of mind and character which will have more 
or less influence upon his future welfare. 

What lesson can the New Creature in Christ learn from 
this commandment to the old creature? It emphasizes to 
him the value and importance of the new mind, the new 
nature, which in him has already devoted to death the 
natural man with his affections and desires. It emphasizes 
to him the declarations of the Lord's Word that, "If ye live 
after the flesh ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do 
mortify [kill, destroy] the deeds of the body, ye shall live" 
(Rom. 8:13)— ye shall correspondingly become strong as 
New Creatures and be acceptable of the Lord to the eternal 
life promised to them that love him. 

The New Creatures are pure in heart, and to them 
everything akin to adultery, adulteration of any kind, must 
be recognized as contrary to the new nature— its foes. It 
recognizes the truth of the Apostle's words, that the flesh 
and the new mind are contrary the one to the other, and 
are at warfare, and that the victory of the new nature means 
the putting to death of all such fleshly desires as would 
lead in the direction of adultery. The general law of love 
which the Lord has given to the New Creation is in harmony 
with the spirit of this command. He who loves his neighbor 
as himself would not wish to destroy that neighbor's home 
and its sacredness, even as he would not wish his neighbor 
to destroy his home and its sacredness. Do unto others as 
you would that they should do to you— the Golden Rule of 
the New Creature in Christ— would effectively bar him from 
any disposition or desire in the direction of this prohibition. 
He would not need this command, because the law of love 
under which he is placed in the school of Christ is still more 
searching, still more effective. 

Our Lord exemplified this higher teaching when he 
said, "He that looketh upon a woman to lust after her hath 
committed adultery already with her in his heart." (Matt. 5:28.) 
In other words, the spirit of God's law is that to 
desire to do wrong and to be merely hindered by circumstances 
and conditions, is in God's sight as serious, as criminal, 
as to have really done that wrong. 

"THOU SHALT NOT STEAL" 

A proper recognition of the rights of others, the property 
of others, is here inculcated. There are no limitations 
here such as a natural man, worldly wise, would be inclined 
to recognize. It does not say, Do not steal if there is the 
slightest risk of your being caught, exposed, punished. It 
does not say, Do not steal a small amount, because it would 
not be worth while, and the risk of being caught would be 
too great— steal only, if you can do so, in a semi-legal manner, 



which could not easily be detected or which, if detected, 
would be shielded by some appearance of legality. It 
plainly and simply meant that each Jew should recognize 
the rights of every other Jew, his property, his interests, and 
not misappropriate them. This command, it will be seen, 
covers every form of theft, both public and private, for the 
most serious of all thefts we may see are the public ones, by 
which under pretense of legality and with the form thereof 
public properties are appropriated, or, in the language of 
the law, "seized" without giving a reasonable equivalent. 

This command relates to justice in general, for the parent 
may steal from his child by failing to recognize the 
rights of the child, and his own obligations as a parent. For 
instance, it is a just obligation that attaches to parentage to 
give, if possible, the offspring a reasonable equipment of 
common education at least, as a preparation for the duties 
of life; and the parent who without necessity deprives his 
children of this is stealing from them, depriving them of 
those things which belong to them of right, of common 
decency, of justice. Children also should recognize an obligation 
toward their parents and toward each other; mine 

R4020 : page 202 

and thine should be recognized in every home as the first 
basis of order, the foundation of all estimation of justice. 
We know of nothing so productive of wranglings and disputings 
in families as the ignoring of one another's rights- 
taking advantage of one another— in other words, stealing 
from each other, perhaps only trifles. The ignoring of conscience 
and justice in trifling matters leads to a general 
searing of conscience, and ultimately to a disregard of the 
rights of others and a selfish appropriation to one's own 
use of any and everything possible where the risk and the 
penalty are not too great. 

As for the New Creature: his law of love, the very 
essence of his mind and heart, is opposed to stealing; love 
rather prompts to giving, to doing: the New Creature delights 
to do good and to communicate, to give, in all good 
things. Not only does he delight to give the Truth to 
others, but in proportion as the Spirit of the Lord fills and 
permeates his heart and his life, he would have pleasure in 
the giving of earthly good things to all in need. Generosity 
is an element of the new heart, the new mind, the new disposition, 
begotten of the spirit of love. Nevertheless, trained 
in the irregularities which generally prevail, practised in 
the little injustices of home and business, it may take the 
New Creature some time to discover that these are out of 
accord with love. He will, however, in proportion as the 
holy Spirit abounds in his heart, consider his words, his 
deeds, yea, his thoughts, to see that justice, the very foundation 
of God's throne, is the foundation of all of his conduct 
in life toward others— that he never gives less than justice 
to anyone. 

Next he will consider how love will even do more than 
justice would demand on suitable occasions, where it would 



not be injurious; and so far as the treatment of himself by 
others is concerned he should be so full of sympathy for 
the world in general in its fallen condition that he would 
neither demand nor expect full justice to be done to him. 
His knowledge of the fallen condition of the race would 
enable him to sympathize with those with whom he had to 
do. He might find it even necessary to spur himself on this 
score lest his love and generosity should do injury, especially 
in his own family, where he holds a responsibility. Some of 
the Lord's people as heads of families need to learn to kindly, 
gently, yet firmly, insist upon justice between the various 
members of their families, even though they may not insist 
on having justice done to themselves in every particular. 

R4021 : page 202 

"Who steals my purse steals trash; 
But he who filches from me my good name 
Robs me of that which not enriches him, 
Yet leaves me poor indeed." 

The New Creature, searching deeply for the spirit of 
love in all the affairs of life, soon learns that one of the 
commonest forms of theft is referred to in the above lines of 
Shakespeare. Common theft may indeed be guarded against, 
but the person who either of malice or of recklessness steals 
his neighbor's good name by starting slander is far more to 
be dreaded, and despised as well. We can see a reason why 
selfishness would permit the appropriation of another's temporal 
goods, even though we cannot justify such a course; 
but who could excuse or justify, either in himself or in 
another, the theft of a good name? This violation of the 
eighth commandment is, alas, so general that almost none is 
exempt from it. 

Sometimes the character of another is traduced for the 
purpose of implying a higher sense of honor or truth or 
righteousness on the part of the traducer; but he who rightly 
judges of the matter will draw an opposite inference, and 
feel a righteous indignation that the one who thus robs 
another of his name should expect the latter to sympathize 
with the act and to be a receiver of the stolen goods. By 
far the greater number, however, traduce their fellows 
thoughtlessly, because they have never trained themselves 
to a proper standard— the Golden Rule. Their tongues are 
loose, they lack secretiveness, and above all they lack love. 
How would love affect such a matter? We reply that love 
affects every matter of life, great or small. The number of 
people who would traduce themselves is fortunately exceedingly 
small, and if they loved their neighbors as themselves 
they would be equally careful in respect to the honor of the 
neighbor's name, equally careful not to cast a reproach by 
statement or insinuation or glance or shrug of the shoulders. 

The New Creatures in Christ must have this spirit of 
love, Spirit of Christ, spirit of the truth. Alas, that it requires 
some of them so long to learn how to properly extend 
this love in all the affairs of life, toward the brethren, toward 



their own kin, toward the world and toward their enemies. 

"If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none 

of his," should ever ring in our ears, and we should remember 

that we are in the school of Christ to learn of him, to 

become copies of God's dear Son; and that in no other particulars 

could we so discredit him and his Word than by 

evil speaking, slandering and slander-mongering. Let us 

awake to righteousness and sin not, for many seem not to 

have a knowledge of this truth. After preaching a discourse 

on this very topic, the writer shook hands with a member of 

the congregation passing out, who declared a great appreciation 

of the discourse and a realization of its importance, 

yet while still shaking hands and evidently quite unconscious 

of the fact, unkind reflections were made against a 

fellow-member of the Body of Christ. 

THE NINTH COMMANDMENT 

"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor." 
This would not only apply to a case in court— perjury 
—but it would be equally applicable in all the little 
affairs of life. Having this in mind none would dare tell an 
untruth against his neighbor, against his goods, his business, 
his anything, however much the untruth might assist in the 
making of a bargain. Justice stands in defense of the neighbor, 
and whoever violates justice, violates the holy law of 
God. The New Creature, possessed by the Spirit of the 
Lord, would certainly not wish to bear false witness against 
his neighbor, yet with many the flesh is weak, and the temptation 
is strong to favor personal interest in violation of the 
truth— righteousness. The New Creature might be overtaken 
by such a fault, but could never assent to it, never agree to 
it. So surely as he is a New Creature and has the new mind 
of Christ, the spirit of love, he would be obliged to hate and 
abominate such a weakness and to make good any injustice 

R4021 : page 203 

done, to fortify his mind against a repetition of the offense. 
On the contrary, the disposition of the New Creature must be 
that of love to his neighbor, which would prefer to tell no 
evil about him, however true it might be— which would prefer 
to shield him, to guard his interests, and to lovingly 
think no evil or as little evil as possible respecting any conduct 
of his that might seem to us irregular. Love suffereth 
long and is kind; it imagines no evil, but rather imagines 
good. 

THE TENTH COMMANDMENT 

Covetousness is not the desire for more blessings for 
ourselves, but an enviousness of the possessions of others, 
and a desire to appropriate them for ourselves. It is akin 
to envy but worse, because it goes further. Someone has 
said, "Envy makes a weakling; covetousness a fiend." 
Standing as it does as the last of a series of commandments, 



this one, as it were, casts a reflection upon all which precede 
it — it is the climax of all the commandments respecting 
our relationship to our fellowman; it takes hold of the 
thoughts, whereas the others take hold upon the words and 
deeds. Of it Canon Farrar has said:— 

"This is a unique commandment. Search all the laws 
of the world and you will not find one which resembles it. 
The sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth commandments you will 
find in all codes, though only as prohibitions of crimes 
amenable to judicial punishment. The tenth commandment 
is the complement of all the rest. It shows that God requires 
of us not only outward virtue but inward holiness; 
that he demands in us the sacrifice of the will, from which 
wicked actions spring; that sinful imaginings are a crime 
against him, as well as wicked acts." 

The New Creature, guided by the new mind, with the 
spirit of love toward his neighbor, cannot covet anything 
belonging to another. He might desire to have good things 
of his own, but he would rather give to his neighbor than 
take from him. It is even permitted of the New Creature to 
covet— the things which he desires— "Covet earnestly the 
best gifts." (1 Cor. 12:31.) The organ or mental quality 
which leads worldly minds to covet the things of others is 
differently directed in the New Creation, and guides them to 
seek for things on the higher plane, the spiritual, the things 
which God hath in reservation for them that love him. And 
these, as the Apostle remarks, must be sought lawfully— in 
harmony with the law of love which God has given us. Whoever 
seeks for glory, honor and immortality, the great price 
of our high calling, seeks a good thing and may rejoice respecting 
it and in the desire to attain it; but he must ever 
keep in mind that it can be attained only at the cost of the 
sacrifice of earthly interests— going to the Master without 
the camp, bearing his reproach. Let us to whom the Lord 
has given the royal law of love remember well that it is 
much more searching, much more strict, than the law of the 
ten commandments given to the Jew, because ours relates to 
us according to the mind, the heart, as New Creatures, and 
not merely to the flesh and its appetites and desires. 



"YOUR FATHER KNOWETH WHAT THINGS YE HAVE NEED OF" 
MATTHEW 6:8 

Our Father knows what things we need, 
Each step along the way; 

His eye of love doth never sleep- 
He watches night and day. 

He knows sometimes, like ripening grain, 

We need the sunshine bright; 
Again, he sends the peace that comes 

With shadows of the night. 



Sometimes our pride would fain unfurl 

Ambition's flaunting sail,— 
Ah! then he knows we need to walk 

Humiliation's vale. 

Sometimes he takes our eager hands 
And folds them on our breast, 

He gently lays our work aside- 
He knows we need to rest. 

Sometimes we need companionship, 
Sometimes "the wilderness"; 

How sweet to feel he'll know and give 
The state that most will bless. 

Then let us leave it all with him, 
Assured that, come what may, 

Our Father knows just what we need, 
Upon our pilgrim way. — G. W. 



R4022 : page 203 

"KEEP YOURSELVES FROM IDOLS" 

-EXODUS 32:1-8,30-35. -JULY 28.- 

A STRANGE picture of inconsistency is presented in 

today's lesson. The Israelites— who, after witnessing 

many manifestations of divine favor and 

power on their behalf, after reaching Sinai and entering 

into a covenant with the Lord, in which their obligations 

were represented briefly in the ten commandments— are in 

this lesson shown as idolaters, violating the second commandment 

and the spirit of the first. Moses, after declaring 

God's commandments to the people, ascended Mount Sinai 

in their sight into the presence of God, to receive the commandments 

written on tables of stone. Day after day 

passed and he did not return. The forty days absence in 

Mount Sinai must have appeared a long time to the people, 

who were waiting and longing for entrance upon the promised 

Canaan possessions. Yet how strange that they should 

forget the terrible sights and sounds which preceded his going, 

when the mountain shook and out of the clouds and 

darkness and midst flaming fire and the voice of a trumpet, 

God manifested himself to them and only Moses was able to 

approach, with Joshua, his servant. How strange that these 

things should all be forgotten within forty days! What an 

evidence we have here of the instability of human sentiment! 

Yet we must remember that these Israelites were 

born in bondage. 

In the absence of Moses they came to Aaron, his brother, 
a very different man, not a leader in the same sense of 
the word, nor so courageous, nor so governed by principles. 
The people gathered to him, saying in effect, "Bestir yourself; 



R4022 : page 204 

we should be going on our way to the land of promise. We 
know not what has become of Moses who has been our 
leader; he may have deserted us here. We want God to be 
our leader, but we want something that will represent him, 
something that we can see. Moses did very well while he 
was with us, but he has gone and might go again. Make 
us an image of God, that we may always have God to be 
our leader, something that will help us as we seek to worship 
him with whom we have just made a covenant, who has 
promised to lead us into the land of Canaan." The people 
were not irreligious; indeed, exceptionally few of the human 
family are irreligious. In man's very constitution divine 
worship is provided for: the very topmost organs of the 
brain represent this religious sentiment and dispose him to 
worship somebody or something. 

This, which was true of the Israelites, is true of mankind 
everywhere from then until now. Hence the necessity 
for instruction, that all may recognize the proper things 
to be reverenced, to be worshiped, to be most highly appreciated. 
The Israelites were learning this lesson, and with us as 
with them there is necessity often that we should not only 
have the plain statement of a truth, but that its weight and 
conviction should be borne in upon us by some particular lessons. 
The commandment had said that they should make 
no likeness nor graven image to represent God, and what 
they did was only indirectly a breach of this, for the golden 
calf which Aaron made for them was not graven, not carved, 
but cast in a mould, and it did not represent God, but probably 
—like the images they had seen in Egypt— was a nondescript 
thing which merely represented divine characteristics 
—a calf's body with a human head and with wings, symbolical 
of strength, of intelligence, omniscience. So many 
Christians, similarly without a wish to infract a divine law, 
are disposed to take too great liberties and to introduce to 
too large a degree their own conceptions in divine worship 
—without sufficient care to hold to the exact instructions 
of the divine message. This is always a mistake, by whomsoever 
committed. 

The only wise, proper course for any is to take heed 
particularly to the Word of the Lord, and to allow themselves 
little if any liberty beyond the very letter of that Word. 
Thus today we see in the religious services of various denominations 
how, little by little, the simplicity of the apostolic 
pattern for the Church and its worship has been departed 
from. Some have taken little liberties, some have 
taken great liberties, with the result that some have departed 
a little and others have departed a great deal from the 
divine standard, and always to their injury. The lesson to 
Spiritual Israelites here should be, "See that thou make all 
things after the pattern that I showed thee in the holy 
mount." If we need divine instruction at all on the subject 
we need to follow those instructions carefully, explicitly. 
Let us remember that we cannot improve upon them, that 



any alteration means injury to us. 

THE DANGERS OF EXPEDIENCY 

We cannot suppose that Aaron fully sympathized with 
the people in the matter of this making of the golden calf; 
we must suppose that he knew better and meant better, 
and that it was a mere expedient on his part to hold in 
check the rebellion of the people whose discontent was manifest 
in this demand. We must suppose that, in apparently 
acquiescing in the demand, Aaron was seeking to gain time 
until Moses would return. Possibly, too, his demand that 
the people produce their earrings and other ornaments of 
gold was originally a mere subterfuge; that he hoped by 
making this demand they would draw back and decline to 
part with their ornaments, and that thus he would be able 
to say, "Well, I cannot make you what would represent a 
god except out of gold, and I have no gold for the purpose 
unless you sacrifice your jewelry." But, however good his 
intentions, the lesson for us is that his course was an improper 
one. 

Spiritual Israelites should never take this position- 
should never say, let us do evil that good may result, let us 
yield some principles for the sake of harmony and the good 
of the cause. Alas, this seems to be the difficulty with the 
leaders of God's people all through the ages. The fear of 
man, that bringeth a snare, has interfered with the fear of 
God, which is the beginning of wisdom. All Spiritual Israelites 
should learn, should fix it in their hearts, that while 
moderation and a disposition to be obliging and helpful and 
considerate of the wishes of others are prominent elements 
of Christian grace and to be cultivated, nevertheless the 
principles of the divine law are never to be infracted, nor 
even compromised for the sake of blessing others. We are to 
remember that when great emergencies arise God is superior 
to every one of them, and they can never be understood as 
his voice commanding us to violate the principles of righteousness 
which he has set before us. We are to do our 
duty in harmony with his law as kindly, as gently, as wisely 
as possible, and leave all the results to him— the Almighty. 
Whatever others may do, however others may think or compromise, 
let us take the Apostle's standpoint and say, "We 
can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth." (2 Cor. 13:8.) 
Our consciences will not permit us to compromise 
where principles are involved, though we should gladly be 
the readiest of all to compromise where principle is not 
involved. 

THE COST OF WRONG-DOING 

People usually are attracted to wrong-doing by the 
thought that thus they escape difficulties or sufferings, or 
thus they gain advantages and blessings. But this is only 
a theory; as a matter of fact it is the reverse, every misdeed 
is costly. The Israelites stripped themselves of their jewels 
to carry out their misguided religious sentiments. And how 



often we see this amongst Spiritual Israelites! How many, 
in their worshiping of a sect or denomination, will strip 
themselves of some of their most valuable possessions! 
How many sacrifice to these idols what God has not directed! 
idols which are set up contrary to the instructions of his 
Word— devoting to them time, influence, money— time which 
should be devoted to a pure worship of God, based upon a 
study and better understanding of his Word; influence 
which should be exerted in a very opposite direction, to a 
maintenance of the liberty wherewith Christ has made us 
free, and to a fellowship with those who are seeking to stand 
fast in that liberty; money which should be spent in building 
up the most holy faith once delivered to the saints, and 

R4022 : page 205 

in putting down the strongholds of error, the golden calf of 
ignorance and superstition! 

And undoubtedly many ministers and many of the 
more intelligent amongst the Lord's people of all denominations 
realize that Churchianity is merely a golden calf, unworthy 
of the reverence and worship accorded to it. Undoubtedly 
many of this more intelligent class, represented in 
Aaron, reluctantly join in the various sectarian practices and 
customs which have a form of godliness and deny its power. 
They should be more courageous if they would be overcomers; 
they must learn this lesson, and come out from among 
them and be separate, and touch not the unclean thing, (2 Cor. 6:17); 
and again, "Come out of her, my people, that ye 
be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues." 
-Rev. 18:4. 

MANY IDOLS IN CHRISTENDOM 

While Churchianity is the idol which more nearly in 
our day corresponds to the golden calf, there are many more 
idols to which professed Christians are bowing the knees of 
their hearts. Chief amongst these is Mammon, the god of 
wealth, of money. O, how many forget the instructions of 
the Word, that we are to seek first the Kingdom of God and 
his righteousness, and to be content with such things as 
God's providence will grant us along these lines. How many 
are anxious to have something better in this world than 
God's providence has accorded them; how many have the 
love of money, of which the Apostle spoke in his day— the 
root of all evil, which some coveting after have stumbled 
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.— 
1 Tim. 6:10. 

R4023 : page 205 

Yes, indeed! this idol has many votaries today, more 
perhaps than ever before, and the worship of Mammon is 
being encouraged on every hand— the poor are almost despised, 
the wealthy highly esteemed. The successful worshipers 
of Mammon, who receive his marks of approval in 



prosperity, are everywhere welcomed in society and Churchianity. 

We are not denouncing wealth or the wealthy; we 

are reprehending the love, the idolatry of the wealthy, that 

it is set up as the standard of human ambition— nay, almost 

as the standard of Christian ambition; whereas, on the contrary, 

God has declared that not many great, not many wise, 

not many learned, not many noble, not many rich, will inherit 

the Kingdom; hence not many of the wealthy are identified 

with the true Israel of God. 

There are other idols, too, of name and fame and pride, 
that call for their toll from their worshipers. Each one of 
these idols calls for its devotees to break off their golden 
earrings, their advantages, their riches of time and influence, 
etc., for their service. Does it not behoove every Israelite 
indeed to make an inspection of his own heart to see to 
what extent there are any idols there, and to cast them out, 
that his worship may be of sincerity for the Lord alone? 
This idol-breaking may properly include the idolatry of 
persons, whether it be of Luther or Calvin or Knox in the 
past or of earthly leaders in the present time. Saint John 
the revelator is represented as falling down to worship before 
the angel who showed him certain things in respect to 
the divine plan, and the angel is caused to reprove him for 
it, saying, "See thou do it not: I am of thy brethren... 
Worship God." 

So every proper leader, in whatever degree of influence, 
should see to it that worship is not tendered to him without 
a rebuke. However well-intentioned the homage may be, it 
must be reproved, because there is but one proper object of 
adoration for the Lord's people— God himself; "Worship 
God." Fellow-creatures may be honored, respected, esteemed, 
as the Scriptures direct, "Honor to whom honor is 
due, tribute to whom tribute is due." But God is to be recognized 
as the source of all our blessings, joys, advantages, 
comfort. If God has been pleased to make use of any of 
his children for the blessing of others, it would not be improper 
for us to rejoice in the Lord's providence and to 
acknowledge the same; but in every case the Lord must be 
recognized as the Giver of every good and perfect gift. Had 
he not given the aid through one channel or servant he 
could and would have given it through another. Hence 
to him belongs the praise of the glorious plan of salvation, 
and of our share therein and of our knowledge of it. 

"HE BUILT AN ALTAR BEFORE IT" 

Evils are progressive: one wrong leads to another. 
Thus, after the golden calf had been made the next thing in 
order was to make a golden altar before it to offer sacrifice 
to it. So it is in respect to the idols of Spiritual Israel. 
An altar always implies a sacrifice, and it is but the natural 
thing that we should sacrifice to whatever we set up in our 
hearts as our idol. As we have already pointed out, some 
hearts have many idols, others a few, and it is not difficult 
to determine which idols a man worships. The worship 
will be indicated by the sacrifice. Tell us the things to 



which a man or a woman sacrifices his or her best 
thoughts, best time, chief influence, and we can tell you 
readily the idol which he reverences most and before 
which he has the largest altar and sacrifices most. 

Each should be most interested in examining this question 
from the standpoint of his own heart; each should say 
to himself, "To whom do I render the sacrifice of my heart? 
Where are my chief affections? To whom or to what do I 
render sacrifices of the most precious things I possess?" 
The laws of nature require that a certain proportion of our 
time be spent in sleep; with many a considerable proportion 
is necessary for earthly toil, for the procurement of the things 
needful and the things honest and necessary for the present 
life. A certain proportion is also necessary for our personal 
convenience, partaking of food and care for our bodies. It 
would be easy to use the entire twenty-four hours in this 
way, for the tendency of our day is to greater and greater 
extravagance in every direction and to consider the luxuries 
of the past as the necessities of the present. Hence every 
hour of the twenty-four taken from the affairs of this life 
might be considered as in some sense of the word 
sacrificed. 

Some divide their sacrifices, putting part upon the altars 
of their various idols; but the true Christian, enlightened by 
the Word of the Lord, must abandon all of these idols, and 
must realize that he has very little at most to present as a 
living sacrifice to the Lord. If he can save or redeem one 
hour a day or more, this should be recognized as a part of 
his reasonable service to the Lord and should be conscientiously 
devoted day by day if he would attain the divine 

R4023 : page 206 

favor and blessing for the life that now is and for that 

which is to come. As the steward of his gifts to the Lord 

he may use some of his time and influence in his own spiritual 

development along the lines of the divine Word. Another 

portion he may devote to the assistance of the brethren, 

building them up in the most holy faith, and thus 

strengthen incidentally his own faith. Other portions of this 

sacrificed time and means he may use in ministering to the 

sick or to assisting others along temporal lines, doing good 

to all men as he has opportunity, especially to the household 

of faith. But his sacrifices must not be made to persons 

nor things nor churchly systems, but to God, and be appropriately 

used according to his best ability to understand 

the divine will through the teachings of the divine Word. 

THE BREAKING OF THE LAW 

At the end of the forty days Moses came down from the 
mountain bearing the table of the Law written in stone, 
and, beholding the idolatry, he dashed the table of stone to 
pieces, symbolically representing the failure of Israel to 
keep the Covenant of the Law, and the impossibility of the 
fallen race ever being justified by the Law Covenant. After 



Moses had reproved the people and chastened the more wilful 
and explained to them their sin more fully, he went up 
into the mountain again to the Lord, acting as their mediator. 
In this connection we have introduced to us the grandeur 
of Moses' character, his unselfishness, his love for his 
brethren in all their weakness. The Lord proposed to 
Moses to cut off Israel as a nation, and to make of Moses 
and his family the nation that he would bless as the seed of 
Abraham. But Moses, faithful to his trust as a mediator 
who had undertaken to represent the people before God and 
to represent God before the people, declined the Lord's offer, 
and pleaded for the people, as mediator. 

All of this, we may be sure, was intended as a type of 
how Christ Jesus, as the better Mediator of the New Covenant, 
would be loyal to his trust and stand for and represent 
the whole human family before God faithfully, notwithstanding 
their sinful condition, alienation and disobedience. 
Moses' language is most pathetic— "And now wilt thou blot 
out their sin, and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of the book 
which thou hast written." As Moses here staked his own 
eternal existence for the benefit of the people, so the life of 
Christ was staked for the race whom he died to redeem, 
and whom he represents and will continue to represent as 
its Mediator until he shall, under the terms of the New Covenant, 
grant to Israel and to all mankind restitution and 
full opportunity to return to divine favor. The course of 
Moses was pleasing to the Lord, and as the Mediator for the 
people he was directed to lead them on and bring the faithful 
to the promised land. Nevertheless the people who 
shared in the wrong-doing received a measure of chastisement. 

The spirit of Moses was not only typical of the Spirit of 
Christ, but illustrative also of the spirit of all who will be 
members of the Body of Christ. We, too, must have this 
spirit of love and devotion, not merely to the members of 
the Body of Christ, our own Body, but a devotion to the 
mission, the work, to which in God's providence we have 
been called. "Ye know your calling, brethren." God has 
called us to be joint-heirs with his Son, to be the Bride, the 
Lamb's Wife, to be participators with him in the great work 
of mediating the New Covenant, and under its blessed provisions 
assisting and uplifting the world of mankind and 
leading them during the Millennial Age along the highway 
of holiness to absolute perfection and eternal life at its further 
end— so many as will obey. It is for us to have the 
spirit of Moses, the Spirit of Christ in respect to this matter 
—to so far as possible measure up to the glorious privileges 
and calling which are ours, and in the present time to do all 
in our power, in harmony with the Lord's providential leadings, 
for the blessing and uplifting of mankind in general, 
for their guidance in the right way, but especially to prepare 
ourselves for the glorious work of the coming age. 

Chief amongst the elements of our preparation will be 
the spirit of sympathetic love which will enable us to be 
copies of our dear Master, who was kind to the unthankful 
and full of mercy and good fruits. Let us take this higher 
plane of thought in respect to our relationship to the world. 



Our Master declared, "Ye are not of the world, even as I 

R4024 : page 206 

am not of the world." We are members of the Christ- 
members of the great Mediator, undergoing schooling and 
preparation for the great work before us of leading the people 
into the promised land of God's favor and life eternal- 
Paradise restored. If we do not learn the necessary lessons, 
if we do not become copies of God's dear Son, in sympathy, 
in love, in benevolence toward the world, we will be rejected 
from membership in the glorious Body, the Kingdom 
class, as unfit, the non-elect. Let us, then, give diligence, 
and remember that the great lesson to be learned is that of 
love— for God, for the brethren, for our neighbors, yea, for 
our enemies. If this love abound in us it shall make us 
neither barren nor unfruitful in God's sight, and so through 
Christ an abundant entrance shall be granted us into the 
everlasting Kingdom as associates with the King of kings 
and Lord of lords in his great work as the world's Mediator, 
the Mediator of the New Covenant, under which all the 
families of the earth are to be blessed. 



R4024 : page 206 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED 

Question.— Does not the foreknowledge of God seal 
our eternal destiny? 

Answer.— However distinctly we may enunciate our 
belief in God's foreknowledge of coming events the 
matter will always be beyond our human powers of 
comprehension. We could easily enough see how God, 
with all power in heaven and in earth, could predestinate 
certain events, and then cause them to come to 
pass, but our difficulty begins when we apply divine 
foreknowledge to human affairs in regard to which we 
recognize, according to the Scriptures, that man is a 
free agent, at liberty to choose his own course, at least 
concerning all moral and religious questions. 

This need have no bearing whatever upon our duty 
and responsibilities, for we know assuredly from the 
Scriptures that God is dealing with us, not from the 

R4024 : page 207 

standpoint of his foreknowledge, but from the standpoint 

of our obedience. If we are willingly obedient to 

him, then he could not have foreknown otherwise respecting 

us. The Lord is dealing with his Church of 

this Gospel Age according to certain principles set 

forth in the Scriptures, and it is for us to obey or disobey 

his instructions, according to our will— God's 

foreknowledge in no sense or degree interfering with 



our liberties. 



Question.— Is the world growing better? 

Answer.— In some respects it is growing better and 
in other respects it is growing worse. It is growing 
better in the sense that a higher moral tone prevails on 
the surface of things, because of knowledge being more 
generally diffused amongst the masses of Christendom. 
While Christian principles have not struck their 
roots deeply into the heart of civilization, they have, at 
least, given a tone to public sentiment which is very 
beneficial. The light of true Christianity, its loving 
spirit, has been exhibited to the world in the Master 
and in the "little flock," who seek to walk in his steps; 
and it has established thus a higher standard of 
thought and deed amongst men— not only of the consecrated 
class, but also of the worldly class. Their consciences 
agree to the principles enunciated, and in 
some degree benevolence has been cultivated, even 
from a worldly standpoint; and even though it be true 
to some extent that many of the benevolences performed 
in connection with the establishment of hospitals, 
libraries, asylums, etc., are for show and for advertising 
and vainglory; and even though some benevolences 
in the care of the sick and the wounded, etc., in times 
of war are probably prompted by love of gain, nevertheless 
all these things attest that there is a generally 
diffused public sentiment which appreciates such things, 
and which it is sought to please. We are glad of this, 
glad to note it, glad to acknowledge it. We regret, 
however, to note that various things indicate that this 
greater benevolence of our day is a very thin veneer, 
covering a great deal of selfishness, malice, hatred, 
envy and strife, which, under certain circumstances, 
show themselves in a very keen ferocity and general 
devilishness which it is difficult for the Christian heart 
to understand. The fact of the matter is that general 
goodness, heart-consecration to the Lord and filling 
with his spirit of love, is apparently decreasing in the 
same ratio as the surface benevolence increases, outward 
moderation and gentlemanliness being accepted 
as instead of heart-consecration and sanctification. 



Question.— Would it be proper for the consecrated 
to spend time in the study of foreign languages, music, 
art, etc., or in attending and belonging to social and 
literary clubs? 

Answer.— It is well that each of us should judge 
for himself in such matters; but well, also, that each 
should leave the judgment of others to themselves. It 
is not for us to lay down any hard and fast rules for 
other men's consciences, but we may suggest some 



lines which each conscience may apply to its own affairs, 
we believe, profitably. 

(1) The consecrated person has given up his will, 
has covenanted that he will henceforth seek to do, not 
his own will, but the Lord's will, whether that agrees 
much or little with his own natural tastes and proclivities. 
This point being decided, it follows (2) that in 
the spending of our time we would consider the Lord's 
will, judging to the best of our ability from his Word 
and our experiences in life what would be his will— 
what would be to his glory and to our own spiritual 
profit and to the spiritual profit of others, and a decision 
on this point must be the rule of our lives as consecrated 
persons, in all of our affairs. (3) With the 
majority of the Lord's people the providing of things 
needful of an earthly kind, for self or family dependents, 
requires much of consecrated time and leaves 
comparatively little for devotion to matters especially 
spiritual. (4) Every truly consecrated person, accepting 
the foregoing views, is bound to admit that the 
amount of time, talent and energy at his disposal for 
special service to the Lord, to the Truth and the brethren 
is very limited indeed. (5) Each realizing this situation 
will use his little time according to the measure 
of his zeal. If he loves foreign languages more than he 
loves the Lord's Word it bespeaks an unsatisfactory 
condition of heart. If he loves the Lord's Word and 
service better than foreign languages, but somehow 
feels that the study of languages, music and art are a 
duty more important than the study of the Lord's 
Word and the service of the brethren, it implies a confused 
condition of mind and an imperfect appreciation 
of the fact that the time is short in which to make our 
calling and election sure. (6) The zeal which we show 
in respect to the use of opportunities in the Lord's 
service and in our attempt to turn the ordinary affairs 
of life to his glory, constitutes the indication we are 
giving to the Lord regarding the amount of our zeal 
for him and his. (7) It is according to the measure of 
this zeal of our hearts for the Lord's will and the 
Lord's service, and not according to the perfection we 
shall attain in the flesh, that we shall be adjudged overcomers 
of the world or not overcomers— worthy or not 
worthy of the prize of our high calling. 



Question.— Will the retributions of the Millennial 
Age be wholly in the nature of corrections in righteousness 
and punishments for transgressions of that 
time? or will the punishments be wholly in the sense 
of or for sins of this present life? or will they take 
cognizance of both of these? 

Answer.— They will take cognizance of both, thus: 
While primarily they will be reproofs and corrections 
for transgressions committed during the Millennial 



Age, and will be reformatory in character, nevertheless 
in a secondary sense they will take cognizance of the 
wilful sins of this present life also, because every wilful 
sin of the present time makes an indelible mark in 
the character, the disposition, etc., and these indelible 
character-marks will be upon all in their awakening for 
trial in the Millennial Age. If the marks be many and 
deep it can be readily seen that the individual will be 
correspondingly at a disadvantage in the next life, and 
have corresponding difficulties and obstacles to hinder 
him, which he will be required to overcome in order to 
obtain the life that will then be offered him. 

Of course, sins committed ignorantly and unintentionally 
have also a degrading effect upon mind and 
body, but far less so than sins committed in violation of 
conscience, sins against light and knowledge. We may 
reasonably suppose, too, that it will be part of the work 
of the Royal Priesthood during the Millennial Age of 
trial to assist mankind the more over the weaknesses 
which were incurred unwillingly. 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY 