A Note to Parents
To young people, going through adolescence can be like walking a tightrope. Each step may seem uncertain​—even frightening. As a parent, you may sometimes wish you could spare your young ones this particular “walk.” You can’t, of course, but you can be their balancing pole. You are in a unique position to help your children stay on course and emerge from their adolescence as responsible adults.
Easier said than done? Certainly. It may seem like only yesterday that your son was an energetic toddler who wouldn’t keep quiet; now he’s a withdrawn teen who won’t talk to you. Not long ago your little girl wanted to go everywhere with you; now she seems mortified at the very idea of being seen in public with her parents!
Yet, you need not feel inadequate when facing these changes. You have access to a source of wisdom that can provide solid guidance for you and your child. That source of wisdom is God’s Word, the Bible.
Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work, Volume 2, is designed to provide your child with solid reasoning from the Scriptures. A look at Contents on pages 4 and 5 will give you an idea of the variety of topics covered. But this publication will do more than present the facts. Consider the following:
(1) The book is interactive. In many places your child will be prompted to write down his or her response to various questions and statements. For example, the “Peer-Pressure Planner” on pages 132 and 133 will help your child think about specific challenges he or she faces and ways to respond to them. In addition, each of this book’s nine sections concludes with a page entitled “My Journal,” in which your child can write personal thoughts and feelings on the material contained in that section.
(2) The book promotes communication. For example, pages 63 and 64 contain the box “How Can I Talk to Dad or Mom About Sex?” Also, at the end of each chapter, there is a box entitled “What Do You Think?” More than a review, this box can be used as an outline for family discussion. In addition, each chapter contains an “Action Plan!” the last segment of which asks the young person to complete this sentence: “What I would like to ask my parent(s) about this subject is . . .” This will encourage youths to look to their parents for balanced advice as they walk the tightrope of adolescence.
A word of caution: To encourage your adolescents to write in their book with candor, allow them a measure of privacy. Later they may well open up to you on the issues they have written about.
Obtain your own copy of this book, and become thoroughly familiar with it. As you read, try to recall all the drama, confusion, and anxiety that were part of your own adolescence. When appropriate, share your experiences with your son or daughter. That will encourage your young ones to confide in you. When they talk, listen! If efforts to communicate seem futile, do not give up. No matter how much they may indicate otherwise, children tend to value the advice of their parents more than that of their peers.
It is our pleasure to provide both you and your children with this Bible-based tool, and it is our prayer that it will prove to be a blessing to your family.
The Publishers

