CHAPTER 18
How Can I Make Some Money?
“I want money to buy a car.”​—Sergio.
“I like to shop.”​—Laurie-Ann.
“There are some things that are really nice, and I would love to have them; but my parents can’t afford them.”​—Mike.
YOU may have similar reasons for wanting to get your hands on some money. Or perhaps you need to make money to help support your family. Even if you don’t directly contribute to household expenses, paying for your own clothes or other personal items may relieve your parents of some economic pressure.
In any event, obtaining things for yourself or for your family requires money. Although Jesus promised that God would provide for those ‘seeking first God’s Kingdom,’ a Christian still needs to take the initiative to provide for himself. (Matthew 6:33; Acts 18:1-3; 2 Thessalonians 3:10) So, how can you make some money? And more important, how can you keep a balanced attitude toward it?
How to Find a Job
If you really need something that costs more than your parents can afford, you may be able to get a job to earn enough money to buy it yourself. Talk to your parents about the idea. They may be impressed by your initiative. Assuming that they agree and that it’s legal for you to work, here are four suggestions that will help you to find employment.
Spread the word. Tell your neighbors, teachers, and relatives that you’re looking for work. If you’re shy about asking them directly, you might simply ask them what work they did when they were your age. The more people who know that you’re looking for work, the more leads and referrals you’ll likely get.
Pursue all leads. Respond to newspaper or Internet want ads and information boards in stores, your school, and other public areas. “That’s how I got my job,” says a youth named Dave. “I looked in the paper, faxed them a résumé, and called them up.” If this doesn’t work, perhaps you can convince an employer that he or she needs a service that you can perform.
Write and distribute a résumé. On a piece of paper, write down how you can be contacted and list your skills and work experience. You don’t think you have anything to list? Think again. Have you ever taken care of a younger sibling when your parents were away, or have you babysat for others? This shows that you’re responsible. Have you helped your dad fix the car? Perhaps this shows that you have mechanical aptitude. Do you know how to type or use a computer? Or did you get good marks in school for some innovative project? Those are good selling points for prospective employers. Include them on your résumé. Give your résumé to potential employers, and ask friends and relatives to distribute it to anyone they know who’s looking for workers.
Work for yourself. Think about your neighborhood. Is there a need for goods or services that no one else is providing? For example, suppose you love animals. You could offer to bathe or trim your neighbors’ pets for a fee. Or maybe you play a musical instrument. Could you perhaps teach others to play? Or possibly it’s a matter of doing work that others often don’t want to do, such as washing windows or cleaning. A Christian isn’t embarrassed to work with his hands. (Ephesians 4:28) Of course, being self-employed requires that you be self-motivated, disciplined, and willing to take the initiative.
A word of caution: Don’t rush into an enterprise before studying all the costs and factors involved. (Luke 14:28-30) First, talk it over with your parents. Also talk to others who have performed similar work. Will you be required to pay taxes? Will you need to obtain a license or a permit? Check with local authorities for details.​—Romans 13:1.
Keep Your Balance
Imagine trying to ride a bicycle while attempting to carry a number of items, such as a school bag, a ball, and maybe some bags of groceries. The more items you try to carry, the harder it is for you to keep your balance! The same would be true if you were to take on a job that is more than you can handle. Use up too much of your time, energy, and alertness on after-school work, and your health and school grades may suffer. More important, a strenuous work schedule may make it difficult for you to follow the Christian routine of meetings, Bible study, and participation in the Christian ministry. “I have missed meetings because I was tired after a day of school and work,” admits a youth named Michèle.
Don’t let your view of money become unbalanced in that way! Jesus said that real happiness comes to those who are “conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matthew 5:3) He also stated: “Even when a person has an abundance his life does not result from the things he possesses.” (Luke 12:15) A Christian youth named Maureen has taken that counsel to heart. “I do not want to get entangled in purely materialistic goals,” she says. “I just know that my spirituality will be the price I pay if I get caught up in simply making money.”
True, in some parts of the world, youths have no choice but to work long hours to help their families survive. If, however, you’re not in that situation, why become unbalanced in this regard? According to most experts, working more than 20 hours a week while attending school is excessive and counterproductive. Some suggest devoting no more than eight to ten hours a week to work. Wise King Solomon stated: “Better is a handful of rest than a double handful of hard work and striving after the wind.”​—Ecclesiastes 4:6.
Remember, “the deceptive power of riches” can choke your interest in spiritual things. (Mark 4:19) So if you do take an after-school job to earn some money, organize your schedule to give spiritual activities priority. Pray to Jehovah God about the matter. He can strengthen you to stand up to the pressures of the situation and can help you to maintain your spiritual balance.
READ MORE ABOUT THIS TOPIC IN VOLUME 1, CHAPTER 21
IN OUR NEXT CHAPTERDo you control your money or does it control you? Find out how you can stay in the driver’s seat.
KEY SCRIPTURE
“No matter how much a lazy person may want something, he will never get it. A hard worker will get everything he wants.”​—Proverbs 13:4, Today’s English Version.
TIP
Send your résumé to companies without waiting for them to advertise a job opening.
DID YOU KNOW . . . ?
In some places, up to 85 percent of available jobs aren’t advertised.
ACTION PLAN!
I will increase my chances of finding a job by ․․․․․
I will limit the amount of time I work to ․․․․․ hours each week.
What I would like to ask my parent(s) about this subject is ․․․․․
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
● Why do you need to make some money?
● What challenges will you face if you find a job?
● How can you maintain a balanced view of money?
[Blurb on page 153]
“If your happiness is always based on owning things, you’ll never be happy. There will always be something new that you want. You need to learn to be happy with what you have.”​—Jonathan
[Box on page 155]
Respect Money​—Don’t Love It
  In the hands of a skilled chef, a sharp knife is a useful tool. But the same knife in the hands of someone inexperienced or inattentive can cause serious harm. Money is like a sharp knife. If you handle it skillfully, it’s a useful tool. But if you’re not careful, you can get hurt! For example, the apostle Paul warned against developing a love of money. In their pursuit of wealth, some sacrifice friendships, family relationships, and even their relationship with God. As a result, they ‘stab themselves all over with many pains.’ (1 Timothy 6:9, 10) The lesson? Learn to use money skillfully. Respect it, but don’t love it!
[Picture on page 153]
Taking on too many responsibilities can make it difficult for you to maintain your balance

