CHAPTER 32
How Can I Have a Good Time?
Mark the following statements true or false.
According to the Bible . . .
It’s always wrong to take part in sports.
□ True □ False
All movies and TV shows are a bad influence.
□ True □ False
Any sort of dancing is condemned.
□ True □ False
YOU’VE worked hard all week. School is over. Your chores are completed. And you still have some energy to burn, one of the blessings of being young. (Proverbs 20:29) Now all you want to do is have some fun.
Your peers may feel that the Bible is anti-fun, that it restricts you from enjoying yourself. But is that true? Let’s consider the true-or-false statements listed on the preceding page and see what the Bible really says about having a good time.
● It’s always wrong to take part in sports.
False. The Bible says that “bodily training is beneficial.” (1 Timothy 4:8) The original Greek expression for “training” that Paul used here means ‘training as a gymnast’ and carries the idea of exercise. Today there are numerous sports​—such as skating, cycling, jogging, tennis, baseball, soccer, and volleyball, to name just a few—​that can be both good exercise and fun.
Does this mean that there’s no need for caution? Well, consider the context of the verse quoted above. When writing to the young man Timothy, the apostle Paul said: “Bodily training is beneficial for a little; but godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and that which is to come.” Paul’s words remind us that our first priority should always be to please God. You can ensure that godly devotion is your top priority​—even when choosing a sport—​by asking yourself the following three questions:
 1. What degree of risk is involved in the sport? Don’t simply rely on hearsay or on the enthusiastic reports of other youths. Get the facts. For example, find out the following: Just what is the accident rate for this particular sport? What safety precautions are taken? What training and equipment are needed to play this sport safely? While there are incidental risks in virtually any activity, is the primary objective of this sport to defy injury or death?
Life is a gift from God, and God’s Law given to the Israelites imposed serious penalties if a life was taken accidentally. (Exodus 21:29; Numbers 35:22-25) God’s people were thereby encouraged to be safety conscious. (Deuteronomy 22:8) Christians today likewise have an obligation to show respect for life.
 2. Will the sport provide good association? If you have some athletic ability, your peers and teachers might exert pressure on you to join a school team. You may feel a strong urge to accept the offer. A Christian youth named Mark says, “I feel it’s just not fair that my parents won’t let me join the school team.” But instead of attempting to coax your parents into accepting your viewpoint, consider the following facts: Practice sessions and games are usually scheduled outside of normal school hours. If you do well, you’ll be encouraged to devote more time to the sport. If you don’t do so well, you’ll feel pressure to spend more time in practice. In addition, teammates often form close bonds of friendship as they revel in the highs of victory and share the despair of defeat.
Now ask yourself: ‘Will spending my personal time in an activity that could result in close bonds of friendship with youths who don’t share my spiritual standards be a good influence on me?’ (1 Corinthians 15:33) ‘What price am I willing to pay just to play on a particular team?’
 3. How much time and money will the sport consume? The Bible instructs us to “make sure of the more important things.” (Philippians 1:10) To help you apply this advice, ask yourself: ‘Will playing this sport eat into time that I’ve allocated for schoolwork or spiritual activities? What is the total monetary cost of the sport? Does my budget allow for this expense?’ Answering these questions will help you to keep your priorities in order.
● All movies and TV shows are a bad influence.
False. The Bible commands Christians to “hold fast to what is fine” and to “abstain from every form of wickedness.” (1 Thessalonians 5:21, 22) Not all movies and TV shows conflict with that standard.a
Certainly, going to a movie can be a fun way to spend time with friends. A South African girl named Leigh says, “If I’m keen on seeing a certain movie, I phone one of my friends, and we spread the word to our other friends.” Usually this group attends an early showing of the movie. Afterward, their parents pick them up, and together all of them eat out.
Movies and TV may be modern inventions, but they’re really just new expressions of an ancient tradition​—that of storytelling. Jesus was a master at reaching peoples’ hearts by means of stories. For example, his parable about the neighborly Samaritan stirs feelings of empathy and teaches profound moral lessons.​—Luke 10:29-37.
Today moviemakers also teach lessons that mold people’s moral perceptions. They try to make viewers identify with the characters portrayed​—even when the hero is a criminal or a sadistic, power-hungry person. If you aren’t careful, you may find yourself rooting for a criminal, mentally justifying his immoral or cruel acts! How can you avoid this trap?
When choosing a movie or a TV show, ask yourself: ‘Will this program encourage me to be tenderly compassionate?’ (Ephesians 4:32) ‘Or will it coax me into rejoicing over another’s disaster?’ (Proverbs 17:5) ‘Will it make it difficult for me to “hate what is bad”?’ (Psalm 97:10) ‘Will I, in effect, be aligning myself with “evildoers”?’​—Psalm 26:4, 5.
Movie reviews and advertisements can give you some idea of the content of a movie. But don’t naively put “faith in every word.” (Proverbs 14:15) Why not? A movie review merely reflects another person’s opinion. And an advertisement may deliberately conceal the fact that a movie has offensive scenes. A teenager named Connie says, “I’ve found that knowing who the principal actors are in the movie often gives you some idea of what the movie is likely to portray.”
Christian peers who share your Bible-based values may know if a certain film is acceptable. But remember, people tend to tell you what they really enjoyed about a movie. Why not ask what’s bad about it? Be specific. For example, inquire as to whether there are scenes of violence, sex, or demon possession. Your parents are also a good source of advice. Says young Vanessa: “I consult my parents. If they think it’s all right for me to watch, I’ll go see it.”
Don’t take the matter of choosing a movie or a TV program lightly. Why? Because the entertainment you select opens a window to your heart, revealing what values you treasure. (Luke 6:45) Your choices tell much about the kind of association you delight in, the type of language you condone, the sexual morals you tolerate. So be selective!
● Any sort of dancing is condemned.
False. When the Israelites crossed the Red Sea and escaped the Egyptian army, Miriam led the women in a celebratory dance. (Exodus 15:20) Also, in Jesus’ parable of the prodigal son, the rejoicing that occurred over the son’s return included “a music concert and dancing.”​—Luke 15:25.
The same is true today. In many cultures dancing is enjoyed by both young and old when family and friends gather together. However, there’s a need for caution. While the Bible doesn’t condemn modest social gatherings, it does warn against “revelries,” or “wild parties.” (Galatians 5:19-21; Byington) The prophet Isaiah wrote: “Woe to those who are getting up early in the morning that they may seek just intoxicating liquor, who are lingering till late in the evening darkness so that wine itself inflames them! And there must prove to be harp and stringed instrument, tambourine and flute, and wine at their feasts; but the activity of Jehovah they do not look at.”​—Isaiah 5:11, 12.
Those gatherings featured the use of “intoxicating liquor” and wild music. They started early and lasted well into the evening. Note, too, the attitudes of the revelers​—they behaved as if God did not exist! Little wonder, then, that God condemned such gatherings.
If you’re invited to attend a party where there will be dancing, ask yourself such questions as: ‘Who will be going? What kind of reputation do they have? Who is taking responsibility for the event? What supervision will there be? Do my parents approve of my attending the party? What type of dancing will be featured?’ Many dance styles are designed solely to arouse sexual desire. Would engaging in or just watching such dancing help you to “flee from fornication”?​—1 Corinthians 6:18.
What if you’re invited to go dancing at a nightclub? Consider the comments of a youth named Shawn who before becoming a Christian would often hang out at dance clubs. He recalls: “The music is usually debasing, the dancing is usually highly immoral, and a great majority of the people who go there have a motive.” That motive, says Shawn, is to leave the club with someone to have sex. After studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, Shawn had a change of heart. His opinion? “Those clubs are not the place for Christians.”
Why Stay Alert?
When do you think a soldier is more vulnerable to an attack​—when he’s on the battlefield or when he’s relaxing with his companions? Really, it’s when he’s relaxing that his defenses are down and he’s most vulnerable. Similarly, when you’re at school or at work, your spiritual defenses are up. You’re alert to possible danger. It’s later when you relax with your friends that you’re most vulnerable to an attack on your moral standards.
Some of your peers may ridicule you for sticking to the Bible’s high moral standards when it comes to having a good time. Pressure may even come from youths who have been raised by Christian parents. But such youths have had their consciences seared. (1 Timothy 4:2) They may accuse you of being unbalanced or self-righteous. Rather than give in to peer pressure, however, “hold a good conscience.”​—1 Peter 3:16.
What really counts isn’t what your peers think of you but what Jehovah thinks of you! And if your friends hassle you for following your conscience, it’s time to find some new friends. (Proverbs 13:20) Remember, you are the ultimate guardian of your moral standards​—even when you’re having a good time.​—Proverbs 4:23.
READ MORE ABOUT THIS TOPIC IN VOLUME 1, CHAPTER 37
IN OUR NEXT CHAPTERPornography is more prevalent and easier to access than ever. How can you avoid this snare?
[Footnote]
For more information, see Volume 1, chapter 36.
KEY SCRIPTURE
“Rejoice, young man, in your youth, . . . and walk in the ways of your heart and in the things seen by your eyes. But know that on account of all these the true God will bring you into judgment.”​—Ecclesiastes 11:9.
TIP
Ask your parents if they would be willing to schedule regular times each month when you can turn off the TV and have fun together as a family.
DID YOU KNOW . . . ?
Dancing and music were an important part of true worship for the Israelites.​—Psalm 150:4.
ACTION PLAN!
If I’m invited to join an after-school sports team, I will say ․․․․․
If a movie that I’m watching with my friends is objectionable, I will ․․․․․
What I would like to ask my parent(s) about this subject is ․․․․․
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
● Why should Christians avoid high-risk sports?
● How can you determine if a movie is suitable?
● How would you define what is an acceptable style of dancing?
[Blurb on page 269]
“I love to dance, but I’ve learned the value of listening to my parents’ advice. I don’t let dancing become the big thing in my life.”​—Tina
[Picture on page 268]
A soldier is vulnerable to an attack when his guard is down​—and you are vulnerable to an attack on your morals when you’re relaxing

