PREFACE
Where Can I Find the Best Advice?
For Girls
You can’t help but think about the gorgeous new boy in class. ‘He doesn’t even know I exist,’ you tell yourself, ‘so, what harm is there in daydreaming?’ Besides, it’s not just you. This boy is every girl’s dream. You know that because you hear the other girls talking about him all the time.
Suddenly he’s looking in your direction. He catches you off guard with his disarming smile. You smile back. He approaches.
“Hi,” he says shyly.
“Hey,” you say back.
“I’m Brett.”
“You’re new here,” you blurt out.
“My family just moved in a few weeks ago.”
You still can’t believe that Brett is actually talking to you!
“Look,” Brett continues, “I’m having a party at my house after school today. Want to come?”
Then he leans forward and winks.
“Let me warn you,” he says. “My parents aren’t home, and the liquor cabinet isn’t locked. What do you say?”
Brett is waiting for your reply. Any other girl in your school would say yes immediately!
What will you say?
For Boys
Two of your schoolmates are approaching. You feel a knot in your stomach because twice already this week they’ve tried to get you to smoke. This will be their third attempt.
The first boy speaks: “All alone again? Let me introduce you to a friend.” He underscores the word “friend” with a wink as he takes something out of his pocket and extends his hand toward you.
You see something between the boy’s thumb and forefinger that resembles a cigarette. You know exactly what it is, and the knot in your stomach gets even tighter.
“Sorry,” you say. “I’ve already told you I don’t . . .”
The second boy interrupts: “It’s that religion of yours, isn’t it? You can’t have any fun!”
“Or are you just chicken?” the first boy taunts.
“No, I’m not chicken!” you summon the courage to say.
Then the second boy places his arm around your shoulder. “Just take it,” he says softly.
The first boy moves the white object closer to your face and adds in a hushed voice: “We won’t tell anyone. No one will ever know.”
What will you do?
SIMILAR scenes are played out every day in virtually every part of the globe. The fact is, though, that some young people are better prepared than others to handle such situations. In the pressure of the moment, a boy being tempted to smoke might think: ‘I don’t want to give in, but I can’t take any more pressure. Why can’t I show my schoolmates that I can be “normal”?’ Or a girl who’s asked out on a date might say to herself: ‘He’s clean-cut. For once​—just this once—​why can’t I say yes?’
On the other hand, many youths have been trained to stand up confidently for what they believe. As a result​—strange as it may seem—​they feel less pressure to do wrong. Would you like to be that kind of youth? The good news is that you can be! How?
The Bible can help you to face the challenges of youth with confidence. It contains the best advice to be found because it’s the inspired Word of God. (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) What types of issues can the Bible help you with? Look at the list below, and put a ✔ next to the topics that particularly appeal to you.
□ Relating to the opposite sex
□ Coming to terms with my body
□ Making friends
□ Surviving school
□ Managing my money
□ Dealing with my parents
□ Controlling my feelings
□ Exploring my recreation options
□ Improving my spirituality
As you will note on pages 4 and 5, the topics listed above correspond to the nine sections of this book. Which ones did you mark? You might want to consult those sections first. Bible principles can help you in each of these areas of life. The book you’re now reading will show you how.a
This book will also provide you with opportunities to express your thoughts. For example, near the end of each chapter, you’ll find a box entitled “Action Plan!” There you will be asked to record your thoughts on how you can apply what you’ve read. Worksheets​—such as the “Peer-Pressure Planner” on pages 132 and 133—​will help you to think through the challenges you face and to create practical solutions. In addition, each section of this book concludes with a page entitled “My Journal,” which will allow you to write about how a particular aspect of the material applies to your life. You will also find at points throughout the book nine pages entitled “Role Model.” In these, various Bible characters are highlighted as being worthy of imitation.
The Bible urges you: “Acquire wisdom, acquire understanding.” (Proverbs 4:5) The words “wisdom” and “understanding” imply more than simply knowing right from wrong. You need to see the big picture. For example, knowing the consequences of a wrong course as well as the rewards for doing what is right will help you to face up to peer pressure with confidence and courage.
Be assured of this: Your problems​—overwhelming as they may seem—​are not unique. Others have faced and successfully dealt with challenges like yours. You can too! Make good use of Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work, Volume 2. It will convince you that the Bible contains the best advice to be found anywhere!
[Footnote]
Much of this book has been compiled from selected articles that have appeared in the series “Young People Ask,” which is a regular feature in Awake! magazine, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

