From Our Readers
Illness  I was touched by the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Cope With Being So Sick?” (June 22, 1997) I admire Jason, Ashley, and Carmen for dealing so well with their sickness.
R. D., France
The advice you give is truly practical, stimulating, and effective. Ashley’s story particularly encouraged me. I am a full-time minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The thought that there are people who would dearly love to enter the full-time ministry but cannot because of health has encouraged me to persevere despite the difficulties I have.
D. I., Albania
Since learning that I have Crohn’s disease, I have been admitted to the hospital over ten times and have needed two surgeries. However, for the past four years, I have served in isolated territory here in a foreign land. And though my health still isn’t perfect, it has improved tremendously. The articles were a great encouragement to me.
G. H., Ecuador
Disappearing Wildlife  I am studying zoology, and the series “Who Will Save Our Animals?” really touched me. (July 8, 1997) I hope that people reading these articles realize how greed and cruelty have affected many species.
G. H., United States
As an avid wildlife enthusiast, I was delighted to read your articles. Zoos are doing much to help endangered species. But if zoos are wildlife’s last hope, then wildlife surely is in trouble. Taking animals out of their natural environment and breeding them in concrete jungles is not the answer.
M. T., Canada
While such conservation efforts are commendable, we believe that the only long-term answer is the management of earth’s resources by God’s Kingdom. (Isaiah 11:9)—ED.
Pet Safety  I want to thank you for the article “Are Children Safe With Your Dog?” (July 8, 1997) I have been a professional dog trainer for 18 years and have always tried to stress the importance of training and personal responsibility. I was pleasantly surprised to read this informative article and happy to see that the trainer interviewed uses the same type of training we use. I hope all dog owners will read and apply the advice.
B. C., United States
I’d like to add one point: Dogs instinctively react to food. A child waving a hot dog or candy while walking past a dog can become a target. The dog doesn’t intend to be vicious, but it may lunge at the food and, in the process, bite the child’s hand. Parents are well-advised to shoulder their responsibility in this regard.
K. S., United States
We appreciate these additional observations.—ED.
Unhealthy Life-Styles  I appreciated the article “Unhealthy Life-Styles—How High the Cost?” (July 22, 1997) As a Christian youth, I face many temptations. But this article really made me see that by following Bible principles, we avoid diseases and injuries.
R. K., United States
Talking Drums  After reading the marvelous article “Do African Drums Really Talk?” (July 22, 1997), I went to my grandfather, a centenarian, to test the veracity of the story. He confirmed it in every detail, and I was impressed!
G. M. O., Nigeria

