From Our Readers
Having Fun  I am 12 years old, and I really enjoyed the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Do Other Youths Have All the Fun?” (July 22, 1996) I used to ask the same question. In my school you can sign up for parties, dances, and other activities. I have often wanted to go. But the article helped me appreciate that I am responsible before Jehovah for the choices I make. So I’ll stick with my Christian friends.
A. S., United States
I’ve had times when I experienced the feelings of [the Bible writer] Asaph, just as you discussed in the article. This article gave me the added strength I need to deal with school.
A. S., Japan
It is true that some youths do feel left out or deprived because they are not “allowed” to participate in worldly parties. But not all of the children of Jehovah’s Witnesses feel that way! Personally, I am disgusted at a lot of the things that take place at worldly parties, and my Christian friends feel the same way. We—and no doubt many others—do not feel deprived!
C. H., United States
Brewery Gulch  I am writing to tell you how much I enjoyed the article “Spiritual Flowers Grew Out of Brewery Gulch.” (July 22, 1996) It brought back many wonderful memories of the 21 months I spent there some years ago. I was away from home for the first time. Some of the families you mentioned in the article—the Smiths, Griffins, and Pughs—became like mothers, fathers, aunts, and uncles to me. They helped me mature as a Christian. Reading the article made me wish I could be back with them. I remember them all with deep love and appreciation.
P. A., United States
Cassava Leaves  Thank you for the article “Cassava Leaves—Daily Food for Millions.” (July 8, 1996) In Africa great esteem is given to cassava because it has been our chief food for centuries. In Nigeria we know little about the leaves, however, as it is the roots that provide us with our favorite meals, such as gari and foo-foo. It was interesting to know that in other parts of the world, the leaves are used not only for medicine but for appetizing meals. Thanks to Jehovah for making cassava!
J. S. E., Nigeria
Changed Priorities  I must tell you how encouraged I was by the article “Why He Changed His Priorities.” (July 22, 1996) I have served as a full-time evangelizer for over 13 years, and setting priorities is not always easy in our increasingly stressful world. Every year, staying in the full-time ministry becomes more of a challenge. To think that Jeremy gave up a rewarding career as the warden of a nature reserve in order to become a full-time minister reassured me that keeping the ministry as a priority in my own life is well worth the effort.
N. C., United States
Window on the Womb  I recently learned that I am pregnant. Because of a botched medical procedure, there was a danger that my child would have birth defects. Your article “A Window on the Womb” (August 8, 1996) helped me decide not to abort my baby. I received the magazine one week before I learned of my pregnancy.
M. C., United States
Dyslexia  Thank you so much for your article “Overcoming the Frustration of Dyslexia.” (August 8, 1996) All my life I knew something was wrong with me, but I never knew what. Recently I was diagnosed as dyslexic by an Attention Deficit Disorder specialist. Now I’m learning to use my forefingers as an aid in reading.
P. C., United States

