Psalms
How Can You Be Happy?
THE famous English jurist Blackstone noted that God’s laws of justice are so inseparably interwoven with the happiness of each individual that, without adherence to divine law, happiness cannot be attained. This is reasonable, for the dominant quality of man’s Maker is love and, therefore, all his laws are designed to promote the highest good of his intelligent creatures.
That is why true happiness in every aspect of life depends upon a wholesome fear of the Almighty God. This is emphasized in Psalm 128, where we read: “Happy is everyone fearing Jehovah, who is walking in his ways. For you will eat the toil of your own hands. Happy you will be and it will be well with you. Your wife will be like a fruit-bearing vine in the innermost parts of your house. Your sons will be like slips of olive trees all around your table. Look! That is how the able-bodied man will be blessed who fears Jehovah. Jehovah will bless you out of Zion. See also the good of Jerusalem all the days of your life, and see the sons of your sons. May there be peace upon Israel.”​—Ps 128 Vss. 1-6.
A proper regard for the Creator is manifest by a person’s walking in his ways, complying with the course he outlines, observing his commands. When people adhere to divine law, they do not squander their resources but manage their affairs wisely and do good, quality work. Hence, with God’s blessing, they enjoy the provisions for which they toil and are truly happy and secure.
The wife of a man who fears God is compared to a fruit-bearing vine. Why? A vine needs some kind of support, such as a pole. Likewise, in benefiting from the good support of her husband and in being the mother of his children, the wife is like a fruit-bearing vine, happy and content to carry out her duties in the innermost part of the home.
The sons of the happy couple are likened to slips of an olive tree. Cuttings or slips cut from a grown tree are often used for starting new trees. Also, an old tree may send up shoots from its roots, thereby perpetuating itself. Like such shoots of the olive tree, the sons surround the father, contributing their part to the happiness of the family.
When this psalm was written, the sacred ark of the covenant, representing God’s presence, was located on Mount Zion. Hence, since the Most High was dwelling there in a representative way, all blessings could be spoken of as coming from Zion or Jerusalem. Since Jerusalem was the center of true worship, the welfare of individual Israelites was closely associated with the welfare of Jerusalem. So it was to the individual’s benefit to see the good of Jerusalem all the days of his life​—a long life that would enable him to see his grandsons.
The happiness that could be gained by obedience to God’s law was not restricted to individual Israelites. It could be enjoyed by the whole nation, if obedient. Appropriately, then, the psalmist closes with the prayerful expression: “May there be peace upon Israel.” (Ps. 128:6) Yes, may God’s people enjoy peace and security at all times.
If you desire the kind of happiness referred to in Psalm 128, consider the Bible carefully and allow yourself to be directed by its guidelines. Confirm, by your own experience, that real happiness comes from obedience to God’s law.

