Ways They Use to Share the Good News
CHRISTIANS are commanded to “make disciples of people of all the nations,” but this does not mean that they are to use pressure or convert others by force. Jesus’ commission was to “tell good news to the meek ones,” to “bind up the brokenhearted,” to “comfort all the mourning ones.” (Matthew 28:19; Isaiah 61:1, 2; Luke 4:18, 19) Jehovah’s Witnesses seek to do this by declaring the good news from the Bible. Like the prophet Ezekiel of old, Jehovah’s Witnesses today try to find those who “are sighing and groaning over all the detestable things that are being done.”—Ezekiel 9:4.
The best-known way they use to find those who are distressed by present conditions is by going from house to house. Thus they make a positive effort to reach the public, just as Jesus did when “he went journeying from city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the kingdom of God.” His early disciples did likewise. (Luke 8:1; 9:1-6; 10:1-9) Today, where it is possible, Jehovah’s Witnesses endeavor to call at each home several times a year, seeking to converse with the householder for a few minutes on some local or world topic of interest or concern. A scripture or two may be offered for consideration, and if the householder shows interest, the Witness may arrange to call back at a convenient time for further discussion. Bibles and literature explaining the Bible are made available, and if the householder desires, a home Bible study is conducted free of charge. Millions of these helpful Bible studies are conducted regularly with individuals and families throughout the world.
Another way in which “the good news of the kingdom” is told to others is through meetings held at local Kingdom Halls. The Witnesses conduct meetings there weekly. One meeting is a public lecture on a subject of current interest, followed by a study of some Biblical theme or prophecy, using the Watchtower magazine as source material. Another meeting is a school for training Witnesses to be better proclaimers of the good news, followed by a part devoted to discussing the witnessing work in the local territory. Also, once a week Witnesses assemble in private homes, in small groups, for Bible studies.
All these meetings are open to the public. No collections are ever taken. Such meetings are beneficial for all. The Bible says: “We ought to see how each of us may best arouse others to love and active goodness, not staying away from our meetings, as some do, but rather encouraging one another, all the more because you see the Day drawing near.” Private study and research are necessary, but meeting with others is stimulating: “As iron sharpens iron, so one man sharpens the wits of another.”—Hebrews 10:24, 25; Proverbs 27:17, The New English Bible.
The Witnesses also make good use of openings for talking about the good news as they come in contact with other people in their daily lives. It may be a few words exchanged with a neighbor or with a fellow traveler on a bus or a plane, a longer conversation with a friend or a relative, or a discussion with a fellow worker during lunch hour. Much of the witnessing that Jesus did when he was on earth was of this kind—as he walked along the seashore, sat on a hillside, dined at someone’s home, attended a wedding, or traveled in a fishing boat on the Sea of Galilee. He taught in the synagogues and at the temple in Jerusalem. Wherever he was, he found opportunities to talk about God’s Kingdom. Jehovah’s Witnesses endeavor to follow in his footsteps in this regard also.—1 Peter 2:21.
PREACHING BY EXAMPLE
None of these ways of telling you the good news would be meaningful to you if the one telling you did not apply the teachings to himself. To say one thing and do another is hypocrisy, and religious hypocrisy has turned millions away from the Bible. The Bible is not rightly blamed. The scribes and Pharisees had the Hebrew Scriptures, but Jesus denounced them as hypocrites. He spoke of their reading from the Law of Moses, then added to his disciples: “All the things they tell you, do and observe, but do not do according to their deeds, for they say but do not perform.” (Matthew 23:3) A Christian’s being an example of right living says more than hours of sermonizing. This was pointed out to Christian wives who had unbelieving husbands: “They may be won without a word through the conduct of their wives, because of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct.”—1 Peter 3:1, 2.
Therefore, Jehovah’s Witnesses try to recommend the good news to others in this way also: by being exemplary in the Christian conduct that they recommend to others. They try to ‘do unto others as they would have others do unto them.’ (Matthew 7:12) They try to be this way with all men, not just with fellow Witnesses, friends, neighbors, or relatives. Being imperfect, they do not always succeed 100 percent. But it is the desire of their hearts to do good unto all people not only in telling them the good news of the Kingdom but also in extending a helping hand whenever possible.—James 2:14-17.
[Picture on page 19]
Hawaii
[Picture on page 19]
Venezuela
[Picture on page 19]
Yugoslavia
[Pictures on page 20]
Kingdom Halls, practical in design, are places for Bible discussion
[Pictures on page 21]
In their family life and in contacts with others, the Witnesses sincerely try to do the things that they advocate

