Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Expansion at the “Hub”
IN INDUSTRIAL circles, the city of Kitwe, Zambia, is often called the “hub” of the Copperbelt. This is because Kitwe lies right at the center of the mining district. Kitwe, however, is also a hub of another sort​—the center of theocratic activities in Zambia. Since 1962 the branch office has been located there, and during these two decades the number of publishers in Zambia has virtually doubled, from 30,129 in 1962 to a peak of 58,925 in 1984. The Memorial attendance for 1984 was 393,431, which is one person for every 16 of Zambia’s total population.
With such rapid growth, the old branch facilities soon became inadequate. At first, the present structure was simply expanded, adding another dining room for the headquarters staff and space for storage and shipping. However, soon the Zambian branch ventured into the field of printing Bible literature. And in no time at all the small printing room became so cramped that there was little space for movement or storage. Too, since the branch office was in a residential area, it was difficult to carry on a factory operation without disturbing the neighbors.
So the brothers in Zambia put in an application for a site on which to build a new factory. Obtaining such a site, however, was not easy. The first site offered was rejected by the city council as being ‘zoned for government use.’ However, a brother came forward and offered some land that he owned. As soon as the brothers got the clearance, they hired an international architectural firm to make plans and present them to the city council for approval. News of this electrified the brothers in Zambia! Many came to help with the construction, which was done under the supervision of a brother who is a professional contractor. In just two years, in 1984, the building was finished.
It was a joyous occasion, indeed, when the dedication program for the buildings took place. Although the brothers were told that seats at the program were extremely limited, over 4,000 from all parts of Zambia attended the meeting! They were thrilled to hear the branch coordinator speak on the history of the work in Zambia and show how Jehovah has backed the work there. Following this, some experiences from old-timers were heard. Some had in times past served as special pioneers in such countries as Tanzania, Kenya, and Uganda when the work there was supervised by the Zambian branch. Now these countries are cared for by the branch that was established in Kenya.
Brother John McBrine, who was visiting from Zimbabwe as zone overseer, concluded the program by encouraging the Zambian brothers to put these new facilities to good use. The literature produced at this factory will further the cause of pure worship and help good-hearted persons to come to a knowledge of the truth! And what will doubtless result from this? Further expansion at the “hub” of theocratic activities in Zambia!
[Picture on page 31]
New Watch Tower branch facilities at Kitwe, Zambia

