Announcements
GUARD YOUR CHRISTIAN TRUST
Jehovah God commits a beautiful Christian trust to his faithful witnesses. He gives them the privilege of proclaiming the beautiful words of life to those who are hungering and thirsting for righteousness. (2 Tim. 1:14) As they make known the good news from place to place and house to house, they are prophetically described in this way: “How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation.” (Isa. 52:7, AV) The apostle applies these words to the faithful footstep followers of Christ, saying: “How beautiful are the feet of those who declare good news of good things!” (Rom. 10:15) So by word of mouth and by means of the printed page Jehovah’s witnesses today bring good news to the people. During March the Watchtower magazine will be offered on subscription at $1 a year, together with three booklets containing good things for those who seek God’s way.
YOUR HOPES SOON REALIZED
Do you long for just government, wisely administered world-wide? That has always been the desire of honest men. But without knowledge of God’s purpose men have groped fruitlessly, seeking by trial and error to produce such a perfect government, one that would bring lasting peace to the entire earth. As the years roll by it seems we have even less reason for hope. Men who cannot control the earth now race madly to control outer space. Where will it all end? There is but one solution. God himself must take a hand to save the earth from those who would destroy it. And that he will, because he taught us to pray through his Son: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will come to pass, as in heaven, also upon earth.” Of all the hundreds of magazines published, only two tell you about this righteous government, the kingdom of God, and what must yet take place before it is fully realized. Those two magazines are The Watchtower and Awake! You can have them on alternate weeks for one year by sending only $2. Subscribe at once and receive six free booklets on related subjects.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
March 30: Surviving a World ‘Without Gratitude.’ Page 113.
April 6: Appreciating Your Privileges at the World’s End. Page 119.

