Appreciating Your Privileges at the World’s End
“Working together with him, we also entreat you not to accept the undeserved kindness of God and miss its purpose. For he says: ‘In an acceptable season I heard you, and in the day for salvation I came to your help.’ Look! Now is the especially acceptable season. Look! Now is the day for salvation.”—2 Cor. 6:1, 2.
 1. At 2 Corinthians 6:1, 2, Paul entreats us to appreciate what?
DO YOU appreciate the undeserved kindness of Jehovah through Christ Jesus? Do you appreciate that now at the world’s end is the especially acceptable time for you to show appreciation for salvation? Like the early Christians at Corinth, you are called to “look” at the facts with understanding, with a view toward taking action.
 2. In appraising his privileges, what conclusion did Paul reach?
2 At the end of the Jewish system of things, Paul manifested keen appreciation for the privilege of knowing Christ and actively serving his kingdom interests. As he expressed it to the Philippians: “If any other man thinks he has grounds for confidence in the flesh, I the more so: circumcised the eighth day, out of the family stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew born from Hebrews; as respects law, a Pharisee; as respects zeal, persecuting the congregation; as respects righteousness that is by means of law, one who proved himself blameless. Yet what things were gains to me, these I have considered loss on account of the Christ. Why, for that matter, I do indeed also consider all things to be loss on account of the excelling value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. On account of him I have taken the loss of all things and I consider them as a lot of refuse, that I may gain Christ and be found in union with him, having, not my own righteousness which results from law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which issues from God on the basis of faith, so as to know him and the power of his resurrection and a sharing in his sufferings, submitting myself to his kind of death, to see if I may by any means attain to the earlier resurrection from the dead.” (Phil. 3:4-11) This appreciative writer invites all: “Become imitators of me, even as I am of Christ.” (1 Cor. 11:1) Is your appreciation for God and Christ rich enough to allow you to consider all else loss even your family, background, job, friends, if necessary—in order to gain everlasting life? If not, what hinders you? It may be one or many things.
 3. (a) Cite some hindrances to appreciation now. (b) What aid to appreciation has Jehovah provided?
3 In the parable of the sower Jesus pointed out some deadly hindrances to appreciation. (Mark 4:15-19) Satan, of course, as the influential god of this system of things, is one. Tribulation or persecution is another. Appreciation for the privilege of serving God’s kingdom is also snuffed out by the anxieties of this system of things, the deceptive power of wealth and the desires for material things. The seeds that fell on right soil are the ones who listen to the Word and take it up, bearing Kingdom fruit. Listening to Jehovah’s Word and getting the sense of it is the great aid to life-winning appreciation. Jesus confirmed this at John 17:3: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” The vital worth of this knowledge was again stressed by Jesus in the sermon on the mount: “Happy are those who are conscious of their spiritual need, since the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.” (Matt. 5:3) Lack of appreciation stems from failure to recognize one’s spiritual need, for one cannot love and appreciate God in the fullest sense until one comes to know, through Bible study, who He is, what he stands for, how he thinks, what his loving purpose is toward his creatures. When that is begun to be learned with understanding, then one begins to cultivate true appreciation for God.
 4. How will increased Bible study develop our appreciation?
4 Fight the plague of ingratitude by fighting ignorance of God’s Word. Spend more time studying God’s Word, learning what God considers worthwhile and what trivial. Jehovah’s witnesses are conducting many thousands of free Bible studies in the homes of those conscious of their spiritual need. Be conscious of your need and welcome them to study with you. They appreciate the privilege. As you learn more about Jehovah’s goodness and his new world of righteousness near at hand, you will grow in appreciation for his spirit, Word and organization. Like appreciative Job, who rests in hope of the resurrection, you will be able to say: “I have treasured up the words of his mouth more than my necessary food.” (Job 23:12, AS) Skill in appraising the need to take in God’s thoughts will let you keep your schedule for home Bible study in spite of any conflict with relatively trivial things such as a literal meal. You are learning that man does not really live by bread alone, but by every word that comes forth through Jehovah’s mouth. (Matt. 4:4) Now your appreciation becomes like that of Jesus.
 5. Why is this especially a time for gratitude?
5 More than at any other time, we have so much for which to be grateful. The long-awaited kingdom government has been installed in heavenly office and has already begun to rule in the midst of its enemies. It will grow and grow until it fills the whole earth. Appreciate that fact. The Kingdom is here to stay. You can stay too if you appreciate the need to support it with full allegiance and devotion, seeking first the Kingdom in your life. Know too that the King’s invisible presence makes this a day of judgment. As in Noah’s day and Jesus’ day, men must choose to obey or suffer the consequences. The most searching loyalty test in history is in progress. The question is not, Are you loyal to democracy? The question is, Are you loyal to The Theocracy, God’s government? It is about to conquer the world as easily as Joshua and his army conquered Jericho. Do you appreciate the need to act as wisely as Rahab did and align yourself with the certain conquerors? The Supreme Court of heaven is in session now. Why ignore its power to sentence all rebellious nations and men to Armageddon’s sword?
 6. (a) How should our conduct resemble that of a man on trial? (b) The value Jehovah’s witnesses put on life is shown how?
6 A man in court on trial for his life makes every effort to convince the tribunal of his worthiness to live. During his defense he does not gaze longingly at the shiny new cars parked outside the court, nor at the fashionable clothes on display across the street. He is absorbed in the making of a defense that may spare his life. Why should you show less appreciation for the record you are making before the Supreme Court of heaven in this day of judgment? Jehovah’s witnesses are busy making a defense before all who ask a reason for the new-world hope within them. (1 Pet. 3:15) They are not anxious for the cares of this life. They are anxious to convince Jehovah God that they are innocent of the universal crime of ingratitude that is punishable with death. The New World society of Jehovah’s witnesses does not go along with the theory that life is “dirt cheap.” Life in Jehovah’s new world will be priceless, and Jehovah’s witnesses show they appreciate it as such now by their faithful witnessing. Those who adopt the old-world theory will find eventually that Jehovah will repay them exactly the price they set on their life. Consider your life “dirt cheap,” and dirt is what you will be returned to at Armageddon. But appreciate life for the gift that it is, and its Giver will never take it from you.
 7. What positive command aids our appraisal of material things?
7 If materialism is distracting you to the point of death, realize that you will not die from lack of luxuries; but you will from lack of appreciation. If you value the material wealth of this system of things more than the precious truths of God’s Word you are a poor appraiser of what is really priceless. (Prov. 3:13-18) Cultivate appreciation by obeying Jesus’ positive command: “Stop storing up for yourselves treasures upon the earth, where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break in and steal. Rather, store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consume, and where thieves do not break in and steal. For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.” (Matt. 6:19-21) Where your heart is, that is what you appreciate highly. Put your heart into this doomed world’s “treasures” and your heart will sink with them at Armageddon. Put your heart and soul and strength into Jehovah’s kingdom and your heart will live as long as the Kingdom does—forever. (Dan. 2:44, AV) Accept Jesus’ appraisal of the two types of treasure and seek the kind that endures. If you try to prove him wrong about materialism, be prepared to prove Jehovah God wrong too, for Jesus said his teaching was not his own, but the Father’s who sent him.
 8. How does fear stifle appreciation? What is the remedy?
8 “But,” you say, “it isn’t love of money. I’ve been to the local Kingdom Hall, to your public lectures, your conventions. I’ve read your Awake! magazine, just as I’m reading this issue of The Watchtower. Jehovah’s witnesses have the truth. I know it, but I’m afraid. I appreciate that we need God’s new world, but your religion isn’t popular. Everywhere you’re spoken against. Why, if I were to go along with you—” How many have strangled appreciation with similar fears! But why? Because appreciation is a matter of the heart and the heart involves the question of what we really love, and it takes perfect love to cast out fear. In this case, it is fear that is restraining love for God and his kingdom and for our neighbors, whom we ought to be busily telling about that kingdom. The apostle John explains that to us at 1 John 4:17, 18: “This is how love has been made perfect with us, that we may have freeness of speech in the day of judgment, because, just as that one is, so are we ourselves in this world.” Get to know God better through his Word, the Bible, and your love for him will grow. Appreciation will grow with it and you will become like Jesus, the model appreciator. As you hold this copy of The Watchtower in your hand this minute, likely some persecuted Christian in a Russian slave camp or behind prison bars in the Dominican Republic or elsewhere may be doing the same. Only his copy may have been smuggled to him. But while you are fearful of the reproach that may happen to you, he is not afraid of the persecution that is already happening to him. The answer is simple: he has love and appreciation and with it Jehovah’s holy spirit and blessing. Appreciation really makes a difference.
 9. By following what counsel may we endure with appreciation?
9 Jehovah inspired the Bible writers to put down in black and white such appreciation-building counsel as this: “As a right kind of soldier of Christ Jesus take your part in suffering evil.” (2 Tim. 2:3) “Only behave in a manner worthy of the good news about the Christ, in order that, whether I come and see you or be absent, I may hear about the things which concern you, that you are standing firm in one spirit, with one soul fighting side by side for the faith of the good news, and in no respect being frightened by your opponents. This very thing is a proof of destruction for them, but of salvation for you; and this indication is from God, because to you the privilege was given in behalf of Christ, not only to put your faith in him, but also to suffer in his behalf.” (Phil. 1:27-29) Our brothers in prisons and slave camps appreciate Paul’s words. They know that their endurance under those circumstances is an indication from Jehovah God that he is with them and that salvation will be their reward. They can agree with Paul: they are privileged to suffer in Jesus’ behalf. The Lord himself gave the disciples assurance when he said: “Do not two sparrows sell for a coin of small value? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father’s knowledge. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Therefore have no fear: you are worth more than many sparrows.”—Matt. 10:29-31.
10. Jesus extended what privilege to everyone?
10 Since Jehovah God is able and willing to appreciate you, you should be willing to appreciate the privileges of service he extends now at the world’s end. Jesus’ next words call for action: “Everyone, then, that acknowledges his belief in me before men, I will also acknowledge my belief in him before my Father who is in the heavens; but whoever disowns me before men, I will also disown him before my Father who is in the heavens.” (Matt. 10:32, 33) Be prepared to stand up against opposition and determined to speak up for God’s kingdom; then the King will both stand up and speak up for you, to your eternal blessing.
11. What privilege has the New World society accepted at the world’s end?
11 Today all sincere students of God’s Word are extended the privilege and duty of dedicating their life to Jehovah, for whatever work he may want done at any given time. Like Jesus, the Christian symbolizes this dedication by water baptism. (Heb. 10:5-9) In your country and at least 163 others, the New World society is made up of appreciative men, women and youths who have become true disciples of Jesus at the world’s end. Have you come to appreciate the need for you to act on this privilege? A disciple is “one who accepts the doctrines of his teacher and assists in spreading them.” Jesus’ command to his fellow witnesses is: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) In whatever language you are reading this journal’s quotation of those words, the meaning is the same. Appreciate that you must become a doer of the Word, not remain a hearer or a reader only.—Jas. 1:22.
12. (a) Revelation 7 shows Christians doing what now? (b) Whose example of dedication is noteworthy?
12 The privilege of publicly hailing God’s established kingdom and its royal King is a privilege held out to all who expect to survive Armageddon and live under that righteous kingdom rule. But the protection of that righteous government at Armageddon is only for those dedicated, responsible men, women and youths who publicly hail the King now, saying, in the words of Revelation 7:10: “Salvation we owe to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb.” Waving the palm branches means you are a living witness to the reigning kingdom. While the time of Armageddon’s trouble is still held off, come out from this wicked system of things. Put on your white robe of identification as a dedicated Christian, with a clean, acceptable appearance before God and the Lamb. In this dedicated condition you will be fit to render sacred service day and night in Jehovah’s holy temple. In appreciation, Jehovah’s Lamb will shepherd and guide you to fountains of waters of life. Joyfully you will walk with the New World society already enjoying the promise fulfilled that “God will wipe out every tear from their eyes.” (Rev. 7:14-17) If this happiness and priceless hope have any value in your eyes, show it by a timely dedication. Jehovah loves a cheerful giver. Appreciate the marvelous privilege of cheerfully, willingly giving yourself. Copy the appreciative course of the Ethiopian of Acts, chapter 8. As treasurer for his queen, Candace, he knew the value of material things. But on hearing preached the good news about Christ, he appreciated this as treasure of greater value. Promptly he showed his appreciation by dedication and baptism.—Acts 8:36-38.
13. (a) What privileges may you enjoy with the New World society now? (b) How can faltering appreciation be strengthened?
13 Among the New World society you will find many rich privileges, each of great value in the eyes of God. There will be public Bible lectures to attend, studies of The Watchtower, public speaking instruction in the theocratic ministry school, as well as a weekly service meeting to help you fulfill your ministerial privileges well. You will associate with true Christians from all walks of life who are clearly identifiable as Jesus’ disciples, because they have love among themselves. (John 13:35) If you have already tasted these blessings, but have allowed the cares of this system of things to choke your appreciation, quickly take the sword of the spirit and cut loose from the entanglements. Let its inspired counsel show you exactly what Jehovah expects from you; then ask his help through prayer that his holy spirit and the Bible truth may set you free. The mature ones in the New World society will do all within their power to help you show appreciation to Jehovah. Their attitude will be the same as that expressed by Paul: “But we desire each one of you to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end, in order that you may not become sluggish, but be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.”—Heb. 6:11, 12.
14. What should be done to conquer apathy and complacency?
14 If complacency or apathy has made you susceptible to the plague of ingratitude that paralyzes the mind and hands and weakens the feet that should be working and walking to meetings and out into house-to-house Kingdom service, hasten to take corrective measures: “Hence lift up the hands that hang down and strengthen the enfeebled knees, and keep making straight paths for your feet, that what is lame may not be put out of joint, but rather that it may be healed.” (Heb. 12:12, 13) Avoid the mistake Demas made in highly appraising the value of anything this world has to offer. Though once enjoying the privilege of colaboring with an apostle, Demas lost his appreciation. His heart was in something else, so that Paul wrote Timothy: “Demas has forsaken me because he loved the present system of things.” Where is that system of things now? Where will this one be after Armageddon?
15. What forceful lesson is learned from Gehazi’s case?
15 Materialism warped the appreciation of Gehazi, who once enjoyed the privilege of colaboring with Jehovah’s prophet Elisha. He misappraised the value of material things to the point of lying to get them from Naaman, the Syrian army chief. “Is it a time to accept silver or to accept clothing or olive groves or vineyards or sheep or cattle or menservants or maidservants?” asked Elisha. Immediately the leprosy of Naaman stuck to Gehazi and he left the presence of Elisha, as “a leper white as snow.” Certainly this leper no longer could enjoy the privilege of serving Jehovah with Elisha. Beware that materialism now at the world’s end does not lead you into an unfit condition where you can no longer acceptably serve God. This is the especially acceptable season to seek first the Kingdom and Jehovah’s righteousness. Doing so, Jehovah’s King will seek you and your welfare at Armageddon.
16. How does Jehovah appraise this world, in spite of its scientific achievements?
16 This world’s religion, politics, business and diversions are purported to be valuable. God’s Word correctly appraises them as worthless as far as aiding you to gain everlasting life. If any part of this world were truly valuable, worth the warmth of satisfaction and approval that so many seem to find in it, would Jehovah be about to destroy it? That he is, John assures us: “The world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.” (1 John 2:17) The advent of the atomic age and the birth of man-made “moons” does not mean an ungrateful world is on the threshold of a new era of peace and prosperity. Stock in the old world has not risen in value because science thinks to reach up into heaven. World builders thought the same at the tower of Babel and have never recovered from the blow Jehovah dealt them. This world will never recover from its smashing defeat at Armageddon.
17. Where is true happiness found?
17 You want happiness now and you want security. You value these along with comfort and hope. Then appreciate that the only way to find them is to look into Jehovah’s Word, the Bible, and learn his will for you here at the world’s end. God’s Word promises you will find there what you are looking for: “He who peers into the perfect law that belongs to freedom and who persists in it, this man, because he has become, not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, will be happy in his doing it.”—Jas. 1:25.
18. In appraising our privileges now, what prospects should we consider?
18 Your happiness will grow with the increasing joy of the New World society as your vision of the post-Armageddon new world widens. Weigh the gloom and fear of the present system against the joy and peaceful prospects just ahead. In appraising the value of God’s kingdom to you, think of the delightful life you may enjoy helping to restore the earth to paradisaic rest. You may help to landscape it, making it a glory to Jehovah. Your children will come into a world where nothing will hurt or destroy. You will be on hand to greet the appreciative men and women who receive their promised resurrection. What a thrill to talk with John the Baptist and hear his description of Jesus! Think of meeting Abel, Noah and his family, Abraham and Sarah, David and Deborah, Jephthah and his daughter, and many other appreciative servants of Jehovah who will be back to enjoy God’s new world with you.
19. How are privileges of service like signposts?
19 If you consider the joys set before you, you will copy Jesus’ example and “sell” all that you have to gain that new world. (Matt. 13:44, 45) Each privilege granted you in the Christian congregation is like a signpost on a fast-moving turnpike. It assures you that you are on the right road, heading in the right direction. (Matt. 7:14) This road is not the broad, spacious road of ingratitude. That road is leading off into certain destruction. The road leading off into life is the road of appreciation. Be among the relatively few who find it. You can by appreciating your privileges at the world’s end.
20. (a) How does Paul admonish all to treat their privileges? (b) For whom will Jehovah’s King show appreciation at the world’s complete end?
20 Whatever gifts and privileges Jehovah extends to you, appraise them highly and faithfully use them to his honor. “Whatever you are doing, work at it whole-souled as to Jehovah, and not to men, for you know that it is from Jehovah you will receive the due reward of the inheritance.” (Col. 3:23, 24) “Since, then, we have gifts differing according to the undeserved kindness given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the faith proportioned to us; or a ministry, let us be at this ministry; or he that teaches, let him be at his teaching; or he that exhorts, let him be at his exhortation; he that distributes, let him do it with liberality; he that presides, let him do it in real earnest; he that shows mercy, let him do it with cheerfulness. Let your love be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is wicked, cling to what is good. In brotherly love have tender affection for one another. In showing honor to one another take the lead. Do not loiter at your business. Be aglow with the spirit. Be slaves to Jehovah. Rejoice in the hope ahead. Endure under tribulation. Persevere in prayer.” (Rom. 12:6-12) To all men of good will who now appreciate their privileges, the King will say at the world’s end: “Come, you who have my Father’s blessing, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the world’s foundation.” (Matt. 25:34) Would you appreciate an inheritance like that? Then appreciate your privileges now at the old world’s end.

