




Onésime and Géraldine





Rich Blessings for Those Who Return to Their Country of Origin




A GOOD number of brothers and sisters who in the past emigrated from developing countries to Western lands have returned to their country of origin. Motivated by love for Jehovah and for their fellow man, they have moved to areas where there is a need for more Kingdom publishers. (Matt. 22:37-39) What sacrifices did they make, and what blessings did they reap? To find out, let us focus on the country of Cameroon in western Africa.



“IN THE RIGHT PLACE FOR ‘FISHING’”

In 1998 a brother named Onésime emigrated from his native Cameroon. For 14 years he lived abroad. One day, at a Christian meeting, he heard an illustration about the preaching work. The speaker said, “If two friends were fishing in different spots and one was catching more fish than the other, would the friend who was catching little not move to the spot where the catch was bigger?”
That illustration made Onésime think about returning to the productive spiritual fishing grounds in Cameroon to help the local publishers there. But he had concerns. Would he be able to adapt to his former home country after all those years living abroad? To find out, Onésime visited Cameroon for six months. Then in 2012, he moved back permanently.
Onésime relates: “I had to adjust to the hot weather and the living conditions. In the Kingdom Hall, I had to get used to sitting on bare benches again. But the more I concentrated on the program,” he says with a smile, “the more the memories of upholstered seats began to fade.”
In 2013, Onésime married Géraldine, who had returned to Cameroon after living in France for nine years. What blessings did the couple receive as a result of focusing their life on theocratic activities? Onésime says: “As a couple, we attended the School for Kingdom Evangelizers and served at Bethel. In the past year, 20 Bible students in our congregation got baptized. I feel that now I am in the right place for ‘fishing.’” (Mark 1:17, 18) Géraldine adds: “I have received more blessings than I could have imagined.”



THE JOY OF FINDING SPIRITUAL CHILDREN






Judith and Sam-Castel




Judith had moved to the United States but longed to expand her ministry. She relates, “At the end of every family visit to Cameroon, I cried because I had to leave behind several individuals with whom I had started a Bible study.” However, Judith hesitated to move back to Cameroon. She had a well-paying job that allowed her to pay for medical care that her father in Cameroon needed. Yet, trusting in Jehovah, Judith made the move. She admits that she missed some of the comforts she enjoyed while living abroad. She prayed to Jehovah to help her adjust and was helped by the encouragement she received from a circuit overseer and his wife.
Looking back, Judith says, “Within three years I had the joy of finding four spiritual children.” Judith started serving as a special pioneer. Today, she accompanies her husband, Sam-Castel, in the circuit work. But what happened with Judith’s father? She and her family were able to locate a hospital abroad that was willing to sponsor her father’s surgery. Happily, the surgery was a success.



EXPERIENCING JEHOVAH’S SUPPORT






Caroline and Victor




A brother named Victor relocated to Canada. After reading a Watchtower article about higher education, he thought about his schooling. He switched from taking university courses to taking a shorter technical training course. “It allowed me to get a job sooner,” he says, “and to do what I had long wanted to do​—pioneer.” Later, Victor got married to Caroline, and the couple visited Cameroon. There, during a visit to the branch office, they were encouraged to consider the possibility of serving in Cameroon. Victor says, “We found no reason to refuse, and since we had kept our life simple, we could accept the invitation.” Although Caroline had some health uncertainties, they decided to go ahead with the move.
Victor and Caroline began serving as regular pioneers to help care for the great interest found in the field. For a while they were able to live off their savings. After that they worked in Canada for a few months, which allowed them to return to Cameroon and to continue pioneering. What blessings did they receive? They attended the School for Kingdom Evangelizers, served as special pioneers, and now serve as construction servants. Victor says, “Leaving our comfort zone allowed us to experience Jehovah’s support.”



THE JOY OF HELPING PEOPLE TO DEDICATE THEMSELVES TO JEHOVAH






Stéphanie and Alain




In 2002, Alain, a university student in Germany, read the tract Youths​—What Will You Do With Your Life? The information motivated him to set new goals. In 2006, he attended the Ministerial Training School and was assigned to Cameroon, his country of birth.
In Cameroon, Alain found part-time employment. Later, he found a better-paying job, but he was concerned that it would cause him to do less in the ministry. So when he was invited to serve as a special pioneer, he accepted without hesitation. His employer offered him a higher income, but Alain stuck to his decision. Later, Alain married Stéphanie, who had lived in France for years. What difficulties did she encounter after moving to Cameroon?
Stéphanie says: “I developed several minor ailments and allergies, but I managed to get regular treatment and find relief.” The couple were rewarded for their endurance. Alain relates: “When we went to preach in a remote village called Katé, we found several individuals who wanted to study the Bible. Later, we were able to conduct Bible studies with them by phone. Two of these Bible students got baptized, and a group of publishers was formed.” Stéphanie adds: “There is no greater joy than helping people to the point of dedicating themselves to Jehovah. By serving here, we have experienced that joy many times.” Today, Alain and Stéphanie serve in the circuit work.
The Advantages of Serving in Your Country of Origin
“We already knew the local culture and mindset. People were less suspicious of us than of foreigners, and we could communicate more effectively.”​—Alain

“We could move around more easily and get to places that are less accessible to foreigners.”​—Stéphanie






“WE DID EXACTLY WHAT WE NEEDED TO DO”






Léonce and Gisèle




Gisèle got baptized while attending medical school in Italy. She was impressed by the simple life of the pioneer couple who taught her the Bible, and she wanted to do more in the ministry. So Gisèle began to serve as a regular pioneer while finishing her schooling.
Gisèle had a desire to do more in Jehovah’s service back in Cameroon, but she had concerns. She says, “I had to forfeit my Italian residency and be separated from friends and family who lived in Italy.” Even so, in May 2016, Gisèle moved back to Cameroon. Some time later, she married Léonce, and the branch office in Cameroon recommended that the couple move to Ayos, a town with a great need for Kingdom preachers.
How was life in Ayos? Gisèle relates: “Often there was no electricity for weeks, and we could not charge our mobile phones. Much of the time, they did not work. I learned to cook on a wood fire, and we went with wheelbarrows and flashlights to fetch water at night when the spring was less crowded.” How did the couple cope? Gisèle says: “Jehovah’s spirit, a supportive marriage mate, and encouragement and occasional financial support from family and friends helped us through.”
Is Gisèle happy that she returned to her country of origin? “Yes! Without a shadow of a doubt,” she says. “There were initial difficulties and feelings of discouragement, but once we overcame those, my husband and I felt that we did exactly what we needed to do. We trust in Jehovah and feel closer to him.” Léonce and Gisèle attended the School for Kingdom Evangelizers, and they are now serving as temporary special pioneers.
Like fishermen who brave different conditions to get a good catch, those who return to their country of origin willingly make sacrifices to help righthearted ones who respond to the Kingdom message. Jehovah will no doubt remember these hardworking publishers favorably for the love they have shown for his name. (Neh. 5:19; Heb. 6:10) If you are living abroad and there is a need for Kingdom publishers in your country of origin, would you be able to return? If you do so, rich blessings await you.​—Prov. 10:22.



How Did They Do It?
If you are considering returning to your country of origin, note what helped the brothers and sisters featured in this article.
  What can you expect?
“Be prepared to face pressure and discouragement from well-meaning family and friends. Rely on Jehovah.”​—Alain


  How can you prepare?
“I doubt that I have prayed so much in all my life.”​—Gisèle

“I saved up so that I would not be financially dependent on someone else.”​—Géraldine

“I had a complete physical checkup.”​—Stéphanie


  How can you support yourself?
“Initially I lived off my savings. Then I started teaching at a high school, and later I learned how to make and sell soap.”​—Géraldine

“We supplemented our income by making milk candies that we supplied to shops.”​—Gisèle

“I worked online, translating documents.”​—Onésime


  How can you stay safe?
“I chose a secure residence with easy access to nearby brothers and sisters.”​—Géraldine

“I am always accompanied by someone while preaching.”​—Gisèle

“I don’t go out alone at night. Also, I don’t display any valuables.”​—Stéphanie

“I didn’t spread the news that I am from abroad, and to blend in I did things the way everyone else did.”​—Judith


  What can you do to remain happy and productive?
“We learned to adapt. We kept in mind why we came and focused on the positives.”​—Victor

“I had to cultivate contentment.”​—Alain





