From Our Readers
Culture Gap
Many thanks for the article “Can the Culture Gap Be Bridged?” (August 22, 1988) Three and a half years ago I emigrated from a Western country to the Far East, as my husband wanted to return to his fatherland. From experience I can say that every word in that article is true. I was surprised at the excellent discussion of the problems that arise between diverse cultures. The counsel given is practical and effective. The article has taught me to avoid comparisons with my former way of life.
A. D., Indonesia
Privacy
I am 17 years old and a regular reader of the series “Young People Ask . . . ,” which until now I have always found gave really good tips. But the article entitled “How Can I Get More Privacy?” (October 8, 1988) was a big disappointment. You suggest that if my parents make unwelcome visits to my room or peer into my diary, they do so only because they love me. I just cannot see it that way. My parents should trust me enough not to have to ‘do the rounds’ and check up on me. If they were ever to glance into my diary, I would never forgive them. I would not be able to trust them again or to tell them things. My diary is where I write about my personal problems and feelings. Whatever my parents need to know, I tell them, and they are satisfied.
S. F., Federal Republic of Germany
The article was not condoning or recommending the practice (over which a youth has little control anyway) but was merely helping youths understand why some parents do this​—that it is not mere nosiness.​—ED.
I’m a 12-year-old. Right before the article about privacy was out, my mother had found a few letters I had written, and she read them. At the time I didn’t understand why, but the article helped me!
A. B., United States
I found the article informative, with much sound counsel. But a red light came on when I read the example of a young girl whose mother would yell to leave the door to her room open when she had a boy over. What business does a young boy have in a young girl’s room, which is usually a bedroom in the first place? None! My mom certainly never allowed it. The living room, the family room, or the kitchen, where others are nearby, would be the wiser course for these teens to entertain or study. Some teens reading that part of the article might be misled!
J. J., United States
J. J.’s concern and suggestions are well taken. The “Young People Ask . . ” series is written for a general audience. The article was merely showing how even people who do not necessarily live by Bible standards view matters. To them, leaving the door open is thus a safeguard.​—ED.
I just wanted to thank you for the article “Why Can’t I Have More Privacy?” (July 8, 1988) I’m 13 years old. Not long ago I asked just that question about privacy. My parents and I had the same go-around about having a TV in my room as Keith and his parents did. Although I didn’t get a TV, I understand why my parents were concerned about what I watched.
S. H., United States

