Announcements
CHOOSE LIFE TO KEEP ON LIVING
Said Jehovah to ancient Israel: “I have put life and death before you, the blessing and the malediction, and you must choose life in order that you may keep alive.” (Deut. 30:19, NW) Similarly, we must make a choice, seriously considering the consequences of the chosen way. The sensible and right-minded person will choose the right way, which is the way of God and the way of life, now and forever. Those choosing to honor and serve God will have opportunity to back up their choice by telling others of God’s loving arrangements for life and offering fellow men a year’s subscription for The Watchtower at the annual rate of $1. Three booklets on vital Bible subjects will be offered with each new subscription.
A SPECIAL REASON FOR ZEAL
Jehovah’s witnesses are zealous in attending assemblies. This year thousands of Jehovah’s witnesses from the United States and Canada who will attend assemblies in England, France, Italy, Germany, Sweden and the Netherlands will find that encouragement to be especially great. Here they will see evidence that they really are one people, undivided by nationalities or even by language barriers. Unity will be increased, love strengthened, zeal mutually encouraged. You have the opportunity of joining with this happy group of international conventioners. Make plans now!
As announced in the January 1 Watchtower, assemblies in Canada and the United States will be held during June and July. It will be of particular interest to the Spanish-speaking people of southern and western United States, as well as to those of Latin-American countries, to know Spanish programs are scheduled for the Dallas, Texas, convention. It is the only one where such arrangements are being planned.
NUMBERING OUR DAYS
“Teach us to number our days, that we may get us a heart of wisdom” was Moses’ prayer. (Ps. 90:12, AS) To mark each day in a profitable and fitting way, we must give some thought to God’s Word and work. To this end the Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses for 1955 and the calendar are timely aids. In the Yearbook there is a text for every day of the year, together with appropriate comments. There is also a report of Kingdom work as done world-wide. The calendar, marking the days as they pass, provides service themes for each month, as well as a yeartext and appropriate illustration in full color. The Yearbook is now available for 50c; the calendar for 25c. Five calendars are sent to one address for $1.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
February 20: God’s Love to the Rescue in Man’s Crisis, ¶1-18. Page 49.
February 27: God’s Love to the Rescue in Man’s Crisis, ¶19-37. Page 56.

