VOL. XXXI MAY 15 No. 10 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 

Reaction in Female Seminaries 163 

Away From Ancient Altars 163 

Begotten of God— He Cannot Sin 164 

"My Soul, Be on Thy Guard" 167 

What the Church Shares With Christ 167 

The Heaven-Provided Bread 168 

St. Peter Cried, "Lord, Save Me" 169 

Some Interesting Questions 170 

The Ransom Work 170 

Outward Polish vs. Inward Grace 171 

The Same Vail Untaken Away 171 

Significance of the Under-Priests 172 

International Bible Students Conventions 172 

The Memorial Celebration 173 

Some Interesting Letters 174 

Berean Studies on the Creation 175 

page 162 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



UNITED STATES POSTAL RULES RE SUBSCRIPTIONS 

The Post Office rulings require that subscriptions shall 
stop, be discontinued, shortly after expiration of the period 
paid for. Hence, we may not continue your papers indefinitely. 
If, however, you cannot conveniently send the 
price you may have them sent on credit if you will definitely 
request this. Remember, also, that we have a fund specially 
set apart for the payment of the subscriptions of such as desire 
our journals, but cannot appropriate any of the amount without 
request. This fund we call the "Lord's Poor Fund." 

But remember that whatever you write us on this subject 
must be pointedly stated, so that the Post Office Inspector 
or any stranger reading your letter will know definitely just 
what you desire. It will not do to say, I am poor and would 
like to have THE WATCH TOWER. Rather say: Please enter 
my WATCH TOWER subscription for another year (charge same 
to me and I will remit later; or, I am one of the Lord's poor 
and thankfully accept God's provision in the "Poor Fund"). 



TABERNACLE QUESTIONS 

Specially prepared in booklet form to assist in private and 
class study of "Tabernacle Shadows." 

We consider these questions invaluable aids. We still 
have ample supply, free on request. Order promptly if not 
already supplied. 



R4613 :page 163 

REACTION IN FEMALE SEMINARIES 
WE GIVE liberal extracts from an article following, 



which confirms our recent statement 
that the same polished infidelity which 
for forty years has steadily been leavening 
all the male colleges and seminaries of 
the United States, Canada, England and 
Germany, and which by now has gotten 
possession of nearly every pulpit and 
Sunday school, is penetrating and saturating 
even common school books. 

Many parents see this but forbear to protest, because 
of their lack of spine and their false standard of parental 
love. Instead of standing up for the Truth and the 
Bible they surrender to the arrogance of Young America 
—male and female. They think that they love their children 
too much to oppose them, when really their trouble 
is too much self-love— "approbativeness." They fear to 
have their educated darlings think of them as "old fogies" 
and behind the times. What they need is more love for 
their Creator, more love for his Word and more love for 
their children— to give them backbone to stand up for 
the Truth at any cost. 

But alas! So blighting and stunting has been the 
misrepresentation of the Gospel of Christ that many dear 
souls, possessed of a keen faith, have so little knowledge 
that they cannot defend it. Yea, they know their ignorance 
and fear even to try. 

"My people perish for lack of knowledge," says the 
Lord. Yet the leaders of all denominations teach 
them to boast. They are rich and increased in goods and 
have need of nothing: they know not of their poverty, 
blindness and nakedness. (Rev. 3:17.) Ah! Thank 
God for the Millennial Kingdom so near at hand! What 
would humanity do without it! Soon the half-truth of 
the dark ages would give way to no creed, no faith. And 
what direful results would follow! 

AWAY FROM ANCIENT ALTARS 

[HAROLD BOLCE IN "COSMOPOLITAN."] 

"Colleges devoted to the education of women have 
revised the accepted estimate of life, with startling consequences 
to ancient creeds. Throughout the ages there 
has been a sad procession of believers who regarded life 
as a burden to be borne, and endured it to the end, with 
sighs and tears. And the memory of their sacrifice and 
suffering has been revered by the thousands that follow 
them. In contrast with this philosophy, which has produced 
unnumbered martyrdoms and is still held in some 
circles, there has been preached a militant gospel. Life 
is regarded as a warfare in an arena. In the hymn that 
sings the spiritual triumphs of conquest when the armies 
of the Lord waged battle, the believer rejects a life of 
either resignation or ease 'while others fought to win the 
prize and sailed through bloody seas.' 

"American educators of women are showing what 



they believe to be the fallacy of both these philosophies. 
Life, they say, is neither a burden nor a battle. It is a 
benediction. It is the great Fact. To live right is to 
live joyously. And so the thousands of young women 
coming out of our institutions of learning do not follow 
the centuries of tearful pilgrimage on the Via Dolorosa, 
neither do they choose the Field of Mars. They believe 
that martyrdom in modern times is as anachronistic as 
the stake, and that to regard life as gladiatorial is to miss 
its finest meanings. 

R4614:page 163 

"The significance of this interpretation of life appears 
when its application to current activities is studied. 'Non 
ministrari sed ministrare,' 'not to be ministered unto, but 
to minister,' is the motto of Wellesley College, and this is 
the spirit of all the institutions pledged to the higher education 
of American women. The new evangels do not offer 
up anguished petitions to a non-resident God. Modern 
scholarship is, indeed, fulfilling Comte's prophecy that the 
God of authority would be escorted out of the affairs of 
man. 

"President William De Witt Hyde, of Bowdoin College, 
who is in demand as a lecturer at many girls' colleges, 
teaches that as human experience develops, the divine 
attributes have to be translated into new terms— into 
terms that are in keeping with the deepening experience of 
the race; and that 'we know God only through man.' His 
teaching that a God symbolized by the outgrown experience 
of bygone ages is little better than no God at all, 
finds emphasis in the loftiest thinking among the professors 
in the colleges under consideration. Katharine 
Lee Bates, professor of English in Wellesley College, a 
woman of rare endowments and profound spirituality, 
teaches that the great foundations of Christianity 'plead 
for ampler walls and gates,' and that 'the heresy of youth 
is the outworn creed of age.' 

"The old idea that the good-will of the Infinite could 
be secured by sacrificial offerings on the altar, or by 
lamentations and Te Deums, has been abandoned by the 
colleges. The futility of such petitionings is emphasized 
by Dr. Caroline Hazard, president of Wellesley, who is 
carrying out with distinguished efficiency the work 

R4614 :page 164 

inaugurated by Alice Freeman Palmer. In a talk recalling 
some of the scenes of Palestine, which she visited 
recently, she told of the faithful in Israel who gather at 
the Wall of Wailing and cry out to the God of their 
fathers to restore the Temple and reassemble the children 
of Jerusalem. 'Make speed, make speed, O Deliverer of 
Zion!' has been the intoned cry of these worshipers 
throughout the dismal centuries that have crept across 
the ruins of the great edifice the Preacher built, and yet, 



in spite of all this supplicating of the Throne of Grace, 
the very City of the Jews is a Moslem town! Just as it 
is unnecessary to go back to Sinai to find the covenants 
of God, so it is idle in our age to look to the skies for 
help. 'Each soul,' said President Hazard, 'has its Holy 
City, deep hidden under the accretions of every-day life.' 

"President Hyde, of Bowdoin, not only tells his own 
students, but has sent the message out to all the students 
of this land, that the modern world, at least the intelligent 
and thoughtful portion, has outgrown the old idea 
that God sent his Son to earth, announcing his advent by 
signs and wonders; or that this Son was authorized to 
forgive sinners who conformed to the terms revealed; or 
that Jesus transmitted this miraculously tested power to 
his Apostles. 

"From a student at Berkeley, who has also studied at 
Stanford University, comes the assurance that 'university 
women are taking a brave and enlightened stand on the 
subject of teaching their children and all children the 
vital facts about life.' She adds that the college-bred 
men and women of the Far West 'seem to have been 
swept along about equally before the irresistible non-church 
wave that has left some of them prostrated before 
crass materialism,' but that 'more and more stagger 
again to their feet, and move with eager steps towards 
the dawn of a creedless spirituality.' 

"This confirms the teaching of Doctor Brown, of 
Stanford University, that 'hard and fast theories have 
been going down before the majesty of fact.' He even 
goes so far as to say that what Tom Paine and Robert 
G. Ingersoll taught, as death-blows to faith, is now proclaimed 
as truth by Christian scholarship. 

"But the new gospel has come without bitterness, with 
humanity as its shrine, and the aspirations of the race its 
litanies. 'The contemporary kingdom of love,' said one 
of the lecturers at Wellesley, 'is the only way over 
which we may pass to the eternal kingdom of love.' 

"Not blind petitioning, but active faith and action 
illumine the new creed. 'We still have our dragons,' said 
Miss Hazard. 'Perseus and St. George have not exterminated 
them all. The world is waiting for Andromeda, 
and still more for the active Dorcas. Under Syrian 
skies, or in a Western World, the call is the same— a call 
to service, to high living, to wage war on the powers of 
evil.' And in the litanies which this president and poet 
has written, self-indulgence, evasion, and fear are enumerated 
as the dragons every human spirit has to fight. 

"So far as the outlook of American students is concerned, 
'the eternal city of the skies,' fabled in Christian 
legend, lies in ruins under the feet of modern scholarship. 
But the education of young women, President M. Carey 
Thomas, of Bryn Mawr, points out, is giving us 'a new 
heaven and a new earth.' These young women are going 
out of the colleges not to destroy, but to fulfil. They are 
taught that Jesus of Nazareth 'never mentioned religion,' 
that 'it was farthest from his thought'; and that 'life' was 



the sublime text of his ministry. 

"Dr. George A. Gordon, of Boston, who is popular as 
a lecturer at Wellesley, teaches that 'we lament the loss 
of belief in angels and seek to revive the doctrine of 
familiar spirits; we speak of the pathos of these vanished 
faiths,' but there is infinite gain to man in 'the grandeur 
of this abolition of all intermediaries'; and President 
Hazard sets forth that it must always be one of the 
glories of woman 'that truth can appeal in a direct and 
concrete form to her mind.' 

"The young college women are not dreamers, save as 
they are inspired by the vision of a new society saved by 
service. They are carrying what they believe to be the 
true spirit of Christ and Christmas throughout the year. 
Though all the recorded miracles may be regarded as 
folk-lore, and though the Manger itself may be no more 
than a sacred myth, life remains beautiful and divine, and 
the call to re-create the spirit of the home and to serve 
humanity is regarded as a commission from the 'King of 
kings reigning in the heart of the race.' They indeed 
constitute an army— an undenominational army— but 
their banners are unseen. Instead of breaking windows, 
they are mending hearts. They believe in the integrity 
of law, and so scout the notion that any sea was ever 
rolled back by a wand. They believe that in all ages, 
wherever the Spirit of God has triumphed on earth, 
dominion has been asserted through the thought of man. 
And that divine presence, the colleges teach and the activities 
of college girls give evidence, is as potent today 
on earth as it ever was in ancient times. 

"This, in substance, is the significance of the repudiation 
by the colleges of what they regard as crude and 
narrowing theology. The young women do not cringe at 
the Throne of Grace. To cry out in despair on bended 
knees is regarded not as an evidence of religious advance, 
but an expression of timidity and fear. The laws of the 
spirit are logical and fixed. The electrician does not 
cross himself before the dynamo. The chemist does not 
deal in burnt offerings to give divine quickening to the 
elements." 



R4614 :page 164 

BEGOTTEN OF GOD-HE CANNOT SIN 

"He that is begotten of God sinneth not, for his seed 
remaineth in him and he cannot sin."— I Jno. 3:9. 

AS in human nature there is an earthly begetting 
and an earthly birth, so, the Scriptures 
inform us, the Lord purposes during 
this Gospel Age to develop creatures of a 
new nature. These are spoken of as first 
begotten of the holy Spirit, at the time of 



their consecration, and subsequently developed 
and ultimately "born from the 
dead" as "members of the Body of Christ" 
—sharers "in his resurrection," "the First 
Resurrection," the Chief Resurrection. 

The begetting power the Scriptures declare to be the 
Word of Truth. Through this Word God operates in us 
first of all, and if we respond to the drawing we shall be 
brought into relationship with Christ through faith, 
recognizing him as the Sin-Bearer, as the Great Advocate 
who is willing to appropriate a share of his merit to us 
and thus to justify us from Adamic sin and the imperfections 
of the flesh, which we no longer approve. The 
Word of God having convinced us that all unrighteousness 
is sin, and we, having reached that place where we 
desire to be in accord with God and with righteousness, 

R4614 :page 165 

are informed through his Word that they who would become 
fully his in the present time, and receive his invitation 
to become members of the Body of Christ, to join 
with our Lord in the laying down of earthly life, may 
"present their bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable 
to God, their reasonable service." 

When we do this, our Lord Jesus, as Advocate, imputes 
his merit to us, and we are accepted of the Father, 
during this "acceptable time of the Lord"— this Gospel 
Age, while the full number of the "elect" are being 
chosen. The Father's acceptance is indicated by the impartation 
of the holy Spirit, and we are "begotten [this 
text improperly translates it 'born'] of God." The word 
for "born" and "begotten," being the same (gennao) in 
the Greek, the context must indicate which should be 
used. In the present case it should be the word "begotten," 
because the New Creature is at this time but an 
embryo; it has not a new body; it has merely a new mind, 
a new will, a new disposition, which has been engendered 
by the Spirit of Truth and accepted of the Father 
as a begetting to the spirit nature. 

Everything connected with this New Creature is pure 
and sinless; it has none of the Adamic condemnation nor 
imperfection. It never had. It cannot agree to sin because 
it is out of harmony with sin. The desire for sin 

R4615 :page 165 

which might still lurk in the fallen members of our body, 
would be called, as the Apostle terms it, "the motions of 
sin in the flesh," or the struggles of the flesh. The flesh is 
reckoned dead, but is not actually dead— merely "dying 
daily." The New Creature thus contending against the 
flesh and mortifying the flesh, makes progress in proportion 
to its energy and success in this direction. 

"HIS SEED REMAINETH IN HIM AND HE CANNOT 



SIN" 



If this new will, this new mind, that God has accepted 
and recognized as a New Creature, should ever, knowingly, 
intentionally, approve of sin and connive at sin, 
this would prove that the Spirit of the Lord, the new 
mind, is gone, because it is merely the new will, the new 
disposition, at the present time that represents this New 
Creature. It is not the flesh; it is not the gray matter of 
the brain; it is the will which controls the brain and seeks 
to regulate the thoughts and intentions of the heart, and, 
so far as possible, all the actions of the daily life. The new 
will is the New Creature in the most emphatic sense. If, 
then, the will has ceased to be in harmony with God's 
will, it has perished as a new will and is merely the old 
will revived. This would indicate that the seed of truth, 
the seed of this power of God, has died in the individual; 
for as long as "his seed remaineth in him he cannot sin." 
He cannot intentionally and knowingly approve sin or 
practice sin. 

The New Will might at times be entrapped, because 
the will is very particularly identified with the body, with 
the human brain, and therefore with all the affairs of life. 
At such times it might become thoughtless respecting its 
obligations and the propriety of its course, and so the 
New Creature might be overtaken in a fault; but it could 
not be a New Creature and yet have a will or intention 
to do that which is evil— contrary to righteousness and 
to the Divine will and intention. 

"If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves 
and the truth is not in us." (I John 1:8.) How shall 
we harmonize this text with the preceding one is a question 
that comes up? The Apostle is not here saying that 
our flesh sins and that we do not sin. Nor do we understand 
him to be saying, "If any man says that his flesh 
does not sin he is a liar," but we understand him to be 
saying, "If we [New Creatures] say that we have no sin, 
the truth is not in us." He is thus saying that we, New 
Creatures, are responsible for sin. We understand the 
solution of this to be found in the difference between the 
will or intention of the New Creature, and the ability of 
the New Creature. The New Creature never wilfully 
sins, never intentionally does wrong, but may be ensnared 
through the evil propensities of its fallen body of flesh. 

This earthly body is reckoned dead and God has nothing 
to do with it. God does not judge nor deal with 
dead things; "ye are dead," so far as the flesh is concerned. 
Hence God is not judging the body; he is not 
noting what your body did, what you as a human being 
did, because you no longer exist as a human being, from 
the Divine standpoint or records. Your whole standing 
with God is as a New Creature; but you have a responsibility 
for your body, your tongue, your hands, your feet, 
and all that these do. As a steward over these it is for 
you, as a New Creature, to do the best with them that 
you can, and you are responsible for them. 



To illustrate: If a man owns a dog and knows the 
dog has a bad temper and will bark and bite and annoy 
the neighbors, it is his duty to muzzle the dog or chain it. 
If the dog gets loose at any time and bites somebody, the 
dog will not be sued in court, because the dog has no responsibility 
in the matter, but the suit will be brought 
against the owner of the dog. He is the one that is held 
responsible for what the dog does. 

So in the Divine Court, we as New Creatures are held 
responsible for our body— for what our hands do, for 
what our feet do, and for what our tongues do. If, therefore, 
the body sins, the New Creature is charged with 
that sin, whatever it may be— whether it be a grievous 
sin or a less sin; and when we say, "if the body sins," we 
are merely putting it in an accommodated form, because 
we know that in the flesh there is no perfection; that 
there is not a New Creature who has a body that is perfect 
and that can keep the law of God absolutely. 

"FORGIVE US OUR TRESPASSES AS WE FORGIVE 
THOSE WHO TRESPASS AGAINST US" 

Thus we see that every New Creature is charged with 
the defects of his mortal flesh. These, in the Scriptures, 
are called "trespasses," and in the Lord's Prayer we are 
instructed what we should do with respect to these trespasses. 
When we pray, "Forgive us our trespasses as we 
forgive those that trespass against us," we are not referring 
to Adamic sin, which God does not forgive, but 
which is atoned for by the merit of Christ, imputed to 
us. When we speak here of "trespasses" we are referring 
to those sins which we as New Creatures commit 
unintentionally, against the Divine plan or law because 
entrapped or ensnared by our infirmities or by the surrounding 
conditions and temptations of life. These 
might overcome the New Creature and swerve him from 
his course, just as the bringing of a magnet into the 
vicinity of a compass might cause the needle of the compass 
temporarily to deviate; this would not mean that the 
compass has been spoiled, nor that it is a bad compass because 
temporarily it has been turned from its proper 
course; and so with us. The new mind, the new will, is 
in harmony with God and anything which might distract 
it in any degree would be merely a temporary matter and 
would not necessarily mean our imperfection as New 
Creatures. In the case of the compass, if the opposing 
magnet were removed, the needle of the compass would 
immediately revert to the North; and so with us, if the 
overpowering temptation were out of the way, our hearts, 
as New Creatures, would at once revert to loyalty to 
God. This illustration, of course, is not a perfect one 

R4615 :page 166 

because the compass has no intelligence, no will, no power 
to improve itself nor to add to its resistance of outside 



influences. 

These trespasses, as we bring them to the throne of 
grace, would not be forgiven unless we had an Advocate, 
and then our Advocate could do nothing for us except as 
he had merit at his command that he could appropriate on 
our behalf, because God is dealing on lines of strict and 
absolute justice. Hence when we come to the throne of 
heavenly grace the basis of our faith and confidence 
should be that we have a great High Priest who has entered 
for us into the "Most Holy"; that this Great One 
is our Advocate with God, and that the basis of his effective 
advocacy is the merit of his sacrifice— that he has the 
wherewithal to satisfy Justice on behalf of all of those 
imperfections that are ours unwittingly, unintentionally. 

God might have arranged that the merit of Christ's 
sacrifice should not only cover or be effective for 
"all those sins that are past through the forbearance 
of God" at the time of our acceptance as New Creatures, 
but should also be applied for all further imperfections 
of the flesh to the very end of our lives. But 
he did not make such an arrangement and evidently he 
purposed this that it might be to our advantage, so that 
when we trespass we might have the humiliating experience 
of being forced to come "to the throne of grace to 
obtain mercy and find help for every time of need." Whoever 
has had any experience as a child of God in coming 
to the throne of grace has, doubtless, to some extent, had 
this very humiliation. 

If, for instance, the New Creature found that he was 
overtaken in the same fault a second time, it would produce 
special humiliation, and every additional humiliation 
should make that New Creature more and more earnest 
in his endeavors that this particular lesson should be well 
learned— that never again need he make application along 
the same line to the Lord for forgiveness. Thus we see 
in this arrangement of the Lord a great blessing— a blessing 
in that it will keep us humble and also keep us continually 
coming to the throne of grace and cognizant of 
the fact that we are imperfect according to the flesh; 
keep us looking at the standard which God has set, to see 
to what extent we are still imperfect; and will lead us 
to watch ourselves daily that we may grow as New 
Creatures. In harmony with this the Apostle Paul, addressing 
New Creatures, says: "If any man sin, we have 
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous." 

We must understand the Apostle here to mean that if 
any man sin because of his not having a perfect body, if 
he sin because of the imperfection of the flesh and surrounding 
temptations, but who as a New Creature desires 
to do God's will, let him "come boldly to the throne of 
Heavenly grace." Let him have courage to come. Let 
him not delay to come. As a matter of fact, however, 
we know that many do delay to come to the throne of 
grace; they feel ashamed to go to the Heavenly Father to 
acknowledge that they have made another failure; and 
thus hindered by their shame, or by their pride, or by discouragement, 



they are in great danger, because the longer 

they remain away the more serious will their condition 

become, the colder will be their heart and the more 

numerous will be the spots upon their "robe of 

righteousness." 

GREAT COMPANY MUST WASH THEIR ROBES AND 
MAKE THEM WHITE 

And so it is that those who are most fervent in spirit 
and most fully in accord with the Lord are very careful 
that not even a single spot shall soil their robe of righteousness; 
but if a spot should appear they hasten at once 
to have it cleansed with the blood of Christ; while others 
who take a different course grow gradually more and more 
careless until their robe becomes very much spotted and 
the cloud between them and the Lord becomes darker and 
darker, and they may perhaps be engulfed in worldliness, 
and eventually incur the penalty of the Second Death. 
Even in the case of those with whom it does not eventuate 
so seriously, we see the picture given us in the Scriptures 
of how deplorable is their condition; that they will 
not be accounted worthy to be of the "Little Flock"; they 

R4616 :page 166 

will not be accounted worthy to be of the Royal Priesthood; 
they must suffer many stripes; and the very highest 
position possible for them to attain is a place in the 
antitypical Levite company, the "Great Company," 
servants of the Royal Priesthood. 

This picture is given us, we remember, in Revelation, 7th chapter, 
where the "Great Company" is shown as 
washing their robes and making them white in the blood 
of the Lamb. There would be no need of washing the 
entire robe unless the entire robe were spotted. Those 
who keep their garments unspotted from the world by 
noting every spot which might appear, and go to the 
throne of grace immediately that they, as New Creatures, 
may "walk in white"— these are the ones who are pleasing 
in the Lord's sight. It is to this class that we all 
wish to belong. 

WHEN THE NEW CREATURE CEASES TO EXIST 

It might be asked, at this time, how does Christ act 
as Advocate for the sins of the New Creature and apply 
his merit for their sins? We answer that all the sins that 
are charged to the New Creature are the earthly weaknesses 
and imperfections, and Christ's merit is all of an 
earthly kind. He has nothing to give away of a heavenly 
kind. The sacrifice he made was an earthly sacrifice, the 
merit of which has been imputed to those who come to the 
Father through him; so it is merely for the earthly sins, 
and the unwilling sins, so far as the New Creature is 
concerned, that his merit is applied. 



If the New Creature is unfaithful in the sense of 
agreeing to sin then the New Creature ceases to be- 
there is no New Creature there. But the New Creature 
might be asleep and might be entrapped in that way; as 
for example: There might be a servant who is at heart 
loyal to his master in that he would not wish to connive 
with robbers that they might enter the house; but if that 
servant were careless with respect to the locks on the 
doors and a thief should break in through that carelessness, 
he is unfaithful, and is a transgressor to that extent. 
But if he had connived with the marauders and robbers 
and had opened the door to let them in, he would be no 
longer a servant; he would be no longer a member of that 
household, but an enemy. He would be a robber himself. 

So if we as New Creatures connive at sin and make 
provision for the flesh and watch for opportunities to get 
into relationship with sinful things, the New Creature in 
that case has ceased to be a New Creature. He is an old 
creature, merely masquerading, and there would be no 
further hope for such a one. He has passed beyond hope. 
But if he has been careless and the robbers (we speak of 
these sinful propensities as robbers) have insidiously 
engaged him in conversation, and one is enticing him to 
hold open the door for conversation, while another goes 
around in some other way and thus breaks in, he is responsible 
to the extent that he has communed at all with 
any of these influences. He has no right to have anything 
whatever to do with sin. He has no right to have any 
fellowship with sinful things. He should have nothing 
to do with the unfruitful works of darkness, nor be in 

R4616 :page 167 

harmony with them in any sense of the word, but should 
turn from them as from an enemy. We have no right to 
have any fellowship or sympathy with that which the 
master of the house has prohibited. The Master of our 
house is Christ the Lord, and his will and his rule are to 
be respected, not only in the outward letter, of apparently 
trying to keep the house secure, but to the full extent of 
resisting and treating as enemies everything that is not in 
accord with him. The more firmly we get this thought 
fixed in our minds the greater will be the power that we 
shall find supporting our new wills in this resistance of 
sin. 

"MY SOUL, BE ON THY GUARD" 

According to the Scriptures, as well as according to 
our own experience and that of many others of which we 
have knowledge, all sin which comes in upon a New Creature, 
comes very insidiously and generally in some soft 
way. An outward attack, like throwing stones, is never 
made. One would shut the door promptly against such 
an attack; but it is the smooth-spoken sins, the smooth-tongued 
sins, that come in, the sins that appear to be right. 



Going back to the illustration of the dog: It is when we 
feel that there is some provocation for letting down the 
chain, so that the dog can do some good with his teeth— 
that there is somebody that ought to be bitten— that is the 
time when we throw ourselves open to danger. We are 
slow to learn to fully appreciate the fact that the dog is 
not to bite anybody; he is not to bite the friends of the 
family, nor the enemies of the family. He is to be kept 
chained all the time. Then, as to how much the dog 
may bark: You can readily see what that would mean. 
That is evil speaking. If the dog keeps on barking he 
will annoy not only the family, but also the neighbors and 
friends and even the enemies. The New Creature has 
no right to allow this. His tongue may speak that which 
is good and that only. This is an absolute command: 
"Speak evil of no man"— not only of no man in the 
Church, but of no man outside of the Church; and in this 
case, the man includes the woman. 

We might ask if our Lord Jesus, when he ascended 
up on high, "there to appear in the presence of God for 
us," applied the whole of his merit; and if so, what has 
he now to apply for these daily trespasses that we unwittingly 
and unwillingly commit and on account of which 
we are bidden to come with courage to the throne of 
Heavenly grace and remember that we have an Advocate? 
We answer that our Lord, when he died, gave into the 
Father's hands the entire merit of his earthly life, but 
he did not apply it to any specific use or purpose. He 
merely said, "Into thy hands I commit my spirit"— my all 
is given up to the Father. When he ascended up on high 
all those earthly life-rights were in the Father's hands, 
were in bank, so to speak. But it is one thing to have 
something in bank and another thing to appropriate 
money to others. Our Lord deposited his merit in the 
heavenly bank, so to speak, and it was there for him 
when he ascended up on high to make appropriation of it. 

What appropriation did he make? He did not appropriate 
his entire merit to one individual and as soon 
as that individual was through using it, appropriate the 
whole to another individual; but all this merit of his, in 
every particular and in the widest scope it could possibly 
cover, was left in the hands of God, and he did not appropriate 
it all at one time, but merely drew against it. 
As we would say if we were speaking financially; he drew 
many drafts against that deposit; he imputed a share of 
that merit to each one who would believe in him and turn 
from sin and make a consecration such as he has made, 
and would seek to walk in his steps to the end of the 
journey. 

So, then, our Lord's merit was not merely for believers 
living at the time of his death, but for us who are 
now living and for all consecrated believers of the obedient 
class, and for all of their interests. But while it was 
all put into God's hands for that purpose and left there 
as security for all that class, nevertheless it went out or 
was individually applied as each one needed it. At that 



time there was only a small number of disciples, about 
five hundred brethren, and the merit, or imputation of 
merit, to cover their Adamic sin and render them acceptable 
as sacrifices, was granted instantaneously, and as a result 
the holy Spirit came upon all those in that waiting attitude 
at Pentecost. The Lord has since been appropriating 
his merit to all those who come to the Father by 
him; this merit is applied to no others, and it flows 
from that same source and fountain of grace. It is not 
only sufficient to apply for all the sins, imperfections and 
blemishes of the past, but is sufficient for all the imperfections 
and blemishes as long as we remain in the flesh, 
because it has not been given wholly at any time, but 
remains as a continual fountain of supply, from which 
we may daily draw. 



R4616 :page 167 

WHAT THE CHURCH SHARES WITH CHRIST 

BRIEFLY summed up, the Church is called, by 

special invitation, to a "high calling"; a 

high station— now to suffer with Christ, 

that she may in due time reign with him. 

This suffering with Christ is not suffering 

for sin we may commit, for he never suffered 

in any such sense. If we suffer with 

him, our suffering must be along the line of 

experiencing injustice and in laying down 

our lives in the service of righteousness. 

His sufferings were sacrificial sufferings, hence if 

we share in his sufferings, our sufferings must be 

sacrificial. 

We share with him in the begetting of the holy Spirit 
and we share with him in his resurrection, if, as the 
Apostle says, we are faithful in suffering with him, faithful 
in the matter of participating in his death; for, "If we 
be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer 
with him, we shall also reign with him." 

Looking at the matter from the standpoint of the 
Scriptures we shall see that they sometimes speak of 
Christ and the Church under the figure of one 
great Priest, Jesus the Head and the Church his Body, his 
consecrated self-sacrificing members, and the "Great Company, 
the antitypical house of Levi, the servants of the 
Priest. Sometimes the Scriptures speak of us as the 
under-priesthood, and Christ Jesus as representing the 
Head of this priesthood. In all these figures the thought 
is that in some sense we share with our Lord in his 
work. As the Apostle expresses it, "we are one loaf," all 
members or participants in that one loaf. The breaking of 
that one loaf, which was accomplished in our Lord Jesus 
primarily, is continuing in those who are accepted as 
members of him, continuing in those who keep their 



hearts with all diligence. 

In the matter of sin atonement, "we were children of 
wrath even as others," and therefore we had nothing 
wherewith we could procure the redemption either of ourselves 

R4617 :page 168 

or of anybody else. Hence we were wholly dependent 
upon God's provision in Christ Jesus our Lord, 
"who gave himself a ransom for all"— a ransom-price. 
We, therefore, have none of this ransom merit in us; 
but when he gives us a share of this, or imputes 
it to us, and then, by virtue of our consecration 
and his becoming our Advocate, the Father receives us as 
members of his Body, we thus become members of the 
Ransomer, because his work of ransoming is not completed. 
He has indeed given the ransom-price, but he has 
not yet applied this price for all. We had nothing whatever 
to do with the matter at the time the price was 
laid down, but we become identified with him before 
that price is applied to the world. We have, therefore, 
that much share in the ransoming-work, because the word 
"ransom" takes the thought not only of the work that 
Jesus did in the past, but also of the whole procedure 
down to the very end of the Millennial Age. To ransom 
means, not only to purchase, but to receive or to recover 
the thing that is purchased. We have nothing to do with 
the payment of the price that secures the ransom, but we 
have something to do— and are counted in with him— in 
the work of recovering that which was bought with his 
merit. 

It will take all of the Millennial Age to recover 
mankind in the full sense of the word, to ransom them or 
to bring them back; as we read, "I will ransom them from 
the power of the grave." The ransom-price for that purpose 
was paid nearly 1 ,900 years ago, but they are not yet 
ransomed from the grave and will not be until the 
awakening time in the Millennium. Then, as they gradually 
come out of sin and death conditions, the full intent 
and purpose of that ransoming will be in process of accomplishment, 
and since the Church is to be associated 
with Christ in all the work of the Millennial Kingdom, 
therefore the Church, in that sense of the word, will be 
identified with the ransoming work, or the work of 
deliverance. 

As represented in the "sin-offering," the merit 
originally proceeded from the great High Priest, who is 
Jesus, and that merit is conferred upon the Church, his 
Body, not apart from himself, but as members of himself. 
He does not treat us as separate from himself. He 
is simply adding to himself these members, and as soon 
as we become justified through his merit and accepted of 
the Father as members of his Body, we are members of 
the great High Priest who has a great work to do; and 
when the merit that has been imputed to us, and to every 
spirit-begotten member of the household of faith, shall be 



available for disposal the second time, all the members of 
his Body will have participation in the application of his 
sacrifice, in the sprinkling of the New Covenant. 

Our Lord's present invitation is to drink with him his 
"cup," to partake of it. This is the blood of the New 
Covenant, his blood, "shed for many for the remission 
of sins," of which we are all to drink, and it takes the 
entire Gospel Age to find the proper number of those who 
are thus invited in harmony with the Father's plan, and 
who are willing to drink of this cup, to be baptized into 
his death. 



R4617 :page 168 

THE HEAVEN-PROVIDED BREAD 

-MAY 29.-MATTHEW 14:13-21; 15:29-39.- 

Golden Text:— "I am the bread of life."— John 6:35. 

THE GOSPELS give us two distinctly different 

miracles of feeding the multitude 

in the wilderness places. On one occasion 

the number fed was five thousand and in 

the other four thousand. In the one case 

it was a lad who provided five small barley 

cakes and two fishes; in the other the 

disciples themselves had seven loaves and 

a few fishes. In one instance twelve 

baskets full of fragments were gathered 

after the repast; in the other seven baskets full. St. 

Matthew's Gospel records both of these miracles. In 

each instance there was a seeming necessity for the 

miracle, and the necessity prompted our Lord's compassion 

and the use of the Divine power. It will be noticed 

that in these instances the Master used for the benefit of 

others the special powers communicated to him at the 

time of his baptism through the descent of the holy 

Spirit; but we recall that Jesus refused to use this same 

power selfishly for his own comfort, even when he hungered 

after having spent forty days in the wilderness at 

the outstart of his work, studying the Scriptures to know 

the mind of the Lord, how he should suffer and become 

the Mediator of the New Covenant. 

"BUT SOME DOUBTED" 

Not all, even of those who associated with our Lord, 
understood, appreciated, believed in his wonderful 
miracles. Where there is a desire to disbelieve there is 
also a possibility. Indeed, the Scriptures are evidently 
quite true in their assurances that faith is a difficult 
matter at the present time; and that for this very reason it 
is specially appreciated of the Lord in those who profess 



to be his followers. The Scriptures intimate that faith 
is a gift of God, while at the same time it is a matter of 
our own exercise. It is for God to set forth the facts and 
bring them to our attention. It is for us to be able to appreciate 
those facts and to exercise the corresponding 
faith. As the Scriptures declare, "All men have not faith"; 
"Without faith it is not possible to please God"; "According 
to thy faith be it unto thee." 

God has not made faith equally possible to all, in 
that he has not given mankind the same opportunities for 
exercising faith by not giving all the same degree of 
knowledge upon which to base faith. And even amongst 
those who have the necessary knowledge, faith must depend 
considerably upon the structure of the brain. Some 
people have scarcely anything of faith; others with a different 
structure of brain, are inclined to believe too much 
—to be credulous and easily hoaxed. 

While God declares that none can be of his Church 
now being called unless they have faith, including the 
necessary knowledge as a basis for it, yet he does not say 
that those who have not the knowledge and have not the 
faith will, on that account, be turned over to demons for 
eternal torture. On the contrary such already suffer a 
measure of deprivation of joy and of blessing. Failure on 
their part to exercise faith should not bring upon them 
any additional disadvantages. God has decreed that faith 
shall "come by hearing and hearing by the Word of God;" 
that none can believe except they hear, and that none 
but the believing will have part in the Church's salvation 

R4617 :page 169 

now being effected. But he has equally decreed and 
arranged for the great mass of mankind who have never 
had the sufficiency of knowledge and of faith, that all may 
yet come to a salvable condition. Indeed, God has 
specially made the way of faith in this age a "narrow" 
one, that thereby he may select a very special class. But 
these selected or elected ones, as the Scriptures show, are 
to be the Royal Priests of the next age, who will enlighten 
and instruct all the families of the earth. Then 
"all the blind eyes shall be opened and the deaf ears shall 
be unstopped." (Isa. 35:5.) Then everything in the 
Divine arrangement connected with mankind will be 
openly revealed, plain to be understood; as the Scriptures 
say of that time— then the way-faring man, though simple, 
need not err as respects the way of righteousness. Let 
us, however, rejoice if we are amongst the blessed, the 
favored ones of the present time to whom the things of 
God are not obscure— of those whose hearts are so in 
tune with the Infinite One that the things of faith revealed 
to us in the Scriptures do not seem unreasonable. 

THE LANGUAGE OF FAITH 

Approached from the Bible standpoint, these 



miracles are most rational, but not from any other 
standpoint. The power of God, which produces, in the 
recently discovered "miracle-wheat," as much as two hundred 
and fifty grains from one kernel, is surely sufficient 
to produce many times as much if the necessity occurred. 
Are we not surrounded by miracles continually? Out of 
the same ground and growing side by side we get blue, 
red, white, yellow and purple flowers from seeds which we 
could not tell apart; similarly with animal life— the oats 
which constitute the breakfast of so many humans, help 
to produce human heads and faces and hands and feet, 
hair and nails for black and white and yellow races. 
Similar oats fed to horses, mules and donkeys sustain 
very different organisms of very different shapes and 
qualities. The same oats fed to birds and chickens produce 
feathers, claws, etc. Are not these miracles which 
we do not understand? 

If the wisest and most skillful man in the world cannot 
produce a flea nor the very smallest germinating grain, 
how great must be the Creator who formed all things and 
who gave to man all that he possesses! How can we 
limit the powers of such a Creator when once we have 
recognized him? He that made the eyes, can he not see? 
He that made the arm, has he no strength? He that made 
the human brain and stamped it what it is, has he not infinitely 
greater wisdom and power? This, then, is the 
lesson to us of the loaves and fishes. 

It is the lesson of Divine power; a lesson also that 
Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of God, through whom 
that Divine power was exercised. This lesson leads us 
onward to the thought that this same Jesus is appointed 
of the Father to be the Savior of the world. Thus far 
merely the Church, the elect, his Bride, has been selected, 
along lines of faith. Shortly the new dispensation will 
usher in the reign of knowledge and glorious opportunities 
for the opening of the eyes of all to see, to know, to 
appreciate, things Divine and to come, if they will, into 
the condition in which they may enjoy "the gift of God, 
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord." 



R4618 :page 169 

ST. PETER CRIED "LORD, SAVE ME" 

-JUNE 5. -MATTHEW 14:22-36.- 

Golden Text:— "Then they that were in the ship came and worshiped 
him, saying, Of a truth thou are the Son of God." 

RESPECTING its heroes the Bible, unlike any 
other religious book, tells the naked truth. 
Today's study emphasizes both the strength 
and the weakness of St. Peter's natural disposition. 
We identify the character here 



pictured as the same which was displayed 

on other occasions— noble and courageous, 

but rather forward and boastful. Not a 

single weakness of any of the Bible 

characters seems to be smoothed down or 

cut away in the narrative. It was this same St. Peter 

who, after hearing Jesus tell of his approaching death, 

took the Master to task for it, upbraiding him for speaking 

after this manner and assuring him that he did not 

tell the truth, and that the disciple knew more than his 

Master; that the latter was either ignorant or else wilfully 

misrepresenting the future. No wonder the Master rebuked 

him, as in this matter being an adversary. 

The same courageous man afterward drew his sword 
and smote the servant of the High Priest in his Master's 
defense. Yet with all this it was only a few hours later 
when he denied him entirely with oaths and cursing. 
Nevertheless, the Master loved him; with his peculiar 
combination of weakness and strength he had, withal, a 
noble, faithful heart, even while he boastfully declared, 
"Though all men forsake thee, yet will not I." 
Our study shows us St. Peter with the other disciples in a 
fishing-boat on a boisterous sea. Jesus had declined to 
go with them in the boat, withdrawing himself to the 
mountain for a season of prayer. The boat had not yet 
reached her destination, when the disciples saw the 
Master walking upon the water and drawing near. At 
first they were all affrighted; then reassurance came from 
his word, and finally St. Peter asked the Lord's permission 
that he might walk to him on the water. This permission 
was granted, and we cannot doubt that, had the 
Apostle maintained his faith, he would have reached the 
Lord in safety, for the same power that had exercised 
itself in him and in the other disciples for the healing of 
sick and the casting out of demons was absolutely able 
to keep him from sinking into the water. 

"O THOU OF LITTLE FAITH" 

But while St. Peter's faith was stronger than that of 
the others and stronger than ours today, in that he even 
attempted to walk on the water, nevertheless it was 
not strong enough. As his eye caught a glimpse of the 
boisterousness of the sea his faith began to fail and he 
began to sink. The Master, however, caught him, saying, 
"O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt" ! 
The lesson of the occasion being ended, the wind ceased. 
All the disciples then offered the Lord their worship, 
realizing afresh that he was the Son of God in power; 
that even the winds and the waves obeyed him. 
"A hand that is not ours upstays our steps, 
A voice that is not ours commands the waves; 
Commands the waves, and whispers in our ear, 
O, thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt?" 
All are sinners. "There is none righteous; no, not 
one." Some do not realize the extent of their imperfections. 



R4618 :page 170 

Nevertheless it is safe to say that all sane people 
recognize themselves as imperfect and hence as unworthy 
the recognition of the great Creator. They cannot commend 
themselves to him as being worthy of his favor and 
life eternal. It is when this conviction of unworthiness 
becomes deep-seated; when the realization is keen that 
"the wage of sin is death," that the heart is most likely 
to realize the value of life eternal and to cry unto the 
Lord for deliverance from darkness, from sin's bondage 
and from its death sentence. To all such the Savior 
stands ready to lend a helping hand, as in St. Peter's case. 
He will not reproach such for their sins if they have repented 
of them and turned to righteousness. Rather, he 
will say, "Why did you not come sooner? I was quite 
willing to aid you as soon as you cried." 

THREATS OF TORTURE FAILED TO CONVERT THE 
WORLD 

Our forefathers used to think that they should picture 
before the sinner's mind an everlasting torture at the 
hands of devils. It seemed to them that such pictures 
would be more successful in drawing men from sin to 
righteousness than the Scripture penalty which declares 
that the wages of sin is death, "everlasting destruction." 
(2 Thess. 1:9.) But they overdid the matter. Their 
message failed to convert the world. It merely tortured 
the saintly, the loving, the Godlike. Men reasoned that 
there was probably some mistake about it, as it is contrary 
to all human experiences that life could persist in 
such untellable torture. Now, however, with the aid of 
the modern Bible, superior translations, marginal references, 
etc., the people of God are learning more and more 
that God's Word is true and that it should not be twisted 
—that when it says death it does not mean life in torture. 

Indeed, some have told us that to their minds the 
utter blotting out of existence which God has ordained 
to be the fate of those who refuse his every opportunity 
and offer of salvation is more of a terror to them than 
life in any condition would be. One reason that it has 
greater terrors undoubtedly is that it is more rational, 
and thinking people can and do receive it more earnestly 
and give it more weight. It is from everlasting destruction 
that the Savior stands ready to deliver every member 
of Adam's race from the death penalty— from the tomb 
and all the imperfections of mind and body which are 
parts of death. Jesus' death at Calvary was of sufficient 
value to cancel the sins of the first man and of all those 
who share the death penalty with him. Without 
Christ's death there would be no resurrection, no future 
life. 

A little while and the faithful ones shall come forth 
in the "first resurrection" to be Christ's Joint-heirs. Then 



will come the general uplift of mankind, including the 
awakening of those of the whole world from the sleep of 
death. Our Lord's help of Peter corresponds to that 
greater help of the whole world. It also illustrates 
how those who have already become the children of God 
would be in danger of sinning again, were it not for our 
Lord's helping hand. 



R4618 :page 170 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

THE RANSOM WORK 

QUESTION.— Were the physical sufferings of 
our Lord Jesus requisite to the ransoming 
of humanity? 

The Ransom, or corresponding price 
which our Lord Jesus gave, consisted 
in his being the Perfect Man with all the 
rights of Adam and in these being surrendered 
or given up to death regardless of 
whether his death would be an easy or 
a painful one. The Scriptures say that "it 
pleased the Father to bruise him," not indicating by this, 
however, that our Heavenly Father took pleasure in the 
sufferings of his Son, but that this was his pleasure so 
far as his Plan of Salvation, etc., were concerned. He 
put severe tests upon this One who would be the Redeemer 
of mankind, not only to develop him as the beginning 
of a new creation (Heb. 2:10) and to prove his 
character, but also to manifest to us and to angels and to 
all creatures the wonderful obedience of the Lord Jesus 
and his worthiness of the high exaltation to the divine 
nature and all the glorious offices to be accorded him. 
Hence the Father provided that he must be "led as a lamb 
to the slaughter," and he also provided, in the Jewish 
Law, that the extreme curse of that Law should be a death 
penalty on the tree. "Cursed is every one that hangeth 
on a tree." 

These provisions, we understand, were not of Divine 
necessity, but of Divine wisdom and expediency. It was 
necessary that Christ should suffer that he might enter 
into his glory— before he could be the qualified High 
Priest, and ultimately accomplish the work of Mediator 
between God and the world of mankind; hence his sufferings 
were permitted for the testing, the proving of himself. 
And so with the sufferings that come to the Body 
of Christ, the Church. They are for our own development. 
The Father deals with us as with sons. He lovingly 
chastises and corrects us that he may thereby fit and 
prepare us and demonstrate our worthiness of the glorious 
reward which he has arranged for us with our Lord, 
and under him. 



We get the right view of the entire matter, we believe, 
when we see that the death of Jesus was not the ransom; 
that it did not accomplish the ransom-work, but simply 
furnished the ransom-price; and that the ransoming with 
that price is a matter that is done in the "Most Holy"— 
in heaven. To explain: He ascended up on high, having 
to his credit the price or value sufficient to ransom the 
whole world, but none of it yet applied for any one. He 
has appropriated the merit of that ransom-price to the 
Church, imputing this merit to them during this Gospel 
Age, to cover their Adamic sins and to make good, to 
compensate for, the imperfection of their mortal bodies, 
thus enabling them to present sacrifices which God can and 
will accept through the merit of their Advocate. 

But that ransom-price, so far as the world is concerned, 
is still in reservation and will be given on behalf 
of them, as represented by the "sprinkling of the blood" 
at the end of the Day of Atonement, shortly now, in the 
beginning of the Millennial Age, to seal the New Covenant 
and to put into operation all the glorious provisions which 
God has made for the world. 

We believe it to be a very important matter to keep 
distinctly separate the work which Jesus did and the 
value of that in God's sight as an asset, something to his 
credit on the heavenly account and something which he 
now applies to us, and by and by will give in perpetuity 
to mankind as their ransom-price. 

R4619 :page 171 

OUTWARD POLISH VS. INWARD GRACE 

Question.— What constitutes the difference between the 
outward polish and politeness of some natural men 
and that polish and politeness which properly belongs to 
the New Creature, developed in the fruits and graces of 
the holy Spirit? 

Answer.— The qualities of meekness, gentleness, patience, 
etc., are qualities that belonged to the first man 
when he was created in the image and likeness of God. 
They are, therefore, human qualities that may be cultivated 
to a certain extent by any human being, and should 
be striven for by all. But, as a matter of fact, as a result 
of the fall, selfishness and general meanness have 
depraved the appetites and ways of all mankind to so 
great an extent that, as the Scriptures say, there is none 
righteous, perfect, no, not one; "from the crown of the 
head to the sole of the foot," all are imperfect. Hence 
no natural man would have these glorious traits of character 
largely and fully developed, though there certainly 
is a difference between the development of some and that 
of others. 

We see, however, that aside from these natural graces, 
some worldly people have assumed something of the 
various graces of the Spirit. In their business methods 
they attempt to be gentle, and properly so. It is considered 



a part of the proper conduct of colleges, and especially 
ladies' seminaries, to instruct the young in politeness, 
in what to say and what not to say; in how to say 
things and how not to say things; and all of this brings 
an outward smoothness to these persons in their general 
deportment. In such cases, however, the smoothness is 
cultivated because of the idea that this constitutes "good 
breeding"; that this is what any lady or gentleman should 
do or say; and thus it may be a mere veneer, not really 
effecting the sentiments of the heart. The person may 
be outwardly very calm and smooth and pleasant, and 
yet at heart feel very sour and envious and mean. 

Those who are merely outward observers might not 
be able to ascertain whether that man or woman were 
actuated by the proper spirit or not. They might not be 
able to know whether these changes were the "fruits of 
the spirit" or fruits of good education, but anyone knowing 
well the private life of such persons would be sure 
to ascertain the facts, because, as the old expression has 
it, "Murder will out"; and these persons, while they 
might preserve a smooth outward demeanor, would occasionally, 
in private at least, demonstrate that they were 
not in sympathy with the outward demeanor, but that it 
was merely a veneer, and to that extent hypocrisy. Perhaps 
a measure of hypocrisy in that sense would be advisable 
for some people; it might be better for them to 
put on a little veneer if they cannot have the genuine 
article; better that they should appear smooth rather 
than appear rough; it would at least help the world along 
a little for them to be as smooth as they are able in their 
general dealings. 

The merchant who, after pulling down large stocks 
of goods and telling a customer that it is no trouble at all 
to show goods, that he is just pleased at having the opportunity 
to do so, and that there is no obligation whatever 
in the matter, and showing the very essence of politeness, 
but who, after the lady is gone out of the store, 
stamps his foot and complains, announces thus to all in 
his company, that his politeness is merely assumed as a 
necessity in the business. He does this either for his 
own sake, if he is the proprietor of the store, or for the 
sake of his situation, if he is an employee. 

With the Christian these graces are developed from 
within. Whatever he may have been naturally, smooth 
or rough, the New Creature cultivates and approves these 
graces in the heart, and they reach from the heart 
all the way to the surface. It is the new mind that 
is regulating the New Creature, and the New Creature, 
instead of having smoothness merely on the outside, has 
it running clear through the grain from the very core. 

This New Creature that is thus developing may not at 
all times have as smooth an outward exterior as some of 
the old creatures who have the veneer for the sake of 
money or for other reasons. They may have worse 
natural dispositions; they may have naturally less 
patience, or less sympathy, or may be moved by such 



honesty as would lead them to avoid saying anything different 
from what they would feel, anything different 
from what would be their sentiments; and their sentiments, 
not having yet reached the right point, sometimes 
impel them to say the wrong thing. These, of course, 
should learn to govern the outward man even before all 
their sentiments have come into fullest sympathy with the 
Spirit of the Lord. They should recognize the proprieties 
of outward conduct, and speedily get in line with 
these proprieties, and as rapidly as possible bring every 
sentiment into full accord with the Spirit of the Lord that 
they may become more and more kind and loving and 
helpful to others and thus "show forth the praises of him 
who has called them out of darkness into his marvelous 
light." 



THE SAME VAIL UNTAKEN AWAY 

Question.— Please explain this text: "And not as 
Moses, which put a vail over his face that the children of 
Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which 
is abolished; but their minds were blinded, for until this 
day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading 
of the Old Testament, which vail is done away in Christ." 
-2 Cor. 3:13,14. 

Answer.— It was the intention that the Law Covenant 
should not be perpetual, because of the imperfections connected 
therewith. It has not yet been abolished, however, 
in the sense of being totally set aside. It is still 
operating and is still a condemnation upon those who 
are under it. But "to those who are in Christ Jesus," 
there is now no further condemnation; it is abolished so 
far as they are concerned. 

The thought, then, would be that the Apostle is here 
speaking of the Law Covenant being abolished in the 
sense that it is condemned or that its passing away is 
arranged for. "Christ has become the end of the Law for 
righteousness to every one that believeth," not to every 
one who has given merely an intellectual assent, but to all 
who believe in the Scriptural sense— to all those who become 
his followers, all those who so thoroughly believe 
his message as to accept the wonderful provisions he has 
offered; for it may properly be said that no one is fully a 
believer who does not accept God's offer of glory, honor 
and immortality— a proposition so wonderful that any 
one whose faith truly grasps it would sacrifice every other 
thing imaginable that he might avail himself of its offer. 

If, therefore, some obey partially, the inference is that 
they believe only partially; but if they believe fully, then 
all the arrangements are made for them whereby they 
may make their "calling and election sure"; hence the 
frequent statements that "all things" are for believers— 
those who believe in the proper, full, thorough sense. So 
"Christ is the end of the Law" to all these, and the arrangement 



is that all the world shall yet have the opportunity 
of coming to a full knowledge and full belief, 
during the Millennial Age. The whole Jewish nation 
will be granted an opportunity of transfer from the Law 

R4619 :page 172 

Covenant, under Moses, to the New [Law] Covenant, 
under the glorified Christ, in his Mediatorial Kingdom. 



SIGNIFICANCE OF THE UNDER-PRIESTS. 

Question.— In the appointment of the Aaronic priesthood, 
Aaron was the High Priest and his sons were associate 
priests. Is the fact that his sons were associated 
with him specially typical? 

Answer.— Evidently the type was intended to teach 
that these under-priests were the members, or body, of 
the High Priest, because that was the form in which the 
matter was expressed. He was to "make atonement for 
himself and his house." Now, what is the thought in this 
word "himself"? How would we most clearly express it? 
What relationship except that of a wife would more 
nearly represent one's self? The sons of Aaron, then, 
would represent him in a special manner, as though they 
were his body. A father is represented in his son in a 
particular sense. The type of the High Priest in his 
office would thus be maintained through successive 
generations. The sons were not, as sons, typical, but 
sons were in type the best representation of the body of 
the priest that could be made, and hence were representative 
of us, who are the Body of Christ. 

Question.— Are there any antitypical priests doing a 
priestly work at this time? 

Answer.— To our understanding the picture of the 
"priest" is an individual picture. It is not a work which 
priests are in a collective sense to do, but here the one 
priest is to do the work. In other words, the under-priests 
are merely recognized as representatives of the 
priest, the same as we are representatives of Christ. In 
that sense of the word it might be said that there is only 
one priest, the officiating priest, the one who does the 
particular work; but in another sense there is an under-priesthood 
—in the sense that we have a separate personality, 
as individuals, yet acting in conjunction with our 
Lord as his members. 

While recognizing the Scripture, "ye are a royal 
priesthood," let us lay stress on the Apostle's words which 
declare of our Lord, "if he were on earth he could not be 
a priest, seeing that there are priests who offer according 
to the Law." The Apostle then proceeds to prove that 
our Lord was a Priest after the order of Melchisedec, and 
that this Melchisedec priesthood was acknowledged of 
God with an oath, and that Aaron and his priesthood were 



never acknowledged thus. But respecting this man the 
Lord said, "I have sworn with an oath, thou art a Priest 
forever after the order of Melchisedec." 

Melchisedec was, of course, only the one priest, and 
that one priest, therefore, represented all our Lord's members, 
and since the great work of the antitypical Priest is 
in the future, and is not the present work, we see that 
this is the reason why Aaron is not so particularly referred 

R4620 : page 172 

to in the type of the Great Priest. The Great 
Priest will really do his great work during the Millennial 
Age, and what is done in the present time is merely a 
preparatory work, preparing himself for work. 

First, the Lord Jesus, in the three and one-half years 
of his ministry, proved himself worthy to be the Priest, 
and during the 1800 years since he is proving us worthy 
to be his members, and by the time he shall have completed 
his work of proving us all worthy, with himself, 
for this great and honorable position of Prophet, Priest, 
Mediator, King, Judge of the world, he will at the same 
time have to his credit certain merit which he can apply 
for the world and on account of which he can perform a 
priestly office for mankind. The priestly office, as before 
stated, is more that of the future than of the present. 
The present time is the sacrificing time, the time for 
making a covenant with the Lord by sacrifice. 

We agree, of course, that none of us is doing the sacrificing. 
The high priest smote the bullock and killed it, 
and the high priest, likewise, smote the goat and killed it. 
Then came the presentation; as, for instance, when the 
Apostle says, "Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, 
acceptable unto God," etc., he is not here saying, Perform 
the work of a priest upon your body, but offer yourself 
as a sacrifice to the Lord; he may accept you; he may 
sacrifice you, and he may perform a service upon you 
which will prepare you for a share with himself, as a 
member of his Body, in the glorious work of the future, 
in the work of blessing all the families of the earth, in 
the work of ushering in the Times of Restoration which 
God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets 
since the world began.— Acts 3:19-21. 



page 172 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION CONVENTIONS 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 5 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 
o'clock, in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks St. The 
evening meeting at 7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. 
Discourse for the Public at 3 p.m. in the Brooklyn 



Academy of Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. Felix St. 
Topic, "Jerusalem." 

LOUISVILLE, KY., JUNE 17-19 

Convention Hall, Scottish Rites Cathedral, Sixth and 
Walnut Sts. Services for the Public Sunday, June 19, 3 
p.m., Macauley's Theatre, Fourth and Walnut Sts. 
Bro. Russell will speak on "The Thief in Paradise; the 
Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." For 
particulars as to lodging, meals, etc., address Brother 
Percy McCormack, 1160 15th St., Louisville, Ky. 

CINCINNATI, OHIO, JUNE 20 

Morning meeting for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 
and afternoon meeting with address for the interested 
at 2:30 to be held in Germania Hall, 132 E. Court St., 
near Court House. Evening session at 8 o'clock at Music 
Hall, Elm St. near 12th. Discourse for the public; topic, 
"The Thief in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus 
in Abraham's Bosom." 

CANTON, OHIO, JUNE 21 

Morning Rally at 10:30 o'clock. Discourse for the interested 
at 2:30 p.m. in McCurdy Block Hall, Walnut 
and East Tuscarawas Sts. Evening session for the public 
at 7:45 in the Auditorium. Subject, "Where Are the 
Dead?" 

MUNCIE, IND., JUNE 22 

Morning Rally at 10:30. Discourse for the interested 
at 3 p.m. in Red Men's Hall, High and Jackson Sts. 
Public meeting in the Wysor Grand Opera House at 8 
p.m. Subject, "The Overthrow of Satan's Empire." 

LIMA, OHIO, JUNE 23 

All meetings in the Auditorium of the Memorial 
Building, Elm and Elizabeth Sts. Praise, Prayer and Testimony 

page 173 

meeting, 10 a.m. Discourse for the interested at 
2:30 p.m. Meeting for the public at 7:30 p.m. Subject, 
"The Thief in Paradise; the Rich Man in Hell; 
Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." 

DAYTON, OHIO, JUNE 24 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10. Discourse 
for the interested at 2:30 p.m. in Rauh Hall, S. 
W. cor. Fourth and Jefferson Sts. Service for the public 
at 8 p.m. in Memorial Hall; topic, "The Thief in Paradise; 



the Rich Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's 
Bosom." 

CHICAGO, ILL., JUNE 24-26 

All sessions in Orchestra Hall, Michigan Ave., between 
Jackson Boulevard and Adams St. Discourse for the 
Public Sunday, June 26, 3 p.m., by Brother Russell. 
Topic, "Hereafter." If a sufficient number of the friends 
attend this Convention, railroads have promised one and 
one-half fare for the round trip from all points except 
the extreme West and from nearby places where the 
regular fare is less than $ 1 one way. Purchase tickets 
one way only, and get a certificate, showing that you have 
paid full fare to Chicago on account of Watch Tower 
Bible & Tract Society's Convention. Notify your agent 
in advance so that he may have plenty of time to secure 
the certificate and ticket. The certificate, plus 25c, will 
entitle you to purchase your return ticket at one-half 
the regular rate. For particulars, address Brother John 
Hoskins, 418 W. 67th Blvd., Chicago, 111. 

TOLEDO, OHIO, JUNE 26 AND 27 

Morning Rally, afternoon and evening services on 
Sunday, June 26, Pythian Castle, Jefferson and Ontario 
Sts. Service for the public Monday, June 27, 7:30 
p.m., Memorial Hall, Adams and Ontario Sts. Discourse 
by Brother Russell on "The Thief in Paradise; the Rich 
Man in Hell; Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom." All Monday 
meetings in the same building. For particulars, address 
Charles Moser, 842 Norwood Ave., Toledo, O. 
Come all who can and let those who cannot join us at 
these conventions in person, join us in spirit and in 
prayers, and thus participate in the showers of refreshing 
which the Lord will surely grant. 



R4620 : page 173 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION 

ON FRIDAY EVENING, April 22d, approximately 

360 celebrated our dear Redeemer's 

Memorial Supper in Brooklyn Tabernacle. 

The occasion was a very solemn and impressive 

one. It was shown that the eating 

of the bread pictured the appropriation of 

our Lord's human rights, by which we were 

justified and by which our justification or 

righteousness in God's sight is maintained, 

notwithstanding the imperfections which 

are ours through heredity. It was also shown that the 

blood represented primarily our Lord's earthly life rights 

appropriated to us, justifying us to life. 



Then the second and larger view of the matter was 
shown in the light of the Apostle's words— that all of the 
faithful, all of the Royal Priesthood, all of the members 
of the one Body of Christ, join with their Lord in becoming 
the One Loaf and join with him also in the breaking 
of that Loaf, that it may be the Bread of Restitution 
to the world of mankind. It was also shown in the light of 
the Apostle's words, that in becoming members of the 
Body of Christ we become sharers with our Lord in his 
cup of suffering, in his sacrifice of earthly life. It was 
further shown that in the Divine purpose this earthly life, 
which we surrender forever, goes under the New Covenant 
to Israel, Judah and all the families of the earth, 
while we are granted spiritual life. 

"The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion 
(fellowship-sharing) of the blood of Christ? The 
bread which we break, is it not the communion (in his 
sufferings) of the Body of Christ? For we being many 
are one bread and one Body; for we are all partakers 
(sharers) of that one Bread."— I Cor. 10:16,17. 

As a fresh glimpse was thus taken at the significance 
of the "deep things of God," the hearts of all were stirred 
to their depth. How wonderful it seems that we should 
be called to such an intimate association with our Lord 
and Redeemer, both in the sufferings of this present time 
and in the glories that shall follow, called to be "dead 
with him, that we might live with him." 

Almost all present partook of the Memorial emblems. 
The service was closed with prayer, followed by a 
hymn, after which all went out quietly, without the usual 
greetings, striving to carry, so far as possible, the precious 
thoughts of the occasion. 

Reports thus far received are that the celebration has 
been very general and the numbers participating very encouraging. 
Altogether the general interests of the harvest 
work seem to be deepening and broadening. We deeply 
appreciate the privilege of serving the Lord of the harvest 
in whatever way he may indicate. Let us all continue 
to do with our might what our hands find to do, and thus 
show forth more and more the praises of him who has 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. Let 
us resolve to keep our hearts with increasing diligence, 
recognizing that out of them are the issues of life. 

Below are some reports of the numbers participating 
in the Memorial celebration in the more prominent congregations 
which have thus far reported attendances of 
twenty and above:— 

Newark, O.; Elwood, Ind.; McLoud, Okla.; Bethlehem, 
Pa.; Kalamazoo, Mich., 20. Auburn, Ind.; Norfolk, Va.; 
Shawnee, Okla.; Abilene, Kan., 21. Rockford, 111.; Lime 
Sink, Ga.; Muncie, Ind.; Houston, Tex. (colored); Tacoma, 
Wash., 22. Colorado Springs, Colo., 23. Jacksonville, Fla.; 
Jackson, Mich., 24. Hamilton, Ont.; Cromwell, Conn.; Winnipeg, 
Man.; York, Pa., 25. Moore, Pa.; Port Huron, Mich.; 
Cohoes, N.Y.; Reading, Pa., 26. Butler, Pa.; Everett, 
Wash.; Harrisburg, Pa., 27. Dundee, Scot.; Tiffin, O.; 



New Brunswick, N.J., 28. Kewanee, 111., 29. Ashland, Ore.; 

Tampa, Fla., 30. Leicester, Eng.; New Brighton, Pa., 32. 

Johnstown, Pa., 33. New Liskeard, Ont., 34. Grand Rapids, 

Mich.; St. Petersburg, Fla.; Allentown, Pa., 35. Port Limon, 

Costa Rica, 36. Milwaukee, Wis., 37. Schenectady, N.Y., 

38. Stockholm, Sweden, 40. Atlanta, Ga., 41. Hayne, N.C., 

41. Omaha, Neb., 42. Bristol, Eng.; Lynn, Mass., 43. Denver, 

Colo.; Spokane, Wash.; Richmond, Va.; Worcester, 

Mass.; Youngstown, O.; Roseland, 111., 44. Altoona, Pa.; 

Kingston, Jamaica; Camberwell, Jamaica, 45. Houston, Tex. 

(white); Portland, Ore., 46. Bridgetown, Barbadoes, 47. 

Springfield, Mass., 50. Baltimore, Md., 51. St. Joseph, Mo.; 

Binghamton, N.Y., 52. Newark, N.J. , 53. Louisville, Ky.; 

Toledo, O., 54. Lancaster, Pa., 56. Kansas City, Mo., 57. 

Detroit, Mich., 59. Cincinnati, O., 65. Dayton, O., 67. Indianapolis, 

Ind.; San Antonio, Tex., 68. Columbus, O., 76. Toronto, 

Ont, 84. St. Louis, Mo., 96. Seattle, Wash., 103. 

Orebro, 107. Washington, D.C., 112. St. Paul and Minneapolis, 

Minn., 115. Providence, R. I., 105. Philadelphia, Pa., 

150. Chicago, 111., 275. Boston, Mass., 260. Glasgow, 308. 

Allegheny, Pa., 330. Brooklyn, N.Y., 360. 



R4620 : page 174 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

On Sunday morning thirty Sisters and fourteen 
Brothers symbolized their consecration into Christ's death 
by water immersion, and on Friday evening following partook 
of the Memorial Supper here in Glasgow; 287 in the 
Berkeley Hall, and 18 in their homes. As the time draws 
so near when the last of these Suppers will be partaken 
of by us, and when we shall "drink the wine anew" with 
our dear Lord in his Kingdom, we feel solemnized; but at 
the same time we are enabled by the Lord's grace to lift 
up our heads and rejoice, knowing that the time of our 
deliverance draweth nigh. 

While we were partaking of the Supper, we called to 
mind that several of our number had already passed beyond 
the vail since the last occasion. We remembered 
also many of our dear brothers and sisters who have 
emigrated from Scotland during the past year, and we 
prayed that the Lord would keep them faithful and continue 
to use them in his glorious service. We remembered 
also that a few of our number have ceased to meet 
with us because they differ, and we are praying that the 
Lord may open their eyes. 

We are looking forward with glad anticipation to the 
near visit of our beloved Pastor, and are preparing to distribute 
100,000 of the PEOPLES PULPIT issue, from door 
to door, in order to advertise the public meeting which 
(D.V.) he will address here on May 17. 

Requesting your prayers on our behalf, as we also 



pray for you, I am, 
Yours in our One Hope, JOHN EDGAR-Scotland. 



page 174 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

On Friday evening, April 22, 32 of the Ecclesia at 
Leicester participated in the Memorial of our Lord's 
Death. We realized that it was a privilege, not only to 
memorialize the death of our Lord, but to be counted 
worthy to suffer with him as prospective members of his 
Body, and in due time to reign with him if faithful. 

We also felt the nearness of the time when all the 
faithful ones will be gathered, and our earnest prayer 
is that we may ever abide in the "House" and have the 
"door-posts of our hearts" sprinkled with the blood, and 
be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the 
saints in light. With much Christian love, I am, dear 
Brother, 

Sincerely yours in the Lord's grace, 

HENRY S. PORTER. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Church here celebrated the memorial of our Lord's 
death. Thirty-six partook of the supper, and pledged 
themselves anew to be "broken with him" and with each 
other, and to "drink the cup" which he drank, trusting in 
his merit and grace sufficient to help us to be faithful 
even unto death. 

On Friday morning eleven persons symbolized their 
consecration. We had a Prayer, Praise and Testimony 
Meeting and the Supper after 8 P.M. It was a glorious 
day and the Lord was with us. We remembered all in 
our prayers. With Christian love from the Church, 

Yours in fellowship and service, 

J. L. A. CONDELL-Costa Rica. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

It gives us great pleasure to be again privileged to forward 
you a report of our Memorial Service held on Friday, 
April 22. Twenty-eight brethren met in our hall, 
and a very impressive service was held, special attention 
being directed to the thought that very soon now, these 
Memorials will be at an end, and our heavenly hopes 
realized. 

Praying the Lord's rich blessing on our beloved Pastor 
in his tour among us and with continued love from us all, 

Yours in the one Hope, DON F. MURRAY-Scotland. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Knowing your interest in the reports of the Memorial 
observed by the Lord's people, I am pleased to hand in 
this report of the observance of the Ecclesia here. 

Sixteen of the class met and observed the Memorial 
according to instruction received from the Bible and 
through the DAWNS and WATCH TOWERS. The service 
was very impressive and all received a blessing in having 
our minds centered on our Passover Lamb, "who is slain 
for us," and also on our participation in the one Loaf and 
the Cup. 

This was all the more impressive as we realized the 
few remaining years in which it will be possible for us 
to observe the Memorial in this manner. Our attention 
was also called to the joy with which we expect to drink 
the Cup anew with our Head in the Kingdom. 

It was a blessed occasion. We pray that we may remain 
faithful as each year brings us nearer to the time 
when "we shall see him as he is" and be seated with him 
in his throne and commence the grand work of 
Restitution. 

During the day we were blessed by keeping our minds 
on what was occurring in Jerusalem— after sunset there. 
We were impressed with the thought that probably this 
year Brother Russell and those with him were privileged 
to observe the Memorial in that "upper room," possibly 
next after it was observed by Jesus at its institution. 

May the dear Lord continue to bless us all with "every 
good and perfect gift that cometh down from above" ! 

Your loving brother in Christ, 

C. WILBUR WILEY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A company of consecrated followers of our dear Redeemer 
met together and partook of the Memorial Passover 
Supper. The occasion was solemn indeed. As 
each cup was drained, I am sure an appropriate prayer 
ascended from every heart that partook. We all appreciated, 
as never before, the great love of our heavenly 
Father for us, and the great privilege we have of being 
partakers of our Lord's broken body and shed blood, 
and we all went forth with renewed determination to 
follow more and more closely in the footsteps of our 
King. 

The service was conducted by our dear Brother Ganoung. 
Two of the number present came eighteen miles. 
They were Sister Lewis and Brother Schoonmaker, colporteur. 
With much love from all the class, and prayers 
always, that God will shower blessings upon you, we 
remain, 

Yours in love and fellowship, 

CLASS AT SENECA FALLS, N.Y. 



R4620 : page 174 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Our hearts were made glad as once again we celebrated 
the death of Christ, our Paschal Lamb, and our 
privilege of participation in the Body and in the death of 
The Christ, assurances of our future union with our 
living Head. The rarity of the occasion made it more 
precious. We considered that, at most, there are four 
remaining, and then we shall drink the product of the 
vine new in our Father's Kingdom. Forty-seven 
participated. 

Yours in Christ, A. T. JOHNSON-Barbadoes. 

page 175 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Memorial of our Lord's death was celebrated in 
our home, five fully consecrated persons participating. In 
the name of our Lord, the "Prince of Peace," we met. 
Brother H. F. Kuehn served the little company as we 
renewed our covenant with the Father of our Lord. 

It was a glad and solemn time: gladness for the great 
privilege of a participation in the same "loaf" and in the 
same "cup," and also for the great joy to know of the 
blessing that will come to all the families of the earth. 
We fully realized the Price which bought us, and the 
meaning of the covenant which we have made. 

Prayers were offered by all present, for all the dear 
ones "in our Lord," assembled together for this occasion; 
we also remembered you in particular, and those 
dear co-laborers with you in the Upper Room at Jerusalem. 
What a grand privilege you had! We seemed to 
realize the deep solemnity of such a great occasion, not 
only the being in the upper room, but the having one 
heart, one mind, one thought. Every heart seemed overflowing 
with love to our Heavenly Father and to our 
blessed Redeemer, Jesus Christ our Lord, and all the 
"household of faith." Our prayer is that we may be permitted 
to "die daily" in his cause, and to his honor and 
glory. 

We ask your prayers, dear Brother, and those of all 
your dear co-laborers, that we may be kept bound together 
in love, harmony and peace with God and our loving 
Master, and with each other during the coming years. 

Our dear brethren, Pilgrims A. Saphore and J. W. 
Adams, have made a very deep impression upon the hearts 
of the dear local brethren, and all present who heard their 
discourses. I hope that all present received some blessing 
through our Lord. 

May God's favor rest richly upon you and upon our 
mutual efforts to serve his cause. 

Yours in the love and service of our Lord, 
J. H. B. HOWARD-Tenn. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We know you will be interested in hearing from our 
little company regarding the celebration of the "Passover" 
Supper. Sixteen were present, and we felt the 
influence of the sweet fellowship which all of the Lord's 
people have in following the Master's instructions. It was 
a blessed thought that so many thought upon the dear 
Lord and were striving to be "broken" with him and pour 
out their lives in sacrifice. We feel sure his presence 
and Spirit were with us. We thought and spoke 
of the little company who were spending the Passover 
season amid the scenes and localities where our dear Lord 
passed the days of his earthly pilgrimage. No doubt he 
was in that "upper room" in person, even as he was so 
many years ago. 

We rejoice in the privilege of renewing our consecration 
vows and beginning another year with greater determination 
than ever to "run with patience the race set 
before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of 
our faith." May the Lord's blessing be with you is our 
prayer. THE CHURCH AT SANTA MONICA. 



page 175 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE CREATION 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE IS 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES, VOLUME VI--STUDY I 

"In the beginning." 

JUNE 19 

(1) What is signified by the opening sentence of 
the Bible, "In the beginning God created," etc.? And 
are there other beginnings recognized in the Bible? If 
so, what? P. 17, par. 2. 

(2) Does the Genesis account relate to the creation 

of our earth? If not, why not? And what are the limitations 
of the creative work as recorded in Genesis? P. 18, 
par. 2. 

(3) Does the word day apply invariably to the 
twenty-four-hour periods generally so called? If not, 
describe other uses of the term day in the Scriptures and 
give citations. P. 19, par. 1. 

(4) How may we be sure that the Genesis days do 
not signify solar days, as in the more common usage of 
the word? P. 19, par. 1. 

(5) Should we understand that all of the days of the 
creative week are of uniform length? And if we ascertain 
the length of one of those days, would we be justified 



in assuming that the others were of similar length? 
P. 19, par. 2. 

(6) If we were to estimate those creative days as of 
seven thousand years each and the entire creative week 
as of forty-nine thousand years, how would these figures 
compare with the usual estimation of geologists? P. 19, 
par. 2. 

(7) What had Professor Dana to say on this subject? 
What were his opinions of "scientific guesses"? 

And how much must we suppose the writer of Genesis 
understood of the full import of his words? P. 20, 
par. 1,2,3. 

JUNE 26 

(8) Which is more logical, to believe as science 
teaches, that a blind and intelligent force is operative in 
the development of our planet, of which we can learn 

only by comparisons and guesses, or to suppose the manifestation 

a part of the Divine handiwork showing forth 

Divine wisdom, order and arrangement, and these items of 

the Divine Program revealed to us by a gracious Creator 

who foreknew the longings infinite of our minds? 

P. 20, par. 4. 

(9) Summarize the views of the Higher Critics and 
Evolutionists respecting creation. P. 21. 

(10) Do we object to Mr. Darwin's theory because 
he was a foolish man or on what grounds? And what 
can we say of his theory and of his test respecting 
pigeons, etc.? P. 22, par. 1,2. 

(11) What great error has helped to confuse Bible 
students and how should we understand the formation of 
our earth's crust in various layers of clay and rocks, evidently 
deposited in a liquid or plastic form? P. 22, par. 3. 

(12) Has God revealed anything respecting the 
manner in which the atoms of matter composing our 
earth were brought together? Or is there anything in 
the Bible to answer this question? P. 23, par. 2. 

(13) What is signified by basic, igneous rocks, and 
what does their location deep under the earth's surface 
indicate? And what do the higher layers of water-laid 
rocks and clays imply? P. 23, par. 3. 

(14) Explain in harmony with the Genesis account 
how the firmament or expanse or atmosphere surrounding 
our earth must have been formed and whether or not it 
probably required considerable lapse of time. P. 23, par. 3; 
P. 24, par. 1. 

(15) Explain the process by which the various strata 

of clay and sand, etc., were piled upon the igneous rocks, 
which evidently once had been in the molten condition. 
Tell why they were called rings and explain their influence. 
P. 24, par. 1,2. 



page 178 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: In German, 
five vol.; in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 5; in Dano-Norwegian, 
three vols.; in Greek three vols.; in French, two vols.; 
in Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian and Polish, one vol. 
each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the 
same. 

Vol. 6, German and Swedish (WATCH TOWER form), $1.50 
each. 



page 177 



SEMI-MONTHLY 