A World Full of Adversity
NEVER before in history has mankind undergone so much affliction, oppression, and suffering. Disasters have become almost as common as the air we breathe. Describing the period since the year 1914, one journal commented: “This has been a time of extraordinary disorder and violence, both across national frontiers and within them.”
Especially agonizing is the tendency toward uncontrolled brutality in present-day warfare. In one small African country, a seven-year struggle took more than 20,000 lives. There were abductions, rapings, and similar acts. Elderly people and young children became victims of land mines, rocket fire, and just plain brutality.
When we view adversity from the standpoint of individuals, the sadness of the situation stands out very clearly. For instance, try to put yourself in the place of a woman who, with her children present, was forced at gunpoint to sing and clap her hands while a gang of men slowly hacked her husband to death. What would your reaction be? Yes, there is truly “anguish of nations,” and the individual suffers the adversity.​—Luke 21:25.
Christians often avoid calamities because of maintaining strict neutrality and keeping away from places where violence is most likely to occur. (John 17:16) However, they cannot avoid all calamity, and at times they suffer, as do those who are part of the world. Through violence and deceit, Satan the Devil can cause untimely deaths. Since part of the message declared worldwide by Jehovah’s Witnesses includes exposing the Devil’s works, should we not expect Satan to use his “means to cause death” in an effort to do away with these message bearers? The Scriptures so indicate.​—Hebrews 2:14, 15; Revelation 2:10; 12:12, 17.
Christians Face Further Sufferings
In addition to the adversities confronting people in general, faithful followers of Jesus Christ must endure the persecution that comes upon them because of their firm stand for the Universal Sovereign, Jehovah God, and his Kingdom. After describing distressing events that would portend the conclusion of the system of man-rule under Satan, Jesus said: “Then people will deliver you [Jesus’ disciples] up to tribulation and will kill you, and you will be objects of hatred by all the nations on account of my name.” Mark quotes Jesus as adding, “And you will be beaten.”​—Matthew 24:3, 7-9; Mark 13:9.
Yes, because of their determination to preach “this good news of the kingdom” earth wide under all circumstances, Jehovah’s people have had to endure the additional trial of persecution​—beatings, bans, imprisonments, and other forms of mistreatment. (Matthew 24:14) Why, persecutors have even killed some Christians whose only “offense” was teaching that the Kingdom of God is the sole hope for mankind!
Jesus did say: “He that has endured to the end is the one that will be saved.” (Mark 13:13) However, can we endure and not give out? Is there any source of comfort in even the greatest of adversity? Do we have examples of those who have endured?

