Do You Show Godlike Kindness?
CAN you remember the last time someone was truly kind to you? Surely, all of us appreciate the helpfulness, sympathy, and gentleness of a kind person.
Though often in short supply, kindness is not unknown in today’s world. Salespersons are instructed to show it to their customers. Businessmen know its value in dealing with their clients. True, kindness is often shown with ulterior motives. Yet genuine human kindness does exist. Thus, when a married couple living a good distance away visited the husband’s father who had been incapacitated by a stroke and was barely able to move, how refreshed they were to observe that the neighbors had already taken care of some necessary chores!
The Bible contains some outstanding examples of human kindness. While en route to Rome by ship, Julius, the army officer placed in charge of the apostle Paul, allowed his prisoner to visit and enjoy the care of friends at Sidon. Yes, Julius “treated Paul with human kindness.” (Acts 27:3) Shortly thereafter, when a shipwreck occurred, the people of Malta showed all the 276 passengers and crew “extraordinary human kindness.” In fact, Publius, “the principal man of the island,” was notably hospitable.​—Acts 28:1-10.
That all men, created in God’s image, can reflect a measure of Jehovah’s personality was indicated when the apostle Paul wrote: “Whenever people of the nations that do not have law do by nature the things of the law, these people, although not having law, are a law to themselves. They are the very ones who demonstrate the matter of the law to be written in their hearts.” (Romans 2:14, 15; Genesis 1:26) So some kindness is inherent in mankind. Yet we would rightly expect that true Christians would show a distinctly godlike kindness. What is the nature of such kindness? How does God exercise kindness? And how can we imitate him in displaying this fruit of his spirit?​—Galatians 5:22.
Jehovah’s Loving-Kindness
The Bible repeatedly extols God’s loving-kindness. “Praise Jah, you people! Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; for his loving-kindness is to time indefinite,” said the psalmist. (Psalm 106:1; 107:1) In the Hebrew Scriptures, the word used for “loving-kindness” refers to a quality that lovingly attaches itself to an object until the purpose is realized. Thus, out of his love for mankind, God has exercised loving-kindness with man’s salvation in view. Otherwise, mankind would have perished long ago. Tolerating no wrongdoing, God expelled our first human parents, Adam and Eve, from the garden of Eden. Still, he showed loving-kindness by providing them with clothing, allowing them to bring forth children, and permitting them to live for a considerable time in spite of their rebellious acts.​—Genesis 3:21–4:2; 5:4, 5.
In many ways, Jehovah has shown loving-kindness to Adam’s sinful descendants. For instance, the apostle Paul could tell practicers of false religion in Lystra that God “did not leave himself without witness in that he did good, giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts to the full with food and good cheer.” (Acts 14:16, 17) Even though their worship was directed to a false god, Jehovah kindly provided for them richly in a material way.
Of much greater significance, however, was the loving-kindness God showed toward Adam’s yet-unborn offspring. Through the promised “seed,” Jehovah provided hope of deliverance from human sin and death. (Genesis 3:15; Romans 5:12) In spite of mankind’s God-dishonoring record, God did not abandon mankind. Why, he even gave his most beloved and only-begotten Son as a ransom sacrifice in their behalf! (John 3:16) And in a further manifestation of “undeserved kindness,” God has also arranged for some integrity-keeping humans to be joint heirs with Jesus Christ in the heavenly Kingdom that will bless all obedient mankind.​—Romans 5:8, 15-17; 8:16, 17; Revelation 14:1-4.
Showing Godlike Kindness
How can imperfect humans show godlike kindness? Well, Jesus provided an example and guidelines that can help us to exercise such kindness. (1 Peter 2:21; Matthew 11:28-30) For instance, he indicated that we should be kind even to our enemies. Jesus said: “Continue to love your enemies and to do good and to lend without interest, not hoping for anything back; and your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, because he is kind toward the unthankful and wicked.” (Luke 6:35) So if we would show the superior quality of godlike kindness, we will be kind not only to family members, friends, and Christian brothers but also to those who are unthankful and have shown themselves to be our enemies. This is not done to irritate them but to help them and to bring out the best in them.​—Galatians 6:10; Romans 12:20, 21.
Since our human inclination is to treat others as they treat us, we do well to remember Jehovah’s reminder: “In loving-kindness I have taken delight, and not in sacrifice.” (Hosea 6:6) Thus, if we wish to have Jehovah’s favor, we must endeavor to display godlike kindness, or loving-kindness, in all our dealings with others. (Compare Micah 6:8.) But to demonstrate this godly quality, we need to imitate Jehovah in a specific way. What is that? Well, just as he kindly took the first steps to put us in good standing with him, so we should take the initiative in sharing Bible truths with others. Even if rebuffed at first, we must still exercise loving-kindness by endeavoring repeatedly to reach their hearts with the good news of God’s Kingdom. How fine it is when this display of godlike kindness helps others to get on the road to life!​—Matthew 7:13, 14.
How to Cultivate It
Cultivating godlike kindness is possible only by learning and acting in harmony with God’s thoughts as expressed in the Bible. Yes, we must first gain an accurate knowledge of the truth. Paul commended Christians at Colossae and acknowledged that the truth had borne fruitage “from the day [they] heard and accurately knew the undeserved kindness of God in truth.” (Colossians 1:5, 6) Yet, no Christian gets to the point where further progress cannot be made. Therefore, each one of us must “go on growing in the undeserved kindness and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.”​—2 Peter 3:18.
Since kindness is part of the fruitage of God’s holy spirit, Christians submitting to the influence of that spirit will be kind. In fact, Paul specifically connects godlike holiness with kindness, saying: “As God’s chosen ones, holy and loved, clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion, kindness.” (Colossians 3:12) So we must have God’s holy spirit in order to display godlike kindness.
But how do we get Jehovah’s spirit? By asking him for it​—repeatedly. Jesus showed that if we humbly supplicate Jehovah for this precious gift, our heartfelt request will be granted. After mentioning the need to “keep on asking” and to “keep on seeking,” Jesus said: “Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!” (Luke 11:9-13) Indeed, by requesting Jehovah’s spirit and specifically asking for his help in displaying greater kindness, we are assured of a favorable answer. (1 John 5:14, 15) Of course, our actions need to be consistent with our request for God’s spirit.
Another aid in cultivating this quality is meditating on the expressions of Jehovah’s kindness that we can observe around us. Concerning God, the psalmist said: “I shall certainly meditate on all your activity, and with your dealings I will concern myself.” (Psalm 77:12) We do well to take note of and reflect on God’s qualities as observed in everyday life. The beauties of creation, the delights of food and drink, the items we need for our comfort and pleasure, the joy that children bring​—even the antics of animals—​all bespeak God’s kindness to mankind. Yes, a beautiful sunset, a colorful rainbow, a fine meal, or a treasured friendship can well remind us that God kindly provides many things for our enjoyment. Truly, “his invisible qualities [including kindness] are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made.” (Romans 1:20) Meditation on such things is vital if we truly wish to imitate our great God of kindness.
Make It a Goal
It certainly is worth while to make it our goal to develop the quality of godlike kindness. Personal and family relationships are bound to improve where kindness is displayed. Kindness also attracts people to the Kingdom message. Many a skeptic has been moved to examine the truth because of the kindness shown by Jehovah’s Witnesses in the ministry. Yes, kindness has brought out the best in those who might otherwise be hostile.
In the door-to-door ministry, one young Witness met a woman who curtly rebuffed her. Noting that the woman was ill, the sister asked if she could do anything for her. The woman coolly refused any assistance. But two weeks later the young sister stopped by to see the woman again and asked if she had been able to do any shopping for food since they had met. Since the woman had not been able to get food into her home, the sister insisted on going to the store for the needed items. Thereafter, this woman was much more cordial to Witnesses calling at her door​—all of this because the sister had shown godlike kindness.
This most desirable quality has drawing power. Illustrating this are the observations of a young college graduate after going to the Kingdom Hall for the first time. At the hall, the Witnesses from humble backgrounds were concerned about how this woman would respond to them and their speech. But this educated woman did not recall failings they may have had. Rather, she remembered only that everyone was so kind to her, and she was impressed with the genuine interest they took in her. Moved by their example, she dedicated her life to God. Soon she was showing selfless interest in others as a regular pioneer and later as a member of the Bethel family.
Truly, godlike kindness is a most desirable quality. It is one that should be evident in all our dealings. Do you show it?

