Why Do You Want to Give a Bible Talk?
JESUS CHRIST often spoke to large crowds, and he surely was an effective speaker. In fact, after Jesus concluded his renowned Sermon on the Mount, “the effect was that the crowds were astounded at his way of teaching.” (Matthew 7:28) There can be no doubt that the Son of God had the highest of motives and that his public discourses brought glory to his heavenly Father.​—Compare John 12:46-50.
Public speaking was also one way that the good news was spread by Jesus’ followers in the first century of our Common Era. For instance, at Corinth the apostle Paul “would give a talk in the synagogue every sabbath and would persuade Jews and Greeks.” (Acts 18:1, 4) Moreover, Paul encouraged his co-worker Timothy with the words: “While I am coming, continue applying yourself to public reading, to exhortation, to teaching.” (1 Timothy 4:13) So public reading and speaking, with noble motives, certainly had their place among Jehovah’s loyal servants of the first century.
Yet, there is need for caution. When Herod, clad in royal raiment, began giving a public address, the assembled people started to shout: “A god’s voice, and not a man’s!” At that instant the angel of Jehovah struck Herod. Why? “Because he did not give the glory to God.”​—Acts 12:21-23.
Need for the Right Mental Attitude
Today, giving a public Bible talk surely is a very desirable privilege granted to mature Christian men. However, each minister would do well to examine his heart as to his motive. (Genesis 8:21; Jeremiah 17:9) Is he motivated by a desire to honor God and benefit fellow believers and others? Or does he wish to give such Bible talks because of the prominence associated with public speaking and his own desire to shine?
The right motive will manifest itself in various ways. For one thing, it will make us realize that only with the help of Jehovah’s spirit can we do justice to the privilege of speaking God’s truth from the public platform. Therefore, we will have an attitude similar to that of the apostle Peter, who said: “If anyone speaks, let him speak as it were the sacred pronouncements of God; if anyone ministers, let him minister as dependent on the strength that God supplies; so that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ.”​—1 Peter 4:11.
Love must be the underlying reason for wanting to give a Bible talk. First of all, we must have love for Jehovah God, desiring to bring him honor and to share in the sanctifying of his holy name. Second, our motive should include love for our listeners, a sincere desire to instruct them and incite them to “holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion.”​—2 Peter 3:11.
A sincere desire to upbuild our fellow believers and others should also be our motive for giving a public discourse. This will prevent us from attempting to ‘tickle the ears’ of our listeners by telling them only what they want to hear. (2 Timothy 4:3) The desire to upbuild others spiritually will also move us to refrain from telling jokes or saying things just to amuse our audiences or get them to laugh. Neither will we use flowery speech or make a display of worldly wisdom in an effort to impress our hearers. Rather, if we have the right motive in speaking publicly, we will follow the example of the apostle Paul, who gave ‘a demonstration of spirit and power so that the faith of his hearers might be, not in men’s wisdom, but in God’s power.’​—1 Corinthians 2:3-5.
Three Basic Elements
Giving a public Bible talk is a matter of mind and heart. Therefore, Christian speakers must have not only the right attitude but also something worth while to say. That requires the giving of thought to three basic elements. These are the Scriptures, facts, and logic.
First, it must be remembered that the burden of a public Bible talk obviously is to be borne by the scriptures used by the speaker. If you are privileged to give such a talk, you should have a good knowledge of your subject and should be able to quote scriptures, read them well, and apply them properly. On the day of Pentecost, 33 C.E., the apostle Peter repeatedly referred to the Scriptures in support of his remarks. (Acts 2:14-41) The Beroeans were satisfied that Paul had based his remarks solidly on the Scriptures. (Acts 17:10, 11) And Apollos “demonstrated by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ,” the long-looked-for Messiah.​—Acts 18:28.
Of course, the Scriptural basis for a public talk is furnished in the outline provided by the Watch Tower Society. Yet, the speaker can use additional or parallel scriptures, provided they apply equally well and that this is not done excessively. In this regard, the Christian minister must be careful to keep up with the increasing spiritual light. For example, a speaker might incorrectly apply 1 Corinthians 2:9 to the future earthly Paradise, whereas the context (1Co 2 verses 7 and 10) shows that it applies to the deeper things of God’s wisdom.
Second, there is the matter of facts used in support of remarks made by a public speaker. Care should be exercised so that the points presented are not open to legitimate question or challenge. Especially is care important if a point seems to be sensational. It is wise​—and essential—​to make certain that what is said really is factual. For this reason, it is always best to be able to refer to reliable sources of information in case certain statements are questioned. On the day of Pentecost, Peter pointed to well-known facts. So did the apostle Paul on the Areopagus, or Mars’ Hill, in Athens.​—Acts 2:22; 17:22, 23, 28.
Third, there is a definite need for logic. The Christian public speaker needs to reason with his listeners. Thus we read that Paul “began to reason in the synagogue with the Jews and the other people who worshiped God and every day in the marketplace with those who happened to be on hand.” (Acts 17:17) In a public talk, the reasoning should be logical, simple, clear, easy to follow. Of great help in this regard is the use of connectives that show the relationship between what has been said and what follows it.
If you are privileged to be a public speaker, then be sure that you have the right mental attitude toward giving a Bible talk. Have love in your heart for your Creator and for your fellowman. Assemble and present scriptures and facts in a logical manner. Then this proverb will apply to you: “The tongue of the wise ones is a healing.” (Proverbs 12:18) Moreover, giving fine Bible talks that honor God is one way to “save both yourself and those who listen to you.”​—1 Timothy 4:16.

