VOL. XXXVII JULY 15 No. 14 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

"Lest We Forget" 211 

Self Our Special Battle-Ground 211 

Never Presume Upon God's Mercy 212 

Careless Ones Unfit for the Kingdom. . .212 

What Is Universal Redemption? 213 

Universal Salvation Explained 214 

"Called" (Poem) 214 

"The Greatest Thing in the World" 215 

Superiority of the Tongue of Love. . . .215 
Lessons Taught in the School of Christ .216 

The Grace of Giving 217 

The Benefits of Systematic Charity . . .218 

Liberality an Index of Love 218 

Office of Advocate and Mediator Contrasted .220 

Conscience and the War 220 

At Peace Amongst Yourselves 221 

Militarism and Conscience 222 

Berean Lessons and Pilgrim Visits 223 

Pilgrim Brother Barton Gone Home 223 

The St. Louis Convention 223 



page 210 

GENERAL CONVENTIONS 

SIOUX CITY, IA.-July 6-9. For assignments address A. 

J. Strite, 1422 W. 5th St. 
NEWPORT, R.I.-July 9-16. For assignments address Mrs. 

Anna R. Calvert, 12 Everett St. 
PORTLAND, ME.-July 21-23. For assignments address A. 

F. Buxton, 55 Chestnut St. 
NORFOLK, VA.-July 22-30. For assignments address P. 

L. Derring, 216 12th St. 
NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y. -Aug. 19-22. For assignments 

address A. Fosbraey, 727 Pine Ave. 
NASHVILLE, TENN.-Aug. 24-27. For assignments address 

Milton E. Confehr, 1516 McGavock St. 
LOS ANGELES, CAL.-Sept. 2-10. The Long Beach Convention 

has been transferred to Los Angeles. For assignments 

address F.P. Sherman, 808 S. Figueroa St. 
SEATTLE, WASH.-Sept. 14-17. For assignments address 

H.G. Backbock, 2410 First Ave., W. 
MILWAUKEE, WIS.-Sept. 16-24. For assignments address 

C. Hilton Ellison, 2704 Wells St. 
DAYTON, O.-October 5-8. For assignments address Dr. 

Chas. E. Kerney, 475 S. Broadway. 



NEWPORT CONVENTION TRANSPORTATION 

Special New England rates to Newport, R.I., are as 
follows: 

(1) On the Certificate Plan or 

(2) Special Convention Rate, 2 cents per mile. 
Tickets to be sold and certificates issued and good going 

July 8, 9 and 10 and returning to reach original starting point 
not later than midnight of July 19. 

(3) Or Mileage Book or 

(4) Ten or more traveling together can get one ticket for 
the party at cheapest rate or 

(5) Sound Steamers can be used. The Bay State Line 
from N.Y. City to Newport, $2.05; Stateroom for 2, $1.00. 
Colonial Line, $2.35; Stateroom for 2, $1.00. 



NORFOLK CONVENTION RATES 

GENTLEMEN:— A very low rate will be named by the Seaboard 
Air Line Railway to Norfolk and return, account above 
mentioned Convention, with suitable selling dates and limits. 
We are the direct line from this territory to Norfolk. The 
round trip will be approximately three cents per mile, and we 
will be glad to furnish the exact rate from any point in the 
South when requested to do so. 



The best train for those attending from this territory to 
use is our train No. 6, leaving Birmingham 9:50 a.m., July 
21st (Friday), passing Wellington, 1 1:44 a.m.; Cedartown, 
12:54 Noon; Atlanta, 3:00 p.m.; Athens, 5:17 p.m.; Greenwood, 
8:39 p.m., arriving Norfolk 1 1:00 a.m. Eastern Time, 
Saturday, July 22d. 

We expect to provide extra equipment on this train, of 
whatever style is desired, to take care of those using it, and 
are anxious to have advice as soon as possible how many 
will go, whether they will want Pullman, and if so, if they 
will want it all the way through to Norfolk, or just for the 
night, so that ample accommodations can be provided for. 
Please address 

Yours very truly, FRED GEISSLER. 

Asst. Gen. Pass. Agt., Atlanta, Ga. 

From other points, excursion rates may be had to Old 
Point Comfort, near Norfolk. Remember that the special 
rates for parties of ten apply on all railroads at all times 
when the party travels on one ticket. 

From New York City the rate, all rail, or rail and water, 
is $14.00 the round trip. The stateroom will be extra— $1.00 
via Washington or Baltimore. 

The all-water route, $14.00, includes stateroom and meals- 
Old Dominion Line. 



POLISH CONVENTION 

CHICAGO-JULY 1-4. This is the second Polish Convention 
of this season; the first being held at Toledo, O., in June. 



ARMENIAN CONVENTION 
PROVIDENCE, R.I., JULY 2-4. 



R5923: page 211 

"LEST WE FORGET!" 

"Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without 
which no man shall see the Lord."— Hebrews 12: 14. 

ALTHOUGH the Lord's people are counseled 
by the Lord's Word to be peacemakers, and 
to pursue peace, nevertheless they are forewarned 
that they must fight. On the surface 
these injunctions seem paradoxical. 
It seems strange that we should be admonished 
to be peacemakers and then be told 
that we are to fight. These conflicting 
statements may be harmonized however. 



If we are loyal to the Lord and to His 

cause, our loyalty will bring us into opposition with whatever 

is contrary to God. It is not that we are to strive 

with people; but the very fact that we are counseled to 

be peacemakers implies that there will be opposition. 

How is it that when one wishes to do right and is 
doing this to the best of his ability he meets with opposition? 
It was so with our Master. Although He was 
perfect, yet He had opposition. We need not be surprised, 
then, if we who are imperfect should have similar experiences. 
What did Jesus do to cause people to do evil 
toward Him? He did only good and sought to bless all. 
His loyalty to the Father, however, made it a necessity 
for Him to rebuke sin and error. This brought upon 
Him the antagonism of those who upheld these sins and 
errors. The darkness hates the light because it is a 
constant rebuke to the darkness. 

Then we not only have the opposition of the spirit 
of the world, but also the opposition of our own fallen 
flesh and the virulent opposition of the great Adversary 
and his hosts. What a power this all means! At one 
time in our lives we did not know what it meant to have 
the opposition of the world, the flesh and the Devil; but 
we are learning what this means, dear brethren. Our 
great Adversary is a very wily foe, and is on the alert 
to seize every opportunity to ensnare and entrap us, to 
put our enemies in antagonism against us, and to stir up 
all kinds of persecution and opposition. One might think 
that Satan would be satisfied to have taken the wrong 
course himself; and that he would ere now have been 
ready to say, "I have had enough of it." Why does he 
not say this? It is because he is so implacable a foe to 
God and to all that is good. He has so hardened his 
heart to all that is holy that he cannot be renewed to repentance, 
to change about and take an opposite course. 

LET US TAKE WARNING FROM SATAN'S COURSE 

What a solemn warning this should be to us to resist 
stoutly and unequivocally the very beginnings of sin, to 
resist the approach of temptation to be disloyal to God 
in the slightest degree, by hastening to the Throne of 
Grace in every time of danger! The Adversary's designs 
seem to be especially against the saints of God. 
He steadfastly opposes all those who desire to walk in 
the footsteps of Jesus, rather than those who walk according 
to the course of this world; for the latter are 
already more or less under his control. He does not seek 
to run after them or seek to entrap them. All he needs 
to do is to keep them from the light.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 

Satan does not wish the glorious light of God's goodness 
to shine into men's hearts; for wherever the light 
of Truth goes it brings a transformation. We become 
changed men and women as soon as the Truth shines into 
our hearts; and this transformation goes on day by day. 
When Satan sees this, he exerts all his power to blind 



the one who has gotten out from under his domination, 
and to weave his web around him again. When the fly 
begins to struggle to escape, the spider at once proceeds 
to strengthen the web around him. If the fly escapes the 
snare, the spider will again entrap him, if possible. 

But in spite of the foes with which we have to contend, 
the foes without and within, we are perfectly safe 
so long as we keep close to the Master. Stronger and 
greater is He that is on our part than all they that are 
against us. We have learned something of the character 
of our Heavenly Friend. At first we saw that God was a 
great Being, deserving of our reverence; but now we are 
coming to see more and more how just He is, how wise 
He is, how loving and lovely He is. As we come to 
thus appreciate His glorious character, it inspires within 
us a great desire to be like Him, and we find that the injunction 
of Scripture is that we should be like our Father 
in Heaven. Jesus was like Him, and we are instructed to 
become copies of God's dear Son. "Be ye followers of 
us," said the Apostle, "even as we are followers of Christ." 

SELF OUR SPECIAL BATTLE-GROUND 

We are now God's special representatives in the world, 
fighting a good fight of faith against sin and evil, especially 
in ourselves. We are not at all commissioned to 
clean up the world. The Bible gives us no such instructions. 
The Lord will use us to do this work by and by, 
when we reach the Kingdom. We cannot now quite get 
ahead of the evil that we find in our own flesh, and so 
we need to turn our forces against sin entrenched in our 
mortal bodies. We need to exercise great care lest, while 
we preach to others, we ourselves should become castaways. 
What a thought that is, that, after having told 
others about God, His love. His power and His salvation 
in Christ, we should ourselves become castaways from 
this glorious salvation! 

R5923: page 212 

As New Creatures we should be very vigilant, should 
continue to grow, should increase in power to overcome 
the flesh. Then we shall be safe. Self is to be our special 
battle-ground. Many of the Lord's people have a great 
deal of natural combativeness. This is a good trait if controlled 
and turned in the right direction. Combativeness 
is necessary, or we could never overcome. But we need 
to restrain ourselves that we do not fight the brethren; 
and we are not to enter into a personal combat with the 
Devil. We are no match for him. But we are to resist 
him. The Lord will soon take hold of him and bind him 
up for a thousand years. He will conquer the Adversary 
and will undo all Hi s works. But it will require the entire 
thousand years to accomplish fully that work. We need 
not hope to overthrow Satan or his works while we are 
in the flesh. It is not our mission. What the Lord has 



given us to do is to conquer ourselves, to control this 
body which is of the fallen race of Adam, to keep ourselves 
that that Wicked One touch us not.— 1 John 5: 18. 

We all have natural inclinations toward sin. It is necessary, 
therefore, that we overcome the inclinations of 
the flesh, the disposition of the flesh— all these things that 
war against the Spirit. From the moment that we surrendered 
ourselves to the Lord and were begotten of the 
Holy Spirit, we were New Creatures. Old things have 
passed away, and all things have become new. We no 
longer belong to the old family, the family of Adam; we 
are an entirely new creation. We have passed from death 
unto life, from condemnation to death in Adam to a new 
life in Christ. The continuation of this new life will depend 

R5924: page 212 

upon our faithfulness as children of God. We must 
show our loyalty to the Lord by resisting everything that 
pertains to the old life. 

SCRIPTURAL ENCOURAGEMENTS TO COME OFTEN TO GOD 

None of us can fully do the things that we would. 
Some are more and some less fallen by nature. If we 
think we are succeeding fully, it is because we are more 
or less blind to our own deficiencies. We would do perfectly, 
but we cannot. But by fighting a good fight, we 
are to prove to the Lord that we are doing the best we 
can. We are not merely to make a little effort, but are to 
put forth all our strength, which will be supplemented by 
the grace of the Lord. If, then, in spite of our best efforts 
we come short, as we surely shall, what then? "The 
blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin." 

Thus we are to continue "without spot or wrinkle or 
any such thing." This does not mean that we are to keep 
from ever getting any spot or wrinkle upon our garments; 
for we could not avoid so doing. But God's wonderful 
arrangement is that we may come to Him and claim the 
merit of the blood of the Savior who died for us. We 
need not permit a spot or wrinkle to remain so as to 
blemish our glorious wedding robe. When we first came 
into the Father's family we received merit to cover all our 
past sins; but we have weaknesses and sins of the present, 
and we need the blood for these also. Thus the Lord has 
provided for our need. With this knowledge of the love 
of the Father and of our Lord Jesus, we are to come 
boldly— courageously— to the Throne of Heavenly Grace. 

Some may feel that it is rather presumptuous to come 
thus to the Lord for continual cleansing from all earthly 
defilement, for the forgiveness of our daily unwitting 
transgressions. But we are instructed to the contrary by 
the Apostle. We need the encouragement of God's Word 
thus to come to the Lord to be forgiven. The flesh says, 
"Do not go very often to the Throne of Grace." When 
we first made a mistake it was comparatively easy to take 



it to the Lord. We came without much difficulty, or perhaps 

without any. We told the Lord that our transgression 

was not wilful, and that we were sorry; and we realized 

His forgiveness. But the second time it was not so 

easy; and it becomes more difficult the oftener we have 

to come, every time we sin. We told Him at first that 

we would try to be more careful; yet we continued perhaps 

to come short of the standard which we recognized. 

So we were tempted not to come to God with the matter. 

NEVER PRESUME UPON GOD'S MERCY 

We all need to refresh our minds with the promises 
for our encouragement in continuing to come for mercy 
and grace to help in every time of need. Thus we are 
made stronger for the difficulties of the future. We are 
not, however, to presume upon the mercy of the Lord by 
becoming measurably careless as to our words and 
thoughts and deeds; for if the Lord sees anything of this 
spirit. He will not readily forgive us and restore us to 
favor. He will withhold the assurance of His forgiveness; 
and we may come to Him again and again before we 
realize the sense of His love and blessing. This will 
make us more careful not to be thus derelict another time. 

The condition of those who fail to keep their record 
clean before the Lord is a very sad one. After the first 
or second offense they say to themselves, "I cannot go to 
the Lord again; I will go to sleep and forget it." They 
wake up in the morning out of harmony with God. But 
they think, "Well, I cannot help it." At night the thought 
that all is not right with the Lord comes again. "I know 
that I have had plenty of difficulties today and more failures; 
but I cannot go to God. It is of no use." So the 
breach widens. They forget the great mercy of the Lord. 
They forget that He has said, "Like as a father pitieth his 
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear Him; for He 
knoweth our frame. He remembereth that we are dust." 

This is a wrong course, fraught with extreme danger. 
We should clean up our accounts with the Lord every 
day. We should retire every night just as we should wish 
to do if we knew that we would not wake up in the flesh. 
In the morning before we arise our first thought should 
be, "How can I please the Lord today and be helpful to 
others, and especially how can I overcome myself?" 
Some who fail to take advantage of the grace offered for 
every time of need gradually get so far off from the Lord 
that by and by they scarcely think about it any longer. 
They have a reverence for God, but they do not love Him. 
He is not close to them, and they know it. They know 
the right way, but they feel that they cannot walk in it. 
They realize that they have spots on their robe, but they 
try to put the thought behind them. If this course continues, 
where will it end? 

These are not the things to put behind us. The things 
that the Lord has forgiven should be put behind us; but 
the things for which we have not sought forgiveness 



should trouble us until they are settled. It is not a good 
plan to wait until evening to go to the Lord if we realize 
that we have displeased Him. If we can go to our closet 
at once, we should do so. If not, we might close our 
eyes for a moment and get into communication with our 
Father in Heaven through the merits of our Savior. Let 
us keep in constant touch with the Lord, and tell Him 
about all our affairs, our mistakes, our unwitting trespasses. 
There are probably many trespasses committed by 
us that we do not recognize. But daily application for the 
blood of cleansing will keep our garments clean and white. 

CARELESS ONES UNFIT FOR THE KINGDOM 

Those who get spots upon their robes and leave them 
there will not be fit for the Kingdom of God; for the 
Bride of Christ will be composed of only those who will 
be "without spot or wrinkle or any such thing." Jesus is 

R5924: page 213 

to present this class blameless and unreprovable before the 
Father. They did not walk perfectly, without a blemish; 
but they were careful to keep their garments unspotted 
by going often to the Lord. They let nothing keep them 
away. This is the spirit of the Bride class. We each 
wish to be of that class, dear friends. If any of us are 
not sure just now as to our standing with the Lord, let 
us make haste to go to Him and see that the record is 
cleared by our dear Redeemer and Advocate. Let us not 
wait, but go at once. 

The faithful class is pictured to us in Revelation 7:3,4 
and 14:1-5. These are the 144,000 who have the Father's 
name in their foreheads. They sing the new song, which 
none can sing but these 144,000. Oh, we long to be among 
them! We cannot afford to be anywhere else. The outcome 
is all in our own hands whether we succeed or fail, 
after God has given us His Holy Spirit. It will be our 
own fault if we miss the Kingdom. There will be no 
blame to attach to the Lord; for He has arranged for our 
continual cleansing day by day. His grace is provided 
for us at every step of the way; and His loving, protecting 
providences are continually about us if we are trustful and 
obedient to the best of our ability. 

The other class who allow spots to accumulate upon 
their robes, is a "great multitude, whose number no man 
knoweth." (Revelation 7:9); that is, they are not 
of an ordained or fixed number as is the Bride class. 
These must through great tribulation wash their robes, all 
spotted and soiled, in the blood of the Lamb. These will 
then stand before the Throne, will serve God day and 
night in His Temple. The Bride class will be The Temple; 
or, in another figure, they will be seated upon the Messianic 
Throne with their Lord and Bridegroom. These 
different figures give different phases of the honored position 
and work of the Body of Christ in glory. These 



are spoken of as wearing crowns, the others as merely 
carrying palm branches, indicating final victory. 

How glad we are that our dear Heavenly Father has 
mercifully provided for those who through lack of sufficient 
zeal and faithfulness lose the "Prize of the High 
Calling"! We rejoice that even the "foolish virgins" do 
not lose all, but will through tears and travail of soul yet 
come wholly back to the Lord. They will finish their 
course in death. Theirs is an enforced destruction of the 
flesh. Although they covenanted to sacrifice it willingly 
yet they failed to do so. They love the Lord and love 
righteousness, but not sufficiently to be thoroughly loyal 
and faithful; and so they must be severely scourged, that 
their spirits may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. 

EARNEST EXHORTATION TO FAITHFULNESS 

No one has been called of God to the Great Company 
class. "We are all called in one hope of our calling." 
Let us then walk with the Lord in white every day, dear 
brethren and sisters. Let us keep our robes spotless. It 
is easier to get spots on them than to get the spots off, and 
each spot will be more difficult than the previous one. 
We understand spots to be the result of a measure of 
carelessness. "It is impossible for me to keep my robe 
from ever getting spotted," you say, "but I am very thankful 
that the Lord has provided a way whereby the spots 
may be removed when I earnestly apply for the cleansing." 

Each experience of this kind should make us more 
humble, more careful, more alive to our weaknesses and 
more watchful to avoid getting spots on our white robes. 
Otherwise the Lord will chastise us by withholding for a 
time His peace, lest we think that we may be careless, and 
then may have the spot removed without any trouble. The 
Lord wishes us to realize that this is no light matter. 
Then let us each be very faithful, that we may soon hear 
the Master's sweet "Well done!" 



R5925: page 213 

WHAT IS UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION? 

WE ARE asked whether or not we believe in 
Universal Redemption, and what we consider 
to be the full scope or meaning of the 
term. We reply: 

To our understanding, many who use the 
expression, "Universal Redemption," fail to 
understand clearly its signification. They 
mean universal and eternal salvation, which 
is another matter entirely. We believe that 
the Bible teaches Universal Redemption in 
its statement that Jesus Christ, "by the grace of God, 
tasted death for every man," and that He "gave Himself 



a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (Hebrews 2:9; 
1 Timothy 2:5,6.) Again, "He is the propitiation for 
our [the Church's] sins and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2.) All these 
texts speak of the redemption of mankind; and all clearly 
and positively declare that it will be universal— that is, 
that it will apply to every member of our race. 

The universality of the Redemption, having been thus 
established, our next question would properly be. What is 
included in the word Redemption? The answer is that in 
the Greek, as well as in the English, the word has the 
significance of purchase— of the acquiring of something 
by the giving of something else in its stead. This thought 
is emphasized several times in the Bible. Not only are 
we told that we are bought with a price, even the precious 
blood of Jesus, but we have Jesus' word for it that He 
gave Himself a corresponding price, for sinners. (Matthew 20:28.) 
The word used in the Greek is lutron-anti, signifying 
a price in exact offset. St. Paul gives exactly the 
same thought when he says, "the Man Christ Jesus, who 
gave Himself a Ransom-price [anti-lutron] for all." 
(1 Timothy 2:5,6.) St. Paul again emphasizes the same 
thought when he says, "As by a man came death, by a 
Man comes also the resurrection of the dead; for as in 
Adam all die, even so all in Christ shall be made alive." 
-1 Corinthians 15:21,22. 

Thus we have the matter of Redemption and the Redemption-price 
for mankind emphasized and particularized. 
It surely is universal; it covers every member of 
our race. The sin came by one man, and he alone was 
sentenced by the great Heavenly Court to die. His wife 
and his children share with him in this penalty— not by 
direct sentence, but indirectly; for the measure of life 
which we have came from Father Adam, and it was only 
a spark, its right to exist having been forfeited before it 
came to us. It was thus, however, that our great Creator 
provided Universal Redemption. By this decree against 
one person He made it possible that one perfect man 
might redeem the condemned one. It was to this end that 
our Lord, the great Logos, left the Heavenly Courts, 
humbled Himself and was made flesh, the Man Christ 
Jesus, who tasted death for every man. His death is 
sufficient for the satisfaction of the claims of Justice 
against the first man; and all the results of that sentence 
in that man's race are provided for. 

UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION DEFINED 

In order to see what Adam and his race may expect 
as a result of this Universal Redemption, we must notice 
what Father Adam was before he sinned; for redemption 
implies the bringing of him and his race back into the condition 

R5925: page 214 

in which he was before he sinned. Note, therefore: 



(1) Adam had fellowship with his Creator. 

(2) He lived under Divine blessing, which provided 
for his every need and maintained him in life as long as 
he was obedient. 

(3) His claims had not been decided as respects 
eternity. He was in the School of Experience, gaining 
knowledge, and was assured of a continuance of his life 
as long as he remained obedient and used his knowledge 
in harmony with his Creator's will. 

(4) He was, therefore, a probationer for eternal life. 

It is our understanding that had Adam continued obedient 
under certain tests he would have been recognized as a 
graduate in the school of experience and as no longer 
properly subjected to tests and trials. But he never 
reached this position. He failed in his trial time, and 
never attained his graduation therefrom. 

Universal Redemption, therefore, means a bringing of 
Adam and his race back again to the probationary state 
in which Adam was when he sinned. That which was 
lost is that which was redeemed, and which is to be restored. 
God's provision, the Scriptures tell us, is for 
"Times of Restitution"; and those times, or years, of 
Restitution are for the bringing of Adam and his race 
back to all that they at first had. The Scriptures intimate 
very clearly that the experiences of mankind— first, under 
the reign of Sin and Death; and secondly, under the 
Restitution blessings of Messiah's Kingdom— will give 
such ample knowledge of God and of His Plan that at 
the conclusion of Messiah's Reign every member of the 
race will have had his probation in full— full knowledge, 
full opportunity. 

The Scriptures show us that some, when granted all 
these blessings, will resist them and, sinning wilfully, will 
be accounted as unworthy of any further favor of the 
Almighty, and will be destroyed in the Second Death. 
They show us clearly that in the end of the Millennial 
Age, some, even of those who will attain full human perfection, 
will not be accounted worthy of eternal life, but 
on the contrary will be destroyed in the Second Death, 
because, having enjoyed their share in the Universal Redemption, 
they have not improved the opportunities for 

such character development as would meet the Divine requirements. 
Their destruction is shown in Rev. 20:7-10. 
It is also pictured in the destruction of the goat class in 
the parable of the Sheep and Goats. -Matt. 25:31-46. 

UNIVERSAL SALVATION EXPLAINED 

But some one will inquire. Will not the redemption 
which God has provided still pursue them and recover 
them from the Second Death? We answer. No! During 
the Millennium Christ will give to all every assistance 
necessary and proper. "The world will be judged in 
righteousness." (Acts 17:31.) Besides, to suppose anything 
further to be done for these after they have gone 
into the Second Death through their own wilful course. 



would imply another sacrifice for sins. The sin which 
brought death to Father Adam was wilful sin. This the 
death of Jesus will fully offset: but the sin which will 
bring the Second Death will be individual, wilful sin 
on the part of every one who will die the Second Death; 
and the cost of redeeming each one of those sinners would 
be the death of a sinless one as a sacrifice for each. 

The case of Adam is altogether different from what it 
will be with the race then; for each one of those sinners 
would be equally as guilty as was Adam himself; and 
each one will be personally condemned to the Second 
Death. If each one were to be redeemed again, he would 
need a personal Savior. The Bible intimates a considerable 
number of goats at the end of the Millennial Age, 
who will come under the Second Death penalty; and it 
would require an equal number of perfect sacrifices for 
their redemption from that sentence. What good would 
that do if they had not profited by all the experiences of 
the present life and all the experiences of the Millennial 
Restitution time? We could not imagine their profiting 
by any experiences. 

Evidently, therefore, the Divine Plan is the only wise 
one; and no redemption will be given for the recovery 
of such from the Second Death, nor is there any kind of 
hope for them. Who would die for them? Who would 
redeem them? Not Christ; for the Apostle distinctly 
points out, "Christ dieth no more." (Romans 6:9.) 
Would a company of the holy angels voluntarily die for 
them under all these circumstances and conditions, seeing 
that they had sinned against such light, knowledge and 
loving provision? And would any of the Church, the 
Bride of Christ, die for them? We believe not. Would 
any wise or intelligent being give his life a corresponding 
price for one who was incorrigible under such favorable 
conditions' 1 We think it unreasonable so to suppose. 

A WORD OF WARNING 

It surprises us that any who have once tasted of the 
good Word, and have been made partakers of the Holy 
Spirit, should be liable in any degree to be entrapped by 
such sophistries of the Adversary. We are to remember, 
however, that the Adversary is very alert at the present 
time to find snares for the Lord's people. We are led 
to write these words by the inspired suggestion of St. 
James, "Brethren, if any of you err from the Truth, and 
one convert him, let him know that he that converteth 
such from the error of his way [course] will save a soul 
from death and hide a multitude of sins." (James 5:20.) 
This does not signify that God's people might not be 
more or less ensnared with errors; but it does signify that 
the course or tendency is to lead off more and more from 
the Truth, from the way of Life into the way of Death. 

We are in the Day of the Lord mentioned by the 
Apostle; and instead of casting aside the armor or of trying 
to make some improvement upon the plain statements 



of the Word of God or of permitting ourselves to take our 
own or other men's philosophies instead of the Word of 
God, we must be buckling on the breastplate, fastening 
our helmet, girding up the loins of our minds, grasping 
the shield of faith and taking a firm grip upon the Sword 
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, in order that 
we may be able to keep standing in this Evil Day; and not 
only so, but that we may help others to stand against the 
wiles of our great Adversary.— Ephesians 6:12-18. 



R5926 : page 214 

"CALLED" 

"Partakers of the Heavenly calling."— Heb. 3:1. 

"Holy brethren, called and chosen by the sovereign Voice of 

Might. 
See your high and holy calling out of darkness into light! 
Called according to His purpose and the riches of His love; 
Won to listen by the leading of the gentle. Heavenly Dove! 

"Called to suffer with our Master, patiently to run His race; 
Called a blessing to inherit, called to holiness and grace; 
Called to fellowship with Jesus, by the Ever-Faithful One; 
Called to His eternal glory, to the Kingdom of His Son. 

"Whom He calleth He preserveth, and His glory they shall see; 
He is faithful that hath called you; He will do it, fear not ye! 
Therefore, holy brethren, onward! thus ye make your calling 

sure; 
For the Prize of this High Calling bravely to the end endure." 



R5926 : page 215 

THE GREATEST THING IN THE WORLD 
-AUGUST 6.-1 CORINTHIANS 13.- 

GODLIKENESS IN THE HEART, IN THE TONGUE, IN THE HANDS, 
IN THE THOUGHTS-LOVE THE ESSENCE OF THE DIVINE 
CHARACTER-DIFFERENT KINDS OF LOVE-THE SPECTRUM 
OF LOVE REVEALS THE CHARACTERISTICS ESSENTIAL TO 

MEMBERSHIP IN THE GLORIFIED BODY OF CHRIST- 
SUGGESTIONS FOR SELF-EXAMINATION-LOVE THE QUALITY 
WHICH WILL PERSIST THROUGHOUT ETERNITY-THE GIFTS 
OF HEALING, ETC., CEASE. 

"Now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; 
and the greatest of these is love."— Verse 13. 

LOVE is a quality which seems beyond the 
power of man to describe. The best that 



we can do is to describe its conduct. Those 

who possess this quality are able to appreciate 

it, but are not able to explain it; for it 

is of God— God-likeness in the heart, in the 

tongue, in the hands, in the thoughts, permeating 

all the human attributes and seeking 

to control them. 

There are different kinds of love, however; 
and the Apostle is not speaking of general affection, 
but of that particular kind of love which belongs to God 
and to the New Creation, begotten of Him. There is an 
animal love, such as the brute creation exercise toward 
their young— a love which frequently leads to the sacrifice 
of life itself in its devotion. This kind of love inheres in 
the natural man, even in his fallen condition. It is all a 
more or less selfish love; for at times it is even ready to 
rob others in order to lavish good things upon those whom 
it favors. This is not the love which the Apostle describes, 
nor is he addressing the natural man. He addresses 
the New Creation, and informs them that the natural 
man will not be able to appreciate that which he presents. 
In order to have a clear comprehension of this 
love and a hearty acceptance of it as the rule of life, it is 
apparently necessary that we be begotten from Above, by 
the Most High.-l Corinthians 2:9-14. 

THE "MORE EXCELLENT WAY" 

The Church at Corinth had been founded for nearly 
five years, and had enjoyed a wide range of Divine providences. 
In addressing this Epistle to them, St. Paul was 
evidently considering well their needs, and seeking to minister 
to them the Divine Message of grace. He may not 
have realized how great a work he was doing and how 
far-reaching would be the scope of his instructions. Perhaps 
it was better for himself that he did not know how 
important was his service to the entire Church of the 
Gospel Age. Such a knowledge might have made him 
heady— the very condition of things which the Lord was 
warding off by permitting him to have still the "thorn in 
the flesh."-2 Corinthians 12:7-10. 

In this Epistle St. Paul has been gradually leading the 
minds of his readers up to a higher appreciation of the 
blessings which they were enjoying. In the chapter preceding 
today's Study he calls attention to the various 
"gifts of the Spirit" which were conferred upon the early 
Church for its establishment and development. He closes 
the chapter with the exhortation that while esteeming these 
gifts, each member of the Church should covet earnestly 
the superior ones. Then he adds, "Yet I show unto you 
a more excellent way"— something still better than any of 
those gifts of the Holy Spirit. Our Study pertains to 
this more excellent ambition which should actuate every 
child of God; namely, the acquisition and development of 
the spirit of Love, the Spirit of the Lord. 

The gifts of the Spirit, which the Apostle discusses 



in the chapter preceding our lesson, took, with the early 
Church, the place of other blessings which we now enjoy. 
They had no Bibles, as we have, no Concordances, no 
helps in Bible study. Therefore they needed the miraculous 
"gift of tongues" to draw them together once a week 
to consider the Lord's Message. They needed that the 
Message should come in this miraculous manner, in order 
that they might the better appreciate it and realize that it 
was of the Lord, not of themselves. This made opportunity 
for another gift, "the interpretation of tongues." 
Thus by the various gifts of the Holy Spirit they were 
drawn together and edified— built up— until such times as 
the books of the New Testament gradually accumulated. 
After the death of the Apostles and the consequent cessation 
of the gifts, these Divine providences of the written 
Word were quite sufficient, as the Apostle here sets forth. 

After St. Paul had called attention to these various 
facts and to the oneness of the Church, he pointed out to 
the Corinthians that they were putting rather too high a 
value upon the "gift of tongues." While a gift had its 
proper place in the Church as a blessing, he explained, yet 
a still higher blessing lay in the ability to present the Truth 
in a well-understood tongue, or language. He declared 
himself able to speak with more tongues than could any 
of them, and yet pointed out that he preferred to speak in 
that tongue which would be understood by his hearers. 
Finally in his argument he came to our present lesson, 
which he gave as the climax to his hints preceding. 

SUPERIORITY OF THE TONGUE OF LOVE 

Boldly the Apostle sets forth a great truth, which has 
come to be more and more recognized amongst Christian 
people everywhere, in proportion to their development in 
the character-likeness of their Redeemer, in proportion to 
their development as the children of God. St. Paul declares 
that not knowledge, not wisdom, not talents, not 
gifts of any kind are the things to be sought for above 
all else, but that love should be most highly esteemed. 

God is Love; and therefore whoever would be pleasing 
to Him must develop this disposition; for according to 
the Divine Law no one will ever have full Divine approval 
or life everlasting on any plane of being without 
the full establishment in the heart, in the character, of 
this Divine quality of Love. Therefore "Love is the fulfilling 
of the Law." (Romans 13:10.) The truth of this 
statement is obvious to all. 

St. Paul forcefully declares that if he had all the 
tongues of earth and of Heaven and could speak them with 
perfection and charming rhythm, even these would not 
constitute a proof of his acceptance to life eternal. Should 
he do all this in a perfunctory manner, even to the extent 
of speaking of the Divine character and in the interests 
of his fellows, he might still have no heart in the matter, 
but be merely like sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal. 
The argument, therefore, is that tongues were not to be 



esteemed as a proof of Christian character. 

The Apostle's declaration is introduced with an "if," 
which might be challenged, to a certain extent, by the 
assertion that no one could speak forth with power the 
Gospel of Christ unless he possessed the spirit of love. 
Although we have all heard public speakers who could 
deliver very beautiful essays upon Scriptural themes, we 
have generally perceived a hollowness in their teachings 
unless they spoke from the heart, prompted by love of the 
Truth— not by love of applause, nor for love of money. 

Next he argues respecting prophecy— oratory— and the 
understanding of mysteries and knowledge and respecting 
the possession of mountain-moving faith. He asks. Would 
these abilities not signify a glorious development of character, 

page 216 

a full acceptance with God and an assurance of 
life eternal? Then he answers. No; precious as these 
abilities are, they would have no value whatever in the 
Divine estimation, would profit us nothing, unless based 
upon love. How the Apostle's argument exalts this quality 
of Love before our minds! He proceeds to say that 
although we should give all of our goods to feed the poor, 
and although as martyrs we should be burned at the stake, 
yet it would profit us nothing if the motive, the sentiment, 
behind t lie giving and behind the endurance of martyrdom 
were not love. Without proper love as the mainspring of 
our conduct, there will be no reward. 

LOVE'S CONSTITUENT ELEMENTS 

To those of the Lord's people who have never studied 
out the elements of love, its constituent parts, the Apostle's 
suggestions in today's Study will seem like a revelation. 
He enumerates nine component parts: 

(1) Patience— "Love suffereth long"; 

(2) Kindness— "and is kind"; 

(3) Generosity— "Love envieth not"; 

(4) Humility— "Love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed 
up"; 

(5) Courtesy— "Doth not behave itself unseemly"; 

(6) Unselfishness— "Seeketh not her own"; 

(7) Good Temper— "Is not easily provoked"; 

(8) Guilelessness— "Thinketh no evil"; 

(9) Honesty— "Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth 
in the Truth." 

Despite all our pains and aches physical, what a wonderful 
world this would be if every member of the race 
were perfect in these qualities enumerated! However, it 
would be a useless waste of time to weep over what we 
have not, or to chide unnecessarily our neighbors and our 
friends because they, like ourselves, are not perfect in 
love. Indeed, the more we come to understand the teachings 
of the Bible, the more sympathy we may have with 
the poor "groaning creation." In one sense of the word 



our sympathies are all for this glorious standard which 
the Apostle holds up before us. We cannot sympathize 
with the wrong, the error, the evil. It is uncongenial to 
us. But, understanding the situation, we can sympathize 
with our fellows and with ourselves as being in a fallen 
condition, in which none can do the things he would. 
The Scriptural key to the situation is the fact that as 
a race we were born and shapen in iniquity, in sin did our 
mother conceive us. (Psalm 5 1 :5; Genesis 3:20.) The 
calamity of sin, imperfection and death has injured the 
whole world mentally, morally and physically— has made 
us what the Apostle describes as a "groaning creation." 
(Romans 8:22.) This knowledge of the facts in the case, 
possessed by so few, understood by so few, should tend 
to make these few a peculiar people in their loving sympathy 
and kindness towards their fellows in distress. Alas. 
the difficulty is that even these few who know these facts 
from the Divine Word have selfishness so ingrained in 
them, and are so oppressed by the cares of this life, that 
often their sympathies are not all that they should be! 

NEW CREATURES ALONE ADDRESSED 

It is for this reason that the Scriptures do not address 
the natural man; for his mind is so sodden with selfishness 
that his eye of pity and his ear of sympathy are well 
nigh closed. Instead of appealing to the natural man in 
general, the Scriptures represent that the Lord especially 
draws some who are possessed of certain qualities of heart 
and mind, and especially leads these to a knowledge of the 
Redeemer, leaving it open with them to accept or to reject 
the offer of Divine grace and forgiveness. 

Such as respond are still further enlightened; and, if 
further responsive, they are treated as justified because 
of their faith in the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then 
are granted further special opportunities, and exhortations 
to make a full consecration of themselves to God and to 
His service even unto death. If they still respond and 
make this consecration, they have then come to the place 
where the Lord is pleased to reckon them dead to earthly 
things, according to their profession, and to beget them 
of the Holy Spirit and the glorious promises of His Word, 
and to count them New Creatures in Christ— members of 
the Redeemer's Body, which is the Church. 

Now they have reached the stage where, as children of 
God, they must go to school and develop in knowledge 
and in character, that they may be made actually fit, prepared, 
suitable, for eternal life and a share with their Redeemer 
in His Kingdom. 

LESSONS TAUGHT IN THIS SCHOOL 

When we enter the School of Christ, the ultimate purpose 
of the course of instruction is set before us in the 
Great Teacher's words, "Be ye like unto your Father 
which is in Heaven." The same thought is presented to 



us in St. Paul's assurance that God has predetermined that 
only such as become copies of His dear Son— in character 
likeness— can be His joint-heirs in the promised Kingdom. 
(Romans 8:29.) When we entered the School of Christ, 
we did not know that so much would be required of us. 
We did not understand all that we did when we made our 
consecration even unto death in the service of righteousness. 
However, no advantage was taken of us; for what 
was presented to us, and what we consecrated to do, includes 
everything in our power— and no more— even unto 
death. So then, no lesson that can be set before us is 
beyond our covenant, or agreement to perform. 

In the spectrum of love given us in today's Study the 
Apostle is delineating the various parts of this one great 
lesson of Christ-likeness, which is God-likeness. He is 
pointing out what constitutes such a character as God has 
predetermined that we must have, in order to be worthy 
of the gift of God, which is eternal life through our Lord 
Jesus Christ.— Romans 6:23. 

LOVE VIEWED IN COMPARISON 

"Love beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all 
things, endureth all things." Its elements of patience and 
gentleness are love in the sense of willingness to endure 
under all sorts of opposition, wherever it sees a proper 
subject for its sympathy. Love "believeth all things" in 
the sense that it is not given to doubt, to disbelieve, to 
impugn the motives and the truthfulness of its fellows. 
Only after full and convincing proofs to the contrary will 
it cease to exercise faith. Love "hopeth all things" in the 
sense that it desires a blessing for all with whom it is in 
contact; and in harmony with its desire it is continually 
striving to do them good. Love "endureth all things" in 
the sense that it cannot be quenched wherever there is 
anything upon which it can properly exercise itself. 

Viewed from another standpoint, these qualities might 
be interpreted thus: Love "beareth all things," as enduring 
pressure on every side without being crushed. It "believeth 
all things," as being full of faith in the Divine 
promises and arrangement, doubting nothing. It "hopeth 
all things, in the sense that this perfect love toward God 
enables the heart to be filled with confidence in the Almighty, 
in whose love it reposes. It "endureth all things," 
in the sense that the soul which is united to God by the 
link of love cannot be vanquished, cannot be overcome; 
for this is the Divine will and arrangement. God will 
not suffer any of these little ones to be tempted above 
that which they are able to bear, but will with every 

page 217 

temptation provide a way of escape.— 1 Corinthians 10:13. 

The Apostle institutes a comparison between love and 
some of the gifts of the Spirit which the Corinthian 
Church properly held in high esteem. He would have us 



all see how infinitely higher love is than any of the gifts 
in which the early Church rejoiced. Love is not a gift, 
but a growth. It is a fruitage which must be developed in 
the garden of our souls, and which must be tended with 
much care, in order to its proper development. He says 
that love never fails, but that the other things will fail; 
namely, the power of prophecy— oratory— the gift of 
tongues, knowledge, etc. They would lose their value as 
changing conditions would comparatively do away with 
their necessity. Prophesying would be done away with, 
tongues would cease, and knowledge would vanish. 

The argument advanced by St. Paul is that all these 
things would necessarily come to an end, when perfection 
would come in; for all our gifts and talents are imperfect. 
Surely with our glorious "change" in t lie First 
Resurrection and with the ushering in of the Millennium 
our conditions will be so different that many things now 
highly esteemed under present unfavorable circumstances 
will then be valueless! Just so flints were once valuable 
for the striking of a light, but are now never used, having 
been supplanted by matches, electric lights, etc. Many of 
those gifts, however, including the gift of tongues, perished 
long before the morning light of the Millennium. 
Shortly after the death of the Apostles they ceased altogether; 
for they were imparted only by the Apostles. 

"GIFTS" VS. "FRUITS" 

Next the Apostle compares the gifts of the Spirit with 
the fruits of the Spirit, and shows that the former, when 
contrasted with the latter, were as the toys of childhood 
in comparison with the valuables of manhood. "When 
I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, 
I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away 
childish things." So the gifts of tongues, interpretation 
of tongues, etc., were given to the Church in its infancy, 
and served useful purposes then. But they were put away 
as the Church emerged from infancy to the strength and 
development accruing from a greater knowledge of God's 
great Plan. The milk of the Word and the strong meat 
of the Word were purposed by God to develop the members 
of the Body of Christ, until they all come to the stature 
of manhood in Christ. The more advanced the Christian, 
the more surely would he know that the gifts of the 
Spirit were merely like a childish plaything, to be supplanted 
by the fruits of the Spirit, much more valuable to 
the Church in its developed condition.— Hebrews 5:12-14. 

St. Paul points us further to the fact that we are living 
not merely for the present, but especially for the future; 
and that whatever will last us into the eternal future must 
certainly be the most important matter for us to acquire. 
He would have us see that to the Christian that most important 
thing is the Love which he has described in our 
Study. Our knowledge, our tongues, etc., of the present 
time are mere shadows of the great powers which will be 
ours if we attain to the glorious blessings of the First 



Resurrection. Whatever clearness of sight we have at 

the present time we shall then find to be darkness in comparison 

with the full light of the glorious Millennial Day. 

Where now we see as through an obscure glass, then we 

shall see face to face. Now we know in part; then we 

shall know even as we are known. 

The Apostle would have the Church see that faith, 
hope and love— three fruits of the Holy Spirit— are far 
superior to all the gifts of the Spirit; for these fruits 
will abide throughout the Age. Until the Millennial Morning 
we shall need faith, hope and love. We cannot get 
along without them. We cannot make any progress in 
the Master's footsteps without these qualities. But if we 
seek to contrast these imperfect qualities amongst themselves, 
he points out that the chiefest of these is love. 

Love is the Divine quality without which we should 
still be unsatisfactory to God. even if we possessed all the 
other qualities which go to make up Christian character. 
Love is the quality which will persist to all eternity. If 
we would abide in Divine favor, we shall need always to 
have Love. As for faith and hope, excellent qualities 
though they be, the time will come when they shall be 
swallowed up by sight, by the actualities of the glorious 
condition of fellowship with the Lord. But love will 
never fail. Amongst all the graces of the Spirit it stands 
supreme and eternal. 



R5926: page 217 

THE GRACE OF GIVING 
-AUGUST 13.-2 CORINTHIANS 9.- 

GIVING TO THE POOR-LENDING TO THE LORD-THE SECRET OF 
ISRAEL'S BLINDNESS TO THE GOSPEL-THE BETTER CLASSES OF 

THE GENTILES ATTRACTED BY THE TRUTH-SYSTEMATIC 
ALMSGIVING BETTER THAN SPASMODIC CHARITY-GENEROSITY 
INCULCATES BREADTH OF MIND AND HEART-DEGREE 

OF PROSPERITY SHOULD BE MEASURE OF OUR CHARITY. 

"In all things I gave you an example, that so laboring ye ought 
to help the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord 
Jesus, that He Himself said. It is more blessed 
to give than to receive."— Acts 20:35. R.V. 

CHRISTIAN benevolence— almsgiving— is the 
lesson inculcated in today's Study. The general 
disposition of the fallen nature is to 
give adherence or support to the strong and 
to expect weaker ones to rally around and 
uphold us. This is self-pleasing— the way of 
the fallen nature. But the method of the 
New Creature in Christ is to be the reverse 
of this. He is to be on the lookout for the 
welfare, the interests and the comforts of 



others, especially of those in his own family and of the 
weaker members of the Household of Faith. The stronger 
of the brethren in Christ should take pleasure in helping 
the weaker and the less able, and so far as possible in 
bringing all up to the stature of manhood in Christ. 

Our Study is addressed to the Corinthian Church, and 
is on behalf of the Christians in and about Jerusalem. 
Naturally the question arises, "Why should collections 
have been then for the Christians in Jerusalem any more 
than for the Christians at Corinth? There were three reasons 
why this should be done: (1) A severe famine had 
prevailed in the vicinity of Jerusalem; (2) Jerusalem was 
not a commercial city, and therefore money was less 
plentiful there; (3) Apparently those in and about Jerusalem 
who received the Gospel were chiefly the poor. 

Moreover, from the open persecution of the Truth there 
we can readily judge that there was also a great deal of 
quiet opposition to all who sympathized with the Gospel 
of Christ. As small shop people, they were probably boycotted; 
and as laborers, they were probably rejected as far 
as possible, except as necessity might demand their services. 
On the contrary, the cities of Asia Minor, Macedonia 
and Achaia were prosperous; and as far as we may 
judge, the class which accepted the Gospel was in many 
cases the better element. For instance, we recall the 
conversion of Sergius Paulus, the deputy governor at 

R5926 : page 218 

Paphos; that of Dionysius, one of the professors in the 
University of Athens; that of Damaris, of the same city; 
that of Justus, of Corinth, and of Crispus, the chief ruler 
of the synagogue of that city. 

BLINDED BY RELIGIOUS PRIDE 

The question naturally arises. Why should the same 
Gospel attract the well-to-do classes in Asia Minor and 
Greece and repel the majority outside the poor class in 
Judea? The answer would seem to be that amongst the 
Jews, who had been long acquainted with the true God 
and His gracious promises of Messiah, a religious pride 
had developed, especially amongst the wealthy and the 
learned. Moreover, because their religious system was in 
advance of every other religious system in the world, the 
learned attributed a like superiority to themselves individually. 
They "trusted in themselves that they were righteous, 
and despised others."— Luke 18:9. 

This was the secret of Israel's blindness to the Gospel. 
The religious leaders and theologians were so self-conscious, 
and relied so implicitly upon their interpretations 
of the Divine promises as centering in themselves, that 
they could not regard the humble Nazarene and His unlearned 
followers except as impostors. Later, when the 
Gospel began to be preached to the Gentiles, the opposition 
of the Jewish theologians was increased; for it was 



utterly contrary to every thought of their religious pride 
that God would accept either the humble Jews or the Gentiles 
to His favor, and reject themselves, the leading representatives 
of His Cause and work.— John 7:43-53. 

Amongst the Gentiles, however, the case was very different. 
While the illiterate masses were firmly bound by 
the superstition of their various religions, those who were 
of an honest mind amongst the better educated were quick 
to discern that many features of their own religion were 
merely superstitions. Probably they had been somewhat 
attracted to the Jewish religion as being much more reasonable 
than their own; for we find that the Gentiles 
readily resorted to the Jewish synagogues. But the Jewish 
religion would necessarily be unsatisfactory to them, 
since it would appear to be very narrow, limiting the Divine 
blessings in a special manner to Israelites only— a 
people whom the Greeks considered rather inferiors in the 
arts of that time. But the Gospel, throwing wide open 
the door to those who desired righteousness— of every nation, 
people, kindred and tongue— would naturally commend 
itself to the class whom we are describing as being 
the most reasonable explanation of the Jewish doctrines 
and their grand eventual outcome, the meaning of which 
had long been hidden. 

THE BENEFITS OF SYSTEMATIC CHARITY 

At all events, the saints at Jerusalem were poorer 
than were the saints at Corinth. Therefore it was appropriate 
that the Apostle should suggest to the latter the 
propriety of sending a gift to the former. Living at a time 
when the conveniences for transferring money were very 
inferior to the very poorest known today, the various congregations 
could send their gifts only at the hand of the 
Apostle when he should go to Jerusalem the following year. 

St. Paul's words intimate that the suggestion which 
he had made to the Corinthian brethren nearly a year before 
had been well received, and the collections zealously 
entered upon. For this reason it was superfluous for him 
to write in this connection any of the particulars respecting 
the necessity for this collection. But he hints to them 
that there was a bare possibility that the work zealously 
begun a year before might not have been patiently carried 
out; and that after he had boasted somewhat to 
others of their love and zeal for the Lord, he would regret, 
when he came to them en route to Jerusalem, if it 
should be found that, after all, they had failed to have 
their donation ready. 

In his previous letter to the Corinthians, the Apostle 
had suggested methodical charity, saying, "Now concerning 
the collection for the saints, as I have given instructions 
to the Churches in Galatia, even so do ye. On the 
first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in 
store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings 
when I come."— 1 Corinthians 16:1,2. 

It was the Apostle's experience, as it is the experience 



of all thoughtful people, that systematic charity is better 
than spasmodic giving. Not only is the result generally 
larger, but the influence upon the giver is more beneficial; 
for it keeps before the mind an object, a service to be 
rendered as unto the Lord. With many, almost the only 
opportunity for serving the Lord's Cause is that of contributing 
money. Of course, where a consecrated child of 
God can do so, it is far better that he should give to the 
saints after the manner of St. Paul and his traveling associates- 
giving spiritual gifts and blessings, either by 
public preaching or by house-to-house visiting— presenting 
the Truth either by the printed page or by tongue or both. 
But there are those so circumstanced in life through 

R5927: page 218 

lack of talent or of strength or of opportunity— hindered 

by prior mortgages upon their time in the way of family 

obligations— that practically their only chance for serving 

the Lord and manifesting their love for Him is through 

their gifts to His Cause and to His people. For such to 

be deprived of the opportunity of exercising themselves 

in the Lord's service in this manner, either through lack 

of a case needing their assistance or through lack of instruction 

respecting this method of Divine service, would 

be to deprive them of an important opportunity of service, 

and correspondingly to deprive them of the blessings 

which follow every service rendered to the Lord. 

LIBERALITY AN INDEX OF LOVE 

We notice, therefore, that the Apostle felt very free 
to recommend to the Church the grace of giving and even 
to press upon them the fact that their liberality, in proportion 
to their ability, would in a large degree be an index 
of their love for the Lord and for the Gospel. But 
here we note, in contrast, the fact that the Apostle did not 
ask alms of these believers when first they received the 
Lord's grace, lest they should in any degree get the impression 
that the Gospel was being preached from mercenary 
motives— for filthy lucre's sake. Accordingly we 
find that rather than mention money the Apostle preached 
to these very same Corinthians for more than a year without 
even a suggestion as to remuneration; that rather 
than be chargeable to any, he labored with his own hands 
at his trade of tent-making.— 2 Corinthians 1 1:7-9. 

Let us also note the change which the full appreciation 
of the Gospel wrought upon the believers at Corinth. At 
first they were so negligent of their privilege that seemingly 
they never even thought of volunteering financial assistance 
to the Apostle while he was serving them by the 
labor of his own hands and receiving some assistance 
from believers in other places. But after the grace of 
God had entered more fully into their hearts, they began 
to appreciate the value of the Truth which they had received 
and to realize that it had brought them priceless 



blessings of hope, joy, faith and character. Then they 
had a zeal, a "forwardness," to do something financially 
in the Lord's service. 
And now that the Apostle was absent from them, and 

R5927: page 219 

after his course had proved to them that he sought not 
their money but themselves, to do them good, he felt free 
to draw their attention to the great blessing which would 
result from liberality in the Lord's Cause in proportion to 
their ability and love. To impress this matter, he gave 
them a parable, saying, "He that soweth sparingly shall 
reap also sparingly; and he that soweth bountifully shall 
reap bountifully." This reminds us of the proverb, 
"There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is 
that withholdeth more than is proper, but it tendeth to 
poverty. The liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that 
watereth shall be watered also himself." (Proverbs 1 1:24,25.) 
The evident lesson is that the Lord is pleased to see 
His people cultivate breadth of heart as well as of mind- 
generosity in proportion to their knowledge of Him and 
of His generosity. 

OUR LORD'S ESTIMATE OF OUR GIFTS 

The Scriptures nowhere declare that cases of absolute 
privation amongst the Lord's people are proofs that at 
some time in their past life, when possessed of means, they 
failed to use a portion of it in charity, in the Lord's service. 
But the inspired words above quoted come very close 
to giving this lesson. At all events, it is profitable that we 
lay this testimony to heart and that every child of God 
henceforth shall be earnestly careful that out of the blessings 
of the Lord coming to us day by day some measure 
be carefully, prayerfully and lovingly laid aside as 
seed to be sown in the Lord's service according to the 
best wisdom and judgment which He will give us. 

How many have such carefulness for themselves, either 
in using every penny as fast as it comes or in being so 
interested in laying by for the outworking of future plans, 
that they feel that they can spare nothing for charity! 
How many such can afterward see that they made a great 
mistake in so doing! When their accumulations suddenly 
vanish, either through sickness or through accident or 
bank failure or otherwise, then they have good reason to 
regret that they sowed no "seed" after the manner described 
by the Apostle in Verse 6 of today's Study. 

Our Lord showed us how He measures our gifts — 
that He esteems them not according to the amount given, 
but chiefly according to the spirit which prompts the gift 
—when He drew attention to the poor widow who cast 
two mites into the Temple treasury. (Luke 21:1 -4.) From 
the standpoint of His estimation, that poor widow had 
cast in a larger sum than had any of the wealthy who had 
given merely out of their abundance, and not to such an 



extent that they felt it. How many of the Lord's people 
would be more "fat" spiritually today, if they would give 
attention to the exercise of this talent, this opportunity for 
service, we cannot say. The Lord alone knows. But today's 
Study makes it incumbent upon us to point out a 
privilege in this direction which is within the reach of the 
very poorest of the Lord's people. 

A THANK-OFFERING TO THE LORD 

Seldom is it necessary to caution people against over-much 
giving. Yet in some instances such caution is 
proper; and in some instances in Scripture giving has 
been restrained. No one should give to the extent of 
causing privation to those dependent upon him. Nor 
should any one give to such extent as to bring upon 
himself financial bankruptcy and cause losses to others. 
The Apostolic rule for giving we have already quoted. The 
"laying by on the first day of the week" should be general— 
"according as the Lord hath prospered him." The 
degree of our prosperity should be the measure of our 
charity. Upon this, as upon every subject, the Scriptures 
inculcate the spirit of a sound mind. 

"The Lord loveth a cheerful giver." Gifts bestowed 
in any other than a cheerful spirit might just as well not 
be given; for they will bring no blessing. The Lord does 
not appreciate such giving. In His estimation it has no 
"sweet odor." To be appreciated of the Lord, the gift 
must be a thank-offering, prompted by a realization of our 
debt of everlasting gratitude to Him from whom cometh 
every good and every perfect gift. And to such, the 
Apostle assures us, "God is able to make all grace abound." 
Whoever gives anything in the Divine service— time, 
talent, strength, money or influence— will find himself 
proportionately abounding in the different graces; for such 
are in the right attitude of heart to grow in grace. 

The Apostle seems to imply that such will have "sufficiency 
in all things," as well as be able to "abound in 
every good work." Sufficiency may not mean luxury and 
every comfort; but "all sufficiency" is gained always where 
there is "godliness with contentment." In proof that he 
is inculcating no new theory respecting the Divine care 
over those who are seeking to scatter to others a portion 
of the blessings that come to them, whether temporal or 
spiritual, the Apostle quotes from Psalm 1 12:9. 

In Verse 1 1, the Apostle speaks of "being enriched in 
everything." We are not to understand him to mean that 
all of the Lord's people will be enriched financially. St. 
Paul himself was an example of the fact that the Lord's 
people do not become wealthy. He is speaking of the enrichment 
of the heart. In another place he speaks of 
himself and his colaborers in the Gospel work, "as poor, 
yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing 
all things." (2 Corinthians 6: 10.) These faithful 
servants of God made many rich in hope, rich in faith, 
rich in love and in all the various concomitant graces 



which these qualities imply. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ is the grandest Example of self-denial 
in the interests of others. He was rich in the possession 
of the spiritual nature with all its glory and 
honor. Yet for our sakes He became poor, taking the 
human nature in order that He might redeem mankind. 
To this end He surrendered life itself at Calvary, that 
through His sacrifice we might become rich— possessed of 
Divine favor and the riches of Divine grace in Christ- 
even joint-heirship with Him who now is our exalted 
Lord at the right hand of Divine Majesty. But to attain 
this joint-heirship with Him, we must study to be like 
Him, to have His Spirit and to share with others whatever 
He may give us of either temporal or spiritual favors 
—either to feed or to clothe others (particularly those of 
the Household of Faith) temporally or spiritually, as circumstances 
may dictate. 

"Thanks be to God for His unspeakable Gift!" That 
Gift is our Savior, our Redeemer. (John 3:16.) In this 
connection it is impossible for us to tell the riches of 
Divine grace toward us— the numberless blessings and 
mercies which are ours through our Lord. He represents 
to us the very fulness of every Divine provision for our 
eternal welfare. As the Apostle elsewhere says, "In Him 
dwelleth all the fulness of the Deity bodily." (Colossians 2:9.) 
As yet, only the Church can now give thanks 
to God for His unspeakable Gift. But by and by the 
whole world of mankind will be in a condition to recognize 
that Gift and to render thanks. When, at the close 
of the Messianic Reign for the restoration of the Adamic 
race to their original perfection, all wilful sinners shall 
have been destroyed, then "every knee shall bow and 
every tongue confess, to the glory of God." Then every 
creature in Heaven, on earth and in the sea shall be heard 
saying, "Praise, glory, honor, dominion and might be 
unto Him that sitteth upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, 
forever!" for the Unspeakable Gift. 



R5928 : page 220 

OFFICE OF ADVOCATE AND MEDIATOR CONTRASTED 

THE fact that the Church is "the Mystery of 
God" has become more clear within the last 
twenty years. We know that Christ and the 
Church are separate and distinct from the 
world in every particular. They are neither 
under the old Law Covenant nor under the 
New Law Covenant, but are a peculiar people, 
called, sanctified, developed, under a special 
Covenant by themselves, in which none 
of the world will ever participate. This the 
Scripture styles the Covenant of Sacrifice: "Gather My 
saints [holy ones] together unto Me [saith the Lord]; 



those that have made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice." 

(Psalm 50:5.) This special class of saints, or holy ones, 

who make the Covenant of Sacrifice have as their Head 

the Lord Jesus Himself. When this company shall have 

completed their Covenant by Sacrifice, this present Age 

will end. Moses of the Law Covenant given to Israel represented 

specially the Law Covenant which will be given 

to the world through the antitype of Moses— The Christ. 

In other words, the Mediator of the Law Covenant was 

one man; but the Mediator of the New Law Covenant of 

the Millennial Age is the new Man, of which Jesus is the 

Head— and the Apostle declares that the members are 

made up of those elected both from Jews and Gentiles. 

From the time of Jesus down, the Mediator of the 
New Covenant has been in process of selection, and the 
"better sacrifices," as the basis for the New Covenant 
have been in process of offering. During this Gospel Age 
Jesus has not exercised His office as Mediator for the 
world; and the world has no relationship with God, but 
still lies in the Wicked One. The Mediator Himself has 
been in process of development. As the Apostle declares, 
God raised up Jesus first and since has been raising up the 
Church, and soon will finish the raising up. It is this 
Mediator or Prophet of whom St. Peter speaks in Acts 3:22,23. 
(See also 1 Timothy 2:5,6.) No mediating can 
be done until the Mediator of "many members" has qualified 
for the office. His qualification consists of His sacrificing, 
according to His Covenant of Sacrifice. The Christ, 
Head and Body, are, therefore, the Mediator for the world 
in a prospective sense— in the same sense as Jesus, the 
Babe, could be spoken of as the Savior and the King. He 
is only now becoming the King and has yet saved only a 
few of His people. 

There is a wide distinction between the work of a 
mediator and the work of an advocate. The Great Mediator 
between God and man— The Christ of glory— will fill 
His mediatorial office for a thousand years and complete 
it only by the end of that time, when He will deliver over 
to the Father, fully reconciled, all who can be brought into 
harmony with the Divine arrangement. The work of an 
advocate is different, and according to the Bible, relates 
only to the work which Jesus accomplishes on behalf of 
the Church during this Age. The Church will need no 
advocate in the future. The world has no advocate now. 
"We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
Righteous." It is Jesus individually who is the Advocate 
for us— "the Church, His Body." He advocates our cause 
—first of all by imputing to us the merit of His sacrifice, 
thus making us presentable in the Father's presence and 
acceptable as sons of God. Because of this Advocacy, we 
have received the Holy Spirit and are New Creatures in 
Christ. As New Creatures we still need our Advocate, because 
we cannot do the things that we would— perfectly. 
We have imperfections of the flesh, which, as New Creatures, 
we cannot fully control. Hence we need a Throne 
of Grace and an Advocate through whom we may maintain 



our present relationship with the Father, and thus 
not be condemned with the world. 



R5928 : page 220 

CONSCIENCE AND THE WAR 

IN PERHAPS all the armies participating in 
the present war men have been shot or imprisoned 
as a penalty for refusing on conscientious 
grounds to take up arms as soldiers. 
We are not, therefore, to think of 
the British course at the present time on this 
subject as extreme. The fact is that, so far 
as we are aware, the United States and 
Great Britain are the only countries which 
have proposed by their law to recognize conscientious 
scruples on the part of their citizens as a reasonable 
basis for being excused from military duty. 

Of course, no country forces aliens into the army; and 
were it recognized that true Christians are aliens as respects 
earthly governments, the whole question might solve 
itself. The Bible Students' claim is that the followers of 
Jesus have their citizenship in Heaven, and that by giving 
their obedience to the Heavenly Lord they renounce in a 
degree their allegiance to earthly kings— governments. It 
is for this reason that we have long advocated that the 
fully consecrated abstain from voting on political issues. 
If they so vote, they are identifying themselves with the 
earthly kingdoms, and might properly enough be called 
upon to shoot as they vote— to support the government 
which they helped to create. 

On the other hand, the Scriptural proposition is that 
while our citizenship is in Heaven and we are aliens, 
strangers and foreigners in the world, with allegiance to 
the Heavenly King, nevertheless, like all other foreigners, 
we are to be subject to the powers that be— subject to the 
laws of the country in which we may be living. But if 
obedience to the laws does not imply military service on 
the part of the foreigner, so obedience to the laws on the 
part of Bible Students does not imply military duty. Similarly 
with the oath of allegiance required by those who 
enter the army— they are required to swear allegiance to 
the king and obedience to the officers of the king in all 
things. This oath is not required of aliens, foreigners, 
and is objected to by Bible Students, not because they are 
opposed to law and order or unwilling to be regulated by 
the government under which they live, but because they 
have already given allegiance to the higher power— the 
Heavenly Lord. To them His words. His commands, etc., 
are paramount. 

Of course, such aliens could not object to deportation, 
nor make any stand for personal rights which any other 
alien of any other government might not request. 



PUBLIC SENTIMENT AROUSED 

The papers inform us that the matter of conscientious 
objectors to military service is deeply stirring the British 
people and has led to several wordy battles in Parliament. 
The claim made is that the laws of Great Britain provide 
for the consciences of all British subjects and that while 
these laws seem to be complied with, by the appointment 
of commissioners to hear the conscientious objections, 
nevertheless the laws are really disregarded, because the 
judges appointed are military judges, whose interests are 
not judicial but military. Some of those who refused on 
conscientious grounds were sentenced to prison for two 
years at hard labor. Others were forced to put on military 
uniform, and were kicked and bruised by companions 
in the ranks, either because of their conscientious loyalty 
to the Word of the great King or because they refused 
to swear allegiance to the British king and obedience to 

R5928 : page 221 

his officers. Others were sent to the army in France, the 
threat being made that if they did not do their duty they 
would be shot forthwith. 

All this is arousing British sentiment on this subject— 
for and against warfare. No doubt the courage, the witness, 
the martyr spirit on the part of the Lord's consecrated 
people will exercise a great influence and will lead 
to a more careful study of the commands of our King and 
the rules governing all who are under His banner. Whatever 
hardships may come to these dear brethren, we believe 
that a blessing will result in showing forth the 
praises of Him who has called us out of darkness into His 
marvelous light. 

In the meantime, it is not for us to exert force in opposition, 
nor to shout loudly about our rights. We are 
to remember that, in becoming soldiers of the Cross, we 
voluntarily gave up all earthly rights in order that we 
might be participators with the Captain of our salvation, 
who permitted all of His rights to be taken from Him, 
even unto death. As the followers of Jesus are made a 
spectacle to the world and to angels, they are also permitted 
to strengthen and build up one another in the most 
holy faith by their love and zeal for the Lord and His 
Message. We may well remember our privilege of praying 
one for another under such circumstances. We may 
not pray for the Lord to hinder others or ourselves from 
having trials or tests along these lines, for it is for the 
Divine Wisdom to determine what these shall be, but it is 
our privilege to pray for each other and for ourselves— 
to pray for that grace to help in every time of need which 
the Lord has promised He will grant.— Hebrews 4:16. 

May a very faithful witness, then, be given with great 
humility and with great sympathy to those who take a 
different view from ourselves! They hold that Christ's 



Kingdom has been set up; and that the present kings of 
Europe are of Divine appointment, as they claim upon 
their coins, and that for them to be at war is for God's 
Kingdom to be at war; and that their soldiers are God's 
soldiers. Inconsistently they fail to see that if their contentions 
be true, God's Kingdom is divided and God is 
fighting against Himself! A little while, and the dawning 
of the New Dispensation will be clearer. Then all nations 
will come to see that the need of mankind is the 
Rule of the Heavenly Lord with all power. By that time 
the Bride of Christ will have passed beyond the veil. 
Crowns of glory and palms of victory will have been 
bestowed, and the time for blessing the world of mankind 
will have come. 



R5929: page 221 

AT PEACE AMONGST YOURSELVES 

WE HAVE all heard the proverb, "Diamond 
cut Diamond." All jewels are very 
hard as well as very pure. This hardness 
enhances their value. The Lord's people 
are all jewels— not only are they purified by 
the Lord's grace, but they have crystallized 
characters. This being true, as we have 
previously pointed out, there is more danger 
of cutting and scratching when they are 
together than there would be with materials 
less hard. Putty and clay do no cutting— neither do characters 
of putty-like quality. 

Remembering this, the Lord's people should be very 
sympathetic with each other and very appreciative of each 
other. We learn to appreciate, as the Lord does, positiveness 
of character, strength of character, fixity of purpose, 
even though at times these qualities of character may 
cause some trouble. No wonder then that Berean Bible 
Classes have their difficulties sometimes, as well as do 
worldly organizations! 

THE LORD'S PEOPLE NOT STRIFE-BREEDERS 

Nevertheless, the Lord's people are to remember the 
special injunction of their Master that they should be 
peace-makers and not strife-breeders. It requires no 
great skill to stir up trouble. It requires considerable of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, and the other qualities of 
the Holy Spirit amongst the Lord's people to prevent 
strife, even with only the best of intentions prevailing. 
How much we all need to be on guard lest the Adversary 
tempt us, mislead us from the paths of peace! 

It requires considerable experience and the wisdom 
that cometh from Above to enable us to judge rightly 
whether a matter of difference between others and ourselves 



is a question of principle, where some fundamental 

truth is at stake, or whether it is merely a question of 

opinion and preference without principle being involved. 

In the latter case, we should be willing to submit to practically 

anything for the sake of peace, whereas we could 

not do so where principles would be involved. However, 

the delusion is often presented to us that our preferences 

are always backed up by principles of truth and righteousness. 

We must learn from experience that this is a mistake, 

and must critically examine every such suggestion. 

asking the Lord's wisdom to enable us to see the difference 

between that which is merely our preference and 

those questions which involve principles and teachings of 

Divine origin. 

For instance, in a Class there are often brethren or 
sisters who critically insist on a matter being done in a 
certain way, because that had been the previous custom 
or because they believe it to be the better way. They 
are ready to precipitate a quarrel unless their preference 
is followed. The wiser course is to waive our preference 
in favor of the preferences of others, if they are insistent, 
provided the right result is reached— namely, provided 
the will of the Class is really attained; for the will 
of the Class is to be taken as the will of the Lord— or if 
not that, the Lord will overrule the matter and bring a 
lesson to us out of it for the Class. 

Each and every member of a Class should earnestly 
strive to promote in a Class fruits of the Holy Spirit- 
meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly-kindness, love, 
joy, peace. This promoting is to be done by remembering 
these qualities and exercising them ourselves, thus setting 
an example to others and showing forth the influence of 
the Holy Spirit operating in our own hearts and lives. 

A FREQUENT MISTAKE 

Too often the mistake is made of thinking that the 
whole weight of responsibility rests upon us— forgetting 
that our responsibility ends when we have exercised our 
judgment and have acted upon it. 

Lack of faith in the Lord is closely associated with the 
error of bringing strife into a Class on some technical 
grounds. We should remember the Lord's interest in the 
Class and in all of His people, and that He is able and 
willing to overrule our experiences for good— likewise the 
experiences of others. If, therefore, matters are not going 
exactly to our pleasement in the Class, it will be better 
for us, and often for all, that we take the matter to the 
Lord in prayer, rather than that we should be continually 
nagging or fault-finding with that which is or which appears 
to be, satisfactory to the others, or at least to the 
majority of the Class. 



R5929 : page 222 



MILITARISM AND CONSCIENCE 

WHILE Christians are enjoined to be subject to 
the "Powers that be"— the kings, governors, 
magistrates, etc.— nevertheless this is not to 
be understood as meaning the renouncement 
of our fidelity to the King of kings and Lord 
of lords. He is our Over-Lord. Our allegiance 
to earthly lords and powers and their commands 
is merely to the extent that they do 
not conflict with the commands of our Over-Lord. 
The Jews in renouncing Jesus cried, 
"We have no king but Caesar"! The Christian's position 
is, "Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, but 
unto God the "things that are God's". Whenever Caesar 
and his laws conflict with the Divine requirements, all 
true soldiers of the Cross are left no alternative. 

It is not for us to set up standards for others. Conscience 
is an individual matter. It would be as wrong 
for Bible Students to antagonize earthly governments, and 
to oppose enlistments in the army and navy under the call 
of earthly governments, as it would be wrong for others 
to force their opinions upon Bible Students, contrary to 
our consciences. Let every man be fully persuaded in his 
own mind. Bible Students are to remember that they are 
citizens of the Heavenly Kingdom and are not to specially 
insist upon their earthly rights, except such as might be 
reasonably expected by foreigners. Messiah's Kingdom 
is not to be established by the sword of Bible Students, 
nor by their angry declamations against others, nor by 
their violation of the laws of the land in which they may 
be residing, nor by any hostility to the governments which 
undertake to guarantee their lives and happiness. We are 
to be subject to these governments. We are to appreciate 
them. But all this will not break our relationship to the 
Heavenly King and His commands. These come first with 
Bible Students— each according to his own conscience in 
respect to the meaning of the Lord's Word. 

At the present time in Great Britain many of the dear 
Brethren are enduring trying experiences with great 
loyalty. Imprisonment at hard labor is severe punishment 
for a law-abiding alien who merely refuses to engage in 
war because his Over-Lord has so commanded. Yet the 
sufferings of the faithful are. perhaps, still greater in 
other directions. One is in a very trying position when 
the finger of scorn is pointed at him; when he is proclaimed 
a coward; when he is discharged from the employment 
which brings him daily bread, while others who 
take to the sword are cheered. Not questioning the valor 
and courage in the latter, we believe that it requires still 
more courage to be in the ranks of the former— to stand 
loyal to the King of kings when opposed by the scorn of 
our neighbors and friends. 

We are sure, nevertheless, that the Lord is bringing 
a blessing to all who are seeking faithfully to know and to 



do his will. We believe, moreover, that a witness is thus 
going out in a great land to a great people— to a God-fearing 
people as a whole— such as they have not had since 
the days of persecution. How much the Lord may use 
present experiences for the finding and ripening of the 
wheat class of the British people is not for us to say. 

The Brethren of the London Office have very properly 
bestirred themselves to meet the conditions prevailing 
around them. They have sent out letters to the different 
Classes advising that the regularly-elected Elders of the 
Class may properly claim exemption from military duty 
as ministers of the Gospel, and advising that they so report 
when called upon and that the Classes report the 
names of their Elders. A petition signed by about five thousand 
has been forwarded to the Government as follows: 

A PETITION 

TO THE RT. HON. H.H. ASQUITH, M.P. 

SIR:— We, the undersigned Members of the International 
Bible Students Association, beg to present this Petition on behalf 
of the young men, associated with us in Christian fellowship, 
who are affected by the Military Service Measures now 
in operation, but whose deep religious convictions prohibit 
their engaging in such service. Many have already proved 
their fidelity to conscience by suffering, and their numbers 
are being augmented daily. We know of none who, were they 
given the opportunity, would refuse work of National importance 
under the supervision of the Committee appointed 
by the Government. 

We earnestly petition that those who conscientiously feel 
bound to refuse military service of any description may be 
recognized as loyal and law-abiding citizens, and be given an 
opportunity of effective service for the country apart from 
the machine of war, and that they be not treated as criminals. 

Your good offices and influence to end the present intolerable 
situation will be ever greatly appreciated by each of the 
undersigned: SIGNED BY 5,000. 

Accompanying this petition and signatures went the 
following letter. We have not yet learned the outcome. 
Our prayer is that the Lord's will shall be done, that His 
name shall be glorified and that His people shall be sustained 

R5930 : page 222 

with the necessary strength and grace to meet whatever 
Divine providence may permit. The situation of our 
Brethren in Great Britain may possibly find some parallel 
later amongst the Brethren in Australia and in Canada. 
And who knows but that the same conditions may ultimately 
prevail here in the United States? How thankful 
we are for the Divine promise, "My grace is sufficient for 
thee; My strength is made perfect in weakness"! 

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS 



TO THE RT. HON. H.H. ASQUITH, M.P. 

SIR:— As a British Chartered Association known as The 
International Bible Students Association, and as law-abiding 
citizens of the United Kingdom, we desire to petition you, 
the Head of His Majesty's Government, craving your good 
offices to secure consideration at the hands of the Government 
for those members of this Association whose consciences 
will not permit of their undertaking Military duties of any 
description, to the intent that they be granted permission to 
undertake work of National importance as prescribed by 
the Government Committee, and already granted to some 
other citizens who are also Conscientious Objectors on similar 
grounds. We think it right to explain that no pressure of any 
kind against Militarism is brought to bear upon its members 
by this Association; all alike are free to act as led by their 
own conscience, so that their cases are those of genuine personal 
conviction. 

At the present time there are at least 40 of our members 
in Military Prisons under sentences varying from a few days 
to two years with hard labor, and we are informed that eight 
have been sent to France. These men state that nothing can 
cause them to change their attitude towards Militarism, and 
their actions, thus far, are in harmony with this statement. 
Almost every day adds to the number incarcerated, and the 
extension of the Act to affect married men will increase the 
number still more in the future. Permit us to submit for 
consideration the fact that these men are at present an expense 
to the Country and a trouble to the Authorities, whereas their 
services are available for the public weal if permitted to 
undertake work apart from Military control. 

We feel it is only proper to state that this Association, 
which is affiliated in its religious work with the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY of America, is not allied with any 
other body— political or religious— which is opposed to Militarism, 
and to state further that we have no intention of 
allying ourselves with any such body. 

Accompanying this we send lists containing 5,000 signatures 
to this Petition; also a list of names of those of our members 
known to us as being incarcerated, praying the Government 
to extend to these their clemency by granting them also the 
desired exemption from Military control. 

Yours faithfully, INT. BIBLE STUDENTS ASS'N. 



R5930 : page 223 

BEREAN LESSONS AND PILGRIM VISITS 

SOME inquire what they shall do when a Pilgrim 
visit happens to be on the same night as the 
regular Berean Study— explaining that sometimes 
they must get behind as to Berean Lessons. 
Our advice is that unless there is some 



essential reason against it, the Berean Lessons 

should take precedence and the Pilgrim Brother 

conduct the meeting, giving example of a profitable 

Berean Lesson. The same thing applies to 

the Wednesday evening Prayer and Testimony 

meeting. This should go on as usual, the Pilgrim 

leading, unless for some special reason; 

as, for instance, if the Pilgrim's appointment be but for one 

night. We esteem that there are no more important services 

held by Bible Students than these two, and regularity is an 

important feature in connection with these meetings. 

We take this occasion to express the hope that all the dear 
friends who have taken the Vow read it publicly or privately 
every morning, and that the MANNA TEXT every morning 
be not forgotten. Some additionally read the MORNING 
RESOLVE. Thousands of letters from dear brethren and sisters 
all over the world testify the great blessings in connection with 
these endeavors to keep close to the Lord. The Prayer Circle 
formed by the Vow is perhaps one of the most wonderful 
things that has ever been in the world. Think of it! approximately 
twenty thousand consecrated people of God praying 
for one another and for the Harvest work every day. The 
blessing that this is bringing to them is almost inestimable; 
it is a blessing that maketh rich indeed. 

Those who are not using the Manna daily are losing a 
great blessing; and those who do not participate in the 
Wednesday evening Testimony Meeting whose topic is the 
Manna Text of the preceding Thursday are missing a rich 
blessing. As many as believe that we are now in the Evil 
Day of special trial upon the Church of God should appreciate 
these meetings— drawing very near to the Lord and to each 
other daily. If you have not done so before, we urge that 
you make a start forthwith. 

While thus exhorting, we are prompted to remind our dear 
readers in general that quite a good many are making it a 
practice to read at least twelve pages of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES each day, thus completing the entire six volumes 
every year. Reports show that great blessings of knowledge 
and of grace follow this course. 



R5930 : page 223 

PILGRIM BARTON GONE HOME 

BROTHER BENJAMIN H. BARTON has been 
on the Pilgrim staff of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY for quite a good many 
years, and is widely and very favorably remembered 
by our readers. Although always 
apparently frail, Brother Barton had a strong 
voice, and by the Lord's grace was able to do 
very efficient service up to about June 1st. We 
then heard from him that he had not been 
very well and was obliged to cancel future appointments 



in Oregon. He was kindly entertained 

by the friends, and everything possible 

for his comfort was attended to, but he continued to grow 

weak and, without special pain or suffering of any kind, so 

far as we have learned, passed away on Saturday, June 24th. 

His remains were shipped to the residence of his parents in 

Philadelphia, where they were interred Monday, July 3d. 

The Editor has most kindly remembrances of dear Brother 
Barton, not only as a faithful servant of the Lord, of the 
Truth, of the brethren, but also as a personal friend. The 
knowledge of the Truth, heart-abounding grace, the spirit 
of a sound mind, all contributed to the development in 
Brother Barton of a very noble character, highly esteemed 
amongst the friends in general, and especially amongst those 
who knew him best. We will miss him greatly; nevertheless 
we also greatly rejoice on his behalf, believing that he 
has passed beyond the veil, has experienced his resurrection 
change, and with the others of the faithful will henceforth 
be forever with the Lord. "Blessed are the dead which die 
in the Lord from henceforth; Yea, saith the Spirit, that they 
may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them." 
—Revelation 14:13. 

As one by one the number beyond the veil increases and 
the members this side correspondingly decrease, the great 
privilege of being servants of God and being found faithful 
as such looms larger and larger before our mental vision. 
We know not which of us will next be called to enter into 
the joys of our Lord in full, but we trust that all of the 
truly consecrated are in the waiting attitude, expecting, hoping, 
longing for the resurrection change, which the Apostle 
assures us is necessary, because "flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the Kingdom," shortly to be established.— 1 Cor. 15:50. 

It is remarkable that as we near the consummation of this 
Age, and the completion of the Church, the opportunities for 
serving the Household of Faith seem to increase. And 
while old, active servants are passing beyond, new, loyal, 
zealous successors are being found by the Truth. Thus the 
work on this side the veil is going grandly on. 

Well did the Apostle write that the Lord's true people, 
enlightened, encouraged and fortified by the promises in the 
Divine Word, "sorrow not as do others" in the presence of 
the great foe-DEATH. 

BROTHER BAKER'S REPORT 

This morning, June 24, at Portland, Ore., Brother Barton 
passed to his reward at 1:15. His end came suddenly, even 
though his low vitality and weakness gave evidence of his 
grave condition. Friday he appeared somewhat brighter than 
usual, sitting up for twenty minutes, after which he asked to 
lie down to sleep, as he felt tired. That evening he ate a 
hearty meal (for him), and talked hopefully of starting 
home soon. The Brother's mind was apparently clear until 
the last, but he could not articulate well, owing to trouble 
due to a slight stroke of paralysis about four weeks ago. As 
death approached the cares of his season of illness seemed 



to vanish and his features relaxed, and, with a smile on his 
lips, he passed into the Kingdom. Friday afternoon he 
expressed to Sister Baker his love for the brethren at the 
Bethel and particularly for dear Brother Russell, and that 
it was his hope to see them again. His only care has been 

R593 1 : page 223 

his mother. The desire to see and comfort her again probably 
did much to retain the slight hold he had on life for 
some weeks. 

The opportunity of serving the Brother has been a great 
blessing to all here, and while individual privileges of service 
were limited for obvious reasons, the privilege of serving his 
spiritual interests through prayer has greatly blessed all. 
His cheerful, patient endurance of his physical disability, his 
desire to please and his efforts to keep himself from being 
burdensome to those about, will prove a lasting lesson to 
all. Our loss has been his gain. How appropriate today's 
MANNA TEXT! 



R593 1 : page 223 

THE ST. LOUIS CONVENTION 

ALTHOUGH the attendance at the St. Louis Convention 
—June 22-25— was not large, it was 
an enthusiastic gathering and gave strong evidence 
of the Master's blessing. The Apostle's 
exhortation, "Be ye filled with the Spirit," seems 
to have been quite well realized by those in 
attendance. The exhibitions of the PHOTODR AM A 
OF CREATION in the evening were a very 
happifying feature of the Convention. The 
pictures and the lectures— the Bible story from 
Creation to Restoration— seem to have a charm 
for Bible Students everywhere. Like the charm 
of God's Word, they never grow stale. 

The Convention attendance varied from three hundred 
and fifty to six hundred and fifty, aside from the public meeting 
on the closing night. It was held in the Odeon Theatre 
and was addressed by the Editor of this journal. The house 
was crowded to its capacity, twenty-three hundred, and at the 
same time an overflow meeting of Bible Students was held 
in the Convention Hall to the number of about six hundred. 
At the close of both meetings, about 10:30 p.m.. Brother 
Russell came into the Convention Theatre. He was welcomed 
with the Chautauqua Salute— the waving of handkerchiefs, 
while the familiar old hymn was sung with zest: 

"Blest be the tie that binds 
Our hearts in Christian love." 

After a few words of greeting and reference to the Convention 



and its conclusion and the hope for blessings upon 

those present and the dear ones at the home towns represented 

by them. Brother Russell arranged the Love Feast, 

in which nearly all participated with many manifestions of 

earnest Christian love and zeal. Thus happily, joyfully, the 

First General Convention of the season came to an end. 



page 225 
