Be a Progressive Minister
1 Our heavenly Father is pleased when his servants make spiritual advancement. That includes progressing as a mature and effective minister of the good news. Paul encouraged the overseer Timothy to continue applying himself so that his advancement would be manifest. (1 Tim. 4:13-15) All of us should endeavor to improve the quality of our ministry, even those of us who are experienced publishers.
2 Set Personal Goals: Making progress requires setting personal goals. What are some goals we may set for ourselves? We might try to become more adept at using our spiritual sword, the Bible. (Eph. 6:17) Perhaps there is a feature of the ministry that we need to improve in, such as street witnessing, telephone witnessing, or working business territory. Perhaps we could work at making more effective return visits. Another excellent goal might be to improve our ability to start and conduct Bible studies.
3 Provisions: Congregation meetings, especially the Theocratic Ministry School and Service Meeting, are designed to help us grow as ministers. The more effort we expend preparing for and attending these meetings and applying the suggestions given, the greater the benefits we are bound to receive.​—2 Cor. 9:6.
4 We also need to help one another to progress. (Prov. 27:17) Listening carefully to the presentation of those with whom we work in the ministry will help us to improve. In addition, our book study overseer may arrange for us to receive personal assistance. What a blessing it is to have an experienced pioneer or other publisher help us to become more productive and reap greater joy in the ministry! Is there a new publisher in our book study? Perhaps we can take the initiative to invite him to work with us.
5 The most important work being done today is the Christian ministry. As we offer Jehovah our “sacrifice of praise,” we want to give him our best. (Heb. 13:15) If we endeavor to be progressive in the ministry, we will be workmen “with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.”​—2 Tim. 2:15.

