Comfort the Mourning Ones
 1. Why do mourning ones need comfort?
1 Losing a loved one in death is a traumatic experience, especially for those who do not have the Kingdom hope. (1 Thess. 4:13) Many often wonder: ‘Why do people die? Where do they go? Will I ever see my loved one again?’ Below are some suggestions for giving comfort to those we meet in field service who are mourning the death of a relative or a friend.​—Isa. 61:2.
 2. If a householder tells us that he is grieving, should we always try to give an extended witness?
2 From Door to Door: A householder may tell us that he just had a death in his family. Is he in emotional turmoil? Is the house filled with grieving relatives? In such cases, it may be best not to give an extended witness. (Eccl. 3:1, 7) Perhaps we can express our sympathy, give him an appropriate tract, magazine, or brochure, and excuse ourselves. Then we can return at a more suitable time to share further comfort from the Bible.
 3. If the circumstances allow, what scriptures might we show a grieving householder?
3 On other occasions, we may discern that more can be said on the initial call. Though this is not the time to refute wrong views, we may be able to read with them the Bible’s promises regarding the resurrection. (John 5:28, 29) Or we could share what the Bible says about the condition of the dead. (Eccl. 9:5, 10) A Biblical account of a resurrection may also provide comfort. (John 11:39-44) Another option would be to consider the words of hope in Jehovah expressed by faithful Job. (Job 14:14, 15) Before leaving, we may offer What Happens to Us When We Die?, When Someone You Love Dies, or another appropriate brochure or tract. Or we might leave the Bible Teach book, draw attention to the information in chapter 6, and arrange to discuss the subject further when we return.
 4. What other occasions do we have to provide comfort?
4 On Other Occasions: If a funeral or memorial service is being held at the Kingdom Hall, will unbelievers be present? Literature that provides comfort could be made available for them. Some funeral homes have appreciated having some appropriate literature on hand for grieving families. At times, funeral notices appearing in the newspaper have opened the way for writing a brief comforting letter to bereaved family members. In one case, after receiving a letter that included some tracts, a widower and his daughter went to the publisher’s home and asked: “Are you the people that sent me this letter? Well, I want to know more about the Bible!” The man and his daughter agreed to a Bible study and began attending congregation meetings.
 5. Why should we be alert to opportunities to comfort those who are grieving?
5 Ecclesiastes 7:2 says: “Better is it to go to the house of mourning than to go to the banquet house.” The mourner is usually in a better frame of mind for listening to God’s Word than the merrymaker. All of us should be alert to recognize appropriate opportunities to comfort those who are grieving the loss of a loved one.

