Question Box
▪ Is it proper for one of Jehovah’s Witnesses to receive treatment and care at a hospital or nursing home operated by a religious organization?
Various religious organizations operate hospitals or nursing homes that provide medical treatment or long-term care. Generally, such facilities are not established for the outright promotion of Babylon the Great. (Rev. 18:2, 4) They may originally have been incorporated to serve a religious organization as a source of income. Today, some hospitals are religious in their name only, whereas others are still partially staffed by members of the clergy.
If one of Jehovah’s Witnesses requires hospital or nursing care, he must make his own decision as to whether he will go to a facility that may possibly be connected with a religious organization. The conscience of one might permit him to do so, but the conscience of another may prevent him from doing so. (1 Tim. 1:5) There are certain circumstances that may have a bearing on one’s decision, and it is good to consider these.
For example, a hospital or nursing home with a religious name may be the only one in the immediate area. Or if there is another facility nearby, the one with possible religious connections may have a reputation for superior service. Such a hospital with a religious name may be the only one equipped to provide the particular treatment needed, or it may be the only hospital where your doctor or surgeon is able to handle cases. Also, sometimes hospitals with religious connections may respect your viewpoint as a Christian on the use of blood, whereas some other private or municipal hospitals may not. So these are some factors that you may have to consider when deciding what facility to use.
If you do decide to use a hospital or nursing home with religious connections, you might view it merely as paying for services rendered. You might view it as if the religious organization were operating a certain business, and in purchasing a service from such a business you would not be making a direct, voluntary contribution to the support of a false religion. You would merely be paying for a product or a service.
Of course, as a Christian, in such circumstances you must definitely see to it that you do not engage in any acts of false worship. Also, you would not ascribe the usual religious titles, such as “Father” or “Sister,” to individuals who may work at or visit the facility. (Matt. 23:9) You would have to see to it that the matter is strictly a business arrangement in which you are receiving treatment and service, and nothing more.
When being admitted to the hospital, you may indicate that you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and that you would like to receive visits from local elders. This will ensure that you receive proper spiritual support during your stay.​—1 Thess. 5:14.
Believing family members, local elders, and others in the congregation should responsibly care for the spiritual needs of any elderly brothers and sisters who live in nursing homes, particularly when operated by a religious organization. Diligence in this regard will be of great encouragement to such older ones and will prevent them from inadvertently being included in religious services, celebrations, or other similar activities held at such facilities.
With these points in mind, each one will have to consider all the circumstances involved and then make his own decision as to which hospital or nursing home he will use.​—Gal. 6:5.

