Service Meeting Schedule
NOTE: A Service Meeting will be scheduled in Our Kingdom Ministry for each week during the summer months. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the “Guided by God’s Spirit” District Convention. Where appropriate, use 15 minutes on the last Service Meeting before attending the convention to repeat counsel and reminders from this month’s insert that apply locally. A month or two following your convention, set aside 15 to 20 minutes on a Service Meeting (perhaps using a local needs portion) for a review of points from the convention that the publishers have found to be helpful in the ministry. The service overseer should handle the review. Invite the audience to comment on how they are applying or plan to apply that information in their ministry.
Week Starting April 14
Song 183
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the April 1 Watchtower and the April Awake!
15 min: “Show Yourselves Thankful.”a As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
20 min: “Comfort the Mourning Ones.”b Invite audience to relate outstanding experiences they have had giving comfort to someone who lost a loved one in death.
Song 42
Week Starting April 21
Song 171
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Remind audience to bring the May 1 Watchtower and the May Awake! to the Service Meeting next week and to be prepared to discuss appropriate presentations for the local territory.
10 min: Local needs.
25 min: “An Occasion to Eat Spiritually and Rejoice.”c To be handled by the congregation secretary. Mention the convention to which the congregation is assigned. Review the box “District Convention Reminders.”
Song 197
Week Starting April 28
Song 55
15 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for April. Using the May 1 Watchtower and the May Awake! give a brief overview of each issue and ask the audience which articles may appeal best to people in the territory and why. Invite audience to suggest presentations using articles they plan to feature. What question could be asked to start a conversation? Which scripture in the article could then be read? How could the scripture be tied in? Using a presentation suggested by the audience or sample presentations from Our Kingdom Ministry, demonstrate how each magazine might be offered.
10 min: Question Box. Audience discussion.
20 min: “Follow His Steps Closely.”d As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
Song 65
Week Starting May 5
Song 217
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Jehovah Will By No Means Leave You. Encouraging talk based on the October 15, 2005, Watchtower, pages 8-11.
20 min: “Be a Progressive Minister.”e When considering paragraph 3, include comments on the Ministry School book, pages 6-8, under the subheading “How to Benefit to the Full.”
Song 11
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

