“Follow His Steps Closely”
 1. How may we become effective ministers?
1 Jesus was not educated in the rabbinic schools, yet he was history’s greatest Minister. Thankfully, a written record of Jesus’ ministry has been preserved for our benefit. In order for us to be effective ministers, we must “follow his steps closely.”​—1 Pet. 2:21.
 2. What will help us to cultivate Christlike love for people?
2 Demonstrate Love for People: Loving concern for people motivated Jesus. (Mark 6:30-34) Many in our territory are “in pain” and in great need of the truth. (Rom. 8:22) Our reflecting on their dire situation and on Jehovah’s loving interest in them will motivate us to persist in preaching. (2 Pet. 3:9) Furthermore, people will more readily respond to our message if they discern that we genuinely care about them.
 3. On what occasions did Jesus preach to others?
3 Speak at Every Opportunity: Jesus took advantage of every opportunity to share the good news with others. (Matt. 4:23; 9:9; John 4:7-10) Similarly, we want to be prepared to talk about the truth as we go about our daily routine. Some keep a Bible and literature handy so that they may witness at work, at school, when traveling and shopping, and so forth.
 4. How may we make the Kingdom the theme of our preaching?
4 Focus on the Kingdom: The good news of the Kingdom was the theme of Jesus’ preaching. (Luke 4:43) Although our presentation may not immediately or directly mention the Kingdom, we keep in mind helping the householder see the need for it. Even when mentioning bad world conditions that indicate that we are living in the last days, we primarily “declare good news of good things.”​—Rom. 10:15.
 5. In order for our ministry to be effective, what role must the Bible play?
5 Rely on God’s Word: Throughout Jesus’ ministry he relied on the Scriptures. He taught nothing of his own originality. (John 7:16, 18) He fed on God’s Word and applied it to himself when under satanic attack. (Matt. 4:1-4) In order for us to teach others effectively, we must read the Bible daily and make personal application. (Rom. 2:21) When answering questions in the ministry, we should cite Scriptural backing for what we say and read directly from the Bible whenever possible. We want the householder to see that we are not expressing personal opinions but adhering to God’s thoughts.
 6. What did Jesus do to reach the hearts of his listeners?
6 Reach the Heart in Your Teaching: “Never has another man spoken like this.” (John 7:46) So said the officers about Jesus when the chief priests and Pharisees asked why the officers failed to arrest him. Rather than simply conveying facts, Jesus taught in a way that reached the hearts of those he instructed. (Luke 24:32) He used true-to-life illustrations to breathe life into his words. (Matt. 13:34) Jesus did not overwhelm his listeners with too much information. (John 16:12) He drew attention to Jehovah rather than to himself. Like Jesus, we can become good teachers only by paying ‘constant attention to our teaching.’​—1 Tim. 4:16.
 7. Why did Jesus persist in the ministry?
7 Persist Despite Apathy and Opposition: Though Jesus performed powerful works, many did not listen to him. (Luke 10:13) Even members of Jesus’ own family felt that he had “gone out of his mind.” (Mark 3:21) Nonetheless, Jesus persisted. He maintained a positive attitude because he was totally convinced that he had the truth that could set men free. (John 8:32) With Jehovah’s help, we too are determined not to give up.​—2 Cor. 4:1.
8, 9. How may we imitate Jesus in making sacrifices for the sake of the good news?
8 Make Needed Sacrifices to Have a Full Share: Jesus sacrificed material comforts for the ministry. (Matt. 8:20) He preached tirelessly, sometimes late into the day. (Mark 6:35, 36) Jesus knew that he had a limited amount of time to accomplish the work. Since “the time left is reduced,” we too need to make personal sacrifices of our time, energy, and resources in imitation of Jesus.​—1 Cor. 7:29-31.
9 First-century Christians were effective ministers because they learned from Jesus. (Acts 4:13) We too can fully accomplish our ministry if we imitate history’s greatest Minister.​—2 Tim. 4:5.

