“Show Yourselves Thankful”
1 When Jesus healed ten lepers, only one of them returned to express gratitude. Jesus asked: “The ten were cleansed, were they not? Where, then, are the other nine?” (Luke 17:11-19) How important it is for us to be appreciative and to show ourselves thankful for every good gift and perfect present bestowed upon us by our generous and loving heavenly Father, Jehovah God!​—Col. 3:15; Jas. 1:17.
2 What are some things for which to be thankful? We appreciate the ransom, God’s greatest gift to mankind. (John 3:16) We are also thankful to Jehovah for drawing us to him. (John 6:44) Our Christian unity is another reason for being thankful. (Ps. 133:1-3) No doubt you can think of many other gifts from Jehovah. Never would we want to become like the ungrateful Israelites who forgot Jehovah’s works in their behalf!​—Ps. 106:12, 13.
3 Demonstrate Thankfulness: Though all ten lepers may have appreciated what Jesus did for them, only one showed himself thankful. (Luke 17:15) Similarly, we demonstrate appreciation by having a zealous share in the ministry. If we are truly thankful for all that our loving heavenly Father has done, our hearts will be moved to reflect his love and generosity by telling others about him. (Luke 6:45) In turn, as we recount to others Jehovah’s ‘wonderful works and his thoughts toward us,’ our love and appreciation for Jehovah will grow.​—Ps. 40:5.
4 Instill Appreciation in Others: We should be alert to help our children and Bible students to develop appreciation. Parents have many opportunities to do this, such as when enjoying Jehovah’s creation with their children. (Rom. 1:20) When conducting a Bible study, we might ask our student, “What does this tell us about the kind of person Jehovah is?” As the student’s appreciation grows, so will his love for God and his determination to please him.
5 During these last days, many are unappreciative and unthankful. (2 Tim. 3:1, 2) How it must please Jehovah to see his devoted servants demonstrating thankfulness by their zealous participation in the ministry!​—Jas. 1:22-25.

