How to Prepare for the Service Meeting
 1. What is the purpose of the Service Meeting, and how may we gain the most benefit from it?
1 The Service Meeting is designed to equip us for a productive ministry. The focus is on preaching the Kingdom good news, making disciples, and declaring the approaching execution of divine judgment. (Matt. 28:20; Mark 13:10; 2 Pet. 3:7) We benefit most from this important meeting when we are well prepared and ready to participate.
 2. How can we prepare to listen to a talk?
2 Talk: Source material for a talk is generally shown in the instructions to the speaker. You may review the assigned material, including the cited scriptures, and think about how you may apply the information in your ministry.
 3. What may we do to prepare for a question-and-answer discussion?
3 Question-and-Answer Discussion: This part will be handled much like the Watchtower Study, with a brief introduction and conclusion. Underline key points in each paragraph, and be prepared to give brief meaningful comments.
 4. How may we prepare for an audience discussion?
4 Audience Discussion: This part will be presented as a talk, but the speaker will call for some audience participation. If you underline the key points and look up the cited scriptures, you may be able to comment when questions are asked. The brother handling this part will make every effort to involve the audience in covering main points.
 5. What will help us to benefit the most from demonstrations?
5 Demonstrations: Some parts will include realistic demonstrations to show how the information considered may be used in the local territory. Elders or experienced publishers or pioneers will be called on to help out in this way. Your preparation for this part may include anticipating how the matter will be presented. When a sample presentation is demonstrated, think about how you might personalize it and adapt it to different householders. Be sure to have with you the publication or magazine that will be used in the demonstration. During your Family Worship evening, you may find it beneficial to practice some of these presentations.
 6. What are some reasons for preparing for the Service Meeting?
6 The Service Meeting is more enjoyable when we are prepared and we anticipate the fine instruction to be presented. Doing so will result in a greater interchange of encouragement. (Rom. 1:11, 12) If we take the time to prepare for the Service Meeting, we will be better equipped to fulfill our commission.​—2 Tim. 3:17.

