Make Good Use of Our Publications
 1. How may we imitate Jesus’ example of appreciation for Jehovah’s provisions?
1 After Jesus miraculously fed a large crowd, he arranged for the leftover food to be saved. (Matt. 14:19-21) Such appreciation for Jehovah’s provisions sets a fine example for us to ‘show ourselves thankful’ by making good use of all that Jehovah provides through “the faithful steward.”​—Col. 3:15; Luke 12:42; Matt. 24:45-47.
 2. How may we prevent the accumulation of magazines?
2 Magazines: Magazines can easily accumulate. If we regularly have leftover magazines, we should reduce the number that we request. What about older magazines? These do not lose their value with the passage of time. If we have an accumulation of older magazines, perhaps the service overseer or another elder can assist us to find effective ways to place them.
3, 4. What points should we keep in mind when we obtain literature at the Kingdom Hall?
3 Other Literature: When the offer changes to a different publication, first check to see if you already have field service copies of the publication at home before obtaining additional copies of the literature at the Kingdom Hall. Be mindful of getting copies only as needed for the week, and return to the counter for more after those are placed.
4 As for publications for personal use, request only what you actually need. Write your name in the space provided. That will help you keep track of your personal copy. If you use the Watchtower Library on CD-ROM and have saved your personal copies of the magazines, you may not feel a need to request personal copies of the Watchtower and Awake! bound volumes.
 5. What should we keep in mind when placing our publications?
5 Placement of Publications: We strive to place our publications only with those who show genuine interest. Keep in mind that we are the ones primarily responsible for the financial coverage of these valuable tools in our ministry. When leaving a publication with interested ones, do not hesitate to inform them of the privilege they have to support the worldwide work with their donation.
 6. Why do we value our publications so much, and what will this move us to do with them?
6 Jesus miraculously provided physical food for others, but more often he fed people spiritually. Jesus said: “Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.” (Matt. 4:4) Our publications teach Bible truths vital for gaining everlasting life. (John 17:3) They are far too valuable to waste!

