Teach With Simplicity
 1. What is one important aspect of clear, effective teaching?
1 Simplicity is a key ingredient in effective teaching. Considering the way the Great Teacher, Jesus, taught can help us to enhance our “art of teaching.”​—2 Tim. 4:2; John 13:13.
 2. What is involved when teaching with simplicity, and what effects does such teaching have?
2 Speak With Simplicity: The Sermon on the Mount contains some of the most profound truths ever spoken by man, all expressed with simplicity. (Matt., chaps. 5-7) The crowds listening to Jesus were “astounded at his way of teaching.” Officers sent to arrest him were moved to say: “Never has another man spoken like this.” (Matt. 7:28, 29; John 7:46) We do not need to use high-sounding words, complicated phrases, or detailed illustrations to make the truth thoroughly convincing to others. The truth can be clearly explained using familiar terms.
 3. Why may some tend to overwhelm their audience, and how can this be avoided?
3 Gauge the Amount: Jesus took into consideration his audience in determining how much information to convey to them at one time. (John 16:12) We must be observant and flexible in this regard, especially when witnessing to relatives, newly interested persons, or children. We should be careful not to overwhelm them with information even when they may appear to be listening attentively. Those who are honesthearted will continue to take in knowledge of the true God, Jehovah.​—John 17:3; 1 Cor. 3:6.
 4. Why is it beneficial to focus on main points rather than details?
4 Focus on Main Points: Jesus did not clutter what he was teaching by including too many details. When he said: “All those in the memorial tombs will . . . come out,” it was not the time for him to elaborate regarding the two destinies of those resurrected. (John 5:28, 29) When conducting Bible studies, we should focus on the main points and curb the tendency to bring unnecessary outside material into the discussion.
 5. What blessing may we obtain if we teach with simplicity?
5 How grateful we are that Jehovah has taught with simplicity all we need to know! (Matt. 11:25) May we apply ourselves to teaching with simplicity and experience the joys of having a fruitful ministry.

