From Our Readers
Trust  I was feeling weighed down because of having been betrayed by some friends and relatives. I began to doubt the credibility of everyone around me. But the series “Whom Can You Trust?” (February 8, 1996) gave me a more balanced view of trust. Thank you for such timely information.
E. I., Korea
Over the years, I have experienced betrayal by my father, who abused me, by two husbands, and by a Christian brother. I reached the point where I decided not to trust anyone. I convinced myself that I didn’t need people. But the article helped me to become more balanced. Although it is very hard for me to trust, I am going to keep trying. This time I will be more careful about whom I trust.
C. H., United States
Matterhorn  I read the article “The Unique Matterhorn.” (February 8, 1996) The photo of this beautiful mountain really attracted my attention! The article made me appreciate God’s creation yet more.
J. W., United States
Apples  Thank you ever so much for the article “An Apple a Day Keeps the Doctor Away.” (February 8, 1996) It struck my fancy, since we have over 100 apple trees on our small farm. We enjoy pruning and grooming these trees to make them produce well. We appreciate the accuracy of all your articles. They provide refreshing, trustworthy information.
P. B., United States
Compulsive Behavior  Thank you for the excellent article “Compulsive Behavior—Does It Control Your Life?” (February 8, 1996) I am only 20 years old, and I suffer from compulsive behavior. Frequently I have asked Jehovah in prayer to send me information about what was happening to me.
M. A. C., Spain
I began to be troubled by involuntary, disrespectful thoughts about God around the time I started pioneering, serving as a full-time evangelizer. I thought I had committed an unforgivable sin, and I cried many times. You cannot imagine how I feel now, seeing my feelings described in black and white. I never thought any other person could be suffering from this. Thank you, brothers, for always being there for us.
C. B., Nigeria
I read the article over and over, in tears. It described me in such detail! I had wondered if I was going crazy or if the demons were taking over my mind. It was a relief to know that others among the brothers are suffering the same disorder.
K. T., Japan
I had often turned to Jehovah for aid with this problem. But I decided to give up because I felt that it was futile and that nothing could help me. Now I understand myself, and I feel relieved. I doubt that the article could have been written more lovingly. I am sure that Jehovah really cares for us.
J. F., Czech Republic
I have been mentally tormented by compulsive thoughts for seven years now. It has left me feeling worn down and depressed. I have felt too ashamed and guilty to discuss it with anyone. I really thought I had lost my mind. When I read this article, I could not believe it. There was someone else out there who had experienced what I was going through! Tears came to my eyes. I was not alone anymore. I had not committed the unforgivable sin, and Jehovah was not angry with me.
S. B., South Africa

