Take Control of Your Life Now!
SCIENTIFIC research into human behavior and motivation has benefited us in many ways. Perhaps we have been helped to cope with a sickness by having a more in-depth understanding of it. At the same time, it is prudent to be cautious when it comes to sensational theories, especially those that seem to contradict well established principles.
On the subject of genetics and behavior, the questions arise: Can we abdicate our responsibilities and accept no blame for our actions? Can we beg off or even blame someone or something else for any indiscretion or wrongdoing, thus joining the growing numbers in this “not-me” generation? Not at all. Most people willingly take credit for any successes in life, so why should they not likewise be willing to accept responsibility for their mistakes?
Hence, we might ask, What does God’s Word, the Holy Bible, have to say about who or what controls our lives today?
What Is the Bible’s View?
The first thing we need to recognize is that all of us are born in sin inherited from our original parents, Adam and Eve. (Psalm 51:5) Additionally, we are living in a special time, called “the last days,” when people experience “critical times hard to deal with.” (2 Timothy 3:1) This indicates that, generally speaking, we encounter more problems in exercising wholesome control over our lives than our forebears did.
Nevertheless, all humans are free moral agents, who can make their own personal choices. To that extent they are in control of their lives. This has been so since early times and can be seen in the words of Joshua to the nation of Israel: “Choose for yourselves today whom you will serve.”—Joshua 24:15.
The Bible acknowledges that Satan the Devil has been cast from the heavens and now, more than ever, exerts strong influence for bad on the entire human race. It also tells us that even in the days of the apostle John, the whole world was lying in the power of the wicked one. (1 John 5:19; Revelation 12:9, 12) However, just as Almighty God does not control our every action or predestinate us to an end that only he knows, we should not lay the blame directly on Satan for every one of our mistakes or failures. The balancing Scriptural truth is that “each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed by his own desire. Then the desire, when it has become fertile, gives birth to sin.” (James 1:14, 15) The apostle Paul wrote these inspired words: “Do not be misled: God is not one to be mocked. For whatever a man is sowing, this he will also reap.”—Galatians 6:7.
So Jehovah God holds us individually accountable for our actions. We must be careful not to try to excuse ourselves because of our genetic makeup and inherited imperfections. God held the violent, homosexual community of ancient Sodom and Gomorrah accountable for their corrupt acts. Obviously, he did not consider the inhabitants as poor, unfortunate creatures who because of some presumed genetic flaw could not help being wicked. In similar fashion, the people living in the days of Noah had many evil influences around them; nevertheless, they had to make a choice, a personal decision, if they were to survive the Deluge soon to occur. A few made the right choice. Most did not.
The Hebrew prophet Ezekiel confirms that personal control is required if we are to merit God’s favor: “As for you, in case you have warned someone wicked and he does not actually turn back from his wickedness and from his wicked way, he himself for his error will die; but as for you, you will have delivered your own soul.”—Ezekiel 3:19.
The Best Help Available
Of course, all of us need help to exercise personal control in our everyday life, and for many of us, this is quite a challenge. But we need not despair. Although our inherited sinful leanings are unacceptable to God, if we want to modify our behavior, he will provide us with the best help available—his holy spirit and his inspired truth. Despite any genetic predisposition we may have and any external influences that may affect us, we can “strip off the old personality with its practices, and clothe [ourselves] with the new personality, which through accurate knowledge is being made new according to the image of the One who created it.”—Colossians 3:9, 10.
Many Christians in the Corinth congregation made dramatic changes in their behavior. The inspired record tells us: “Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men kept for unnatural purposes, nor men who lie with men, nor thieves, nor greedy persons, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners will inherit God’s kingdom. And yet that is what some of you were. But you have been washed clean, but you have been sanctified, but you have been declared righteous in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ and with the spirit of our God.”—1 Corinthians 6:9-11.
So if we are struggling with our imperfections, let us not give in to them. Many modern-day Christians have proved that with Jehovah’s help, they were able to ‘be transformed by making their minds over and prove to themselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.’ They feed their minds on whatever things are true, righteous, chaste, lovable, virtuous, praiseworthy; and they “continue considering these things.” They take in solid spiritual food and through use of it have their perceptive powers trained to distinguish both right and wrong.—Romans 12:2; Philippians 4:8; Hebrews 5:14.
It is heartening to know of their struggles, their temporary failures, and their eventual success with the help of God’s holy spirit. God assures us that changing our behavior often involves the heart and its desire: “When wisdom enters into your heart and knowledge itself becomes pleasant to your very soul, thinking ability itself will keep guard over you, discernment itself will safeguard you, to deliver you from the bad way.”—Proverbs 2:10-12.
Therefore, if you want to make everlasting life your goal—life without the troubles of the wicked world and free from debilitating imperfections—‘exert yourself’ in taking control of your life now and be guided by heavenly wisdom. (Luke 13:24) Avail yourself of the help of Jehovah’s holy spirit so that you can produce the fruit of self-control. Make it your heart’s desire to bring your life into harmony with God’s laws, and heed the advice: “More than all else that is to be guarded, safeguard your heart, for out of it are the sources of life.” (Proverbs 4:23) Getting hold of “the real life” in God’s new world—in which Jehovah God will correct all genetic deficiencies on the basis of faith in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ—is worth all the efforts you make to control your life in this world!—1 Timothy 6:19; John 3:16.
[Picture on page 9]
Studying the Bible can give us strength to overcome deeply ingrained weaknesses
[Picture on page 9]
Bible study can help us to hold true to God’s moral standards

