Announcements
● Please note the literature offers for the following months. Order any needed literature now.
April: Watchtower subscription and one free 384- or 416-page book, or the pocket-size book God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good, for $2.00. Publishers placing the large bound books may obtain them from the literature counter for 10c each. The congregation may request 35c credit for each large book placed over the counter during April. The pocket-size “Eternal Purpose” book may also be obtained for 10c by the publishers, and the congregation may request 20c credit for each of those books placed with the brothers. Congregations requesting credit should use the Remittance and Credit Request form on the lines below “other items.”
May and June: Three pocket-size books for $1.00. In each set include the book God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good. If none of this publication is on hand, congregations may submit orders to the Society.
July: Watchtower subscription, for $2.00; a pocket-size book as a gift with a new subscription for one year.
● The only ones appropriately invited to attend the pioneer meeting during the circuit overseer’s visit are those currently in the regular or special pioneer service and those who are in the auxiliary pioneer service at the time of his visit. This is in harmony with the Organization book, page 83, designating this as a special meeting with the pioneers.
● Before the Memorial, we would like to suggest that you do Bible reading from the book of Mark as outlined below. It covers the last six days of Jesus’ life on the earth. We recommend that, if possible, you do this reading as a family. If you are not able to do that, read it personally.
We have scheduled the reading a day or so ahead of the Jewish date on which the events took place, so you can finish your Bible reading before Nisan 14, which begins after sundown on April 11.
If you would like to read further information on the events that took place during the final week of Jesus’ public ministry, please see the Aid book, page 930.
Thursday, April 5       Nisan 9
Mark 11:1-11
Friday, April 6         Nisan 10
Mark 11:12-19
Saturday, April 7       Nisan 11
Mark 11:20–13:37
Sunday, April 8         Nisan 12
Mark 14:1-11
Monday, April 9         Nisan 13
Mark 14:12-16
Tuesday, April 10       Nisan 14
Mark 14:17–15:47
● District assembly lapel cards in English and Spanish, and the celluloid holders, should be ordered on the regular Literature Order Blank. Please send in orders after April 1, 1979. The lapel cards are 1c each and the celluloid holders are 5c each.
● New Publications Available:
Unseen Spirits—Do They Help Us? Or Do They Harm Us?—Italian
Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood—French, Hiri Motu
Holy Spirit—The Force Behind the Coming New Order!—Afrikaans, Danish, Dutch
Good News—to Make You Happy—Afrikaans, Dutch, Gujarati, Kanarese, Malayalam
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1977—English
● Starting in July the book Is This Life All There Is? will be used in the congregation book studies. Study question booklets for this book have been prepared and should be ordered now by congregations for five cents each. Also, if some publishers do not have a personal copy of the book, you may need to order some of these.
● The Society now has a limited supply of cassette recordings of The Good News According to John with Braille labels for use by the blind. These cassettes may be obtained by writing to the Society’s Braille Desk in Brooklyn. Please remit $3.00 for each set at the time of ordering. Cassettes should not be stocked by the congregations.
● Is it appropriate to have a Kingdom Hall sign saying: “Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Christian Witnesses”? So there will be uniformity, the Society encourages all to make their signs read: “Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” (See October 1978 Our Kingdom Service, page 3, paragraph 5.)

