Announcements
“WAY OF SUCCESS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Diligently the world seeks for success. But to no avail, for it strives for fleeting, superficial things, for selfish gain. Actually success is measured in terms of living, life in happiness for all eternity to come. That is real success. But how does one get it? Joshua 1:7, 8 discloses the formula for success: loyal obedience to the Creator, Jehovah God, studying his Word, the Bible, meditating on it and then keeping it on our tongues by discussing it with others and informing them of it for their guidance to success. During the month of October, this sure way of success will be made clear to many thousands of lovers of righteousness by offering a subscription for the Awake! magazine for 1 year and 3 booklets, at the regular rate of $1.00. Prosperity not only for the reader but also for others is assured by gaining and then applying the information contained in that magazine. Take part in this grand work, and attend the meetings of those engaged in this way of success. Write to us for further information and assistance.
WHAT HAS RELIGION DONE FOR MANKIND?
That probing question is thoroughly answered in the new book of that title, released in London last month at the international assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses. Worsening world conditions show we hasten toward a climax that will fix the eternal destiny of mankind now living. What has religion done to prepare men for that showdown? This book answers by showing how the true religion in Eden turned false, branched out after the Noachian flood, and formed the great religious divisions of Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism and Mohammedanism. It traces prophecies concerning the true Seed, Christ Jesus, and shows which one of the many so-called “Christian” religions is the true one, then projects the reader’s mind into the future via Bible prophecy, to disclose what this true religion will do for mankind in a united new world under the Seed promised in Eden millenniums ago. This penetrating book of 352 pages, indexed and illustrated, will be an eye opener to its readers, enabling them to now make right decisions for their eternal destiny. What Has Religion Done for Mankind? is available on a 50-cent contribution.
WILL RELIGION MEET THE WORLD CRISIS?
This is the title of a public address delivered in London, England, by the president of the Watchtower Society, Mr. N. H. Knorr. It has now been published in the form of a 32-page self-covered booklet. Herein the question “Will Religion Meet the World Crisis?” is faced squarely and it is answered Scripturally with honesty and frankness. Mailed on a 5-cent contribution.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL CORPORATION MEETING
This announcement supplements the regular notice which all the members of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society (Pennsylvania Corporation) will receive by mail relative to the forthcoming annual meeting. Pursuant to the provisions of the Society’s charter the annual meeting of the members of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society will be held on Monday, October 1, 1951, at ten o’clock in the forenoon. The registered office of the Society is the meeting place, and this is located in the Wabash Building, 410 Liberty Avenue, Pittsburgh 22, Pennsylvania. At this meeting the regular business of the corporation will be transacted. Proxy forms will be sent by mail together with the notice of the meeting to all those who are members, and the proxies should be returned to the Society as soon as convenient. Some of the members will attend the meeting in person and some will not be there themselves. All, however, should return the proxies whether they will be in attendance or not. So after receiving the regular notice and proxy form, each member should fill out and mail his proxy to the office of the secretary of the Society, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn 2, New York. We would like, to have all the proxies in not later than September 15, 1951.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of October 21: Confidently Facing the End; also, What to Do in the Face of the End, ¶1-6.
Week of October 28: What to Do in the Face of the End, ¶7-27.

