VOL. XVIII. MARCH 1, 1897. No. 5. 



CONTENTS. 



Can You Do More? 62 

Views from the Watch Tower 63 

"Collapse" of Foreign Missions 63 

The Arbitration Treaty 64 

The Problem of Church Unity 66 

Real Import of Modern Criticism 67 

The Memorial Supper 68 

Millennial Dawn Misrepresented 70 

"Why Persecutest Thou Me?" 72 

Christian Liberty and Self-Restraint 74 

page 62 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1910 : page 62 

CAN YOU DO MORE TO SERVE THE TRUTH? 



WE hope that each TOWER reader will ask himself this question; 
and then act according to his answer. Furthermore, we want 
to assist whoever will accept our assistance. 

The past three years of financial depression have greatly hindered 
what we esteem to be the chief branch of the work— the colporteuring 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN— and the circulation, instead of increasing 
yearly, has been decreasing, because many of the colporteurs, unable 
to make expenses, have been obliged to go into other employment. 

It occurs to us that if this fact were realized by the friends of the 
truth it would lead them each and all to say, "In that event I must step 



into the breach; I must be that much more active in the service; I must 
devote that much more time in letting the light shine out upon others." 
And to such we proffer cooperation as follows:— 

(1) We cannot make any concession on tracts, for they are already 
supplied by the Tract Fund free, in any quantity, post free, to any 
TOWER reader. Avail yourself of this arrangement. No other tracts 
were ever offered so cheaply. The poorest, who desires to serve the 
Lord and his cause thus, has no excuse. 

(2) The price of the paper-bound DAWNS, when sold by Colporteurs 
will hereafter be 25 cents instead 35 cents, which will enable a 

larger number to purchase. 

(3) We will hereafter supply the paper-bound edition of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN (any language or any assortment) in packages of ten volumes 

to one address, post paid, for one dollar;— larger orders at the 

same rate. Five or more volumes, to various addresses, at 15c. per Vol. 

Let all who can avail themselves of this offer. If the new postal 
bill now pending would pass, it would make the postage alone seventy 
cents on these packs of ten, and would necessitate the cancelling of 
this offer,— except by freight. 

(4) The DAWNS bound in leatherette, embossed (English only), 35 
cents per vol., we will supply in packs of six for one dollar, post free; 
or by freight, at colporteurs' charges, for 12-1/2 cents per volume. 

(5) Where a town has been thoroughly canvassed for DAWN we 
advise a canvass for "Tabernacle Shadows" and "Reply to Robt. 
Ingersoll," leatherette, embossed, 10 cents, three for 25 cents; or for 
What Say the Scriptures About Hell? For this purpose we will supply 
these pamphlets at 50 cents per dozen, assorted as you may please. 

Those who use one hour or one afternoon a week may by these 
terms be enabled to devote two hours or two half-days per week. 
Those who loan the DAWNS may increase their work. (One sister in 
Allegheny has eighty copies constantly loaned out— changing them, 
about every three weeks.) 

Let us, dear Brothers and Sisters, by the Lord's help, take a fresh 
hold of his work. The people never needed the truth more! It is the 
only thing that will keep them from Infidelity! People never were 
more ready to receive the truth! They realize that some great changes 
are at hand, and many want to understand them. "When the judgments 
of the Lord are abroad in the land, the inhabitants of the world 
will learn righteousness [truth— justice]." If we are anxious to serve, 
the Lord will give us an opportunity. Here it is! 



R2112:page63 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



DANGER OF THE "UTTER COLLAPSE" OF FOREIGN 
MISSIONS. 

THE Missionary Review of the World has been edited 
by Rev. A. T. Pierson, D.D., for ten years. 
Its editor is well posted in everything pertaining to 
missions, has written a number of books and pamphlets 



and delivered hundreds of addresses on this subject. 
Its opinions therefore are entitled to the greatest respect. 
In its January issue it declares:— 

"Without claiming any undue capacity for observation, 
sagacity in discernment, or accuracy in judgment 
and induction, the calm conclusion reached after 
thirty years of study of this theme and of active participation 
in the actual machinery of missionary enterprise, 
is, that at no time during the half-century now 
closing have missions to the heathen been at greater peril 
of utter collapse! Wide doors are open, immense fields 
invite, some soil calls for the sower, while harvests 
demand the reaper; we never knew so well how much 
territory there is to be possessed, and how deep is the 
need of mankind; never had the church such opportunities 
and facilities, never such large numbers and 
wealth at her disposal; and yet, with doors open wider 
than ever, and candidates offering in unprecedented 
numbers, the giving of the people of God is so utterly 
inadequate and disgracefully disproportionate, that 
where every divine sign of the times is a call for rapid 
advance and expansion, our drums beat a retreat, and 
our boards loudly call for retrenchment! 

"And— what is to our view most fraught with 
risk— there is a growing apathy about the whole question 
of the world's evangelization, which seems to argue 
a decay at the very root of missionary enterprise. The 
causes for this we can not for ourselves either doubt or 
deny. On one hand there is laxity of doctrine, which, 
at least, leads disciples to indulge a vague 'eternal 
hope,' like Dean Farrar, that the heathen are not 
really lost without Christ: and on the other hand, there 
is a laxity in practice, which leads to a practical recognition 
of all religions as belonging to a universal 
brotherhood of faiths, and to the fellowship of their 
representatives as entitled to our 'Christian charity,' 
forgetful of the famous proverb quoted by Dr. John 
Ryland to Robert Hall, that 'charity is an angel while 
she rejoiceth in the truth, but a harlot when she rejoiceth 
in iniquity," embracing those whom she should 
rather pity and weep over." 

The following is given by the same journal as a 
survey of the condition of the nominal church which 
has led, and is leading, to this threatened "utter collapse." 
It declares the cause to be the decline of "vital 
godliness." It says:— 

"Look at the church pervaded by sectarianism, 
sacramentalism, ritualism and Romanism, and an even 
more fatal secularism. Behold the awful lack of gospel 
preaching, the reckless extravagance that reigns 
and practical denial of stewardship, the low level of 
piety, the prevalence of prayerlessness and the encroachment 
of virtual infidelity. See the church confronting 
the world with its more than thousand million unconverted 
souls, scattered over a wide unevangelized territory, 
with its unoccupied and neglected fields continental 



in breath; yet unable to grapple with the awful 
problems of society, conscious of a widening gap or gulf 
between itself and the world, yet unable to bridge the 
gulf, while the intemperance, licentiousness, and anarchy 
of society takes on a more and more revolutionary 
aspect." 



It was necessary that the gospel should be preached 
in all the world, to every nation, for a witness, before 
the end of this age should come. This work, we believe, 
has been accomplished. We should be glad indeed 
if as good a civilization as our own could be carried to 
the uttermost regions of earth, but the civilizing and 
social uplifting of the world we clearly see from the 
Scriptures does not belong to this age, but to the next, 

R2112 : page 64 

the Millennial age. Those who are hoping for the 

conversion of the world along the lines of present missionary 

effort, or any effort possible under present conditions, 

are hoping against hope. Not only can they 

see such discouragements as are above pointed out by 

the Missionary Herald, a "danger of utter collapse" 

because of lessening of interest in civilized lands, but, 

on the other hand, they must look squarely in the face 

the fact that while their most sanguine and exaggerated 

estimates of this century's success with the heathen 

claims one million converts, the same period of time 

has witnessed a natural increase of those heathen peoples 

of over two hundred millions. Why cannot all 

true Christian hearts, which long for the blessing of 

their fellow creatures, see that there is something wrong 

with their expectations, which now after fifteen centuries 

are as far as ever from realization, so far as the 

complete conversion of the world is concerned? Why 

will they not turn to the Word of the Lord and there 

see with us that the divine purpose in this age is the 

election or selection of a Church, a "little flock," of 

which our Lord Jesus is the Head and of which all his 

fully consecrated and faithful ones are members? Why 

can they not see that this Church, through trials of 

faith and oppositions from the world, the flesh and the 

devil, and through much tribulation, is being prepared 

of the Lord to be "his Kingdom and priesthood," 

through which, clothed with divine power— glory, honor 

and immortality— God will be pleased shortly to bless 

all the families of the earth according to his original 

promise as made to father Abraham.— Gal. 3:16,29. 

Those who have been blessed by the Lord with 
the light of present truth have no such cause of despondency 
as others; nor have they any lack for fields 
of work. The Chief Reaper sends us, as he did the 
disciples in the Jewish age, with the message of present 



truth— "the kingdom of heaven is at hand,"— not 
to the wild savages of foreign lands, but to the 
fields "white already to harvest"— to those who 
have already heard the gospel,— to gather the "wheat" 
into his garner before the "fire" of the great trouble 
shall come upon the "field"— the whole civilized world. 

And wherever there are ripe grains of "wheat," 
there we believe the Lord is sending the sickle of truth. 
In our last issue we gave letters from some interested in 
present truth from the various quarters of the world, 
and we might have added to them others from 
South America, Africa and India. Wherever there are 
ripe grains of "wheat," thither we believe the Lord 
will send the separating present truth. It will be first 
of all a test as to loyalty to him, and worthiness to be 
gathered into his "garner," as one of his faithful ones; 
secondly, if the test of faithfulness be passed successfully, 
it will serve to bless and uplift and strengthen, 
and to prepare the true believer with an understanding 
of many things that were, many things that are, and 
much respecting the things that are yet to be,— that he 
may not walk on in darkness and stumble into the 
ditch of unbelief with the masses. 

RELIGIOUS AND SECULAR AFFAIRS COMMINGLING. 



The general tendency for religion and politics to 
draw together is illustrated by the recent decision of a 
New York supreme judge, denying a Jewish organization 
a certificate of incorporation because its annual 
meeting was fixed for Sunday. The journals of the 
larger religious denominations very generally approve 
the judge's decision, while the organs of the smaller 
denominations, and Hebrew papers, very generally, 
condemn the decision as unjust and an attempt to control 
by the power of the state questions that are purely 
religious. The smaller denominations very properly 
see that if the views of the majority are permitted to 
control in any religious matter, it will be an entering-wedge 
for almost absolute majority control in all religious 
matters and liberties. The Jewish Messenger, 
commenting on this decision, says:— 

"It has served the purpose of again making the 
Jew appear as under proscription, and at the hands of 
a jurist who, both by birth and training, was supposed 
to be above such bigotry. One cannot but feel 
ashamed that our age and city should witness such a 
revival of the blue laws. Perhaps Judge Pryor has 
been influenced by the recent opinion of the New York 
Presbytery as to the doubtful character of Jewish moral 
environment. Judge Pryor's ruling should not go unchallenged, 
and his violation of American civil and religious 
liberty merits a more effective rebuke than it 
has yet received." 



THE ARBITRATION TREATY. 



The U.S. Senate has not yet confirmed the Arbitration 
Treaty between the United States and Great 
Britain; but there is every probability that it will be 
approved with perhaps slight amendments. The 
measure is extremely popular both in Great Britain 
and here, and that with all classes. The disposition 
with many is to consider this the beginning of universal 
peace, with Reason as the arbiter instead of the 
Sword. The suggestion is freely made that it will not 
be long before all the nations of Europe will practically 
disarm. In this, and in connection with the hope for 
"union" amongst Protestant denominations, the 
worldly Church is looking for the realization of its 
ideal of the Millennium, when the whole world will be 
converted; not by the preaching of Christ, and him crucified, 
as the only name given under heaven or amongst 
men, but by harmonizing the Christian religion with the 
various religions of the world, saying, "There is some 

R2113 : page 65 

good in every religion, and the important things are 
civilization and prosperity, with some outward form of 
religion." 

Alas! how far short all this would come of the 
grand hopes set before us in the gospel— even if it 
could be attained. If the whole world were as peaceful 
and as unarmed as are these United States, and if 
the whole world had a great civilization and prosperity 
as have these United States, and if the whole world 
had as much formalistic and true religion as have these 
United States; alas, how far we would still be from the 
blessed condition for which our Master taught us to 
hope and to pray, when he said, after this manner 
pray ye— "Our Father which art in heaven. ...Thy 
Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." 

The following from the Jewish Exponent shows 
that the Hebrews are looking at the matter in a very 
proper light: — 
"THE BEGINNING OF INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATION. 

"And it shall come to pass in the last days that 
the mountain [kingdom] of the Lord's house shall 
be firmly established on the top of the mountains, and 
shall be exalted above the hills; and unto it shall flow 
all the nations. And many people shall go and say, 
come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, 
to the house of the God of Jacob; that he may teach 
us his ways and we may walk in his paths. ...And 
he will judge among the nations and decide for many 
people; and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares 



and their spears into pruningknives; nation shall 
not lift up sword against nation, and they shall not 
learn war any more' 

"This prophecy of Isaiah and Micah dates at least 
as far back as the eighth century before the Christian 
era. At the end of the nineteenth century of the 
Christian era it begins to find actual realization in the 
affairs of two great nations. 

"In presenting the treaty of arbitration between 
the United States and England to the Senate of the 
United States, President Cleveland intimates that the 
result reached may not meet the views of the advocates 
of immediate, unlimited and irrevocable arbitration of 
all international controversies." 

How far from such an ideal the present measure 
is may be judged from those of its provisions which 
limit its duration to five years, and make it include but 
a limited class of subjects within its scope. Compare 
this with Isaiah's prophecy of universal and perpetual 
arbitration, disarmament and peace, under the guidance 
of divine justice and law, and then judge how far 
off yet are those "last days" of which the prophets 
speak. Over two thousand six hundred years have 
elapsed, and this is all that the most enlightened and 
most closely affiliated of nations are as yet prepared for. 

"Nevertheless, the President declares that this 
treaty cannot fail to be everywhere recognized as making 
a long step in the right direction, and will mark 
the beginning of a new epoch in civilization. If this 
be true, Israel's prophetic writings can hardly be considered 
obsolete. On the contrary, they promise to 
attain a new and increased importance from the fact 
that the policies they prescribe are now beginning to 
be practically carried out among the nations. As in 
many other fundamental principles, a remarkable 
unanimity is here seen between the teachings of 
Israel's faith and the highest ideals of the American 
people." 

"As it was in the days of Noah," men do not 
realize that we are now in the last days of this "present 
evil world [order]." The new dispensation is coming 
so differently from what they expect. Alas! how the 
bright hopes of this nineteenth century must shortly 
be dashed to pieces. What chagrin there will be as, one 
after another, present institutions shall be drawn into 
the vortex of the great time of trouble which is near 
at hand and hasteth greatly. The Lord has not only 
declared through the prophets that the sword shall be 
beaten into plowshares and the nations learn war no 
more, but he has also declared through the same channels 
that this blessed time shall be introduced by a 
time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation. 
And of that time of trouble it is declared that then 
many shall beat their ploughshares and pruninghooks 
into spears, and the whole world be involved in the 
great battle. The battle will eventuate in the utter 



prostration of the world in the zenith of its power and 
glory. But, praise God, those days of trouble will not 
be permitted to continue, else as our Lord declared, 
"there would no flesh be saved." For the sake of the 
elect— because of Christ, the elect Head, and the Church, 
his elect body, and the acceptableness of the sin-offering 
—the Kingdom of God shall be established under 
the whole heavens, to lift up and bless the groaning 
creation, and to grant eternal life and joy to all who 
will accept them under the conditions of the New 
Covenant. 



Meantime even the blind can see that the common 
hopes of peace are not built upon a change of the 
controlling principles of human hearts from selfishness 
to love. For instance, note the fact that the French 
government appointed M. de Kerjegn to examine into 
and report upon the French Naval equipment as compared 
with that of Great Britain. He has filed his report, 
which, after pointing out the great superiority of 
the British Navy, urges a large increase of the French 
navy, and concludes thus: "The aim of every patriotic 
Minister of Marine ought to be to push on to the 
possession of a fleet capable of ruining the commercial 
supremacy of England at a given moment." Germany 
also is increasing her naval armament, so are the United 
States, Japan and Russia, while Great Britain feels 

R2113 : page 66 

bound to keep her fleet ahead of all, to prevent the 
ruination of her commercial supremacy. Evidently the 
lion and the lamb are not yet ready to lie down together 
in peace;— the lion must first get a new disposition. 

Lord F. von Luttwitz, writing recently in a Berlin 
journal, commenting on the determination of the German 
government to greatly increase its navy, says:— 

"A second partitioning of the world is at hand. 
We need only remember the dissolution of Turkey and 
the opening of China in order to realize what great opportunities 
for colonial enterprise [commercial warfare] 
still exist. Nor should the restless condition of some 
of the South American republics be forgotten, for these 
to many offer future advantages. But we will miss 
our chance again unless we have a fleet. We must 
become so strong at sea that nations which can afford 
to snap their fingers at our army cannot afford to ignore 
us in partitioning the world. We must have a 
navy, and we must not lose time in getting it. Our 
alliances are of no value in this matter. We cannot 
afford to go to war for the sake of some miserable little 
piece of land far from us, yet we will have to do so if 
we have no navy. It may be assumed that the next 
partitioning of colonies will be eminently peaceful. 



But unless we have a navy powerful enough to take 
possession of our share and to defend it, the maritime 
powers will not even consider us as competitor, and we 
will go out empty." 



On the other side of the question a new factor is 
discovered. The soldiers of Europe are beginning to 
think, and are not so anxious as they once were to give 
up their lives at the behest of kings and princes. A 
recent dispatch from Brussels, which will be read with 
interest, is as follows:— 

"The disaffection in the Belgian army, founded 
on the Socialist propaganda against the use of armed 
force, appears to be making headway. The Soir announces 
the discovery of organized Socialist clubs in 
barracks, whose members, while submitting to the rules 
of the service, are pledged to refuse active service 
should occasion arise. 

"Inquiry in one large center has already revealed 
the existence of a club of this description, and seventeen 
non-commissioned officers have been suspended." 

THE PROBLEM OF CHURCH UNITY. 



Under this caption the Christian Statesman says:— 
"What we maintain is no mere speculative theory, 
away up in the ecclesiastical clouds, and impossible of 
realization in this matter-of-fact world. On the contrary, 
it is the simple, practical, Scriptural rule by 
which the Church of Christ, according to her divinely 
ordained nature, is under obligation to order her 
earthly life.... We believe that the church cannot 
effectively meet concentrating hostility in her present 
divided condition, with her separate denominations 
often failing to cooperate and not infrequently working 
at cross purposes. We further believe that she 
will be compelled in the near future to search for the 
true solution of the problem of her imperatively needed 
organic unity. We are constrained, therefore, to point 
out what we are fully convinced is the remedy that 
must soon be applied for the healing of her sectarian 
divisions. ...The church, like the state, is a social 
being made up of individual members. Each of these 
collective beings, by divine ordainment, is clothed with 
authority in its appropriate sphere of action. And in 
each of these collective or social beings are found subjects 
of authority. Christ is the Sovereign Lord and King 
over both church and state. His Word, given in the 
sacred Scriptures, contains supreme law for each of these 
social bodies in its distinct sphere. 

"Due regard in the state for the law of Christ 
secures for it the balance of political authority and the 



liberties of the citizen, and thus the establishment and 
preservation of national organic unity. And in like 
manner due respect for the law of Christ will secure to 
the church and all her individual members the balance 
of ecclesiastical liberty and law and consequent enduring 

R2114 : page 66 

organic unity. The admitted differences between 
the sphere and functions of the church on the one 
hand and the sphere and functions of the state on the 
other hand will not affect this analogy. Ecclesiastical 
authority wields no material sword. Its penalties are 
spiritual." 

It is seldom that we find the advocates of Church 
Federation so outspoken as this; but we admire honesty 
and frankness even in a bad cause;— and as our readers 
well know we esteem the movement for the proposed 
organic union of the churches and then their 
cooperative union with the state a very bad cause;— 
one fraught with danger to the liberties of all classes 
—but foretold in the Scriptures as associated with the 
great trouble with which the social and ecclesiastical 
order of this Gospel age will come to an abrupt end. 

We deny every proposition of the quotation. 
(1) We deny that the church (collectively) is "clothed 
with authority." On the contrary, we hold that the 
individual Christian is free from authority except that 
of the head of the true Church— Christ. His fellows 
may advise with him or may withdraw from his fellowship, 
but they have no "authority" over him according 
to the Scriptures. Since there are none "clothed with 
authority," there can be no "subjects of authority." 
The object of Satan, and unwittingly of those whom he 
deceives, has ever been to deprive the individual 
Christian of the liberty wherewith Christ has made 
him free, and under one pretext or another to sink the 
individual in the mass, under human heads and authorities. 
Papacy is a woeful illustration of Satan's successes 
in this direction in the early centuries of this 
age; and the Protestantism of the sixteenth century, 
which never entirely rid itself of that influence, is now 
being drawn into the same snare. 

(2) It is not true, as stated, that God's Word 
given in "the sacred Scriptures contains supreme law 
for each of these bodies." On the contrary, the Lord's 
commands and counsels and promises were first to the 

R2114 : page 67 

little nation of Israel only, and secondly to the peculiar 
people, royal priesthood and holy nation— the Church 
called out of the world and begotten of a new spirit 
through that Word. And the Lord's words to the 
Church are not as an organization but as individuals 
only. "If any man [individually] will be my disciple, 



let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow 
me. He that hath an ear let him [individually] hear." 
So far from recognizing the state, the nations, and 
giving them laws, the Lord's Word declares that they 
are all "kingdoms of this world" and under "the Prince 
of this world"— Satan. And through the prophet he 
has pictured these Gentile governments or states as 
ferocious beasts, and told of their utter destruction at 
the time of the establishment of his Kingdom for which 
he taught us to pray, "Thy Kingdom come!" 

(3) It is not true that "Due regard in the state 

for the law of Christ secures for it the balance of political 
authority." Quite to the contrary, the balance in 
politics often goes to the side of the corrupt and the 
saloon element. The history of the various so-called 
Christian States of Europe, written in blood, shows 
that none of them have ever been controlled by the 
laws of Christ, but all of them per force on contrary 
lines. Christ gave no national laws because his kingdom 
is not of this world. He rules individually each 
citizen of his heavenly kingdom. 

(4) The claim that such an organized and dominating 
Ecclesiastical Authority would need no sword 

but would merely execute spiritual penalties is delusive. 
This was Papacy's claim in the zenith of her power. 
For instance, she damned the Huguenots as "heretics," 
told how God would torment them in the future, and 
declared that "heretics" had no rights which governments 
or people were bound to respect, and promised 
eternal rewards to all who would oppose them. And 
when the French king, thus incited, entrapped and 
massacred them Papacy struck medals to his honor 
and made him a saint. Thus spiritual penalties and 
rewards was interpreted not very long ago. We do not 
presume that Protestant authority would at once become 
so arrogant, but in some form all dissenters would 
be considered "heretics" or "anarchists," and persecuted 
to the extent that public sentiment would sanction. 

THE REAL IMPORT OF MODERN CRITICISM. 



The editor of the New York Sun has devoted considerable 
space to the discussion of modern criticism 
of the Scriptures, as recently publicly voiced by Rev. 
Lyman Abbott. The editor shows himself as ever to be 
a logician. Of course, his editorials have aroused opposition 
from many who seek to defend this modern 
infidelity. Referring to these defenders, the Sun of 
Feb. 9, says:— 

"They all miss the point, which is that if there is 
not supernatural authority for Christianity it becomes 
simply a system of moral philosophy, regarding whose 
soundness disagreement is justifiable and inevitable. 
If it is not believed in as coming from God by supernatural 



revelation, but is treated as simply human in 

its origin, it will be criticized on its merits alone, as 

the Jews, for instance, criticize it, and as it was criticized 

by the Romans. The Romans opposed the Christian 

system and tried to destroy it as essentially inimical 

to the state and the established social order. They 

viewed the Christians and dealt with them as we now 

regard and treat Anarchists. If, then, the supernatural 

origin and character of Jesus are denied, his teachings 

will be examined in a light radically different from 

that in which their discussion has proceeded hitherto. 

They will cease to be the foundation of a religion imposing 

an obligation of belief as essential to obedience 

to God, and become debatable propositions made by a 

human teacher of philosophy, and therefore properly 

and necessarily examinable to determine their intrinsic 

value.... 

"It is this destruction in which Dr. Abbott and his 
defenders are now engaged. If the Biblical story of 
Jonah and the whale is to be regarded as purely a parable, 
an allegory, whose actual occurrence was impossible 
and therefore unbelievable, Christianity must descend 
from its exaltation as a religion of divine authority, 
and drop to the level of a system of religious philosophy 
or speculation, of human authorship. If the 
story of Jonah is merely allegorical, a fable, every other 
Biblical tale, from the creation of Adam and Eve up to 
the supernatural birth and resurrection of Jesus, is 
likewise allegorical, for they conflict equally with the 
possibilities under merely natural law. In other words, 
the arguments of Dr. Abbott and his defenders shatter 
the whole fabric of religion built by faith, and put the 
Scriptural reports of supernatural occurrences in the 
same category with the tales of mythology. This is a 
conclusion which the theologians of the school of Dr. 
Abbott try to avoid, with a timidity which may be 
natural in view of their ecclesiastical relations, for it 
takes away the reason for their existence.... 

"Our correspondents who discuss the case of Dr. 
Abbott, have no conception of the tremendous revolution 
in sentiment of which it is a symptom. All the 
infidelity of past periods has been of no consequence 
as compared with the present infidelity, of which, for 
the moment, he has made himself an example. It is 
an infidelity which strikes at the supernatural basis 
upon which Christianity rests, and therefore relegates 
the religion of Christendom to the position of mere 
mythology and fallible human philosophy." 

We freely endorse the editor's arguments and his 
definition of modern criticism as the rankest infidelity. 



The disposition of many to fail to discriminate on 
such subjects is witnessed by the fact that Dr. Buckley, 
of the New York Christian Advocate is rated as an utter 



repudiator of the Bible, worse than Dr. Abbott,— simply 
because he declared his disbelief that every word, 
punctuation and fly-speck of our English translation 
of the Bible is inspired. Nobody of sense could dispute 

R2114:page68 

his proposition. It is the original Scriptures 
that we hold were inspired; not the translations of it. 
Vastly different is Doctor Buckley's position from that 
of Doctor Abbott. 



The start of modern criticism or "higher criticism" 
may be said to have been in the theory of Evolution— 
which is diametrically opposed to the Bible theory of the 
creation of man in God's likeness, his fall into sin, imperfection 
and death, his redemption by a ransom and 
the restitution to come. 

"But according to the following clipping from 
the New York Tribune, the most intelligent Christians 
are already perverts from the Bible faith to the protoplasm 
and monkey doctrine of Evolution, and hence 
to its associated doctrines known as "higher criticism." 
It says:— 

"To-day, though evolution is not a demonstrated 
truth, and perhaps never will be, it is practically accepted 
by most intelligent Christians as the best explanation 
of life.... 

"Quite as terrible at first seemed the blow which 
evolution aimed at the literal interpretation of the 
Scriptures. Most of those who first read The Origin 
of Species believed literally in the creation stories in 
Genesis; and, of course, any theory that made such a 
belief impossible must have seemed a denial of God's 
Word. That view of the matter has been abandoned 
long ago by Christians. ...Thirty-six years ago it was 
Darwin against the whole Christian world. To-day Darwin 
lies among Christian England's honored dead in 
Westminster Abbey, and the man who publicly protests 
against elevating to the chair of St. Augustine a clergyman 
who holds the views of Darwin is contemptuously 
brushed aside as a crank." 



The man referred to, who was treated as a "crank," 
is the clergyman mentioned in our issue of January 15, 

R2115 : page 68 

who protested against the enthronement of Dr. Temple 
as Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of all England, 
because as an Evolutionist he was necessarily 
lacking in all the fundamentals of Christianity. Now 



hear Brother Moody, the Evangelist. Before a large 
audience in Carnegie Hall, New York City, he said:— 

"Nineteen hundred years have rolled away since 
Christ found no place on earth to lay his head. His 
gospel is now preached in all parts of the world, but is 
it not a fact that even now there is not room on earth 
for the Son of God, and no nation wants him? 

"Does America want him? It is a Christian nation. 
England claims to be the most Christian nation, 
but if a man stood up in Parliament to-morrow to advocate 
—could it be possible— that Christ should come in 
person to rule England, he would be hooted down. 
France, Germany, Italy and Spain are Christian nations. 
Is there room for him in either? 

"Has not Christianity settled down to be a mere 
lifeless form? Suppose it were possible to petition 
Christ to return to earth to rule us. How many of the 
people of New York would sign the petition? Would 
business men sign it? They would have to change 
their methods first. Would stock-brokers sign it? It 
would smash up their business pretty quick. Would 
saloon-keepers sign it? They would find their occupation 
gone should they do so. 

"I'll bring the question closer home to you. How 
about the churches? Do they want him? Pride and 
form and dignity in the church would have to step down. 

"But we can bring the question even closer to 
us. How many ladies here would vote to have him 
come? I think but few hands would be raised should 
the vote be taken this afternoon. Thank God, there 
are a few who have stepped out of the world who 
would welcome him!" 



R2115 : page 68 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



AS instituted by our Lord, and perpetuated by the 

apostles and the early Church, the Memorial 

Supper took the place of the Passover Supper— on 

the fourteenth day of the Jewish first month Nisan. 

This custom of the early Church is still preserved in 

the English, Roman, Greek, Armenian and other so-called 

"Catholic" churches and by Lutherans. But 

soon after the death of the apostles, ceremonialism 

gradually crept in and very greatly altered the original 

simple Memorial services. Then, too, the idea of the 

Mass was evolved— a fresh sacrifice of Christ as the basis 

for forgiveness of special sins. Masses are not figurative 

sacrifices, remembrancers of the great sacrifice at Calvary, 

but meant as new and real sacrifices. The priest is specially 

commissioned to turn plain ingredients of bread 



and wine into the actual body and blood of Christ in order 
that the priest may make a fresh sacrifice of Christ, 
with fresh efficacy for the forgiveness of the special 
sins for which the Mass (sacrifice) is performed. These 
Masses appear in many respects to merely elaborate 
the Lord's blessing and breaking of the bread and wine 
at the institution of the Memorial Supper, only that 
they may be and are celebrated at any hour of any day 
or night. 

It is not surprising that after a thousand years of 
false teaching and false practice along these lines, Protestants, 
when awaking and seeking to find the old 
paths, failed to discern all of the Papal error on this 
and other subjects. Accordingly, while discarding the 
Papal Mass (called in Scripture "the abomination that 
maketh desolate") as additional sacrifices for sins, and 
properly holding and teaching that "by one offering he 
[Christ] hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified" 
(Heb. 10:14), they overlooked the fact that the added 

R2115 : page 69 

times for what they term "Communion" were added 
for Masses, and that the anniversary of our Lord's death 
is the only appropriate and the only appointed time 
for its commemoration. 

Accordingly, some celebrate three times a year, 
some four and some weekly. If the contention, "the 
oftener the better," be correct, why should they not 
celebrate it every day? While we cannot say that done 
in sincerity it is at any time a sinful abomination like 
the Mass, we may be sure that men of to-day are not 
wiser than our Lord and the inspired teachers of the 
Church— the Apostles— and that any change from 
the original institution must result unfavorably. The 
occasion loses its weight and impressiveness by repetitions 
disconnected with the fact memorialized. How 
national memorials would lose their intended significance 
if repeated three to fifty times a year! The fourth 
of July, for instance, celebrates a great event, the institution 
of the United States Government, and it is 
generally celebrated. But suppose instead it were celebrated 
weekly or quarterly— would not this deprive the 
celebration of weight and influence? Assuredly; and 
so with the Memorial of our Lord's death— its anniversary 
is its only proper or designated occasion for celebration. 
But once the origin was lost sight of, general 
carelessness and indifference prevailed, so that although 
always mentioned in the Scriptures as a "Supper," it 
is now generally observed at dinner time; and rarely 
or never as a supper or evening meal, like its pattern. 

The expression, "As oft as ye do this, ye do show 
forth the Lord's death, till he come," has been misinterpreted 
by many to mean,— Do this as often as ye 
choose. But the emphasis should be put upon this— 
As oft as ye celebrate this annual Memorial, instituted 



by our Lord, ye are showing forth his death, and are to 
so do until his second coming— until the establishment 
of his Kingdom and your glorification therein will fulfill 
or complete all that is symbolized in the Memorial. 

As the people of God "seek for the old paths" (Jer. 16:6), 
the light of present truth spreads and the number 
who celebrate the central fact of redemption (the 
great Sin-offering) on its anniversary increases; and 
this year probably more than ever before, since the 
fifth century, will "Do this" in remembrance of their 
Redeemer, on the anniversary of his death. 

The "Catholic" churches slightly changed the 
method of reckoning the anniversary so that they always 
celebrate a Friday for our Lord's death (Good 
Friday) and, on the Sunday following, his resurrection 
(Easter Sunday). The early Church, however, followed 
the Jewish custom of counting, regardless of the 
days of the week, and so we do. In fact, it is claimed 
by some that, as the Jews had an abrupt beginning of 
months every Spring, with the appearance of the new 
moon at or after the vernal equinox, so they had an abrupt 
beginning of weeks with the beginning of Passover, 
which was always counted a Sabbath and the new start 
of the cycle. However this may be, their Passover 
week always began with the fifteenth day of Nisan by 
divine direction.— Exod. 12; Num. 28:16,17. 

We Christians, however, do not celebrate the 
Passover week. That will find its anti-type by and by, 
when the glory of the Kingdom shall be enjoyed. We 
celebrate the fourteenth; a day of which the Jew takes 
little or no account. It would appear that the fourteenth 
of Nisan should have been generally observed, 
but that the Jews seemed to begrudge the time, and 
generally crowded the supper over onto the fifteenth 
day, to gain one more day for business. Certain it is 
that it was proper to both kill and eat the Passover 
lamb on the fourteenth, for our Lord and the twelve 
apostles so did, and our Lord was crucified on the 
same day; this being provided for in the Jewish arrangement 
of time, which began each day at six P.M. 
-Lev. 23:5,6. 

Reckoning according to the Jewish rule, the fourteenth 
of Nisan will this year commence Thursday, April 
15, at six P.M. At 8 P.M. a few earnest Christians 
all over the world, including a little company in 
Allegheny, will break the memorial bread and taste 
the memorial fruit of the vine, in grateful remembrance 
of him who loved us and gave himself for us; 
and in pledge of our fellowship with him and all 
who are his, in the sufferings and trials of this present 
time; and in testimony of our hopes of fellowship by 
and by in his glory. Reader, will you not join with us 
at that hour? Whether alone, or as little groups, hundreds 
of miles asunder, we will surely have a special 
blessing; and, if we seek it, no doubt we will be welcomed 
specially near to our Heavenly Bridegroom, 



and be specially strengthened to share his cross, and 
to withstand the wiles of the devil. 

We do not invite a general convocation to Allegheny 
as formerly, for two special reasons: (1) we are 
so situated as to be unable to entertain as formerly; 
and (2) we believe that the cause in general is benefited 
by having all of each little group meet together 
on this occasion. Every family together, was the law for 
the Jews; and it seems appropriate and profitable for us. 

As we have heretofore pointed out, anyone of the 
Lord's people, the choice of the company, may serve 
the emblems of our Master's broken body and shed 
blood. The distinctions of "clergy" and "laity" are 
not of God, but of mistaken men. All who are true 
"disciples" are invited to take, eat, drink and distribute 
the emblems. It would surely require a great 
amount of authority and ordaining to qualify any man 
to "create God" out of bread and wine, as it is claimed 

R2115 : page 70 

the Catholic priests do; but it requires only a fully 
consecrated, humble believer to do any and every thing 
commanded by our Lord in respect to this beautiful 
Memorial. Let us, therefore,— all who are his and 
who see the beauty of his arrangement— obey, and "do 
this" in remembrance of him. Unleavened bread is 

R2116 : page 70 

best to use, as an emblem of our Lord's purity, his 
freedom from sin, which leaven symbolizes. Fruit of 
the vine may be wine or (preferably, we think) unfermented 
grape-juice, or the juice from stewed raisins; 
—"fruit of the vine" is quite a broad term. 

MAKE DUE PREPARATION. 



In the type only the circumcised were allowed to 
eat of the Passover supper. Circumcision of the heart 
is the antitype, as the Apostle explains, and signifies 
a full consecration to the Lord and a separation from 
the filth of the flesh and sin in general. Let us note, 
also, that none but those consecrated to be broken with 
him, and to share his cup of suffering and self-denial, 
are truly "disciples," and invited to "do this."— See 
Matt. 20:22,23. 

Note, also, that even the "circumcised" were to 
cleanse their dwellings and put away sin, symbolized 
by leaven. And faith in the blood must be publicly 
confessed as symbolized by its being sprinkled on the 
front of their houses. All these things represented 
Christian life during this Gospel age. The eaters are 
to be Pilgrims who seek a heavenly country; our "bitter 



herbs" are the trials and persecutions and revilings 
and disappointments, incident to our faithfulness to the 
Lord;— they will only sharpen our appetites for more 
of our Lamb— Christ our Passover (lamb) slain for us. 
(Exod. 12:8,11,12; 1 Cor. 5:7.) And, inasmuch as 
the law provided that none of the lamb must remain 
over to be eaten on the morrow, it seems to signify, 
typically, that the privilege of participation in the 
Lord's sacrifice is meant by the eating; and that this 
fellowship or communion in sufferings is confined to 
this Gospel age. This is intimated also by the Apostle. 
-1 Cor. 10:16,17. 

Let all of the Lord's people examine themselves 
to see that their hearts are circumcised, separated from 
the will of the flesh and fully subjected to the will of 
God in Christ. Let us see to it that we purge out any 
of the old leaven of malice, envy and strife (1 Cor. 5:8), 
that the thoughts and intents of our hearts are 
pure and sweet and clean, and that unavoidable weaknesses 
are under cover of the precious blood. Although 
the Lord and the Apostles gave no command to fast 
forty days, as is the custom of the "lenten season" 
with many, and although we deprecate such formal 
commands of men, nevertheless, we believe that those 
who as a preparation voluntarily do some fasting, as 
well as praying, will be blest according to their faith 
and love and devotion. 



R2116 : page 70 

MILLENNIAL DAWN MISREPRESENTED. 



A SEVENTH-DAY Adventist journal contains 
the following misrepresentation:— 

"If it was expedient that Christ should pass the 
portals of the tomb to save men from the Adamic death, 
then it is equally expedient that he should pass the 
second death tomb, in order to save those who fail in 
the first opportunity, that they might have the second 
probation as per Millennial Dawn theology. A second 
probation for all mankind, and especially the heathen, 
is a corner-stone in Millennial Dawn theology. We 
ask, Where is the scripture to show that Christ passed 
the second-death tomb? If not, can he, or will he, 
save man from the second death, through a second 
probation?" 

As a Seventh-day Adventist, the writer of the above 
no doubt acknowledges himself amenable to the command 
which says, "Thou shalt not bear false witness 
against thy neighbor." In the above statement he 
violates that rule: he bears false witness against MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and should make amends by reading 



the book unprejudicedly and then correcting the 
misrepresentation . 

MILLENNIAL DAWN teaches the very contrary of 
what is here attributed to it. It teaches that there will 
be neither redemption nor recovery from the Second 
Death, but on the contrary, that it is the everlasting 
punishment predicted for all intelligent and wilful 
evil doers. 

The merest babe in spiritual things should know 
that under the divine sentence against Adam, which 
was shared by all of his race, not one of the human 
family could have everlasting life;— no, nor even a 
trial for it, which was what Adam had and lost,— except 
as the ransom-price first secured a release from 
that original Adamic sentence. This is the plain argument 
of the great Apostle Paul in Romans 5:12,17-19. 

This one opportunity or chance for life, secured 
by the great sin-offering finished at Calvary, is the only 
one recognized in MILLENNIAL DAWN. And it is quite 
sufficient. The Scriptures assure us that it was "for 
all," for "every man," "a propitiation for our sins, 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world;" and logically this implies that "all," "every 
man," "the whole world," will be granted an opportunity 
to profit by it, and, if they will, to come into 
harmony with God, under the merciful provisions of 

R2116 : page 71 

the New Covenant, and thus gain the gift of God, eternal 

life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. This one 

chance is to be so complete, so ample, that there will 

be no reason for another. It will be a second chance, individually, 

to but one person, Adam. It can only be 

considered a second chance for the entire race by reckoning 

the entire race as having its first chance while in 

the loins of Adam, in Eden. That Eden chance or 

trial resulted in loss to Adam and all in him; none 

gained life under that chance or trial; and it is from 

that loss that all have been redeemed by the Second 

Adam who came to seek and to save that which was lost; 

and who under the New Covenant, sealed with his own 

blood, provides an opportunity for the whole race to 

return to life and harmony with God— (1) the Church 

as his bride; (2) the world as his children, to the willing 

and obedient of whom he shall become "the everlasting 

father."— Isa. 9:6. 

This chance, secured by Christ for all through his 
atoning-sacrifice;— this chance which dates from our 
Lord's resurrection (except as in a typical manner it 
was previously faintly revealed to the faith of the 
patriarchs and prophets and in the Law to Israel);— 
this chance, call it first or second as any may please, 
is the only one we find in the Scriptures, and the only 
one presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN. But let us see 
how ample it is, and how few have yet enjoyed this 



chance of trial for eternal life, secured by the precious 
blood. 

Did the millions who lived outside of the favored 
nation of Israel for the period of over forty-one centuries 
before Christ, whom the Apostle describes as 
being "without God and having no hope,"— did those 
millions have any share in this chance or trial purchased 
by the precious blood? Surely not!— See 
Eph. 2:12. 

Did the millions of Jews who lived and died before 
Christ, and who at the very most had only typical 
atonements for sin, year by year, which could never 
take away sin, nor make the worshipers perfect;— did 
these have a chance or fair trial for eternal life under 
the New Covenant, which had not in their day gone 
into effect? Surely not!-See Heb. 9:9; 10:4. 

Did the Jews of our Lord's day who rejected him 
have a full chance? No; for our Lord and the prophets 
and the apostles testify that "they were blinded" and 
that "through ignorance" they crucified Christ, "as 
did also your rulers." (Acts 3:17.) And we are 
clearly informed that their national blinding was for a 
purpose, and is to be removed; and that then the New 
Covenant will go into effect toward them as a people.— 
See Rom. 11:25-27-33. 

How about the heathen of to-day, and the hundreds 
of millions of the same class who have died since 
the true Light, the great Light came, since the Atonement 
sacrifice was slain at Calvary;— have they had 
any chance of everlasting life, in the remotest sense, 
never having so much as heard of the New Covenant 
or of the only name given under heaven or among 
men, whereby we must be saved? Knowledge is essential 
to a trial for life everlasting. 

How about the other millions who have lived in 
so-called Christian lands, and have heard church 
bells ring and seen Bibles, and heard perhaps the preaching 
of clashing creeds— that we are saved by works 
and it matters not what is believed;— that we are saved 
not by works but by faith; that we are saved by both 
faith and works;— that we are saved by water baptism; 
—that it should be done by sprinkling;— that it should 
be by immersion;— that it is for the forgiveness of 
sins;— that it is not for the forgiveness of sins, but for 
induction into the elect Church;— that there is but 
one true Church, one Lord, one faith, one baptism;— 
that the Roman Catholic Church is that one and all 
others false;— that the Lutheran is the one, and all 
others false;— that the Presbyterian is the one, and all 
others more or less in error;— that the Methodist 
church is the one, and all others confused. What shall 
we say of those who in all this din and confusion 
("Babylon") do not believe, because they know not 
what to believe? 

Shall we say that such have had a full, fair chance 
for eternal life; and that their failure to believe marks 



them as fit for the Second Death? No; we will rather 
hear the Word of the Lord on the subject. (1) The 
Apostle's declaration that "the God of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the 
glorious light of the goodness of God should shine into 
their hearts. (2) We will remember the promise of 
our Lord's Word, that times of refreshing and restitution 
shall come at his second advent (Acts 3:19-21), 
and that then Satan, who now blinds and deceives men, 
shall be "bound" and "deceive the nations no more" 

R2117 : page 71 

for the thousand years of our Redeemer's reign. (3) 
We will remember the promise through the prophet 
(Isa. 29:18; 35:5; 42:7,16) that in that Millennial 
day all the blind eyes shall be opened, and the light of 
truth made seven-fold clearer,— perfectly clear— so that 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, 
ocean deep (Isa. 1 1:9); and then all the families of 
the earth who have not had "ears to hear" during this 
age shall be blessed with a chance or trial for life under 
most favorable conditions, according to the blessed 
terms of the Abrahamic Covenant through the Seed 
of Abraham (Christ Jesus, the head, and the Church, 
the body). -Gal. 3:16,29; 1 Cor. 6:2. 

Let us remember that trial always precedes sentence. 
Adam was on trial for everlasting life: the 

R2117 : page 72 

result of his failure was the penalty, Adamic death, in 

which we all share. Adam and all of his race were 

bought back from that sentence by the great sin-offering 

which God accepted. As a result another "chance" 

or opportunity for trial for everlasting life comes to 

Adam and to his race. But since the race is no longer 

"in Adam" this trial must be an individual one. 

(See Jer. 31:29-34; Ezek. 18:2-4.) As a full, fair 

opportunity was necessary under the first trial in Eden, 

so now all must come to a clear knowledge of the conditions 

of life and death before he can be condemned 

or justified. This trial will be so complete that there 

would be no use for another, a third trial, and hence 

there is no provision for recovery from the Second Death. 



R2117 : page 72 

"WHY PERSECUTEST THOU ME?" 

-MARCH 14.-ACTS 9:1-12,17-20.- 

"This is a faithful saying, and worthy of acceptation, that Jesus Christ 
came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief."— 1 Tim. 1:15. 



SAUL'S transformation, from an enemy of 
Christ and his Church to a friend and zealous 
servant, is generally termed his conversion. In our 
opinion, however, the term "conversion" would scarcely 
be appropriate in such a case. Saul of Tarsus was 
either a bad man and a hypocritical Pharisee, a money-lover 
and self-lover, as were many, or else he was an 
Israelite indeed, whose aim and object was the service 
of God, and whose persecution of the early Church was 
prompted by his fidelity to God. We believe that the 
latter description is the one which fitted his case; it is 
in harmony with his own testimony on the subject: "I 
verily thought that I did God service." If then Saul 
was not only a member of the favored nation of Israel, 
but a true and loyal member of it, thoroughly consecrated 
to the Lord and serving him to the best of his 
knowledge and opportunity, but merely blinded for the 
time by prejudice and misconception, we can no more 
think of his case as a conversion than the cases of the 
other apostles. The Lord chose the original twelve 
because they were Israelites indeed; and he gave them 
the needed instruction for his service; and this he did 
also for Saul, though in a more striking manner. The 
word convert signifies to turn about in an opposite direction. 
But Saul was already going in the right direction; 
namely, in a whole hearted service of God, though 
his efforts were expended upon the wrong thing in the 
right direction. The Lord merely opened the eyes of 
his understanding and showed him the better how his 
efforts should be used. Saul needed no conversion and 
needed merely to be shown aright; and he proved this 
by as much fidelity and energy in the Lord's service 
afterward as he had ignorantly misused previously. 

Saul was one of those Israelites who lived amongst 
the Gentiles, but who occasionally went up to Jerusalem 
to certain of the feasts. His home was in the city 
of Tarsus, one of the notable cities of that date— said 
to have been excelled in scholarship and fine arts by 
the cities of Alexandria and Athens only. He not only 
had the advantages of a home in such a city, but his 
family was one of the influential ones, as is implied in 
the fact that he was not only a citizen of Tarsus but also 
a citizen of Rome. In addition to the education of his 
home city he had received a special course in theology 
or Jewish Law at Jerusalem, under Gamaliel, one of 
the greatest teachers of that time. His early training, 
therefore, and all of its conditions were favorable to 
producing in him a breadth and refinement of thought 
equaled by few; and these conditions combined with 
his honesty of heart and his zeal for God, though not 
at first according to knowledge, fitted him to become 
just what the Lord subsequently made of him; namely, 
"A chosen vessel unto me to bear my name before the 
Gentiles and kings and the Children of Israel."— 
Acts 9:15. 



(1) It would appear that the circumstances connected 
with the stoning of Stephen only incited Saul 

to the greater energy in stamping out what he believed 
to be a very injurious doctrine— a heresy. Our own 
experience confirms the thought that an earnest, conscientious 
opponent is more to be respected than a cold, 
indifferent professed friend, and we are reminded of 
the Lord's words, "I would thou wert cold or hot. So 
then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor 
hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth." Let us have 
respect, therefore, for all who are warm-hearted and 
zealous; remembering that there is more hope of their 
being pleasing to God, and being accounted worthy to 
receive the truth, than for the lukewarm. 

(2) The Jewish priesthood was granted and exercised 
considerable power under the arrangements of the Roman 
government. It had come to exercise very much 

of the power subsequently used by the Popes of Rome. 
They had power to authorize arrests and imprisonments 
for the infractions of their religious rules and regulations. 
Saul, exercising the same respect to law and 
authority that subsequently marked all of his dealings 
and teachings as a Christian, did not attempt to take 
matters into his own hands in the persecution of the 
Christians, but went about it in the manner recognized 
as legal— under the sanction and authority of the 
highest religious tribunal. Let us remember that nearly 

R2117 : page 73 

all persecutions have been sanctioned by some human 
law, and regulate ourselves under the divine code. 

(3-9) The account here given of the opening of 
the eyes of Saul's understanding is that of Luke, and 
was doubtless received directly from the Apostle Paul 
himself— with whom he traveled for a time. Two other 
accounts are given by the Apostle Paul himself. (See 
Acts 22:6-11; 26:12-20.) The three accounts are in 
practical agreement, and show only such variations as 
might reasonably be expected, considering the fact 
that they were delivered under different conditions; as 
it was sought to emphasize or elaborate different points. 
Had the three accounts been exactly alike, word for 
word, there would have been just ground for supposing 
a special preparation of the text with this harmony 
in view. Even the seeming discrepancy of the account, 
when rightly seen, are additional evidences of the 
truthfulness of all. The account itself being simple, 
we need give attention only to those points which apparently 
conflict. All three accounts say that Saul 
himself heard the voice, saw the light and fell to the 
ground. One of the accounts adds that all with him 
fell to the earth as well. The account in our lesson 
tells that the men of his company "stood speechless, 
hearing a voice but seeing no man." Another account 
says, "They beheld indeed the light, but they heard 



not the voice of him that spake to me." These accounts 
can be harmonized in this way: Saul himself was evidently 
the center of manifestation— "a great light shone 
round me." His companions doubtless saw something 
of this light in a general way, but they did not see 
the source of the light; they did not see the glorious 
body of our Lord Jesus— "seeing no man." Saul, however, 
saw the glorious body of our Lord Jesus, as he 
himself subsequently testified, "last of all he [Jesus] 
was seen of me also." Although none but Saul was 
smitten to the ground, the others who stood speechless 
and terrorstricken no doubt soon kneeled reverently 
about their leader. Respecting the voice— Saul and 
all that were with him heard a sound, "the voice," 
but only Saul could distinguish the words— which were 
meant for him alone. A similar case is recorded in 
John 12:28,29, where it is stated that our Lord Jesus 
heard a voice from heaven, saying, "I have both glorified 
it, and will glorify it again." But the people that 
stood by and heard the voice understood not the words, 
but said that "it thundered." Saul and all of his company 
in one sense of the word heard the sound or voice, 
but in another sense of the word he alone heard the 
voice. We use this same form of expression in our 
daily conversation to day. If some one speaks to us in 
a low or indistinct voice, we say that we did not hear 
—we mean that although we heard the voice we did 
not understand or comprehend it. 

The feelings of Saul, as he heard from the Lord 
of glory a reproof of his misdirected zeal, can be 
better imagined than described. Nevertheless, we 
can but admire the promptness with which he at once 
laid down the arms of his opposition, and placed himself 
on the side of the one whose cause he had so recently 
persecuted. We can imagine him praying, Lord, 
teach me! In my blindness and ignorance I have 
been fighting against thee, the Only Begotten of the 
Father, the Messiah; while "I verily thought I did 
God service." Having made such a great mistake I 

R2118 : page 73 

am thoroughly humbled, I can no longer trust to my 
own wisdom nor to the wisdom of those in whom I 
have heretofore confided;— the chief priests, the scribes 
and Pharisees. Now Lord, I come to thee: Show me 
how I can undo some of the great wrong I have done 
ignorantly: show me, and I will be glad to promptly 
follow and obey. 

How deep a hold the matter took upon the mind 
of Saul may be judged from the fact that he neither 
ate nor drank for three days. He could not think 
lightly of his own blinded course. Deep contrition is 
always a good evidence of genuine repentance of wrong. 
No doubt his thoughts were busy, and, well educated 
in the Law and in the Prophets, and familiar with what 



he had learned concerning the Nazarene and his teachings, 

we may reasonably suppose that those three days 

of blindness and fasting were days of prayer and reflection, 

in which he diligently compared the testimony 

of the Law and the Prophets with what he knew of the 

Nazarene and his teachings. His natural sight had 

been destroyed, but his mental vision had been opened, 

and he now saw matters in a new and wonderful light. 

(10-17) The name Ananias in a previous lesson 
was associated with ungodliness and falsehood, but 
here we find another Ananias of a totally different character 
—a true servant of the Lord. His hesitation (vs. 13-16) 
does not seem to have been caused by opposition, 
nor faithlessness, but rather a reasonable caution. 
He had heard of Saul and possibly also knew Saul's 
host to be an enemy of the cause of Christ, and therefore 
wanted to assure himself that he was not misunderstanding 
the Lord. The Lord very graciously made 
the matter clear to him, as he always does to his faithful 
ones, and Ananias promptly fulfilled his mission. 
Here again is an illustration of divine methods: The 
Lord sent upon this important errand one who apparently 
was a very humble member of the Church. He 
did not send Peter and John and James the apostles 
from Jerusalem with great pomp and show to receive 
the penitent enemy of the cross and to make a public 
triumph, but used an instrument ready and willing 
that was nearby. This should be a lesson to us that 
the Lord is both able and willing to use in his service 

R2118 : page 74 

the humble ones who are ready and waiting— 

"Emptied, that he might fill them, as forth to his service they go; 
Emptied, that so unhindered his life through them might flow." 

(18-20) The scales which fell from the eyes of 
Saul would seem to indicate that a certain portion of 
the eye had been thoroughly destroyed by the great 
light; and the healing may be said to have been in 
a natural way by the removal of the injured cornea. 
Although informed that he received his sight, we are 
not informed that his eyes were made whole. Indeed, 
it seems very evident, from subsequent statements, 
that to his dying day his eyes never recovered their 
soundness and his sight was never again normal. It 
has been surmised, and we think with good reason, 
that the continued weakness of his eyes constituted 
what he terms "a thorn in the flesh." Although under 
the power of the holy spirit he was granted many gifts 
of the spirit, amongst others the gift of healing, and 
although he exercised this gift of healing upon many 
(see Acts 19:11,12), yet the Lord did not relieve him 
from his own weakness in this respect. This must 
have been all the greater trial; it would seem all the 



more strange that he who could heal others could not 
heal himself; that he who had divine power for the 
blessing of others in this way, should not have the divine 
power for his own blessing. Our Lord's answer 
to his petition was, "My grace is sufficient for thee, 
my strength is made perfect in weakness." The noble 
Apostle exclaims, Therefore most gladly will I suffer, 
if thereby the grace of God toward me shall be the 
greater: and thereafter he never requested the removal 
of this "thorn." Several incidents in his experience confirm 
this conclusion. (1) Although an educated man, he 
seldom wrote his own letters; and of the one letter which 
he did write, although one of the briefest, he remarks 
(Gal. 6:11), "Ye see how large a letter I have written 
unto you with my own hand." The Greek would even 
give the thought that these words apologize for the use 
of very large characters in the writing,— such as a 
semi-blind person would use; (2) the Apostle comes 
down to us in history as "the bleared-eye Jew;" (3) 
when standing before the tribunal of the chief captain 
he declares that he did not know Ananias as the high 
priest; whereas, if his eyesight had been good, he 
could not have well helped knowing him, on account 
of his gorgeous apparel (Acts 23:5); (4) in writing to 
the Galatians he tells them (4: 15) that, when he first 
met them, their love and sympathy for him were such 
that they would willingly have plucked out their own 
eyes for him— an expression which would be meaningless, 
unless his eyes were defective. 

After a few days to gain strength from his fasting 
and the nervous excitement incidental to his experiences, 
days of communion with those whom he had 
come to persecute, and whom now in his renewed condition 
of mind he recognized and fellowshiped as dear 
brethren, he promptly began to preach Christ as the 
Son of God— publicly using the opportunities afforded 
in the Jewish Synagogues. 

Those who think of the Apostle Paul's experiences 
as on a par with the conversion of sinners 
greatly err. Such conduct as is here related is not the 
conduct of sinners, enemies of God. The account of 
the Apostle's enlightenment in the gospel is the account 
of a most noble character which commends the respect 
of every class in every time. And we are inclined to 
regard the Apostle Paul as in some sense of the word a 
figure, or likeness, or type of his race— Israel— and the 
opening of their eyes now shortly due to take place. 
Amongst the Jews are many who seem to be Israelites 
indeed, merely blinded, as the prophet and the apostle 
have described. (Rom. 11:7-12.) That nation whose 
blinding took place in the fifth (1,000 year) day, and 
which has been blinded throughout the sixth (1,000-year 
day), is to have its eyes opened on the third day, 
which will be the seventh (1,000 year) day— the Millennial 
Day. Israel also has been without food or drink 
of a spiritual kind during all this time. Israel also 



is to be a chosen vessel in the Lord's hand as connected 
with the earthly agencies in bearing the message 
which shall bless the Gentiles and all the families of 
the earth. We are near to the time for the opening of 
Israel's eyes. When the time shall have fully come, the 
Lord will send some Ananias whose touch and blessing 
under divine favor shall bring sight. The name Ananias 
signifies, "Jah is gracious." 



R2118 : page 74 

CHRISTIAN LIBERTY AND SELF-RESTRAINT. 

--March 21.-1 Cor. 9:19-27.- 

"Every man that striveth for the mastery 
is temperate in all things."— 1 Cor. 9:25. 

DOUBTLESS it was in great measure because 
of his breadth of learning, as well as the result 
of his deep consecration, and hence his nearness to the 
Lord and fellowship in the divine plan, that the Apostle 
Paul was enabled to grasp the conditions of the New 
Covenant and the Gospel dispensation more quickly 
than did the other apostles. Although the Apostle 
Peter took as broad a view as others of the original 
twelve, and although in addition the Lord gave him 
the vision to indicate that the Gentiles were no longer 

R2118 : page 75 

to be considered unclean by the Jews, and sent him 
direct to preach the Gospel to Cornelius, the first 
Gentile convert, and although he witnessed the gifts 
of the holy spirit communicated to him, yet the Apostle 
Paul seems to have grasped the whole situation 
much more comprehensively than did even Peter; so 
that when Peter was confused on this subject, and 
stumbling, Paul was both able and willing to help him 
to clearer views. (Gal. 2:14.) It was Paul who 
first saw "that the righteousness of the law is fulfilled 
in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit"; 
and that amongst those who have come under the new 
order of things there is no distinction of Jews and 
Gentiles, male and female, bond or free, because they 
are all one in Christ Jesus. It was Paul who recognized 
the fact that those who had accepted Christ were 
entirely free from the Law of Moses; that to them 
Moses was dead and they were married to another, even 
Christ, and were under his law;— the law of the spirit 
of life in Christ Jesus which made Israelites free from 
the law of sin and death.— Rom. 7:4,6. 

(19-23) But though realizing his liberties in Christ, 
his freedom from all bondage, as of holy days, new 



moons, sabbaths, meats, etc. (Col. 2:16; Rom. 14:5), the 
Apostle was not anxious to use his liberty except as 
between the Lord and himself, and such of the brethren 
as could appreciate the matter. Those who were weak 
and bounden by laws and ceremonies and human traditions 
received from the elders, found in the Apostle 
one who did not seek to triumph over them by boasting 
of his liberty and their bondage. On the contrary, 
if they were in bondage to the Law he waived for the 
time his own liberties that he might thereby through 
sympathy and patience help them to the same liberty 
which he enjoyed at heart. And so we find him advising 
and urging others. He said:— 

You find yourselves free from the law and those 
restraints which are upon your brethren, the Jews, 
you now say they are no longer bondages to you. You 
are thus greatly relieved: nevertheless, use not your 

R2119 : page 75 

liberties for an occasion of the flesh. You may know 

that an idol is nothing, and that meat offered to an 

idol (the custom amongst Gentiles) is not thereby injured, 

and you may feel perfectly free to eat that meat; 

but if a brother is with you who does not yet realize 

this freedom and see matters from this loftier standpoint, 

do not put a barrier between your heart and his 

by using your liberties, but rather for his sake avoid 

the use of that liberty that you may have the greater 

influence with him and bring him to appreciate the 

still greater liberties which are ours through Christ. 

The blessings of the Kingdom of God are not 
merely these liberties to eat what we please without 
condemnation, and to be without restraint from fast 
days, new moons and sabbaths! No, no; the liberties 
which we have as the incipient Kingdom of God are 
far better than these, though they include these. The 
more important things are the freedom from sin, the 
communion and fellowship with the Lord, and the 
prospect of a glorious inheritance in the future. Righteousness, 
peace, joy in the holy spirit, these are the 
fruits of our new relationship to Christ which are to 
be specially enjoyed, and in comparison to which our 
liberty to eat and not to eat what we please and to observe 
such holy days as we may please are insignificant. 
-Rom. 14:17-20. 

This is the Apostle's meaning in this lesson. He 
did not mean that he dissembled or deceived or pretended 
to be a Jew, etc., but that having and realizing 
his liberties, he did not always choose to exercise his 
liberties in Christ if he found better opportunities for 
usefulness by simply neglecting to claim or use liberty. 
Principles may never be abandoned for any consideration; 
but liberties and personal rights may be ignored 
in the interest of others, frequently and to divine 
pleasing; the Apostle was ready to go any length in 



defense of principle, and could not be budged an inch 
(Gal. 2:5,1 1); but in the sacrifice of his earthly rights 
and privileges and liberties for the sake of Christ and 
his Church, the Apostle evidently came next to our 
Lord Jesus, and is a noble example to all the Church, 
as shown in this lesson. 

An illustration of such a proper ignoring of liberties 
without abandonment of principle is found in connection 
with Sunday observance. To our understanding 
Sunday, the first day of the week, is in no sense of 
the word the Sabbath Day that was commanded to the 
Jews,— which was the seventh day. The Christian is 
not commanded by the Bible to keep any particular 
day, in any particular manner different from other days; 
but by his covenant with God he is to keep every day 
holy unto the Lord. He has no more right to do wrong 
on one day than on another. His rest in Christ under 
the New Covenant is not the physical rest of the Jew 
under the Law Covenant. It is higher: it is a rest of 
faith that brings joy and refreshment; not only physical, 
but mental and spiritual. 

This rest is not merely for one day in the week; 
the true Christian is to rest in Christ, and have joy and 
peace in believing every day. Instead, therefore, of 
having a seventh day rest in each week the Christian 
has seven days of rest in each week— a rest and a 
peace which the world can neither give nor take away. 

Not by divine appointment but of their own volition 
the early Church began to keep as a day of special 
gathering together the first day of the week, as a 
Memorial of our Lord's resurrection from the dead, 
and the new life and new joy which began with that 
day. For a time they continued to observe also the 
seventh day, until they learned through the apostles' 
instructions that they were dead to the Jewish law and 
had become "new creatures" in Christ under the law 
of the spirit of life,— which has but one commandment 
and that an all comprehensive one,— Love. 

The majority of Christians to-day seem to have 
drifted away in part from the liberties and appreciations 
of the New Covenant and to be attempting to 
mix the Jewish Covenant with the Christian Covenant, 
the Jewish law of ten commandments with the Christian 
law of one commandment— love. Accordingly Sunday, 
the first day of the week, is by many regarded as the 
Sabbath day of the Jews; and they mentally attach to 
it all the requirements of the Jewish law, and yet they 
continually feel a heart-condemnation in respect to it, 
as did the Jews, because they rarely or never live up to 
the requirements of the Law for that day. The law 
demanded that no work of any kind should be done by 
parents, children, servants or cattle; and as exemplifying 

R2119 : page 76 

the rigor of that law there is a record in the 



Scriptures that a man was stoned to death because he 
gathered sticks for a fire on the Sabbath day. By reason 
of this false conception that the first day is the 
Sabbath day or that somehow or other (they know not 
how or when or where) the authorities and ordinances 
respecting the Jewish Sabbath Day were transferred to 
Sunday, the first day, many are continually under condemnation 
to conscience— a consciousness of sin. 

With some of those who learn the truth on this 
subject there is a combative disposition which leads 
them to wish to display their liberties by doing on the 
first day of the week that which their fellow Christians 
regard as improper— sinful. Such a combative 
spirit is a sign that the spirit of Christ is not dwelling 
richly within— that more knowledge has reached the 
individual than he has been able to wisely use. It indicates 
that such have need to grow in grace, in love, 
proportionately as they grow in knowledge. 

The Apostle's declaration, in the lesson before us, 
is an illustration of the right spirit concerning every 
such question. If our neighbors meet in worship on 
the first day of the week, because they believe it to be 
the command of God, our liberty can be just as fully 
exercised meeting on the same day; not from a sense of 
obligation, not under law, but in the full enjoyment of 
the liberty wherewith Christ makes free. Indeed, we 
can enjoy the day very much more when we realize it 
as a liberty and privilege rather than as a duty and 
command. Yet there are trifling liberties which we 
should yield; for instance, our neighbor, thinking that 
he is under the Jewish law, might consider the driving 
of a tack to be a violation of the day of rest. We who 
know that we are not under the law but under grace, 
realize that no sin would be committed in driving a 
tack; but nevertheless we can well and properly set 
aside our liberties in that matter and conform and cooperate 
in the maintenance of the peace and quiet of 
the day. Indeed, we realize that the mistake of our 
friends is in many respects a blessing and a mercy to 
us. For if many appreciated the matter as we do, as 
a liberty and privilege and not as a law of God, quite 
probably a majority would pay no respect whatever to 
the day, and very soon it might be as other days. We 
are very glad, therefore, that a day for rest and quiet 
and study and meditation on holy things is set aside 
by the laws of the land in which we live. But even if 
we saw no reason whatever for observing the day, the 
fact of its legal secular appointment is a sufficient 
ground for abstinence from earthly labors. But on 
the contrary we see the wisdom of having a day for 
special fellowship in spiritual things and the day 
adopted by early Christians is eminently proper. The 
opening day of a new week symbolizes our new rest, 
new hopes and new life— all of which spring from the 
resurrection of our Lord. 

We advise those who are seeking to walk in the 



"narrow way" to follow the Apostle's counsel and example 
closely, and while realizing themselves free in 
Christ to make themselves servants unto all— "doing 
good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially 
to the household of faith." 

The Apostle was not moved to this abrogation of 
his own liberties from any selfish motives, but by his 
love of the gospel and his desire to supply to others its 
blessed healing balm, which had come to his own spirit. 
Wherever the spirit of Christ is, this spirit is received; 
and if developed it will manifest itself sooner or later 
by this disposition of self-negation in the interest of 
other— especially in spiritual interests and affairs. 

(24-27) The Apostle would have us see that while 
we are granted liberties in Christ, nevertheless the essence 
of Christian teaching is to deny ourselves the 
use of those very liberties. As slaves of sin we were 
set free in order that we might become the voluntary 
bond-servants of righteousness— serving with self-sacrifice 
"even unto death." The Jews, as a house of 
servants under Moses, were bound as servants by rigorous 
laws, the meaning and object of which were not 
even explained to them. But the house of sons, of 
which Christ is the Head, is left free from any law, 
except the one— to love God with every power of being 
and our neighbor as ourself. But this very liberty, 
which is granted to us on the one hand, is the greater 
trial on the other hand. It leaves with us each the 
responsibility of proving our love to God and to his 
cause and to his people, and our sympathy for the world, 
by the extent to which we are willing to abandon our 
liberties for these— as their servants. 

The Apostle illustrates this by the Olympic games 
of his day, prominent amongst which was foot-racing. 
Racers were set free to run, so we as Christians are set 
free from the law that we may run our race and win 
the great prize; but he that complies with certain recognized 
conditions, and "so runs," shall be crowned 
an overcomer. 

Consecrated Christians have entered the lists, to 
run the great race for the prize of our high calling 
in Christ Jesus— the prize of joint-heirship with him in 
the kingdom of glory, to be established at his second 
coming. We start on our race course not aimlessly, 
not hopelessly, not simply for the sake of denying 
ourselves, not to do penance for sins, nor simply for 
the sake of developing character; but the Lord has 
graciously arranged the matter so that we will have a 
grand and noble incentive to self-denial. The prize at 

R2120 : page 76 

the end of the race is his "Well done, good and faithful 
servant;" and to the faithful little flock "the crown 
of life" and the glory of the Kingdom. Therefore 
we are not running uncertainly, doubtfully, not knowing 



what the prize will be, for we are instructed by 
the Lord's own words. 

The Apostle points out in this connection that if 
we hope to be overcomers and approved of the Lord 
we must be moderate, temperate, self-denying in all 
things. This he emphasizes in verse twenty-seven. 
It is not only necessary that our whole being should 
be consecrated to the Lord at the beginning of the 
race, but it continues necessary all along the way, that 
it shall be continually subject to the new mind, the 
mind of Christ, which is to dwell in us richly and 
abound. Otherwise, if we allow the old, fallen nature 
to rise up and hinder the new mind, the mind of Christ 
in us— if we permit the will of the flesh thus to come 
into control again, we may count the race as ignominiously 
terminated and ourselves as "castaways;" because 
the mind of the flesh leads to death, but the mind 
of the new spirit of life in Christ, by which we are begotten 
through the Word of truth, leads to life everlasting, 
and through faithfulness to eternal glory. 



page 77 