VOL. XXI. NOVEMBER 1, 1900. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 323 

Still Debating Infant Damnation 323 

Dead Bodies and Quickened Bodies 325 

The New Creature Alive, the 

Old Dead 329 

"Unthankful, Unholy" 330 

Proper Christian Daily Living 332 

Why the Christian Should Live Separate 
From the World 335 

Looking For That Blessed Hope 336 

About "Pilgrim" Calls 322 

Marked New Testaments 322 

page 322 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2750 : page 322 

ABOUT "PILGRIM" CALLS. 

We find to our joy that the Pilgrim visits are greatly enjoyed 
by the friends of the truth:— the limited responses to our 
previous notice being the result of misunderstandings. Some 



presumed that our inquiry was for places where a "Pilgrim" 
had never yet stopped and who desired one. Others thought 
we meant to send the "Pilgrim" at once and direct from Allegheny, 
and thought the distance and expense too great to ask. 
Now they understand that our method is to make out routes in 
advance and that we wanted to know where the "Pilgrim" 
visits are most appreciated in order to specially include such 
places in those routes. We have many responses. Some are 
from very remote places not likely ever to be reached: and yet 
some have already been reached of which at first we had the 
same thought. We will do our best to serve all. 

page 322 

MARKED NEW TESTAMENTS. 

We have now a goodly supply of the Marked New Testaments. 
The markings are in red ink, making prominent verses 
which are specially forceful as respects various features of the 
divine plan for our salvation. The ransom, justification, sanctification, 
the second coming of our Lord and the resurrection are 
made quite prominent in these markings. Price postpaid two 
for 25 cents or $1.10 per dozen by express at your charges. 

The publication, markings, etc. are not our work. 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in 
Bible House chapel, No. 610 Arch street, at 3 P.M. 

Cottage meetings for prayer and testimony on Wednesday 
evenings; and Dawn Circles for Bible Study on Thursday, Friday 
and Saturday evenings— various localities, Pittsburg and 
vicinity-inquire at WATCH TOWER office. 



R2718 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



STILL DEBATING INFANT DAMNATION. 



IN DEBATES on creed revision among Presbyterians 

no feature has called forth such heated 

discussion as that relating to "elect infants dying in infancy. 

This clause of the Westminster Confession, 

with those clauses which have popularly been taken as 

interpreting it, follow:— 

III. 3. "By the decree of God, for the manifestation 
of his glory, some men and angels are predestined 
unto everlasting life, and others foreordained 
to everlasting death. 



III. 4. "These angels and men thus predestined 
and foreordained are particularly and unchangeably 
designed, and their number is so certain and definite 
that it can not either be increased or diminished. 



X. 3. "Elect infants, dying in infancy, are regenerated 
and saved through the Spirit, who worketh 
when, where, and how he pleaseth; so also are all 
other elect persons who are incapable of being called 
by the ministry of the Word. 

X. 4. "Others, not elected, altho they may be 
called by the Word and may have some common operations 
of the Spirit, yet they never truly come to 
Christ and, therefore, can not be saved. Much less can 
men not professing the Christian religion be saved in 
any other way whatsoever, be they never so diligent 
to frame their lives according to the light of nature, 
and the law of that religion they do profess; and to 
assert and maintain that they may, is very pernicious 
and to be detested." 

From a remote period these statements have been 
popularly supposed to teach, by implication, that non-elect 
infants dying in infancy are damned. However, 
the recent General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church (South) claimed that no such interpretation 
could rightly be put upon the clause, and refused to 
consider a proposition to alter it. For instance, Dr. 
Warfield, of Princeton, says, "I think we may characterize 
the interpretation of Chapter X., section 3 
[of the Westminster Confession], which finds a body 
of non-elect infants dying in infancy implied in its 
statements, as one of the most astonishing pieces of 
misrepresentation in literary history." Rev. Dr. Eugene 
Daniel also asserts that it is unjust to say that 
the Confession implicitly teaches the damnation of 
non-elect infants. He points out that it teaches positively 
the salvation of elect infants, but makes no attempt 
whatever to solve the Creator's intentions with 
regard to non-elect infants. 

It seems peculiar indeed that anyone claiming to 
believe in Calvinistic predestination of adults could 
dispute that the same conditions prevailed in infancy. 
But hearken to other interpreters of the Westminster 
Confession, as follows:— 

Rev. Dr. Horace L. Singleton (The Homiletic 
Review, September), states that prior to the Westminster 
Confession all of Christendom had believed that 
infants dying without baptism are damned, but that 
Confession took a step forward in asserting that elect 
infants, even if unbaptized, are saved. He says:— 

"The sacramentarian doctrine of the papal and 
other prelatical churches, and the logical conclusion 
of Arminianism, left no other provision for infant salvation 
than baptism. To die without it was to be 



lost forever. This detestable doctrine the Confession 
of Faith was designed to destroy. It does destroy it. 
The Christian Church and the world are debtors to it 
for removing the gloom which surrounds the death of 
babes. The Assembly divines were all Calvinists, in 
entire accord with the second Scotch Confession, which 
on this subject 'abhors and detests among the doctrines 
of the Roman Antichrist his cruel judgment against 
infants dying without the sacrament' The Calvinists 
of the Westminster Assembly who indorsed or approved 
that Confession, would surely not frame an 
article on infant salvation which would imply that any 

R2718 : page 324 

dying in infancy were without the pale of God's grace 
and redemption. So they made provision for all by 
referring all to the sovereign will of him 'who worketh 
when and where and how he will.' Only Calvinistic 
theology and a Calvinistic Confession can say 
that. The phrase contains the essence of Calvinism. 
What is that? Why, the grace of God is sovereign 
both in its source and application. 

"As to the device of the doctrine of infant damnation, 
not one of the other denominations can point 
at the Presbyterian Church and say: Thou didst it.' 

"The Roman Catholic Church in the Council of 
Trent decreed, and the decree still stands:— 

'"If any denies that new-born children must be 
baptized, or says that they do not derive from Adam 
anything of original sin which makes the washing of 
regeneration necessary to cleanse them for an entrance 
into everlasting life, let him be accursed.' 

"The Lutheran Church did not rid itself altogether 
of Roman sacramentalism. Its Augsburg Confession 
teaches that 'Baptism is necessary to salvation.' 
It condemns all 'who affirm that children are 
saved without baptism.' 

"Archbishop Cranmer, the first primate of the 
English Church, said in his 'Catechism': If we should 
have heathen parents and die without baptism, we 
would be damned everlastingly.' 

"...The founder of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church, John Wesley, in his Treatise on Baptism,' 
1756, says:— 

"If infants are guilty of original sin, then they 
are the proper subjects of baptism, seeing in the ordinary 
way they can not be saved unless this be washed 
away by baptism. It has already been proved that 
this original stain cleaves to every child of man, and 
that they thereby are children of wrath and liable to 
eternal damnation.'" 

The Independent (August 30) says:— 

"It is a mere evasion to assert that 'elect infants' 
can mean all infants. It would be as easy to say 'all 
infants', as 'elect infants' if that were intended, and 



if it were not contradicted by the doctrine clearly expressed 
in the Confession, that original sin is worthy 
of eternal death. That the plain meaning of the Confession 
and its implications throughout includes infants 
among those who are lost, is sufficiently proved 
from the language of Dr. Twiss, prolocutor of the 
Westminster Assembly, who says distinctly in his 
'Vindicae' I., 48:- 

'"Many infants depart from this life in original 
sin, and consequently are condemned to eternal death 
on account of original sin alone. Therefore, from the 
sole transgression of Adam condemnation to eternal 
death has followed upon many infants.' 

"What Dr. Twiss said was the belief of the rest 
and the teaching of the Confession." 

The Rev. Henry Frank quotes John Calvin himself, 
saying:— 

"John Calvin says with his accustomed clearness: 
'The children of the reprobate [i.e., the non-elect] 
whom the curse of God follows, are subject to the 
same sentence'. (Opera II.) Again: 'You deny that 
it is lawful for God, except for misdeeds, to condemn 
any human being. ...Put forth your evidence against 
God, who precipitates into eternal death harmless, new-born 
children torn from their mother's bosom.' ('De 
Occulta Dei Providentia'). 'As the eggs of the asp 
are deservedly crushed, and serpents just born are deservedly 
killed, tho they have not yet poisoned any 
one with their bite, so infants are justly obnoxious 
to penalties' (Molineaux of France).... 

"Once again hear John Calvin: 'Very infants 
themselves bring in their own damnation with them 
from their mother's womb; who, altho they have not 
yet brought forth the fruits of their iniquity, yet have 
the seed thereof enclosed within them; yea, their 
whole nature is a certain seed of sin; and therefore 
it can not be otherwise than hateful and abominable 
to God.' 

"Now let us learn what the framers of the Confession 
themselves said concerning this damnable doctrine. 
William Twiss: If many thousands, even all 
the infants of Turks and Saracens, dying in original 
sin are tormented by him in hell-fire, is he to be accounted 
the father of cruelties for this?' For a vivid 
picture of the disposition of these eternally damned 
infants by this mild and maudlin Presbyterian God, 
read Samuel Rutherford, one of the Scotch commissioners 
who assisted in framing the creed. 'Suppose 
we saw with our eyes a great furnace of fire, ...and 
all the damned as lumps of red fire, and they boiling 
and louping for pain in a dungeon of everlasting brimstone, 
and the black and terrible devils, with long and 
sharp-toothed whips of scorpions lashing out scourges 
on them; and if we saw our own neighbors, brethren, 
sisters; yea, our dear children, wives, fathers, mothers, 
swimming and sinking in that black lake, and heard 



the yelling, shouting, crying of our young ones and 
fathers....'" 



It will now be quite in order for some very conscientious 
Presbyterian brother to tell us that John 
Calvin knew nothing about Calvinism anyway; or to 
assure us that tho there were damned non-elect infants 
in times past, there are none today, tho God and his 
Word have not changed in the interim. 

If, instead of saying elect and non-elect infants, 
Brother Calvin had said the children of the non-elect 
are damned when they are born, he would have come 
much nearer stating the matter truthfully, however 
erroneous his conception of the facts. For the word 
damned in plain English simply signifies condemned, 
and the same is true of the Greek word translated in 
these two ways in the Bible.... 

No one can dispute that the Scriptures plainly 
teach that condemnation (damnation) passed upon all 
men because of father Adam's transgression (Rom. 5:12), 
and hence the declaration that mankind are 
"born in sin." (Psa. 51:5.) The only exceptions 
to this rule of being born condemned (damned) being 
in the case of children one or both of whose parents 
are believers.— 1 Cor. 7:14. 

But then, the great difficulty of "Orthodoxy" lies 
in the fact that it has accepted theories respecting this 

R2719 : page 325 

original condemnation (damnation or curse of God) 
framed in "the dark ages," that it means condemned 
(damned) to everlasting torture, either in fire and 
brimstone or something worse: a thought as opposed 
to the Scriptural teachings as to sound reason and 
common sense. If, however, the Scriptural thought 
be attached to the condemnation (damnation) and it be 
seen that all of Adam's race are born aliens and strangers 
from God, his enemies and under condemnation 
(damnation) to death as imperfect beings unworthy 
of God's favors, including everlasting life,— then all 
is plain, all is reasonable. 

It will then be seen that as Adam's sin and its 
penalty were entailed upon his children, so the harmony 
with God of a believing parent would properly 
and consistently attach to his children until they shall 
have reached years of discretion and ability to accept 
or reject divine favor for themselves. 

However, the children of unbelievers have the 
opportunity of accepting God's grace when they come 
to years of discretion, provided they have the necessary 
"ears to hear"— ears of the heart. And even 
such as, under Satan's influence, are deaf to the voice 
of God now speaking to us through his Son— and who 



therefore continue through the present life under condemnation 

(damnation), we have the assurance will in 

the Millennial age have the ears of their understanding 

opened and then have opportunity to obey and be 

blessed with the gift of God— eternal life. 



R2719 : page 325 

DEAD BODIES AND QUICKENED BODIES. 



"O wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me from this dead body? 
I thank God [for deliverance] through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

So then with my mind I serve the law of 

God, but with the flesh the law of sin." 
-Rom. 7:24,25.- 

MUCH PERPLEXITY has been caused to 

many Christian minds by the statements 

of the seventh chapter of Paul's Epistle to the Romans. 

Some have concluded that he here teaches that 

he lived a life of sin, according to the flesh, but a life 

of righteousness according to his mind; and yet they 

are ready to concede that this is rather a perplexing, 

unreasonable and unsatisfactory view of the matter. 

Others reach the conclusion that the Apostle must 

here be describing his condition of heart and mind 

before conversion, while he was still a sinner; yet 

these also find difficulties, and confess that many features 

of such a view are quite inconsistent with the 

Apostle's language. We submit the following interpretation 

of the chapter, as proving itself correct by 

its harmonizing with all the Apostle's statements in 

this chapter and elsewhere. 

The Apostle is addressing believers at Rome, 
"beloved of God, called saints" (1:7). Some of these 
were probably converts from amongst the Gentiles, 
while undoubtedly a considerable proportion were 
converts from Judaism. This is implied by the fact 
that the Apostle in this Epistle so particularly explains 
the Law, not as to Gentiles having no knowledge of 
the Law, but as to Jews having full knowledge of it. 
The Epistle is a very comprehensive statement of the 
entire plan of God. The Apostle begins in the first chapter 
by showing that God was not responsible for 
the prevalent degradation, ignorance, sin, etc., throughout 
the world, and concludes with the crushing of Satan 
under the feet of the saints during the Millennial 
reign of the Christ. He explains that at one time 
God gave to mankind in general certain knowledge 
and blessings, but that "when they knew God they 
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but 
became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish 



heart was darkened. Confessing themselves to be 
wise they became fools." He explains that thus gradually 
men came down to idolatry and bestiality, dishonoring 
and degrading themselves, and "perverting 
the truth of God into a lie;" "for which cause God 
gave them up to vile affections and to a reprobate 
mind, to do those things which are not proper;" and 
they became filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, 
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, envy, 
murder, dispute, deceit, malignity, etc., etc. Thus 
he accounts for the various degrees of degradation, 
ignorance and superstition prevalent throughout the 
world.-Chap. 1:21,22,25,26,28,29. 

Proceeding, he shows that while Israel had received 
God's Law, under a special covenant, and with 
special favors at his hands, they had not been saved 
by the Law, any more than the Gentiles had been 
saved without the Law; and that therefore both Jews 
and Gentiles needed just such a Savior as God had 
provided. Answering the supposed argument of the 
Jews, he declares, "Not the hearers of the Law are 
just before God, but the doers of the Law," and he 
argues that the Jew who rested in the Law, and made 
his boast of being of God's favored people, and who 
by reason of these favors knew the will of God more 
particularly than the Gentiles, would not, by reason 
of this knowledge and advantage, be justified under 
the Law, but could only be acquitted by a perfect 
keeping of that Law; and that since the Jews did not 
keep the Law perfectly they could not claim the reward 
promised by the Law, namely, eternal life. Hence, 
so far as eternal life was concerned, they had no more 

R2719 : page 326 

claim upon it than had the Gentiles, who had less 
knowledge as well as less outward piety. He asks: 
"Are we [Jews] better than they [Gentiles, living 
according to the light that they possessed]? No, in 
no wise; for we have before proved both Jews and 
Gentiles, that they are all under sin; as it is written, 
There is none righteous, no, not one." 

The Apostle's argument is that none being righteous, 
none could be acquitted or approved before God, 
whether they had the Law or did not have it. Thus 
he proved that the Jews as well as the Gentiles, up 
to the time of Christ, were all under sin, all under 
condemnation, and that none of them had any claim 
upon eternal life, according to divine arrangements 
thus far made. For "By the deeds of the law there 
shall no flesh be justified in his sight."— Chap. 2:13,17; 
3:9,10,19,20. 

Next the Apostle proceeds to show that whoever 
would be justified before God, whether he had previously 
been a Jew, favored with the knowledge and 
advantages of the Law, or a Gentile, in blindness and 



ignorance doing to the best of his knowledge, God 
has now provided for both, one way to be saved and 
to come into harmony with him— namely, through 
Christ. He shows that the Law, so far from justifying 
the Jews, showed them to be in a condition of sin, 
by their inability to keep it perfectly. But this Law 
which had condemned the Jews, because of their failure 
and inability to keep its conditions perfectly, 
served the more abundantly to attest God's justice; 
it became a witness to God's righteousness— that he 
had been right in his declaration that Israel had not 
kept the Law, and that all mankind, being in a fallen 
condition, were unfit to receive his favors; and it witnessed 
more than this: it witnessed to the justice of 
God in providing the ransom for sinners, in the person 
of his Son our Lord— "even the righteousness of 
God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and 
upon all them that believe [whether Jews or Gentiles]: 
for there is [now] no difference, for all have sinned 
[and consequently all are unworthy of divine favor 
upon any basis of works of their own, and must therefore 
needs be redeemed with the precious blood, and 
their penalty met for them, ere they could be received 
back into harmony with God]; being justified freely by 
his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, 
whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation [satisfaction] 
through faith in his blood."— Chap. 3:19-26. 

Appealing to those who had formerly been Jews, 
and who had been inclined to boast of themselves as 
God's favored people, and inclined to think that in 
some sense of the word they were still more favored 
of God than those formerly Gentiles, the Apostle says, 
in view of the preceding facts, "Where is [the room 
for] boasting then?" and he answers, "It is excluded." 
There is no room for boasting; the Jew and the Gentile 
having come into Christ are on a common level- 
both have been justified by faith in Christ; neither 
was benefited or injured by his previous experience, 
whether under the Law or without the Law, if now 
by God's grace they had received adoption into his 
family through Christ. Boasting on the part of those 
who previously had been Jews would certainly be excluded, 
for they had not been able to perform the 
works which their Law Covenant had demanded, and 
now being exempted of God, under the law of faith, 
it would hinder them from any boasting as respects 

R2720 : page 326 

the law of works. "Therefore we conclude that a 
man is justified by faith, without [necessity for] the 
deeds of [works demanded by] the Law." 

The Apostle proceeds to show that the Lord's 
operation of favor on account of faith does not make 
void the Law, with which for centuries he had dealt 
with Israel,— the Law of Righteousness. On the contrary, 



the fact that it was necessary to justify the 
Jews by faith, and the fact that they could not be 
justified under the Law of Works proves, not that the 
Law of Works was bad, but that it was good, and that 
the Jew was imperfect through the fall, so that he 
was unable to obey the perfect Law given. Thus 
God's dealings through the new Law of Faith really 
upholds and magnifies his old Law of Works, for the 
latter had to be fulfilled by Jesus on behalf of his people, 
in order that he might be the Redeemer of the 
world in general, and set free from the Law of Works 
those who had been under it, that they also, with the 
remainder of the world, might be accepted of God 
under the Law of Faith.— Chap. 3:27-31. 

Buttressing his argument, the Apostle shows that 
Abraham was not justified by the Law of Works, the 
Law Covenant, but by faith; and hence the claim advanced 
by some that the Mosaic Law was necessary, 
with faith for justification, was an erroneous one; because 
Abraham was called the friend of God, and had 
his faith counted to him for righteousness, not only 
long before the Law was given at Mount Sinai, but 
even before the outward sign of circumcision was given 
to himself— the latter being given, not as a requirement 
to his justification, but as a seal or mark of justification 
and harmony with God, to which he had 
already attained.— Chap. 4:1-15. 

As Abraham was justified by faith, and received 
into favor with God because of his exercise of faith, 
so, says the Apostle, it is with us. "Being justified 
by faith we have peace with God through our Lord 
Jesus Christ." And how and why through our Lord? 
Because, says the Apostle, "He was delivered for our offences 
[bearing the condemnation which those offences 

R2720 : page 327 

implied and involved— the very offences or weaknesses 
of the flesh which hindered Jews from keeping the 
perfect law given at Sinai, and being justified under 
it by works of obedience to it]."— Chap. 4:25; 5:1. 

This justification, which we receive through faith 
in Christ, becomes to us the basis of our new hopes 
in him,— of becoming his disciples, and, if faithful, ultimately 
joint-heirs with him in the Kingdom. This 
the Apostle expresses in the words, "By whom also 
[additional to justification and its peace] we have access 
by faith into this grace [the privilege of adoption 
into God's family] wherein we stand, and rejoice in 
the hope of the glory of God [in the hope of sharing 
in God's glory and Kingdom with our Lord and 
Head]." The Apostle proceeds to prove, not only 
that the death of Christ was necessary as the off-set 
to Adam's transgression, and the payment of his penalty, 
but he demonstrates that this penalty was fully 
paid, and that God has accepted it on behalf of the 



world in general, and not of the Jews only, and has 

transferred all to Christ; for as "the judgment was 

by one to condemnation, the free gift is of many offences 

unto justification. As one offence resulted in 

a pronouncement which affected all to condemnation, 

even so by one righteous act a pronouncement was 

made [by the same Justice] which affects all men [permitting 

their attainment] unto justification of life." 

And, adds the Apostle, the Law Covenant was 
introduced, not for the doing away of sin, but that 
sin might be more distinctly seen to be sin, and in its 
true colors; not, however, with a view to the injury 
of the Jews, with whom that Law Covenant was made, 
for if sin abounded amongst them the more by reason 
of their greater knowledge through the Law, then 
God's grace abounded proportionately the more; for 
as sin hath reigned unto death, even so there is to be a 
reign of grace unto eternal life under righteous provisions 
through Jesus Christ our Lord.— Rom. 5:12,17-21. 

The next point is, If God's grace will be caused 
to abound in proportion to the sentence, so that he 
who has many and deep sins can be as fully and completely 
forgiven and released as he who has fewer and 
smaller sins, shall we then argue that we may as well 
delve deeply into sin, assured that God's grace will 
be that much the more abundantly provided for us? 
No, says the Apostle; those who have come into the 
position to see and comprehend this much of divine 
mercy and favor must first have made a consecration 
of themselves to God, otherwise their eyes of understanding 
would not be opened widely enough to grasp 
the subject with clearness and definiteness; and if one 
had made a consecration of himself, and immersed his 
will into the will of God in Christ, and thus reckoned 
himself dead to the world and to sin, how could such 
persons live lives of sin or take pleasure therein? So 
surely as they have received the holy spirit, the new 
mind, that surely that new mind would be out of harmony 
with sin, craving, hungering and thirsting after 
righteousness, truth, etc. 

We are therefore to reckon ourselves dead to sin, 
but alive to God through Christ; and we are not to 
let sin reign in us, because we, as new creatures, are 
begotten of a different spirit, that is at warfare with 
sin, as sin is at warfare against righteousness. Instead, 
therefore, of continuing to be servants of sin, 
and yielding our bodies to that service, we are to 
recognize ourselves as "new creatures in Christ," servants 
of God, his ambassadors and representatives; 
and are to seek to use our members, our bodies and 
their talents, in the new service of righteousness,— 
remembering our past experience in sin, that its wages 
are degradation and ultimate death, and that this 
privilege which we have now entered upon as new 
creatures, redeemed by the precious blood, is God's 
covenant through Jesus Christ our Lord, and means 



to us eternal life, if we maintain it.— Chap. 6. 

Having reached this climax of the argument, and 
having demonstrated the process of our justification 
and our subsequent adoption into the divine family; 
and having shown the necessity for maintaining our 
standing as new creatures, and gaining victory over 
the weaknesses of the flesh; and that all these privileges, 
nevertheless, are not of the Law but of grace 
and of faith— the Apostle next turns his attention to 
another phase of the subject in Chapter 7. He has 
in mind, and is specially addressing the Christian 
brethren at Rome who were formerly Jews, as he says, 
"I write unto you who know the Law." He wishes 
to demonstrate to them logically that altho the Jews 
previously, through the Law Covenant, had "much advantage 
every way," yet now since the introduction 

of the New Covenant they were to some extent at a disadvantage 
—hindered or bound by the old dead covenant, 
unless they recognized it as dead, and cut loose 
from it. They were tightly bound by the Law given 
at Sinai; because as a nation they entered into a positive 
covenant with God, through Moses, the mediator 
of their covenant. St. Paul represents this as a marriage 
contract between that people and the Law Covenant; 
picturing the Jews as the wife, and the Law 
Covenant as the husband. He shows an incompatibility 
between them, but that nevertheless the Jews 
would be bound by their covenant, as a woman would 
be bound by her marriage contract, so long as the husband 
would live. 

Hence the Jews, as a people, were less at liberty 
to enter into a New Covenant with Christ than were 
the Gentiles, because they were already bound to the 

R2720 : page 328 

Law Covenant through Moses. The Apostle proceeds 
to prove three things: 

(1) That the Law Covenant, or husband of Israel, 
had not been abrogated, had not been executed, 

as a bad law, but had died a natural death, through 
the fulfilment of the purpose of its creation; and that 
hence, 

(2) Every Jew might properly consider himself 
as released from all obligation to the (dead) Law 
Covenant, and might properly be united or married to 
another, Christ, accepting the terms of the New Covenant, 
with its grace, mercy and peace through believing, 

now offered to them. 

(3) It was proper that they all should see how 
much better was the New Covenant, into which they 
would enter by becoming united with Christ, than was 
the old covenant, which, he declared, had died a natural 
death. 

However, he would not have them think evil of 
the first husband, the Law Covenant. On the contrary, 



he assures them that it was a good husband to 
them— "The Law is holy and just and good," all must 
speak well of the Jews' first husband. Nevertheless, 
argues the Apostle, we all realize that we did not receive 
from the Law Covenant the blessings we so earnestly 
coveted; we did not receive an actual cancellation 
of our sins, but merely a temporary covering of 
them, which required to be renewed and made mention 
of year by year continually (Heb. 10:1), nor did we 
obtain the longed for everlasting life. As Jews, we 
cannot blame the Law Covenant; we must only blame 
ourselves;— nor can we blame ourselves (for I may 
consider myself a representative, in thought and conduct, 
of all true Jews, and may speak for them, says 
the Apostle); and I can truly say that while living 
under this Law Covenant I approved it with my mind, 
with my heart, and I endeavored to serve it accordingly, 
but when I came to perform its requirements I 
found another law, a law of sin working in my members, 
which hindered me from rendering the obedience 
I desired to render to that Law Covenant. 

Not that it hindered me entirely, for I certainly 
succeeded in some degree in conforming life and conduct 
to its requirements; but since I could not render 
perfect obedience to its every requirement I necessarily 
failed, because in that Law Covenant no provision 
was made for my weaknesses and imperfections which 
I had inherited, and which were my share of the fall 

R2721 : page 328 

of our race. I found, on the contrary, that even tho 
I had been able to perform the requirements of the 
Law in nine points out of ten, and had failed in the 
tenth point, and even tho that failure were properly 
attributable to inherited weaknesses, and was entirely 
contrary to my desires of heart, nevertheless it was 
failure, and my efforts as a whole were branded failure, 
and the great prize of eternal life was denied me under 
that covenant. 

Thus I found myself in a terrible predicament: 
my heart crying out for God and for righteousness, 
and earnestly desiring to fulfil the requirements of 
my covenant and to gain life everlasting, but I found 
myself wholly unable to fully obey its requirements; 
I found them entirely beyond my reach. Not that 
they were beyond the reach of my mind, for with my 
mind I grasped them and enjoyed them and appreciated 
them; nor that they would have been beyond the reach 
of obedience of my body, had my body been perfect; 
but, O wretched man! I find that my body is a dead 
body, that sin has gained such a power over it and so 
chained it down to things that are evil, in fact and in 
intention, that I cannot do the things that I would,— 
that when I would do good and keep the perfect law, 
sin is present with me, and hinders,— being an integral 



part of my body; so that the good that I would 
do, the perfect life that I would live, I am unable to 
perform, and the evil things that I would not do, which 
my mind, my will, rejects, and which I strive against, 
those things to some extent I find myself unable to 
resist; and here was my helpless condition as bound 
to the Law Covenant. I realized that I never could 
gain, through its assistance and offers, the glorious 
perfections that I desired, and the eternal life which 
could accompany only these perfections. 

What shall I do? How can I escape this condition 
of things? I thank God that a way of escape has been 
provided; I thank God that in his due time he has 
sent Jesus, as a great Redeemer, and that through his 
death the world of mankind has been redeemed from 
the original sentence, and additionally that all we who 
were Jews and under the Law Covenant are set at liberty 
from that covenant— that the death of Jesus on 
our behalf means the death of our Covenant, which, 
tho in some respects an advantage, was very unfavorable 
to us because of our inherited weaknesses. I thank 
God that now I am at liberty to become united to 
Christ, at liberty to consider my union with Moses 
and the Law Covenant as at an end, at liberty to take 
on me the vows and covenants required of all called 
to be the Bride of Christ. Thanks be unto God for 
this deliverance from the bondage of the Law of Works 
into the liberty of the Law of Faith in Christ Jesus! 

The advantage of this new position in Christ over 
the old position in Moses is that now God accepts my 
new mind, my heart desires, accompanied by my best 
endeavors; and under this New Covenant, through the 
merits of the ransom, he justly ignores and hides from 
his sight the imperfections of the flesh, which are contrary 
to my wish, and against which I am striving. 

R2721 : page 329 

It may be said of me, then, and of all such, that it is 
with our minds, with our hearts, that we are serving 
God— even if, to some extent, contrary to our wish 
and endeavor, our flesh should, either through weakness 
or ignorance, serve the law of sin at times.— 
Romans 7. 

THE NEW CREATURE ALIVE, THE OLD DEAD. 
-ROM. 8:1-11.- 

Under the covenant through which we are united 
to Christ, our mortal bodies are reckoned as dead, as 
sacrificed, as no longer us, and our minds are reckoned 
as the new creature adopted into the family of God, 
and seeking to serve God and to grow into his likeness, 
by being conformed to the image of his dear Son. 
It is therefore according to the standpoint from which 
we view the matter that we could say of these new 



creatures that they are holy, and that the righteousness 
of the Law is fulfilled in them, and that the 
wicked one toucheth them not.— 1 John 5:18. 

In such expressions we are referring exclusively 
to the reckoned "new" creatures, and are ignoring 
entirely, as dead, their mortal bodies. But if we should 
speak from another standpoint, and attempt to say 
that we are actually perfect in the flesh, it would be 
untrue, and not only so but would be an ignoring of 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice, and our continued need 
(while in the fallen flesh) of a share in the justification 
which it provides. Those who would thus speak 
of their flesh as perfect, would hear the Apostle speaking 
to the reverse, saying, "In my flesh dwelleth no 
good thing,"— no perfection; and all imperfection is 
un-right, and all unright-eousness is sin. Hence, says 
the Apostle John, "If we say [speaking of our flesh, 
and ignoring the justification provided in Christ to 
cover its blemishes] that we have no sin, we deceive 
ourselves, and the truth is not in us."— 1 John 1:8. 

St. Paul proceeds to clearly mark the distinction 
between the new mind, which consecrated in Christ 
is accepted as the "new creature," holy and acceptable 
to God, and our mortal bodies, which he calls "this 
dead body"— originally dead, under divine sentence, 
because of sin, but redeemed by the precious blood of 
Christ, and justified, and then included in our sacrifice, 
when we gave our little all in consecration to the 
Lord, as living sacrifices— to be dead with Christ, to 
suffer with him even unto death. He declares that it 
is to those who are walking after the spirit, seeking 
to serve the Lord in spirit and in truth, from the heart, 
that are freed from the condemnation; and that this 
includes the thought that they do not now walk after 
the flesh, desiring to fulfil its desires. And here we 
are to closely distinguish between the walking up to 
the spirit, and walking after the spirit. We should of 
course follow as closely to the spirit of truth and 
righteousness as possible, and yet we cannot hope, so 
long as we are in the imperfect flesh, that we could 
ever walk up to the spirit of the divine requirements, 
tho we are to strive in this direction continually. One 
thing is positive, however,— we must not walk after 
the flesh. To do so would imply that we had lost the 
new mind, the new disposition, the new will,— that 
we had become dead to those hopes and covenants 
which had led to our consecration. 

Any who get into this condition of walking after 
the flesh,— seeking to serve the flesh, therein have 
the evidence that their minds had become "carnal," 
that they had lost much, if not all, of the new mind, 
the new disposition. All such should know most 
unequivocally that the carnal mind is at enmity against 
God, and hence that God could not fellowship it or 
favor it in any sense or degree. The Apostle urges, 
then, that all remember that they who are in the flesh, 



who live in harmony with their fallen propensities, 
serving their fallen fleshly natures, are not pleasing 
God and that such an inclination or course leads toward, 
and, if persisted in, would end in death. 

He proceeds to reason that if the spirit [mind, 
disposition] of God [the spirit of holiness] dwell in us 
we cannot be in sympathetic accord with the fallen 
fleshly nature and its appetites and ambitions. We 
may know, on the contrary, that if any man have not 
the spirit of Christ he is not of the body of Christ at 
all, and not to be considered as identified with the 
elect Church,— and Christ's spirit is not a spirit of 
harmony with sin, but of opposition to sin, for did he 
not lay down his life to vanquish sin, and to deliver 
us from its power and dominion? Whoever, therefore, 
claims to have the spirit of Christ, but loves and 
wilfully practices sin, and with his mind serves sin, 
such an one deceives himself, for he has neither part 
nor lot in Christ. 

The Apostle proceeds further along the same line, 
arguing that our adoption into God's family, our begetting 
to newness of heart and mind, and our acceptance 
thus as members of the body of Christ, while it 
means, first of all, that the body is ignored and reckoned 
as dead, because of sin, and only our spirits or minds 
are reckoned righteous and alive, the beginning of 
our eternal existence, nevertheless this good condition 
is not to be considered the limit of our ambition and 
attainment in Christ-likeness. On the contrary, we 
are to remember that the spirit of God is powerful: 
that in the case of our Lord Jesus it was powerful 
enough to raise him from the dead; and as we become 
more and more imbued with and controlled by the 
holy spirit of God in our hearts, in our minds, divine 
power will come gradually to us through this channel 
of the holy spirit, which will permit a figurative raising 

R2721 : page 330 

of our mortal bodies from their death-state into 
activities of spiritual life, in the service of the Lord. 
"If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the 
dead dwell in you [in sufficient measure, aboundingly], 
he that raised up Christ from the dead shall 
also quicken [energize] your mortal bodies [not your 
immortal resurrection bodies] by his spirit that dwelleth 
in you." 

It is our hope that in due time the Lord by his 
spirit will give us new bodies in the resurrection; and 
that those new bodies will be immortal, perfect in 
every respect; and that then not only our minds, but 
our bodies also will be fully in harmony with God and 
his every law and work of righteousness. That will 
be glorious— it is already a glorious prospect; but the 
Apostle holds before us the thought that even our 
present mortal bodies, sentenced, then justified, then 



reckoned dead because of sin, consecrated, may be so 
quickened or energized now, that instead of being any 
longer servants of sin, or even merely dead to it, they 
may, under the careful watchfulness of the new mind, 
be used as servants of righteousness, of truth. This 
means, of course, a high Christian development, a 
large attainment of "the measure of the stature of the 
fulness of Christ." It is the measure or attainment, 
nevertheless, which every one of the Lord's people 
must continually strive after, and their success will 
be proportioned to their attainment of the mind [disposition] 

R2722 : page 330 

of Christ, holy conformity to the Father's 

will in all things. And how comforting, in this connection, 

is the promise of our Lord, that our heavenly 

Father is more willing to give the holy spirit [spirit of 

holiness] to them that ask him, than are earthly parents 

to give good gifts unto their children!— Luke 11:13. 



R2722 : page 330 

"UNTHANKFUL, UNHOLY." 

-LUKE 17:ll-19.-NOV. 18.- 

"Be ye thankful."-Col. 3:15. 

LEPROSY is a very prevalent disease in eastern 
lands, and amongst the Jews lepers were 
specially proscribed— separated from others— not allowed 
to have intercourse with their own families nor 
to come near anybody, but obliged to keep at a distance, 
and on the approach of a stranger to cry out, 
"Unclean! unclean!" From the standpoint of the Law 
it is evident that leprosy was meant to represent sin and 
its loathsome, contagious and consuming character. 
A traveler in the Orient writes: "As our traveling 
party passed out the western gate of Nablus, the site 
of ancient Sechem, a group of repulsive lepers greeted 
us with calls for help. They showed various forms of 
that terrible disease: the nose or the lips or a hand or 
a foot eaten away; the limbs distorted, and one case at 
least was a leper 'white as snow.' When we were fairly 
in our tents beyond the city westward, those lepers 
came, fifteen in all, and seated themselves afar off, in 
a semi-circle, facing our tents, with one of their number 
a little in advance of the others, holding out a dish 
for alms, and, as with one voice, they cried aloud to us 
to have pity on them and give them aid." Another 
writer describes leprous conditions thus: "The hair 
falls from the head and eyebrows; the nails loosen, decay 
and drop off; joint after joint of the fingers and 



toes shrink up and slowly fall away; the gums are absorbed 
and the teeth disappear; the nose, the eyes, the 
tongue and the palate are slowly consumed." 

The horrors and loathsomeness of leprosy and its 
contaminating qualities, both by heredity and infection, 
well illustrate the disease of sin, which has taken 
hold of the entire human family, and which separates 
and alienates from God and all that are pure and in 
harmony with him. The isolation of lepers was distinctly 
enjoined in the Law, but no cure or remedy was 
prescribed. The disease was treated from a religious 
standpoint, and in every case made amenable to the 
judgment of the priests: they decided whether or not 
a case of leprosy had developed, they banished the leper, 
and in the event of anything occurring to cure him, the 
priests must pass upon his cleansing before he would 
be readmitted to society. So, in the great malady of 
sin, God commits to the hands of the antitypical priesthood 
—Christ and the faithful under-priests now being 
selected from the world— the work of pronouncing and 
making manifest what is sin, as distinct and separate 
from what is righteousness, and thus to separate between 
the clean and the unclean, between those who 
are in harmony with God, and those who are out of 
harmony with him. And in the coming age, when 
the Royal Priesthood shall be glorified and in official 
power to bless the world with the knowledge of God 
and the knowledge of how to become free from sin and, 
through the merit of the precious blood, to attain to 
full restitution,— to purity and perfection of mind and 
heart and body,— it will be this Royal Priesthood that 
will have the deciding of when the purification has been 
complete— when sin has ceased to exist in the condemned, 
and they have been brought back into full 
harmony with God and righteousness. 

Travelers tell us that in the locality mentioned in 
our lesson— the borders of Samaria and Galilee— leprosy 
still abounds rather more than elsewhere; and that 
groups somewhat like the one described in our lesson, 
are frequently to be seen. This group stood afar off, 
as they were compelled by law to do; yet recognizing 
Jesus as the great Teacher, of whose miracles they had 
heard something, they conceived the hope that he might 
have compassion upon them and heal them of their 
loathsome disease. Therefore they lifted up their 

R2722: page 331 

voices together, crying, "Jesus, Master, have mercy on 
us." There is no doubt as to the meaning of their cry; 
altho they usually begged for money, they evidently 
now were seeking for healing from the great Physician. 

Hearing their voices Jesus turned compassionately 
toward them, and we can better imagine than describe 
the sympathy which he felt for them in their pitiable 
condition, and no doubt also his mind at the same time 



took in the thought of the great malady of sin, from 
which the whole world was suffering, and whose sufferings 
he had come to relieve, whose bonds he had come 
to break, by giving his own life a ransom price for 
theirs. Our Lord merely said to them, "Go show yourselves 
to the priests." This implied that the leprosy 
had ceased its ravages, and that they might expect to 
be pronounced free from contagion and permitted to 
return to their homes and families, even tho the maiming 
and marring occasioned by the ravages of the disease 
would still be with them. Thankful for such a release 
from their sufferings, the entire ten obediently hastened 
to comply with the injunction, but in the way they 
discovered that the blessing they had received from the 
Lord was not merely a staying of the disease, but a 
restoration to normal conditions. Their faith had 
brought them far more than they had expected. 

One of them turned back and prostrating himself 
before the Lord rendered homage and thanks to his 
deliverer. The other nine passed on to comply with 
our Lord's words, and to show themselves to the priests, 
not having a sufficiency of love, appreciation and thankfulness 
to return in their cleansed condition to, first of 
all, acknowledge the giver of the blessing they had received. 
Our Lord remarked this, and called attention 
also to the fact that the one who did return was a Samaritan, 
and not one of the Jewish household of faith; 
saying, "Were there none found that returned to give 
glory to God save this stranger?" And he said unto 
him, "Arise, and go thy way; thy faith hath made 
thee whole." 

Nothing is said in the record respecting any spiritual 
blessing or favor which came to the Samaritan whose 
thankfulness of heart led him to Jesus' feet in acknowledgement. 
We are not told that Jesus invited him to 
become one of his followers, nor that he received any 
spiritual blessing; indeed, we know that it was not 
possible that he could receive any spiritual blessing, 
because, being a "stranger," like all Gentiles, he was 
debarred from any share in divine favor until the full 
measure of favor was granted to the Israelites— Cornelius, 
three and a half years after our Lord's crucifixion, 
being the first Gentile to be received into favor, and 
that time being the earliest at which the favor might 
go to the Gentiles— the end of the "seventy weeks" of 
favor promised to Israel.-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. 
IL, pp.69-71. 

Neither are we told that the nine who received the 
favor of God without being moved at heart to return 
and render thanks were, because of their unthankfulness, 
in any degree deprived of the blessing already received. 
We can readily imagine, however, that their 
condition of heart would not be favorable to them in 
connection with a hearty acceptance of the Lord and 
the Kingdom privileges he was offering. We may reasonably 
suppose that if they were unmoved by so great 



a manifestation of divine love toward them, experienced 
in their own persons, they would be equally unmoved 
by any preaching of the Gospel which they might hear 
at any future time, either from the lips of Jesus or the 
apostles. We may even surmise that those nine never 
came into the Church of Christ. On the contrary, we 
would have good reason to hope for the Samaritan, 
whose gratitude manifested itself;— that his condition 
of heart was nearer to the Kingdom requirement, and 
that when subsequently the gospel of Christ was preached 
to Gentiles and Samaritans, this one would be a ready 
hearer and have a ready heart to receive the good message 
and to be healed from the moral leprosy of sin, 
and to come into harmony with God by presenting 
himself before the great High Priest of our profession, 
who died for our sins and who accepts as clean all who 
come unto the Father through him. Tho we have no 
record of it, we believe that the Samaritan was of the 
kind the Lord is now drawing and calling to sacrifice 
with Christ, and that receiving that message of the 
Kingdom he would be ready to lay down his life and 
become dead with Christ— presenting his body a living 
sacrifice unto God.— 1 John 3:16; Rom. 5:1,2. 

Viewed from this standpoint, thankfulness of heart 
is a very sure sign of the character God is seeking,— 
especially in matters pertaining to our great salvation. 
And we find parallels to this illustration all about us. 
We find those who have suffered from the leprosy of 
sin, and who have appealed to Jesus for mercy and 
help, and who have been justified by faith— cleansed 
from their iniquities, covered with the righteousness of 
Christ; and yet amongst all these who have experienced 
such blessings and favors at our Lord's hands how 
few, comparatively, there are who return to him and 
prostrate themselves before him, to offer thanks for release 
from the bondage of sin and condemnation, and 
lay themselves at his feet, living sacrifices— making a 
full consecration of themselves to the Lord, their reasonable 
service. (Rom. 12:1.) Only the truly thankful 
are constrained thus to do,— only the truly appreciative. 
As the Apostle declares of himself and all 
such, it is true that "The love of Christ constraineth 
[draweth, impelleth] us; for we thus judge that if one 
died for all then were all dead [yea, worse than dead 
in trespasses and sins and condemnation], and that we 

R2723 : page 332 

who live [justified to life through faith in his blood] 
should not henceforth live unto ourselves but unto him 
who died for us."— 2 Cor. 5:14. 

Unthankfulness is unholiness, lack of that proper 
appreciation which would lead to a full consecration 
of life and every interest and affair to the Lord— regardless 
of what reward he may bestow. The "exceeding 
great and precious promises" of God's Word are 



not given to inspire thankfulness and consecration, for 

they are given only to the thankful and consecrated 

who already have presented themselves living sacrifices 

to God. "To you it is given to know the mysteries 

of the Kingdom," "God hath revealed them unto 

us by his Spirit," which is granted only to the consecrated. 

These promises are to strengthen and nerve 

us and to enable us to "overcome," in fulfilment of 

our covenant of consecration.— 2 Pet. 1:4; Matt. 13:11; 

1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

Let us each and all seek and cultivate more and 
more the spirit of thankfulness, the "reasonable" spirit 
or disposition. Thankfulness will make every trial 
and sacrifice on our part seem small, and proportionately 
easy to be offered, and it will make all of God's 
mercies and favors toward us proportionately grand and 
great and inspiring. 



R2722 : page 332 

PROPER CHRISTIAN DAILY LIVING. 

TITUS 2:l-15.-NOV. 25. 

"We should live soberly, righteously, 
godly, in this present world." 

THE APOSTLE PAUL penned the words of our 
lesson, instructing Titus, an overseer (bishop) 
of the Church— ministering to the believers in the 
island of Crete. The instructions are not intended for, 
nor applicable to others than consecrated believers, and 
refer specifically to six classes in the Church at Crete. 
(1) The elderly men— not merely the aged, but rather 
the advanced, the matured, who doubtless oftenest 
would be also advanced in years. (2) The aged women 
—advanced, matured. (3) The younger women. (4) 
The younger men. (5) Those who, tho freemen in 
Christ, were bondmen according to the flesh,— servants. 
(6) To Titus himself. (7) The lesson ends with an 
exhortation applicable to all classes in the Church. 
Titus, as a preacher, should have before his mind 
a certain standard or ideal in respect to each class in 
the Church, and should as a wise workman labor to the 
attainment of that ideal, which the Apostle here brings 
clearly to his attention,— intimating that instructions 
along the lines here laid down are in fullest accord with 
"sound doctrine." It has been claimed by some that 
the people of Crete were specially degraded and lacking 
of good character, and that this thought is necessary to 
the Apostle in giving such an exhortation to those who 
had left the world and joined themselves to the Lord 
as his Church. We shall see, however, that every word 
of the exhortation is quite applicable to the Lord's people 



today, even tho they live under the most enlightened 
conditions. 

The Elderly Men, the advanced, were to be sober, 
grave, temperate (moderate)— not light, frivolous and 
excitable. Not only their years of natural life, but also 
their years of experience in Christian life, should bring 
them to conditions of maturity and sobriety. These 
three qualities would belong to a large extent to their 
mortal bodies, exercised and influenced by their new 
minds; but in addition to these there should be three 
other graces, characteristic of their new natures; viz., 
soundness in the faith, and in love, and in patience. 
It is of intention that the Apostle here emphasized (in 
the Greek) the faith, the love and the patience, for there 
are various faiths, various loves and various kinds of 
patience, and he meant to be understood as inculcating 
the faith, the love and the patience which are of God, 
and respecting which he is instructing his people through 
his Word, as it is written, "They shall be all taught 
of God." 

It was not by accident that the Apostle placed 
"sound in the faith" before "sound in love," for since 
love is one of the fruits or graces of the spirit of truth, 
and since one cannot receive much more of the spirit 
of the truth than he receives of the truth itself, therefore 
the importance of the truth, in the having of the 
sound faith. 

Often we are told it matters not what a man believes, 
but matters all how he does; but to this we answer 
that a sound faith is all-important, not only in shaping 
conduct, but also in inspiring it. It is only in proportion 
as we have the truth that we have the sanctifying 
power: in proportion as we hold errors which vitiate 
or nullify the truths which we hold, in that same proportion 
we will be lacking and deficient in the sanctifying 
power; and hence deficient also in the sanctification 
itself. We should ever remember and cooperate 
with our dear Redeemer's prayer to the Father on our 
behalf, "Sanctify them through thy truth; thy word is 
truth." 

Neither was it by accident that the Apostle placed 
love before patience; because, altho patience may be 
cultivated from a natural standpoint, as, for instance, 
in the interest of worldly aims and desires, nevertheless, 
such patience does not affect the heart, but is 
merely a forcing or curbing of the outside life, and when 
the force is removed there is a rebound as of a spring, 
to the original condition of impatience. The patience 
which will last and become an integral part of character 

R2722 : page 333 

must result from a change of heart: the mainspring 
of love must first replace the mainspring of 
selfishness. 
How grand the characters thus portrayed! We 



could not wish for more amongst the Lord's people of 
any place today than that the matured brethren should 
be sober-minded, dignified and moderate, with their 
new minds well stored with the sound faith of God's 
Word, and their hearts full of love, manifesting forth 
all of the various good qualities represented by this 
word,— kindness, meekness, gentleness, all of which 
might briefly be summed up in the word patience. We 
exhort all of the advanced brethren in the truth everywhere 
to note well this likeness of a matured man of 
God, well grown up into Christ, the living Head, and 
well conformed to his image; and we exhort that we 
all keep this image well before our minds, and make 
it our ideal in our Christian course. 

The Aged Women, matured, developed, have also a 
model set before them by the Apostle. They should 
be "reverent in demeanor" (Revised Version). They 
are supposed to have professed holiness, full consecration 
to the Lord, full desire to know and to do his will, 
and such consecration is to show out in their lives. 
The Apostle proceeds to mention a few of the ways in 
which it would be manifest. They will not be "slanderers" 
(Revised Version)— neither false accusers nor 
accusers in any slanderous sense of the word. On the 
contrary, as the Apostle shows further on, they will be 
examples in the matter of minding their own business. 
They will not be enslaved to much wine, but be teachers 
of that which is good, by precept as well as by example, 
to all with whom they have an influence. Naturally 
their influence will be greatest over the younger 
women, and it should be exercised as becometh women 
professing godliness, professing to be guided by the 
Word of the Lord, the spirit of the truth. 

The Younger Women should find ensamples in their 
elder saintly sisters, the influence of whom will not be 
in the direction of insubordination and a battle between 
the husband and wife in the home; and their advice 
will very rarely be, "Stand up for your rights;" "Give 
him a piece of your mind," etc. On the contrary, they 
will be peacemakers, and assist the younger women 
with such advice as will help to make home happy by 
obedience to the directions of the divine Word. Instead 
of helping to cultivate in the younger women the spirit 
of selfishness, which inheres naturally in every human 
being, through the fall, they will assist them, by both 
word and example, to cultivate the opposite spirit, the 
spirit of love— "to love their husbands and to love 
their children." 

If love were thus inculcated as the first law of every 
home, the chief of the Christian graces to be developed 
and practiced, it would indeed make a wide distinction 
between Christian homes and others; and thus, perhaps, 
better than in almost any other manner, the 
Christian mother can preach the glorious gospel of salvation, 
and illustrate in her own life and home its power 
to deliver from the bondage of sin and selfishness, even 



in this mortal state. 

They will learn from them also to be discreet, or 
sober-minded— not too emotional;— to do some sober 
thinking along sober lines, and thus to cultivate both 
heart and head, and to increase their own joys in the 
Lord as well as to prepare themselves the better for 
their family duties and privileges. Chastity, modesty, 
purity, should also be learned— an instruction deep and 
powerful in its influence for good; not only to the 
younger women themselves, but also in their families. 
They should learn to be "keepers at home," or "workers 
at home," as the Revised Version renders it, appreciating 
the fact that the duties of a wife and mother 

R2724 : page 333 

are chiefly home duties; that the home is her workshop 
and her pulpit, where her influence should be greatest 
and most valuable. 

They should also learn to be "obedient to their own 
husbands," or, as the Diaglott renders this, "submissive" 
—not attempting to usurp the place of the husband 
in the home, not keeping up a continual strife and battle 
about life's affairs, so that the husband will have 
one battle of life to win their daily bread and another 
battle while they eat it. By "obedience" and "submission" 
we do not understand the Apostle to mean 
blind obedience or dumb submission, nor in any sense 
of the word that the wife shall not enjoy fully all proper 
liberties and privileges; but that while enjoying these 
she shall use them with propriety, so as to make life a 
blessing and not a burden to her husband, with whom 
lie chiefly the responsibilities of the home, according to 
both divine and human law. 

As a Christian wife she should have a judgment 
respecting the Lord's will, as presented in the Lord's 
Word, respecting the affairs of the home, and all the 
interests of the family, and these views she should express, 
in love and moderation, and kindly, however 
emphatically; but having expressed her judgment respecting 
the Lord's will in the matter and the reasons 
therefor, she should be "submissive" to the decision 
of the husband (in all matters not involving her conscience); 
because, according to divine arrangement, the 
husband is the head of the wife as Christ is the Head of 
the Church— the final arbiter respecting family affairs. 

Should the Christian wife at times find that the 
pursuance of this Scriptural course had brought her 
disadvantages or were about to work ill to the general 
interests of the family, let her protest kindly, and point 
out to her husband, without "harping," what she foresees 
to be the results, and urge a change; pointing out 
(especially if the husband be not a Christian) that the 
responsibilities of the transaction lie wholly in his 
hands: and let her then console herself with the thought 
that she, at least, is following the divine direction, and 



that the ultimate result is sure to be a spiritual blessing, 
in harmony with the Lord's promise that all things 
shall work together for good to them that love him— 
and who demonstrate their love by obedience. Let her 
take the matter to the Lord in prayer, and "bear a song 
away." As the Apostle points out, this course is the 
one least likely to bring reproaches upon the cause we 
love and to which we have consecrated even life itself. 
To the Young Men of the Church the Apostle sends 

R2724 : page 334 

an exhortation that they be sober-minded— not rash, 
thoughtless, conceited— that they exercise self-control. 
And then, in view of the fact that Titus himself was 
a young man, he exhorts that he shall be a pattern to 
all the young men of the Church, and thus incidentally 
he exhorts all of the young men of the Church to note 
carefully and to be exercised by the qualities and considerations 
then urged upon Titus. 

Upon Titus the Apostle urges that he shall be a 
model man, a pattern of good works and soundness of 
doctrine; not permitting his teachings (doctrine) to be 
corrupted either with vain imaginations of his own or 
those of other people. He urges upon him, and thus 
incidentally upon all young men also, gravity, the opposite 
of frivolity, levity: as Christians we have something 
to occupy our minds that the world has not; and 
the greatness and grandeur of their hopes and ambitions, 
based upon the exceeding great and precious 
promises of the divine Word, should give to their lives 
and general conduct a weight which, like a good cargo 
in a vessel, would keep them from being top-heavy and 
prepare them to outride the storms and difficulties of 
life through which they must pass to reach the desired 
haven. 

Sound speech, with which no fault could be found, 
is another of the qualities that Titus and all of the 
Lord's people, especially the young men, are to strive 
for. Not merely sound speech in the sense of accurate 
and grammatical expression, but sound speech especially, 
in the sense of having their conversation and the 
influence which one exerts through conversation, of a 
truly helpful, strengthening kind— to mind and heart 
and character. Alas, how much of the conversation of 
even Christian young men is anything but sound, anything 
but helpful to themselves and their companions. 
Young men in Christ are to be copies of God's dear 
Son, so that by their common conversation as well as 
by their general demeanor they shall continually preach 
Christ and properly represent before the world his noble 
characteristics,— truth, righteousness, purity, gentleness, 
goodness, love. Sound speech cannot be condemned 
by anybody, friend or foe, heathen or Christian, 
saint or sinner; and, as the Apostle suggests, such a 
course will be a constant reproof to those enemies who 



must always be expected; in the face of such noble 
living they of the contrary part must surely be put to 
shame eventually. 

To Servants the Apostle sends a message also; and 
it was a very different message from what some of God's 
dear children, less wise than the Apostle in their understanding 
of the divine plan, would have given. 

Many of God's people of today, instead of being peace-makers 
are peace-disturbers, because of a failure to see 
properly the principles which underlie the Gospel, and 
their proper application in the present time. They exhort 
servants to "strike," to "stand up for their rights," 
to see that they are not "tramped upon," to "demand 
justice," and see that they get it. The Apostle, on the 
contrary, understanding God's plan, knew not to expect 
full justice, not to expect human rights or any 
others to have great consideration in the present time, 
because we are still in what he designates "this present 
evil world [dispensation];" because "the prince of this 
world [dispensation]" is Satan, and because his Kingdom 
of the present time is based upon neither love 
nor righteousness, but upon selfishness.— Gal. 1:4; 
John 14:30. 

The Apostle knew not to expect the wrongs to be 
righted and justice to be dispensed under Satan's administration, 
and hence in all of his teachings he points 
the believers to the coming time when the Lord, the 
righteous King, shall take possession of earth's governments, 
and fulfil that petition of our prayer, "Thy 
Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." Then justice may be expected, because 
justice is done in heaven; then all rights will be respected, 
as all rights are respected in heaven; but before 
that glorious condition shall obtain Emmanuel's 
Kingdom must be established and Satan, the prince of 
this world, must be bound, that he should deceive the 
nations no more, and that his rule of unrighteousness 
and selfishness shall be set aside, supplanted by the 
laws of him who shall lay justice to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet. -Rev. 20:1-3; Dan. 2:44; 
Isa. 28:17. 

The Apostle's exhortation to servants is in harmony 
with this, that they be obedient to their masters, 
and seek to please them well. They were not to be 
shiftless, careless, indifferent as to the prosperity of 
their masters' interests and the care of their masters' 
goods. They were to take as much interest in those 
things as tho they were their own;— as the Apostle elsewhere 
expresses it, they were to do their work as tho 
they were doing it to the Lord himself, faithfully, well. 
(1 Cor. 10:31.) Such service rendered to an earthly 
master "as unto the Lord," and because of a desire to 
please the Lord, and because of the indwelling of his 
truth and its spirit, will undoubtedly be accepted of 
the Lord as tho it were some service done directly in 
the interest of his cause, should the conditions of the 



servant hinder him from doing any work more particularly 
in the Lord's service and the service of the truth. 

Not only were servants to endeavor to please their 
masters and to please them well, but this in all things 
—in the little things as well as in the great affairs; and 
thus Christian servants would be recognized, wherever 
they might be, as different, distinct from others, too 
many of whom are "eye-servants," faithful merely under 
the eye of their employer. Such Christian servants 
will come to be recognized as jewels even by those who 
have no sympathy with their religious convictions, and 
possibly would constitute the most weighty sermons 
these could deliver. They might obey their masters 
and yet continually protest and complain; hence the 
Apostle adds a word on this point, saying, "Not answering 
again"— not gainsaying nor quarreling with 
the master over his methods and ways and work; not 
complaining of sharing the common lot of other servants, 
whatever that might be; preferably, indeed, letting 
others complain, and holding their peace, rather 
than stirring up strife,— and rather than have the cause 
they love and seek to serve ill thought of. 

Not purloining— secretly appropriating to themselves 
the master's goods, etc., contrary to his known 
wishes. And it might be not inappropriate here for 
us to remember that if the master should desire the 
servant to engage in some work that would be dishonest, 
morally wrong, this would be a proper ground upon 
which the servant should object and protest. His 
conscience must be preserved in every matter that properly 

R2725 : page 335 

belongs to his conscience; but he may not busybody 
himself with the master's affairs in matters which belong 
to the master's conscience, and with which the 
servant has nothing to do. By his own strict integrity 
even in the smallest things he shall do his preaching 
and exercise his influence upon his master, "showing 
all fidelity," faithfulness to his master's interests. 

The effect of all knowledge is to render the intelligent 
restive under restraints, and as Christian knowledge 
is the highest form of knowledge, it more than any 
other tends to restlessness. It inculcates the thought 
that however widely different the conditions between 
the king and the peasant as respects men and earthly 
things, they really are on a par as respects morals,— 
on the same level from the standpoint of divine justice. 
This thought once received into the humblest mind 
destroys very much of the veneration which otherwise 
might be felt toward those in earthly authority. It is 
an uplifting thought to the poor, that before the great 
King of all the earth they stand on the same footing 
with the richest, the most learned and the most powerful 
of earth;— that whether rich or poor "A man is a 
man for all that." It causes them to realize that a 



man has a man's rights, and that these are more than 
animal rights, that they include liberty of mind and 
conscience and certain liberties of conduct. 

It is this very enlightenment which Christianity 
has brought to the world which is about to cause it the 
great convulsion and revolution which shall overthrow 
all present institutions in anarchy. The Christian servant 
is to be more than merely an enlightened man: 
he is a man consecrated to God as well; one who has 
surrendered his "rights" to the will of God, and who, 
having placed himself in the Lord's hands to be taught 
of God, and to be fitted and prepared for the heavenly 
Kingdom, is full of faith that the Lord is both able and 
willing to keep the trust, to safeguard his interests, and 
to permit nothing to come upon him that shall not be 
overruled for his spiritual development and welfare. 

The true Christian servant (and all Christians must 
be servants if like their Master— Phil. 2:7) thus consecrated, 
realizes that under divine providence he is 
not to expect his rights in the present time, nor to strive 
for them; but that, on the contrary, he sacrifices them 
to the will of God— to the doing of the Lord's will so 
far as he may have opportunity, and to the having of 
the Lord's will done in him according to the Lord's 
wisdom and providence. If oppressed and dealt with 
unjustly, he will look to the Lord for deliverance, and 
whatever way it shall come will accept it as of divine 
arrangement; and whatever God does not provide in 
the way of deliverance along reasonable and just lines 
he will accept as the rulings of his providence, and render 
to the Lord thanks for his watch-care and seek to 
learn the lessons of patience and experience and long-suffering, 
which these trials may inculcate; recognizing 
in such a case that these trials, from whomsoever they 
come, are permitted of the Lord if not ordered by him, 
and intended for his welfare and spiritual development. 

Such Christian servants, and such Christians in 
any walk of life, are the only ones who know what contentment 
really is. Others are striving for the attainment 
of rights and for the correction of wrongs, and 
are only cultivating more and more the spirit of selfishness 
in their own hearts, and generally causing themselves 
the more trouble and discontent. Only the Christian 
can say, 

"Content, whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis God's hand that leadeth me," 
and he can only take this position by the exercise of a 
living faith, and can only exercise such a living faith 
in life's affairs after he has made a consecration of himself 
to the Lord, and can only make such a consecration 
of himself after he has come to some knowledge of the 
divine character and plan. Such servants, the Apostle 
assures us, adorn the doctrine of God our Savior. They 
show that it is not a doctrine of strife, but of peace and 
of good-will toward men, not a doctrine merely of personal 
rights and of selfish strife for their attainment, 



but a doctrine of love, joy and peace in the holy spirit. 

WHY THE CHRISTIAN SHOULD LIVE SEPARATE FROM 
THE WORLD. 

After recounting to us as above the proper course 
for the various classes in the Church, the Apostle proceeds 
to give the logical reason for the above advice, 
saying: "For [because] the grace of God hath appeared, 
bringing salvation to all men."— Revised Version. 

When did God's grace appear thus? We answer, not 
until the Gospel began to be preached after our Redeemer's 
death and resurrection. For four thousand 
years the grace of God did not appear, was not manifest 
in any sense of the word. The Law Covenant was 
to the Jew only, and it was not of grace but the reverse 
—of law and of justice. At very most this "grace of 
God" was prophesied of, that it would appear later, 
and that blessings would follow upon all the families 
of the earth. It has not yet appeared to all men, but 
more properly this would be rendered "for all men," 
since God's grace is intended to apply to every man- 
as widely as did the curse apply. 

In the present time the majority of mankind do 
not see the grace of God,— it does not appear to them. 
More than four-fifths of the human family are totally 
blind to this grace, in heathen darkness, today, and of 
the one-fifth who have seen something of this grace 
divine, the vast majority have seen it so obscurely, so 
dimly, as not to be able to discern its beauties or appreciate 
its value. Blessed are our eyes if they have seen. 
In the Apostle's day, and still in our day, this grace of 
God has appeared "to all men," in the sense that it is 
no longer in any sense of the word confined to the Jew, 
but is now open to Jew and to Gentile alike, the middle 
wall of partition having been broken down, as the 
Apostle explains. 

In what does this grace of God consist? We answer 
with the Apostle, It is God's favor that has been announced 
and manifested as the basis of reconciliation 
—not man's righteousness. God tells us through his 
Word that he himself has provided the great sacrifice 
for sins, demanded by his own law, that Jesus has met 
the penalty in full on our behalf; and that as a result 
we may be reconciled to God now, and he can justly 
and without violence to his laws receive us whom he 
had previously condemned to death. And this receiving 
of us signifies a restoration of his favor; and the 
restoration of his favor, if rightly received by us, will, 
under his providence, bring us to such conditions as 
will effect our salvation, our full delivery from sin and 

R2725 : page 336 

death, and imperfection, into the full life and perfection 
and liberty of the sons of God. 



This applies to the Church being elected from the 
world during this Gospel age, and the same will apply 
to the world of mankind in general as they shall be 
blessed of God through the elect Church in the Millennial 
age. God's grace in the present time is manifested 
in connection with the "high calling" to the divine 
nature and the life immortal connected therewith. His 
grace in the Millennial age will be manifested in connection 
with the "restitution" blessings which will be 
offered to all mankind, and the earthly life-everlasting 
which will be granted to all those who then come into 
harmony with the terms of that grace. 

What has the grace of God to do with us? And why 
should it lead to such a revolution in our conduct and 
character as the Apostle has just intimated? Because, 
says the Apostle, this grace of God, by which we are 
called to salvation, teaches us something: it teaches us 
that the way of reconciliation back to God's favor is a 
way of self-denial,— denying everything that is ungodliness, 
everything that is contrary to our highest conception 
of the divine character and will; the denying 
also of every worldly love or desire or ambition— ambition 
for worldly influence, for the riches of this world; 
and that instead of aiming and striving for these things, 
we who desire the salvation which God promises are to 
live to the contrary of these, "soberly, righteously, 
godly [God-like], in this present world"— not expecting 
worldly honors and advantages under the reign of 
"the prince of this world," who not only had no interest 
in our Master, but likewise no friendly interest in 
any who follow in his footsteps. 

But if we are thus to live self denyingly in this 
world (age) that we may attain to the grace of God in 
the next world (age)— "the world to come"— what are 
we to have before our minds in the nature of a prospect 
or hope toward which we are to look with longing and 
interest and comfort of heart? Ah! the Apostle tells 
us what. He holds up before us the grand consideration 
toward which all of our ambitions are to turn, in 
which all of our hopes are to centre, and in which our 
hearts are to find their treasure, outweighing and outvaluing 
every earthly consideration. He thus describes 
this hope,— 

LOOKING FOR THAT BLESSED HOPE AND THE APPEARING 
OF THE GLORY OF OUR GREAT GOD AND SAVIOR 
JESUS CHRIST.-Revised Version. 

This is to be the centre of our expectations. We 
are not to hope for blessing this side of the manifestation 
of God's Kingdom. We are to note that this Kingdom 
must come before God's will can be done on earth 
as it is done in heaven. We are to know that this Kingdom 
must bind Satan and overthrow his institutions, 
based upon selfishness, before it can supplant these 
with new institutions of justice and truth based upon 



the grand principle of love. Whoever, therefore, has 
been blessed with the grace of God, and has had the eyes 
of his understanding opened by the Word of truth, and 
its spirit, finds its teachings to be that these blessings 
of salvation are to be "brought unto us at the revelation 
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ" (1 Pet. 1:13), and 
that our chief object in the present life is to fight a good 
fight against self and against sin, and in defence of 
righteousness and in the assistance of the household of 
faith; and not to fight for earthly rights nor to strive 
for earthly honors and riches,— the warfare and strife 
in which the whole world, except ourselves, is almost 
exclusively engaged. If the Lord's saints possess talents 
or influence or wealth, these are not their treasures, 
but merely their servants, and they are not the possessors 

R2726 : page 336 

of these, but merely the stewards, whose privilege 
it is to use them as best they may know how, in the 
Master's service, and to the forwarding of the interests 
of righteousness in the preparation of themselves and 
others for his appearing and Kingdom. 

The Apostle speaks of our Lord Jesus as "our great 
God and Savior," and this is in full accord with the 
general teachings of the Scriptures. Our Lord Jesus is 
a mighty one, a great one amongst the mighty ones, 
and as our Lord himself declares, all should "honor the 
Son even as they honor the Father."— John 1:1; 5:22. 

The Apostle presents in another consideration why 
we should be exercised by this blessed hope of the 
Lord's second coming and our gathering together to him 
as his elect Church. It is not merely that we should 
think of life everlasting and glory in which we might 
share; but that we should think also that this One coming 
in glory, and to whom we hope to be joined everlastingly, 
as members of the Bride, to the Bridegroom, 
—is no other than he who gave himself for us, who sacrificed 
his own life in our redemption. We are to remember, 
too, that he not only redeemed us from the 
penalty of sin, death, but that the redemption which 
he purposes and provides is more than a redemption 
from iniquity, from sin. We are to remember also 
that this purging away of sin and the instruction and 
cleansing which the Word of truth is to do for us, as 
the Apostle has foregoing set forth, is to the intent that 
by these means the Lord may "purify unto himself a 
peculiar people"— a people different from others, possessed 
of a special love for that which is just, that which 
is pure, that which is noble, that which is good; and 
who, despite the imperfections of their mortal bodies, 
are striving to cultivate these graces more and more in 
their hearts, and to keep their bodies in subjection. 
Moreover, says the Apostle, these peculiar people will 
be "zealous of good works," earnestly desirous and 
striving to do good unto all men as they have opportunity, 



physically, mentally, morally,— and especially 
to do good to the household of faith. 

The Apostle's exhortation, in conclusion, is that 
Titus shall speak and exhort the Church along these 
lines which he has laid down, reproving them, whenever 
necessary (in love and gentleness, and yet with 
full authority, not doubting as to the meaning of the 
divine instruction). He was to let no man despise 
him, in the sense that he was to declare these principles 
of righteousness governing the Lord's people in a plain, 
positive and authoritative manner. He was to speak 
with authority and not as with uncertainty and questioning. 
And so let us speak, each and all, to ourselves 
and to others, setting forth the principles of the 
salvation which has appeared to us, with no uncertain 
sound, that thus we may minister grace to the hearers 
and glorify our Father in heaven and our Redeemer 
and Deliverer. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 


