From Our Readers
The Elderly  I need to thank you for the August 8, 1993, Awake! article “Growing Old With Understanding.” The article brought tears to my eyes. You see, my mom is nearly 90. Recently she decided to go outside alone, although she is not supposed to do so, and fell and broke her arm. She has healed well but cannot be left alone. I haven’t been able to attend some Christian meetings, and at times I feel as if I’m letting Jehovah down. But you have given me much support. When I get depressed, I think of this article.
B. T., United States
Forgiveness  I have just finished reading the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint . . . How Complete Is God’s Forgiveness?” (December 8, 1993) It was truly what I needed. This article helped me to see that when our God removes sins, they are gone, blotted out, washed away. As I write this letter, I feel real peace of mind.
J. W., United States
It was comforting to know that Jehovah sees the heart and that he is willing to blot out our sins. I used to feel so unworthy of Jehovah’s forgiveness that I became depressed. I even thought of suicide. Close friends in the congregation have helped me. But I still need reassurance, and this article helped me.
K. H., United States
Eyeglasses  Thank you very much for the article “A Look at Eyeglasses.” (July 8, 1993) I knew I had a problem with my eyes and that I should visit an eye specialist, but I kept putting it off. After reading your article, I made an appointment. I am happy I did so. This article came at the right time for me.
J. W., England
Faithful Father and Son  I read the story “My Father’s Faithful Example” without pausing. (December 22, 1993) This article has encouraged me to do more in God’s service. The firm determination of the Daveys (both father and son), to serve Jehovah until death, has revived the determination I had when I was baptized two years ago at the age of 18. I hope that articles like this may touch the hearts of many other youngsters the world over.
C. M., Italy
Butterflies  I want to take this opportunity to thank you for the article “A Day in the Life of a Butterfly.” (October 8, 1993) My wife and I were enjoying some relaxation in Zion National Park last month. We were reading this article together when suddenly a butterfly landed on the ground and stretched his wings out flat. We had never known before why they did that! The article really helped us to appreciate the wonders of Jehovah’s creation.
C. B., United States
Moody Parents  I appreciated the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Are My Parents So Moody?” (November 8, 1993) My mother has been moody lately. The article really helped me to understand that economic difficulties, along with other responsibilities, are the big contributors to her moodiness. Now I am going to help out more when I can and hug her and tell her that I love her.
T. B., United States
We are the parents of two boys, ages 7 and 12. Several of the issues you raised in this article have come up in our household recently, and we have been trying​—unsuccessfully—​to explain things to our boys. This article has truly been an answer to our prayers. It has already helped our situation.
R. P. and A. P., United States

