God’s Word Is Alive
You Are Not Alone
HAVE you ever been discouraged because of believing that no one shared your sentiments? Has it been difficult for you to take a firm stand for what you thought to be right when everyone else opposed you? Did you feel all alone?
The Hebrew prophet Elijah had such an experience after witnessing a miraculous display of divine power. In answer to his prayer, fire came down from heaven and consumed his water-soaked offering and the altar. This proved to all onlookers, including King Ahab, that Jehovah was indeed the true God, whereas Baal was incapable of answering the appeal of 450 of his prophets. At Elijah’s direction, these prophets were slaughtered. Still another prayer of his was answered when a great downpour ended a long drought.​—1 Ki. 18:21-45.
With God’s spirit upon him, Elijah ran ahead of Ahab’s chariot, arriving at Jezreel before the king got there. When Queen Jezebel heard from her husband about what Elijah had done to the Baal prophets, she sent out this word: “So may the gods do, and so may they add to it, if at this time tomorrow I shall not make your soul like the soul of each one of them!”​—1 Ki. 18:46–19:2.
In fear, Elijah fled with his attendant. Leaving him behind at Beer-sheba, the prophet continued his flight, finally arriving at Horeb in the Sinai Peninsula. There he entered a cave to spend the night, and Jehovah God put this question to him: “What is your business here, Elijah?” Discouraged, he replied: “The sons of Israel have left your covenant, your altars they have torn down, and your prophets they have killed with the sword, so that I only am left; and they begin looking for my soul to take it away.”​—1 Ki. 19:3-10.
But was Elijah really alone in serving Jehovah? No. Unknown to him, a remnant of faithful Israelites existed. The word of Jehovah to him was: “I have let seven thousand remain in Israel, all the knees that have not bent down to Baal, and every mouth that has not kissed him.” (1 Ki. 19:18) In yet another way Elijah was not alone. He had the backing of Jehovah God and a host of mighty angels.​—Compare 2 Kings 6:15-17.
Hence, when we feel all alone, we do well to recall that there are many others who are faithfully enduring under similar trials and that we are under the watchcare of mighty spirit persons. We can take to heart the Bible’s encouragement: “The same things in the way of sufferings are being accomplished in the entire association of your brothers in the world.” (1 Pet. 5:9) “The angel of Jehovah is camping all around those fearing him, and he rescues them.”​—Ps. 34:7.
[Map on page 29]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
(1 mile = c. 1.6 kilometers)
MT. CARMEL
c. 20 miles
JEZREEL
c. 85 miles
BEER-SHEBA
c. 200 miles
HOREB

