Conducting a Home Bible Study
1 How is an effective home Bible study conducted? What basic example do we have? How can scriptures in the study material be considered? Who should read the paragraphs? In addition to the basic procedure for conducting a study, what more is needed to help the student make the truth his own? What pitfalls must be avoided?
2 How to Conduct a Study: Generally speaking, a home Bible study follows the pattern of the Watchtower Study. First, the paragraph to be considered is read. Then the one conducting the study asks the printed question on that paragraph and allows the student to answer. If the student hesitates, the conductor should be prepared to ask leading questions that will cause the student to reason on the subject matter and arrive at a proper conclusion.
3 Consider how the scriptures apply to the material in the paragraph. Show the student how to identify quoted scriptures, and reason with him on how they apply. If scriptures are cited but not quoted, it is good to look them up in the Bible, provided they are not too long. Then allow the student to read them and to comment on how they support or clarify what is stated in the paragraph.
4 Help the Student Make the Truth His Own: Encourage students to prepare well for the study. Emphasize that reading is vital to learning. The more study material the student reads and meditates on, the better. Some conductors have the student do all the reading of the paragraphs during the Bible study. Others alternate with the student in reading the paragraphs. Good judgment should be used, keeping in mind the spiritual advancement of the student.
5 Covering the study material in an academic manner may help the student take in knowledge, but does he believe what he is learning? If he is to make the truth his own, he must see how the material affects him personally. How does he feel about what he is learning? How can he use what he has learned? Use searching questions to reach the student’s heart.
6 Avoid Pitfalls: There are pitfalls to avoid when conducting a Bible study. When subjects come up that are not related to the material being considered, it is usually best to discuss them at the conclusion of the study or on another occasion. Also, it is important to have the student give answers in his own words rather than read them from the book. This will help you as the conductor to determine whether the student is understanding the material.
7 Why not make it your goal to conduct at least one Bible study? It is not a difficult task if you rely on Jehovah and follow the basic procedure of the Watchtower Study. The most effective way to teach the truth to others and make disciples is by conducting a home Bible study. By doing this, you too can experience the joy that comes from having a full share in fulfilling Jesus’ command at Matthew 28:19, 20.

