Demonstrating Impartiality in Our Ministry
1 “God is not partial,” stated Peter, but “the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) Our ministry today is carried on in full recognition of that clearly stated truth. Therefore, it is important that we make every effort to overcome any barrier that would impede our reaching everyone with the good news.
2 When we preach from house to house in some areas, it is not unusual to find people who do not speak or understand the language used in our congregation. The language barrier prevents some people from benefiting fully from the Kingdom message we are preaching. Among these are the deaf, who communicate by sign language. What can be done to help overcome the language barrier that prevents us from reaching these people effectively with the good news?
3 In 1991 the Society sent a supply of form S-70a, Foreign Language Follow-​up Slip, to all congregations in the United States. The purpose of this slip is to help ensure that people who do not speak the language of the congregation in whose territory they live, including people who use sign language, are afforded opportunity to receive the Kingdom message in their own language.
4 When you find someone in the territory who is deaf or someone who does not understand the language used by the congregation, you should legibly fill out one of these slips. This should be done even if the person does not manifest interest in the truth. You may not always be able to get the name of the person, but you should list the address and the language he speaks. The slip may be deposited in the box for field service reports at the Kingdom Hall. The secretary will collect the slips, check them for accuracy and legibility, and send them to the nearest congregation or group that cares for people who speak the language listed.
5 In some cases this may not be necessary. For example, most Spanish-​language congregations in the United States likely know where the Spanish-​speaking people live in the territory. On the other hand, people who speak a certain language may be widely scattered. The congregation or group using such a language may be required to cover vast territories and would appreciate assistance in locating the people they may be able to help.
6 If there is no congregation or group in the general area that can give a witness in the language needed, there may be a publisher in one of the local congregations who knows the language and could handle the call. If no one is found who speaks the language even after consulting with the city overseer, the local brothers should do the best they can to see that a witness is given. The brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! has proved to be very helpful under such circumstances.
7 Each publisher should be alert to use the follow-​up slips as needed. If the congregation does not have a supply of form S-70a, the required information may be written on a small sheet of paper and turned in as described above. By putting forth earnest effort to reach all people with the good news regardless of their language, we will be reflecting the love of our God, Jehovah, “whose will is that all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”​—1 Tim. 2:4.

