Divine Teaching Exerts Powerful Influence
1 How privileged we are to receive instruction from the Divine One, our Creator, Jehovah God! (Ps. 50:1; Isa. 30:20b) Out of all nations today, multitudes are streaming to his mountain of pure worship to be taught by him. (Mic. 4:2) Millions of others enroll in schools that exalt human thinking and worldly wisdom. But the wisdom that ignores Jehovah and his written Word is foolish in the sight of God, and those who are led by it become senseless.​—Ps. 14:1; 1 Cor. 1:25.
2 This past summer at our district convention, we experienced in a unique way the power of divine teaching. The theme “Divine Teaching” permeated the entire program. We learned that God’s Word together with his spirit unites us in a worldwide brotherhood, shapes our personalities, protects us from teachings of demons, and trains us to be better ministers. How have you personally benefited from divine teaching?
3 Effect on Christian Living: Divine teaching helps to mold our consciences. Everyone is born with a conscience, but in order for it to guide us in the way of righteousness and in service that is pleasing to Jehovah, it must be trained. (Ps. 19:7, 8; Rom. 2:15) People of the world have not molded their thinking according to God’s Word, and for that reason they are confused and uncertain as to what is right and what is wrong. Controversies rage over moral and ethical issues because each one insists on doing what is right in his own eyes. The majority want total freedom to decide their own life course. They refuse to heed the only source of true wisdom. (Ps. 111:10; Jer. 8:9; Dan. 2:21) But divine teaching has resolved such issues for us, and we remain united as the household of God because we are taught by him. We confidently face the future with a good conscience, keeping busy in our ministry.
4 Divine teaching helps us resist “every wind of teaching.” (Eph. 4:14) We are not enamored with the study of philosophy, which makes people faultfinders and skeptics, encourages self-​determination, and leads to moral breakdown. We delight to be taught by Jehovah, and thus we avoid the sorrow and heartache experienced by many. Jehovah’s laws and reminders are like ‘a word behind us,’ saying: “This is the way. Walk in it, you people.”​—Isa. 30:21.
5 Our Meetings and Ministry: We view Hebrews 10:23-25 as a command from God. At the congregation meetings, we are taught by Jehovah. Is it our custom always to be present at meetings, or do we view meeting attendance as a low priority? Remember, meeting together is part of our worship. It should not be regarded as optional. We cannot afford to miss any part of the spiritual feeding program that Jehovah has prepared for us.
6 Moses prayed to God: “Show us just how to count our days in such a way that we may bring a heart of wisdom in.” (Ps. 90:12) Is this also our prayer? Do we appreciate each precious day? If we do, then we will “bring a heart of wisdom in” by spending each day in a worthwhile way, to the glory of our Grand Instructor, Jehovah God. Divine teaching will help us to do that.

