Give Attention to Interest Found
1 When we distribute our magazines and other theocratic publications, we are spreading abroad the message that Jesus Christ proclaimed. We should therefore make a special effort to call back on everyone who shows interest.
2 If you highlighted a specific article in Awake! that interested the householder, develop additional points from the article when you return, centering your conversation around one key scripture and perhaps one or two paragraphs. If there is continued interest, point out that Awake! benefits the entire family. Each issue deals with a variety of subjects, such as the environment, self-​improvement, coping with today’s problems, and questions that concern young people. When genuine interest is shown, let the householder know that Awake! is available by subscription and that he may receive 12 issues over a period of six months.
3 What if the householder is not interested in any of the articles in the current issue of Awake!? Rather than ending the conversation, you might take advantage of this opportunity to teach the householder more about the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses by using the information on page 206 of the Reasoning book.
4 If you previously placed an issue of “The Watchtower” by using 2 Timothy 3:1-5 and highlighting information on page 2 of the magazine, when returning you may say something like this:
▪ “In our previous conversation, we discussed the meaning of what’s happening around us in the world today. Many people appear to have lost interest in God and in his standards for living as set forth in the Bible. This has greatly influenced the attitude of people toward one another, as described in the scripture at 2 Timothy 3:1-5. Do you think that there is sound reason to expect better conditions in the future?” After allowing for comment, you may direct attention to 2 Peter 3:13. Then turn to pages 227-33 in the Reasoning book, and highlight what the Kingdom will do for mankind.
5 On the return visit, you may discern that the householder is reluctant to discuss his religion, feeling that it is a very personal matter. You could say something similar to this:
▪ “With so many religions in a world that gets smaller and smaller by virtue of ever faster travel and communication, the impact of various faiths is felt worldwide, whether we like it or not. Therefore, understanding one another’s viewpoints may lead to more meaningful communication between people of different faiths. It may dissipate some of the hatred that is based on religious beliefs. What do you think?” After allowing for comment, direct the householder’s attention to the table of contents in the book Mankind’s Search for God.
6 Let us put forth every effort to call back on all who show interest in the truth and help them on the path that leads to eternal life.​—John 4:23, 24.

