Service Meetings for October
Week Starting October 4
Song 225
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Suggest ways current magazines may be used in local territory. Emphasize importance of calling back on all magazine placements with the purpose of starting magazine routes. When householders prove to be genuinely interested, subscriptions may be offered.
15 min: “Do You Respect Your Place of Worship?” Talk by elder based on article in June 15, 1993, Watchtower. Apply information to local circumstances. If there is a particular problem to be addressed, tactfully give appropriate counsel.
20 min: Intensify Your House-​to-​House Ministry During October. Service overseer or another qualified brother discusses with audience the importance of house-​to-​house ministry. Versatile literature offer for October allows for great variety of presentations. Demonstrate: (1) Publisher initiates conversation that will lead into an article in current Awake! or Watchtower. Depending on interest manifested by householder, publisher may offer latest magazines or give person a tract. (2) Publisher initiates conversation with thought of leading into book Mankind’s Search for God. According to circumstances, publisher may offer book or decide to offer two magazines. (3) Publisher uses a tract to initiate an informal conversation and then offers current magazines to the interested person. (4) Publisher making magazine-​route call decides to offer a subscription. Such versatility should encourage all publishers to intensify their house-​to-​house ministry during October. No doubt some in congregation will be serving as auxiliary pioneers this month. It may not be too late for others to enroll who are in a position to do so.
Song 42 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 11
Song 4
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Read contribution acknowledgments, and commend congregation for generous support of worldwide work as well as caring for material needs of local congregation. Briefly review field service arrangements for the week, and express appreciation for zealous support of publishers.
15 min: “Using Our Magazines From House to House.” Discussion with audience. We have good reason to be enthusiastic in presenting the magazines to people we meet in field service and those we witness to informally. Although the magazines are dated and the latest issues should be featured on Magazine Day, we need not hesitate to offer older magazines when the occasion warrants. Just be sure that the magazines you offer are clean and not damaged. Have qualified publisher demonstrate presentation outlined in paragraph 4.
20 min: “Divine Teaching Exerts Powerful Influence.” Question-​and- answer coverage of article. Read paragraphs and cited scriptures as time permits. Allow for brief comments that express personal appreciation for benefits received from attending convention and using convention releases.
Song 44 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 18
Song 65
 5 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News.
15 min: “Demonstrating Impartiality in Our Ministry.” Questions and answers. Highlight aspects of this subject that are of particular concern in local territory.
15 min: “Give Attention to Interest Found.” A talk with some questions directed to audience. Demonstrate how publishers have developed interest in local territory, or have publisher relate recent experience that shows value of calling back on those who have accepted individual copies of Awake! and The Watchtower.
10 min: Local needs or a stirring talk on “The Early Christians and the World,” based on first article in the July 1, 1993, issue of The Watchtower. Highlight need for us today to imitate example of the early Christians.
Song 60 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 25
Song 75
10 min: Local announcements. Include field service arrangements for week, and call attention to points in current magazines that publishers can use in field service in days ahead. If time permits, briefly demonstrate one or two presentations that would be appropriate for local territory. Give reminders of the need to call back on all who have manifested interest.
15 min: Be Prepared to Comfort Mourning Ones (based on pages 102-4 of Reasoning book). (3 min.) Brother handling this part points out that Jehovah’s Witnesses do not reject all customs that are associated with death. (5 min.) Demonstrate how a Witness would explain to a coworker why Jehovah’s Witnesses avoid certain traditional customs of mourning for the dead, basing discussion on Reasoning book, pages 102-3. (7 min.) Discuss with audience portion under “If Someone Says—” on pages 103-4.
20 min: “Conducting a Home Bible Study.” Question-​and-​answer coverage of article. Present well-​rehearsed demonstration of publisher helping student understand how cited scripture supports information in paragraph being considered. In same demonstration publisher uses auxiliary questions to help student make the truth his own. Use selected portion of United in Worship or Live Forever book.
Song 78 and concluding prayer.

