Using Our Magazines From House to House
1 The purpose of Awake! is stated clearly on page 4 of each issue: “This magazine builds confidence in the Creator’s promise of a peaceful and secure new world before the generation that saw the events of 1914 passes away.” Certainly such a magazine deserves as wide a distribution as possible in our house-​to-​house ministry!
2 Awake! is an excellent avenue for arousing the interest of people who may not be spiritually inclined. When reading each issue, look for appropriate points to share with others. Some publishers make notes in their personal copy, and before going in field service with that particular issue, they review the notations in order to have specific points in mind to share with householders.
3 We may choose to begin our presentation by making a pointed comment on a subject discussed in the issue of Awake! we are using.
If the householder shows interest, we can introduce the magazine, perhaps by saying:
▪ “This Awake! article goes into more detail on the subject.” Then read a previously selected sentence or two, and continue: “Since you seem to be interested in this subject, would you like to read this article as well as the other timely articles in this issue of Awake!? If so, I would be happy to leave it and its companion magazine, The Watchtower, with you.” If the householder accepts the magazines, it may be appropriate to say something like this: “Our work is done worldwide and is supported by voluntary donations. If you wish to make a small donation today, I will be pleased to accept it.”
4 If the householder plainly expresses an interest in spiritual things, we might refer to a scripture, such as 2 Timothy 3:1-5 about the last days. After that, in order to arouse his interest in our magazines, we could read directly from page 2 of the current issue of The Watchtower the portion that begins: “The purpose of The Watchtower.” Afterward, offer him the current issues of The Watchtower and Awake!
5 In some territories where people seem interested in specific religions, rather than feature the magazines, you might say:
▪ “In this community, we meet people who practice various religions quite different from our own. Mankind’s search for God has taken many different directions. [Read Acts 17:26, 27.] Do you agree that people generally follow the religion of their parents, rather than search for God themselves? [Allow for comment.] That is the point made in the first chapter of this book, Mankind’s Search for God. [Highlight information in paragraph 12 on page 8.] Learning more about other religions is both enlightening and educational. This book explains the origin, practices, and teachings of the major religions of the world.” As time allows, show the householder the list of chapters and one or two illustrations in the book.
6 As we go from house to house, let us remember that we have two of the finest instruments in the world for helping people make spiritual progress, The Watchtower and Awake! May we work at stimulating the interest of householders in these magazines and placing them at every opportunity.

