A Loving Provision to Help Us
1 The Christian congregation in the first century prospered spiritually and expanded rapidly. Why? The Bible shows that one of the outstanding factors was the provision for traveling overseers to visit congregations. These visits helped the congregations to be “made firm in the faith and to increase in number.”—Acts 15:22; 16:4, 5.
2 There is no less need for such help today. Surely we appreciate that we are in the last days foreshadowed by the climactic events of the first century. More than ever we need to be made firm in the faith and encouraged to continue making public declaration of our hope. In addition to the loving assistance being given by local elders, circuit overseers are sent to help us congregationally and individually to be strong. But you may ask, “How can the visit of the circuit overseer help me personally?”
HOW HE HELPS US
3 He is an elder with spiritual qualifications. He has experience in dealing with a variety of problems and may be able to offer helpful suggestions that will assist you in some way. His example in wise use of his time and energy may well motivate you toward stronger appreciation and whole-heartedness. Perhaps some of his comments in personal conversation will help you to develop a deeper, warmer relationship with Jehovah. Having an “interchange of encouragement” will likely aid you to be made more firm in the faith.—Rom. 1:11, 12.
4 His schedule of activity with the congregation is planned with your spiritual interests in mind. His Bible-based talks may help you to understand better its teachings and see how its principles can be applied in your everyday life. He gladly takes time to give you kindly encouragement if he sees that you are depressed. Counsel may be needed; he will be glad to give that, too, with genuine concern for your welfare and, above all, your relationship with Jehovah. By word and example he will endeavor to help you to appreciate your blessings, privileges and responsibilities more fully.
5 Additionally, you benefit indirectly in many ways from the help he gives to the elders. Profitable discussion on a variety of congregation matters makes his meeting with them beneficial to the elders. This, in turn, will radiate out to the other publishers in practical, loving ways. He has much to share from the experience he has gained in working with other congregations that have needs similar to yours. The elders will find him ready to offer practical suggestions on problems that concern them, including judicial matters, if needed. Like Paul, he will not hold back good counsel, tempered with mildness and kindness, that will help them to ‘pay attention to the flock of God.’—Acts 20:27, 28.
6 Jesus’ example of “preaching and declaring the good news of the kingdom of God” is copied by the circuit overseer daily during his week with the congregation. (Luke 8:1) He will be there each day, Wednesday through Sunday, to take the lead and perhaps to work with you personally. Accompanying him (or his wife, if he is married) at a few doors may give you some new ideas, a fresh approach or a more effective way to reach those not inclined to listen. Do you have a Bible study? He will be glad to go with you on the study and even conduct it if you like. Such a week of vigorous activity can be most rewarding to you personally, as you can readily appreciate.
7 Can you take greater advantage of this provision made to help us? After considering the benefits, look forward to the next visit with heightened anticipation and interest. Surely such a provision is something to be grateful for and is designed to help you to become stronger and more firm in faith. If we all take advantage of this loving provision, then the traveling overseers will be able to report that “our visit to you has not been without results.”—1 Thess. 2:1.

