Announcements
◆ Offer for May: Truth book for 25c; June: New World Translation and God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good on a contribution of $1.25; July: any pocket-size book on a contribution of 25c or four for $1.00; August: True Peace and Security for 25c.
◆ There are still congregations unable to cover their assigned territory regularly. We request that publishers or pioneers whose circumstances would allow them to go elsewhere for a few weeks or on a permanent basis write the Society, supplying the information requested on page 135 of the Organization book. Mention the distance you can travel. Give your letter to the presiding overseer. He along with the other committee members will review it and they will probably recommend that the branch office consider your availability. However, if anyone does not qualify, the service committee will kindly inform the applicant of the reason why they cannot recommend him and they will not send the letter to the Society’s office. (Same basic procedure as outlined for pioneers, on page 137 of the Organization book.)
◆ A copy of the insert appearing in Our Kingdom Service this month is to be placed in the file of the congregation for future reference in connection with Kingdom Hall construction or operation.
◆ Pioneers be sure to take to the district assembly your United States Pioneer Identification card for the 1976 convention for use in obtaining food tickets as well as literature at pioneer rates. Treat it as carefully as cash.
◆ Available Again in U.S.A.:
From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained—English, French, Spanish
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life—Romanian, Vietnamese
“Look! I Am Making All Things New”—Vietnamese
“This Good News of the Kingdom”—Vietnamese
◆ New Publications Available:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life—Oshindonga, Palauan, Pampango
◆ District assembly lapel cards in English and Spanish and also celluloid holders should be ordered on the Literature Order Blank. These are cash items. Lapel cards will not be available at the assembly.
◆ For your information, the Memorial date (Nisan 14) for 1977 will be Sunday, April 3, after sundown.

