Presenting the Good News—By Arousing Interest in God’s Word
1 Do you find it a problem to arouse interest in the Bible when you share in field service? Many of us do. To assist us, two field-tested presentations that have been used effectively are here provided. Remember, our goal is to start a Bible study, which could be done in the Truth book after making either of these presentations. The wording of the presentations is given as a guideline; thus, feel free to adjust the wording to fit you and/or the territory where you work.
2 (1) ‘We all face many problems today, don’t we? We’ve been asking our neighbors this question: If you had the power [or ability], what problem [or wrong] existing in the world today would you like to correct? [Allow for response; if necessary, perhaps suggest a problem.] Interestingly, the Bible informs us here at Revelation 21:3, 4 that God is going to remove all of the problems and wrongs that man faces, all that cause him pain. [Read.] Notice this illustration on page 4 of this Bible handbook. [Comment appropriately.] On page 5 we are asked: “If you had the power to do so, would you not bring to an end the conditions that cause so much sorrow? Of course you would! Should we think that the Creator of mankind will do any less? The Bible tells us that ‘God is love.’” God certainly has the power, hasn’t he? [Allow for comment.] But wouldn’t you like to know how and when he will do it?’ [Follow through in offering the book.]
3 (2) ‘We’re calling to share information that will help to strengthen family life and happiness. Do you feel there is anything that would help to build a stronger bond of family love? [Allow for response.] Here at Matthew 19:5, 6 Jesus said something very interesting about the family. [Read.] So God purposed for married people to be “one flesh,” bonded together by love. Note how nicely this Bible handbook applies the principle so we can use it in our lives. [Read last sentence on page 170.] This can be achieved by following the Bible’s counsel for building a happy family life. That is the title of this chapter [direct attention to title on page 170] in this publication. It discusses the raising of children and the settling of family difficulties in God’s way, the way the Bible teaches.’ [Follow through in offering the book.]
4 Have you recently prepared a presentation with someone else? Practice one or both of these presentations, with someone else acting the part of a householder. By doing so, you will become familiar with the presentations and feel comfortable and confident in using them.

