Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MAY 2
12 min: Song 22. Introduction. Comments on May theme, “Depend Constantly upon the Hearer of Prayer.” (Ps. 65:2) Include comments on Psalm 25:4, 5. Earnest prayer is vital to a good personal relationship with Jehovah.
15 min: “Have Your Say in Your Heart.” Warm talk based on March 1, 1976, Watchtower article, pages 133, 134.
18 min: “We Want to Help People.” Question-and-answer coverage. In discussing paragraph 2, particularly help all to appreciate the importance of whole-souled service in accord with their individual circumstances. In covering paragraph 6, encourage local expressions of the added joy publishers have had in using the Bible.
15 min: Concluding comments. Experiences enjoyed in distributing current Kingdom News or in previous distributions. [Arrange for these ahead of time.] Encourage full weekend of distribution. Brief demonstration of offering tract. Try to put out your allotment. Publishers who will not be able to distribute all copies will give what they cannot use to the field overseer. If extra tracts are available at the time of the service meeting, publishers will be encouraged to take extra copies. Song 48 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 9
10 min: Song 50. Introduction. Discuss Colossians 4:12, emphasizing prayer on behalf of our brothers and the importance of doing what our circumstances permit in aiding our brothers.
15 min: “A Loving Provision to Help Us.” Question-and-answer discussion. Throughout discussion ask publishers to comment on how circuit overseer’s visits have helped and encouraged them.
23 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Arousing Interest in God’s Word.” After demonstrating first presentation draw out audience by using these questions as appropriate: (1) Why is it good to allow householder an opportunity to express himself in answer to initial question? (2) To what kinds of people will it likely appeal? (3) What is the advantage of turning directly to the Bible text? (4) How does this presentation arouse interest in God’s Word?
Do the same with the second presentation. Throughout this entire part, the one conducting will have in mind helping all to see the need of preparing something definite to use in presenting the Truth book with the goal of starting a Bible study.
12 min: Concluding comments. Cover Question Box, congregation’s field service report for April and accounts report. Song 56 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 16
 8 min: Song 59. Discuss Romans 10:1, showing we should pray for those we seek to aid. One way we aid others is through Bible studies.
15 min: “Do You Really Want a Bible Study?” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Stress how obstacles to conducting a study can be overcome.
20 min: Various Ways to Start a Study. Chairman points out that there are numerous ways to start a study. Begin demonstration of study started on initial call with reading of Revelation 21:3, 4, using material from first presentation under “Presenting the Good News.” Direct attention to paragraph 3 on page 6 in Truth book, reading paragraph aloud up to 2 Timothy 3:1-5. Ask question “a” conversationally, without directing householder to bottom of page. Make literature offer after starting study. Chairman invites audience to comment about benefits of this approach.
Second demonstration begins with reading of Matthew 19:5, 6 (of second presentation) and book is offered. After book is accepted, tactfully take the initiative in showing the householder briefly what the Bible teaches about raising children, directing attention to paragraph 9 on page 173. Read it together, along with Proverbs 22:6. Ask question on paragraph 9 conversationally, drawing householder out. Get audience comments as to benefits of this approach.
Chairman encourages all to be alert to start studies on the initial call, if possible. If not, return promptly with scripture and paragraph in mind to start discussion, working gradually into a study. While it may require a number of calls to get study started, keep your objective in mind each time you return.
If you encounter a householder who already has the Truth book, the following suggestions can be used in starting a study. Demonstrate: Publisher reads Revelation 21:3, 4, presents book; householder states he has the book; publisher is pleased householder has the Bible study aid, directs attention to paragraph 3 on page 6 . . . [Follow through as outlined above.]
Remember to be friendly and natural, having in mind our desire is to help people through Bible study service.
17 min: Concluding comments. Brief local experiences (lined up in advance) from several publishers stating how a Bible study was started with them, covering various ways study was started such as in house-to-house work, on a return visit, through referral, by a relative, etc. Some questions might be used: What motivated you to start studying? How was the study started with you? What publication did you start studying first? Help audience to see there are many approaches. Inform congregation of number of studies they conduct with public. Encourage applying suggestions made this evening to start Bible studies. Song 67 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 23
10 min: Song 75. Introduction. Discuss value of praying with regard to those in spiritual need.—James 5:14-16.
20 min: Serving Jehovah Together. To be handled by an elder, with audience participation. Explain that elders very much appreciate privilege and responsibility that is theirs, want to aid and encourage flock in every way, rendering personal assistance when problems arise. Elders desire to be of even greater help, but often face time limitations. In addition to presiding over congregational meetings, shepherding and other congregational responsibilities, what basic Christian obligations do the elders have? (1 Tim. 3:5; 5:8; Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) We can help them by not unnecessarily adding to their load. They must handle weighty matters of a judicial nature but might enlist aid of other qualified ones in connection with other activities. All of us want to work and cooperate together in doing Jehovah’s will so elders can care for all of their responsibilities, including public preaching and disciple-making work.
What can we do to cooperate with the elders? (Heb. 13:7, 17; may be able to discuss problem or question before or after meeting, when working with elder in field service; not always necessary that a personal visit be made, perhaps consuming much time, or phone calls at a late hour.) What attitude toward one another will be helpful? (1 Pet. 4:8; Gal. 6:1) When faced with problems, is it always necessary to go to an elder for help? [Older sisters may be of assistance to younger sisters, Titus 2:3-5; young persons should consult parents, Ephesians 6:1; wives should consult their husbands, Ephesians 5:22; all can check Index on Scriptural questions.] What are some things all of us should do before making weighty decisions? [Luke 6:12; 2 Tim. 3:16, 17] Should any of us always look to the elders to make final decisions for us? (Gal. 6:5) Because of loving concern for congregation, all elders wish they could do more, had more time, but must balance their responsibilities.—2 Cor. 11:28.
20 min: How Do You View Your Kingdom Hall? Audience participation on first part of insert down to “Planning for Expansion.” Cover next two sections down to “Building a New Kingdom Hall” by talk.
10 min: Concluding comments. Cover highlights of the Branch Letter and appropriate Announcements. Outline arrangements for holiday witnessing on May 31. Song 77 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 30
 7 min: Song 99. Introduction.
15 min: How Do You View Your Kingdom Hall? Summary of second half of insert, from “Building a New Kingdom Hall” to end. If it is thought advisable locally to spend additional time discussing this material, this can be done, according to need.
25 min: “Preaching Christ—Through Envy or Goodwill?” May 15, 1976, Watchtower article. To be handled by elder, with a good deal of audience involvement.
13 min: Concluding comments. If congregation is attending convention in June, may use some time to review appropriate points in convention insert in March issue of Our Kingdom Service. If assembly comes later, please adjust program at appropriate time prior thereto. Include points on field service for June. Song 104 and prayer.

