From Our Readers
Our Greatest Need, Love
I have just read the article “From the Cradle to the Grave, Our Greatest Need Is Love.” (September 22, 1986) Not only was the article encouraging and helpful in ways to show love but it exuded love from you as well. Being raised without love, I have been well acquainted with the difficulty of loving myself, as well as loving others. Through the congregation I was in several years ago, I was encouraged to apply the scripture to “practice giving” in Luke 6:38. It has taken about 14 years, but I am finally beginning to reap the benefits of applying this counsel.
L. R., United States
Scientific Dates
I wish to thank you for the article “Scientific Dates for Prehistoric Times.” (September 22, 1986) It has greatly helped me to progress spiritually. I must confess that the dating of historical finds caused me to doubt some of the Bible’s dates. I am grateful for your help.
M. M., Italy
Beating Cancer
I would like to thank you for the articles on “Cancer​—Can You Beat It?” (October 8, 1986) My husband was diagnosed as having kidney cancer in 1978. At that time we were encouraged to alter our diet, and the very foods you recommended are what we have eaten for the most part. Since his surgery about five years ago, we have continued eating this way. At his checkup last year, he was still found to be cancer free, so far. Our observation is that most people have very little knowledge of nutrition and have no idea of what foods are best, so many needlessly have health problems because of their poor eating habits. Articles like this will educate people, and many of them will feel better as a result of heeding your practical advice. Keep supplying us with this timely information.
R. I., United States
I just want to thank you for your excellent articles on cancer. Your articles helped me to see that by eating right and taking care of our bodies, we can reduce the risk of cancer.
H. E., United States
I just had to take a few minutes to express my appreciation for your series on cancer. I recently underwent surgery for cervical cancer and am currently on the Hoxsey treatment. You are to be praised for publishing such fine information on this subject. I am looking forward to sharing these articles with others. Most of all, I am anxiously looking to the “new earth” under God’s Kingdom when cancer and like diseases will be things of the past. I am also excited about receiving the October 22, 1986, issue, with the article “Cancer​—How Can You Be Supportive?”
J. P., United States
None of the information published was intended as advice for a sure cure for cancer or a sure defense against it. The only sure defense or sure cure will come by the healing efforts of Christ Jesus during God’s coming new system of things. But proper eating habits and other good care of our bodies may well provide at least a better defense or a help toward extending our life a little longer at present.​—ED.

