The Bible’s Viewpoint
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Different From Other Religions
“LOOK, I’m busy, and besides, I never talk with Jehovah’s Witnesses.” That was the householder’s response to a knock on the door by one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The visitor kindly replied: “I heard you say you’re busy, but may I at least ask you why you say you don’t talk with us?” The reasons turned out to be only misunderstandings of what Witnesses believe and practice. Once these were cleared up, an excellent conversation resulted.
Do you know what Jehovah’s Witnesses believe? Do you know what makes them different from other religions and the importance of this to you?
Their Beliefs
Their beliefs​—not mixed with traditions, pagan ideas, or nationalistic ideals—​are based entirely on the Bible, which they believe to be the unerring, inspired Word of God. This makes for some significant differences in basic beliefs.
Use of the divine name: The name JEHOVAH, Yahweh to some, may sound strange to many people, yet the use of it more than 7,000 times in the Bible argues that God’s worshipers are expected both to know and to use his personal name. (Psalm 83:18) Since Christians are “a people for his name,” Jesus used it in teaching his disciples. (Acts 15:14; John 17:26) In view of this, rather than thinking Jehovah’s Witnesses strange for using the name, would it not be more appropriate to ask why other religions do not consistently use it?​—Malachi 3:16.
God’s Kingdom: A real government​—though heavenly—​with Christ Jesus as king, with dominion over the earth. It is not just ‘something in the heart.’ “The government will be upon his [Christ’s] shoulder.” (Isaiah 9:6, 7, Revised Standard Version) It will vindicate the rightful sovereignty of God. He “will set up a kingdom that will . . . put an end to all these [human] kingdoms,” restoring unity and world peace forever.​—Daniel 2:44.
The human soul: Not something immaterial and immortal that somehow survives the death of the body but, rather, the person himself or the life he enjoys. When created “the man came to be a living soul.” (Genesis 2:7; 1 Corinthians 15:45) “Immortality of the soul is a Greek notion formed in ancient mystery cults and elaborated by the philosopher Plato.” (Presbyterian Life, May 1, 1970) So the dead are not really suffering anywhere. They are asleep. (Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10) The hope for a future life for the dead hinges on the role of Christ Jesus as a ransom sacrifice and depends on having the favor of God for a resurrection.​—John 5:28, 29; Acts 17:31; 24:15; 1 Corinthians 15:13, 14.
The earth’s future: Earth will not become a lifeless cinder, either by God’s hand or by a nuclear holocaust. God “did not create it simply for nothing.” He “formed it even to be inhabited.” (Isaiah 45:18; Ecclesiastes 1:4) God’s Kingdom will see to it that his will shall “take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 6:10) Then, “the righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”​—Psalm 37:29.
Those who embrace such beliefs experience a change of attitude toward God, life, and fellowman. Life has purpose and meaning.​—Romans 8:19-21.
Their Practices
These are also based on the Bible. Even though some of them may be viewed as odd, these very practices constitute significant identifying marks of true worship.
Public ministry: Many bring this up as a major difference in activity and organization. Yet, in this work Jehovah’s Witnesses obey Jesus’ command to “go . . . and make disciples.” Imitating the apostolic example, all who qualify as ministers can teach “publicly and from house to house.” (Matthew 28:19, 20; Acts 20:20) Some churches have the traditional clergy-laity division, but “there is not the slightest justification . . . for that ‘split-level’ distinction,” says Theology Today. Rather, as the Encyclopedia Canadiana observes: “The work of Jehovah’s Witnesses is the revival and re-establishment of the primitive Christianity practised by Jesus and his disciples during the first and second centuries. . . . All are brothers.”
Christian neutrality: Though little understood on this matter, Jehovah’s Witnesses remain neutral as to politics and to all forms of conflict that require one to hate one’s fellowman. (John 18:36; Isaiah 2:2-4) About early Christians, historian Edward Gibbon says: “They refused to take any active part in the civil administration or the military defence of the empire.” So, what at first might appear to be radical is really the peaceful role of those who must be “no part of the world.”​—John 17:16.
Racism: “Racial discrimination​—still an issue in some churches—​is not a problem for Witnesses,” said a newspaper in the southern United States. A genuine love for their Christian brothers unites them in a worldwide brotherhood. Though imperfect like anyone else, they strive to apply among themselves the teaching of Jesus: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”​—John 13:35.
Get to Know Them Better
Of course, not all the things that make Jehovah’s Witnesses beneficially different have been discussed here. So why not get to know these Christians better? Your prospects for a happy present and future life are bound up in accurately identifying the religion that must be different if it is to meet God’s standards.​—Matthew 7:21.

