What Do Clothes Mean to You?
“TO ME, clothes mean warmth, covering, and comfort,” replied one woman.
“Decoration!” responded another.
“They mean everything,” said one man. “Why, without them I couldn’t go outside or do my work.”
Indeed, views about clothes are varied, since no two persons are exactly alike. So how do you view clothes? Do you give thought to what you wear and how you wear it? And what do your clothes say about you?
More Than Covering
Of course, the basic function of clothes is to cover the body. But within this framework, the variety is endless. For example, the Indian sari, the Japanese kimono, the Hawaiian muumuu, and the Middle Eastern aba all cover the body but in completely different ways. The German homburg, the French beret, and the Arabic kaffiyeh all cover the man’s head, yet they are very different from one another. Sabots, sandals, and boots all cover the feet but in different ways. And who is to say which is more comfortable​—the Scottish kilt or the American slacks?
Regardless of how we feel about our clothes, they reveal much about us and about our feelings toward others. Before we even say a word, our clothes have said something about us. People judge and categorize us based on what we wear and how we wear it. For instance, a beggar in his rags and a man in a tuxedo both have clothes on, but there is a vast difference in the impression they make and in the way they are treated.
More and more, clothes are being used as a means of expressing one’s choice of life-style, political views, nationalistic identity, and so on. For example, in Shanghai, China, many women are favoring more makeup, leg-revealing dresses, and Western wedding garb​—a definite departure from the past. On the other hand, in some Middle Eastern and other Muslim countries, women are going back to the traditional Islamic dress.
Even on a more personal level, decisions must be made as to what to wear, and when and where to wear it. Dungarees, or blue jeans, may be ideal for farming or working around the house or on casual occasions, but they are hardly appropriate for formal occasions, for business, or at meetings for worship. What we usually put on when going shopping for food may not be right for an evening out with friends. Care must also be exercised in choosing certain types of clothing, since trends and fashions are heavily influenced by the “new morality” and the life-styles that it reflects.
The vast array of clothing possibilities presents everyone, male or female, young or old, an interesting challenge that calls for personal discretion and scrutiny. Do you give proper thought to what you wear and how you wear it? On what basis do you make your choices? And what do your clothes reflect about you?
The Challenge of Choice
“What once was a concern for quality had become an obsession with the designer label,” says Barbaralee Diamonstein in Vogue magazine. Indeed, for most people, clothing choices are no longer simply a matter of quality, function, and need. Rather, we are constantly bombarded by advertisements that promise beauty, status, fame, and popularity if we wear clothes endorsed with the signatures or emblems of one designer or another.
Resisting such advertising gimmicks, or controlling one’s own impulse to buy, takes willpower and discipline. Rare are the individuals who can resist the suggestion: “Oh! Go ahead and buy it. It looks great on you.” While such words may be music to our ears, they can also spell disaster to our budget. Do you easily give in to the persuasive words of an aggressive salesperson? Or can you resist the pressure to buy an item that you really neither need nor can afford? If you can, you are to be commended.
This is not to say that one cannot choose something that is new and fashionable. But caution is the key. It is always a good policy to dress according to age, personality, and life-style rather than be controlled by what is the latest or give in to peer pressure and adopt a certain style. The fact that a certain look is “in style” does not mean it is right for you. For example, the androgynous look, recently popularized by certain rock singers, blurs the line between the masculine and the feminine by using makeup, hairstyle, and mannerisms borrowed from the opposite sex. It is not sensible to adopt such a style just because it is popular with certain groups. And note in the Bible what Deuteronomy 22:5 states on this matter.
Basically, style, as the dictionary defines it, is the way in which something is done rather than the thing itself. In clothing, it is the overall presentation of oneself rather than the kind of clothes one wears. It is far more valuable to cultivate a personal style that reflects good taste and moderation than to be endlessly pursuing the latest in fashion and design.
Shrewd Shopping
A good wardrobe is not a matter of having a lot of clothes or being up to the latest in fashion but is usually the result of careful shopping and selection. So before you go shopping, take a good look at the clothes you already have. Perhaps you can alter or eliminate things you have not used for some time. Experiment with the clothes you have and discover how you can interchange your items of apparel to create new looks. Doing this will put you in a better position to determine what you really need.
When you shop, give thought to how a new item will blend with outfits you already have. Select those items that will harmonize with both the color and the style of your clothes. Classic simple lines are good investments because they are flexible and wear well for a long time. Also, learn to make the most of your existing wardrobe by the effective and varied use of accessories. Such practices will enable you to wear your clothes longer and enjoy them more.
Shopping at the right time and the right place can make a big difference. This takes a little planning, but the rewards are worth it. “I make it a point to shop for clothes only during the seasons when they are on sale,” says one woman. However, the fact that something is on sale does not make it a good buy. So try to develop an eye for garments of good quality. “I seek out discount shops or wait for drastic reductions in others,” she adds. “That way I can get good quality and still stay within my budget.”
Maintaining Balance
A sloppy appearance may convey indifference and a lack of self-esteem, even selfish disregard for the effect one has on others. On the other hand, an extremely style-conscious appearance may reveal a self-centered, narcissistic outlook. Thus, it would be good to check out motives. Ask yourself: Am I trying to outshine everyone else by a showy display of clothes? Am I using clothes to compete with others or keep up with them? Are my clothes appropriate for the time, place, and occasion?
Without a doubt, clothes do tell a lot about us. They can tell if we are modest or conceited, respectful or haughty. They can testify to our good taste and self-respect, or they can betray us as being egotistical and uncaring. Yes, they can whisper, talk, or shout about us. So maintaining balance in our choice of clothes is essential.
Keeping in mind that clothes are merely an extension of the person we are within, our clothes should be pleasing and attractive, avoiding fashions that are immodest or extreme. If we give proper attention to what we wear and how we wear it, our clothes will speak well of us.
[Box on page 18]
Tips for a Quality Wardrobe
  “Quality in a garment guarantees that it will feel good, fit well and regain its shape after cleaning for many years,” says a senior officer of Hart Schaffner & Marx Clothes. Here are some tips on assembling a quality wardrobe.
□ Spend as much as you can afford for quality
□ Avoid fads and extremes in color, fabric, and style
□ Insist on good fit and workmanship
□ Select fabric and color to suit purpose of garment
□ Hang garment up, air it out, and allow 24 hours’ rest between uses
□ Clean garment only when needed; follow instructions carefully
[Pictures on page 16, 17]
Discreet and attractive styles of dress vary from country to country

