Announcements
◆ Literature offer for May: Paradise-Theocracy book with booklet, 50c. June: New World Translation and Great Teacher book, $1.25. (Large congregations may want to order a few copies of the large-print Bible, which is placed for $5.00. Other Bible translations printed by the Society, as well as the Aid book and “Make Sure,” may be offered to interested persons.) July: Truth book, 25c. (Great Teacher or Evolution book may be offered where people have Truth book. Great Teacher book will be featured in August and Evolution book in September, so congregations would do well to stock up on these books.)
◆ Young publishers who will be out of school for the summer, have you begun making plans to have a share in temporary pioneer service?
◆ The body of elders in each congregation should make arrangements to meet at a convenient time early in June. (See or, pages 64, 65.)
◆ Permanent address for congregation: All correspondence to the presiding overseer (including Kingdom Ministry and written review papers) will be sent in care of the permanent address supplied by the body of elders. It is not necessary that this address be that of the presiding overseer. The one who receives the mail should promptly turn it over to the current presiding overseer. If it is necessary to make a change in the permanent address, the body of elders should submit to the Society the name and address to be used as the congregation’s permanent mailing address.
◆ All serving as regular pioneers as of February 1, 1973, will obtain from their presiding overseer their pioneer meal ticket for use at the international assembly. The pioneer meal tickets are being sent to the presiding overseer with the May congregation statement.
◆ District assembly lapel cards in English and Spanish may be obtained by requesting them on a Literature Order Blank. All orders for lapel cards and celluloid holders will be charged to your congregation literature account. Lapel cards will not be available at the assembly.
◆ With your congregation’s next shipment of literature there will be a supply of folders listing various Bible translations, and certain study aids, available from the Watchtower Society. The folders are free. There is one for each publisher. No more are available. Take good care of your copy. It is meant for use in the field service, so that you can show householders what you are able to obtain for them. No doubt you can make good use of it during June.
◆ During the month of May or early in June, each congregation will receive the first eight of a new series of public talk outlines. The material is timely and practical, directly affecting the lives of those who attend the meetings. The outlines are in large print, so they require no retyping. We recommend that you work these talks into your schedule during August, September and October.

