Branch Letter
Dear Fellow Publishers:
We wish you could have been with us at the Bethel breakfast table when Brother Knorr told us about his recent trip through South America. He and Brother Larson had just completed a seventeen-day trip to eight of the Society’s branches.
Everywhere they went, more persons had been baptized so far this year than for the same period last year. Expansion of printing facilities was needed. In Colombia arrangements were made during their visit to enlarge the printing operations there. In Peru and Venezuela plans were laid for expanding the branch facilities, in order to handle the increasing flow of publications needed to equip the brothers for their ministry. In Argentina the present branch building is being enlarged, and another large building was purchased. The number of publishers has been growing rapidly there, and it is hoped that much more printing can be done right in the country. It was thrilling to hear about all these plans for expansion, especially in view of what it means in terms of accomplishing the vital “marking” of foreheads during the short remaining time.
A highlight of the trip was the dedication of the enlarged factory and Bethel home in Brazil. The plane on which they were traveling was delayed, but the brothers arrived just in time for the program in São Paulo. Brother Knorr spoke to an enthusiastic crowd of 1,376 who were present for the dedication that evening, and then to 28,919 at a special meeting the next morning. With their new facilities, the 75,000 publishers in Brazil should now receive their magazines on a far more regular basis than was possible with international shipping of supplies.
In most of the countries where they stopped on their trip, Brother Knorr was also working out details concerning the forthcoming “Divine Victory” International Assemblies in those lands. Here in North America those assemblies begin just next month, in June. What a grand spiritual feast there will be! Don’t miss any of it.
Truly, these are thrilling days in which to be alive and serving our Grand Creator. May all of us share to the full in the work that he has given us to do.
We send our warm love to all of you.
Your fellow servants,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

