Serving with a Sense of Urgency!
New Peak of 436,459 Kingdom Proclaimers
The work of gathering in the “other sheep” is going ahead at a fast pace. Already in the first five months of this service year, 69,838 world wide have become dedicated, baptized disciples of Jesus Christ. In the continental United States alone, 21,822 have taken this important step in the last six months. And the month of February saw more Kingdom proclaimers in the field ministry here than ever before​—a total of 436,459, an increase of 5,280! To supply the needs that have arisen due to worldwide increases, the Bethel family has been kept very busy. Think of it, 14,547,882 bound books and a total of 115,539,350 magazines have been produced in the Society’s factories in New York in just six months!
2 It is a joy to see that the efforts put forth by our brothers and sisters here in the United States give evidence of a genuine interest in getting the “good news” proclaimed in these “last days.” In February, though it was a wintry month in some areas, 6,117,302 hours were devoted to the field ministry, 611,000 more than a year ago. Also magazine placements increased by 907,000. Truly these magazines can be instrumental in opening up the hearts of individuals to respond to the truth.
3 As we see what is happening today, we cannot help but have a feeling of urgency. We know that Jesus Christ is already ruling over the “kingdom of the world.” We are living deep in the “time of the end.” The fulfillment of prophecy points unmistakably to the approaching destruction of Babylon the Great. Does this not fire us with zeal to get around our territory as often as possible? Yes, we want people to learn the truth NOW.
4 People everywhere need to be made aware of Jehovah’s grand purpose for mankind. They must be helped to see that a decision must be made as to whether they really want God’s kingdom or prefer the pleasures of this world and submission to the “god of this system of things.” (2 Cor. 4:4) The Paradise-Theocracy book is an excellent means by which to place this issue before them. During May we will therefore want to use every opportunity to place this publication along with a booklet.
5 The more time we spend in house-to-house work and the more we are alert to opportunities to share in informal witnessing, the more people we will be able to help to learn the truth. People living in the territory are our neighbors. All of them are in great spiritual need. To help all we can, we must view each one as an individual, not judging the territory as a whole. (Luke 10:36, 37) Keeping in mind that we are bearing Jehovah’s name and making known his message for a witness, regardless of the response, we can have real satisfaction in knowing that we are doing the divine will.
6 Warmer weather and longer days may provide opportunities to share in evening witness work, also increased street witnessing. One 87-year-old pioneer sister in New York State regularly places 1,500 magazines a month by offering them on the street. Many have had excellent results in approaching persons waiting in cars at shopping centers.
7 Of course, we appreciate that literature distribution is just one part of our preaching work. There is a real need to follow through on interested persons with return visits and home Bible studies. Many have found that temporary pioneering has aided them to have a fuller share in this. A brother serving in the South commented: ‘As a temporary pioneer last month I started six Bible studies, and thus far this month four more.’ Asked if he was doing anything extraordinary to start studies, he replied: ‘No, I just let people know that the purpose of our ministry is to study the Bible with them.’ He located so many interested persons as a temporary pioneer that he took up the regular pioneer service to care for them.
8 While we may not be able to be regular pioneers, can we individually share more fully in Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making? Feeling the urgency of the times as we do, we will want to do all that our circumstances reasonably permit in working alongside the ‘king’s secretary,’ Jehovah’s anointed ones, in marking the foreheads of honesthearted ones. (Ezek. 9:4) As we do so, Jehovah will bless us richly.
[Blurb on page 1]
Joining the King’s Secretary in Marking Worthy Foreheads.

