Your Service Meetings
WEEK OF MAY 13
10 min: Song 22. Introduction, text and comments.
12 min: “‘Divine Victory’ International Assembly.” Question-and-answer coverage of article, paragraphs 1-7. Stress that these matters are to be given immediate attention if not already cared for. Cover points in the May 1971 “Question Box.”
10 min: Branch Letter and Announcements.
 2 min: Accounts report.
16 min: “Serving with a Sense of Urgency!” Question-and-answer discussion, followed by brief stimulating talk.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include points from field service report and month’s service theme, bottom of page one. Song 30.
WEEK OF MAY 20
10 min: Song 26. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “What is Your Heart’s Desire?” Question-and-answer coverage from paragraph one of the insert to the end of the section on “Pioneering While Going to School.” Allow for local experiences as time permits.
18 min: “Have You Set a Personal Goal?” Round-table discussion of the material by family or other group.
12 min: Concluding comments. Include Theocratic News items. Song 34.
WEEK OF MAY 27
10 min: Song 36. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “What is Your Heart’s Desire?” After brief introduction, question-and-answer discussion starting with “Rejecting College Education to Pioneer” through to the end of the section on “Willingness to Give Up Seeming Material Advantages.”
10 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In Business Territory.” Handled by field overseer. Ones who work business territory may be interviewed, highlighting how to approach businessmen. Field overseer will inform congregation of local business territory to be worked and encourage the working of it.
10 min: Offer the “New World Translation” and “Great Teacher” book. Encouraging talk for all to share in field ministry during June. Make the month of June a real Bible study month. Remember that we have, not only the regular edition, but also a large-print edition, as well as “The Kingdom Interlinear Translation of the Greek Scriptures.” Use the folder on “Bibles and Bible Study Aids” to acquaint people with these. In carrying out our field activity, we will try to encourage all people to read the Bible. People might say they have a Bible, read it and are not interested in a copy of the “New World Translation.” Such a householder can be informed of the “Aid” book. Show the person the sample in your folder. In some cases, you may want to arrange a return visit to show the householder your copy and how we use it, and tell him that, if he so desires, one can be ordered for him. We can also offer to interested householders “Make Sure” for 75c. Brothers can carry their own copy of “Make Sure” with them. Then if people say they have a Bible, we can offer the householder something that will help him to understand the Bible. Appreciating the importance of the Bible study work, encourage all to start studies at every opportunity.
10 min: Concluding comments. Song 43.
WEEK OF JUNE 3
10 min: Song 45. Introduction, text and comments, and comments on service theme for June.
10 min: “Question Box.” Talk or discussion by elder(s).
15 min: “What is Your Heart’s Desire?” Panel discussion of remaining material, starting with “The Encouragement of Parents Helps,” to conclusion of article.
15 min: “‘Divine Victory’ International Assembly.” Continue question-and-answer coverage, paragraphs 8-12. Stress need for our conduct and our children’s to be above reproach both at the assembly and everywhere else. Read pertinent paragraphs of June 15, 1970, “Watchtower” as time allows.
10 min: Concluding comments. Song 37.
WEEK OF JUNE 10
Congregations that do not receive the June “Kingdom Ministry” in time may make up their own program.

