“Divine Victory” International Assembly
1 All of us are looking forward with eager anticipation to the good things to be enjoyed at the international assemblies. If any have not yet done so, now is the time to make definite plans to be in attendance. And do we not want those with whom we are studying to enjoy the rich spiritual food along with us? Certainly! So include them in your plans. To aid you, here are a few suggestions.
2 Many of you will be needing rooming accommodations. No arrangements will be made by the Society for camper, tent or trailer sites in the United States. If you plan on camping, please work this out personally, using commercial facilities. As to hotel and motel accommodations, prices have been increasing; so, few rooms will be available at the lowest prices listed. However, real effort will be put forth to get good accommodations at reasonable prices in private homes.
3 Be sure to send in your room request form six or seven weeks before the start of the convention you plan to attend. Mail it, not to the Society, but to the address shown on the form for that city. Wherever possible, rooming assignments will be mailed directly to you. If you do not receive an assignment before you leave home, you may obtain it at the rooming department in the convention city. In case you have to cancel an accommodation, please be sure to notify both the landlord and the rooming department. This will enable the rooming department to assign the rooms to someone else, and it shows consideration for the one who offered to provide the rooms.
4 There is need for caution in large cities. Be sure to lock your car. Never leave anything showing in it, but keep any necessary items locked in the trunk. Also beware of pickpockets. They often mingle among large crowds.
5 In view of the new session times this year, you may wonder what meals will be served at the assemblies. Arrangements will be made for breakfast and/​or suitable refreshments prior to the morning sessions. There will be a noon meal and refreshments during the intermission. Also at the conclusion of the afternoon session food will be available.
6 Pioneers should be sure to bring their meal tickets, caring for these as if they were money, as replacements are not available. They will also be needed to obtain literature in the bookroom at pioneer rates.
7 One way to advertise the assembly is by wearing badges. If your congregation does not already have a supply of lapel cards and holders, these should be ordered immediately. The celluloid holders are 5c each and the lapel cards are 1c each.
8 Another fine way to advertise the assembly is by sharing in the field service. True, no organized field service is scheduled for the days of the assembly. But handbills, magazines and literature will be available. Why not plan to spend some time while in the assembly city, either in the morning or in the evening, distributing handbills? No territory needs to be obtained. Also informal witnessing can be done on your way to the sessions in the morning or when returning to your accommodations in the early evening. Take advantage of every opportunity to speak about the good news and invite everyone possible to attend the assembly, especially those in whose home you may staying. Even deaf-mutes can benefit, as there will be a deaf-mute section at all English-language assemblies.
9 Any who do accept our invitation to attend the assembly ought to be able to see by our conduct that we truly reflect unselfish love and concern for others. This should be evident in our interest in helping others to get seated, and in our not saving seats needlessly. Of course, there is no objection to saving seats for those who have left temporarily or for volunteer workers who will soon return. But otherwise, would it not be the unselfish thing to leave seats open for anyone to use when we are not sitting on them? And even if a younger person is seated, how fine it is to offer it freely to an elderly or infirm person who may not have found a place to sit and listen. By such loving concern for others we honor our God, Jehovah, who has taught us what love really is.
10 Then, too, volunteer service provides an excellent opportunity for us to minister to the needs of others as Jesus did. Such ministering, motivated by love, can contribute to our happiness. (Acts 20:35; Ps. 110:3) Why not plan to volunteer as individuals or as family groups? Brothers having families could perhaps volunteer to serve as attendants in sections where they will be sitting with their families. If you cannot serve all five days, your doing so for any other period of time will be very much appreciated. Volunteer service applications should be signed by the presiding overseer and sent to the convention city (not to the Society). Please advise the volunteer service department of any change in your plans.
11 To reap the bountiful spiritual benefits from the assemblies, we need to be in our seats when the sessions begin and make every effort to stay for the entire program, including the closing prayer. The changes in the session times should enable everyone to do this.
12 How we conduct ourselves while attending assemblies is very important. Not only does it make things pleasant for others, but it can serve as a fine witness to outsiders. (1 Pet. 2:12) Certainly it is refreshing to see and be with those who manifest love and consideration even when they are a little tired or must wait a few minutes to be served. Parents can aid by keeping their children with them at all times. In fact, all of us may find it helpful to review the article “Showing Love for One Another at Assemblies,” In the June 15, 1970, Watchtower. As all of us strive to reflect the fruitage of God’s spirit, we will enjoy many blessings at the “Divine Victory” Assembly.
[Blurb on page 8]
Have You Made Arrangements to Attend an Assembly?

