Announcements
“ANNOUNCING MESSIAH’S PRESENCE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
April closes the 1950 campaign of taking subscriptions for the Watchtower magazine. This final month has been set aside as “Announcing Messiah’s Presence” Testimony Period and will be a month of special effort and activity world-wide in this behalf. When first published in July, 1879, our magazine was called “Zion’s Watch Tower and Herald of Christ’s Presence”. It is still a herald of the invisible presence of Christ or Messiah, with more proof of this now than ever before since 1914. Very fittingly, then, subscriptions for The Watchtower are to be taken during the Testimony Period thus designated. For each subscription for a year at the regular rate of $1.00 a set of 8 booklets is to be given as a premium. Where people are already subscribers for The Watchtower, they may be offered, instead, our companion magazine Awake! but without the booklet premium. We should like this twelfth Watchtower campaign to realize a peak of subscriptions. If you are in favor of that, join us in the campaign. Write us, should you need any assistance to that end. Each one’s report will enhance the world-wide total. So submit your report on our form for such.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 21: “Servants Feed the Flock,” ¶1-20 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15, 1950.
Week of May 28: “Servants Feed the Flock,” ¶21-25 inclusive, also “Divine Requirements Resting on Servants”, ¶1-14 inclusive, The Watchtower April 15, 1950.
SAVE
your personal or home copy of each issue of The Watchtower. Do not throw them away, but preserve them in a binder or drawer or on library shelves. At the end of each year, in its December 15 issue, The Watchtower contains an index of subjects and an index of all the scriptures cited, quoted and commented upon in all the leading articles throughout the year. By saving your copies and keeping them in date order you will have an invaluable reference library for consultation in your study of the Bible. Organized companies should preserve copies in the library of their local Theocratic ministry course school.
FOREIGN-LANGUAGE SUBSCRIPTIONS
When writing the Society regarding a Watchtower or Awake! subscription in a language other than English, the foreign language should be clearly indicated (as, Greek, Spanish, or Polish, etc.). This is especially necessary when sending in changes of address and subscription renewals, using other than the regular renewal slips. Renewal slips with no foreign language indicated are always believed to be English, hence considerable trouble and delay may be caused if a foreign-language subscription is desired. Be sure to indicate the language plainly in all correspondence and in upper right-hand corner on all renewal slips. It will greatly facilitate the work in the office if you use the renewal slips that are sent with your magazine. Your correspondence with the Society’s office at Brooklyn will be given quicker attention if you write in the English language whenever possible.

