A Relief Mission to Ukraine
AGAIN the grim reports fill the media. Economic chaos, food shortage, and hunger are stalking the earth​—this time in parts of the former Soviet Union. The Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses recently asked the branch office of the Watch Tower Society in Denmark to organize relief for needy Witnesses in Ukraine. What did the Danish brothers do?
They went right to work! The branch office immediately sent brothers out to scour the markets for the best buys in foodstuffs. Word went out to all congregations of Jehovah’s people in Denmark, notifying them of the need. The branch reports: “All congregations were more than willing to contribute. Finally, we were able to give tangible proof of the sympathy we had for those suffering ones.” Meanwhile, the Society’s branch office in Germany sent to Denmark five trucks that had been donated. These, along with two vans and 14 volunteer drivers, arrived at the Denmark branch on Saturday, December 7, 1991. Branch workers filled the trucks with the foodstuffs they had bought.
At noon on Monday, December 9, the convoy set out on the long journey through Europe to Ukraine. “It was a touching scene as the whole Bethel family assembled to wave them good-bye,” the branch writes. “Knowing that many relief missions have been victims of attacks, we followed our brothers with many prayers all the way.”
On December 18 the suspense ended. The Denmark branch received word that the convoy had arrived safely in Lviv, Ukraine. The brothers in Ukraine had received the aid. How relieved they were to unload 1,100 family-size, 44-pound [20 kg] packages​—each containing meat, flour, rice, sugar, and other staples! In all, the convoy delivered some 22 tons of supplies. The Denmark branch writes: “Our joy is great, as we thank Jehovah for his protection and for giving us this opportunity to extend a helping hand.”
A shipment of clothing is also planned. The branch reports that in this regard as well, “the response of the congregations has been overwhelming.” Jehovah does indeed ‘enrich his people for every sort of generosity.’ (2 Corinthians 9:11) They, in turn, feel deeply the joy that comes from giving freely to their brothers and sisters. The love they thereby show is an identifying mark of Jesus’ followers. (John 13:35) Such love is all too rare in this needy world.

