VOL. XIV. SEPTEMBER 1 & 15, 1893. NO. 17 & li 

"THE CHURCH OF THE LIVING GOD." 

-1 TIM. 3:15.- 



"As the body is one, and hath many members, and all the 

members of that one body, being many, are one body, 

so also is Christ; for by one spirit are we all baptized 

into one body. "..."There is one body, and one 

spirit; even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; 

one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God 

and Father of all. "..."After the way which 

they [many] call heresy, so worship I the God of 

my fathers. "..."Am I become your enemy, 

because I tell you the truth?" If so, then, 

"I have become a fool for Christ's sake."— 

1 Cor. 12:12,13; Eph. 4:4-6; Acts 24:14; 

Gal. 4:16; 1 Cor. 4:10. 

THAT during the Gospel age God has been 
selecting a Church is admitted by all Christians 
except Universalists; and that all thus 
selected constitute the one Church, and that 
a membership in that one Church can be secured 
only during the present life— during the 



Gospel age— are also generally admitted to be 
the teachings of the Bible. 

And many will admit, also, that our present 
union with Christ's body, the Church, though 
precious, is but a probationary membership, 
which will only be confirmed and made everlasting 
by introduction into full membership 
in the Church triumphant, at the close of this 
probationary period of the present life.— John 15:5,6; 
Phil. 3:12-16. 

But, while we and other Christians agree that 
the Church triumphant is to be one Church, 
and not many churches, there are parts and 
bearings of the subject regarding which we are 
not agreed. 

We hold that the conditions of the present 
trial, of all accepted as probationary members 
of the heavenly Church, are more severe and 
exacting, and that the selection is consequently 
much smaller, than Christian people generally 
suppose; that only a "little flock" is now 

R1571 : page 259 

being selected. (Luke 12:32.) Many suppose 

that the object of our God in calling the 

Church and promising her high exaltation was 

merely to save them from everlasting torment. 

We claim, and find and produce abundant 

Scripture proof of it, that God's object in this 

selection, training, discipline and final exaltation 

of the Church, is for the ultimate purpose 

of blessing through them all his fallen, sin-stricken 

creatures (human and angelic), by 

granting to all a full, perfect judgment or trial 

under most favorable conditions, of which perfect 

knowledge and sufficient help will be the 

chief elements of favor. Thus seen, the Church 

is being selected for the great work, to be 

accomplished during the Millennial age, of restoring 

"whosoever will" of the fallen ones 

back to their former estates, and of consigning 

the wilfully unholy to the second death— everlasting 

punishment— everlasting destruction. 

See TOWER for Oct. 15th, '92, for the nature 

and methods of God's elections, and Feb., '93 

for an examination of all Scripture texts bearing 

on the subject of future punishment. 

Nor can it be denied that this Scriptural 
view is much more elevating than the common, 
selfish view which originated in the great Papal 

R1571 : page 260 

apostasy. Those called out by the hope 
of sharing in God's plan for doing good to 



others— blessing "all the families of the earth" 
—are sure to be few, and spiritually above the 
masses, who are moved only by a selfish hope 
of escaping torment. 

We also differ from most Christians in that 
we regard the Church in its present condition 
as merely in a probationary state. And we further 
claim that there is only one Church now, 
even as there will be but one Church in glory; 
that our Lord and the apostles never recognized 
any but one Church on earth; that so far 
from establishing many, or recognizing many, 
they denounced all efforts to separate into different 
parties and under different names, as 
schismatic, sectarian, and contrary to God's 
will; as injurious, and as an evidence of carnality 
in all who consented to or aided such 
divisions of the probationary Church. 

Paul's able and pointed reasoning upon this 
subject is partially obscured by the common 
translation, yet even in it, when attention 
is called to it, the trend of the Apostle's reasoning 
is clearly discerned; much more so in 
that valuable and generally very faithful translation, 
the Emphatic Diaglott. He exhorts that 
those teachers who favor divisions in the flock 
of Christ be "watched," and turned away 
from; because they are not following the Lord's 
will, but their own. And he adds, "by kind 
and complimentary words they mislead the unsuspicious. 
(Rom. 16:17.) He reproved the 
Corinthian Church because of a tendency toward 
sectarianism among them. (1 Cor. 1:10-13; 
3:3-6.) They were dividing into Paulites, 
Apollosites and Peterites, while a few rightly 
clung to the name Christian. 

Each of these teachers had his peculiarities 
of manner in teaching, which caused some to 
esteem one, and others another, most highly. 
But they all had the one gospel— the one Lord, 
the one faith and the one baptism. The spirit 
of favoritism, which led to factions and divisions, 
and to the exaltation of sectarian or 
party names, or to the name of an individual 
teacher, to be the standard around which to 
rally, the Apostle declared was an evidence of 
carnality— proof of a worldly spirit. 

While the taking of different names was 
wrong, it was an evidence of a deeper wrong 
—of a selfish, party spirit. It was an evidence 
that those Corinthians who took the party 
names had never appreciated the oneness of 
the body of Christ; that they did not really 
appreciate that Christ is the only head, leader 
and standard; and that his is the only name 
by which his followers should recognize themselves 



and each other. Where scoffers apply 
a name in derision, it is not the fault of the 
faithful; but the true, loyal soldiers of the 
cross should never own or recognize such a 
name. Instances of names so originating are 
"Methodist" and "Baptist," both of which 
were given in derision, but were afterwards 
adopted as party names, representing sects, factions 
or divisions in the body of Christ. All true 
teachers are not only sent by Christ, but receive 
their instructions from him; and any man 
who attempts to put his own or any other name 
upon all or any portion of the Church is an 
opponent, an adversary to the true and only 
Lord and Head of the Church. He is a misleader 
and an evildoer, no matter what his claims 
or motives may be. 

The Apostle, upbraiding the Corinthians, and 
seeking to show them their error in owning 
any other teacher, besides Christ, to be their 
head and standard and leader, asks, "Has 
Christ been divided?" Are there several seeds 
of Abraham now, each an heir of a promise? 
Is this the reason you countenance divisions 
into different parties? Or, is it because one 
of these leaders— Paul, Apollos or Peter— has 
specially favored you and put you under obligation 
to him, that you requite him by calling 
yourselves his servants and followers, bearing 
his name? Was Paul crucified for you? or 
were you baptized in his name? 

Nay, nay, dearly beloved; one, and only one, 
deserves all the honor of the Church, both 
now and forever, and that one is her true Lord 
and Master; and his name only should she 
own in any manner. He leads, he teaches, 
he feeds; and the various human agents used 
by him, as channels for his blessings to his espoused, 
should neither take his place in her 
heart nor share his honor before the world. 

R1571 : page 261 

We may, however, and should, honor his servants 
"for their work's sake," and count those 
who serve well as worthy of double honor; 
but we must always "hold the Head," and 
render him supreme reverence and obedience. 
(1 Thess. 5:13; 1 Tim. 5:17; Col. 2:19.) Our 
esteem for others should be "in the Lord." 

For a long time, in fact until very recently, 
Christians recognized this true principle, that 
there is but one body or church on earth, even 
as there will be but one in glory. And, following 
this idea, each sect claimed to be that 
one, the only true Church, and persecuted 



others. But by and by each began to see in 
the other certain good features of doctrine and 
practice, and gradually their ideas changed, 
until to-day they claim boldly, and in opposition 
to the word of our Lord and of the apostles, 
that sects are a decided advantage; that 
the human mind is so constituted that a common 
faith, which Paul urges upon the Church, 
is an impossibility; and that the various sects 
of to-day with their contradictory diversities 
of faith are necessary accommodations to human 
prejudices and imbecility. 

Yet, still clinging to the idea that somehow 
there should be but one Church, they are anxious 
to reunite all the larger sects so as to make 
(nominally) one church, while each sect therein 
may retain its own special features of faith 
or disbelief as at present. All in such a union 
(of which the Evangelical Alliance is a beginning) 
merely agree to disagree, to live and let 
live, and to recognize each other, in this 
general way, because of an increased influence, 
power and protection which the association 
will bring to each, and because it would detract 
from the influence of other sects not so 
associated, and thus hinder independence of 
thought. This would serve to fix and establish 
an "orthodox" boundary line, inside of which 
there would be bounds to individual liberty, 
and yet a measure of freedom— a permission 
to choose a preference among the forms and 
doctrines of these associated sects, and still permit 
them to be recognized as "orthodox." 

This is, in fact, the case now, among the so-called 
"liberal minds" of all denominations; 
and it is being urged that an organization of 
this sort, already founded in the Evangelical 
Alliance, be fully consummated, and that an 
attempt be made to have such a composite 
church in some degree recognized by the government. 
The latest effort in this direction is 
"The Brotherhood of Christian Unity," of 
which we had something to say in our issue of 
Dec. 1, '92. 

But, even when fully consummated, this could 
be no more than a union in name, with the 
same divisions and differences in fact— one 
church nominally, but many sects really. 

The first danger against which the Apostle 
warned the Church was sectarianism; and he 
was evidently heeded at the time at least, for 
no great sects of Paulites or Apollosites developed. 
But, as usual, the great enemy, 
thwarted in one direction, moved to the opposite 
extreme, and attempted to insist upon 
a oneness very different from what our Lord or 



the apostles ever taught. This attempt was to 

have every recognized member of the Church 

think exactly alike, on every minutia of Christian 

doctrine. This attempt finally developed 

into Papacy, where every matter of doctrine 

was decided by the popes and councils; and 

every man who desired to be considered a 

church member was obliged to accept such decisions 

fully, and to profess that such decisions 

were his belief, his faith; whereas they were 

not his in any sense but that of adoption. 

They were generally either blindly received or 

hypocritically professed with mental 

reservations. 

This was not at all the oneness urged by 
Paul. He urged a oneness of heart and mind, 
and not a thoughtless, heartless or hypocritical 
profession. He urged a oneness such as naturally 
results from the proper exercise of the 
liberty which we have in Christ— to search and 
believe the Scriptures, and to grow in grace 
and in knowledge, every man being thus fully 
persuaded in his own mind, and firmly rooted 
and grounded in the one faith as set forth in 
the Scriptures. The oneness of faith which 
Paul urged was not that elaborate faith which 
touches and embraces all subjects, heavenly 
and earthly, divine and human, revealed and 
unrevealed. Quite the contrary: Paul's letters, 

R1572 : page 262 

weighty with logical reasoning, do not 
even mention the subjects upon which sectarians 
do most insist, and which are by them 
generally made tests of fellowship. 

Paul said nothing about an everlasting torture 
of sinners; he said nothing whatever about 
a mysterious trinity, in which three Gods are 
incomprehensibly one God and at the same 
time three Gods; he said not a word about 
man being of a nature such as could not die but 
must live everlastingly, in a place of either 
pleasure or woe; he said nothing, either, about 
the present life ending all trial for all classes; 
and he entered into no entangling discussion 
about the bread and wine used in commemoration 
of the Lord's death— as to transubstantiation 
or consubstantiation; yet it can easily 
be discerned that he was not in harmony with 
any of these errors. 

Notice particularly, however, that without so 
much as mentioning a single one of these sectarian 
tests of fellowship, Paul declares— "I 
have not shunned to declare unto you the whole 
counsel of God." (Acts 20:27.) From this it 



is very evident that none of these points, which 
are to-day regarded as the very essence and 
substance of Christian doctrine and as the 
proper tests of faith, are the one faith, or in 
any sense or degree parts of "the faith once 
delivered unto the saints."— Jude 3. 

The one faith, which all should hold, was a 
very simple one; one so simple that all, the 
learned and the unlearned alike, could grasp 
it and comprehend it, and be "fully persuaded 
in their own minds" concerning it. It was 
not a dose of incongruous mysteries, inconsistent 
with themselves and inharmonious with 
reason as well as with the Bible, to be swallowed 
by the ignorant with credulity, and by 
the learned with hypocritical mental reservations; 
but it was so simple, and clear, and 
reasonable, that any and every honest follower 
of Christ could be fully persuaded in his own 
mind concerning it. 

What was this one faith? The basis of it is 
stated by Paul, thus: "I delivered unto you first 
of all, that which I also received [first of ali- 
as a foundation truth or doctrine, upon and in 
harmony with which all other doctrines must 
be built], how that Christ died for our sins, according 
to the Scriptures; and that he was 
buried; and that he rose again the third day, 
according to the Scriptures." (1 Cor. 15:3,4.) 
"There is one God and one Mediator between 
God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave 
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time."— 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

This, in a word, confesses sin and utter helplessness; 
it acknowledges God's loving plan 
for our redemption; it owns that our Lord's 
death was our ransom price; and that forgiveness 
(justification), and reconciliation to God, 
and the restitution of believers, come as a result 
of faith in this Redeemer, when in due 
time it is made known to each and all. 

These brief statements contain the whole 
gospel, in the same sense that an acorn contains 
an oak tree. Without this gospel kernel, 
the true gospel can never be possessed; hence 
this must be insisted on as a test of Christian 
fellowship. This must be received, else the 
gospel is not received. When it is received, 
the gospel is received. Then a work of growth 
begins— a development of this gospel. It may 
vary in rapidity of growth according to temperament 
and surroundings; it can develop into 
a twig, a sapling, a sturdy oak successively, 
but the nature of the seed will appertain to it in 
every stage of its development. So is faith— 
the true faith: it must begin with the one kind 



of seed-faith in all, no matter what stage of 
development each may attain. This one gospel 
acknowledges man's fall and sinfulness, and 
God's mercy and love manifested through 
Christ's great work of redemption, forgiveness 
and final restoration of all the willing and obedient, 
but of no others. All theories, and they 
are many, which omit any of these items are 
spurious. 

Some deny God's love in the matter, and 
claim that all the love was Christ's, and that he 
interposed and thwarted the Father's original 
plan; but those of the one faith are guided by 
our Lord's own testimony, that God so loved 
the world that he devised the plan as it is being 
carried forward, and sent his only begotten 
Son to do what he has done and is yet to 
do for the world. (John 3:16,17.) Others 

R1572 : page 263 

deny that any redemption was accomplished by 
the death of our Lord Jesus, deny that his life 
was substituted as a corresponding price or 
"ransom for all," and claim that the Father 
does all by simply pardoning the sinners. But 
again the one faith is clearly pointed out by 
the words of Paul— "There is one mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 
who gave himself a ransom [corresponding 
price] for all." 

When received into honest hearts, this simple 
gospel, the true gospel, will gradually open 
up and spread its roots of reason and its 
branches of hope in every direction, feeding 
upon the promises of God, building itself up 
as he designed, and grasping, as it progresses, 
the "one baptism" (See TOWER, June 15, '93) 
and every other feature of the gospel in its 
fulness. 

Note the difference between this, God's test, 
on the simple first principles of the gospel, and 
the wrong course of men who attempt to enforce 
upon all an entire system of faith (and 
that when they are the merest babes in Christ), 
so fettering them, then, that their growth is 
hindered. To ask babes in Christ to assent 
to thirty or forty articles of faith arranged 
by fellow-men, and to agree to take those as 
the infallible truth, and to promise never to 
believe either more or less than they contain, 
is like selecting in an orchard one gnarled and 
crooked tree, as a standard, and requiring all 
the other trees to be padded out to make them 
look as thick and as gnarled as the sample, and 
to be bound with iron bands that they might 



never grow larger or straighter. 

This true gospel, this simple faith, easily 
understood and confessed by the weakest babe 
in Christ, must also be, and always, and equally, 
the faith of the most developed sons of God. 
This one faith (and not the endless ramifications 
and details of faith which lead out from 
it) Paul placed as a standard or test of all 
claiming the name Christian. All the consecrated 
who agreed on this one standard, or 
foundation truth, Paul counted as in and of the 
one Church. While each member was to grow 
in grace, knowledge and love, there would always 
be harmony and oneness in the faith and 
fellowship of the Church, if all growth were 
kept in line and harmony with this foundation 
truth. 

Here was a perfect basis of union, which allowed 
for all the various stages of individual 
development in the truth, and which most effectually 
guarded against errors. For if this 
simple creed were to-day made the standard 
by which all doctrines should be tested, it would 
speedily lead to the discarding of every error 
and to the true union of the Church in the 
"one Lord, one faith and one baptism." 

The endeavor to compel all men to think alike 
on all subjects, culminated in the great apostasy 
and the development of the great Papal 
system; and thereby the "gospel," the "one 
faith," which Paul and the other apostles set 
forth, was lost— buried under the mass of uninspired 
decrees of popes and councils. The 
union of the early Church, based upon the simple 
gospel and bound only by love, gave place 
to the bondage of the Church of Rome— a slavery 
of God's children, from the degradation 
of which multitudes are still weak and suffering. 

The Reformation movement of the sixteenth 
century came as an effort to regain liberty of 
conscience; but, deluded by the idea of an 
elaborate creed, insisted upon for so many centuries, 
the reformers and their followers formed 
other systems of bondage very similar to that 
of Papacy, though slight modifications gave 
liberty to fuller ideas on some subjects. And 
so it has been ever since: each new reform 
movement has made the failure of attempting 
to make a creed just large enough for its prime 
movers. 

A "CHURCH TRUST" UNDESIRABLE. 



But while division in the Church of Christ 



are very wrong, and very contrary to the will 
and word of our Lord, they are better far than 
a union in bondage under Papacy's system, 
creed, etc. Instead, therefore, of attempting 
to get all the sects to combine in a sort of 
"Church Trust," an image or likeness of the 
Papal system of oneness (though on a higher 
plane), to regulate and restrict further investigation 
and further growth, we need to do the 
very opposite— to abolish all sects and all elaborate 

R1572 : page 264 

creeds and confessions of faith. Instead 

of being further bound (by such a Church Trust 

Union— or wheel within a wheel, double imprisonment), 

all bondage should be set aside, 

except the simple tests first imposed in the one 

faith once delivered to the saints; and all 

party sectarian names should be repudiated, 

and the name of Christ should be the only 

name borne by his Church. 

Such a breaking down of sectarian fences 
would leave the true children of God willing 
to accept the original and simple test— "all 
one in Christ Jesus;" and this is what is 
needed. It would destroy sectarian pride, 
which so often counterfeits true Christian zeal 
and love, but it would tend to develop the truth, 
and thereby to develop the real zeal for the 
truth which our Lord desires in his followers. 
The term Church of Christ would no longer 
mean to any "our denomination," but, when 
they would sing, 

"I love thy Church, O God, 

Her walls before thee stand, 
Dear as the apple of thine eye, 

And graven on thy hand," 

R1573 : page 264 

they would think, instead, of the one, true and 
only Church. 

Under such conditions, recognizing the true 
and only test, as above quoted from Paul, 
those who formerly championed opposite sides 
of the various questions of doctrine would join 
heads and hearts in carefully weighing the 
various statements of the Scriptures; and, truly 
seeking the divine plan, they would ere long, 
as promised, be guided into all truth. 

They would join hearts and hands as Christians, 
and while their heads might not at once 
agree on certain points, it would be only a 
question of a short time; for the unbiased study 
of God's plan, with no sectarian theory and 



organization to uphold, would bring the heads 
of all into union and general harmony, even 
though, as at first, the growth of faith-roots 
and faith-branches might vary. All would believe 
the "same things," even if some could see 
and believe more elaborately than others.— 
Phil. 3:15,16. 

This freedom, and yet harmony and union, 
which is the result of a full acceptance of God's 
will and Word, will not be attained in the 
present age except by the few, the "overcomers." 
Others, the Scriptures show, will continue 
in sectarian bondage, and even increase 
their bondage-union by a Church Trust or 
"confederacy" (Isa. 8:12), until, in the close 
of this time of trouble, all this is corrected by 
the fall of sectarian systems as well as of present 
political governments.— Dan. 12:1; 
Rev. 18:2-5. 

In the next age, during the world's trial, 
such great deceiving systems will not be permitted; 
but now they are permitted in order 
to the testing and manifesting of the 
"overcomers." 

Let the dear saints who now walk the narrow 
way, and whose names are "written in 
heaven" as probationary members of the one, 
true Church of Christ, patiently persevere in 
worshiping God after the manner which others 
term "heresy"— closely studying and believing 
all that is written in the inspired Word, 
however it may conflict with human creeds 
and the opinions of so-called great theologians. 
Be simple enough to take God at his Word, 
however church monopolies or trusts may seek, 
either willingly or unintentionally, to wrest it 
to their own advantage. Flee all so-called 
unions, which are merely bondages. What is 
needed is fewer of such unions, not more. 
Each individual needs to feel and exercise the 
same liberty on doctrine that each sect now 
claims. From this standpoint the bondage-union 
of the church under Papacy was the 
worst and most complete enslavement of the 
individual Christian; and the full breaking up 
of all sectarianism, so that no two persons will 
be bound to hold one faith (except on first-principles) 
is the most desirable condition. 
The breaking of Papacy into a hundred sects, 
each free from the other, was a good work, 
tending to the realization of the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free. Though at first regarded 
as a calamity, it soon came to be known 
as the Reformation. And now the breaking 
up of these numerous sects, so that each individual 
will be free, is essential to a fuller 



growth in grace, knowledge and love than is 

at present possible. This breaking up of sectarianism, 

R1573 : page 265 

now regarded as a calamity, will by 

and by be recognized as truly the greatest of 

all religious reformations. The signs of the 

times indicate that such a reformation is impending, 

and the Scriptures declare it. A little 

more light, a little more knowledge, and 

these sectarian shackles upon the individual 

conscience will fall. Then whatever union 

shall exist will be upon right principles— a 

union of hearts and principles and not merely 

a heterogeneous confederacy. Recognizing 

each other's personal liberties, each disciple of 

Christ will be bound to the other by his love 

of the Lord and of his Word alone; and others 

will be separated. 

Sectarianism has wofully distorted that beautiful 
figure of Christian union given by our 
Lord, recorded in John 15:1-6. To fit it to 
sectarianism, and to make their error in this 
appear to be supported by God's Word, it is 
claimed that the "vine" is the whole church, 
and that the various denominations of "Christendom" 
are the branches. But that the 
Lord's words will bear no such construction 
must be evident to any one who will give the 
passage candid consideration. The branches 
are the individuals, and "any branch" is defined 
by our Lord's own words to be "any 
man." Let this, our Lord's illustration of the 
proper union of all the branches in one vine, 
connected and nourished by the same sap, from 
the same roots, teach us of true union and 
personal freedom in the body of Christ. 



Suppose that the salaries and "livings" of 
all ministers, bishops, priests, etc., were cut 
off, all churches, chapels and cathedrals destroyed, 
all theological seminaries broken up, 
and their professors turned to other pursuits, 
all religious guilds and societies disbanded, including 
all sectarian organizations— what would 
be the effect? 

Who can doubt that it would be a real blessing 
under the disguise of a great and terrible 
catastrophe? The effect would be to bring true 
Christians together as the family of God, and 
not as sectarian bands; to study God's Word, 
and not human traditions and creeds formulated 
in the dark ages. Very soon, unhindered, 



God's Word would be heard by all truly 
his; and one Lord, one faith and one baptism 
would soon be the result, while the worldly 
mass would speedily drift apart, and the true 
distinction between the Church and the world 
would be discernible. The Scriptures seem to 
indicate that very much of this sort of destruction 
of present systems must take place before 
all the "wheat," the true Church, will be separated 
from the "tares," the mere professors. 
Party spirit and love of sect are so strong that, 
apparently, nothing short of a complete wreck 
of all the sects will suffice to set free all of 
God's children now bound and blindfolded in 
and by them. 

This catastrophe— sectarian destruction, the 
fall of Babylon— is what is referred to in the 
Book of Revelation under the symbol of the 
seven last plagues. (Rev. 15-18.) The pain 
from these will consist largely of mental chagrin, 
the disappointment of sectarian hopes 
and plans, and the wounding of sectarian pride. 
When the Master said, "Watch ye, that ye may 
be accounted worthy to escape all these things 
coming upon the world," it included the pain 
of these plagues, as well as other annoyances 
to which the world will be subject because of 
ignorance of the real plan of God. It is of 
escape from these plagues that the Revelator 
(our Lord— Rev. 1:1) speaks to us, saying, 
"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not 
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not 
of her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

THREE VIEWS OF THE CHURCH. 



Brother Wright sends us the following clipping, 
with the remark, "Two views well stated. 
Please give us the third and true one, Brother 
Russell." 

"There are two conceptions of the Church, 
which, for convenience, I shall designate as the 
Protestant and Catholic conceptions. The 
Protestant idea of the Church is that it is a 
voluntary association of believers in Christ; 
that those who think alike upon religious subjects 
join together in a society and choose their 
pastor, who derives his commission and his 
authority from them. Consequently they are 
at liberty to prescribe what he shall and shall 
not teach, or to unmake their church and make 
another, precisely as the members of a club, 

R1573 : page 266 



or of a political party, have a right to withdraw 
and form a new organization. The Protestant 
theory of the Church is that of an aggregation 
of individuals, 'who can rearrange 
themselves at will, and thus create new churches 
at every re-arrangement.' (Ewer.) The Catholic 
theory, on the other hand, is that it is an 
organization which God Almighty has founded 
once for all, to last to the end of time, and into 
which he invites men: it is his family, his 
household, his kingdom, his city. Its officers 
are commissioned by him and hold their authority 
as teachers only from him. In a word, 
the Catholic Church is not a democracy but 
an empire, not a republic but a kingdom. As 
such, it comes to man with divine authority: 
its officers are under oath to the Eternal King, 
and they are to minister to man in his name, 
and for him."— The Living Church. 

In presenting the true view of the Church, 
we labor under the disadvantage that for fifteen 
hundred years people have been taught 
one or the other of the above views, or combinations 
of both, while the true idea has been 
generally lost sight of since the second century. 
The true view, as we conceive it, is as 
follows:— 

God's Church, when completed and organized, 
will be all that is given above as the 
Catholic or Episcopal view. But it is not yet 
completed, and hence not yet organized. When 
organized, it will be clothed with power, and 
will be, "not a democracy, but an empire; not 
a republic, but a kingdom. As such it [will] 
come to man [the world— during the Millennium] 
with divine authority [and with power 
to back up that authority]. Its officers are 
[then to be] under oath to the Eternal King, 
and they are to minister to man in his name, 
and for him." All this, it is to be noted, fits 
exactly to the coming reign of the Church, 
when it shall "bless all the families of the 
earth;" but it does not fit at all to the present 
state or condition. There is no organization 
to-day clothed with such divine authority to 
imperiously command mankind. There is no 
organization doing this to-day; though we are 
well aware that many of them in theory claim 
that they ought to be permitted to do so; and 
many more would like to do so. 

R1574 : page 266 

This was the fatal mistake into which the 
Church began to fall in the second century; 



and the effort to realize this false conception 
culminated in the boastful, imperious counterfeiting 
of the coming Kingdom in Papacy, which 
for centuries sought to dominate the world, by 
claimed "divine authority." This idea has 
more or less pervaded and poisoned the ideas 
of all the Protestant "clergy" as well; who, 
copying Papacy's false ideas of the Church, 
claim also that the Church of Christ is now 
organized, though they make less boastful claims 
to "divine authority," to teach and rule mankind 
in general, than Papacy does. 

God's Church is not yet organized. On the 
contrary, the Gospel age has been the time for 
calling out and testing the volunteers willing to 
sacrifice and suffer with their Lord now, and 
thus prove themselves worthy (Rev. 3:4,5,21; 
2 Tim. 2:1 1,12; Rom. 8:17) to be organized 
as joint-heirs in his Kingdom at the close of 
the Gospel age, when he shall "set up" or 
organize his Kingdom in power and great 
glory, to bless and rule the world with "divine 
authority." 

In the meantime, these unorganized but merely 
called out ones, who are seeking to make 
their calling and election sure, that they may 
obtain a share in the Kingdom (2 Pet. 1:10; 
2 Cor. 5:9), are "a voluntary association of believers, 
drawn together for mutual assistance 
in seeking to know and to do the Master's 
will, that they may be accounted worthy the 
honors and glories promised, and not now to 
rule men by divine authority; for they have as 
yet no such authority. In this "voluntary association" 
of the consecrated there is no imperial 
authority of one over another; and no 
lording over God's heritage should be permitted; 
for the one and only Lord has left the 
instruction, "Be not ye called Rabbi; for one 
is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are 
brethren. "--Matt. 23:8. 

Instead of the kingly and lordly rule prevailing 
in the customs of the world, the Master 
gave all another and an opposite rule, saying, 
"Ye know that they which are accounted to 
rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over 
them; and their great ones exercise authority 
upon them. But so shall it not be among you; 
but whosoever will be great among you, shall 

R1574 : page 267 

be your minister [literally, servant]; and whosoever 
of you will be the chiefest, shall be 
servant of all [or greatest servant]; for even 
the Son of man came not to be ministered unto 



[to be served], but to minister [to serve], 
and to give his life a ransom for many."— 
Mark 10:42-45. 

The Lord was chief servant; and those among 
the apostles who served the Church at greatest 
cost to themselves— Paul, Peter, John and James 
—are esteemed, by those who have the spirit 
of the truth, in proportion to their service, and 
not in proportion to their titles, their priestly 
vestments, or their praise among men, etc., of 
which they had none. 

The Church, or company of believers, probationers 
for coming glory, in its "voluntary 
association," was indeed to recognize "teachers," 
"helps," "apostles," etc., but not to make 
them. If they recognize a man "mighty in 
the Scriptures," "apt to teach," able to make 
clear the divine plan, and specially qualified to 
build them up in the most holy faith, they 
gladly acknowledge God's favor in raising up 
among them such a servant of all to assist them 
in the understanding of his Word. But they 
should be careful always, even while rejoicing 
in and thanking God for such a servant, to require 
a "thus saith the Lord" for every point 
of doctrine, and to search the Scriptures daily 
to see whether these things be so— whether the 
deductions and arguments of the teacher agree 
with the whole testimony of God's revealed 
plan. 

Thus the Lord is the teacher of his followers, 
sending, now and again, of their own number, 
certain ones to call attention to truths 
being overlooked, or to injurious errors being 
entertained. The "meek" among the probationers 
will hear the Master's voice by whomsoever 
he speaks; and these will be guided into 
the truth, and prepared in due time for 
organization as his Kingdom. "The meek 
will he teach his way."— Psa. 25:9. 

Thus seen, both the Catholic and the Protestant 
views of the Church are erroneous. The 
Catholic view gets the future organization applied 
to the present time, and the Protestant 
view, though ridding itself of some of that error, 
carries along enough of it to injure itself; 
for, instead of admitting all consecrated believers 
into a "voluntary association," in which 
God would raise up his own teachers, Protestantism 
attempts also to organize and bind with 
creeds and confessions into various sects, each 
of which, anxious to perpetuate itself and its 
ideas, selects and makes its own teachers in its 
own seminaries. 

THE TRUE CHURCH. 



To-day there are many organizations claiming 
to be the Church, and having various bonds 
of union; but we wish now to show, upon the 
authority of God's Word, first, what Church 
our Lord established, and what are its bonds 
of union; second, that every Christian should 
belong to that Church; third, the injurious 
effects of joining the wrong church; and fourth, 
having joined the right Church, what would 
be the results of losing our membership. 

First, then, the Church which our Lord Jesus 
began to gather during his ministry, and which 
was recognized by the Father at Pentecost, 
after the ransom price for all was paid, was the 
little company of disciples who had consecrated 
earthly time, talents and life, a sacrifice 
to God. Theirs was a "voluntary association" 
for mutual aid; and this society was 
under the laws and government of Christ, its 
head or recognized ruling authority. The bonds 
were bonds of love and common interest. 
Since all were enlisted under the captaincy of 
Jesus, the hopes and fears, joys and sorrows 
and aims of one were those of the others; and 
thus they had a far more perfect union of hearts 
than could possibly be had from a union on 
the basis of any man-made creed. Thus their 
only union was of the spirit; their law for the 
government of each was love; and all, as a 
whole, were put under obedience to the "law 
of the spirit," as it was expressed in the life, 
actions and words of their Lord. Their government 
was the will of him who said, "If ye 
love me, keep my commandments." 

There are two senses in which the true Church 
of Christ may be considered: All who, like 
the early Church, are fully consecrated to the 
doing of our Father's will, amenable only to 

R1574 : page 268 

Christ's will and government, recognizing and 
obeying none other— these, the saints, from 
the beginning of the gospel age down to its 
close, when all of this class are sealed— 
constitute 

"THE CHURCH OF THE FIRST-BORN, 



[whose names are] written in heaven." These 
are all one in aim, hope and suffering, and in 



due time will be joint-heirs with Christ Jesus 
to the great "inheritance of the saints in 
light"— joint-heirs with him of the Kingdom 
which God has promised to them that love him. 

The other sense, in which this same class is 
recognized, is by counting a part for the whole. 
Thus all the living of this class may be spoken 
of as "the Church;" or, again, any part of this 
class of living followers who may meet together 
may properly be called the Church; for, wherever 
two or three are assembled, the Lord has 
promised to be among them. Consequently, 
that would be a Church meeting— an assembly 
of "the Church of the First-born." The general 
assembly will be when all the Church are 
made like their Head, and glorified with him. 

Such, then, is our definition of the Church 
of Christ. It is perfectly illustrated by Paul 
(Rom. 12:4,5), when he compares the Church 
to a human body. In this figure the head represents 
our Lord, and all who are his constitute 
the body, over which the head rules. Jesus 
has been and always will be the Head over his 
Church as a whole; he is likewise the Head 
and ruler of the entire living Church; and 
in every assembly where two or three meet 
in his name (when his Word is sought and 
heeded), he is the Head, ruler and teacher.— 
Eph. 1:20-23. 

If it be asked, In what sense does he teach? 
we answer, by exercising the qualities of the 
Head or teacher; by using one or more of those 
present as his mouth-pieces in unfolding truth, 
strengthening faith, encouraging hope, inspiring 
zeal, etc., just as the head of the human 
body calls upon one member to minister to another. 
But here a word of caution: If one become 
as useful a member as a right hand, he 
should take care that he assume not the position 
and authority of the Head, to put forth 
his own words and ideas as truth. He must 
ever remember that his highest honor is to be 
an index-finger to point out, or a mouth-piece 
to express, the will of the one Lord and Master. 
Be not puffed up: pride will paralyze and 
render useless. "Be not ye called Rabbi 
[master, teacher], for one is your Master [head], 
even Christ, and all ye are brethren." And 
let not the least member despise his office, 
"for if all were one member, where were the 
body?" "Nay, those members of the body 
which seem to be more feeble are necessary" 
—"God hath set the members, every one of 
them, in the body, as it hath pleased him."— 
ICor. 12:12-31. 

How simple, beautiful and effectual is God's 



plan of the "voluntary association" of his 
children ! 

This brings us to our second proposition, viz." 
that all Christians should be joined to this association 
or incipient organization. In the 
light of what has just been said as to the class 

R1575 : page 268 

constituting the Church which our Lord is 
calling, it is evident that if you have given up 
all your will, talent, time, etc., you are recognized 
by the Lord as a probationary member 
of the Church, of which he is the Head, and 
whose names are written in heaven. Thus, by 
consecration, we join the true Church, and have 
our names recorded in heaven. But, says one, 
must I not join some organization on earth, 
assent to some creed, and have my name written 
on earth? No: remember that our Lord 
is our pattern and teacher, and neither in his 
words nor acts do we find any authority for 
binding ourselves with creeds and traditions 
of men, which all tend to make the Word of 
God of none effect, and bring us under a 
bondage which will hinder our growth in grace 
and knowledge, and against which Paul warned 
us, saying, "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made you free, and 
be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage." 
-Gal. 5:1. 

Another says: If it is not proper to unite 
with any of the present nominal churches, would 
it not be well to form a visible association of 
our own? Yes, this is what we have— a society 
modeled after that of the early Church. 

R1575 : page 269 

We think we have come back to primitive 
simplicity. The Lord Jesus alone is our Head 
or law-giver; his Word is our rule of faith and 
practice; the holy Spirit is our interpreter and 
guide into truth; our names are all written in 
heaven; and we are bound together by love 
and common interest. 

Do you inquire— How shall we know one 
another? We ask, How can we help knowing 
one another when the spirit of our Master is 
made manifest in word and act and manner 
and look? Yes, the living faith, the unfeigned 
love, the long-suffering meekness, the childlike 
simplicity, coupled with the constancy and zeal 
of maturity, make manifest the sons of God, 
and we need no earthly record, for the names 
of all such are written in the Lamb's book of life. 



Do the sick need visiting or assistance? 
These stand ready with consecrated time. Does 
the Lord's work require money? These stand 
ready with consecrated means. Does his work 
bring upon them the reproach of the world, and 
of a degenerate nominal church? These have 
also sacrificed reputation and all else to God. 

But, again, do you inquire, How shall we 
deal with one who walks disorderly in our 
midst? if we have no organization such as we 
see about us, how can we free ourselves from 
such, as the Lord requires us to do? We answer: 
Do just as the Scriptures direct. 

Now, as in the early Church, there are various 
degrees of advancement among the individual 
members, and, Paul says (1 Thes. 5:14), 
some are feeble-minded, comfort them; some 
are weak, support them; but, while you should 
be patient toward all, warn the disorderly 
(those who are drifting away from the true 
spirit of Christ). Don't mistake the disorderly 
for the weak, and comfort them, nor for the 
feeble-minded, and support them; but patiently, 
lovingly, warn the disorderly. Whom does 
he call disorderly? There are many ways of 
walking disorderly. In 2 Thes. 3: 1 1, he speaks 
of some who work not at all, but are busy-bodies, 
and says they should do as he did— work, that 
they be not chargeable to any; and if any will 
not work, neither should he eat. Thus he 
said he did, that he might be an example to 
others; and (verse 14), after you have warned 
such a one, if he "obey not,. ..note that 
man, and have no company with him, that he 
may be ashamed.... Yet count him not as 
an enemy, but admonish him as a brother." 
He warns us also against immoral and unjust 
persons, and those who wrest (twist) the Scriptures, 
and thus turn the truth of God into a lie. 
And the following citations clearly show that, 
in the Apostle's estimation, doctrinal disorders 
are among the chief.— 2 Thes. 3:6-14; 1 Cor. 5:11; 
Eph. 5:6-11; Rom. 16:17; 2 John 9-11; 
Gal. 1:8,9; Tit. 3:10. 

Our Lord gives explicit directions where 
there is a matter of offense between two brethren 
(Matt. 18:15,17): "If thy brother shall 
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault 
between thee and him alone. If he shall hear 
thee, thou hast gained thy brother; but if he 
will not hear thee, then take with thee one or 
two more, that in the mouth of two or three 
witnesses every word may be established. And 
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto 
the Church [the company of brethren who assemble 
together]; but if he neglect to hear the 



Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen 
man and a publican." If, under the captaincy 
of our Head, we heed his commands, which 
we will do if we love him, how few will be the 
misunderstandings and difficulties among the 
brethren. And if the true brotherhood in 
Christ is in any degree realized, the admonition 
of the Apostle will be gladly heeded— "Not 
forsaking the assembling of yourselves together, 
and so much the more, as ye see the day drawing 
on."-Heb. 10:25. 

And if new converts be properly begotten 
by the Word of Truth, they will be far more 
eager to meet with two or three possessed of 
the right spirit and seeking to understand the 
Word of the Lord, than they would be to mingle 
with those whose religion consists chiefly 
of forms of godliness. And here will be the 
opportunity for those who are strong [in the 
faith and love of God] to bear the infirmities 
of the weak and not to please themselves 
merely— in the choice of subjects, studies, etc. 

Should the newly enlightened one know none 
with whom he can meet personally and regularly, 
let him not forget his privilege of communion 

R1575 : page 270 

with the Father and the Son in prayer, 
and with the WATCH TOWER by mail; and let 
him seek for others of the truth-hungry among 
his neighbors— "holding forth the Word of 
life," the Truth. 

This association has its evangelists, pastors 
and teachers, appointed and directed by the 
Lord. (1 Cor. 12:28.) They need no laying 
on of hands by the so-called "apostolic succession;" 
for the "Spirit of the Lord hath 
anointed" all the members of the body "to 
preach," etc. (Isa. 61:1), and it is the duty 
of every member of the body to exercise his 
office for the edification of the other members. 
All the true Church are priests, an association 
of priests, and not an association under the 
control of a clerical or priestly class. (1 Pet. 2:9.) 
There is one great Bishop or overseer, 
who, from time to time, raises up and sends 
his own special messengers to uncover truths, 
overthrow errors, etc.— Luther seems to have 
been one of these, and Wesley another. But 
our Lord retains the Bishopric himself. (1 Pet. 2:25.) 
How complete is the voluntary union 
of the Church of Christ, with its heaven-written, 
love-bound, Spirit-ruled membership, and 
how sad the error of mistaking the nominal for 
the real Church! 



The importance of our fourth proposition 
need not be urged. It would, indeed, be a 
dreadful calamity to lose our membership in 
the true Church or body of Christ. And no 
member is out of danger except when keeping 
a vigilant watch over the old nature, counted 
dead, lest it come to life again, and assert itself 
in the form of pride, selfishness, envy, 
evil-speaking— or what not? But, filled with 
love (the love that prompts to sacrifice), and 
clothed with humility, and under cover of the 
redeeming blood, we are safe in the Church 
(the body), having the assurance that it is our 
"Father's good pleasure to give us the 
Kingdom." 

Yes, the Kingdom is the glorious destiny of 
the true Church— the "little flock"— now treading 
the pathway of humiliation, and drinking 
the bitter cup of death. The glory that shall 
be revealed in us does not yet appear, except 
to the eye of faith, but the temptations and 
trials are very apparent on every hand. "Let 
us, therefore, fear lest, a promise being left us 
of entering into his rest, any of you should 
seem to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 

Thus Paul warned others, and thus he feared, 
lest even after having preached to others, he 
himself should be a castaway. (1 Cor. 9:27.) 
We may have our names cast out as evil by 
those of the nominal church, and yet "rejoice 
and be exceeding glad because our names are 
written in heaven." They may frown upon us 
and despitefully use us and say all manner of 
evil against us falsely, or they may seek to win 
us back by flattery, saying they cannot afford 
to lose our influence, we could do so much 
good by remaining among them, etc.; but we 
must let none of these things move us; but, 
rather, rejoice that we are counted worthy to 
suffer (Acts 5:41,42) for his name's sake. Oh, 
how necessary in this "evil day" is the faith 
"That bears unmoved the world's dark frown, 

Nor heeds its flattering smile; 
That seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile." 

Dearly beloved, let us again repeat the 
warning: "Stand fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made you free, and be not again 
entangled with the yoke of bondage." 

CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP. 



Humanity longs for fellowship; and, of recent 
years, the morally inclined have very 



generally found this in the nominal, Protestant 

churches— in their committees, socials, prayer-meetings, 

etc. Such fellowship and such influences 

have done much to elevate the tone 

and moral and respectable standard of the 

world; but such fellowships are seldom worthy 

of the name Christian fellowship; because, 

not Christ and his Word, but worldly ambitions, 

pride, dress, show and social gossip are 

generally the grounds and subjects of fellowship. 

Hence, while disapproving church organizations 

as churches, we do esteem them as 

R1576 : page 270 

the highest order of worldly diversion. For, 
although they are often schools in which pride, 
envy, hatred and scandals are cultivated, these 
evils are less gross than the many vices which 
flourish outside these schools of morality. 

R1576 : page 271 

But, however beneficial these social clubs, 
called churches, may be to the world, as tending 
to tone down murder to malice and envy, 
and to moderate theft to slander— the really 
consecrated believer, who has passed from 
death unto life, finds in them but little real 
fellowship, except as he discovers here and 
there a kindred spirit, similarly begotten to 
newness of life,— to new motives, thoughts, 
words and deeds. Nevertheless, custom draws 
them together, and the very thought of disturbing 
that social union is dreadful, because, 
poor as it is, it is all they have. 

Then, to many, there comes the thought of 
influence— upon wife or husband or child or 
sister or brother or friend. What if their withdrawal 
and the admission that their church 
and all others are really worldly and unsatisfying 
should hinder some one from joining 
some church, and thus, outwardly at least, from 
confessing Christ? What then? Perhaps next 
winter their social club will get up a revival of 
religion, and, by dint of an imported revivalist, 
and hymns, and prayers, and sermons, hot 
with descriptions or inferences of the everlasting 
torment awaiting all who do not join some 
sect, some might be induced to assume the 
outward forms of godliness without the power; 
and, by withdrawing now you would be debarred 
from helping them in this work.— What 
then? 

So much the better, we answer. If we have 
found that God's name and character are dishonored 



and misrepresented by every denomination 

of Christendom, why should we want 

our children and friends to join a society under 

those dishonoring confessions of mis-belief? 

Why should we want to join in such work— so 

contrary to all that our Lord and the apostles 

taught and practiced?— which so seriously misrepresents, 

to the seeker after God, the real way 

to find him, and which so deceives the penitent 

as to what is the real "Church of the living 

God"— "whose names are written in heaven?" 

Why should not every one who finds the truth, 

or, rather, who is found by the truth, in this 

time of harvest, be glad to use every atom of 

his influence for the truth, and against those 

errors which bind so many of God's dear saints? 

Surely the more conscientious we are the 
more we must regret the influence already given 
in years past toward error, to God's dishonor 
and to the enslavement of his children; and 
the more must be our anxiety to reverse our 
influence as rapidly as possible, in order that 
our future influence for the truth may as far as 
possible counteract past influence given to error. 
And, if we find the bonds of sectarianism difficult 
and painful to burst, we should the more 
jealously seek to spare our children similar 
pain. An outward confession of full consecration 
to Christ, not lived up to, and of faith 
in a creed not really believed, is an injury to 
whoever makes it. Better far teach your children 
to be honest with themselves, with others, 
and above all with God, than teach them to 
stultify themselves by dishonest professions. 
It will be to their advantage now, as well as in 
the purgatory of the future. See TRACT NO. 
17— Purgatory. 

But, still, we will need fellowship. And the 
scarcity of the proper sort in the nominal 
churches should lead us nearer to the Lord, 
that we may the more appreciate and value his 
love, his Word, his fellowship, and the love 
and fellowship of all who are of his true family 
and spirit. Soon you will learn to appreciate 
the words of our Master— as true respecting 
the worldly church to-day, as in his day— 
"Marvel not, if the world hate you; ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you;" "for 
the friendship of the world is enmity against 
God." Thus, separated more and more from 
the worldly-spirited, you will learn what the 
Apostle meant when he said, "Hereby we 
know that we have passed from death unto life, 
because we love the brethren." Your love for 
Jesus, our Elder Brother, will grow more intense, 
affecting your every thought, word and 



deed, and begetting a love for all who bear his 
likeness; and this love will not depend upon 
wealth or personal beauty or social conditions. 
But only those somewhat grown in the spirit 
and likeness of our Redeemer can appreciate 
such counsel or such fellowship. Others love 
the worldly because the love of the Father has 
not been developed in them, and because they 
do not hate every evil way. 

R1576 : page 272 

THE TRUE CHURCH NOT A SECT. 



The Church of Christ is neither a sect nor 
an aggregation of sects: it is one and indivisible. 
It is Christ and all who are united to him; 
—joined by a living faith in his redemptive 
work for them, and in a full consecration to 
him, his will and his work, even unto death. 
This true Church is represented by our Lord 
himself under the simile of a vine, of which 
and in which all truly his are, individually, 
branches. 

Webster's Dictionary defines the word "sect" 
to mean,— "A part cut off,. ..hence a body 
of persons who have separated from others by 
virtue of some special doctrine, or set of doctrines, 
which they hold in common." 

This description fits all the various denominations 
of Christendom. All separate themselves 
from other Christians; all do so by virtue 
of some doctrine or set of doctrines which they 
hold in common. But the members of the true 
Church are each individually united to Christ, 
and not to each other. As the spokes of a 
wheel are each separately fastened in the hub, 
so each member of the body of Christ is, in 
his inner or spiritual life, bound only to Christ. 
And as the tire steadies and gives unity of operation 
to the spokes at their extremities, so 
love, the bond of perfectness, is the only bond 
that should be permitted between those whose 
wills are buried into Christ's. 

Our Lord declared that he did not come to 
put a patch or amendment upon Judaism, nor 
to put the new wine of his teaching into the 
old bottles of Judaism. It follows that Christianity 
is not a schism or sect or split off from 
Judaism. It is, on the contrary, a new system 
of religious teaching, based upon a New Covenant 
made between God and man by Christ 
the Mediator, whose blood sealed that new 
covenant and made it operative. 



The only test of fellowship therefore is,— to 
be a Christian; one truly united to Christ by 
faith and consecration;— not without a real 
consecration, nor without the true faith. But 
the meaning of a full consecration of thought, 
word and deed is readily understood by some 
who doubt and question what is the true faith 
necessary to the true membership in Christ— 
the faith at first delivered unto the saints by 
our Lord and his apostles. This true faith is 
—that all were sinners, justly under God's condemnation 
to death through the fall; that Christ 
Jesus our Lord died for OUR SINS according to 
the Scriptures, and that he was raised from the 
dead by the Father, who thus gave assurance 
to all that Christ's sin-offering on our behalf 
was complete and fully satisfactory, the signing 
and sealing of the New Covenant under which 
all of Adam's race who are sick of sin and desirous 
of harmony with God can be justified 
and return to his love, favor and blessing. 
(1 Cor. 15:3,4; Rom. 5:1,6,12,18.) Whoever 
holds this simple faith is a believer, a 
member of "the household of faith." Whoever 
with this faith fully consecrates himself 
to the Lord's service is a baptized believer, a 
probationary member of the one, true Church 
whose names are written in heaven. If he 
run the Christian race as he has covenanted to 
do, he will win the prize, and be one of the 
elect Church in glory, granted a place with 
the Lord in his throne. 

This is the basis of our hope: the only foundation 
—the one which no man ever could lay, 
but which God laid for us (1 Cor. 3:11); for, 
"while we were yet sinners, Christ died for 
us" (Rom. 5:8), the "just for the unjust, that 
he might bring us to God." (1 Pet. 3:18.) 
Realizing ourselves as sinners under condemnation 
to death, and that we may have peace 
with God and be justified to life by appropriating 
to ourselves the merits of his death, we 
gladly accept him as our Redeemer. "We 
have redemption through his blood, even the 
forgiveness of sins." (Eph. 1:7.) This is justification; 
and, being thus justified by faith, we 
have peace with God. Then, realizing, further, 
that those who are thus redeemed should not 
live the remainder of their lives to themselves 
and their own pleasure, but to him who died 
for them (2 Cor. 5:14,15), we consecrate ourselves 
to his service. 

Built upon this foundation are the minor 
doctrines and those principles which must be 
worked out in the life. Thus we are admonished 
by the Apostle (2 Pet. 1:5-8) to add to this 



R1576 : page 273 

faith various graces and further attainments— 

of virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, 

brotherly -kindness and charity (love). 

This was the faith of the early Church; and 
this is the faith of all who acceptably bear the 
name of Christ; and such only are properly 
termed Christians. True, the early Church 
progressed beyond these first principles, to the 
use of the "strong meat," and a comprehension, 
with all saints, of the deep things of God; but 
the "babes in Christ," and those "who, by 
reason of use, had their senses exercised," 
were together one family— "all one in Christ 
Jesus." They were not to leave these principles 
by displacing them by other theories, but 
by adding to them as above explained. The 
more advanced in grace and doctrine bore the 
infirmities of the weak, each and all seeking 

R1577 : page 273 

to grow in grace and knowledge, more and 
more. Where this apostolic rule was observed, 
there could be no sect, no division in this 
body. It was only when error began to develop 
in the congregations that Paul wrote to some: 
I hear that there are divisions (sects) among 
you, and I partly believe it; for it is evident 
from what I learn of the worldliness and error 
coming in among you, that there would of 
necessity be divisions; for those true to the 
Lord could not have fellowship with such unfruitful 
works of darkness, but must rather reprove 
them.-lCor. 11:18,19. 

Divisions were objected to in the one true 
Church, and all the apostles taught that there 
is one Lord, one faith and one baptism. There 
is one fold and one Shepherd. (1 Cor. 12:25.) 
Christians are a separated class— separate from 
the world, separate from sinners, separate from 
all others— in that they accept salvation through 
the redeeming blood of Christ. Their sympathy 
and co-operation are not of force, doctrinal 
or other, but merely of love and common 
interest, as fellow-pilgrims and fellow-heirs. 
The doctrine of the ransom serves to guard 
each one thus in Christ against all professing 
Christ's name but denying or ignoring this 
fundamental part of his work. Not collectively 
but individually the saints should have no fellowship 
with works of darkness.— Eph. 5:11. 

It is not remarkable that Satan should seek 
to divide and separate the sheep, and to put 



up fences, such as the denominational creeds 
prove to be, which would hinder some of the 
sheep from following the Shepherd into green 
pastures of fresh and living truth. This would 
be but wisdom on his part. But it is strange 
that he should be able to fetter the reason of 
so many, that they should think it a mark of 
spirituality to say, I am of Luther, a Lutheran; 
I of Calvin or Knox, a Presbyterian; I of 
Wesley, a Methodist, and so on. The Apostle 
Paul, on the contrary, said to some of his day, 
who were in danger of this spirit of sectarianism: 
While one saith, I am of Paul, and I of 
Apollos, and I of Peter, are ye not carnal? 
Is it not in direct opposition to the spirit of 
Christ to think or act thus? "Is Christ divided?" 
Did Paul or Peter or Knox or Calvin 
or Wesley or any one else than Christ die 
for your sins, and redeem you? They, as servants 
of Christ and the Church, should be 
esteemed very highly for their works' sake, but 
to name the Bride after any other than the 
Bridegroom is manifestly improper. 

Oh, that all could see that in God's sight 
there is but one Church— whose names are 
written in heaven— and that God cannot and 
does not sympathize with or recognize any 
split in the real Church. He does not recognize 
the narrow creeds in which so many of 
the sheep are confined and starving. As we 
have shown, he has placed but one fence 
around his fold. Inside of it there is plenty 
of room, for both the lambs and the fully 
matured sheep. 

A PARABLE OF FALSE SHEEP-FOLDS. 



Picture in your mind a fine, large pasture, 
surrounded by a strong and high fence (the 
Law of God), which keeps all the sheep within, 
but which recognizes no means of access to 
that fold (justified condition), except Christ, 
the door, faith in whose sacrifice for sin is the 
only way into the fold. All climbing into the 
fold by any other way are thieves and robbers. 
This is the pasture provided by the Good 
Shepherd for his sheep, for whom he once laid 
down his life. Into the true fold of Christ 
quite a flock of sheep have entered. They belong 

R1577 : page 274 

to the true Shepherd; but, as we look 

before us at the grassy slopes, only a few sheep, 



a little flock indeed, seem to be enjoying the 
liberty of the fold— the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made them free. Where are the others? 
We look, and see inside the door, on either 
side of the pathway, small enclosures. Over 
each is written a peculiar name— Presbyterian, 
Methodist, Baptist, Second Adventist, Roman 
Catholic, Greek Catholic, Episcopalian, Lutheran, 
etc. Looking at these pens we find 
they differ. Some are built like prisons with 
iron frames and bars and chains, others less 
strong, and some are merely marked out "dead 
lines," over which the sheep understand they 
must not go. 

These pens are full of sheep, but they are 
weak, delicate and sickly for lack of proper 
exercise and fresh, nourishing food. They are 
regularly fed, but only upon husks, with occasionally 
a little milk, but they eat without relish 
and get no good from it. Many of them 
are leaner and poorer than when they first entered 
the fold, and some have become blind. 
Strange to say, all seem to be perfectly satisfied, 
each with his own pen, and very seldom 
does one attempt to escape. 

We also noticed that under-shepherds had been 
appointed to help to pasture the sheep, and that 
they had constructed these pens, but apparently 
without the Chief Shepherd's permission. 

Perplexed to know why the sheep thus submitted 
to be penned, we watched to see how 
they were induced to enter the various enclosures. 
As they entered the fold through the 
only door (faith in Christ), each under-shepherd 
tried to impress upon them, as they passed, 
the necessity of getting into one of the many 
pens, and the desirability of the particular one 
he represented. As a consequence, nearly all 
the sheep which entered the fold got penned, 
for they trusted the under-shepherds and followed 
the majority; and only a few passed on 
to enjoy all the liberty of the fold. The under-shepherds 
sought continually to impress upon 
their sheep that the free sheep were heretics 
and en route to destruction. 

We watched to see the end of this matter, 
for we learned that the Chief Shepherd was expected 
by some, and we knew that his coming 
would soon demonstrate whether he approved 
this dividing and imprisoning of his flock. 
Nearly all the under-shepherds claimed that he 
would not come for a long time yet. 

Presently we heard great rejoicing among 
the free sheep. We looked, and found that 
the Chief Shepherd had come quietly, unobservedly 
("as a thief"), and was now recognized 



by some of the sheep; and hence the 
rejoicing. Some of those imprisoned heard 
the Shepherd's voice: they looked and listened, 
yet could scarce believe. It was indeed the 
voice of the Shepherd as he tended and ordered 
his flock. His true sheep seemed to hear his 
voice condemning the penning process, and 
saying to his sheep: "Come out!" 

Some leaped the fences and thus gained liberty 
and food from the Shepherd's hand, while 
others were so weak and faint for lack of nourishment 
that they trembled with anticipation, 
but did not come out through fear of the 
under-shepherds. We noticed, outside the 
fences, that some of the free sheep brought 
food to the bars, thus nourishing the weak ones 
until they were strong enough to leap the fence. 
The under-shepherds, meanwhile, were alert 
with redoubled vigilance, and by varying policies 
sought to keep control of their (?) flocks. 
Some denounced and scoffed at those without, 
and threatened the sheep within; and others 
redoubled the customary exercises— the "forms 
of godliness." 

We waited to see the outcome, and saw the 
unfaithful under-shepherds bound and beaten 
with stripes, the prison-pens all destroyed, and 
the fold used as designed— the flock one, its 
name one, and its head— the true Shepherd who 
gave his life for the sheep— Christ Jesus. 

"COME OUT OF HER, MY PEOPLE!" 



In Revelation 18:4-8, we have most emphatic 
instructions from our Lord, respecting our 
proper course at the present time. This advice 
was not always applicable: not until mystic 
Babylon's fall under divine condemnation, 
which prophecy shows was in A.D. 1878. As 
shown in the Scriptures, Babylon, the mother 
of abominations, had long misrepresented the 

R1577 : page 275 

truth and the true Church, which to a large 
extent was in her and in her daughter systems 
(See M. DAWN, VOL. II., pages 271-282, VOL. 
III., pages 135-197); but her sentence of rejection 
was reserved until the time of "harvest." 

The expression, "Come out of her, my people," 
indicates clearly that some of God's true saints 
have been in Babylon, and that, up to the 
time of her fall, God did not object to their 
being in the nominal church systems, and did 



not call on them to come out. Indeed the 
Lord himself sometimes spoke to and through 
Babylon up to the time when, having knocked 
at the door, declared his presence, and been 
unheeded by the self-conscious, but really blind 
and miserable Laodicea, he spewed her out of 
his mouth (to be no longer his mouth-piece) 
forever.— Rev. 3:14-22. 

But now the judgment of the great Millennial 
day has begun; and its beginning is with the 
Church— to separate the true from the false or 
nominal. 

To accomplish this separation, the truth— 
"the sword of the spirit"— sharper than any 
two-edged sword, is unsheathed. The conflict 
now in progress between truth and error, light 
and darkness, is for the very purpose of testing, 
sifting and separating the "children of light," 
who love the truth, from the children of darkness, 
who love the error. As heretofore shown, 
the second advent of our Lord is in this respect 
like his first advent; and his words, 
"Think not that I am come to send peace on 
earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword" 
(Luke 12:51), are applicable now;— until his 
Church has been gathered and glorified, and 
his Kingdom set up in glorious authority. 

The expression, "that ye be not partakers 
of her sins, and receive not of her plagues," 
implies that, in this time in which they are 

R1578 : page 275 

called out, God's people will be brought to a 

clear knowledge of the truth;— they will see 

clearly what constitute Babylon's sins— errors 

of doctrine and of life. And, when so enlightened, 

those who are God's people, having 

his spirit, his love for right and truth, will hate 

the error and darkness in which for so long 

they have been. Such will be ready and anxious 

to know their duty toward the nominal 

church. The effect of the light of truth upon 

their hearts will be such that they will instinctively 

feel and ask themselves, "What communion 

hath light with darkness?" and will 

be merely asking the Lord to indicate to them 

his wisdom and will. To such the Lord answers, 

through his Word, "Come out of her, 

my people." 

The expression, "that ye be not partakers 
of her sins," is in the nature of a reminder, 
as well as a threat. It is a reminder that, when 
in ignorance of the truth, they had no responsibility 
for the errors and the wrong course of 
Babylon, mother and daughters; but that now 



that they see those errors— those sins— they are 
responsible; and that if now they stay in these 
systems they, by intelligently assenting, are as 
responsible as those who formulated those errors, 
or more so, and will surely and justly 
partake of the consequences. 

But, for various reasons, some seem anxious 
to excuse themselves, and to stay in Babylon. 
Such indicate that they lack the proper spirit 
of the truth, or else that they have not yet 
digested a sufficiency of the "meat in due 
season" to give them the necessary perception 
of her sins, which in the Lord's estimation are 
piled up to heaven. Another confusing thing 
is that some of the daughters of the Roman 
Mother have put away many of the mother's 
outward marks and forms, while retaining much 
of her spirit and doctrines. 

For instance, Baptists, Congregationalists, 
Second Adventists, Disciples, and a few other 
denominations, claim to be without bondage: 
claim that the Bible is their creed and that 
each group or congregation has charge of its 
own affairs, and that the meetings in which 
these independent congregations of each denomination 
unite are merely voluntary associations, 
in which denominational supervision or 
bondage finds no recognition. Then, especially 
with the "Disciples," the confession demanded 
is very simple. But they mostly mention 
the doctrine of the trinity, or eternal torment, 
or both. And where these are not specified, 
they are understood, and if attention be called 
to these subjects, or to the manner of our Lord's 
second coming, or to "the times of restitution," 

R1578 : page 276 

there is always a strong current of opposition, 
and, whether written or unwritten, a creed will 
be found which admits no Biblical examination 
or criticism; and, unless you assent, you 
must either keep quiet or get out. 

The word "creed" comes from credo, and 
means I believe. It is entirely proper that 
every Christian have for himself a creed, a belief. 
And, if a number of Christians come to 
a unity of faith upon the lines of the Word of 
God, their assembling together for fellowship 
and communion is both proper and helpful, as 
the Bible declares. The general difficulty is 
that, when groups of Christians meet as brethren, 
they either make a written or an understood 
creed, which goes beyond the Word of 
God and includes human tradition; or else 
they ignore all faith, and make morality— good 



works— the only basis of fellowship. But, as 
the name indicates, Christians are believers in 
Christ, and not merely moralists. While, therefore, 
a creed is necessary, and he who has none 
has no belief, and would therefore be an unbeliever, 
and while in Christian fellowship harmony 
of faith is necessary to communion, all 
should see that the fellowship and faith of the 
early Church, under divine direction, were built 
upon the first principles of the doctrine of 
Christ; and nothing more nor less should be 
the basis of Christian fellowship here and now. 

We will suggest a safe way to judge whether 
your present associations in the name of Christ 
are part of Babylon or not, and whether, therefore, 
you are one of those called to "Come 
out." It is this: If there is no meeting of the 
congregation at which, either by calling up a 
passage of Scripture for discussion, in which 
discussion you, with others, can present your 
views of God's Word, there is something wrong. 
You cannot long have fellowship there. Your 
light is under a bushel, and will go out, unless 
you give it more liberty. You must come out 
of such condition or your light will become 
darkness. 

But if there be meetings at which you have 
an equal opportunity with others of calling up 
any portion of Scripture and expressing your 
view of its meaning on a par with others, you 
may conclude that you have found at least some 
evidence of Christian liberty; for no Christian 
has the right to refuse to give, when asked, a 
reason for the hope that is in him. And since 
the credo or belief of each Christian professes 
to be built upon God's Word, it follows that 
each should be not only willing but ready at 
all times to change his belief for one more 
Scriptural, if such can be pointed out to him. 

Having found those who follow Berean methods, 
rejoice— but with fear, until you have 
tested them further. Do not abuse their hospitality 
by attempting to monopolize the time: 
be content and thankful to get your proportion 
of it. And, when your choice of a subject 
comes up, see (1) that it is wisely chosen, 
one that will strengthen, and not strangle, your 
hearers. (2) Pray that, as a minister (servant) 
of the truth, you may be "a workman that 
needeth not to be ashamed." (3) Let nothing 
be done through strife, contention or vainglorious 
effort to display yourself or your 
knowledge of the Word; but (4) "speak the 
truth in love," while you speak it none the less 
clearly and forcibly. 

So long as you have such opportunities to 



hear others and to express yourself, you may 
conclude that you are in a safe place. As you 
progress, in hearing from others, and in expressing 
yourself to others freely and candidly, 
either you and they will come into harmony 
in the spirit of the truth, or, if you be Scriptural, 
and they tenacious of views for which 
there is no Scriptural support, they will come 
to hate you and the truth, and soon you will 
find no fellowship with them. 

But in a majority of cases no such proving 
of spirits will be necessary. Generally you 
will find that congregations have formulated a 
creed to which each member is obliged to subscribe; 
—if not in writing or by voice, at 
least by silent assent. In such a case, get 
such creed or confession, and see whether or 
not it fairly, frankly and truthfully represents 
your faith. If it does not, you should lose no 
time in repudiating it, however conscientiously 
ignorant of it you may have been for years 
past. Now you know, and now if you remain 
in, intelligently, you belie yourself, and thus 
prove yourself not a lover of the truth and a 

R1578 : page 277 

pleaser of God, but a lover of error and a 
pleaser of men. 

It does not matter at all that you may have 
told the minister and some or all of the elders 
of the church of your disagreement and disbelief. 
They have no authority with God or 
men to absolve you from your public confession. 
If, for instance, you are a Presbyterian: 
it is not the minister nor the Session nor the 
local congregation merely that you have joined, 
but as well the entire body of Presbyterians, 
everywhere. And so long as you are professedly 
a member, you are obligated in your belief 
and conduct to them all. And before the 
whole world you stand numbered as one of 
them, and as a partner in all that is professed 
by them all in common. If you do not believe 
as they do, it is your duty to them all, and to the 
world, to withdraw, and thus set yourself and 
others right before all. If by the Lord's mercy 
you are one of the few passed from darkness 
into his marvelous light, you will now feel 
ashamed of the doctrines you once delighted 
to confess, and will delight to reduce by one 
the number of errorists, and to add one to the 
number of the despised little flock— disowned, 
indeed, of men, but owned and loved and 
cherished of God. 

As you did not join the minister or Session 



merely, but the congregation and the entire 
denomination, your dissolution of your membership 
should, if possible, be as public as was 
your joining. And, in reply to many inquiries, 
we suggest below a general outline for a letter 
of withdrawal which such as desire are at liberty 
to copy and use. If possible, it should be 
read aloud at some general congregational 
meeting, at which general speaking, remarks, 
etc., are in order— such as a prayer meeting. 
After being read, it should be handed to the 
leader of the meeting as the representative of 
the congregation and officers. If by reason 
of sickness or from any other cause this course 
be not possible, then let it be addressed on the 
envelope to all the members of the official 
board which examines candidates for membership, 
or which represents the congregation in 
spiritual matters. 

The suggested letter follows:— 
Dear Brethren and Sisters, 

Members and Officers of the 

Church. The Lord has of late been teaching 
me some wonderful things out of his Word, 
whereof I am glad. The Bible has become a 
new book to me, so widely have the eyes of 
my understanding been opened. God is now 
my Father, Christ my Redeemer, and all believers 

R1579 : page 277 

my brethren, in a sense never before 
appreciated. 

I would not have you understand that I saw 
a vision or had a special revelation: I merely 
have God's Word, "written aforetime for our 
learning;" but God has recently made it clearer 
to my understanding, through some of his 
servants. Nor do those servants claim special 
inspirations or revelations, but merely that God's 
due time has now come to unseal and make 
known his glorious plan, wisely kept secret in 
the past, as the Scriptures themselves declare. 
-Dan. 12:9. 

Of these blessed things I might mention a 
few, very briefly: I find that the Scriptures do 
not teach the eternal torment of all except the 
saints. I there find that the full penalty of 
wilful sin against clear knowledge will, in the 
language of the Apostle, be "everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord." But, 
still better, if possible, I find that, while so 
many of our race (indeed by far the majority) 
have died in total or partial ignorance of God 
and his offer of life everlasting through Christ, 
God has graciously provided that during the 



Millennial age all such, of the families of the 
earth, shall be blessed with the needed knowledge, 
and granted opportunity for obedience 
unto eternal life. And, further, I find its 
teaching to be, that we, the Gospel Church, as 
joint-heirs with Christ our Lord, are to be 
God's agents in bestowing that great Millennial 
blessing. And, finally, it appears that 
this time of blessing for which God's people 
have so long prayed, saying, "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as it is 
done in heaven," is very near at hand, and 
even now wheat and tares are being separated, 
and soon a great time of trouble will overthrow 
existing institutions and usher in Christ's 
Kingdom of peace and equity. 

R1579 : page 278 

I will be glad to furnish the Scriptural evidences 
of these things to any who may desire 
to search the Word, and to prove whether these 
things be so. 

But now, dear friends, comes an unpleasant 
duty. I find that many of these gems of truth 
are in direct conflict with our views as held 
and taught and confessed in our denominational 
literature; and hence, in honesty to you and, 
myself, I must withdraw from membership 
with you in this church. To remain would be 
to misrepresent your views, and to have you 
misrepresent my views— the doctrine of the 
eternal torment of nine-tenths of our race being 
now in my judgment horrible;— indeed a 
blasphemy against the God of love, whose Word, 
when understood, teaches quite the contrary. 

For nearly. ..years I have tried faithfully 
to keep my engagements with you as a fellow-member 
of this church, and have learned to 
love some of you very dearly— some for social 
qualities and some for saintliness— Christ-likeness. 
It is, therefore, with pain that I announce 
to you my withdrawal, and I owe you 
this explanation. Let me assure you that it is 
not because my love is less than formerly, for, 
by God's grace, I believe it is expanding toward 
him and his, and, sympathetically, toward 
all our race. This action, therefore, is 
not to be understood as a withdrawal from the 
Church of Christ, whose names are written in 
heaven, but merely a withdrawal from the 
...Church, whose names are written on 
earth. I withdraw in order that I may be more 
free in my conscience, toward God and men, 
and that I may most fully fellowship all who 
are heartily the Lord's people— not only such 



in this congregation and denomination, but in 
all others as well. I ask no letter of dismission, 
for I could not hope to be better suited 
elsewhere. So far as I am concerned, I wish 
to remove every barrier between myself and 
fellow pilgrims. So then, to all of you who 
are in Christ Jesus— members of his body— I 
still am a fellow member, a branch in the true 
vine (Christ), whom nothing can separate from 
the love of God in Christ, my Lord.— John 15:5; 
Rom. 8:38,39. 



R1579 : page 278 

THE EMBRYO KINGDOM OF GOD, 

AND ITS PRESENT PRIVILEGES. 

"For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but 
righteousness, and peace, and joy in a holy spirit." 
-Rom. 14:17.- 



THOSE who have studied the subject of the 
Kingdom of God, as presented in the Scriptures, 
and treated in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., 
have not only noticed its prominence in the 
Word of God, and that it constitutes the sum 
and substance of the gospel theme (Matt. 4:23; 
Matt. 10:7; Luke 9:60), but they have also 
marked the difference between the Kingdom 
established in glory and power, and the 
Kingdom in its incipient or formative stage— 
the Kingdom in its humiliation, as it at present 
exists. 

To the Kingdom established (at the second 
presence of Christ) belong all those precious 
promises of its glory. Its dominion shall be 
"from sea to sea, and from the river unto the 
ends of the earth;" its royal members shall 
shine forth as the sun in glory and majesty and 
power; its authority will go forth in righteousness; 
and its blessing of peace and joy and 
justice will be realized by all the families of the 
earth. But to this Kingdom in its humiliation 
belong those prophecies which tell how the 
Kingdom of heaven must suffer violence, how 
the violent should take it by force, and how its 
members would be despised and rejected of men 
and counted as the filth and offscouring of the 
world, and be hated of all men. 

It is easy to see that the one is yet future, 
while the other is present. And it is the 



privilege of the saints who now constitute the 
kingdom in its humiliation, to avail themselves 
of its present privileges, and to look forward in 
joyful anticipation to its future establishment 
and reign. In its future glory we see both its 

R1580 : page 278 

visible, earthly phase, in which Abraham and 
Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets shall sit 
down, and from which all the unworthy of the 

R1580 : page 279 

Jewish age shall be excluded (Luke 13:28; 
Matt. 8:11,12), and also a higher spiritual 
phase, whose royalty will be Christ and the 
apostles and all the faithful overcomers of the 
Gospel age. 

But while we dwell with special delight upon 
the glory and blessing of the established 
Kingdom of the near future, it is our present 
purpose to notice what are the privileges of 
being in the Kingdom now. In the Apostle's 
days, some Christians got the idea that its 
chief privilege consisted in their freedom from 
the ceremonies of the Jewish law, which formerly 
restricted them in eating and drinking 
and enjoined the keeping of sabbaths and holy 
days; and now they rejoiced that they were no 
longer under the Law, but under grace (Rom. 6:14): 
they could eat and drink what they 
pleased, so far as the Law was concerned, and 
might esteem every day alike, or set apart any 
day they might choose to be holy to the Lord. 
(Rom. 14:1-16.) And some, specially prizing 
this liberty, used it thoughtlessly to the 
injury of weaker brethren, who had not yet 
learned of this freedom from the yoke of the 
Law. 

The Apostle remonstrates with these, and 
urges them to more carefulness, lest their good 
be evil spoken of. Then he declares that 
the Kingdom blessings and privileges do not 
consist in a mere release from these requirements 
of the Law, and consequently a little 
more freedom in eating and drinking, etc., but, 
rather, that its privileges consist in "righteousness 
[the imputed righteousness of Christ, making 
us acceptable to God as his sons], and peace 
[there being now "no condemnation to them 
that are in Christ Jesus"], and joy in a holy 
spirit [in the joy that comes from the possession 
of the spirit or mind of Christ]." These 
blessings— of justification through faith in 
Christ, of peace with God, and of joy in the 



possession of a holy mind— are blessings which 
the world cannot give or take away. 

These present blessings are necessary to fit 
us for the inheritance of the Kingdom of God 
in glory and power. Without the blessing of 
justification, we would still be like the world, 
under condemnation, disowned of God and 
disinherited; nor could we be filled with the 
joys of righteousness or hope. But, having 
these, we are privileged to make our calling 
and election sure to the inheritance incorruptible, 
undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved 
in heaven for the called according to 
the divine purpose to be heirs of the established 
Kingdom. 

Being justified and fully consecrated to the 
Lord, how blessed is the further privilege of 
being filled with his holy spirit— a spirit of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, faith, love and 
joy. With such a spirit, the cares of this life 
set lightly in comparison with those not so 
supported, and the joys of hope and of the 
realized fellowship of the Lord, gladden the 
heart, even under the tribulation which the 
Kingdom of heaven now suffers because of the 
world's opposition to it. 

These precious privileges of the Kingdom, 
even in this time of its humiliation, are such as 
the world cannot appreciate. The world might 
appreciate the freedom from the law, which 
permits the eating of any thing which is wholesome 
and good, and which requires no holy 
days, etc.; but these, to the Christian who rightly 
views his privileges in Christ, are minor 
considerations in comparison with those which 
the Apostle enumerates. 

To-day, as well as well as in the days of the Apostle, 
it is occasionally manifest that some do not 
catch the real spirit of their liberty in Christ, 
and their use of it becomes an occasion of 
stumbling to others. If we have learned to 
esteem every day alike— holy unto the Lord, a 
sabbath or rest of faith (Rom. 14:5; Heb. 4:10) 
—shall we offend the conscience of other Christians, 
who regard the first day as holier than 
the rest, by devoting it to the common pursuits 
of life and causing many to stumble? No: 
we rather delight to have the special opportunities 
of such a day before us; and, if other men 
had not ordained such a day, we would feel 
like doing it ourselves, if possible, that we might 
have the privileges of spiritual communion with 
others of like precious faith. 

Our liberty in Christ is not to be made a 
mere occasion of ministering to the flesh in any 
way; but it should rather be accepted as an opportunity 



R1580 : page 280 

to manifest the loyalty of sons, which 
so enters into the spirit of the righteousness of 
the law as to require no special commands or 
prohibitions. The righteousness of the law is 
fulfilled in those who walk not after the flesh, 
but after the spirit. 



R1580 : page 280 

OUR CHICAGO CONVENTION. 



WE have been assured by letters since received, 
as well as by many of the friends 
while the meetings in Chicago were in progress, 
that many, if not all, who attended the 
Chicago Convention were greatly blessed and 
strengthened in the good way. 

The location was all that could be desired, 
facing Washington Park and near the lake 
front. Our meetings were held in a large 
pavilion. The number in attendance was 
about 360, of whom fully 300 came from a 
distance, California, Oregon, Washington, 
Texas, Florida, Ontario, Manitoba, New England 
and Nova Scotia, as well as the nearer 
states, being represented. 

The services of each day began with a prayer 
meeting followed by a short testimony meeting 
in which present experiences, only, were 
in order. There were special topics assigned 
to the prayer meetings for each day, and from 
these it will be seen that the absent ones were 
not forgotten. The topics were as follows: 

(1) The WATCH TOWER office and its 
laborers. 

(2) The Colporteurs, and all laborers in 
the general harvest field. 

(3) The Little Flock, walking in the light 
of present truth. 

(4) The Consecrated yet in the darkness 
of error. 

(5) Prayer for more laborers in the vineyard, 
and for greater wisdom, love and zeal 

for all engaged in it. 

Following these services came a discourse of 
about an hour and a half, then an adjournment 
for dinner, after which the afternoon, from 2 
until 5, was devoted to the public answering 
of questions. The last day was devoted to the 



interest of the Colporteur work; and on the 

day after the close of the Convention, some of 

the experienced Colporteurs remained with 

some of the less successful and the beginners, 

and held a school of colporteuring— giving instructions, 

pointing out good and bad methods, 

manners and expressions, etc. 

It was a happy looking gathering, and the 
soul present that received no blessing has good 
reason to feel that considerable of the fault 
lay in his own state of unpreparedness to share 
the blessing bestowed upon others. But we 
heard only of blessings; and, thanks to the 
Giver of every good and perfect gift, we trust 
and believe that as results of the meetings our 
Lord's honor was increased and a number of 
his saints refreshed and strengthened. And 
we hope that the influence of that Convention 
may extend to the families and neighborhoods 
of those present, whose lights we trust will 
shine brighter and brighter, hereafter, before 
their fellow-saints, before the nominal church 
and before the world. 

The Calvary Baptist Church of Chicago very 
kindly granted us the use of their baptistry; 
and, in all, seventy symbolized their baptism 
into Christ's death by immersion into water. 
The proportion of brethren and sisters was about 
equal, and their ages ranged from 17 to 70 years, 
the average being about 35 years. These who 
thus witnessed to their consecration had generally 
been Christians for a considerable time, 
although there were among them some new 
converts. 

Remaining for a few days after the Convention, 
to have private interviews with some, 
as well as to get a glimpse at the great Columbian 
Fair, the Editor's last public address 
was delivered on Sunday evening, August 27. 
About fifty, chiefly colporteurs, remained, 
and the subject was Prayer. He sought to 
show that it is a mistake to suppose that the 
Lord Jesus may not be addressed in prayer, as 
well as the Heavenly Father,— showed that 
our Lord's expression in John 16:23-27 did 
not mean that our Lord Jesus should no more 
be recognized in prayer, but rather that, as 
the disciples had freedom toward Christ, and 

R1580 : page 281 

confidence in approaching him, he was showing 
them that the time was coming when they 
could approach the Father direct, in his name, 
"because the Father himself loveth you," and 
that, as soon as the sacrifice of atonement 



would be completed and accepted, he could 
recognize these, because redeemed with the 
precious blood.— John 14:13. 

Prayer, it was shown, consists not merely of 
petition or request, but as a general term also 
includes invocation, adoration, communion 
and thanksgiving. It was pointed out that 
the prayers of "babes in Christ" are usually 
requests for earthly favors and blessings, 
whereas the advanced Christian rarely requests 
earthly favors. His prayers are usually thank 
offerings and communion seasons— telling the 
Lord (the Father or the Son, either or both, 
for the Father, as well as the Son, loves us;— 

R1581 : page 281 

John 16:27— and we have promise of communion 
with both;-John 14:23-both are to 
be worshiped and loved equally, for "all men 
should honor the Son even as they honor the Father; 
—John 5:23— but intercourse with the 
Father can be had by us only in the name and 
merit of his Son our Redeemer;— Heb. 10:19) 
of all his trials and troubles and temptations, 
and calling to mind the gracious promises of 
his Word, but not attempting to urge his will 
upon the Lord— fearful even to move the 
Almighty's arm, which, with his super-human 
wisdom, is pledged to cause all things to work 
together for good to them that love him, the 
called ones according to his purpose. Concerning 
earthly blessings our Lord remarked, 
After all these things the Gentiles seek- 
but your Father knoweth [better than you 
do] what things ye have need of. The requests 
of the advanced saints are for spiritual 
favors, concerning which our Lord said, 
Your heavenly Father is more willing to give 
the holy spirit to them that ask it, than earthly 
parents are to give good (earthly) gifts to their 
children.— Luke 11:13. 

One thought particularly impressed throughout 
the meetings was the necessity for a heart 
religion; and that any who have this should 
be and will be glad to get as much intellectual 
knowledge of the divine will and plan as 
possible; but that those who cultivate merely a 
head knowledge, and whose hearts and lives 
do not accord, will surely be permitted to follow 
their own or other people's false reasonings 
into the outer darkness and confusion in 
which the world and nominal Christians are 
at present groping. 



R1581 : page 281 

"THE SEA AND THE WAVES ROARING." 



THE financial pressure which has weighed 
heavily upon the whole world within the past 
few months is but another pang in the travail 
of the world, incident to the birth of a new 
order of society. As the Apostle predicted, so 
it is coming,— pang after pang, with increasing 
severity, with respites between, until the 
present order of society shall perish in a great 
time of trouble such as was not since there was 
a nation. 

Already there have been "bread riots" in 
the very city where the "Columbian Exposition" 
offers its testimony that we are living in 
the most enlightened era of this world's history 
—in the dawning of the great Millennial 
Day. The mutterings of the unemployed 
crowds in Chicago, and in Jersey City and 
elsewhere, are only premonitory suggestions 
of what may be expected if the present order 
of affairs were still more disturbed, and a larger 
proportion of the population thrown out of 
employment. 

The question comes from many quarters: 
"Brother Russell, are you not possibly mistaken 
by a few years in your calculations, since you 
expect, upon Scriptural authority, that the 
great trouble will all be over by A.D. 1915, 
and that in its severity it will probably not 
reach us before A.D. 1906 to 1908? Is it not 
possible that the present financial trouble is 
the beginning of the great trouble?" 

We answer, No; we think there is no mistake. 
The present trouble is not the start of 
the great calamity which is to involve the 
overthrow of all government, law and social 
order. As aforesaid, it is only another pang, 

R1581 : page 282 

and will pass off— perhaps speedily, perhaps 
slowly. We are sure of this, not merely because 
of our confidence in the Bible Chronology 
and the Dispensational Parallels, but also 
in another way. Before that trouble upon the 
world, the trials of faith amongst God's people 
will increase until many shall fall,— into doubt 
and skepticism. "A thousand shall fall at thy 
side, ten thousand at thy right hand." Hot 
and close as the battle between truth and error 



already is, it will grow more serious. Then, 
again, the Scriptures point out that all the 
great Protestant sects will yet unite, and attempt 
and accomplish a partial union with the 
civil governments of the world— and all this 
will be before the last great dying pang of the 
present social order. 

No, we are more than ever convinced of 
the harmony of the times and seasons presented 
to our attention in God's Word, with the other 
features of the great Plan of the Ages therein 
portrayed. 

"And when these things begin to come to 
pass, lift up your heads; for your redemption 
draweth nigh ! " 

Neglect not the assembling of yourselves 
together, and so much the more as ye see the 
day drawing on. 



page 282 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1581 : page 282 

PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY. 



III. QUAR., LESSON XII., SEPT. 17, ROM. 14:12-23. 

Golden Text— "It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to 
drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth. 
-Rom. 14:21. 

The special point in this lesson is found 
in verse 17, for treatment of which see article, 
The Embryo Kingdom of God, on page 
278 of this issue. The remainder of the 
lesson, as it relates to this central thought, 
is so plain as to require but little special 
comment. 

The faith mentioned in verse 22 refers 
specially to the confidence of the Jewish converts 



in the truths of the new dispensation, 
which enabled them to realize their release 
from the bondage of the Law covenant; but 
they were here counseled not to so parade 
their liberty before their weaker brethren 
as to make it an occasion of stumbling to 
them. "Happy is he that condemneth not 
himself in that thing which he alloweth 
[that does not violate his own conscience, 
whether that conscience be enlightened or 
not]. He that doubteth [that is unsettled 
as to what is right or wrong in any matter] 
is condemned if he eat [if in eating he does 
that which he believes to be wrong], because 
he eateth not of faith [because his 
eating, and thereby repudiating the claims 
of the law, is not on account of the newly 
received faith which sets him free from the 
law]." It is wrong to violate conscience in 
any case. But we should always seek to 
have it rightly informed, and then to follow 
its leading. 

R1581 : page 282 

REVIEW. 



III. QUAR., LESSON XIIL, SEPT. 24, ACTS- 
CHAPTERS 16-28. 

Golden Text— "So then faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God."— Rom. 10:17. 

A careful review of the instructive lessons 
of this quarter is earnestly commended to 
all, that they may bring before the mind 
again, and connectedly, the noble self-denial, 
the unwavering confidence in God, the 
implicit obedience, the loyalty and faithfulness 
and untiring zeal of the Lord's chosen 
Apostle to the Gentiles, affording a most 
noble example for study and imitation. 

In the divine direction of his course and 
supervision of his work, we see manifested 
the Lord's wonderful providence over his 
Church; and we rejoice to realize that though 
the apostles long since fell asleep in Jesus, 
the work which the Lord accomplished 
through them is as potent at this end of the 
age as at the beginning; and that his promise 
— "Lo, I am with you always, even to 
the end of the age," is verified to us as 
manifestly as to the early Church. 

The book entitled, "The Acts of the Apostles," 



might be more properly captioned, The 

R1581 : page 283 

beginning and early history of the Christian 
Church: it is a volume well worthy of 
study and meditation. As we pursue the 
divinely guided course and mark the inspiration, 
zeal and faithfulness of the apostles 
in accomplishing their mission, as set forth 
in the The Acts of the Apostles, we come 
with deeper interest and with the profoundest 
reverence to the study of their inspired 
Epistles, prescribed for the next quarter. 
The Golden Text of this lesson is very 
suggestive— "So then faith cometh by hearing 
[we must hear "this gospel of the Kingdom" 
before we can have faith in it: it 
must enter into our ears and commend itself 
to our judgment; and only on its reasonable 
testimony can true faith be predicated], 
and hearing by the Word of God [the testimony 
of these good tidings originates with 
God only: it is, as the Apostle here states, 
"the Word of God," no matter if modern 
critics do affirm that it is not the Word of 
God. This gospel could never have originated 
with men: it bears the unmistakable 
stamp of divinity]. 

R1581 : page 283 

THE POWER OF THE GOSPEL. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON I., OCT. 1, Rom. 1:8-17. 

Golden Text— "I am not ashamed of the gospel of 
Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation to every 
one that believeth."— Rom. 1:16. 

R1582 : page 283 

We now come to the study of one of the 
most notable of all the Pauline epistles, the 
epistle to the Romans. Apparently this 
noble production, like the other epistles, was 
the result of merely accidental circumstances: 
Paul, while in Corinth, saw an opportunity 
to send his greetings and counsel 
to the Church at Rome by the hand of 
Phoebe, who was about to sail thither; and, 
in consideration of their condition and circumstances, 
he wrote this letter. The Church 
at Rome was composed of both Jews and 



Gentiles, and naturally there were among 
them some unsettled questions incidental to 
the transition from Judaism to Christianity, 
which the Apostle in this epistle endeavors 
to adjust. The full settlement of these questions, 
however, was to be found only in a 
clear explanation of the principles of the 
gospel, which the Apostle, therefore, so ably 
set forth in this writing. 

Its preservation to us is due, humanly 
speaking, to the high esteem in which it 
was held by them and others of the early 
Christians. Recognized by them as a logical 
presentation of the gospel of Christ, 
penned by a divinely inspired Apostle, they 
carefully cherished it, as did the other 
churches the various apostolic epistles written 
to them; and later these important letters 
began to circulate among the churches 
that all might receive their valued instructions. 
But when we consider further, how 
these writings have been preserved from 
generation to generation, sometimes in the 
hands of those who devotedly appreciated 
them, but for a long time— all through "the 
dark ages"— in the possession of Antichrist, 
hidden away under the sack-cloth of 
dead languages, and again brought forth to 
bear their testimony even to us at the end 
of the age, we recognize in this gift to us 
also the beneficent hand of divine providence. 
Some in these days point derisively 
to the human agencies through which 
God's truth has been handed down to us, 
forgetting that back of these has been the 
Lord's almighty hand making use of these 
agents as his honored instruments. We are 
not at all surprised when, with the Apostle, 
we are enabled to see the deep philosophy 
of the divine plan, as sketched in this epistle, 
that he is not ashamed of the gospel of 
Christ; for with him we see that it is indeed 
the power of God unto salvation to every 
one that believeth.— Verse 16. 

This epistle was sent from Corinth. It 
was dictated by Paul and written by Tertius, 
at the house of one of the Corinthian Christians 
-Gaius. (Rom. 16:22,23; 1 Cor. 1:14.) 
Up to the date of its writing Paul had never 
been in Rome. It is not known how the 
Church at Rome started, though there were 
Christians there who had been in the way 
for many years. It was probably one of the 
results of the outpouring of the holy spirit 
on the day of Pentecost; for on that occasion 
there were present "strangers from 



Rome." (Acts 2:10.) These probably returned 
to Rome with the blessings of the 
gospel, and began to live Christian lives and 
to preach the truth to others; and a company 
of believers, even in the midst of that corrupt 
city, was the result. It seems difficult 
to understand how, in the midst of such 
conditions as the city of Rome presented, 
a people could be found to give an ear to 
the Word of the Lord, and to submit themselves 
to his training and discipline. It was 
the capital city of a great and powerful 
empire, presenting all the contrasts of wealth 
and poverty and all the hideous deformities 

R1582 : page 284 

of sin. Yet God could work even there, 
and his Word was quick and powerful. 

VERSES 1-7. Paul introduces his epistle 
by first declaring his apostleship, and his 
divine call to preach the gospel of Jesus 
Christ among all nations; second, by acknowledging 
the Christians at Rome as also 
called of God (but not as apostles); and 
third, by expressing his Christian greetings 
—"Grace to you, and peace, from God our 
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ." 

VERSES 8-13. Here we see how the spirit 
of God had been at work in Rome; for 
they were widely known as men and women 
of great faith. Paul rejoiced over their spiritual 
prosperity, prayed for them continually, 
and longed and prayed for the opportunity 
of meeting them personally, to the end 
that he might impart to them some spiritual 
gift (such as the gifts of tongues and of interpretation, 
etc., some of which were given 
to all of the early Christians by laying on 
of the apostles' hands, and never in any other 
way), that so they might be established and 
able to progress more rapidly in the knowledge 
and work of the Lord. Thus their 
mutual faith would be a mutual comfort. 

VERSE 14. "I am debtor [I am under 
obligation] both to the Greeks and to the 
Barbarians; both to the wise and to the unwise." 
Why? Because they had done something 
for him? No: but because God through 
Christ had done something for them, and 
Paul, as the servant of God, was charged 
with the commission to preach the gospel— 
to be his witness unto all nations. 

VERSES 15-17. "So, as much as in me is 
[to the extent of my ability], I am ready to 
preach the gospel to you that are at Rome 



also. For I am not ashamed of the gospel 
of Christ [Paul was not ashamed to bring 
it into contrast and competition with all the 
philosophies of men then extant]; for it is 
the power of God unto salvation [it is the 
instrument of God for salvation— to every 
one? No: but] to every one that believeth 
[God works through instrumentalities, and 
his truth is the instrument for human salvation. 
As Paul subsequently shows— Chap. 10:17 
—"Faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Word of God." And there is 
not the slightest intimation in the Scriptures 
that there is salvation to any without 
faith in the promises of God's Word]— to 
the Jew first [out of respect to the covenant 
made with their father Abraham], and also 
to the Greek"— the Gentiles. 

VERSE 17. "For therein [in the gospel] 
is the righteousness of God revealed [the 
deep philosophy of his plan makes manifest 
his righteous character, as the Apostle shows 
in this epistle. It is revealed] from faith 
to faith [i.e., in coming to the study of the 
divine plan, we must come with faith begotten 
of reverence for its all-wise Author, 
expecting to find in it a wisdom superior to 
all human philosophies. And from this 
starting point faith will progress to higher 
and higher altitudes], as it is written, "The 
just by faith shall live"— those justified by 
faith must continue to live by faith until 
faith is lost in full fruition of the glorious 
promises of God. 

R1582 : page 284 

REDEMPTION IN CHRIST. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON II., OCT. 8, ROM. 3:19-26. 

Golden Text— "Being justified freely by his grace 
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus."— 
Rom. 3:24. 

The theme of this lesson is the foundation 
doctrine of Christianity, which in these days 
of worldly wisdom is rapidly falling into 
disrepute. In innumerable ways the enemies 
of the cross of Christ are twisting and 
whittling the Scriptures and resorting to 
every form of subtle sophistry in order to 
show men how to climb up into the fold of 
God in some other than his appointed way. 



All such are thieves and robbers (John 10:1) 
seeking to steal away the faith and hope 
of God's people. 

The Apostle is here showing the immense 
importance and value of the death of Christ, 
to both Jews and Gentiles, both of whom 
are alike under the dominion of sin and condemned 
to death: the Jews in that they 
were unable to keep the Law of Moses, the 
Gentiles in that they were unable to live up 
to the law of their own conscience; so that 
every mouth is stopped from self-justification, 
and all the world stands guilty before 
God. The Jews had vainly hoped to justify 
themselves before God by keeping his Law; 
but this the Apostle shows they did not, and 
could not, do; for the Law uttered only condemnation 
to all that were under it, its only 
office to them being to convince them of sin, 
and to show them how far short they had 
come.— Verses 19,20. 

But though salvation could never come 
by the Law, Paul shows that God had a way 
provided, apart from the Law, whereby men 
could be saved— not merely Jews, but all 

R1582 : page 285 

men who would come unto him in his appointed 

way— by faith in Christ Jesus, "whom 

God hath set forth to be a propitiation 

[place of satisfaction], through faith in his 

blood, to declare his righteousness for the 

remission of sins that are past, through the 

forbearance of God." The one condition of 

this salvation is a grateful acceptance of it, 

by faith, as the free unmerited gift of God 

through Jesus Christ, which also implies an 

acknowledgment that we all have sinned 

and come short of the glory of God, that 

we are under just condemnation to death, 

and that we need a redeemer. (Verses 20,22-25.) 

Thus this Bible plan of salvation 

requires on our part (1) the acknowledgment 

of the Bible account of the fall of 

man, and of his just condemnation to death; 

(2) our dependence upon the grace of God 
to rescue us from that condemnation, and 

(3) faith in his appointed means of doing 

it, with a grateful, humble acceptance of the 
favor. But this Bible plan of salvation is 
antagonistic at every point to the evolution 
theory, now being thrust forward by 
many, which denies the fall of man; claims 
salvation as a natural consequence of an evolution 
of the human race from low to higher 



conditions, by the destruction of the carnal 

or sinful propensities in each sinner by himself; 

R1583 : page 285 

repudiates all necessity for a ransom; 
and thus rejects the favor of God through 
the atoning blood of Christ. 

VERSES 21,22,26 declare that in the plan 
of God set forth in the Law and the Prophets, 
and fulfilled in Christ, the righteousness 
of God is clearly manifested: that he is 
shown to be just, and yet the justifier of 
those whom he formerly condemned. If 
this fact is witnessed to by the Law and the 
Prophets, the suggestion is that we look to 
the Law and the Prophets and see how they 
thus vindicate God's character. 

The simple account, as foretold by the 
prophets, and as historically related by the 
apostles, is (1) that the only begotten Son 
of God, who was with God from the beginning 
of creation, gave up his former 
glory and took our human nature; (2) that 
the object of this was that he might become 
a substitute, a ransom, for the man Adam 
(and all his posterity) whose life was forfeited 
by sin; (3) that he might be raised 
again by the Father and highly exalted to 
the divine nature, with all power in heaven 
and in earth to accomplish the complete deliverance 
of all those whom he purchased 
by the sacrifice of his humanity.— John 1:1; 
Col. 1:15-17; 1 Tim. 2:6; Rom. 11:32; 
Isa. 53:3-5; Phil. 2:9; Isa. 11:10. 

The Law, in its typical features, also prefigured 
the same truths. See Tabernacle 
Shadows of Better Sacrifices. 

VERSE 26. God, having justly condemned 
Adam and all his race as unworthy of everlasting 
life, could not justly reverse his own 
sentence, without a cause. By his own arrangement, 
however, Christ was that cause, 
for the removal of that original sentence of 
death— in that Christ died for our sins. 
Thus seen, the preaching, through faith in 
Christ, of divine favor to sinners, once under 
divine sentence, is not preaching a violation 
of justice on God's part, but quite the 
reverse. The very fact that God provided 
so expensive a ransom-sacrifice for sinners 
proves that his justice is inviolable and unbending. 
It was because divine justice could 
no deviate, that divine love and mercy were 
brought into action; thus revealing to us that 
side of the divine character. Those who thus 



see the divine plan of mercy and forgiveness 
through a sin-offering, a corresponding price, 
and none others, can see God to be just in 
justifying sinners whom he had once justly 
sentenced to death. 

The doctrine of the ransom is thus shown 
by the Apostle to be fundamental to a 
proper conception and appreciation of God's 
character. 



page 285 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:- 

We desire to convey to you how deep an 
impression is made on our spiritual being 
by the Chicago Convention. I want to 
speak particularly of Brother Rogers also, 
and his wisdom and patience in the 
canvassing school. I thank the dear Lord 
for Brother Rogers. I also found how 
much some have grown in the last year. 
Like myself, they have been advanced, and 
received strength for a more vigorous and 
patient warfare, as well as spiritual growth. 
I think a very general expression of benefit 
received will come to your ears. For myself, 
I am not only stimulated, but subdued, 
under the mighty hand of God, seen not 

page 286 

alone in the mighty events of this, Jehovah's 
Day, and in the force and clearness in which 
the truth in purity can now be seen (as well as 
"how great is that darkness" now opposing 
truth), but also in the force and powerfulness 
of the "weak things" of this world, 
that God is using to confound the mighty. 

Among others, Brother Nordlung asked me 
to tell you how much the Convention benefited 
him, and also that he expects to "lose 
something" when the Swedish Dawn is ready. 

With love to God, and to you as his messengers, 
MR. & MRS. J. B. ADAMSON. 



BELOVED BROTHER & SISTER RUSSELL:- 
Having returned from our Convention, I 
feel it a duty I owe both to my Master and 



to you, to tell you of the great benefits 
vouchsafed to me, a very weak servant, 
while in attendance. Had there been time 
for each to have related his or her experience, 
all I could say is that "God's 
grace is sufficient for me," and that "The 
life I now live, I live by the faith of the 
Son of God." I feel like writing a long 
letter from a heart overflowing with joy 
and gratitude, but I realize more now than 
ever that your time is exceedingly precious. 
Yours in much love, A. M. RUSSELL. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is with a 
very grateful heart that I write these few 
lines, to express my appreciation of being 
so privileged as to attend the meeting at 
Chicago, and there to meet so many whose 
sole desire is to serve their Lord and Master 
in all things and at all times. I was very 
much blest to hear so many kind and loving 
words of exhortation and counsel. May 
the Lord continue to bless and give an 
abundance of his Spirit to all those who 
truly love the truth, that they may each be 
able to speak as an oracle of God. 

I have done very well in the colporteur 
work since the meeting. I sold and delivered 
ninety-nine DAWNS in four days. One 
day I took orders for fifty-four. I hope 
my success will continue. 

May the Lord bless his co-laborers, Yours 
in the Redeemer, WM. McALPINE. 



DEAR BRETHREN:-I enclose you an order 
for DAWNS, which I would like hurried 
forward. I have finished the canvass of 
four small towns having a combined population 
of about 1800, and have taken orders 
for eighty -eight books. I found only three 
or four who were interested to any extent 
in truth, but many who were strongly bound 
in Babylon by the fetters of man's wisdom(?). 
"Gross darkness [certainly] covers 
the people." I must say that I felt rather 
lonely traveling so far, meeting so many, 
and finding so little concern expressed 
about God's plan and Church. Assist me 
with your prayers, that I may properly and 
fearlessly present the truth, and not become 
weary in well doing, knowing that I shall 
reap, if I faint not. 



With Christian love and prayers to and 
for you all I remain, 
Yours in the harvest work, N. F. SEARS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose 
Express Order for $3.50, as a free-will offering 
to the Lord, which I wish the Tower 
Bible and Tract Society to use in any way 
most advantageous to God's service. As 
I have benefited myself so much from the 
reading of the DAWNS and TOWER, I wish 
to help to carry the same message of God's 
wondrous love and favor to others. I was 
trying to walk a middle path between Christ 
and the world, but the reading of DAWN 
brought to my view the uselessness of such 
an effort, and gave me a determination to 
make my sacrifice complete. Hoping you 
may be spared and strengthened to carry 
on the work through the harvest, 

Your brother in Christ, WM. VASSIE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just 
returned from a three weeks' trip, and found 
last TOWER waiting for me— into which I 
plunged and found so good. I had thought 
it very strange, regarding the religious parliament 
to be held in Chicago, that Christians 
should be dragged into listening to the 
claims of Judaism, even when Christ spoke 
against its teachers and then finished the 
law, to say nothing about listening to the 
claims of heathens. Surely we should be 
thankful for a solid rock on which our feet 
may stand. 

We have just heard from some friends in 
Iowa. The lady gave DAWN to her sister 
who is delighted with it. 

With much love to you all I remain, in 
Him, F. B.UTLEY. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write to 
let you know that I am still in the race, 
and that the last three TOWERS have given 
my soul much joy. "Baptism and its Import" 

page 287 

has settled a great difficulty with me 

and several others, and the many rich truths 



in the double number of July are a perfect 
feast to my soul. They give me strength 
and courage to press on for the Master's 
cause. 

I know several men who say that the 
reading of MILLENNIAL DAWN has not 
only given them knowledge, but that it has 
made better men of them. 

In regard to the Chicago Convention: 
It grieves me to think that I cannot be there; 
but I will be in your midst in spirit. My 
heart and my prayers are with you. 

Your Brother, ANDREW J. FREEMAN. 



R1583 : page 287 

DEAR FRIENDS:-Please change TOWER 
to present address. I miss it, and would not 
do without it. I shall never drop this welcome 
visitor; rather would I do my work 
on one meal a day. It is food to the truth-hungry 
soul, I need it to sustain my spiritual 
being, just as I need food to sustain me 
physically. I hope all subscribers read and 
digest its precious truths as I do. How it 
opens up the Word of God and throws light 
where darkness reigned before! We cannot 
all uncover these hidden truths, but we 
can see and accept them when the due time 
comes for them to be known and pointed 
out by the Lord's servants. 

I close with every kind wish to all in the 
TOWER office and all the readers of this priceless 
seed sower. I hand you a letter from 
my friend May, to whom I had the pleasure 
of introducing these precious truths. 

Yours in the Lord's service, 
J. A. BOHNET. 



MR. J. A. BOHNET.-My dear Sir:~ 
I have not only read but studied the DAWN, 
which you recommended me to secure, and 
I want you to consider yourself thanked a 
thousand times for the priceless favor. It 
is the most wonderful explanation of the 
old Book that I have found in all of forty 
years reading and study of its teaching. I 
assume some acquaintance with Addison, 
Sherlock, Locke, Scott, and others of less 
note; besides I have owned every commentary 
on the Bible that I have ever heard 
of as having been published in the English 



language during the last twenty-five years, 
and nothing that I have ever read seems even 
to point in the direction of the straight and 
narrow path opened up and made plain by 
those three volumes. In its pages I find 
there is a perfect and complete system, to 
understand which one must read from 
Genesis to Revelation. 

But I will not write what you well know. 
Last but not least: They are full of comfort. 
Faithfully, J. J. MAY. 



BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL:-Your answer 
in a recent TOWER about voting, etc., seems 
right; and yet if not right now for Christians 
to take part in politics, I do not see 
that it could ever have been; but if the best 
part of mankind had always kept out, it 
seems to me we would have had a much 
worse government than we have. [You 
will find few saints' names amongst those 
of politicians. We make a distinction, you 
see, between good people and consecrated 
saints.— Editor.] 

You say a good deal about the "fully 
consecrated." I often wonder just what 
you mean by that expression. Of course I 
have read something of your meaning here 
and there in your writings, but I would like 
right well to see a connected, full statement 
of it. Before I knew anything at all of the 
DAWN teachings, I had given myself to our 
Maker and to our Redeemer in every way 
of which I could think; and I have never 
taken anything back, so far as I know, nor 
do I have any thought of so doing. My 
determination is, and long had been, to 
cling to him, come what may, in the strength 
that he gives. Is this "consecration"?— 

In His name, O. B.M'CURDY. 

[Yes, dear Brother, you have the correct 
idea. Our wills, then all our powers and 
influence, given to God, is entire consecration. 
Your query relative to reckoned and 
actual holiness was, I trust, answered in 
the August 15th TOWER-"Christ in You 
the Hope of Glory."— Editor.] 



page 287 



DEAR BRETHRENr-Although I can do 
but little, I am so grateful that Christ has 



chosen me to be a co-worker with him in 
his "harvest work," and I often think what 
great opportunities the colporteurs have 
for spreading the truth. I am constantly 
looking for a chance to speak for the truth, 
but it is only occasionally that I find one 
who will listen; and when I do, the 
Spirit enables me to pour out the truth in 
great measures. How clearly I see that he 
will use us, if we are but willing. That 
seems to be the trouble with most people 
that profess him: they are not willing to 

page 288 

be used except in their own way. How 

sorry I am that no one told me before that 

it was necessary to give up the human will 

to be able to see the deep things of God. 

I had been praying for sixteen years for a 

love of God's Word, but could not get interested 

in the study, until I grasped the plan 

of the ages in the DAWN, and for the last 

year it has been my greatest delight to 

search the Word. 

The food is very sweet, though the effect 
of standing for it is bitter; but I count it 
all joy to be able and chosen to suffer for 
the truth's sake; for "I reckon that the sufferings 
of the present time are not worthy 
to be compared with the glory that shall be 
revealed in us." My mind is kept constantly 
on the future and the crown, and I 
try not to be puffed up because of the 
knowledge of the Word that I have, because 
I see that God will not use us if we 
are so. Oh, the joy and peace of being in 
Christ! People think I am very queer because 
I do not enjoy the things of this 
world, but I look upon them with pity, because 
I have that which satisfies. 

I receive great spiritual good from the 
TOWERS, and great strength from the letters 
of others that have come into the marvelous 
light. I believe that the letters that I 
have read in the back numbers have been 
used of God to strengthen many of his little 
flock, and I write to tell you of the effect 
they have upon me. 

Believe me, dear ones in the faith, 
Your Brother, M. T. LEWIS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have it in 
my mind now to make a vigorous campaign 



next fall, beginning about October 

1st, so you may count me in the colporteur 

work again about that time. 

I put the TOWER literature into the hands 
of a Baptist brother a short time since, and 
he has put me to shame. "Why," said he, 
"did you not tell me about this a year ago? 
You saw me then." I replied, "I did give 
you some of the tracts a year ago." "Yes, 
but you did not talk about the subjects 
enough to get me interested." This brother 
is not able, physically, to enter the colporteur 
service. If he were, he would gladly do so. 
Truly the harvest is ripe. Yours in hope of 
the Kingdom, M.M.PHILLIPS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-There has 
been such prejudice in the western part of 
this city, that some who have purchased 
DAWNS of me, after finding that others object 
to them, have spoken openly against 
them in church, and advised all not to purchase 
them. And then, too, I have been 
told that the ministers have preached against 
it. I think, however, that it is a case of 
"little fire and much smoke." 

One young man, who had given me an 
order, told me his friend took them and 
threw them into the street. I waited a few 
days, and then called on that one, and 
learned from him that he had not thrown 
them away, but had felt called upon to speak 
against them in meeting, and had done so. 
I spent three profitable hours with him and 
wife, and parted friends. He promised to 
ask God to show him if he should read them 
carefully. He wished me God's blessing, 
and asked me to call as often as possible. 

I called on another: a young man who opposed 
the truth. When he tried to show 
me where it was "way off," behold, it had 
vanished, and a second reading showed him 
he had read too hastily. So, though I am 
making at present but few sales, I think I 
will succeed in overcoming the prejudice of 
many. Yours in the Lord, J. O. MURPHY. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL: 
I am using the improved method in canvassing, 
learned at the Convention, and am 
greatly pleased with it. This is a very dull 
place, but I took sixteen orders Friday, and 



fifteen yesterday. The introduction on entering 
is a great help. I never knew, till I 
used it, that introducing myself as "Miss 
Way— a representative of the Tower Bible 
& Tract Society," would do so much to gain 
me an attentive hearing. 

How we thank the Lord for the meeting 
in Chicago, and the joy of meeting yourselves 
and so many of the dear brothers and 
sisters in Christ, enabling us to realize more 
fully the joy set before us and that happy 
everlasting meeting beyond the vail! We 
learned many lessons, too, that I trust will 
bear fruit all through our lives. We feel 
encouraged to press on, more desire to be 
proficient in our work and more submissive 
to him who moulds us according to his 
will. Pray for us— as we do for you ail- 
that we may be kept from every seducing 
error, and may overcome through the blood 
of the Lamb. 

Yours in the Redeemer, 

FRANCES A. WAY. 



page 290 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL CLOTH DAWNS. 



We still have plenty of the gilt-stamped, 
cloth edition of MILLENNIAL DAWN, with slight 
mismatch in color, stamping and paper, but 
otherwise perfect. As previously announced, 
we will close these out at twenty-five cents per 
volume by express, or the set of three volumes 
for one dollar postage paid by us. 

A LARGE CIRCULATION. 



In order to permit the friends of the truth 
to circulate them freely, we supply the DAWNS 
in paper binding in packs of 5, 10 or 20 of any 
one volume to one address at the rate of fifteen 



cents per volume, including postage. Less 

than five copies of any one volume we supply 

at twenty-five cents per volume. Colporteurs 

are authorized to sell these at thirty-five cents 

per volume. No books of the kind were ever 

supplied on such liberal terms. What opportunities 

are thus afforded to all who have a 

heart for harvest work! And that many are 

improving the opportunity is evidenced by 

the fact that the four hundredth thousand of 

the first volume is now in course of publication. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 



Many new readers do not know about our 
gospel envelopes, which have the gospel message 
printed on their face, leaving room for 
stamps and addressing, and on the back mention 
VOL. I. of MILLENNIAL DAWN. There is 
no better way than this to call to the attention 
of your friends the glad tidings of great joy, 
and the book which will make the gospel so 
plain that a wayfaring and unlearned reader 
need not err therein. 

These are supplied by mail, postpaid, at the 
following rates: 

100 envelopes 25 cents; 500 envelopes $1.00. 

Is this one of the ways in which you can 
serve God and your friends?— "holding forth 
the Word of life." 

Friends who are in business, and who send 
out circulars and bills, and who could use 
these envelopes (with their business address 
printed at the corner) in lots of five or ten 
thousand at a time will be supplied, regardless 
of cost, at the rate of one dollar a thousand. 
—We want these to go everywhere, preaching 
the Word. 

R1585 : page 290 

BLESSED ASSURANCES. 



Do you need a counselor? "Thou shalt 
guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive 
me to glory." Psa. 73:24. 

Do you want a friend? "There is a friend that 
sticketh closer than a brother." Prov. 18:24. 

Are you discouraged? "Be of good courage 
and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that 
hope in the Lord." Psa. 31:24. 

Have you been wronged? "But I say unto 



you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse 
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray 
for them which despitefully use you and persecute 
you." Matt. 5:44. 

Do you suffer for well doing? "But if, when 
ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, 
this is acceptable with God." 1 Pet. 2:20. 

Are you heavy laden? "Come unto me all 
ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will 
give you rest." Matt. 1 1:28. 

Are you ignorant? "If any of you lack wisdom, 
let him ask of God, who giveth to all 
men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall 
be given him." James 1:5. 

Are you tempted to do wrong? "If sinners 
entice thee, consent thou not." Prov. 1:10. 

Do you hunger after righteousness? "Blessed 
are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, 
for they shall be filled." Matt. 5:6. 

Are you fearful? "O Israel, trust thou in the 
Lord: he is their help and their shield. Psa. 1 15:9. 

Do you want sympathy? "Like as a father 
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them 
that reverence him." Psa. 103:13. 



R1583 : page 291 
