VOL. XXXIV NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

The Dawn of the Morning 323 

Signs of the Dawning 324 

"The Last Day" 324 

How to Overcome Fleshly Weaknesses 325 

Religious Intoxication 326 

Our "Cup of Blessing" 327 

"Drink Ye All Of It" 327 

Church's Part in the One Loaf 327 

Unforfeited Earthly Life Right 328 

Significance of Eating Our Lord's Flesh 

and of Drinking His Blood 328 

Most Valuable Food and Drink Known 329 

How Israel Crossed Jordan 329 

Entering Into Canaan Rest 330 

The Fall of Jericho 331 

"Captain of the Lord's Host" 331 

Mammon the Principle of Selfishness 332 

Holiday Remembrancers 333-334 

Some Interesting Letters 335 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 335 

page 322 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



WACO, TEXAS, CONVENTION 
-NOVEMBER 14, 15, 16- 

The Waco Cotton Palace Exposition will secure very 
special railway rates; and the brethren of that vicinity are 
anxious to take advantage of the cheap rates and hold a Convention 
November 14, 15, 16. Brother Russell had expected 
to be present; but, finding this impossible, he has delegated 
two of the Pilgrim Brethren to represent the Society. One 
of these will act as Chairman at the Convention. 

We trust that this will be a very profitable Convention, full 
of spiritual power— the spirit of the Truth. It will be convenient 
for considerable numbers, we believe. We suggest 
that Brethren who are unable to attend give the Convention 
the support of their prayers at the Throne of Heavenly Grace. 

The Young Men's Business League has granted us the 
use of their hall during the Convention. It is located at 711-1/2 
Austin Ave., convenient to all the railway stations. 

Arrangements have been made for board and lodging at 
from $1 to $3 per day. Requests for accommodations should 
be sent promptly and must be explicit as to number, sex and 
color. Address A. B. Landrum, Secretary I.B.S.A., 1917 
Grace St., Waco, Texas. 



"THE WATCH TOWER" FREE TO THE POOR 

We are now following the usual custom of sending a subscription 
blank on the expiration of each subscription. The 
Post Office law is particular re the wording of these, 
and will not allow us to explain that any of the Lord's 
people desiring it, but too poor to pay, can be supplied 
free by us. 

We again assure all such that a postcard stating their continued 
desire for THE WATCH TOWER and their continued 
inability to pay, will renew their subscription for another 
year. These subscriptions are paid for out of a fund specially 
provided for the purpose. 



R5338 : page 323 

THE DAWN OF THE MORNING 

"The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore 
cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of 
light. Let us walk honestly as in the day; not 
in rioting and drunkenness."— Romans 13:12,13. 



FOR A long time the world had been more or 

less in darkness, in sin, in ignorance, in 

superstition. By one man's disobedience 

sin entered the world. This darkness still 

continues. "Darkness covers the earth, and 

gross darkness the people." The Bible accounts 

for this condition of things by explaining 

that man by heredity is born in 

sin, and that additionally Satan takes advantage 

of the situation, with a view to 

further alienating mankind from the great Creator, and 

thus, if possible, preventing any reconciliation that might 

ever be undertaken. 

Satan is called the Prince of Darkness, and he is working 
in the children of disobedience. The children of disobedience 
being far more numerous than the children of 
obedience, it follows that the present is a dark time. 
The Bible tells us that God will not leave mankind always 
in this darkness; but that the curse shall be rolled away 
and all the darkness shall be dissipated, and instead, shall 
come His blessing, His light. The light of the knowledge 
of the glory of God shall cover the earth as the 
waters cover the great deep. (Isa. 11:9; Hab. 2:14.) 
Provision for this recovery was made in the Divine Purpose, 
before the foundation of the world. 

THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD 

About nineteen hundred years ago God began to take 
steps to bring to pass the things which He had promised. 
The first step was the sending of His Son, that He might 
be the Redeemer of man. Our Lord is spoken of as 
being a great Light, in the same sense that the Heavenly 
Father is called the Father of Lights. Jesus said, "I am 
the Light of the world." Mankind, under the influence 
of Satan and their own imperfect judgments, became 
twisted in their minds, and are in a state of darkness, 
so that they cannot reason correctly. The majority are 
not able to see the desirability of the Truth, and so they 
live in darkness— "darkness covers the earth." 

However, we have every reason to believe that there 
are a choice few in the world, who love righteousness 
and hate iniquity. And this class God desires to take out 
first. The selection of this class has been going on 
throughout the Gospel Age. The majority of the world 
would doubtless prefer right rather than wrong if all the 
conditions were favorable. If they could be as comfortable 
financially, as popular socially, etc., by serving 
the right as by serving the wrong, they would much prefer 
to serve the right. 

These are really good people. They have a preference 
for the right. They are very moral, very just. And 
yet their preference for the right is not so strong that 
they would be willing to lay down their lives for the 
right. It is one thing to say, I love the cause of God; and 



it is another thing to say, I will devote my time, strength, 
fortune, all, to it. 

But it is only the latter kind that God is calling now— 
those who are willing to take up the cross in the interest 
of Truth and righteousness. And to these God gives encouragement, 
assuring them that He appreciates their 
love of righteousness: and that if they persist in the 
course of faithfulness they will be made associates with 
Christ in His Kingdom. He tells them that He is seeking 
just such a class. And these are encouraged and inspired 
to keep on, as God sets before them the glorious hope of 
the Gospel— the Divine nature and glory. 

RESPONSIBILITY PROPORTIONATE TO LIGHT 

But all this is going on in the night time; for, although 
Jesus came into the world, and is to be the Light 
of the world, this Light has not yet illumined mankind, 
nor scattered the darkness. The Jewish people had the 
light of the moon, in the sense that the Law Covenant 
and its promises were like the moon, which shines with 
a light reflected from the sun, a light not its own. They 
had the light of the moon, if they wished to walk in its 
light. But they often went from the light of their Law 
and walked in the shadows. The Jews also had stars- 
Abraham, David and the Prophets. These were luminaries 
that shed more or less light upon their pathway. 

But when Jesus came, He was the great Light of the 
world; i. e., He was the one chosen of God to be the Light 
of the world. But Jesus as a man was not this light to 
all. The Light that shone from Him while He was in the 
flesh was very local. And even to many of those upon 
whom it shone, His light was obscure, because of their 
ignorance, blindness. Jesus intimated that some could see 
the light and others could not: "Blessed are your eyes, 
for they see!" (Matt. 13:16.) He also intimated that 
some of the Jewish leaders saw to some extent, and were 
responsible for what they saw. 

Our Lord presented to them the true light. They had 
been hoping to attain the blessing God promised in His 
Covenant with Abraham. They knew from the teachings 

R5338 : page 324 

of the Law that they must be holy. But they did not realize 
how high is the true standard. Consequently they 
thought they could keep up a certain standard of outward 
conduct, and thus become the Seed of Abraham. And 
when Jesus said to them. You are so careful to keep the 
letter of the Law that you would strain out a gnat from 
your drink, and swallow a camel, He intimated that they 
were very careful about the small things, and would let 
great matters, important things, pass by! 

Jesus told them they would devour widows' houses; 
that is, that they would take advantage of this or that technicality 
of the Law to take possession of a widow's substance. 



And in thus doing, they were violating God's 
Law, which is a law of justice and love and mercy. It 
was only the few, therefore, who were Israelites indeed. 
And these would be the true Seed of Abraham— the select 
few of that nation. -Rom. 9:6; Gal. 3:16,29. 

R5339 : page 324 

THE TRUE LIGHT-BEARERS 

So the selection went on, and the faithful ones, having 
the right spirit, the same spirit that Christ had— love 
for justice, love for God and God's Law— these were 
selected— the Elect of that people. These not being a 
sufficiency, God continued to select others from different 
nations. To His disciples Jesus said, "Let your light 
shine before men"; and again, Put not your light under a 
bushel; but put it on a candlestick, that it may be seen of 
others. And so all of God's people have been lights. 
Those who have the Holy Spirit are the only true light-bearers 
in the world. Others may have various lights- 
science, geology, chemistry— but much of their light is 
darkness. Our Lord, however, was referring only to the 
light on God's Plan. 

Some who have light on morality, say that they will 
not become intoxicated, will not use profanity, etc. They 
may have light in those directions, but this is not the 
true light. Much of the true light has been lost on the 
whole world, though they have still some of the original 
light remaining, as is evidenced in man's conscience and 
moral sense. Saul of Tarsus had some of this light, and 
yet persecuted the Church. Conscience is not a sufficient 
guide. We need the light of God's Word. 

The Holy Spirit is the light of the Church, by which 
we are being specially guided into the Truth. St. Peter 
tells us that we have a more sure Word of prophecy, 
whereunto we do well that we take heed as unto a light 
that shineth in a dark place. (2 Peter 1:19.) The light 
on the path of the just "shineth more and more unto the 
perfect Day." We are still in the dark place, and shall 
be until the darkness gives way and the Day is here. 
And so, as St. Peter says, we have need of this Word of 
prophecy "until the Day dawn." Thus we find that one 
Scripture helps to elucidate another. 

Apparently many of our Christian friends have the 
thought that the Apostle meant that the Lord might come 
at any hour, on any day. But when we come to understand 
the Scriptures, and know that God has fixed times 
and seasons, and when we learn more about God's Plan, 
we see what He has revealed respecting the length of the 
night and the time for the dawning of the morning. The 
Apostle had sufficient knowledge to realize that the morning 
was coming and that the night would then have an 
end. He knew that Christ at His Second Coming would 
be the Sun of Righteousness. We also know this. He 
knew that Christ would be the Light of the world. We 



likewise know this; and that the glorified Church will 
be, with Jesus, the Sun of Righteousness, which will arise 
with healing in its beams, and will enlighten the world, 
and lift it up and bless it. 

SIGNS OF THE DAWNING 

We know something of God's times and seasons. 
There is a great difference, however, between knowing 
the day and the hour and knowing the times and the seasons. 
You might know that your Pastor intended to go 
sometimes this season to Great Britain. When the season 
arrives you might say, Well, this is the season. Yes, but 
you would not know what steamer he would take. You 
say, We know the time he will reach London, but do not 
know just the day the boat sails. And thus the Lord has 
guaranteed that His people shall not be left in darkness— 
that we shall have light and knowledge sufficient— that 
we shall not be in darkness with the world. 

Just so surely as we are of the Brethren, just so surely 
that Day will not come upon us as a thief. We shall know 
how to expect it. We shall know about the time. Those 
who think that the Apostles had no knowledge of the 
matter have, we think, taken a superficial view of some 
of the Scriptures. Take, for example, the text under 
discussion. "The night is far spent, the Day is at hand." 
They have thought this meant that this Day might dawn 
that very year, or the following year. 

ST. PAUL HAD SPECIAL INFORMATION 

The Apostle evidently had no such idea; for he goes 
on to explain, in one of his Epistles, how that Day would 
come, and that there would be a time of trouble, and that 
the Lord would permit a strong delusion; that the man 
of Sin must first be revealed. He assured the Church 
that the Day would not come until first there was a great 
falling away. He reminded them: You have been told 
about an evil system arising. Know now that this Day 
of the Lord absolutely cannot come, until the Abomination 
of Desolation has been set up, as noted in the prophecy 
of Daniel. And he warned, "Let no man deceive you 
by any means."— 2 Thess. 2— entire chapter. 

In one of his Epistles to the Church at Corinth, St. 
Paul said, "We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be 
changed." (I Cor. 15:51,52.) The early Church thought 
that St. Paul meant that they would not sleep. But St. 
Paul was referring to the Church as a whole— instructing 
them that some of the Church would remain until the Day 
of Christ. St. Paul and St. Peter both intimated that they 
were not of those who would remain to be changed in a 
moment from the earthly body to the Heavenly. 

So, coming back to our text, we are to recognize that 
the Apostle Paul had special information from the Lord. 
He tells us so. He says he had visions and revelations 
more than all the other Apostles. And he declares that the 



Lord revealed to him things not proper to be uttered at 
that time. He must not explain these visions; their 
meaning was a secret intrusted to him. (2 Cor. 12:4.) 
The Apostle's mind being thus illuminated, he was able 
to write with great intelligence, clearness and power, so 
that we, with the increasing light upon the Holy Scriptures 
now due, might be able to see a depth to his writings, 
and get a grasp on the Truth, not otherwise possible. 
And we do. Nearly all of our knowledge of the deep 
things comes from St. Paul's Epistles, because he had 
this light and it permeated all that he wrote. So we today 
are able to explore and to understand many things which 
were secrets, known only to the Apostle Paul in his day. 

"THE LAST DAY" 

The Day spoken of in our text is the Last Day. 
Martha said of Lazarus, "I know that he shall rise again 
in the resurrection at the last day." (John 1 1:24.) 
Which is the Last Day? It is the great Seventh Day. 
This Day will not be a time of darkness, but a time of 

R5339 : page 325 

daylight. That being so, the other six Days represent 
the night of darkness and sin. In the morning of the 
new Day, the reign of the Prince of Darkness is to be 
overthrown by the Prince of Light; and thus the Day 
will be ushered in. From this standpoint of the six great 
Days of a thousand years each, we are to remember that 
the Apostles and the early Church were living in the 
Fifth Day— there was only one more Day to intervene 
before the Seventh Day, and then would be due the great 
shining forth of the glory of the Lord. From this standpoint 
the Apostle's words are clear. 

During the Dark Ages God's people were permitted to 
have only a measure of light, a measure of knowledge. 
Yet they had certain great landmarks. And so when the 
Papacy was developed, God's people said, This is that 
Man of Sin— this is that falling away which was predicted. 
Thus they could locate themselves. We see that 
in the Dark Ages there was quite a clear understanding 
that the Papacy was the Man of Sin. Still it was not 
God's intention to guide the Church into the fulness of 
Truth until the due time. And we are not claiming now 
that we know the day (the day in the shorter sense) and 
the hour of the setting up of the Kingdom. But we are 
not ignorant of the times and seasons. 

"PUT OFF THE WORKS OF DARKNESS" 

In view of this knowledge of the wonderful Day about 
to dawn, how shall we who are hoping to be of the Kingdom 
class of that Day deport ourselves now? How shall 
we live? Ah! says the Apostle, if we are "children of the 
Day," we are to show it. We are God's representatives 



and ambassadors. We are to tell the people about the 
light and knowledge and glory of God that is to come 
so soon, that will fill the whole earth, by and by. We are 
to help them to contrast the present with the glorious 
conditions that will then exist, so that all who love the 
light may take heed to the Word of God and get ready 
to be members of that Kingdom class. 

What must we do? We must put off the works of 
darkness, everything that is selfish and sinful— for that 
which is selfish is sinful, and that which is sinful is 
selfish. We are to put these off because we belong to the 
new order of things. The works of darkness would be 
any works whatsoever that would not stand the fullest 
investigation; that would not stand approved in the light 
of the New Dispensation, if it were fully ushered in. 
Let us remember that we belong to the New Dispensation, 
and not to the old, and should, therefore, live in accordance 
with our citizenship and our responsibilities toward 
the Prince of Light and in opposition to the Prince of 
Darkness, his works and his ways. 

"PUT ON THE ARMOR OF LIGHT" 

We have enlisted with Christ, and we will fight against 
the enemies of our new nature. We will be worthy children 
of God and strive earnestly, that we may be associated 
with the Lord in His Kingdom of Righteousness. 
And when we have put off the darkness, what must we 
do? We must put on the armor of light. What is the 
armor of light? It is the armor which protects from the 
darts of the Adversary, and includes the helmet of salvation 
—the protection of our intellects through a knowledge 
of the Truth, from the attacks of our great foe. 

As the Apostle urges, let us "Stand therefore, having 
our loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate 
of righteousness; and our feet shod with the preparation 

R5340 : page 325 

of the Gospel of peace; above all taking the shield 
of faith, wherewith we shall be able to quench all the 
fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, 
and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of 
God." (Eph. 6:14-17.) This is the armor with which 
we are to withstand the attacks which appeal to the evil 
tendencies of the fallen nature, that we may come off 
"more than conquerors" through Christ, that we may be 
of that glorious band of overcomers who will be made 
kings and priests of God in that glorious Day— in the 
dawning of the Morning. 

LIGHT MANIFEST IN PURITY OF INTENTION 

The Apostle continues the figure of speech which refers 
to the on-coming Day, in contrast with the night time 
of sorrow, sin and death, during which evil and sin have 



prevailed. The Scriptures declare that evil-doers prefer 
that it be dark, in order that their real aims and objects be 
not known; for they do that in secret which they would 
not wish to have known in the light and open to the public 
in general. 

Then the Apostle discusses what should be the attitude 
of the Church. "Let us walk honestly, as in the 
Day"— honestly, in the sense of conscientiously, openly- 
having nothing that we would need to secrete from the 
whole world, if they were able to understand our motives. 
They would know we had no evil purposes, but only 
pure, honest, good intentions. Our Lord was the great 
Light of the world. But He was misunderstood and misrepresented. 
So all of His followers, in proportion as they 
are light-bearers, will be subject to attacks from Satan, 
who seeks to perpetuate his hold upon mankind. 

Nevertheless, whether it cost us much or little, our 
whole course of life is to be honest, upright. Our lives 
are to be devoted to the cause of righteousness— we are 
to see to it that we do nothing contrary to the principles 
of righteousness. Sincerity, honesty of purpose, should 
make all our life as open as the Day when everything 
wicked is to be disclosed. By showing the right and 
exposing the wrong deeds, thus making known the 
character of these, the Lord will put men on test as to 
which they love. 

For those who love evil, wickedness, after they see it 
in its true colors, after they see where it leads and all its 
consequences, and shall have had full opportunity to know 
and to choose between right and wrong, light and darkness 
—for such God's portion will be death— Second Death. 
The only final reward and punishment for evil is destruction. 
"All the wicked will God destroy." 

So during the Millennial Day, the Day of Christ, the 
Day of the Lord in the largest sense, the light will prevail, 
and all the hidden things of darkness will be exposed. 
Those who love these things are the ones who will suffer 
disadvantage; while all who love the light will be blessed 
and will make progress toward human perfection. 

HOW TO OVERCOME FLESHLY WEAKNESSES 

Those of the Church— those who are hoping to be 
kings and priests and to reign with Christ and to be judges 
of the world— their conduct should be as far as possible 
in accord with God's standard. Everything should be 
open, honest, subject to the investigation of the Lord or 
of anybody. In thus living we shall be proving our faithfulness 
to the Lord. We must demonstrate our loyalty to 
Him by being willing to suffer rebuffs and adversity. We 
must strive most earnestly to overcome our human weaknesses 
and imperfections, and thus manifest our love for 
righteousness and for God. We see that our Lord Jesus 
is the embodiment of these glorious principles for which 
God stands; and we are to be like Him, our Pattern. 

We are to be so in love with God's gracious character 



and God's methods that we shall greatly prefer to be on 
His side, under the banner of light, rather than to be 
children of darkness, whatever its present reward. So 

R5340 : page 326 

let us walk as the children of the light— the children of 
the Day, and thus we shall be laying up treasures above, 
and shall prepare ourselves for the glorious things which 
the Lord has in reservation for those that love Him— for 
those who are seeking to walk in the Master's footsteps. 

"He will never fail us, He will not forsake; 
His eternal Covenant He will never break; 
Resting on His Promise, what have we to fear? 
God is all sufficient for the coming year. 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the Day, 
For His Word shall never, never pass away." 

GROSS FORMS OF RIOTING AND DRUNKENNESS 

The Apostle's use of the first person— we, our, us— 
in the verses preceding our text, would seem to indicate 
very clearly that he is speaking to the Church, including 
himself. Indeed, the introduction to the Epistle shows 
this to be the case. St. Paul is here showing what should 
be the course of the Church, as in contrast with the attitude 
of the world. When he says, "Let us walk," he 
means, Let us daily progress— walk not along the lines of 
rioting and drunkenness. He does not say that the Lord's 
people may not occasionally be overtaken in a fault. But 
if they are thus overtaken, they are to know that they 
are not then walking in the footsteps of Jesus, but are for 
the time being walking in the opposite direction. 

We are to remember that the Church are at this time 
imperfect, in an embryotic state— not fully developed. 
The New Creature has as yet no body of its own, but is 
merely given possession of this earthly body, which 
is an enemy of God. The New Creature is obliged to use 
this instrumentality. As a New Creature, he will ultimately 
be judged, not according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit, for the Lord will make up for unintentional 
blemishes. But these bodies which have been the 
instruments of sin, are to be put into the service of 
righteousness. All of our present experiences must be in 
the flesh, because we have no other instrument of service. 

Now, the Apostle says, we are to beware of rioting 
and drunkenness, for all excesses are of the world. We 
are living in a time when the bacchanalian orgies of the 
past are disapproved by the community in general. Many 
may continue to practise some of these in secret, but they 
think that it is not wise to let it in any way be public. 
And those who sympathize with liquor interests, brewers, 
saloon-keepers, etc., realize that they can no longer do as 
formerly— they can no longer continue to sell liquor to a 
person until he has reached the condition of beastly intoxication. 



All of these evils will be banished when the new 
Kingdom shall have sway. 

THE LORD'S SPIRIT A SPIRIT OF SOBRIETY 

The true Christian has the mind of the Lord, and the 
Lord's mind is thoroughly in opposition to anything in 
the nature of drunkenness of any kind. The Spirit of the 
Lord gives a sober mind, a thoughtful mind, a reasonable 
mind. All rioting and drunkenness are the result of 
inebriation, befuddling the mind. We are not to suppose 
that any New Creature would have any sympathy with 
anything of the kind. The Apostle's suggestion is not that 
some New Creatures may think this the proper course, 
but that some New Creatures may become careless in 
their walk. As the New Creature grows and has more 
experience, he should learn that the only proper course 
is to avoid all places and conditions tending to excess 
and to worldliness. He should study to have new entertainments 
for his mind, study how to turn his mind in a 
new direction, toward Heavenly things. 

While it is true that we have comparatively few of 
the orgies of olden times, it is also true that the world 
today has a more refined kind of rioting and drunkenness. 
There are social functions that might be called riotous, 
in the sense that they are unreasonable and disorderly. 
We might apply this criticism even to nominal Christianity. 
There is a certain kind of rioting mentioned in 
Revelation. We read that great Babylon made drunk the 
inhabitants of the earth with her wine. This might, in 
some cases, be a stupefaction of the mind; in other cases, 
a crazed condition. 

We once believed many things without any real ground 
at all for believing. For example, we have believed in 
fire-proof devils, eternal flames, the roasting of humanity, 
etc. Now we find that we were merely having the hobgoblins 
of nightmare. God is not using His mighty 
power for the injury and useless torture of His creatures. 
We find that we were very seriously intoxicated with the 
wine of false doctrine. We are now becoming sober. 
The people are beginning to wink and blink, and to try 
to overcome the effects of the stupefying drafts of error. 

Some have gotten out of these errors. But there are 
some who still have a kind of frenzy of mind, and some 
of these are attacking us. They launch forth as though 
they would demolish us, and they battle for the error as 
though it were the Truth. In their warfare they use the 
weapons of slander, malice, hatred, strife, and various 
other works of the flesh and of the Devil. Their choice 
of weapons is a proof that they are under a delusion, 
blinding them through false doctrine. 

RELIGIOUS INTOXICATION 

Sometimes there is rioting, even to the extent of 
hilarious conduct in meetings. We were once present at 



a religious meeting where there were all sorts of rioting, 
evil spirits and demonism. Yet the people were apparently 
sincere and honest. This occurred some years ago. 
The preacher hammered the pulpit, while two or three 
men tried to pray, etc. It was a regular pandemonium. 
The young people would go there and eat peanuts and 
snicker and giggle, seeming to consider the service a kind 
of circus. These people were evidently "drunk"— it was 
from a bad kind of "liquor," too. 

R5341 : page 326 

This principle might apply to some of those who have 
gotten free from the errors of the past. There is a spirit 
of anarchy, a lack of orderly behavior with some who 
have come into the Truth. Sometimes it will manifest 
itself in one of a Bible-Class, who will try to have his 
own way and to override the rest. He is simply rioting; 
he has not gotten rid of the wrong spirit; he has not applied 
the principle of righteousness— the Lord's Spirit, the 
spirit of a sound mind— to his conduct. 

Then sometimes it is the leader of the Class who shows 
a riotous spirit. The Scriptures very clearly set forth 
what would be proper in such a case. Each has a perfect 
right to his own opinion on any subject, but no one has a 
right to override others and try to force his opinions on 
them. To do so is contrary to the Lord's Spirit. We 
should not walk that way. We should walk prayerfully 
and carefully along the lines of the Golden Rule, doing 
unto others as we would that they should do unto us. 

Let us walk as becometh saints, showing forth more 
and more "the praises of Him who hath called us out of 
darkness into His marvelous Light." 



"Watchman, tell me, does the morning 

Of fair Zion's glory dawn? 
Have the signs that mark its coming 

Yet upon thy pathway shone? 
Pilgrim, yes! arise! look 'round thee! 

Light is breaking in the skies! 
Gird thy bridal robes around thee; 

Morning dawns! arise! arise!" 



R5341 : page 327 

OUR "CUP OF BLESSING" 

"The cup of blessing, for which we bless God, is it not a 
participation of the blood of the Anointed One? The loaf which 
we break, is it not a participation of the Body 
of the Anointed One? Because there is one 
loaf, we, the many, are one Body."— 



1 Cor. 10:16,17.-Diaglott. 

THE CUP of blessing, for which we bless 
God," is indeed a cup of blessing in many 
respects. It represents the blessed privilege 
of suffering with Christ, and the 
blessed things which will come as a reward 
of those sufferings. The Lord declares 
that the promise will have fulfilment 
in the Kingdom, when we shall share 
the Kingdom joys. 

The Church is represented as being a 
part of the great Vine which God has planted; as Jesus 
says, "I am the Vine, ye are the branches." (John 15:5.) 
Our Lord tells us of the precious fruit of this Vine, the 
development of which represents the sorrowful part of 
our experience. There is a sense in which the cup represents 
the joy which we shall have when we shall have 
passed beyond the sufferings of this present time and 
shall have entered into glory. (Matt. 26:29.) The expression, 
"for which we bless God," may be understood 
to mean, for which we give thanks and praise to the 
Lord. Whoever receives the cup without thankfulness of 
heart, without appreciation, will not get the great reward. 
In order to receive the blessing designed, we must receive 
the cup with thankfulness for this great privilege of suffering 
with Christ. 

In considering this question of the Apostle, "is it not 
a participation [common union] in the blood of Christ?" 
we should have a double thought before our minds: first, 
of the literal cup to which he refers, the literal fruit of 
the vine, which represents the blood of Christ; and second, 
the fact that we have the privilege of partaking of 
His cup, the sacrificial cup. We have the privilege of 
sharing in His death, sharing in His sufferings. This 
thought is borne out in other Scriptures— that Jesus is 
the Head of the Church which is His Body, etc. He is 
to be the great Prophet, Priest, King, Judge and Blesser 
of the world. 

According to the Scriptures, the great Head was glorified, 
after having endured the sufferings even unto death, 
after having laid down His life for the world. And He 
has adopted us as His members— members now in the 
flesh, to be His members shortly in glory. We use the 
word members in the sense that we speak of members of 
the House of Parliament. The body of Parliament has 
many members, and so the Body of Christ has many members. 
The terms on which they may make their calling 
and election sure are that they shall believe in Christ and 
shall give themselves to God. Then our Lord will adopt 
them as His members, members now on earth and afterwards 
members of Him in glory. 

"DRINK YE ALL OF IT" 

On condition, then, that we drink faithfully of this cup 



(Matt. 26:27), we shall make our "calling and election 
sure." (2 Peter 1:10.) The injunction, "Drink ye all 
of it," had a double signification: first, it must all be 
drunk before the end of the Gospel Age; and secondly, all 
who would be members of His Body must drink of it. St. 
Peter spoke of the sufferings of The Christ, Head and 
Body, which have now been going on for more than 
eighteen centuries, and of the glory that shall follow. (I Peter 1:8-12; 
4: 1 ; 5 : 1 .) As soon as the last member shall 
have passed into the Heavenly condition, all the sufferings 
of The Christ will be over, and none others will have the 
privilege of sharing in the "sufferings of Christ," even as 
some others will have the privilege of sharing in His 
glory and becoming His "Bride, the Lamb's Wife." 
It is one cup, though it contains the juice of many 
grapes; and it is one loaf, though made from many grains. 
The grains cannot retain their individuality and their life 
if they would become bread for the world. The grapes 
cannot maintain themselves as grapes if they would constitute 
the life-giving spirit. Thus we see the beauty of 
the Apostle's statement that the Lord's people are participants 
in the one loaf and the one cup. There is no other 
way by which we may attain the new nature than by accepting 
the Lord's invitation to drink His cup, and by 
being broken with Him as members of the one loaf; by 
being buried with Him in baptism into His death, and 
thus attaining with Him a resurrection to glory, honor 
and immortality, attaining unto the First Resurrection. 

THE CHURCH'S PART IN THE ONE LOAF 

The loaf represents primarily the Lord Jesus' body, 
which is broken for us and for the world in general. In 
a larger sense it includes all the Body of Christ, all who 
become His members. Thus the breaking of the loaf, the 
breaking of the Body, has continued for more than 
eighteen centuries. 

We read that in the institution of the Lord's Supper 
Jesus broke the loaf. As a matter of fact, He was the 
only one at that time who could break the loaf. All others 
of mankind were unjustified in God's sight until Jesus by 
His sacrifice and exaltation made good the deficiency of 
a certain class. So Jesus was the first to break the loaf. 
Today, as the unleavened bread at the Memorial season 
is passed to each of us, and as each takes a portion of 
it, he breaks it for himself. 

The fact that our Lord first broke the bread does 
not mean that we should not have our individual part. 
We recall that the Heavenly Father had to do with the 
breaking of our Lord's body. As it is written, "It pleased 
Jehovah to bruise Him; He hath put Him to grief." 
(Isa. 53:10.) This was not done against our Lord's will. 
While the Heavenly Father had to do with His breaking, 
so, in harmony with the Divine arrangement, the breaking 
of our share of the loaf. 

The Apostle's statement in the succeeding chapter, "Ye 



do show forth the Lord's death," applies exclusively to 
the death of Jesus. The setting of the words indicates 
that it is the Lord Jesus personally who is mentioned: 
"As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do 
show forth the Lord's death till He come." (V.26.) 
"He is thy Lord, and worship thou Him." (Psa. 45:11.) 
The Church is never spoken of as the Lord. 

Furthermore, we are to remember that Jesus said, 
"This do in remembrance of Me." (Luke 22:19.) He 
did not say, This do in remembrance of yourselves— in 
remembrance of your own share in the sacrifice. We are 
to be dead with Him. We remember that we must share 
with Him in the sufferings of this present time if we 
would share in the glories to follow. The Father gave 
Him to be the Head— "God blessed forever."— Heb. 3:1; 
Rom. 8:17,18; 9:5. 

THE LIFE IS IN THE BLOOD 

The Scriptures say that the life is in the blood. (Lev. 17:11.) 
In harmony with that statement, the Jews were 
bidden to always refrain from eating the blood. The animals 
must be bled before they were permitted to eat the 
flesh. Nor was any stranger sojourning with them to eat 
any blood. (Lev. 17:10-14.) In this way, God would 

R5342 : page 328 

seem to say that life is a very sacred thing. This life 
principle that He gave to man, seems to reside in the 
blood. As long as the blood is passing through the organs 
of circulation, there is life; but when the blood is 
shed, the being dies. 

When our Lord laid down His earthly life, He did not 
retain a right to that earthly life in the sense of using it 
for Himself. He tells us in the parable that all who would 
gain "the pearl of great price" (Matt. 13:45,46), must sell 
all that they have; that is, all that they enjoy of earthly 
life or privileges. Our Lord had a perfect earthly life. 
He gave up that life. "He poured out His soul [life] unto 
death." (Isa. 53:12.) On what basis? On exactly the 
same basis He has put before us; if we would live, we 
must die; if we would reign, we must suffer; we must be 
dead with Him. (2 Tim. 2:1 1,12.) So we who follow 
in His steps do the same that He did. 

If we, as His disciples, lay down our life for the 
brethren, we are doing what Jesus did. This is all to be 
applied for the world. He took that earthly life, not to 
keep it, but to turn it over, eventually, to all mankind. 
The right to human life is still in His control. He is the 
One who, as the great Mediator, will give to the world of 
mankind the life He poured out. 

He now imputes His merit to the Church, that we may 
share with him in His suffering and in His glorious Kingdom, 
on the spirit plane. This cup, then, represents the 
full renunciation of earthly life and of all claim thereto. 



Our Lord's earthly life was not forfeited, but merely laid 
down. (John 10:17,18.) The intention in laying it 
down was to abandon it, personally, forever, that humanity 
might get it. He has not yet accomplished this, in 
the sense of turning life over to them, but He gave up 
His life with that purpose in view. 

UNFORFEITED EARTHLY LIFE-RIGHT 

Our Lord undertook to accomplish the Divine will in 
the redemption of the world, and He has proceeded in the 
accomplishment of it, but has not yet completed the purpose. 
He laid down His life, but did not forfeit it. When 
He was raised from the dead He still had a right to that 
earthly life, with the understanding, however, that He 
was not to use it for Himself, but that He would give that 
life to all the world who were willing to receive it, assigning 
it to them at the end of His Reign of a thousand years, 
during which His Church will Reign with Him. 

So then, His life was not taken from Him; for His 
life could be taken from Him only by His disobedience. 
(Lev. 18:5; Ezek. 20:11; Luke 10:28; Rom. 10:5.) He 
laid it down voluntarily, in harmony with the Divine 
will. He laid it down that it might become an asset in 
the hands of Divine Justice, so that when the time should 
come He might use that asset for mankind.— John 6:51. 

In the beginning it was the Divine purpose that our 
Lord's human life should be laid down forever, that He 
should not take it again. He consecrated His life at 
Jordan and finished the sacrifice at Calvary. Throughout 
the Gospel Age He has been sacrificing His Mystical 
Body. Just as soon as He shall have finished the sacrificing 
of all these Body members, then their life-right, 
which belongs to the great High Priest, will be used for 
the purchase, the redemption, of the world, by the sealing 
of the New Covenant. Immediately after this, His Kingdom 
will be established. This further application of His 
merit, His life-right, which will not be made until the 
whole Church has passed beyond the veil, is symbolized 
by the sprinkling of the Mercy Seat with the blood of the 
goat. The blood of our Lord and the blood of His Body, 
is all one blood. It is one Priest of many members. It 
is one Atonement for all— for the sins of the whole 
world.— I John 2:2. 

The blood represents not only the death of Christ, but 
also the death of all the members of His Body, to whom 
merit is imputed. This the Apostle expresses in the same 
connection, saying, "The cup of blessing which we bless, 
is it not the communion [common union, or participation] 
of the blood of Christ? The bread [loaf] which we 
break, is it not the communion [common union, participation] 
of the Body of Christ?" that is to say, a union 
in common with Him, a partnership, as represented in the 
cup and in the bread [loaf]. The whole matter has its 
origin in Him. But we are celebrating also our own individual 
share as members of the Church in the sacrifice of 



the flesh, in our participation in the sufferings of Christ. 



R5342 : page 328 

SIGNIFICANCE OF EATING OUR LORD'S FLESH AND OF 
DRINKING HIS BLOOD 

"Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and 
drink His blood, ye have no life in you."— John 6:53. 

IN THIS chapter the Lord is addressing the 
Jews, who believed not on Him, but murmured 
because He told them He was the 
true Bread from Heaven. His expression, 
"eat the flesh and drink the blood," had a 
deep spiritual significance which none but 
Israelites indeed could receive. And this 
is still true today. The world, when dealt 
with in the next Age, by Jesus, will indeed 
have the opportunity to eat of His flesh- 
to appropriate the merits of His sacrifice; but they will 
have no opportunity of sharing in His Cup— of drinking 
His blood. Symbolically, the Cup signifies the sacrificed 
life. The world will have no share in the sufferings of 
Christ, represented in the Cup. 

Our Lord's words imply, If you accept My proposition 
of the Gospel Age, you may have life, and have it more 
abundantly than man has ever had it or could have it. 
You may have inherent life— "life in you." 

THE TWO SALVATIONS PICTURED 

There is a difference, we believe, maintained in the 
Scriptures between the bread, which symbolizes the Lord's 
flesh, and the wine, which symbolizes His blood. The 
Church, in order to be accepted of the Lord as members 
of His glorified Body, must share in both of these by 
participation. The loaf, as the Apostle explains, not only 
represents to us our Lord, as the Bread of Life necessary 
for us, but it also represents us as His members to be 
broken as our Lord was broken; and the wine represents 
not only our Lord's blood, but also the blood of the 
Church— that we are sharers with him in His sacrificial 
sufferings.— I Cor. 10:16,17. 

The privilege of sharing our Lord's Cup is not for the 
world. They will not share in the sufferings of Christ, 
because all opportunity to share in His sufferings and 
glory will have ended when the Church is glorified. The 
Lord said, "Drink ye all of it"— drink it all. There will 
be none for the world to drink. And we who are of the 
Church class "fill up that which is [left] behind of the 
afflictions of Christ."-Col. 1:24. 

"The flesh of the Son of Man" represents Restitution 
to human privileges, i. e., the means to its attainment, and 



R5342 : page 329 

restores to man the life which he had forfeited— the life 
lost in Adam— human life, earthly life. It will be the gift 
of God through Christ. But the supplying of this Bread 
will not be sufficient. The world will need to eat of the 
Bread and to have the assistance the Lord will give them 
through His Kingdom. Jesus said (V.51), "I am the 
living Bread which came down from Heaven; if any 
man eat of this Bread, he shall live forever." 

From one viewpoint the world may be spoken of as 
not dead. They have lost their right to life, but God has 
made arrangements through Jesus by which that life will 
be restored. It was lost in Adam, but will be restored 
through Christ, the second Adam. During these six 
thousand years the world has been in a starved and fallen 
condition. But God has provided this Bread and it will 
be for them in the Millennial Age. 

It is not shown symbolically anywhere in the Scriptures 
that the world will partake of the blood, and thus 
participate in the sufferings of Christ. Only a few are 
represented as partaking of the blood. This is shown in 
Leviticus 16. The blood sprinkled the second time on the 
Mercy-Seat is for all the people, thus satisfying Justice. 
This represented the release of all humanity from the 
sentence of death, giving all an opportunity to eat of the 
Bread and not die. 

In another picture, we find the blood used representing 
man's acceptance of the Divine arrangement. In the sealing 
of the Law Covenant, which is a type of the New 
Covenant, Moses first sprinkled the books of the Law, 
representing the satisfaction of Justice. Then with the 
same blood he afterwards sprinkled all the people. (Heb. 9:19; 
Exod. 24:8.) The sprinkling of the books of the books of the 
Law required only a few seconds; but the sprinkling of 
the people required a long time. 

At the beginning of the Millennial Age— as soon as the 
Church is joined to her Head beyond the veil— the blood 
will be sprinkled to satisfy Justice for the world. Then, 
as the Mediator, Christ will proceed to do a work for all 
who will receive it. And that work is symbolically represented 
as sprinkling the people with the blood. In other 
words, every member of the race will be privileged to 
come into Covenant relationship with God through the 
Mediator, by accepting the terms which He will hold forth 
during the Millennial Reign. 

MOST VALUABLE FOOD AND DRINK KNOWN 

If they meet the requirements during Messiah's Reign, 
by the close of that period they will be perfect; and He 
will present them before the Father, and all will be received 
into full covenant relationship with Him, who endure 
faithfully the test then applied. 

In our context (V.54), we read, "Whoso eateth My 



flesh, and drinketh My blood, hath eternal life." Our 

R5343 : page 329 

Lord's statements in many instances are made so broad 
that they cover, not only the Little Flock, but the Great 
Company as well, and therein show great wisdom. In this 
verse the Lord does not say, "hath eternal life" in him; 
for of those who now make a Covenant of sacrifice, and 
become sharers of the Cup as well as of the Bread, there 
are some who will not attain to inherence of life— immortality 
—but who will come through great tribulations 
and attain life on a lower spirit plane. They will not have 
inherent life, though it will be everlasting life. Those 
who attain immortality will have eternal life, on the highest 
plane. Those of the Great Company will have eternal 
life, but not immortality— not life in themselves. 

When our Lord said, "For My flesh is meat indeed, 
and My blood is drink indeed" (V.55), we understand 
Him to mean that this is the most valuable food and drink 
ever known. No other bread has such value, and no 
other drink could be so precious as this, by the partaking 
of which one may attain to glory, honor and immortality 
—the Divine nature, life in itself. 

ANTITYPICAL SHOWERS OF MANNA 

The Bread from Heaven was our Lord's flesh, which 
He was to give for the life of the world. And Jesus explains 
this to be what was typified by the manna that 
fell in the wilderness. He said, "Your fathers did eat 
manna [in the wilderness], and are dead. He that eateth 
of this Bread shall live forever." He also said (John 12:24), 
"Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and 
die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much 
fruit." And He did fall into the earth and die. And we 
become sharers with Him in His death. We participate 
in His sufferings and death, which the world will never 
do. They share in its outcome. 

All the work of this Gospel Age, is the getting ready 
of the food for the world, and of the blood which will be 
sprinkled upon them. But the Message of our Lord in 
our text was not intended for the world. As He tells us, 
"Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom 
of Heaven." 

It is only a special class who could know anything 
about the Mystery of God all through these nineteen 
hundred years— the two millenniums. These things have 
been hidden from the world in general. But now we believe 
that the time is here when they are to be given to 
the world, making the world conscious of the blessing that 
God has in store for them soon. The Scriptures tell 
us that the Mystery will be unfolded during the sounding 
of the seventh trumpet— which is now sounding. This 
making of these truths known, therefore, would seem to 
be the showering of the manna. 



R5345 : page 329 

HOW ISRAEL CROSSED JORDAN 

--NOVEMBER 30.-JOSHUA 3:7-17.- 

"Fear thou not; for I am with thee."— Isaiah 41:10. 

UNDER Divine direction, the hosts of Israel 

removed from the high bench of the Jordan 

Valley down to the river three days in advance 

of the time appointed for the crossing. 

The Jordan River, as usual at this 

season, was overflowing its banks. Ordinarily 

about ninety feet wide, it is supposed 

to have been about five hundred feet wide 

at this time. 

The Canaanites in general and the people 
of Jericho in particular, although expecting an invasion, 
would not expect it at a time when the river was 
impassable and when bridges were little known. The 
Israelites, too, must have had various opportunities for 
exercising faith or doubt in respect to soon entering 
Canaan. The fact that nothing is mentioned respecting 
doubts or fears or murmurings implies that their experiences 
in the wilderness had taught them valuable lessons 
of faith in God and trust in Divine appointments. 

The crossing day came, and Joshua, by Divine instruction, 
directed the priests to bear the Ark and to go before 
the people, proceeding to the brink of the river until their 
feet were in the water. As their feet touched the water, 
it began to recede and they to advance, until finally they 

R5345 : page 330 

stood in the middle of the stony bed of the Jordan, still 
bearing the Ark of the Covenant, which represented the 
Divine promise under which they had left Egypt and were 
hoping for grand results. 

The hosts of Israel, lining the banks of the Jordan for 
miles, crossed over from Moab to Canaan. Thus the 
crossing was entirely accomplished. Twelve large stones, 
representing the twelve tribes, were taken from the bed 
of the Jordan and piled on the shore as a monument or 
memorial of God's aid, while twelve stones from the 
shore were placed in the bed of the river as a similar 
memorial. Finally the priests followed the people to the 
Canaan shore, and shortly thereafter the waters began to 
return to the river bed, as before. 

HOW THE MIRACLE WAS DONE 

The fact that we may now know with considerable 



certainty just how this miracle was performed should 
not in the least detract from its value. With God nothing 
would be a miracle, since He of His own power is able 
to accomplish His will in every respect. Many things are 
miracles simply because we do not understand the Divine 
processes. We are miracles ourselves, fearfully and wonderfully 
made. The growth of the plant, the flower, or 
even a blade of grass, is a miracle to us— something wholly 
beyond our power, and in a general way considerably 
beyond our comprehension as a process. 

The account tells plainly that the heaping up of the 
waters was in the direction of Adam. This place has been 
located with considerable certainty by Prof. Wright as 
situated seventeen miles above Jericho, on the Jordan. 
The waters became in a heap, a lake, the Professor 
assures us, by reason of a land-slide which choked the 
narrow passage in the river, where there were steep banks. 
The character of the soil in that vicinity would be favorable 
to the blocking of the narrow channel of the Jordan 
there by the slipping of the hillsides. Indeed, history tells 
us that a similar slide took place in the same vicinity in 
A.D. 1267, damming up the Jordan for several hours and 
leaving the bed of the river below quite dry, the waters 
draining off to the Dead Sea. 

Prof. Wright says, "So striking is this conformity of 
the facts to the conditions indicated by the Biblical account, 
that geologists can find but little difficulty in believing 
the written record. At the same time the written 
record is so precise itself, and so free from fantastic 
elements that the literary critic cannot well consider it 
as anything but the original, unvarnished tale of an 
eyewitness." 

The marvel of the story is that the Divine marching 
orders were so timed as to suit the circumstances and 
conditions exactly. 

THE LESSON WAS IMPRESSED 

The memorial stones were to bear witness to future 
generations of this great act of Divine providence on 
behalf of Israel. Joshua admonished, "When your children 
shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What 
mean these stones? then ye shall let your children know, 
saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land. For 
the Lord your God dried up the waters of Jordan from 
before you, until ye were passed over, as the Lord your 
God did to the Red Sea, which He dried up from before 
us, until we were gone over: that all the people of the 
earth might know the hand of the Lord, that it is mighty; 
that ye might fear the Lord forever."— Joshua 4:21-24. 

ENTERING INTO CANAAN REST 

St. Paul, in Hebrews 4:5-8, gives us the suggestion 
that Israel's entrance of Canaan under the leadership of 
Joshua typified the entrance of the Church into the rest 



of faith and special privilege under the leadership of the 

antitypical Joshua, Jesus. The Israelites had rest from 

their wilderness journeyings. It was a wonderful change 

for them, a blessed change, yet it was not the full realization 

of all that God had promised them. That full realization 

will be attained only in Eden itself, and as a result 

of Messiah's glorious work of Restitution. Following the 

Apostle's lead, we perceive that the experiences of Israel 

up to the time when Moses died represented the Law Dispensation, 

which ended at the Cross. The Gospel Dispensation, 

beginning at Pentecost, is typified by the crossing 

of Jordan and the taking possession of the land, 

Canaan signifying rest. 

"We who believe do enter into rest"— in proportion to 
our exercise of faith. He who exercises much faith may 
have much rest, and may conquer, and possess quietude. 
He who has less faith will have less rest and will be able 
only partially to enter upon his privileges. The storming 
of Jericho and the other cities of Canaan typified the warfare 
of the New Creature, begotten of the Holy Spirit, 
against the things of the flesh, the desires of the flesh, 
the weaknesses and depravities of the flesh. The Lord's 
word to those who would enter into His rest is, "Be 
strong and of good courage. Be not afraid, neither be 
thou dismayed. The Lord thy God is with thee, whithersoever 
thou goest." 

Those lacking faith entered not at all into Canaan, but 
died in the wilderness. So we read, "Israel hath not 
obtained that which he seeketh for, but the Election hath 
obtained it, and the rest were blinded." Only the faithful 
will constitute God's Elect. Only these can pass from the 
old to the new conditions. Only these pass from death unto 
life without actually dying. Throughout this Gospel Age, 
God has been making up Israel's deficit by calling a similar 
class from all nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues. 
Each one is called upon to exercise faith and cross over 
Jordan, in the sense of beginning a new life— a life of 
devotion to God, a life of warfare against sin and the 
entrenched weaknesses of his own flesh. 

We agree with the Apostle's words that "We who believe 
do enter into rest." All of God's consecrated people 
can testify that they have a rest, a peace, a joy, a blessing, 
which the world can neither give nor take away— 
and this in proportion to their loyalty and faithfulness. 
Yet even all this is not sufficient. God has in reservation 
something far better. Respecting this the Apostle declares, 
"There remaineth, therefore, a rest for the people 
of God. "--Hebrews 4:9. 

That Heavenly rest will be entered by the perfecting 
of the New Creatures in the First Resurrection. Their 
loyalty and faithfulness having been demonstrated in 
fighting the good fight of faith against the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary, the Lord promises them a glorious 
change, "in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye"— 
a share in His own resurrection to the perfection of the 
Divine nature, "far above angels, principalities and 



powers" and in association with Himself in the glorious 
Messianic Kingdom, by which the world of mankind is 
also to be blessed.— Luke 12:32. 

THE SABBATH OF THE LORD 

St. Paul intimates that the seventh day of the Law 
Sabbath typified the present condition of the Lord's people 
enjoying rest, peace and Divine favor even under imperfect 
conditions; but the true Sabbath will come for 
us when we shall have experienced our resurrection 
change. Then we shall have rest from sin. We shall 
also have rest from our own weaknesses and imperfections; 

R5346 : page 331 

for all of these will be gone. The New Creatures 
will be beings without flaw, blameless and irreprovable. 
"It is sown in weakness; it is raised in power. It is sown 
in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It is sown a natural 
body; it is raised a spiritual body." 

The weaknesses of others will no longer cause us 
unrest. The rest of the glorified condition of the Church 
will be perfect. But before we can enter into that rest, 
we must here show our worthiness by fighting the good 
fight of faith and by laying hold on eternal life, upon 
the conditions which are offered us, walking faithfully in 
the Master's footsteps. 



R5343 : page 331 

THE FALL OF JERICHO 

-DECEMBER 7.-JOSHUA 6:8-1 1,14-20.- 

"All things are possible to him 
that believeth."-Mark 9:23. 

JERICHO was a walled city situated about five 
miles from the Jordan. It was small, as 
cities are now estimated; but its wall was 
a necessity, owing to frequent incursions 
from Syria on the one side, and Egypt on 
the other; and because it was situated on 
one of the main lines of travel leading to a 
mountain pass. It is described as having 
been very rich, not only in precious metals, 
but also in expensive fabrics, clothing, etc. 

The Lord's decree in respect to Jericho and all the 
other cities of Canaan was that they were devoted— 
cherem. The Israelites were not led into Canaan to do 
a pillaging work. They were to be the executioners of 
the Divine decree against the people of Canaan, who 
were divided up into little principalities, each city constituting 



the center of a principality. According to history, 
they were continually at war with each other, and 
atrociously corrupt, after the manner of the Sodomites. 
They were to be destroyed as no longer advantageous in 
the conditions in which they were living, either to themselves 
or others. God took them away as He saw good. 

In the great prison-house of Sheol, the tomb, they 
would wait for the more favorable time of Messiah's 
Kingdom and the release and assistance out of degradation 
and death promised to all mankind through Abraham's 
seed: "In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed." 

The Israelites, as executioners of the Divine decrees, 
were to destroy the cities of Canaan and all their inhabitants, 
their animals and all their property. The exceptions 
were the things of metal; and these were not 
to be appropriated by the Israelites to their own use, but 
were consecrated in advance to the Lord for the furnishment 
and adornment of the Tabernacle and the Temple. 

"CAPTAIN OF THE LORD'S HOST" 

After crossing Jordan, the Israelites encamped about 
midway between the river and Jericho, the latter city 
having shut up its gates tightly, expecting to endure a 
long siege. Joshua was aware that the first place of 
attack was Jericho, but evidently was not aware of the 
character of the siege and of the way in which it 
would be overthrown. While reconnoitering in the vicinity 
of Jericho, he came upon an armed soldier, and at 
once inquired whether he was a friend or a foe to Israel. 
The answer was that he was the Captain of the Lord's 
host. One of the angels had been commissioned to 
materialize— to appear as a human being and to wear 
human garments and armor— for the purpose of communicating 
the Divine plans to Joshua. 

We are to remember that the Bible relates frequent 
manifestations of this kind— spirit beings hiding their 
personality while assuming human bodies, human clothing, 
etc., in which they ate, talked, etc., as men. We remember 
that it was after this same manner that the Lord 
Jesus after His resurrection appeared to His disciples in 
various forms, sometimes similar to His crucified body, 
but more often otherwise— as the gardener, a way-farer, 
etc. Similarly, three spirit beings appeared to Abraham 
on one occasion— not only in human bodies, but wearing 
human apparel. And they ate and talked with Abraham 
(Genesis 18:8,9), and he knew not that they were angels 
until subsequently they revealed their identity. 

Through this Heavenly messenger the Divine plan for 
the capture of Jericho was revealed to Joshua. He immediately 
put it into execution. Every day there was 
a solemn procession around the doomed city. First went 
a military escort from the various tribes. Next followed 
a company of priests blowing rams' horns, making shrill 
noises. Then came a further procession— a rear guard— 



presumably warriors. In harmony with explicit directions 
not a voice was raised, not a threat nor a shout. Everything 
connected with the matter was most solemn and 
funeral, except the blowing on the rams' horns, which 
were the same as were used in announcing each new year, 
but especially and peculiarly used in the Jubilee year. 

These solemn funeral processions encompassed Jericho 
once every day for six days. Then on the seventh day 
they went about the city seven times, the last time 
vociferously shouting— the seven priests blowing upon the 
rams' horns. When they had made the seventh circle of 
the city they stopped in front of it, still blowing; and 
forthwith the wall of the city crumbled and fell. The 
translation of our Common Version, "down flat," seems 
too strong a statement to represent properly the original. 
The walls of the city crumbled and fell immediately in 
front of the Ark. But not all the wall fell; for the account 
tells that the portion of the wall where Rahab's 
house was built did not fall. (Cf. Joshua 2:15-19.) The 
wall fell to such a degree that Israel's soldiers were able 
easily and quickly to surmount it and accomplish the work 
of destruction which the Lord had commanded. 

Is it suggested that such an event would be preposterous? 
If so, we reply that everything in the Divine 
purpose can easily enough be accomplished under the 
Divine supervision. Quite probably the tremor of an 
earthquake, under Divine direction, caused the fall of 
Jericho's wall in front of the Israelites. When we consider 
all the circumstances as related in the Bible, it does 
not seem at all impossible that God thus intervened for the 
carrying out of His own purposes. 

Prof. Wright declares, "The 'mediate' cause of the 
fall of the wall was some subterranean earthquake, which 
shook down the walls of the part of the city where the 
men were standing, or undermined them so that they 
sank. This is easily possible in that region of earthquakes." 
Prof. Lawson describes similar results from 
earthquakes near San Francisco, saying, "The earth waves 
which passed through the highly elastic rocks swiftly 
with a small amplitude seem in this material to have been 
transformed into slow undulations of great amplitude, 
which were excessively destructive." 

Prof. Wright adds, "All the chimneys of the place 
[Oakland] were thrown down, and the bricks were scattered 

R5344 : page 332 

around over the yard as grains of wheat would be 

when falling from the hands of the sower. The record 

is that at the appointed time the walls [of Jericho] fell; 

and we are free to believe that the catastrophe was connected 

with an earthquake, which was made to synchronize 

with the final blasts of the rams' horns. In the light 

of history and geological conditions of this region, the 

story bears every mark of being a genuine and authentic 

account of an event so remarkable that it could not have 



been modified by tradition without rendering it fantastic 
and incredible. To the geologist who believes in God, 
it is perfectly reasonable. To the textual critic, the freedom 
from fantastic comment marks it as having been 
unadorned by tradition." 

There seems to be a typical significance connected 
with the capture of Jericho. In a sense it is made to 
represent all the cities of Canaan as their capital. The 
six days of the quiet marching around the city, with 
nothing accomplished except the witnessing, represents 
the six great Days of the larger Week— each Day a 
thousand years long. During the world's history, Sin 
has been entrenched and impregnable. The Lord's people 
have merely given witness against it— blowing the trumpets 
—giving forth the Bible Message that ultimately Sin 
shall be destroyed— "All the wicked will God destroy." 
They shall perish "like natural brute beasts." "They shall 
be punished with everlasting destruction"— "the Second 
Death. "-Psalm 145:20; 2 Peter 2:12; 2 Thessalonians 1:9; 
Revelation 20:14. 

But little has resulted from all the witnessing. We are 
waiting for the great Seventh Day— the thousand years 
of Messiah's Reign. In it the citadel of evil will be surrounded 
seven times, or completely. The shout of victory 
will go up; and the strong walls of sin and error, of 
Satan's falsehood, of human deception, will fall. Satan 
shall be bound a thousand years, to deceive the world 
no more, and every evil thing and principle and all who 
love sin will be forever destroyed in the Second Death. 
Thus will be ushered in the glorious epoch for which 
we so long have waited and prayed, in which there shall 
be no more curse, no more sighing, crying or dying. 

That victory will be under the guidance and direction 
of Immanuel, the Captain of the Lord's host, the Captain 
of our salvation. Christ and the Church will then be 
beyond the veil in the glory of the Kingdom on the spirit 
plane; but there will be representatives of the Kingdom 
on the earthly plane, though their rule and direction will 
be under the guidance and instruction of the spiritual 
ones— of the glorified. The Scriptures are very clear in 
their indication that none will belong to the Heavenly 
company in the resurrection except such as have been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit during this Gospel Age- 
beginning with Pentecost. 

The glorious characters who preceded Jesus and the 
Church, like John the Baptist, may be friends of the 
Bridegroom and friends of the Bride class, but themselves 
belong to another class. Since no one was begotten 
of the Holy Spirit before the Sacrifice of Calvary, none 
could possibly be born of the Spirit previously. St. Paul 
declares that glorious blessings are coming for all those 
noble characters of the past, such as Moses and others 
whom he enumerates in Hebrews 11. He concludes the 
story of their life and blessing by assuring the Church 
that these Ancient Worthies apart from us (the Church) 
shall not be made perfect. God has provided some better 



thing for us (the Church). Our better portion is the 
attainment of the spirit nature, like unto the angels, but 
far above angels, sharers with our Redeemer in His 
glory and immortality. 

The reward of the Ancient Worthies, however, will be 
glorious. Brought back from the tomb perfect as human 
beings, they will be grand ensamples to the world of what 
Restitution will mean to all who will come into harmony 
with Messiah's Kingdom. And their portion and honor 
will be to represent that Kingdom as Princes or Rulers 
in all the earth.— Psalm 45:16. 

How munificent are the Divine arrangements! Our 
great Creator is the Fountain of blessings, pouring out 
His mercies and favors on every hand. Our Lord Jesus, 
the great Captain of our salvation, who manifested His 
loyalty to the Father even unto the death of the cross, 
has already attained the highest position, next to Jehovah. 
The faithful Church, walking in the footsteps of the 
Redeemer in the narrow way of self-sacrifice, will be 
next to Him in His glory and Kingdom. Then, on every 
man in his own order, the Divine blessings will shower 
for a thousand years, to the uplifting of all out of sin 
and degradation back to the perfection of Adam in his 
Edenic home. The result will be "glory to God in the 
highest, on earth peace, good will amongst men"; for all 
contrary-minded shall be destroyed from amongst the people 
in the Second Death.— Acts 3:23. 



R5344 : page 332 

MAMMON THE PRINCIPLE OF SELFISHNESS 

"No man can serve two masters."— Matt. 6:24. 

A MAN may endeavor to serve two masters, 

or more, but no one can be a satisfactory 

servant to more than one master. 

No two interests are so completely one that 

the service of either would not more or less 

detract from the service of the other. The 

Lord explained this matter in His Sermon 

on the Mount. He tells us that one of the 

masters to whom He refers in our text is 

God, the Heavenly Father, and the other 

is Mammon— selfishness and sin, together with all that 

is connected with unrighteousness— everything contrary 

to God and His righteousness. 

As a matter of fact, we are born in slavery to Sin. 
The Scriptures inform us that we were sold into this 
slavery by the disobedience of our first parents. Sin, 
therefore, has a hold upon the entire world of mankind. 
They are all slaves. It is impossible for them to deliver 
themselves from the thraldom of this slavery; for it is 
everywhere— the world around. 



Some are loyal to the interests of evil; but the great 
majority are at heart disloyal to Mammon, realizing that 
in serving self they are opposing God. But at the same 
time, those who serve Mammon, selfishness, get the best 
in the political sphere, the best in the ecclesiastical sphere, 
the best in the social sphere, and the best in the financial 
sphere. Selfishness succeeds at the present time. All 
human arrangements are along the lines of selfishness. 
Whoever, then, works along these lines serves himself 
better than if he were not selfish. Otherwise he would 
have his fellow-creatures in opposition to him, misunderstanding 
him, etc. 

But Jesus inaugurated a new order of things. He 
declared that God is ready to receive back to Himself 
those who forsake sin and believe on Him. He tells 
them that He will redeem them; and that as many as will 

R5344 : page 333 

accept His gracious arrangement will be set free. "If 
the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." 

SELFISHNESS CHARACTERISTIC OF SATAN 

Most people have selfishness so ingrained in their own 
natures and so mixed up in all with which they have to 
do, socially and otherwise, that to the majority of those 
who heard our Lord the Message seemed foolish. It was 
foolishness to them that our Lord should lose His life, 
that He should waste His life, and accomplish nothing. 
Consequently they thought it a waste of energy for any 
to become His companions, and they continued to serve 
Mammon, not knowing that they were serving the Devil. 

The Mammon principle, the selfish principle, is of 
Satan. But he carefully hides his cloven foot, and makes 
himself to appear as an angel of light. When he is inviting 
people to take his way, the way of selfishness, he 
is at the same time misrepresenting God. And all those 
who take our Lord's way are held up to ridicule; for the 
Prince of this world has much power. Those who serve 
him cannot see that any other way would be reasonable 
or proper. Hence the difference between the children 
of light and the children of darkness. 

Satan sets himself up as an angel of light; but his 
servants cannot see this, and thus he has them continually 
at a disadvantage. He says, "You need not serve Mammon; 
but be moderate in your course. Serve the present 
things. Do a little on this side and a little on that." 
And they say, "We will really in our hearts serve God; 
but outwardly we must serve Mammon. Otherwise we 
shall have trouble in continuing to be worldly-wise— if 
the world sees that we are serving God." Many have 
attempted this double course. This principle has been 
manifested all through the Gospel Age. If there had been 
no cause for Jesus to use these words, we may be sure 
He would not have used them. Jesus is here telling us 



that we cannot be faithful and acceptable servants to the 
world if we would be loyal to God; and we cannot be 
satisfactory to God if we give our hearts to Mammon. 

The majority of Christian people are in this attitude 
today. They try to serve God; and yet they try to be 
worldly-wise, and to shape their conduct and their affairs 
of the present life in harmony with the present order of 
Mammon. The Lord would have them know that it is 
impossible to serve God and Mammon. He has promised 
to pay wages to those who serve Him. They must know 
that there can be no middle course, so far as God is concerned. 
Mammon might be willing to give a partial reward 
for partial service. But so far as Jesus is concerned, 
our service must be undivided. 

Whomsoever the Son makes free will be free indeed. 
In the world they will have tribulation. But they will have 
the peace which passes all understanding. Others cannot 
appreciate their blessings, their real condition. If any 
one should try to serve two masters, his heart would go 

R5345 : page 333 

out to the one or to the other; for he would more and 

more detest his condition. If he were liberated by the 

Son, and fully enlisted in His service, he would come 

more and more into sympathy with the Divine arrangement, 

with the Justice, Wisdom and Love exercised by 

the Heavenly Father in His gracious Plan; and the appreciation 

of this would more and more fill him, so that he 

would have no time for worldly things. 



page 333 

HOLIDAY REMEMBRANCERS 

OUR gifts should in some sense of the word 
always represent ourselves. All who recognize 
themselves as New Creatures should 
have this in mind at this season of the year. 
We refresh your memories by the following 
brief announcements of items we carry in 
stock, additional to our general stock of 
Bibles and Bible Study Helps mentioned 
on the reverse side of this page of THE 
WATCH TOWER: 

"Studies in the Scriptures." India paper edition, fine 
leather binding, gold edges, light, small, beautiful, $4.80 (1L), 
postpaid. 

"Studies in the Scriptures." Morocco, over boards, gold 
edges, but on paper the same as the ordinary cloth edition, 
suitable for book-shelf, $3.60 (15s) per set of six volumes, 
postpaid. 

"Studies," Volume I., with Pyramid Chapter added. This 
special edition is very suitable for presentation to uninterested 



friends. Many have had their interest awakened by the reading 
of the Pyramid Chapter. We recommend this Volume 
for gift purposes. Postpaid 50c. (2s Id), but, to stimulate 
its wide circulation, we offer ten copies for $3.50 (14s 7d), 
postpaid. 

"Poems of Dawn." Nearly three hundred very choice 
poems topically divided, the very thing each should have near 
him for a leisure moment. The value of these as spiritual 
stimulants is inestimable. They can be appreciated by all 
Christians, though of course especially by those possessing a 
knowledge of Present Truth. Postpaid in cloth binding 25c. 
(Is); leather-bound 50c. (2s Id). 

"In the Garden of the Lord." This little booklet is a 
choice poem from the pen of Sister Seibert. It contains sixteen 
colored illustrations, twenty-four pages. Postpaid 6c. 
(3d) each; per dozen 65c. (2s 8d). 

"The Sweet Briar Rose." A poem by Sister Seibert, with 
a commendation of "The Divine Plan of the Ages." Postpaid 
2c. (Id) each; per hundred 50c. (2s Id). 

Choice Motto Cards for home embellishment and spiritual 
refreshment. 

Packet Mz, containing fifteen small cards with different 
texts, postpaid 50c. (2s Id). 

Number Mv, containing eight small and three large-sized 
cards, 50c. (2s Id). 

Number Ma, containing fifteen small and six a little 
larger sized cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Number Mb, containing six small, six a little larger and 
three medium-sized motto cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Number Mc, containing six small and six medium-sized 
cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Number Md, containing six small, six a little larger and 
three large cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Number Me, containing four large cards, $1 (4s 2d). 

Where $5 (LI lOd) worth of these are sent to one address 
the saving in package and expressage would be 50c, making 
the price $4.50 (18s 9d). Order by number only. 

Postcards. Assorted mottoes and designs, 15c. (7-l/2d) 
per dozen; $1.15 (4s lOd) per hundred. 

Memory Cards. We have two different sets of these— 
No. 1 and No. 2. Colors of the cards indicate the topic. As 
for instance, purple represents royalty and the Kingdom, 
garnet represents the redeeming blood, etc. On one side of 
the cards are texts appropriate to the color. On the reverse 
side of the card is the citation of where it is found. Fifty 
cards to the pack, 25c. (Is Id) per pack, postpaid. These can 
be used personally or with a company of friends. The design 
is to commit the text to memory and its citation. Many have 
found these very useful. 

Jerusalem Remembrancers of Olivewood. Brother Russell 
purchased a quantity of these on the occasion of his last visit 
to Jerusalem. We still have some remaining— paper knives 
and paper weights made of olivewood highly polished. Postpaid 
10c. (5d) each. In quantities, 80c. (3s 4d) per dozen. 

ASSIST US BY REMEMBERING TO: 



Write your letters and your full address very plainly. 

Write your orders on a separate sheet of paper. 

If answering a letter marked File A, File R, or otherwise, 
refer to it in the opening paragraph of your letter. 

The Editor thanks you for clippings received from time 
to time, but requests that in every case the articles be marked 
to indicate the name of the paper in which they appeared, 
and the date. 



page 334 

"I.B.S.A." BIBLES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" SERIES 
[SEE OVER] 

We commend also, as aids, the following publications (not all our own), 
which we supply at specially low prices because of the assistance they 
lend to the study of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the 
order in which they seem to us to be desirable aids. 

OUR SPECIAL "I.B.S.A." BIBLE 

Hereafter to distinguish our own special edition from other 
Bibles, we will refer to it as the "I.B.S.A." Bible. This Bible is 
becoming more and more indispensable to all readers as they learn 
how to use it. The translation, of course, is not at all different from 
that of other Bibles of the Common Version. 
We specially recommend it for its smallness 
of size, lightness of weight, and good-sized 
print, and above all for the helps to Bible 
students and teachers bound with it; printed 
on India paper; excellent press work. Its 
special feature, distinguishing this Bible from 
all others, is 

BIBLE TEACHERS' MANUAL. 
Parti. 

Biblical Comments from Genesis to Revelation, 
with references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
showing the page where the text is more 
fully discussed and elaborated. We can 
scarcely imagine anything more helpful than 
these for Bible study. It is so easy to turn 
to the reference and ascertain if the matter 
has been treated and where and how. It represents 
four hundred and eighty-one pages 
of matter. 

Part II. 



INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS. 

This is a topical arrangement of Bible 
subjects specially convenient for those who 
have opportunity for teaching others the 
Divine Plan of the Ages. Its various Topics 
are arranged under distinct headings and the 
various texts bearing upon the subjects are 
collated. With this help a novice has at his 
command, well-furnished, "the Sword of the 
Spirit." It is in condensed form, very convenient, 
and consists of eighteen pages solid 
matter. 

Part III. 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX. 

The Berean Topical Index, alphabetically 
arranged, presents a large variety of subjects 
showing references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
treating the same. This feature covers twenty-eight 
pages. 

Part IV. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED. 

SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED. 

In this, specially difficult texts are brought 
to the attention and references given showing 
where they are treated in our publications. 
Following this is a full list of various 
interpolations and spurious passages of the 
Scriptures not in the original MSS., as 
proven by the oldest Greek MSS.— fifteen 
pages. 

These four features, representing five hundred 
and forty-two pages, are not to be found 
in any other Bibles on earth and, in our 
opinion, they are of almost priceless value. 
One of our interested readers if he could not 
procure another would not sell his copy for 
a hundred dollars— many of them surely 
would not take thousands for it. 

All of our "I.B.S.A." Bibles contain the 
above, and some of them, the numbers of which end with a nine, contain 
additionally Bagster's Bible Study Helps, including an alphabetical 
index of proper names and Bagster's Bible Concordance and Maps— a 
total of one hundred and eighty-six pages. 

We not only supply these Bibles at cost price, but, because of 
the large quantities ordered at a time, we are enabled to secure a 
cost price which is really phenomenal. The very low prices must not 
lead you to think that these are manufactured in any slipshod manner. 
They are first class in every particular. The prices are, many of them, 
less than one-half of what you pay for such books almost anywhere else. 

So great is the demand for these "I.B.S.A." Bibles that hereafter 



we purpose carrying no others in stock except pocket Bibles and 
large type Bibles for the aged. We will still, however, be pleased to 
serve anyone who desires other Bibles. We can procure for these 
wholesale rates, usually twenty-five per cent, off, plus postage. 

DESCRIPTION AND PRICES-"I.B.S.A." BIBLES 

1918, price $1.65, postage prepaid, is a beautiful book. It is small 
and light. Size 4-3/4 x 6-3/4 inches. It has minion type, red under gold 
edges, divinity circuit, French Seal. Looks like the genuine sealskin, 
but it is in reality good sheepskin. 

Number 1919, price $1.75, postage prepaid; the same book, the 
same Bible; the same every way except the addition of Bagster Helps, 
Concordances, etc., making this size a trifle larger. 

Number 1928, price $2.65, postage prepaid. This is the same 
book exactly as number 1918, except that it has genuine morocco binding 
leather-lined. 

LITTLE LARGER, IONIC TYPE, SELF-PRONOUNCING 

Number 1939, price $1.95, postage prepaid. This is the same book 
as 1919, the same binding and contents, but it has a coarser print and 
is a little larger book. Size, 5-1/2 x 7-1/2 inches. 

Number 1959, price $3.65, postage prepaid. This is the same book 
as 1939 except that it has splendid morocco binding, is calf-lined and 
silk-sewed. Bibles similar in quality and finish are listed in many 
catalogues at $8. 

The sale of these books is not restricted to WATCH TOWER readers. 
They are valuable aids in Bible study, and open to the public. 

Remit with order. We can secure such prices only by paying spot 
cash and must sell on the same terms. Registry, 10c. additional. 

Anyone ordering patent index on any of these Bibles should so 
state and should add twenty-five cents to the price. 

Should any desire other Bibles we will be pleased to supply 
publisher's catalogue, giving full description and prices. 
We are usually able to secure a discount of 25 per cent, on 
the publishers' list prices. 

BIBLE STUDY HELPS (BOUND SEPARATE) 

These are the same as in the latest "I.B.S.A." Bibles, described 
above. Leather, $1; postage prepaid. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 

The demand for this publication increases year by year. 

Our present edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts 
and comments as all former editions. Every alternate leaf is blank -ruled, 
for use as an autograph and birthday record. Its value increases 
as additional autographs of friends are secured. It is printed on 
fine bond paper. We now have it in three different grades of binding, 
at very reasonable prices, considering the class of workmanship. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all WATCH 
TOWER subscribers: 



Purple cloth, silver embossed $0.35 

Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 35 

Leatherette, gold edges 50 

" blue edges, Swedish 35 

" gold edges, " 65 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges 1.10 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast table; 
that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the natural food. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 
by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been sold by them at $4 
in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For several years a friend, an 
earnest Bible student, desirous of assisting the readers of our Society's 
publications, has supplied them through us at a greatly reduced price; 
now he has purchased the copyright and plates from the Fowler & 
Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a gift that the poor 
of the Lord's flock may have this help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES. --These will be sold with THE WATCH TOWER 
only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage and, as a 
Premium, one year's subscription new or renewal, to THE WATCH 
TOWER. On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red 
under gold edges, silk sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— includes 
postage and one year's subscription to THE WATCH TOWER. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As footnotes 
it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from the Common 
Version. This is a very valuable little work, published in Europe, 
which we specially import. Price, 50c, including postage. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading Hebrews, 
by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a valuable aid 
in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special price, in leather 
binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. We are not permitted by the 
publishers to cut their price, but we may and do give in addition, postage 
free, any four volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, cloth binding 
with each Concordance, or six volumes if purchaser pays expressage. 
Postpaid, cloth binding, $6. 

EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It has some 
advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we prefer it. 
Special reduced prices— in cloth binding, $3; half leather, $5. Carriage 



prepaid, 96c extra. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have either 
of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, $1, delivered. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. It 
is a large volume of 1,020 pages. Cloth binding, $1.30, including postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and seems 
remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this class of 
books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible lesson with 
their children, and this book furnishes interesting topics, to which may 
be added as much concordant "Present Truth" as the age of the 
children will justify. Parents are responsible for their children's 
training in theology as well as in morals. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and corners, 
gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special price, 75 cents, 
plus 25 cents postage. 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) $0.35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 06 

Poems of Dawn (leather) 50c; cloth 25 

Memorizing Text-Cards (100 in pkg.— two assortments, Nos. 1 and 

2), per pkg 25 

Scriptural Post Cards (assorted) per doz 15 

CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft, $1.00; 8 ft 1.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 8 ft 1.50 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 8 ft 1.50 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER: 

Spring Back (holds 1 yr.) 50 

String " (holds 2 yrs.) 50 

CROSS & CROWN PINS (Gold, with red enamel): 

1/2" and 5/8" (ladies' or gents' style) each $1 and 1.15 

5/8" celluloid, per doz. 25c; each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per hundred, 25c; per M 2.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper) 25c per 100; (silk) each 05 

Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle Shadows, Our 
Lord's Return, Jewish Hopes); also Berean Question Booklets on 

each Vol. of SCRIPTURE STUDIES; each 5c; per doz 50 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

THE BIBLE STUDENTS' MONTHLY, per year 12 

Tracts in all languages FREE 



R5346 : page 335 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
SUCCESSFUL SCANDINAVIAN MEETINGS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I wish to send you an expression of our appreciation of 
the helpful visit of Brothers J. F. Rutherford and A. N. 
Pierson, as your representatives, granted us recently. I will 
also use this opportunity to thank you most heartily for your 
kindness to me in London, during your own physical weakness, 
and for your recent letter. 

Perhaps it will interest you to have a report from me concerning 
the meeting for which you put the responsibility in 
my care. 

From August 13 to September 3, Brother Rutherford held 
eighteen splendid meetings in Norwegian, Finnish and Swedish 
cities, with a total attendance of 25,800 adults and other thousands 
turned away for lack of room. 

He also gave twenty-four encouraging talks to the Truth 
friends in these places, and in connection we had a good convention 
in Helsingfors, Finland, visited by about 250 friends, 
and another convention in Stockholm, attended by about 
400 friends. 

As one proof of the interest in Brother Rutherford's public 
lectures here, not fewer than 1,818 volumes of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES were sold in Sweden and Norway-672 of 
these being sold at a single Sunday morning meeting in Stockholm, 
at which the attendance was 3,300, with 700 turned 
away for lack of room, first receiving free literature. Besides 
this, we received thousands of addresses requesting further 
information re subjects discussed. At the Orebro meeting 
alone, attended by 2,200 adults, with many outside who could 
not gain entrance to the hall, 586 address-cards were received. 
Notwithstanding the fact that in every city we had rented the 
largest halls obtainable, no one of them was large enough 
to hold the crowds. 

For advertisement of Brother Rutherford's meetings in 
Sweden and Norway we distributed 217,500 copies of BIBLE 
STUDENTS MONTHLY. Many papers published very good reports 
of his lectures, reaching other thousands of Swedish 
people. We earnestly desire that you send him to Sweden 
again, as soon and for as long a time as possible. We promise 
you that we will have the largest halls all over the land, 
crowded every night to hear him. 

Meanwhile we are striving to do the best we can, by the 
Lord's grace, to carry on the good work in which we have 
received so many blessings and which every day becomes 
more dear to our hearts. The Colporteur work and all other 
branches make good progress continually. During about five 
weeks before us we have arranged for twenty mass-meetings 
in the largest cities and towns of Northern Sweden, which 
Brother Rutherford could not visit. In these I shall be the 
speaker, D.V. 

We pray that the Master of the Harvest may guide us 
and give wisdom and strength to do all in harmony with His 



will and to the Glory of His name. We shall highly appreciate 
the privilege of being continually included in your prayers 
to this end; we never forget you in our petitions before 
the Throne of Grace. 

With most sincere Christian love and greeting to you, our 
beloved Pastor and brother, in which all the dear helpers at 
this office join, I remain, as ever, 

Your humble co-laborer in the Lord's Harvest, 
AUG. LUNDBORG. 



page 335 

DESIRES TO GAIN THE VICTORY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

The Ecclesia extend to you their Christian love and 

greetings, and we always delight to bear your name up to the 
"Throne of Grace" that you may find help in every time of 
need, so that through your loving ministry we also may be 
enabled to "make our calling and election sure." 

At a recent business meeting it was unanimously voted 
"That Brother Charles T. Russell be officially recognized as 
That Servant,' to whom the Lord promised He would give 
all His storehouse of 'Present Truth,' if faithful, and that 

he serve as Pastor to the Ecclesia at , until the completion 

of the Age." We are pleased to accept the sermons 
and WATCH TOWER as your personal service to us. 

Remember us all when at the "Throne of Grace," that we 
also may make our calling and election sure, especially remembering 
the writer, who is the least of the Lord's dear 
brethren, that I may gain the victory over the things that 
especially beset me. 

Yours in the love and service of our dear Redeemer, 
M. L. WOLF. 



page 335 

BEREAN QUESTIONS ON SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XVI. 
THE PRESENT INHERITANCE OF THE NEW CREATION 

DECEMBER 7 
Read p. 686, par. 1, to p. 688, par. 1. 

(47) What more could we ask respecting the Lord's provision 
for the future glories and present joys of the New 
Creation? P. 686, par. 1. 

(48) What more could we think of or ask for on behalf of 
the world than God has already arranged? P. 686, par. 2. 



(49) Do any of the varying conditions which surround us 
limit our privileges of access to God in prayer? P. 686, par. 3. 

(50) What is our privilege of prayer for personal use? 
P. 687, par. 1. 

(51) What are the privileges and blessings of family 
prayer? P. 687, par. 2. 

(52) What are the blessings of prayer in the Church? 
P. 687, par. 3. 

(53) Why is it essential that every meeting of the Lord's 
people for study and up-building should be opened and closed 
with prayer? P. 688, par. 1. 

DECEMBER 14 

Read p. 688, par. 2, to p. 691, par. 2. 

FAITH A FRUIT OF THE SPIRIT AND A PART OF THE PRESENT 
INHERITANCE OF THE NEW CREATION. 

(54) Is that faith, which is a fruit of the Spirit, the same 
faith which was ours before we were justified? If not, explain 
the nature and source of the faith which justified us? P. 

688, par. 2. 

(55) What is the difference between faith and credulity? 
P. 689, par. 1. 

(56) Describe the logical and progressive steps of the 
growing faith that leads to our begetting of the Holy Spirit? 
P. 689, par. 2. 

(57) Describe the further results as respects the faith-development 
of the spiritually enlightened ones. P. 690, par. 1, 2. 

(58) Explain how this Spirit-begotten faith is in reality 
the basis of all the New Creation's present joys and hopes. 
P. 691, par. 1. 

(59) What does the Apostle James say about the necessity 
for faith? And how shall we increase our faith? P. 691, par. 2. 

DECEMBER 21 

Read p. 693, par. 1, to p. 695, par. 3. 

Series VI, Study XVII. 

THE RESURRECTION INHERITANCE OF THE NEW 
CREATION 

(1) What pre-requisites are necessary to any appreciation 
of the New Creation's future inheritance? P. 693, par. 1. 

(2) Even with the fullest attainment of faith and spiritual 
sight, will the New Creation be able perfectly to comprehend 
the things of the future? P. 693, par. 2. 

(3) To what extent did our Lord lift the veil and give us 

a brief glance at the future conditions, as recorded in 1 Cor. 15:41-44, 
and why is this entire chapter specially interesting 
to the Church? P. 694, par. 1. 

"AS ALL IN ADAM DIE, EVEN SO ALL IN CHRIST SHALL BE MADE ALIVE. 



1 COR. 15:22. 

(4) What is the Apostle Paul's argument, of which the 
above text is the conclusion? P. 695, par. 1, 2. 

(5) What is clearly the Apostle's argument in 1 Cor. 15:21? 
P. 695, par. 3. 

DECEMBER 28 

1. 



Read p. 696, par. 1, to p. 699, par. 



(6) Why is the Common Version translation of 1 Cor. 15:22 
manifestly erroneous? P. 696, par. 1. 

(7) What is the full significance of the phrase, "Be made 
alive," in this text? P. 697, par. 1. 

(8) What is the proper rendering of 1 Cor. 15:22? P. 

698, par. 1. 

(9) What is the distinction between being "in Adam" and 
"in Christ"? And why will not all who were in Adam be 
fully "made alive" through Adam's redemption? P. 698, par. 2. 

(10) What is the Apostle Paul's declaration as respects 
the order of the Church's resurrection? P. 699, par. 1. 

(11) Briefly, to what class does the "after resurrection" 
apply, and what one exception is there to this order? P. 

699, par. 2. 



page 337 
