From Our Readers
Hair Loss  The article “Alopecia​—Living in Silence With Hair Loss” (April 22, 1991) was of special interest to me. I started to lose my hair when I was six and a half years old. It was humiliating at first, but my friends and people in general were very kind and loving. I am 64 years old now and never really understood the cause of my hair loss until I read your article. Thank you so much.
R. W., United States
I am a 16-year-old girl, and I have suffered from alopecia since I was 10. My schoolmates have teased me by name-calling and trying to pull off my wig. This makes me feel sad and depressed. But your article showed me how to cope by relying on Jehovah. I also have the hope of getting my hair back in his new world.
C. B., United States
Gossip  Thank you for the issue “Gossip​—How to Avoid Getting Hurt.” (June 8, 1991) It came at a time when I needed it the most. I have been having a problem with a girl who used to be a good friend of mine, and she has been spreading harmful gossip about me. Your article really helped me to understand and to cope.
M. P., United States
Flirting  I receive Awake! regularly. But in your article “Young People Ask . . . What’s the Harm in Flirting?” (May 8, 1991) I feel that you were a little too harsh. There certainly was nothing wrong with the boy’s asking Sarah to sit next to him. And for goodness’ sake, why is it wrong to smile at the opposite sex? Are you supposed to grit your teeth in a ‘stay away from me’ expression?
W. T., United States
The incident with young Sarah clearly involved her being exposed to daily doses of unwanted attention. Understandably, she found this to be distressing. As for smiling, the article made it clear that “there is nothing wrong with being outgoing.” Indeed, there is a world of difference between a friendly smile and the “coy smile” the article made reference to.​—ED.
Crossword Puzzles  Thank you for the crossword puzzle in the June 8, 1991, issue. While visiting my grandparents, I began working on the puzzle myself. But as I began to do so, my grandfather asked if he could help. I was shocked! My grandfather has never been interested in the Bible. Anyway, he read the scriptures, and I read the clues. About ten minutes later, my aunt arrived and asked if she could help with the puzzle too. The Bible used to be a forbidden subject in my grandparents’ home​—but not anymore!
A. J., England
The Lungs  I was motivated to write you after reading the article “The Lungs​—A Marvel of Design.” (June 8, 1991) Just the day before, I had lost my aunt to lung cancer. The article increased my appreciation for the marvel of the body. It was also easy to understand and helped me see the need to take care of my lungs and not defile them with things [such as tobacco].
C. G., United States
Elderly Care  I care for my dad, who is very ill. My siblings have not helped but say things such as, ‘You’re strong. You can handle it’ or, ‘You should have looked into the possibility of a nursing home years ago.’ I began to feel sorry for myself, realizing that my chances for marriage and having children had passed. I even began having emotional problems. But the series “Do You Honor the Elderly?” (March 22, 1991) gave me the comfort and strength needed to endure.
S. B., United States

