





Did You Know?



How important was music in ancient Israel?

MUSIC was at the core of ancient Israel’s culture. The Bible makes a number of references to both instrumental and vocal music. In fact, about a tenth of the Scriptures are songs, the foremost examples being the books of Psalms, Song of Solomon, and Lamentations. Accordingly, the book Music in Biblical Life says that the Bible “paints a vivid picture of a society in which music was interwoven into other non-musical activities.”
Music in everyday life. The Israelites played music to express their emotions. (Isa. 30:29) Women played tambourines, singing joyfully and dancing at coronations, festivals, and military victories. (Judg. 11:34; 1 Sam. 18:6, 7; 1 Ki. 1:39, 40) Israelites also sang highly emotional dirges while mourning. (2 Chron. 35:25) Without question, “the Hebrews were an eminently musical people,” states McClintock and Strong’s Cyclopedia.
Music in the royal court. The kings of Israel found delight in music. King Saul called David to his royal court to serve as a musician. (1 Sam. 16:18, 23) Later when David himself became king, he invented musical instruments, composed delightful songs, and organized the orchestra that played at Jehovah’s temple. (2 Chron. 7:6; Amos 6:5) King Solomon had male and female singers in his court.​—Eccl. 2:8.
Music in worship. Most important, Israelites used music to worship Jehovah. In fact, 4,000 musicians performed at the temple in Jerusalem. (1 Chron. 23:5) They played cymbals, stringed instruments, harps, and trumpets. (2 Chron. 5:12) But these professionals were not the only ones who worshipped Jehovah with music. Many Israelites evidently sang the Songs of the Ascents on their trips to the annual festivals in Jerusalem. (Ps. 120-134) And according to Jewish writings, Israelites sang the Hallel Psalmsa during the Passover meal.
Music is still essential for God’s people. (Jas. 5:13) We sing as part of our worship. (Eph. 5:19) Music unites us with fellow Christians. (Col. 3:16) And it strengthens us when we suffer hardships. (Acts 16:25) Music is a beautiful way to show our faith in Jehovah and our love for him.



a Jews refer to Psalms 113 to 118 as the Hallel Psalms, which were sung to praise Jehovah.

