





Are You Making Jehovah’s Thoughts Your Own?

“Be transformed by making your mind over.”​—ROMANS 12:2.
SONGS: 56, 123
CAN YOU EXPLAIN?
How do Bible study and meditation help us to make Jehovah’s thoughts our own?

What effect should Jehovah’s thinking have on our actions?

How can meditating on God’s thoughts help us to make wise decisions?







1, 2. As we continue to make progress, what do we learn? Give an example.
IMAGINE that someone gives a gift to a small child. The child’s parents tell him, “Say thank you.” He does so, mainly because they told him to do it. But as the child gets older, he begins to understand why his parents think that it is important to be grateful when others do kind things. Eventually, he is motivated to thank others on his own because he has learned to be grateful.
2 Something similar happened to us. When we started to learn the truth, we learned that it is important to obey Jehovah’s basic commands. But as we continue to make progress, we learn more about his thinking, that is, what he likes, what he does not like, and how he views matters. When we let Jehovah’s thinking influence our personal choices and our actions, we make his thoughts our own.
 3. Why can it be difficult to think the way Jehovah does?
3 Even though we enjoy learning to think like Jehovah, it is sometimes difficult to think the way he does because we are imperfect. For example, we know how Jehovah views moral cleanness, materialism, the preaching work, the misuse of blood, and other things. But it might be difficult for us to understand why he views them the way he does. So how can we learn to think more like Jehovah? And how will this help us to do the right thing now and in the future?



HOW WE MAKE GOD’S THOUGHTS OUR OWN

 4. What does it mean to make our mind over?
4 Read Romans 12:2. In this verse, the apostle Paul described what we need to do to learn to think the way Jehovah does. He said that we must “stop being molded by this system of things.” As we learned in the previous article, this means that we must reject the world’s ideas and attitudes. But Paul also said that we need to make our mind over. This means that we have to study God’s Word, understand his thoughts, meditate on them, and work hard to have God’s thinking.
 5. Explain the difference between reading and study.
5 Study is more than quickly reading information or underlining the answers to study questions. When we study, we think about what the material teaches us about who Jehovah is, what he does, and how he thinks. We try to understand why Jehovah tells us to do one thing and to avoid something else. We also consider what we need to change in our life and in our thinking. Of course, it might not be possible to meditate on all these points every time we study. But it is good to spend time, perhaps half of each study period, meditating on what we have read.​—Psalm 119:97; 1 Timothy 4:15.
 6. What happens when we meditate on God’s Word?
6 Something amazing happens when we regularly meditate on God’s Word. We ‘prove to ourselves,’ or convince ourselves, that Jehovah’s thinking is perfect. We begin to understand the way he views matters, and we eventually agree with his viewpoint. So we make our mind over and start thinking in a new way. Gradually, we make Jehovah’s thoughts our own.



OUR THOUGHTS AFFECT OUR ACTIONS

7, 8. (a) How does Jehovah view material things? (See opening pictures.) (b) If we view material things as Jehovah does, what will always be most important to us?
7 Our thoughts affect our actions. (Mark 7:21-23; James 2:17) Let us consider a few examples that make this point clear. One example, found in the account about Jesus’ birth, clearly shows Jehovah’s thinking about material things. God personally chose Joseph and Mary to raise his Son even though they did not have a lot of money. (Leviticus 12:8; Luke 2:24) When Jesus was born, Mary “laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the lodging place.” (Luke 2:7) If Jehovah had wanted to, he could have made sure that Jesus was born in a much better place. But he wanted Jesus to be raised in a family that put worship to God first. That was the most important thing to Jehovah.
8 This account about Jesus’ birth teaches us how Jehovah views material things. Some parents want their children to have the best material things, even if that causes their children’s relationship with Jehovah to suffer. But clearly, Jehovah views our relationship with him as the most important thing. Have you accepted Jehovah’s view of this matter? What do your actions show?​—Read Hebrews 13:5.
9, 10. How might we show that we view stumbling others the same way that Jehovah does?
9 Another example is how Jehovah views a person who stumbles others, that is, causes others to sin or to stop serving Jehovah. Jesus said: “Whoever stumbles one of these little ones who have faith, it would be better for him if a millstone that is turned by a donkey were put around his neck and he were pitched into the sea.” (Mark 9:42) These are very strong words! And we know that Jesus is just like his Father. So we can be sure that Jehovah is very displeased when someone stumbles one of Jesus’ followers.​—John 14:9.
10 Do we view stumbling others the same way that Jehovah and Jesus do? What do our actions show? For example, we may like a certain style of dress and grooming. But what will we do if our choice may upset some in the congregation or cause others to have immoral thoughts? Will our love for our brothers motivate us to give up our preferences?​—1 Timothy 2:9, 10.
11, 12. How will we protect ourselves if we learn to hate what Jehovah hates and develop self-control?
11 Here is a third example: Jehovah hates unrighteousness. (Isaiah 61:8) Of course, he knows that sometimes it is difficult for us to do what is right, because we are imperfect. Still, he wants us to hate what is bad, just as he does. (Read Psalm 97:10.) If we meditate on why Jehovah hates bad things, it will help us to make his view our own and will give us the strength to resist doing bad things.
Certain things are wrong, even though the Bible does not specifically talk about them

12 If we learn to hate what is bad, it will also help us to realize that certain things are wrong, even though the Bible does not specifically talk about them. For example, a form of immoral conduct called lap dancing is becoming more common in the world today. Some people feel that it is not the same as having sex with someone, so they think that it is not bad.a (See footnote.) But is that really how Jehovah feels about it? Remember, Jehovah hates every kind of badness. So let us stay far away from anything that is bad by learning to develop self-control and by hating what Jehovah hates.​—Romans 12:9.



THINK NOW ABOUT WHAT YOU WILL DO IN THE FUTURE

13. Why should we think about how Jehovah views matters now so that we can make wise decisions in the future?
13 When we study, we should think about how Jehovah views matters because this can help us make wise decisions. Then, if we are ever in a situation where we need to make an immediate decision, we will not be totally surprised. (Proverbs 22:3) Let us consider some examples from the Bible.
14. What do we learn from Joseph’s answer to Potiphar’s wife?
14 When Potiphar’s wife tried to seduce Joseph, he immediately rejected her. Obviously, Joseph had meditated on how Jehovah views marriage. (Read Genesis 39:8, 9.) Joseph told Potiphar’s wife: “How could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God?” This shows that he had made God’s view his own. What about us? What would you do if a coworker started to flirt with you? Or what if someone sent a sexually explicit message or image to your mobile phone?b (See footnote.) It is much easier to stay loyal to Jehovah if we have already learned about and accepted his view on such matters and have already decided what we will do.
15. How can we remain faithful to Jehovah, as the three Hebrews did?
15 Consider also the example of the three Hebrews known as Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. When King Nebuchadnezzar commanded them to worship the golden image he had made, they firmly refused. Their clear answer to the king showed that they had already thought about what would happen if they remained faithful to Jehovah. (Exodus 20:4, 5; Daniel 3:4-6, 12, 16-18) What about today? What would you do if your boss asked you to donate money for a celebration connected with false religion? Instead of waiting until something like this happens, it would be good for us to meditate now on how Jehovah views such things. Then, if we are ever in such a situation, it will be easier for us to do and say the right thing, as the three Hebrews did.





Did you do research, complete a legal medical document, and speak with your doctor? (See paragraph 16)




16. How can clearly understanding Jehovah’s thinking help us to prepare for a medical emergency?
16 Meditating on Jehovah’s thinking can also help us to remain loyal to him if we have a medical emergency. Of course, we are determined to refuse a transfusion of whole blood or any of its four major components. (Acts 15:28, 29) But there are some procedures involving blood that require each Christian to make his own personal decision based on Bible principles. When is the best time to decide what to do? Is it when we are in the hospital, maybe in pain and under pressure to make a quick decision? Certainly not. Now is the time to do research, complete a legal medical document that clearly explains what we want, and speak with our doctor.c (See footnote.)
17-19. Why is it important to learn Jehovah’s thinking on matters now? Give an example.
17 Finally, think about Jesus’ quick response to Peter’s unwise advice: “Be kind to yourself, Lord.” Jesus had obviously meditated a lot on what God wanted him to do and on the prophecies about his life and death on earth. This knowledge gave him the strength to remain faithful to Jehovah and to give his life as a sacrifice for us all.​—Read Matthew 16:21-23.
18 Today, God wants us to be his friends and to do our best to preach the good news. (Matthew 6:33; 28:19, 20; James 4:8) But some people with good intentions may try to discourage us, as Peter did to Jesus. For example, your boss may offer you more money but you know that you would have to work more hours and would not have as much time to attend meetings or preach with the congregation. Or if you are in school, suppose your teachers offer you the opportunity to move away from home to receive additional education. If that happens, will you need to pray, do research, and talk to your family members or the elders before you make a decision? It is better if you learn how Jehovah views these matters now and make his thoughts your own. Then, if you are ever offered these things, you may find that they are not really tempting. You know exactly what to do because you have already decided to stay focused on serving Jehovah.
19 You can probably think of other situations that may suddenly test your loyalty to Jehovah. Of course, we cannot prepare for every possible situation. But if we meditate on Jehovah’s thinking during our personal study, we will be more likely to remember what we have learned and know how to apply it in any situation. So when we study, let us find out how Jehovah views matters, make his thinking our own, and think about how this will help us to make wise decisions now and in the future.



JEHOVAH’S THOUGHTS AND YOUR FUTURE

20, 21. (a) Why will we enjoy our freedom in the new world? (b) How can we enjoy life now?
20 We all really look forward to the new world. Most of us hope to live forever in Paradise on earth. Under God’s Kingdom, we will have freedom from all the pain and suffering that we experience in this system. And, of course, we will still have the freedom to make choices based on our preferences and desires.
21 But that does not mean that our freedom will be unlimited. Meek ones will still make decisions based on Jehovah’s laws and his thinking. And this will bring great joy and abundant peace. (Psalm 37:11) Until that time comes, we can enjoy life now as we make Jehovah’s thoughts our own.



Lap dancing is an activity during which a performer who may be partially naked makes sexual movements while sitting on the lap of a customer. Depending on the facts of the situation, this could be considered sexual immorality and require that the elders form a judicial committee. A Christian who has been involved in this should ask the elders for help.​—James 5:14, 15.
Using a mobile phone to send sexually explicit messages, photos, or videos is called sexting. Depending on the facts, it may require that the elders form a judicial committee. In some cases, government authorities have even charged teenagers as sex offenders because they were involved in sexting. For more information, go to the jw.org website and read the online article “Young People Ask​—What Should I Know About Sexting?” (Look under BIBLE TEACHINGS > TEENAGERS.) Or see the article “How to Talk to Your Teen About Sexting” in the Awake! issue of November 2013, pages 4-5.
For more information about Bible principles that can help you, see, for example, the book How to Remain in God’s Love, pages 246-249.

SOME EXPRESSIONS EXPLAINED
We make Jehovah’s thinking, or Jehovah’s thoughts, our own when we understand why Jehovah views matters a certain way and learn to view matters the way he does




