A Government That Will Free Mankind
FOR some nineteen centuries Jehovah God has been preparing a government that will bring relief to sinful, dying mankind. He has been selecting from among mankind the rulers in that government and bringing them into unity under his Son as head. (Eph. 1:9, 10) The prospect before such ones is resurrection to immortal heavenly life, to serve as king-priests. (1 Cor. 15:42-54; Eph. 1:3-23; Rev. 20:6) Along with Jesus Christ, these king-priests will administer the atoning benefits of Jesus’ sacrifice and liberate humankind from enslavement to sin and death. Billions now dead will be included among those to benefit from their services upon being restored to life.​—Acts 17:31.
What assurance do we have that the rule of Jesus Christ and his associates will have none of the undesirable features of man’s governments? Why can we have faith in the ruling body that God has been selecting for so many centuries?
When you think in terms of human rulership, you may have little confidence in any government’s having the answer to our many problems. Throughout history, social standing, rank, military prowess, fame, wealth or the like have often determined who ruled. In many lands even the most qualified person would have a hard time gaining a high office without the support of strong political parties and generous campaign contributions. Men have been unable to devise a system whereby they can make sure that the persons put into office will be of such integrity that they cannot be corrupted or influenced to use their position for selfish ends.
Tested, Qualified Rulers
What about the selection of king-priests in God’s government, his heavenly kingdom? The manner in which persons attain a position of rulership in that Kingdom is altogether different from what has been true of the world’s governments. The Bible clearly shows that social standing, education, rank, worldly fame, money and the like will not buy a place in that government. (1 Cor. 1:26, 27) No one can campaign for the position. The individual must be tested for the office. Under difficult circumstances, he must prove that he is a person of integrity and more concerned about the welfare of others than his own. (Acts 14:22; 1 John 3:16-18) Jehovah God, who can read the motivations of the heart, is the One who determines whether the individual measures up to the needed qualifications.​—1 Sam. 16:7; John 6:44; 2 Thess. 1:11; Rev. 22:11-15.
Consider what the chief one of this ruling body, Jesus Christ, had to undergo. As the only-begotten Son of God in the heavens, he had everything. “Though he was rich,” says the Bible, “he became poor.” (2 Cor. 8:9) Voluntarily he gave up his high position in the heavens to become a man, and learned obedience to his Father under unfavorable circumstances. He suffered much, finally dying on an executional stake like a criminal of the worst kind. (Phil. 2:5-8; Heb. 5:7, 8) Because of what he experienced while on earth, Jesus Christ really understands the needs of humans and can deal compassionately with them.​—Heb. 2:17, 18.
As a man, Jesus Christ demonstrated depth of concern and love for people. He willingly and eagerly came to the aid of those in distress. (Matt. 14:14; Mark 6:34) He also proved that he was fully capable of solving the serious problems facing mankind. Empowered by God, he healed the sick, crippled and deformed; restored sight to the blind; unstopped the ears of the deaf; opened the mouths of the speechless; miraculously provided food for thousands, and even raised the dead. These things really happened. They are recorded by eyewitnesses.​—Matt. 11:5; 14:16-21.
As for those associated with Jesus Christ in rulership, they cannot be like men who promise much but, upon getting into governmental office, fail to keep their promises. The Bible says of those who will be in heaven with Christ: “No falsehood was found in their mouths; they are without blemish.” (Rev. 14:5) As did Jesus Christ, they must prove themselves to be unselfish and self-sacrificing, being willing to die for their Christian brothers.​—1 John 3:15-18.
In the case of human governments, rulers often do not really understand the problems of their subjects. But this is not so with the men and women whom Jehovah God has chosen over the past nineteen hundred years. As a group, they have come from all backgrounds and walks of life. There is not a trial or problem common to humans that some of them did not have to face. They experienced verbal and physical abuse, misrepresentation, hatred and even violent death. (John 15:19, 20) Despite their own weaknesses and imperfections, they succeeded in maintaining an approved standing before God. Knowing what it means to suffer as men and women, they can truly sympathize with imperfect humans and render needed help.
As immortal spirit persons, they will also have the power to assist humankind. Death will not be able to cut short the beneficial services of any of them. They will have ample time to bring the human race to perfection. The Bible shows that God has set aside a period of a thousand years for this task.​—Rev. 20:6.
According to God’s Word, Jesus Christ and his associate king-priests will be using earthly representatives to assist them in their vital work. (Ps. 45:16) What kind of persons will they be? The King Jesus Christ would certainly never use arrogant, self-seeking men. He willingly died for humankind in expression of his deep love and would, therefore, never tolerate anyone as his representative who would seek to exploit others for personal gain. Jesus’ attitude will be like that of ancient King David, who said: “I will not tolerate one who is conceited and arrogant. I look to the trustworthy in the land to be my associates. He who walks the path of integrity, he shall work for me.”​—Ps. 101:5, 6, New Berkeley Version.
Certain Liberation from Serious Problems
The qualifications of Jesus Christ, his associate king-priests and the Kingdom’s earthly representatives guarantee that the welfare of all who love righteousness will be safeguarded. They will not tolerate the development of a greedy commercial system based on competitive profit making. Nor will they allow anyone to interfere with a balanced distribution of food and other necessities. All mankind, not just the few, will experience freedom from want. With reference to the abundance then to be shared by all, the Bible says: “Jehovah of armies will certainly make for all the peoples . . . a banquet of wine kept on the dregs, of well-oiled dishes filled with marrow.”​—Isa. 25:6.
What about pollution and man’s present mismanagement of earth’s resources? The Bible tells us that Jesus Christ, in his prehuman existence, worked alongside his Father in creation. (John 1:3; Col. 1:15, 16) So he understands the various cycles responsible for sustaining plant and animal life. As King, he can therefore impart knowledge that will prevent pollution, as well as mismanagement of earth’s resources. He can also provide man with the guidance needed for transforming the earth into a state of paradisaic loveliness and for making the best use of its productivity.​—Compare Genesis 1:28; 2:15.
Serious family problems, misunderstandings and hurts due to weaknesses and imperfections will come to their end as Jesus Christ and his associate king-priests aid humans to grow to perfection. This will also result in removing all other problems stemming from inherited sin, including old age, sickness and death. By means of the Kingdom in the hands of his Son, God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”​—Rev. 21:4.
No one will then need to fear becoming a victim of crime, war, injustice or oppression. Everywhere people will be learning the ways of peace. (Isa. 2:4) All will be treated fairly. Speaking prophetically about Jesus Christ’s handling of matters, the Bible tells us: “He will not judge by any mere appearance to his eyes, nor reprove simply according to the thing heard by his ears. And with righteousness he must judge the lowly ones, and with uprightness he must give reproof in behalf of the meek ones of the earth.”​—Isa. 11:3, 4.
Never again will mankind face the fierce competition, frustrations or monotony that often accompany work in this old system. People will find pleasure in doing productive work, knowing that they are in no danger of seeing everything come to nothing through adversity. The language used by the prophet Isaiah reveals that there is a God-given basis for this conviction. We read: “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating. For like the days of a tree will the days of my people be; and the work of their own hands my chosen ones will use to the full. They will not toil for nothing.”​—Isa. 65:21-23.
God’s kingdom by Christ is indeed the answer to man’s many problems. It alone can bring about conditions of peace, security and justice for all. But when will that kingdom take over complete control of earth’s affairs?
[Picture on page 13]
God’s kingdom will soon make this earth a paradise

