Problems Begging for an Answer
DO YOU long for relief from the serious problems facing mankind? If you had the power to bring relief, would you not want to do that? But where would you start? There are so many problems begging for an answer.
Many millions of persons in impoverished lands, also increasing numbers in industrial countries, would like to work but simply cannot find jobs. How fine it would be if all could live active, productive lives! What relief many parents would experience if, instead of seeing their children waste away from hunger and disease, they could provide well for them! Would you not welcome the day when no one, whether yourself or others, would have to live in poverty, without adequate shelter from cold and pouring rains?
Besides earth’s starving millions, many other people yearn for greater stability in life. It would be such a comfort to know for sure that what one has long worked for will not later be reduced to practically nothing because of inflation. If costs of basic necessities were to stabilize, the aged, the infirm, the handicapped and others on fixed incomes would be free of a big worry.
Then, too, even the man with a well-paying job may find little satisfaction in what he does. He may find his work dull and monotonous. Or, poor cooperation among workers and fierce competition may leave him frustrated, tense and completely exhausted at the end of the workday. What a pleasant relief it would be to do work that is really enjoyable and that contributes to the good of others! And it would indeed be refreshing to work alongside people who truly cared about one another.
Besides that, how much happier people would be if they could feel bodily secure! Many city dwellers long for the time when streets will again be safe for women and children even after dark. Think how delightful it would be to live on an earth free from all injustice, oppression, crime and war, free too from sickness, old age and infirmity, and free from pollution of water, soil and air.
If we are really to enjoy life fully, all the serious problems facing us must be solved. There is abundant evidence that this will actually happen. You may even be among the millions to witness it. To understand how this will be possible, one must first determine the source of mankind’s problems.

