Do You Remember?
Have you appreciated reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
□ What is the main purpose of education for a Christian youth?
The main purpose of education should be to equip a youth to be an effective minister of Jehovah. And the most important education to that end is a spiritual education.—8/15, page 21.
□ What are the reasons for reporting the serious wrongdoing of a fellow Christian to the elders?
One reason for reporting serious wrongdoing is that it works to preserve the cleanness of the congregation. Another reason is that doing so is an act of Christian principled love shown toward God, toward the congregation, and toward the wrongdoer.—8/15, pages 28, 30.
□ What does it mean to keep “close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah”? (2 Peter 3:12)
This means not putting “the day of Jehovah” off in our minds. We should not forget that the day when Jehovah destroys this system of things is near. It should be so real to us that we see it clearly, as being immediately ahead of us. (Zephaniah 1:7, 14)—9/1, page 19.
□ Why have the last days of this wicked system continued longer than many expected?
Jehovah takes into consideration what is in the best interests of all humankind. His concern is with the lives of people. (Ezekiel 33:11) We can be confident that the end will come at the right time to fulfill the purpose of our all-wise, loving Creator.—9/1, page 22.
□ How can those in full-time service maintain their joy despite problems that may confront them?
They should reflect on the many blessings they have and recognize that thousands of others suffer greater hardships. (1 Peter 5:6-9)—9/15, page 24.
□ What was William Tyndale’s goal in translating the Bible?
Tyndale’s goal was to let the Scriptures speak to the common man in terms as exact and simple as possible.—9/15, page 27.
□ How can we show that we are loyal advocates of God’s Word?
We show our loyalty to God’s Word by zealously preaching it to others. As teachers, we should use the Bible carefully, never twisting it or stretching what it says to fit our ideas. (2 Timothy 2:15)—10/1, page 20.
□ How can the poisonous spirit of the world weaken our integrity?
The world’s spirit can weaken our integrity by making us dissatisfied with what we have and anxious to put our own needs and interests ahead of God’s. (Compare Matthew 16:21-23.)—10/1, page 29.
□ What does it mean to serve Jehovah whole-souled?
The “soul” refers to the entire person, with all his physical and mental abilities. Serving Jehovah whole-souled means giving of ourselves, using all our faculties and directing our energies to the fullest extent possible in God’s service. (Mark 12:29, 30)—10/15, page 13.
□ What is the key to being a person of godly principle?
The key is really to know Jehovah, his likes, his dislikes, and his purposes. When these fundamentals related to God govern our lives, they become, in effect, living principles. (Jeremiah 22:16; Hebrews 4:12)—10/15, page 29.
□ Jehovah’s servants have what balanced approach toward human rulership?
They are neutral in political matters because they serve as ambassadors or envoys of God’s Kingdom. (2 Corinthians 5:20) On the other hand, they are in conscientious subjection to those in authority.—11/1, page 17.
□ What lesson can we learn from the course taken by Elisha the prophet?
When extended the invitation to special service with Elijah, Elisha immediately left his field to minister to Elijah, even though some of his duties would be menial. (2 Kings 3:11) Some of God’s ministers today have displayed a similar spirit of self-sacrifice by leaving their livelihoods to preach the good news in distant territories.—11/1, page 31.
□ What beneficial counsel does the letter of James contain?
It shows us how to meet trials, counsels us against favoritism, and urges us to engage in upright works. James urges us to control the tongue, to resist worldly influences, and to promote peace. His words also can help us to be patient and prayerful.—11/15, page 24.
□ Why is Jehovah “ready to forgive”? (Psalm 86:5)
Jehovah readily forgives because he does not forget that we are creatures of dust, having frailties, or weaknesses, as a result of imperfection. (Psalm 103:12-14)—12/1, pages 10, 11.
□ Why should we be willing to forgive others?
If we refuse to forgive others when there is a basis for mercy, it can adversely affect our own relationship with God. (Matthew 6:14, 15)—12/1, page 17.

