I Was a ‘Giant Killer’
IT WAS the spring of 1965. I stood in the wrestling ring facing Taiho, one of the all-time sumo giants. We had rinsed our mouths with the cleansing water and tossed salt toward the ring in a purifying gesture. Four minutes of our pacing and facing had passed. We faced again. The referee’s fan was open, a signal that told us that our time was up. We must wrestle​—and wrestle we did! For the sixth time, I beat the great Taiho! This bout earned me the nickname Giant Killer. As a Japanese sumo wrestler, it was a thrill for me.
Sumo is not included in the Olympic sports and really is not well known outside Japan. In fact, Japan is the only country where it is a national sport. But, you might ask, what makes it distinct as a sport? The object of the sumo bout is to push or maneuver the opposing wrestler down to the ground or out of the ring by means of officially prescribed holds or throws.
Sumo​—An Ancient Japanese Sport
It is a very ancient sport that goes back to at least the first century B.C.E. in Japan, and it may have originated on the Asian mainland before that. Over the centuries, sumo has had close ties with the Shinto religion. A Shinto ritual was included when believers implored the gods for blessing on the rice harvest. During the Heian Period (794-1185 C.E.) sumo delighted the members of the Imperial Court and thus became the sport of emperors. As political power fell into the hands of the military in the 12th century, sumo training was ranked in importance with archery and swordsmanship and became a requirement for warriors. Gradually, professional sumo took on the form as we know it today. From the Tokugawa Period (1603-1868), sumo had its feet solidly planted as a spectator sport.
Why Did I Take Up Sumo?
At the age of 12, I was already 5’9” (175 cm) tall and could easily lift two rice bales weighing 130 pounds (60 kg) each. My height and strength raised high hopes in my parents because they wished for me to inherit and care for their farm. By the time I was a teenager, I personally considered my height a severe problem for a farmer because stooping over all day long to work in the fields was very uncomfortable for me.
Born and raised in the northern island of Hokkaido, one might say I was a born sumo. We usually have snow from November to April and lads whose hips are strengthened from walking through snow are said to be prime prospects for the sport. Against my parents’ wishes I entered the world of sumo.
How a Sumo “Stable” Functions
Young hopefuls start their training in sumo schools called stables. In my stable the day commenced at 3 a.m. Rigorous training began with preliminary exercises and then worked into actual sumo bouts among members of our group. Stable life is based on a feudal system in which rank is of utmost importance. We ‘new boys’ were expected to do all the cleaning and cooking for the higher-ranking members. Seniority in the stable determined who ate first and, in the morning, who got up last.
Training continued until noon when we took the first meal of the day​—of course, in order of rank. What a meal! Chanko-nabe is the food of sumo wrestlers. A thick, rich stew, made with a base of meat or fish to which carrots, onions, bean curd, soy sauce and sugar have been added. We ate it with large quantities of rice and washed it down with great amounts of beer.
The leisurely nap that followed this feast is a major factor in accomplishing a wrestler’s goal​—gain weight with back-up strength to excel in competition. A sumo wrestler’s success depends on how much and how fast he can gain weight and strength. Emphasis on physique is illustrated by the fact that a sumo hopeful must meet height and weight standards for his age group in order to begin training. And it takes much endurance to climb the sumo ladder. The young sumo is given his chance to demonstrate his prowess during six 15-day tournaments each year.
Sumo​—Where a Ring Is Not a Square
In the center of the huge sumo hall is an earthen platform that is 2 feet (61 cm) high and 18 feet (5.5 m) square. Because the zone where the action takes place is circular it looks more like a ring than what you see in Western wrestling. Called dohyō, it is not surrounded by retaining ropes. A ring of earth-stuffed rice bales, 15 feet (4.6 m) in diameter, is recessed into the top surface of the platform, which is covered by a thin layer of sand. This sand can be very helpful in a close match. How? It can be checked for imprints to determine the winner!
Purifying salt and water are on hand. A Shinto-style wooden roof hangs overhead and good-luck omens are buried under the ring. Added to that is the ever-watchful referee who is dressed in a warrior-style costume complete with a black headpiece of Shinto origin.
Pageantry reigns as king when the top-ranking wrestlers come in for the daily ring-entrance ceremony. They are clad in elaborate brocaded aprons that weigh 9 pounds (4 kg) or more! The wrestlers circle the ring and perform a hand-clapping ceremony. Soon the bouts will begin. Each day of the tournament, wrestlers appear in turn from the lower rank to the highest. Except for the grand champion, whose rank never changes once attained, rank can fluctuate for the next tournament based on the record of wins and losses.
Who Wins?
In sumo the condition of heart and mind ranks in importance with physique and technique. A saying that aptly describes the spirit of the bout is this: “Begin with a bow, end with a bow.” As the wrestler mounts the platform, he bows his head toward the ring. When the winner is determined, once again heads are bowed.
Each wrestler wears a torimawashi, or silk loincloth, which is 38 feet (11.6 m) long. This has been folded lengthwise six times and wrapped around the waist and groin. It is then tied in an elaborate knot at the back.
Wrestlers may weigh more than 300 pounds (136 kg). Like bulldozers, they charge at each other with remarkable speed for the initial clash, called tachi-ai. The impact is enough to stun. On contact each wrestler maneuvers to grab several layers of the other’s waistband, in order to throw the opponent. At the same time each is trying to protect himself from his opponent’s reach. Quite a feat indeed! Due to my own ability to hoist opponents out of the ring, I became known as the human crane.
How is the winner decided? At the moment any part of the wrestler’s body touches the ground inside or outside the ring, the bout is over and he loses. (Obviously, inside the ring the feet are allowed to touch the ground but not outside.) The winner extends his hand and helps the defeated one to his feet. They are still friends.
During 16 years of active sumo, I never saw karate-type blows or other unethical methods employed. Such action would be extremely impolite, to say the least.
Highest-ranking sumo are grand champions. I had advanced to two steps lower, to sekiwake status, when I defeated Taiho. In 1969, for health reasons, I retired as an active participant but continued in the sumo profession as a judge and instructor. Thus my means of living was guaranteed for life.
The Bible or Sumo and Shinto​—Which?
My professional sumo life took me away from home for six months of the year. One day in 1974 a woman, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, called at my door. Without hesitation I accepted a pamphlet and gave it to my wife. I then left for a tournament in the island of Kyushu. In my absence the woman returned and found that my wife had deep respect for the Bible. I came home six weeks later to find that my wife was studying the Bible. Since I disliked religion in general, I opposed her.
Even so, the Witness who studied with my wife persistently invited us as a family to visit with her family. I felt someone just wanted to talk to ‘the sumo wrestler.’ I could not understand why they were interested in me as a person. When my wife implored me with tears to go, I consented​—but grudgingly. In association with this Witness family, I enjoyed a kind and good atmosphere. But even when my wife was baptized in August 1975, I never thought I would walk the way of the truth myself.
One day in 1976 one of the Witness men called on me. I made no effort at conversation, but then suddenly I said, “Brother, would you study the Bible with me?” I do not know why I said it, but I did. Our study began and I made some progress, but trials were soon to follow.
In the sumo world, one is expected to conform. When on the road, I wanted time off to attend the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses in each city. To get such permission was out of the ordinary and I was ridiculed. However, when I did meet with the brothers, I had the reward of seeing the love and unity of Jehovah’s Witnesses all over Japan.
My first desire was to become a Christian and remain in the sumo society with an assured income. As I came to know Jehovah’s will more correctly I realized that this would be impossible. Yes, it is true that Jacob wrestled with an angel. (Genesis 32:24-29) However, I had to consider the strong false religious connections in sumo. Riddled with ritual from beginning to end, sumo originated on shrine and temple grounds. Even though the up-and-coming wrestler rarely considers the religious aspects, it is impossible to separate Shintoism from sumo.
So I made a firm decision to resign from the sumo society in January 1977. I was baptized that same year and have since become qualified to serve as a ministerial servant in the congregation. Having learned to be content with the present things, I now support my family of five by cleaning work.
I am no longer a sumo wrestler, but you could say that I am still a ‘giant killer.’ The ‘giants’ are false religious teachings and superstition. These traditions fall as I ‘kill’ them with the sword of the spirit, God’s Word, the Bible. (Ephesians 6:17) Now as a regular pioneer minister, I serve my Creator an average of 90 hours each month. How? By preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 24:14) Would you like to be a ‘giant killer’ like me? In association with Jehovah’s Witnesses you can be.​—As told by Kiyoshi Myobudani.
[Picture on page 17]
Ex-sumo wrestler Myobudani in action
[Picture on page 19]
He is now a Christian minister

