Jesuits Safe Teachers?
IN THE United States the Jesuits operate forty-three high schools and twenty-eight colleges. The wisdom of parents in sending their children to Jesuit schools may well be questioned in view of their record. In fact their record is such that jesuitical means craftiness and equivocation; a willingness to stoop to any means to realize one’s goals.
A case in point is two bulls issued by Benedict XIV, who ruled just two centuries ago. He is described by The Catholic Encyclopedia as “perhaps the greatest scholar among the popes.” Concerning Benedict and these bulls the Encyclopædia Britannica, 9th edition, states: “Perhaps the most important act of his pontificate was the promulgation of his famous laws about missions in two bulls, Ex quo singulari and Omnium solicitudium. In these bulls he denounced the custom of accommodating Christian words and usages to express heathen ideas and practices, which had been extensively done by Jesuits in their Indian and Chinese missions. The consequence of these bulls was that most of the so-called converts were lost to the church.”
And that there is no difference in the morality of the Jesuits after two hundred years appears from the report appearing in Time magazine, July 30, 1956, regarding a play written, produced and acted by nuns, which was put on at Notre Dame university. Incidentally, only nuns were allowed to see this play. In it a guardian angel from heaven offered to exchange places with a nun on earth to show the nun how simple a nun’s life really was. But “in no time the angel was in hot water with the mother superior for angelic frankness. When Sister Angelica tells her to stop it, the angel complains: ‘Do you mean I cannot tell the truth in a convent?’ No, says the sister, ‘Use mental reservation . . . a gimmick invented by the Jesuits. Tell as much of the truth as you think advisable, and mentally reserve the rest.’”
In view of the foregoing can it be said that it is wise to send one’s children to Jesuit schools?

