Help Those Attending Meetings
1 David was expressing heartfelt desire when he said: “Among the congregated throngs I shall bless Jehovah.” (Ps. 26:12) David identified the congregated throngs as worshipers of Jehovah. Is our heartfelt desire the same as David’s? We can show that it is by regularly attending meetings where we can bless Jehovah and encourage others to do so.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
2 Likely in your congregation there are a number of individuals who attend meetings but are not yet publishers of the good news. The latest meeting attendance figures for this country show that there are over 200,000 more attending the public talk than there are publishers associated. What can we do to help these persons qualify to participate in the ministry? Some are children of worshipers of Jehovah, but a great many are newly interested persons. Could we be of assistance to these interested ones? Some of them may be persons who are not yet studying. As you speak with them at the meetings, you may find that some would be happy for you to conduct a Bible study with them.
3 The love of the brothers for one another and for new persons does not go unnoticed. As one young man said after attending a meeting for the first time: “I was surprised that they all knew one another and that the hall was alive with friendly conversation.” This made him want to continue attending. He could see that the love the brothers had for one another was genuine.
WAYS TO ASSIST
4 Our love and concern for others can be demonstrated by talking with them before and after the meetings. Such keen interest in the welfare of others was expressed by Paul. In Romans chapter 16, he sent greetings to a number of individuals, indicating that he knew them well and was concerned about their physical and spiritual welfare. (Rom. 16:1-16) He sent greetings to some who had been “in union with Christ” longer than he, indicating his interest in persons in all stages of spiritual growth. His comments about them reveal he had taken time and interest to get to know them. He understood their problems and could help them spiritually. Coming to the meetings early provides a fine opportunity to get better acquainted with others and to encourage them. Why not try diligently to arrive 15 to 20 minutes before the meeting starts and stay awhile afterward so you can share more fully in encouraging others.
5 We can encourage newer meeting attenders by showing them how to prepare for the meetings. They can be encouraged to answer questions at the meetings and join the Theocratic Ministry School when they qualify. A few practical suggestions from an experienced publisher can assist newer ones in preparing talks and in making pointed comments in their own words.​—See School Guidebook, studies 4, 7, and 18.
6 As a part of Jehovah’s congregated throngs showing genuine love for one another, we grow spiritually, and a stronger bond of unity results. (Gal. 6:10) Our desire to be involved in congregation activities deepens, and we seek to have a greater share in the preaching and disciple-making work. Let us, therefore, continue our loving efforts to help new ones to praise and honor Jehovah.

