Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 28
Song 114
 7 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to support field service on first Sunday of March. Obtain supply of Creation books and magazines for use in field service during week.
18 min: “Help Others to Appreciate God’s Love.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Encourage all who can to auxiliary pioneer during March and April.
20 min: New Topic for Conversation. Discussion and demonstration. Review Topic for Conversation and show how Creation book can be tied in. In introduction emphasize that family life today is threatened by many factors. As a result, there are broken homes and much unhappiness. (Ask householder what he feels is the solution to this problem.) Thereafter state that there is a need to look to the Creator of mankind for direction. God instituted the family arrangement. (Read Genesis 1:27, 28.) Then you could say: “Did you know that more and more people, including scientists, believe that humans were created? God’s written Word, the Bible, contains direction that if followed can contribute to a happy family life and can provide hope for better conditions in the future. (Read Isaiah 48:17, 18.) It is important for sincere persons to read and pay attention to God’s written Word.” Offer Creation book, stating that this publication provides evidence supporting the creation account and establishes that God wants men and women to find contentment and happiness in life. (Consider illustration on page 34.) Turn to chapter 19 and select appropriate points and illustrations from pages 232-7, highlighting that all God-fearing people will be blessed when Paradise is restored. Then offer publication for contribution of $2.50. Have qualified pioneer or publisher demonstrate use of new Topic and offer Creation book. After demonstration, consider other talking points that can be used from publication.
Song 154 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 6
Song 155
 7 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to support magazine day on Saturday, March 12. Briefly demonstrate presentation of current magazines.
18 min: “Help Those Attending Meetings.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Highlight need to help newer ones to qualify to share in the field ministry.
12 min: Discussion and Interviews. Elder considers what local congregation can do to render increased assistance to those who attend meetings, with the goal of helping them become publishers. Interview two or three publishers, outlining specifically what they have done to assist and encourage such ones.
 8 min: Question Box. Discussion with audience.
Song 101 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 13
Song 92
10 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Include accounts report. Read appreciatively Society’s acknowledgment of all contributions, including donations to Society Kingdom Hall Fund and for missionary travel.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Help From Jehovah’s Spirit.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Stress need to reflect the fruitage of Jehovah’s spirit when in the ministry.
 8 min: Make Good Use of Theocratic Calendar. Talk. Encourage all to use Society’s calendar. Make notes of schedule for field service and other theocratic activity. (Eccl. 3:1) The weekly Bible reading schedule is printed on calendar. This serves as reminder to read Bible daily. (Ps. 1:2) Take note of Bible reading during week of Memorial. The yeartext is emphasized, and the illustrations stimulate our desire to participate in the field ministry. Review with audience various scenes from 1988 calendar. Pictures also remind us of our worldwide brotherhood. Use calendar to direct Bible students to organization. Place calendar in convenient location in home where it can best serve the needs of entire family. (Note Our Kingdom Ministry, April 1983, page 7.)
12 min: Invite interested persons to Memorial. Discussion and demonstration by service overseer. Highlight need to invite all family members, Bible students, and interested persons to Memorial on Friday evening, April 1. Make good use of printed invitations. Arrange for qualified publisher to demonstrate how to invite Bible student to Memorial, using information under the subject “Memorial” in the Reasoning book, pages 266-9. Service overseer concludes by encouraging all to make list of persons we want to invite and to make special effort to contact them.
Song 29 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 20
Song 151
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Encourage all to participate in field service this weekend. Consider “Adjustment in Watchtower Study Schedule.” As time allows, briefly relate experiences in placing Creation book.
15 min: “Support Midweek Service Arrangements.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Announce local arrangements.
 8 min: Preparations for Memorial. Talk by presiding overseer. Announce time of Memorial and outline local arrangements. (Note Our Kingdom Ministry, March 1987, page 3, “Things to Prepare.”) Mention last year’s attendance worldwide and locally and remind all to contact interested persons who have not yet been invited.
12 min: Can You Auxiliary Pioneer During April? Discussion. Encourage all who can to auxiliary pioneer during month of April. Interview one or two publishers who have made plans to pioneer. How did they arrange their schedule to devote 60 hours to the ministry? What joys and benefits do they anticipate? Encourage all who can to work with pioneers and spend as much time as possible in the field ministry during April.
Song 87 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 27
Song 197
15 min: Local announcements. Remind all that the Memorial will be held on Friday evening, April 1. Encourage publishers to offer subscription on first Sunday and all during April. Illustrate specific articles from the April 1 and April 8 magazines that can be tied in with the current Topic for Conversation. Have brief demonstration featuring presentation of Watchtower subscription.
15 min: “The Value of Singing in True Worship.” Talk based on December 1, 1987, Watchtower, pages 25-7. Highlight need for all to sing enthusiastically and from the heart.
15 min: Local needs. Unless there is a more pressing need, qualified elder can highlight the importance of being on time for meetings and theocratic appointments. This includes circuit assemblies and district conventions. Review information from December 1983 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, page 1, on the subject “Punctuality​—A Mark of Thoughtfulness.”
Song 205 and concluding prayer.

