Presenting the Good News​—With Help From Jehovah’s Spirit
1 In order to be successful in the Kingdom ministry, we need Jehovah’s direction and blessing. It is vital that we pray for the help of holy spirit in our activity, since Jesus assured his disciples that God will give holy spirit to those asking for it.​—Luke 11:13.
2 When witnessing to certain types of people, we may feel a need to be particularly well prepared. (Compare 1 Corinthians 2:1-5.) But God’s spirit will help us if we ask for it, and we will be able to convey the truth accurately and clearly.
3 Holy spirit will give us the needed boldness to speak the truth to “all sorts of men.” (1 Tim. 2:3, 4; 1 Thess. 2:2) Of course, being bold does not mean that a Christian would be overbearing or defiant in his manner.
CULTIVATE FRUITAGE OF SPIRIT
4 The apostle Peter states that when speaking, we should have “a mild temper and deep respect.” (1 Pet. 3:15) Mildness is a fruit of the spirit and is especially important when dealing with unreasonable persons. Other fruitage of the spirit will also help in dealing with trying situations. (Gal. 5:22, 23) There is no need to view rejection by some as a personal affront. Rather, realize that they may not understand the value of the message we bring. Having this mental attitude will help us to be mild and respectful. If appropriate, make a kind expression when departing. This could have a beneficial effect on persons not favorably disposed.​—Prov. 15:1.
5 Whether we are working in the ministry from house to house or on the street, we are being observed by others. Our conversation and behavior should always be inoffensive and above reproach. Not everyone appreciates our work. Many will not listen. Do not become discouraged. Remember that we are looking for sheeplike ones. (Matt. 10:12-14) Our manners in field service should honor God by reflecting the fruitage of his spirit. Good manners and thoughtful consideration of others may soften the hearts of some.​—2 Cor. 6:3.
6 If the person we speak to is genuinely busy, we may be able to make only a few brief remarks. But our being considerate may well bring a warmer response the next time a Witness calls. God’s spirit will help us to demonstrate genuine love and be long-suffering and kind. We rejoice that God in his mercy often grants people many opportunities to hear, with the result that some eventually do believe.​—1 Cor. 13:4.
7 As we let God’s spirit direct our efforts, we will present the Kingdom message in a way that is appealing to reasonable and God-fearing people. Make it your goal to “adorn the teaching of our Savior, God, in all things.”​—Titus 2:10.

