Support Midweek Service Arrangements
1 In his prophecy concerning the time of the end, Jesus said, “In all the nations the good news has to be preached first.” (Mark 13:10) In obedience to this command, Jehovah’s people all over the world are active in the ministry not only on weekends but throughout the week as well. Local elders are encouraged to schedule appropriate meetings for field service during the week. Are you able to share in midweek field service with others in your congregation?
ORGANIZED ARRANGEMENTS NEEDED
2 The service overseer should take the lead in making definite arrangements for midweek service. The locations, days, and times should be convenient for the majority of publishers. Meetings for field service are sponsored by the congregation and would normally be presided over by elders, ministerial servants, or other qualified baptized brothers. If such qualified brothers are not available, capable baptized sisters can be assigned. (Note Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, page 77, paragraph 3.) A sister assigned should wear a head covering and would normally sit when conducting the meeting for field service.
3 Those assigned to conduct these meetings should be well prepared. The daily text can be discussed, especially if it is appropriate for field service. Points from Meetings for Field Service should be used. Appropriate territory and group assignments should be made. Special interest can be shown in helping newer publishers who may be participating in the ministry.
SUPPORT LOCAL ARRANGEMENTS
4 Those who support midweek arrangements for field service have many opportunities to meet householders who may not be home on weekends. You may be able to work with other publishers and pioneers who share in the field service during the week. Many sisters with children in school appreciate these arrangements. Some publishers with unbelieving mates have found arrangements to go in field service on weekdays quite helpful. Youths on vacation from school are able to support midweek service arrangements. Often pioneers and experienced publishers are available to accompany new and inexperienced ones in the various features of the ministry during the week.
5 All are encouraged to arrive on time and share in the discussions and prayer. Your doing so will help you to participate zealously in the field ministry and search out deserving persons in your assigned territory.​—Matt. 10:11.

