Can You Adapt Your Schedule?
 1. Why should we adapt our schedule for preaching?
1 As true Christians, we have accepted the invitation to be “fishers of men.” (Matt. 4:19) Like literal fishermen, we will likely have better results in the work of fishing for men if we schedule time to preach when people can be found. In many lands, the coming months will bring additional daylight hours. In the late afternoon and early evening, more people are at home. Often, they are in a relaxed frame of mind and may be more inclined to receive visitors. Can you adapt your schedule to preach at those times?​—1 Cor. 9:23.
 2. What are some ways we can reach more people with the good news?
2 Evening Witnessing: Planning ahead to preach during the evening hours may enable us to reach more people with the good news. (Prov. 21:5) Youths may be able to preach after school. Others may be able to do so after work. Some book study groups could arrange to preach for an hour before the weekly study.
 3. In what ways can you preach during the late afternoon and early evening hours in your territory?
3 Preaching from house to house during the late afternoon and early evening hours may result in talking to those who normally are not at home. In many territories, street work and other forms of public witnessing can also be done in the evening. And many find evenings to be the best time to make return visits and start Bible studies.
 4. Why is it important to show discernment and to be considerate when engaging in evening witnessing?
4 Discernment Needed: Good judgment is needed when engaging in evening witnessing. Usually, it is best to limit witnessing to the early evening hours, rather than calling when householders may be getting ready to retire for the night. (Phil. 4:5) When you knock at the door, stand where you can be seen, and clearly identify yourself. Quickly make known the purpose of your visit. If you call at an inopportune time, such as when a family is eating, offer to call at another time. Always be considerate.​—Matt. 7:12.
 5. How can we avoid potential dangers while preaching?
5 We also need to be aware of potential dangers. If you are witnessing at dusk or after dark, it is wise to travel in pairs or groups. Stay on well-lit streets where you are not isolated. Witness only in places where you feel safe. Avoid areas that may not be safe after dark.​—Prov. 22:3.
 6. What added benefit may come from witnessing during the late afternoon and early evening?
6 Witnessing during the late afternoon and early evening may allow us to work in service with the auxiliary and regular pioneers. (Rom. 1:12) Can you adapt your schedule to share in this feature of service?

