Worldwide Campaign to Advertise the “Deliverance at Hand!” District Convention
Publishers in Each Congregation to Distribute Special Handbill
1 Starting in the spring of 2006 in the Northern Hemisphere and continuing until the series of district conventions throughout the world is over, a global campaign will be underway to advertise with a special handbill the district conventions that will be held in some 155 lands. This campaign will include the special conventions scheduled to take place in Germany, the Czech Republic, and Poland during July and the first week of August 2006.
2 In view of the late hour in this time of the end, the conventions, highlighting God’s promised deliverance from this wicked system, should have a strong appeal to rightly disposed people. The message should prompt them to consider what lies ahead. In order to give tens of millions the opportunity to hear a message of comfort and hope, over 98,000 congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide are being urged to share enthusiastically in advertising the convention to which they have been invited.
3 Congregations will be consigned sufficient handbills to allow for each publisher to have up to 50 handbills. Any surplus can be utilized by the pioneers in the congregation. In each congregation, the campaign will begin three weeks prior to the opening date of the convention to which the congregation has been assigned. This should provide sufficient time to cover most, if not all, of the congregation’s territory.
4 It is recommended that, wherever possible, a handbill be given personally to each householder. However, if some are not at home, a handbill can be left discreetly at the door. A diligent effort should be made to distribute all the handbills during the three-week period.
5 We feel confident that a tremendous witness will be given as a result of this concerted global effort to advertise the “Deliverance at Hand!” District Convention as outlined herein. We pray that Jehovah’s rich blessing will be upon your personal efforts as you share in this worldwide campaign.

