Announcements
● When requests for territory adjustments are submitted to the Society, it will save us time processing the adjustment and lessen the need for additional correspondence if the instruction letter, “How to Request a Territory Adjustment,” (S-6) is carefully followed. If you do not have a copy in your files, we would be happy to send you one.
● It would be good for all the congregation book study conductors to consider carefully the instructions appearing on the second page of the question booklet for Is the Bible Really the Word of God? There it suggests that the group use whatever time may remain to consider a portion of the Bible reading scheduled for that week in the Theocratic School.
● Secretaries please note: In harmony with paragraph 7 of Instructions for Congregation Accounting, congregation should send in only ONE CHECK EACH MONTH to remit for all literature, magazines and subscriptions. Please enclose a properly filled out remittance form so the Society will know what the check is for and how it is to be applied.
● Effective June 1, the cost of pocket-size books will be: Pioneers, 10c; Congregation, 30c; Public, 35c.
● Literature offer for June: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and Life Does Have a Purpose for $1.85. July: Watchtower or Awake! subscription with a 384- or 416-page book free to new subscribers. August: If excess stocks of older books are still available, offer three books for 60c. Should include two 384- or 416-page books and one pocket-size book from list on page three of January, 1978, Our Kingdom Service. Otherwise, use any one of the pocket-size books for 35c.
● In preparation for the Bible dramas at the international assemblies this year, families will find it profitable to read together the Bible accounts on which they are based, as follows: Genesis 19:1-26, which describes the flight out of Sodom by Lot and his family; 1 Peter 3:1-6 and Titus 2:2-5 telling of the contribution Christian women can make to the congregation: Acts chapters 3 to 7 highlighting the boldness of the apostles in the face of official opposition and Acts chapters 14 to 20 and 28, which show how Timothy’s life course is an example for youths today.
● New Publications Available:
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts” (Deluxe edition)​—Danish, Spanish
● Available Again in the U.S.A.:
Divine Victory​—Its Meaning for Distressed Humanity—​English, Spanish
Human Plans Failing as God’s Purpose Succeeds​—Spanish
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
1978 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses​—English, Spanish

