Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
You will be pleased to know that three years after beginning extensive remodeling work on the 15-story, 450-room former Towers Hotel, the work has been completed and the remodeled lobby and lounge were opened on April 15. When this building was purchased in January of 1975, many thought that it would care for our housing needs for many years to come, as it had room for some 1,000 people. However, due to the continued growth of the Brooklyn Bethel family, the building is now fully occupied.
In addition to housing about half of the Bethel family, this building has its own kitchen and dining rooms to care for those living there. Also located there are the sewing room, dry cleaning and shoe repair departments, a meeting hall for family programs, a library, a portion of the laundry and an infirmary to care for our medical needs. This building is connected with our other home buildings by an underground tunnel system.
Tours of the Bethel home are now originating from the Towers lobby at 79 Willow Street, and we invite you to come for a tour anytime convenient to you during our regular working hours, Monday through Friday, or on Saturday morning. It is best to arrive sometime between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. so that you will have time to complete your tour. There are no tours on Saturday afternoon or on Sunday. A tour of the Bethel home originating at the Towers lobby takes about one hour to complete. The factory tour, which begins at 117 Adams Street, takes nearly two hours. We also invite you to tour our shipping facilities located at 30 Columbia Heights. This tour takes about 20 minutes. No appointments are needed to take these tours, but if you have a group of more than 30 persons, it would be good to notify us of your time of arrival in advance so that we can give you better service. Although our factory and home facilities are within 15 minutes’ walking distance of each other, the complete tour of our entire complex takes almost half a day, so comfortable walking shoes are helpful.
The Bethel family is very pleased with this new facility and we want to thank the hundreds of brothers from around the country who volunteered to help with the remodeling work. Their hard work, the support of all of you, and the blessing of Jehovah have made all this possible.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

