Help Them to Serve Again
1 Serving Jehovah is one of the greatest privileges anyone could have. The psalmist said that to him a day in God’s courtyards was better than a thousand elsewhere. (Ps. 84:10) Concerning the “great crowd,” Revelation 7:15 says: “That is why they are before the throne of God; and they are rendering him sacred service day and night in his temple.” Regarding Anna the prophetess, Luke 2:37 says that “she was a widow now eighty-four years old, who was never missing from the temple, rendering sacred service night and day with fastings and supplications.” Who else but Jehovah would we want to serve? Jesus said in reply to Satan’s effort to tempt him: “It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.”​—Matt. 4:10.
2 So today we are rightly concerned about any of our brothers who stop serving Jehovah, even if they stop only for a short time. Are there some in your congregation who have become inactive in recent years? Are there some you do not see at the meetings anymore? What are your thoughts toward them? Would you like to help them?
WHAT MIGHT YOU DO?
3 This could be discussed by the elders at their June meeting. One elder, possibly the Secretary, could check the Publisher’s Record Card file and make a note of those who have become inactive or are in danger of becoming so. An elder might want to call on a certain publisher because of previous acquaintance and association with that one. Or, other publishers can be asked to help. Maybe you studied with one and would now welcome the opportunity to be of special assistance in this time of need.
4 What will you do? What will you say? It is probably best just to stop in for a short visit. Let them know they have been missed by you and by others. Show your genuine interest and concern. Without prying, try to learn why they have been absent and what they need. Let them know how others in the congregation are and what they are doing. Are new ones associating since they last attended? Tell them about it. What is the latest news about the “Victorious Faith” International Convention? Talk about it and encourage them to be there if they have not yet made arrangements. Their attendance, in fact, would probably be the thing that would help them most at this point. Discuss the special day of field service arranged for Friday and how it is expected that a grand witness will be given in all convention cities. Ask if they would like to accompany you to the next meeting at the Kingdom Hall if you were to stop by to go with them. Do not give up if you do not succeed immediately.
5 How does Jehovah feel about those who stray and need help? To the Israelites he said: “Return to me, and I will return to you.” (Mal. 3:7) Jesus gave the parable about a shepherd who left ninety-nine sheep to search for one that was lost. Recall the results? “And if he happens to find it, I certainly tell you, he rejoices more over it than over the ninety-nine that have not strayed.”​—Matt. 18:13.
6 While the elders will organize matters so that as much as possible can be accomplished, do not think that this in any way prohibits you from taking the initiative and offering help on your own. Not at all! All of us are obligated personally to encourage and help whenever we see a need. (Gal. 6:10) You might well be able to accomplish more than anyone else because of your previous acquaintance with the person, or because of your knowledge of a certain situation. “Do not hold back good from those to whom it is owing, when it happens to be in the power of your hand to do it.”​—Prov. 3:27.

