Presenting the Good News​—By Offering Subscriptions to Everyone
1 For many years The Watchtower and Awake! have been vehicles for spiritual food and life-giving instructions for millions throughout the world. Through these fine publications we have all been helped to strengthen our relationship with Jehovah. In their efforts to make these publications of even more value, the Governing Body is continually striving to improve them. Have you noticed these improvements? Many have commented on the outstanding articles that have appeared, and we can be confident that such consistent improvement will continue. Also, have you appreciated the lively and heartwarming illustrations that have appeared in recent issues?
2 Many have found that a personal subscription is helpful to them. Why? By having a personal subscription, they are assured of getting every issue, even if for some reason they are unable to get to the Kingdom Hall to pick up a supply for the field service. By having a personal subscription, many have found that they more often read the fine information contained in the magazines right away. Thus they not only benefit personally, but are better prepared to use the magazines in the preaching activity.
3 Some parents have found that their children take a greater interest in reading articles when they get a personal subscription with their name on it. Perhaps your family would benefit, too, from having a personal subscription for each member of the household.
4 But besides ourselves and our families, there are thousands of others who would benefit from a personal subscription. Surely none of us would want persons with whom we study to miss the article written that seems to be “just for them.” By their having a personal subscription, they will be assured of getting every issue, even though we ourselves may be away for a time. The same would apply to persons on whom we have made return visits in the past.
5 Certainly it is our desire to assist friends and relatives to know Jehovah and Jesus Christ. A fine way to do that might be to send a gift subscription to them. You no doubt would like to contact them to let them know that they will be receiving the magazines. Or, if you would like the Society to send them a letter of explanation, simply write “Gift” at the top of the subscription blank, and print your name in the space provided.
6 Of course, we will be offering subscriptions to persons we meet in the door-to-door service as well. If the householder does not accept the offer of a subscription for a year, you may find that he will be pleased to have a subscription for six months, along with a book, just as readily as he would accept a book alone. Why not try offering a six-month subscription and a pocket-size book for $1.35?
7 So, although our personal contact with people might be limited, the subscription arrangement provides a means by which millions can regularly receive life-giving instructions, like Jehovah’s provisions described in Revelation 22:2, “yielding their fruits each month.”

