Sharing Joys of House-to-House Preaching
1 By what method of preaching were you first contacted with the truth? Were you one of the 9,000,000 individuals who heard and saw the Photo-Drama of Creation in 1914? Was it by means of the radio or sound cars? Did your parents, relatives or friends first approach you with the good news? Or was it by the house-to-house preaching of one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? No doubt many of us would say, “By a Witness calling at my home.”
2 Jesus, the apostles and early disciples all took the initiative in bringing the good news to people by going to their houses. (Matt. 24:14) And now, for over 50 years, Jehovah’s people have put forth similar efforts. Due to their desire to reach all, they have spent hundreds of millions of hours visiting people in their homes. The fine results over the years testify to the wisdom of this method of preaching.​—Matt. 11:19.
3 The highest court of the United States recognized this method of preaching when it said, “Preaching from house to house is an age-old method of proselytizing. . . . For centuries it has been a common practice in this and other countries for persons not specifically invited to go from home to home and knock on doors or ring doorbells. . . .”
4 Much of a person’s life is spent in or around his home. Would it not be true that at home a person may more readily listen to what you have to say since he is free from the distractions of business? In talking to individuals or family groups in the house-to-house work, we can often give more extensive personal assistance by answering their questions and objections. This opens the way for return visits and Bible studies.
5 Did not Jesus say, “Make disciples of people of all the nations”? (Matt. 28:19) Our house-to-house witnessing not only shows we are obedient and have love for God and neighbor, but it also shows that our love is not partial, because we visit everyone in our area.
6 Would you like to have more zeal for the service? Then try sharing regularly each month in the house-to-house work. Is it not true that the most zealous publishers in the congregation are regularly engaging in this form of preaching?
7 Some may feel that the house-to-house service is not being stressed so much because of the territories’ being so well covered. It is true that in many places the territories are worked regularly with the magazines and other literature. But have we contacted every individual possible whose heart and mind can be filled with Bible truth? Concerning a woman to whom Paul witnessed the record says, “Jehovah opened her heart wide to pay attention to the things being spoken by Paul.”​—Acts 16:14.
8 Many are the expressions of joy that have been made by those sharing in this method of witnessing. One brother says, “It is hard for me to get started in house-to-house work. Then when I get started I enjoy it so much I don’t want to stop.” Another publisher says, “I feel that this is what keeps me strong in the truth.” A pioneer sister remarks, “I just can’t wait to get into the field, for every house is like a surprise package. What will the people inside be like?”
9 During the month of June, how fine it will be to offer the New World Translation and the book Life Does Have a Purpose while sharing in house-to-house preaching.

