Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JUNE 4
10 min: Song 90. Announcements from p. 3 and local announcements.
23 min: “Sharing Joys of House-to-House Preaching.” Conduct by means of questions and answers. In connection with paragraph nine, discuss with audience how the book Life Does Have a Purpose and the New World Translation might be presented. Inasmuch as we will use the same book in June as in May, can use same approach as considered under Presenting the Good News in May issue of Our Kingdom Service. In fact, you can use the tracts again in June if you have any left over. Have demonstration showing how last month’s discussion with the tract can be adjusted for June’s discussion and offer.
22 min: Family Bible Reading. The objective of this Bible reading and discussion is to consider events of Nisan 16, Jesus’ resurrection day, identifying particularly the five appearances of Jesus to his followers on that day. Have group of five to seven persons, members of a household that would fit the circumstances in your congregation. It could perhaps include parents, children and grandparents, or some other set of relatives or persons living together. Have different ones read the scriptures, but have one or two persons in the household obviously prepared and leading the discussion, helping others to see the sequence of events on Nisan 16, perhaps filling in related details as the discussion progresses. (1) Appears to the women as they run to tell the apostles what the two angels at the tomb told them. (Matt. 28:1-10; Luke 24:4, 5) (2) To Mary Magdalene at the tomb, after Peter and John had left. (John 20:3-18) (3) To the two disciples walking to the village of Emmaus. (Luke 24:13-32) (4) When the two disciples returned to Jerusalem they learned from those gathered there that Jesus had meanwhile appeared to Peter. (Luke 24:33-35) (5) Finally, to all those met behind locked doors because of fear. (Luke 24:36-43) In conclusion encourage brothers regularly to include Bible reading in the family schedule. For example, it would be good to read beforehand the Scriptural accounts on which the dramas at this summer’s conventions will be based. Again refer the congregation to the information regarding this under Announcements.
 5 min: Song 87 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 11
10 min: Song 5. Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Branch Letter and Question Box. Discuss with audience by means of questions and answers.
15 min: What Should Children Read? See Awake!, March 22, 1978. Can be handled by means of a talk, but drawing the audience into the discussion.
15 min: House-to-House Work in Our Congregation. Outline arrangements congregation has for meetings for service. If elders have some adjustments in mind, mention these. Comment on how many publishers usually share in these arrangements. Do all book study groups have such meetings? After reviewing matters, do elders have suggestions for building up participation in house-to-house work? Discuss these with your congregation.
 5 min: Song 65 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 18
10 min: Song 86. Local announcements. Congregation report for May.
20 min: “Help Them to Serve Again.” Part of this can be handled by means of a talk, but bring the audience into the discussion frequently. On paragraph one, in addition to discussing thoughts there expressed, can ask audience: “What have you especially enjoyed about serving Jehovah over the years?” On paragraph four, in addition to discussing thoughts there expressed, can ask audience: “What other things do you believe can help inactive ones to begin serving again?”
25 min: Become Imitators of God. A capable elder should be assigned this part, which will require a good deal of preparation. He should be ready with additional questions, and should be thoroughly acquainted beforehand with the application of the scriptures cited. To aid him with his advance preparation he can read his copy of “Pay Attention to Yourselves and to All the Flock,” pages 7-14.
Jehovah is an outstanding example for man in every aspect of life. (Eph. 5:1) We will consider His example in these three areas: (1) Jehovah, the Grand Instructor. (2) Jehovah, the Great Evangelizer, supervisor of the worldwide preaching work, (3) Jehovah, a lover of justice and a God of mercy. Invite the audience to comment on how we can imitate Jehovah in these areas.
(1) Jehovah, the Grand Instructor: Never has mankind been without direction from Jehovah. Instructions were given to Adam on the subduing of the earth. The prophets and priests of Israel continued to instruct Jehovah’s people. (Neh. 8:7, 8) Jesus, too, was noted for his masterful way of teaching. (Matt. 7:28) However, Jesus himself said, “What I teach is not mine.” (John 7:16; 8:38) What provisions have been made by Jehovah for the schooling of his people today? What do we learn about Jehovah’s teaching from Jesus?
(2) Jehovah, the Great Evangelizer: Jehovah provided good news for man when uttering the first prophecy in Genesis 3:15. It was prophesied that Jesus would “tell good news to the meek ones.” (Isa. 61:1) The good news (evangel) was to be “preached in all the inhabited earth.” (Matt. 24:14) Jehovah is responsible for the preaching work. (2 Tim. 4:17) If we find we are slacking off in our preaching work, what can we do? What should motivate us? Why should we take steps to improve?
(3) Jehovah loves justice and displays mercy: How were both justice and mercy displayed in Eden? Note Jehovah’s perfect balance in these qualities. (Ex. 34:6, 7) The ransom provision is based on justice. (1 Tim. 2:6) How can we display these qualities in dealing with: (a) Those with a weak conscience? (b) Those who may have offended us? (c) Younger members of the congregation?
In imitating Jehovah we have the finest example to follow in the universe. We share the desire of the psalmist to ‘worship and bow down before our Maker.’​—Ps. 95:6, 7.
 5 min: Song 41 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 25
 8 min: Song 36. Local announcements.
15 min: “How Is Your Household?” To be considered by means of questions and answers.
20 min: Whole-souled in God’s Service​—Are You? Handled by an elder as a talk with audience discussion, including use of questions below. To be well prepared beforehand, elder can read his copy of “Pay Attention to Yourselves and to All the Flock,” pages 41-43, and or, pages 108, 109, 132-4. (1) What is whole-souled service? It involves using your whole soul, including your heart, mind and strength, every fiber of your existence. (2) Can imperfect people be whole-souled? Jesus would not require something if it were not possible to do so. (Mark 12:30) (3) How does Jesus’ illustration of the sower in Matthew 13 relate to the evangelizing work and the matter of being whole-souled? Was the one bearing thirtyfold not whole-souled? (4) Is it reasonable to conclude that as long as we are doing something in Jehovah’s service we are whole-souled? Why is it dangerous to become complacent? (Rev. 3:1, 2, 15, 16; Luke 21:34-36) (5) Hence, what circumstances should be taken into account today in considering what people do in their service to God?
12 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Offering Subscriptions to Everyone.” Consider by means of questions and answers.
 5 min: Song 115 and prayer.

