Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will find it interesting to recall the following:
▫ Why did the Israelite spies choose to lodge at the house of Rahab the harlot?
The Israelite spies lived by God’s Law, so they did not lodge at Rahab’s house for immoral reasons. They probably reasoned that their presence in a harlot’s house would be less likely to arouse suspicion in the city. That her house was built on the city wall might make escape easier. But above all, Jehovah guided them to a sinner whose heart had been so favorably affected by reports of divine dealings with the Israelites that she repented and changed her ways.​—12/15, pages 24-5.
▫ How does anger affect our health?
Studies indicate that anger produces stress hormones. Frequent outbursts of anger can cause an imbalance between the protective and the harmful forms of cholesterol, putting us at risk of cardiovascular disease.​—12/15, page 32.
▫ What suggestions will help us to increase our distribution of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines?
Be Watchtower and Awake! conscious; keep the presentation simple; be flexible by preparing a few brief presentations; set a personal goal.​—1/1, pages 24-5.
▫ Why is Moses such a fine theocratic example for us to follow?
Moses sought Jehovah’s guidance on matters. He had no personal ambitions but was concerned about Jehovah’s glory. He had strong faith, and he never forgot that Jehovah was the real Ruler of the nation of Israel.​—1/15, page 11.
▫ What are some ways in which divine teaching triumphs?
Divine teaching triumphs by imparting to Jehovah’s people a progressive understanding of the truth. It brings people into spiritual light, and it shows meek ones how to worship God “with spirit and truth.” (John 4:24) Divine teaching also triumphs over trials and the wicked world.​—2/1, pages 10-12.
▫ What is the key to successful counseling?
The key is proper respect for the other person and his right to be treated in a dignified manner. Hence, a Christian counselor should be kind and firm but should clothe the recipient with dignity.​—2/1, page 28.
▫ How did the Roman Catholic Church come to accept Mary’s Assumption as a doctrine?
In the first centuries after Jesus’ death, the idea of Mary’s Assumption into heaven was completely foreign to the thinking of Christians. However, after the Trinity teaching became official church doctrine, Mary was given an increasingly important role. The Assumption theory was not accepted as dogma until November 1, 1950, when Pope Pius XII announced: “We define it to be a dogma revealed by God.”​—Munificentissimus Deus.​—2/15, pages 26-7.
▫ In Jeremiah chapter 24, what did the two baskets of figs, the good figs and those that were bad, represent?
The good figs represented the Jews initially taken captive to Babylon, from which a remnant would return to Judah. The bad figs stood for King Zedekiah and those with him who rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar despite having taken an oath in God’s name. Comparably, we find in modern times the remnant of spiritual Israel, who have produced good fruitage in their lives, in contrast with the clergy of Christendom, who have produced rotten fruitage.​—3/1, pages 14-16.
▫ Who were the Quartodecimans, and why are they of interest to Christians today?
After the time of the apostles, there were some who observed the Lord’s Evening Meal on Nisan 14 each year, following the apostolic pattern. They came to be known as “Fourteenthers,” or Quartodecimans. This is of interest today, for it shows that even after the apostles died, there were some who held to the proper course of commemorating Jesus’ death once a year on Nisan 14.​—3/15, pages 4-5.
▫ Who was William Whiston?
He was a brilliant 18th-century scholar in England, a close associate of Sir Isaac Newton. Whiston translated the Christian Greek Scriptures, openly opposed the teaching of the Trinity doctrine, and was a lecturer on astronomy and mathematics. But Whiston is likely most remembered for his translation into English of the writings of Jewish historian Flavius Josephus.​—3/15, pages 26-8.
▫ How was man made in God’s image? (Genesis 1:27)
Man was made with the ability to exercise God’s outstanding qualities of love, justice, wisdom, and power​—as well as other qualities.​—4/1, page 25.

