The Best Solutions to Our Problems
THERE are many other areas in life where being a servant of God helps us to deal with problems. It helps us to learn how to get along best with all kinds of people, how to handle personality differences, how to improve relationships with family, friends, neighbors, and how to handle mistakes​—ours and those of other people too. But the few examples already noted illustrate that serving God is the most practical way to keep our problems manageable. And those problems that are beyond our control, God himself will solve for us in due time.
This twofold assistance that God’s servants get (that is, the best counsel in handling our problems today, and the grand hope of having all problems completely solved in his new order) gives his servants a peace of mind and joy that are missing in the lives of those who do not serve God. This contrast is interestingly described for us at Isaiah chapter 65, verses 13 and 14. It says:
“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah has said: ‘Look! My own servants will eat, but you yourselves will go hungry. Look! My own servants will drink, but you yourselves will go thirsty. Look! My own servants will rejoice, but you yourselves will suffer shame. Look! My own servants will cry out joyfully became of the good condition of the heart, but you yourselves will make outcries because of the pain of heart and you will howl because of sheer breakdown of spirit.’”
Yes, serving God certainly makes sense, because, as First Timothy 4:8 says, it holds ‘promise, not only of a better life now, but of a far, far better life to come’ in God’s new order.
And what a wonderful life that will be in the new order! Think of living on a beautiful earth, free of pollution, crime, war, poverty, sickness and even death!
Imagine the thrill, each day of life, of enjoying the many things God has created for his people​—the majestic mountains, refreshing forests, flower-decked gardens, the fascinating animal life, the sparkling streams and lakes, delicious foods, as well as the joy of having loving families and friends. Such things will make up the permanent way of life that God is now preparing his servants for.
Really, all things considered, there can be no doubt that serving God can help you with your problems. The question that remains is whether you want to serve him or not. You should want to, since Jehovah is a kind, generous, loving God that gives his people so many benefits. Also, he does not put such heavy burdens on you that you cannot bear them. So serving him is a pleasure.
Indeed, the investment of your time and energy in learning how to serve God is like investing a penny and getting countless wealth in return. Why? Because Jehovah will back you up and will certainly bless your efforts to serve him. He will help you with your problems now, and let you live forever in his problem-free new order, where, as Psalm 145:16 promises, Jehovah will ‘open his hand and will satisfy the desire of every living thing.’

