Would You Like a Life Free from Problems?
DO YOU at times feel that the problems of daily living are almost too much for you? Would you like to be free from these problems so that you could really enjoy life?
Think what it would be like if your life were like this: You wake up in the morning and know that you are going to have a totally delightful day ahead of you. You have no money problems, no taxes, mortgages or rent. Instead, you have complete economic security.
And when you get to your mirror to wash, you see that your face has a clear complexion, no blemishes, no wrinkles of old age, no bags under the eyes. Your face radiates perfect health, and is topped by a beautiful head of hair.
Just think how it would be also if you knew that you would not need health insurance anymore, because you and your family would never get sick again. And that there would be no more news reports of cancer, heart disease, or any other illness, because all of them had been conquered​—forever. How grand that would be!
Then, too, think what it would mean if you were able to walk out the door and know that you could take the lock off, because all crime had been eliminated. Yes, to know that there were no jails, no police forces, no armies, no weapons of destruction anywhere in the world because they were not needed!
Suppose that you also could look forward to the day because you were deeply satisfied with the kind of work you were doing, finding real joy in it. And you very much enjoyed all your neighbors, as they were very pleasant, kind, helpful and completely without prejudice. And best of all, you truly enjoyed your family life because it was so harmonious, with all members showing deep love and respect for one another.
Would you like a day like that? “Well,” you might be saying, “of course I would! Who wouldn’t? But all that is just wishful thinking, a dream world. Nobody could have a trouble-free life like that.”
Well, then, what are we talking about? Have we described some kind of life in heaven? No, nor do we mean life on another planet somewhere else in the universe. Neither are we engaging in some kind of mental exercise, daydreaming. We are talking about the time that is coming when every day of life, right here on earth, will be a genuine delight; when distressing problems will disappear instead of robbing us of our joy; when life’s challenges will be stimulating, interesting, producing the deep contentment that comes with doing things that are really worth while.
Can such a thing happen? Yes, it can! Indeed, all decent people want it to happen, because we were made to desire such a fine life. But will it happen? Yes, it will! Such a delightful condition, free from today’s agonizing troubles, will come to pass for a certainty. Nothing in heaven or on earth can stop it.

