“Tazara”​—A Boon to African Economy
By “Awake!”’ correspondent in Zambia
I WAS there. And I can assure you that what took place last October at Kapiri Mposhi, southern Zambia, was a stirring event for all present. Thousands of Zambians, along with many Chinese, had flocked together for a special event. What was the center of attraction? A blue diesel locomotive with a string of new coaches gleaming in the Zambian sunshine. Crowds had gathered to witness the departure of the inaugural run of a unique railway known as “Tazara” (from (“TAnzania ZAmbia Railway Authority”). The new railway covers a distance of 1,150 miles (c. 1,850 kilometers) from Kapiri Mposhi to the Tanzanian port of Dar-es-Salaam.
The occasion was truly exciting. For weeks prior to the official opening of the railway, newspapers carried almost daily reports of what it would haul, the benefits it would bring to Zambia and the progress of the work. Many hailed the project as “Zambia’s new life line,” “Zambia’s main artery,” “the great Uhuru [meaning ‘freedom’] railway.”
I was one of the passengers on the Tazara railway’s first journey to Dar-es-Salaam. Let me explain some interesting facts about this new transportation facility.
Some Unique Features
If you are accustomed to rail travel in other countries, you might be surprised during your first ride on Tazara. Quickly you would notice that it has but a single track. “What!” you exclaim. “How do trains traveling in opposite directions pass each other?” Simple. About every eight miles [13 kilometers] there is a siding, or spur track, where one train can move aside to allow the other to pass.
Another thing that might catch your eye is that the sleepers, or ties, that serve as a base for the rails are of concrete, rather than wood. Wooden ones would provide a banquet for termites in this tropical area. It was also necessary to expend much effort at planting deep-rooted grasses on the railway’s embankments. This binds the earth together, preventing washout by heavy rains that pelt Zambia during November.
Of the nineteen tunnels on the whole line, eighteen are located in a section, about 93 miles (150 kilometers) in length, toward the center of Tanzania. Here the railway cuts through the Uzungwa Mountains. Interestingly, it was in this difficult terrain that the builders made the most gains against the construction timetable.
China Makes It Possible
There was a great need for the Tazara facility. Zambia is a landlocked country. To survive economically, she must import food, raw materials and mining equipment. Zambia must also export commodities. Copper accounts for 90 percent of her export earnings. The railway was needed to increase Zambia’s opportunities for external trade. But where would money to finance such a large project come from?
I thought of this during the first stage of our journey from Kapiri Mposhi. We crossed a well-wooded, gently undulating plateau. This section of the railway runs parallel to a new road, where we noticed many gray trucks driven by Chinese wearing identical blue-gray uniforms. Some recent estimates put the Chinese labor force for this project between 15,000 and 42,000 persons. We might say that our railway was built by Chinese with the help of Zambian and Tanzanian workers.
How did China become involved in construction of an African railroad? Well, the first step toward securing finances was an approach to the World Bank. But the response was negative. Then efforts were made to get money from the United States, Britain, West Germany, France and the U.S.S.R. These too met negative response.
Early in 1965, however, prospects began to brighten. At that time President Nyerere of Tanzania visited China. Before he returned home, China had agreed to a commitment of up to £100 million ($177,400,000) for construction of the Tanzanian section of the railway. Two years later Zambian President Kaunda visited Peking. On that occasion the governments of Zambia, Tanzania and China came to an agreement, according to which China undertook to provide an additional interest-free loan to cover surveying, designing, construction and equipment costs.
Besides that, China agreed to train Zambian and Tanzanian personnel to operate and maintain the railway. Then, in July 1970, Peking agreed to yet another interest-free loan of £167 million ($296,258,000). This would be divided equally between Zambia and Tanzania with repayments covering a thirty-year-period beginning in 1983. Construction of the railway got under way in mid-1970. On July 14, 1976, a deputy prime minister of China formally handed over the completed railroad to the governments of Zambia and Tanzania.
Economic Benefits
Hopes are high that the Tazara railway will bring sizable economic benefits, especially to Zambia and Tanzania. It is expected to stimulate agricultural and livestock development. For example, about 31 miles (50 kilometers) from the Zambian border lies the Tanzanian town of Mbeya. The plateau and hill country surrounding Mbeya hold considerable potential for cultivation of grain, oilseed and other goods. About midway through Tanzania is the Kilombero Valley, which even now is Tanzania’s major source of sugarcane. Kilombero’s well-watered, fertile soil holds great potential. Besides sugarcane, it is suitable for growing rice and vegetables and for raising livestock. With the railway providing easy transportation to the port city of Dar-es-Salaam, there will be good reason to step up agricultural production.
Tazara will do much to stimulate industry too. Reduced freight rates for transporting copper from Mbeya to Dar-es-Salaam will be one benefit. The present method of conveyance by trucks presents problems. Because of the need for weight distribution, it is necessary to transport copper as individual bars. These must be put on pallets when they reach the port. This calls for additional handling and storage charges. However, rail transportation makes it possible to put the copper on pallets right at the mine. This may result in savings of as much as £2.70 ($4.79) a ton.
As another potential for industrial development, 200 kilometers (124 miles) east of Mbeya there are iron ore and coal deposits. The iron is estimated at 90 million tons and the coal at 1,500 million tons. According to Africa/​Middle East Business Digest, China agreed to another loan, this time of £65 million ($115,310,000) for building an integrated steel mill in this iron-rich area, as well as a rail spur to link up the deposits with the new railway.
For Mbeya itself, the U.S.S.R. has agreed to finance a new cement plant. There are now thoughts of erecting a pulp and paper mill in the Kilombero Valley. And Kasama in Zambia will be the location of two automobile assembly plants, one for Mercedes-Benz and the other for Toyota trucks.
Can Dar-es-Salaam Cope with Expansion?
When we arrived at Dar-es-Salaam, a refreshing welcome awaited us. In the heat of the midday sun, Tanzanians excitedly cried out “Jambo! Jambo!”, a Swahili word meaning “How do you do!” There in the background was the Indian Ocean, its shore fringed with coconut palms.
However, in the minds of many there was a question: While the railway will be able to carry all the imports Zambia needs, can the port of Dar-es-Salaam cope with the increased demands put on it?
True, this port has undergone rapid expansion in recent years. But there are problems. During the past year Zambian goods have piled up at the port. While some place the blame on the inadequacy of Zambian trucks, others blame the East African Harbours Corporation for assigning to goods inaccurate rotation numbers. Too, much of the port equipment, such as cranes and forklifts, is inoperative due to lack of maintenance or because of waiting for spare parts.
Only the future will tell if Dar-es-Salaam can keep up with the increased demands that the Tazara railway presents. Whatever the case may be, Tazara promises to be a boon to African economy.
[Map on page 8]

