Announcements
● The Society is arranging for a limited number of regular pioneers to serve temporarily as special pioneers in isolated territory for a two- or three-month period. There are about 35 assignments and each is organized for a team of two. The requirement will be 140 hours each month in field service. Some financial assistance will be provided. Before writing to the Society, arrangements should be made for a partner (give partner’s name when writing) and the elders should sign the letter indicating that they believe the individuals would do well in this work. Please also specify whether or not you will be willing to work with a congregation that needs assistance in covering its territory. (No financial assistance is given for this.) Also, a car that is in good condition will be necessary.
● Portuguese-speaking publishers who are in a position to serve where the need is greater in the Portuguese-speaking areas of the northeastern United States, particularly in Massachusetts and in California, may write the Society for details and supply the information requested on pages 134 and 135 of the Organization book.
● In September, 1977, the Society mailed a year’s supply of forms to all congregations. The increase in postal rates has made it very expensive for the Society to provide congregations with forms. Therefore, please use your remaining supplies judiciously. Publishers should be careful not to take more forms, such as the Watchtower or Awake! subscription slips, than can be used properly in field service. Neither should forms be used for notepaper or any purpose other than intended by the Society. When two or more congregations share a counter where forms are provided for publishers’ use, it would be proper to maintain a common stock for the use of all publishers. This new arrangement for supplying congregations with forms will prove beneficial to the Society and all congregations.
● Field overseers: Territory covered with the last tract should be reported as territory covered with literature.
● Literature offer for March: Three-book offer for 60c, including any two 384- or 416-page books and one pocket-size book. The pocket-size book should be either Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation?, God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good, or Is the Bible Really the Word of God?
● Literature offer for April: Watchtower subscription (with any 384- or 416-page book free to new subscribers) for $2.00; or subscriptions for both Watchtower and Awake! (with two 384- or 416-page books free to new subscribers) for $4.00. A half-year subscription with a pocket-size book may be offered for $1.25. If the subscription is not accepted, a pocket-size book along with two magazines may be offered for 45c.
● For consideration at elders’ meeting: Can some help be given to any who have become inactive during last two years, or even those who have not reported two months out of the last six? What help do they need? Who might best give them assistance?
● NEW COST LIST: A new Cost List is being published and copies will be sent to all the congregations. Please take note that in this Cost List the congregation publisher subscription price for a one-year subscription is shown as $1.90. Some may wonder about this in view of the announcement that was made in the January, 1978, Our Kingdom Service. The price mentioned in Our Kingdom Service, $1.85, applies only for 1978 since a free book is being given with subscriptions in campaign months. In 1979 the rate will be $1.90 for each new subscription, as stated in the Cost List.
● New Publications Available:
Life Does Have a Purpose​—Italian
A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It—​Kikongo, Kiluba, Lingaga, Polish
Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood​—Italian, Portuguese
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Korean
● A revised Memorial outline is being sent to each congregation along with other material that is scheduled to be mailed out during February. Please see that this outline is made available to your assigned Memorial speaker.

