Personal Goals Are Helpful
1 Is it not a good feeling to have the sense of accomplishment that comes from successfully achieving a goal? When we use goals in a reasonable manner in our field service and other areas of life, much can be accomplished to the glory of our heavenly Father.
2 There are various aspects of our lives that can be improved by our use of goals. Many desire to accomplish more in personal study, making it their aim to read through the Bible by a certain time, or setting aside a certain time each week for personal study and then not letting other things get in the way. Others may be concerned that they are not absorbing as much of what they study as they would like. So that the material you study will be more easily remembered, why not make it your purpose to use it in some way in the field service or in discussions with others? Setting the objective to improve in speaking ability has helped many become effective public speakers. The Theocratic School is very helpful in this regard. For those who do not read as well as they desire, a number of congregations have reading classes that can put them on the right road for improvement.
3 We would all like to continue improving in the application of the fruitage of the spirit in our lives. One way to accomplish this is to make an honest evaluation of ourselves to see in what areas we may be lacking and then try to improve in those aspects to a reasonable degree. For example, at times we may not have as much self-control as we would like. We may need to show a little more patience or long-suffering. If so, we can work on that.
4 In the area of field service, some have found that they are spending a reasonable amount of time but are not getting the results they wish, or find it difficult to get people interested in what they are saying. Likely we could accomplish more by making it our aim to get into Bible discussions with people. We can accomplish this by deciding in advance what subjects are generally of interest to the community, then preparing some questions that will involve the householder, and finally getting ready to talk on the subject.
5 Personal goals can help us to get results on our return visits as well. The purpose of the return visit is to develop further the interest that has been manifest. What objective might we set in this regard? Trying to improve in using teaching questions and having effective Bible discussions will likely help make our return visits more effective.
6 You might try using goals to increase the amount of time you spend in the field service or perhaps to arrange your affairs so that you can auxiliary pioneer. Another fine goal would be to start a Bible study. To whatever extent you are able to serve Jehovah, if it is whole-souled service, then it will be acceptable to him.​—Matt. 13:8, 9.
7 A point to consider, however, is that if personal goals are not reasonable, they can be most discouraging. (Jas. 3:17) Goals must be set according to what one is able to accomplish. Otherwise, we will likely end up in discouragement if we do not succeed. Everyone has a different makeup physically and emotionally. We cannot expect to be able to accomplish something just because someone else does, but we should set goals according to what we can do personally. But could you set as your goal improving your conversations and your use of the Bible when speaking to householders, or perhaps even when starting a Bible study?
8 Can you use goals to improve the quality of your service to Jehovah? What practical objectives can you set to make improvement in your service? Once you have made a decision to work to achieve something, be sure to keep it before Jehovah in your prayers, for what better help could a person have? A goal that is forgotten is not realized. So when you make a decision, keep it in mind and ‘do just as you have resolved in your heart.’​—2 Cor. 9:7.

