Presenting the Good News​—Using Bible Topics for Discussion
1 “How comely are the feet of those who declare good news of good things!” (Rom. 10:15) These words of encouragement have spurred many Christians on to spread precious words of truth throughout the world. The new publication Bible Topics for Discussion can be a valuable aid to us in accomplishing this work.
2 Two of the things that make a successful return visit are a sincere personal interest in the one being called on and an appealing Bible subject to discuss. There are many appealing subjects outlined in this new publication. If it is kept in one’s Bible, it is readily available for use. Before making a return visit you could easily refer to it to gather some of the scriptures you could use on a chosen subject. Also, if a householder brings up an unexpected subject, it can be referred to by glancing at the list of subjects, which directs you to the proper page.
3 For example: If you place the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? using Psalm 119:105 as a basis for the discussion, you may find it convenient to enlarge on the discussion by referring to scriptures from Bible Topics for Discussion under the heading on page three, “Bible,” Topic “C,” “Is a practical guide for our day.”
4 To prepare the householder for the next visit you might want to conclude the discussion by saying: “So we have learned that the Bible is a practical guide for our day. One of the things this guide tells us is that, in the near future, all governments of men will be replaced by the rule of God’s kingdom.” (Then a scripture taken from Bible Topics for Discussion on page 16 under the subject “Kingdom,” Topic “B,” might be read, such as Matthew 6:9, 10; Daniel 2:44; or Revelation 21:24.) Then you can explain, “The next time I call I would like to discuss a little more with you as to just what this kingdom is and how it will affect each one of us.” Now the householder’s appetite is whetted for more information.
5 Then on the next visit you may wish to read or refer to the same scripture about the Kingdom again to refresh their memory and then continue with the discussion of that topic. Be sure to mark in your record which topic you have arranged to discuss with the person. Most have found that when using this method it is best to call back soon while the discussion is fresh in their mind. Toward the end of this call you might find it appropriate to offer a regular Bible discussion.
6 For calls on those who object to the use of Bible literature, such as the Truth book, in connection with a Bible study, the Bible Topics for Discussion can be very helpful. Since the booklet consists only of scripture references, likely the individual would not object to its use.
7 If you find it difficult to learn to use this method of teaching, why not ask someone who has had success in getting into discussions if you could go along with them and perhaps even take part in a return visit where this method is used. They may be able to give you some helpful suggestions.
8 With the goal of improving the quality of your teaching through Bible discussions, use Bible Topics for Discussion as an aid in reaching the hearts of the people in your territory.

