VOL. XIV. APRIL 1, 1893. NO. 7. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD. 



"Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called in 
question."— Acts 24:21. 

—"When they heard of the resurrection of 
the dead, some mocked."— Acts 17:32. 

—The prophet David "spake of the resurrection 
of Christ: that his soul was not left in 
hades."— Acts 2:31. 

—Christ was proved or "declared to be the 
Son of God with power... by the resurrection 
from the dead."— Rom. 1:4. 

—"Now if Christ be preached, that he rose 
from the dead, how say some among you that 
there is no resurrection of the dead?"— 
ICor. 15:12. 

—"But if there be no resurrection of the dead 
then is Christ not risen."— 1 Cor. 15:13. 

—"And if Christ be not risen, then is our 
preaching vain;— and your faith is also vain;— 
and we are false witnesses;— and ye are yet in 
your sins; and they that are fallen asleep in 
Christ are perished."— 1 Cor. 15:14-18. 

—"But Christ is risen from the dead, and become 
a first-fruits of them that slept."— 
1 Cor. 15:20. 

—"For since by a man [Adam] came death, 
by a man also [Christ] came the resurrection 
of the dead."- 1 Cor. 15:21. 

—"The God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
...hath begotten us again unto a hope of life 
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the 
dead."-l Pet. 1:3. 

—The Apostles "taught the people and 
preached through Jesus the resurrection of the 
dead."-Acts 4:2. 

—At Athens, Paul "preached unto them Jesus 
and the resurrection."— Acts 17:18. 

—Paul said, "I count all things but loss... 
that I may know him [Christ] and the power 
of his resurrection;... if by any means I 
might attain unto the [chief] resurrection of 
the [chief] dead."-Phil. 3:8-11. 



—"Blessed and holy are all they that have part 
in the first [chief] resurrection."— Rev. 20:6. 

—"There shall be a resurrection of the dead, 
both of the just [justified believers] and the unjust" 
[now unjustified].— Acts 24:15. 

—Some "concerning the truth have erred, 
saying, that the resurrection is past already."— 
2 Tim. 2:18. 

No other doctrine is made so prominent in 
the New Testament as that of the Resurrection; 
except it be that of the second coming of our 
Lord and his kingdom glory, or his first advent 
and sacrifice for sins. And yet, so far has modern 
popular theology drifted away from that of 
our Lord and his Apostles that, the resurrection 
of the dead is scarcely ever preached upon today; 
and it would be a great convenience, indeed, 
to many ministers of all denominations, 
if the entire doctrine of the resurrection could 
be expunged from the Bible: It would save 
them from many perplexing questions which 
they can only ignore or seek to evade, instead 
of answering them. What a proof this furnishes 
that the Bible is not what infidels assert— the 
work of knavish priests. Had such made it 
they would have made it more to their pleasement 
—to support their theories. 

R1508 : page 100 

FALSE VIEWS. 



If the reader ever heard one sermon on the 
resurrection from any so-called "orthodox" 
pulpit he was remarkably favored. And yet 
that is scarcely true, either, for what he heard 
was probably such a medley, such a confusion, 
that his ideas were worse confounded after hearing 
than before. Such exceptional ones probably 
heard such a discourse as was reported in 
the public press about two years ago, delivered 
by a very learned and able Presbyterian Doctor 
of Divinity to a Brooklyn audience. 

This D.D. explained that the resurrection will 
consist in a regathering and revivifying of all 
the bones and sinews and flesh and skin, etc., 
that ever constituted human bodies, regardless 
of how they had been disposed of, by fire or 
mouldering or otherwise: No matter if parts 
had been destroyed by accident or eaten by 

R1509 : page 100 

fishes or beasts of prey; or if they had rotted 



and gone as fertilizer into various fruits, vegetables, 
grasses, etc., and thus been over and 
over again transformed. 

He explained "the last day" to mean a final 
twenty-four hours before the burning up of the 
world, and pictured that an after portion of 
that twenty-four hours would be devoted to a 
work of judging the world, while the forepart 
would be occupied by the resurrection work; 
and he pictured the air black with hands, arms, 
feet, fingers, bones, skins, sinews, etc., of the 
billions who have lived and died, seeking the 
other parts of their bodies; and that then the 
souls would come from heaven and hell and 
be imprisoned in those resurrected bodies. 

What an unscriptural and nonsensical view! 
And yet, how could the man think or preach 
differently on the subject seeing that he believed 
firmly in a "resurrection of the body," which 
very words nearly all "orthodox" creeds of 
"Christendom" recite? And how could a body 
be resurrected in any other way than by gathering 
together again the various parts and 
members which once composed it? In no other 
way, of course. And if the "resurrection of 
the body" is the resurrection specified in the 
Bible, we as well as others are shut up to the 
nonsensical and ludicrous view expressed by the 
Brooklyn D.D., as above stated. 

THE BIBLE DOCTRINE REASONABLE. 



But the Bible contains no such statement; 
and such an inference is as unwarranted as it is 
unreasonable. The reason which led to this 
statement that the resurrection would be merely 
that of the body is quite evident. The teaching 
had gradually crept into the Church that 
what seems to the five senses to be death is not 
such in reality: none are dead— saints nor sinners 
—but all more alive than ever, when to us 
they appear to be dead. With this idea before 
the mind, many lose sight of the Scriptural 
teaching of a "resurrection of the dead" [beings, 
persons, souls]; and hence they altered it 
to suit their changed ideas, although it is still 
"a very inconvenient doctrine to get around." 
Because after having preached in the funeral discourse 
that the deceased is "free now" and "no 
longer hampered and encumbered with a body," 
it is confusing to read from the Bible as a part 
of the funeral service about the "hope of a resurrection 
of the dead," when they hope that 
their friends are not dead, and would be glad 



to hope that they would never have anything 
more to do with what they term the "prison-house 
of clay"— the body. It is confusing, too, 
to read the Apostle's words (specially intended 
and suited for such an occasion) about the second 
coming of Christ, and the blessing at that 
time, by a resurrection of "them that sleep in 
Jesus" (1 Thes. 4:14-18); and the expression, 
"Wherefore comfort one another with these 
words," only adds to their confusion; for no 
other words would be so comfortless to them; 
because of the unscriptural views they entertain. 

But while, as we have seen, the theory of a 
"resurrection of the body"— the recovery and 
reorganization of the original atoms of matter- 
is nonsensical, as well as without Scriptural warrant, 
let none so regard the doctrine of the resurrection 
of the soul or being, which is taught 
in the Bible, and which is reasonable. 

ANASTASIS-RESURRECTION. 



In the Bible the word resurrection is found 
only in the New Testament; it is the translation 
of the Greek word, anastasis, the meaning 
of which, as given by Prof. Young's Concordance 

R1509 :page 101 

(a standard authority), is, "A standing or 
rising up." Liddell & Scott's Lexicon defines 
the word similarly, viz., "A making to stand or 
rise up; awakening, restoration."* 

Other Greek words are used when referring 
to the temporary awakening of dead ones who 
afterward died again, as in the case of Lazarus, 
Jairus' daughter and others; but neither the 
Greek word anastasis nor its English equivalent, 
resurrection, is used in such cases. We 
are not questioning that the English word resurrection 
is often used with only a limited signification; 
but we are calling attention to the 
restricted use of the Greek word. And we insist 
that it is only by giving it the full weight 
of its meaning that the importance of our Lord's 
work as man's Redeemer can be fully appreciated. 
To say that the ransom given once for 
all by our Lord secured a resurrection (anastasis) 
for all, and then to define that word as 
merely signifying a re-awakening, to a spark 
of life as now enjoyed, would be to rob the Lord 
of the honor of his great work, by robbing the 
word "anastasis" of its full import. Our claim 
is that this word contains the thought of a full 



restitution of all that was lost— human perfection 
—and not merely re-animation. It was all 
that was lost that our Lord died to recover; 
and the promise of a resurrection is therefore the 
promise of the restoration of what was lost and 
redeemed. This has been provided for all, and 
must be given or offered to all— whether then 
they accept of it or reject it. 

To get the full force of anastasis— "restoration," 
"rising up"— we must remember from 
what a height man has fallen into death. The 
resurrection (anastasis) secured for mankind by 
their Redeemer is a full and complete raising 
up (or restoration) to all that was lost, for all, 
by one man's (Adam's) disobedience. "For 
as by a man [Adam] came death [with all the 
degradation which that word implies— mental, 
moral and physical, culminating in utter dissolution 
—utter loss], even so by a man also [the 
man Christ Jesus] came [i.e. was secured] the 
resurrection" [anastasis— a complete restoration 
to all that was lost; a full rising up to the 
grand heights of perfection— the image and likeness 
of God at first enjoyed]. 

The Millennial age is to be the resurrection 
day for the world of mankind; but it will be 
optional with each individual whether or not 
he ever attains this grand perfection, provided 
for all in Christ. It may at first seem strange 
to say that the dead will be obliged to co-operate 
in the matter of their own resurrection 
(to perfection) or else never obtain it; but 
such is the Scriptural representation. The dead 
will not be required to aid or co-operate in 
their awakening from their graves; for "there 
is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom, in the grave" (Eccl. 9:10; Psa. 6:5), 
and they, therefore, could neither assent to 
nor oppose their awakening. That work will 
be done for the world by their glorified Redeemer, 
who declares, "All that are in their 
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man 
and come forth: [that is, all will be awakened; 



*In one exceptional passage another word is used, egersis 
(Matt. 27:53); but there are reasons for seriously 
doubting the genuineness of this verse and the preceding one. 
However, these peculiar verses are found in part in 
the oldest Greek Manuscript yet discovered; hence we 
may not discard them, although they are very difficult to 
harmonize with other scripture statements: for instance, 
if it was the earthquake which occurred at the moment of 
our Lord's death that opened those graves, it seems peculiar 
that they should stay thus three days before coming 



out of their graves after our Lord's resurrection (wrong or 
at least unusual word used for resurrection). And they 
could not be perfected by anastasis because it is written that 
Christ should be the first to thus rise from the dead. Then 
again, who were these "saints" or holy ones? They were 
not holy ones of the New or Gospel Dispensation; for it 
did not begin, and the disciples did not obtain "liberty to 
become sons of God" (John 1:12) until Pentecost, fifty 
days later. And if they were holy ones of the Jewish or 
previous dispensations, their awakening could be only similar 
to that of Lazarus,— to die again; because the Apostle 
Paul, later than this, after recounting the most notable 
of the holy ones of by-gone times, declared, "These all 
having obtained a good report through faith, received not 
the promise [chief of which is the resurrection of everlasting 
life], God having provided some better thing for us 
[the Gospel Church], that they without us should not be 
made perfect." (Heb. 11:39,40.) Hence the holy ones 
of by-gone dispensations are not (in the divine plan as 
here stated) to experience their full resurrection until after 
the Gospel age— until the Millennial age; for the entire 
period of the Gospel age is set apart to the development 
and perfecting of the Church which is Christ's "bride" or 
"body" or "temple." 

R1509 : page 102 

but there will be two classes, who will be 
awakened under different conditions, as our 
Lord proceeds to show, saying,] they that have 
done good [that is, those consecrated ones who 
are good and acceptable to God through 
Christ] to a resurrection life [That is to say, 
this class will come forth from death with a 
perfect life, a completely resurrected or raised 
up life, over which death shall no longer have 
any power or control]; and they that have 
practiced evil [surely this includes all of the 
fallen race except the few above referred to, 
the consecrated, holy ones] unto a judgment 
[or trial] resurrection" [—an opportunity for 
full raising up if they will conform to the discipline 
and chastisements of that thousand-year 
judgment-day of Christ's reign]. 

In harmony with this, the true and full meaning 
of anastasis— a complete or full raising up 
out of death— is our Lord's expression to the 
Sadducees who inquired concerning a woman 
of many husbands, "In the resurrection [anastasis] 
whose wife shall she be? (Luke 20:33.) 
Our Lord avoided giving them a direct reply, 
perhaps because it would have required a long 
discourse concerning the future, for which they 
in their cavilling spirit were wholly unready, 
and perhaps because the due time for information 
respecting God's methods and dealings 



during the Millennial age were not yet due to 

be explained. So our Lord's reply, in effect, 

was,— Ye err, because ye do not understand 

the Scriptures respecting how matters will then 

be, nor do ye appreciate the great power of 

God by which he is able to work all things according 

to the counsel of his own wise plan. 

Then, turning the subject away from the suppositionary 

case suggested by the Sadducees, 

our Lord took occasion to drop a word of instruction 

respecting the first or chief resurrection 

—the resurrection of the blessed and holy. 

(Rev. 20:6.) A knowledge of this resurrection 

would be meat in due season to them that 

stood by, while a direct reply to the question 

would not be, so our Lord said: "The sons 

R1510 :page 102 

of this period marry and are given in marriage, 
but those who shall be accounted worthy to 
obtain that period and the resurrection [anastasis] 
out from dead ones will neither marry 
nor be given in marriage; neither can they die 
any more: then, like the angels they will be, and 
sons of God— becoming sons by THE resurrection." 
The emphasis on "resurrection" and 
"dead" here, intensified by the expression 
"out from dead ones," leaves no room for doubt 
that the Lord referred to the First Resurrection. 

It will be perceived that in this statement 
our Lord omits any reference to the masses of 
the world and their opportunities for restitution 
to human perfection through a judgment-resurrection, 
a resurrection depending upon 
their co-operation, during Christ's Millennial 
reign, when, under him, their head, the saints 
(the holy ones who shall be accounted worthy 
of that first or chief resurrection to spirit conditions) 
shall judge the world.— 1 Cor. 6:2. 

RESURRECTION OF THE SOUL. 



There is nothing in the word resurrection, 
nor yet in the word anastasis, to limit or in 
any way determine the nature or organism of 
the one who experiences resurrection. If a resurrection 
of the body were predicted, then it 
would imply that exactly the same body would 
be raised up: and, since the human family are 
all flesh-beings, it would imply that the very 
same bodies now possessed, with exactly the 
same atoms of matter, would be "raised up." 
For the exact meaning of the word anastasis 



must be born in mind, viz., "restored" or 
"raised up."— Liddell & Scott. 

If then the human body which dies were the 
thing to which resurrection is promised, nothing 
more or less than the same body with its 
same atoms, same defects, and the same peculiarities, 
could be expected: and, as a result, 
resurrection would be merely a renewal of 
present, unfavorable, fallen conditions. 

But it is not the bodies of men that God 
promises to resurrect, but the men themselves 
—the beings (in the English Bible translated 
souls). It was Adam as a whole that sinned, 
—Adam, the living soul (being), and not merely 
his body. It was Adam as a whole, as a living 
soul (being), that was sentenced to death, and 
it was the souls of his posterity yet in his loins, 
unborn (Heb. 7:9,10; Exod. 1:5; 1 Cor. 15:22), 

R1510 :page 103 

that shared in him the penalty— "The 
soul that sinneth, it shall die." 

In harmony with this it would seem reasonable 
that when Christ redeemed man from this 
death-penalty, his soul must have paid man's 
penalty. And so we find it clearly stated of 
our Redeemer:— His anguish was a "travail of 
soul:" His soul was "exceeding sorrowful, 
even unto death:" "He poured out his soul 
unto death:" "He made his soul an offering 
for sin"— a corresponding price for the soul 
of Adam and all in him. Thus God redeemed 
our SOULS from destruction. -Psa. 49:15. 

And it is those souls condemned in Adam's 
soul, and redeemed by the sacrifice of Christ's 
soul, that are to have a resurrection. The 
Scriptures, when speaking of this, do not always 
use the word soul, but it is always implied; 
as, for instance, in the statement, "As in Adam 
all [souls— beings] die, even so all [souls, beings] 
in Christ shall be made alive;" and again, 
"There shall be a resurrection of the dead 
[souls, beings], both of the just [souls, beings] 
and of the unjust [souls, beings]." Wherever 
character is expressed, as here by the words 
"just" and "unjust," it is evident that not 
bodies but beings are meant; for although we 
might say lean or fat, beautiful or homely bodies, 
character cannot be predicated of bodies merely: 
a body cannot be either just or unjust: the soul 
or being is always understood where character 
is asserted or implied. [What is the "soul?" 
will be more fully discussed at some future time.] 

WITH WHAT BODIES WILL THEY COME 



FORTH? 



While a soul or being is more than a mere 
body, yet there can be no being, no existence, 
no soul, without a body. But then, again, there 
are different kinds of bodies,— "There is a 
natural [animal] body and there is a spiritual 
body" says the Apostle, explaining this question. 
(1 Cor. 15:44.) And the kind of body 
determines the nature of the being or soul. 

Beings with spirit-bodies are spirit beings, 
or heavenly beings— as God, and angels; a 
further distinction being shown amongst these 
spirit-beings in that those possessed of inherent 
life (immortality,— God, the Father, and our 
Lord Jesus Christ) are said to be "of the divine 
nature"— far above angels, etc. (Eph. 1:21.) 
And this is the grade of spirit body and being 
promised to the overcoming "bride" or "body 
of Christ," the "royal priesthood." 2 Pet. 1:4. 

Beings with the highest order of fleshly bodies, 
of the earth, earthy, are called human beings; 
—animal souls or beings; the highest of all 
earthly or fleshly beings or souls,— originally 
in God's likeness; and, as his representative 
Adam was, the King of Earth.— Psa. 8:5,6. 

Since the human family is evidently a fleshly, 
earthly race, and not a heavenly or spiritual 
one; and since the inspired Apostle assures us 
of this fact, saying, "That was not first which 
is spiritual, but that which is animal," "the 
first man was of the earth, earthy." (1 Cor. 15:46,47), 
we must conclude that, unless something 
should occur to work a change, the promise 
of a resurrection (anastasis, "raising up," 
"restoring"), when applied to Adam and his 
family, would mean simply a restoration of his 
being (soul) to its original powers possessed 
before his sin and fall— when he was the earthly 
likeness of his Creator, and upright.— Gen. 1:27; 
Eccl. 7:29. 

Since the word anastasis merely signifies to 
"raise up," as from a fallen to an upright, or 
from an imperfect to a perfect condition; and 
since it applies to the soul or being of man, it 
is evident that unless there be some change of 
nature since the fall of the race in Adam, raising 
up would imply nothing more and nothing 
less than raising all the way up to that standard 
of perfection and divine likeness represented 
and lost in Adam. Of the vast multitude of 
the human family it is true, that they are of the 
earth, earthy; of human nature, like father 
Adam, except that they have fallen farther from 



the divine image in which they were created in 
him. But this is not true of all, as we shall see. 
The Apostles Paul and Peter clearly explain 
to us that during this Gospel age God has been 
selecting a peculiar people, a little flock, to be 
joint-heirs with Christ, their Redeemer and 
Lord, in the Millennial Kingdom, which is to 
bless all the families of the earth. And they 
no less clearly assure us that those who shall 
be of that "bride" class will be changed in 

R1510 :page 104 

their resurrection, to a new nature, the divine 
nature, that thereafter they may be with their 
Lord, and be like him, and see him as he is.— 
See 2 Pet. 1:4; 1 John 3:2. Compare also 
our Lord's words in John 17:24. 

The same authoritative teachers assure us that, 
in order to secure such a change in their resurrection 
(necessary to all who will be members 
of that Kingdom), a certain change must take 
place in them before death. This latter change 
is Scripturally called a begetting of the spirit, 
and the resurrection change is called a birth of 
the spirit. That which is begotten and born of 
the spirit will be a spirit-being, and no longer 
a human-being. As that which is begotten and 
born of the flesh is flesh, so that which is begotten 
and born of the spirit is spirit. Nicodemus, 
and the Jews generally, thought that 
when the due time should come their nation 
would become God's Kingdom— a fleshly kingdom 
under a fleshly Messiah. But our Lord corrected 
Nicodemus' error, and assured him that 
all who would ever become members of that 
Kingdom, or who should even see it, would 
have to be begotten and born again,— a second 
time,— of the spirit of God.— See John 3:5-7. 

The Apostles explain that the begetting to 
this new nature comes only to believers, already 
justified by faith in the Redeemer; and that, 
while the justification of believers comes to 
each as a free gift through Christ, this begetting 
to be new creatures "of the divine nature" 
comes to us directly from the Father, and that 
as a result of our full consecration to him. 
The Truth, the word of God's grace,— "our 
high calling which is of God"— is the begetting 
and quickening influence which starts the new, 
consecrated life in all who are properly exercised 
thereby. The Apostle says: "The God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten 
us."-l Pet. 1:3. 

The Gospel age is exclusively devoted to this 
work of begetting and quickening and preparing 



of the true Church, the "little flock," for 
birth to the divine nature, and thus to an inheritance 
in the promised Kingdom which flesh 
and blood (souls or beings of human nature) 
cannot inherit, nor even see. (John 3:3,5.) 
The resurrection of the Church includes the 
resurrection of Christ Jesus, who is the head of 
the Church which is his body. (Eph. 1:22,23.) 
This resurrection is not only the chief or first 
resurrection in the sense of being the grandest 
and most wonderful "raising up," far above 
human and angelic natures— to the very pinnacle 
of glory and power, the divine nature— 
but it will also be first in order. And upon its 
completion, all other features of God's great 
plan for human salvation wait and depend. 
This first (chief) resurrection began over 
eighteen centuries ago, when the head of the 
Church arose, the first-born from the dead. 
Since then, one after another, a "little flock" 
of believers, after sharing in justification 
under the New Covenant sealed by the Redeemer's 
sacrifice, consecrating themselves to 
the Lord and becoming joint-heirs with Christ 
in the Abrahamic Covenant (Gal. 3:29), have 
been begotten and quickened to this course of 
action by the exceeding great and precious 
promises of God, and sealed by the holy spirit 
of promise, which continually, by God's Word 

R1511 :page 104 

and providences, bears witness that they are 
"accepted in the Beloved;" and that if they 
suffer with him they shall also reign with him; 
—if they be dead with him they shall also live 
with him. (Rom. 6:8; 8:17.) "Beloved, now 
are we the sons of God [begotten to the divine 
nature, witnessed by the spirit of adoption 
which enables us to recognize God as our Father]; 
but it doth not yet appear what we shall 
be [what shall be the peculiarities of our new 
bodies which we shall receive when born from 
the dead as sharers in Christ's resurrection], but 
we [do] know that when he [Christ] shall appear, 
we shall be like him; because we shall see 
him as he is [not as he was]; and none can see 
spirit beings as they really are except such as 
are also spirit beings— even as none except 
those begotten of the spirit can now understand 
spiritual things.— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

TWO ORDERS OR CLASSES RESURRECTED: 
ONE IN THE HEAVENLY, THE OTHER 
IN THE EARTHLY LIKENESS. 



The Apostle Paul gives a most complete discourse 
on this subject. (1 Cor. 15:12-28,35-55.) 
First, he proves that faith in a resurrection 

R1511 :page 105 

is a part of Christian doctrine, without which 

the entire fabric would be senseless. Secondly, 

having proved the doctrine, he shows that 

our Lord's resurrection is God's guarantee of a 

resurrection to all our race, for which Christ 

died. He proceeds to prove this fact and its 

reasonableness (verse 21) in that as by Adam 

came death to all, so by the man Christ Jesus 

the resurrection blessing is made applicable to 

all. Notice, however, that although a full resurrection 

up to perfection is made applicable 

to all, by God's plan, it does not follow that 

all will obtain it. It is only for those who 

shall successfully pass a judgment or trial to 

prove their worthiness of it under God's conditions 

—the New Covenant. It is made applicable 

to all, in that the terms will be such 

that all may avail themselves of the offer, in 

Christ. Next the Apostle shows that "as all 

in Adam died, even so all in Christ will be 

made alive [i.e., fully escape death], but each 

in his own order or class.— Verses 22,23. 

He next pointedly shows, in a few words, 
what we are here seeking to elaborate: namely, 
that only those who get into Christ by 
"faith in his blood" will ever get the perfect 
life which he has provided, and will make possible 
of attainment to all. And he shows that 
of these who come into Christ, into the household 
of faith, there will be more than one class or 
order— each one in Christ will be made alive, 
or fully "raised up" out of death, in his own 
proper class or order. These orders he shows 
to be two. The "first-fruit" class, the "members 
of his body," will be first in order and 
first in rank. Because associated with Christ 
in sacrificing, during this age, they shall be accounted 
worthy to have part in his resurrection 
—the chief resurrection.— Phil. 3:8-11; Rom. 6:5; 
Rev. 20:6. 

"Afterward [that is, next in order, or the 
remainder of those to be made alive in Christ, 
will be], those who are Christ's during his [second] 
presence [during his Millennial reign]. 
Then will come the end [the finish of the great 
salvation which he began by the sacrifice of 
himself once for all], when he shall deliver the 
[Millennial] kingdom to God the Father,— 



when he [Christ] shall have put down [by love 
or by force] all rale and all authority and 
power [opposed to righteousness, truth and 
love;— opposed to God and his perfect law]. 
For he must reign until he has put all enemies 
under his feet. [His Millennial Kingdom, having 
been arranged for the very purpose of releasing 
those who shall desire to be in harmony 
with God, when made fully aware of his real 
character and plan, and of destroying all who, 
under similar knowledge, are wilful opponents 
of God and righteousness, cannot cease until 
all these ends are fully accomplished. The 
enemies to be humbled in the dust include not 
only evil forces, moral and physical, but also 
all persons who wilfully become associates in 
and parts of those evil things. The enemies 
will therefore be both animate and inanimate.] 
Even the last enemy, THE death shall be destroyed: 
for he [the Father] hath subjected all 
things under his [Christ's] feet." 

It was an easy matter for those whom Paul 
addressed to believe that when the Millennial 
Kingdom should be in operation sin and sinners 
would be brought low; but the point most 
difficult to them, and the one which the Apostle 
was now seeking to impress, was that the 
death which had reigned over and conquered 
the race through Adam's sin had now become 
an enemy, an opponent of God's plan: and 
hence would surely be destroyed by the reign 
of Messiah. Death had not always been an 
enemy or an opposer of God's plan: once it 
was his servant, executing upon fallen man the 
penalty pronounced by God. But now, since 
Christ had paid the ransom price for Adam and 
for all condemned in him, this Adamic death 
is no longer to be accounted as a servant of 
God to execute justice, but as an enemy which 
the Redeemer of men is fully authorized and 
empowered to destroy— thus liberating from its 
bondage all for whom he died— "every man," 
all who died in Adam. (Rom. 8:31-39.) This 
destruction of the death from which Christ redeemed 
us, the enemy death, does not have any 
thing to do with the Second Death, to which, 
under Christ's rule, all will be subjected who, 
when released from the Adamic death and 
granted a new trial for life, are found wilful 
sinners. The second death will be the friend 

R1511 :page 106 

rather than the enemy of all who love righteousness; 
for in it "the abominable," and they 
only shall be destroyed— and that utterly. 



Verses 27,28, show that Jehovah alone is 
superior to our Lord Jesus, and that after subduing 
sin and death Christ as well as all things 
will be subject to the Father, who will be recognized 
as THE GREAT I AM, in whom the 
all in all of majesty and power will inhere. 

Having thus proved the fact of a general resurrection, 
and having shown the two orders— 
the Christ order, including every member of the 
body of the Christ who is to be like him and 
with him and a sharer of his glory and divine 
nature, and having shown the other class who 
will get life in Christ during the Millennial 
reign, the Apostle comes to particulars respecting 
these two classes (verses 35-54), in answer 
to a supposed question— "How are the dead 
raised up, and with what body do they come?" 

First, he treats the two classes together, saying, 
It is with man in death and resurrection 
as with the planting of grain and its reappearance. 
If you sow barley you expect barley; if 
you sow wheat you expect wheat to come up. 
So of whatever kind or nature a person is when 
he dies, he will be of that same nature, perfected, 
in the resurrection;— a resurrection will 
be a raising up of the same kind that goes into 
death. 

All men are of the human nature, of the Adamic 
family, of the earth, earthy. Hence, with the 
exception of those begotten by the word of divine 
promise to the new spiritual nature (and 
who by reason of this change belong to "the 
order of Melchisedec" and are "new creatures 
in Christ," "members of his body"), all the 
race of Adam die in Adam's nature, human nature; 
and if raised up to perfection would attain 
the perfection of man-hood. But those 
begotten of the spirit to the spiritual nature 
will, when resurrected, be perfect spirit-beings. 
To the Adamic seed God has given a grand and 
wonderful human or flesh body, whose grandeur 
may be conjectured if we can imagine all 
the grand qualities and gifts which we see exhibited 
exceptionally in poets, philosophers, musicians, 
orators, mathematicians and physical 
prodigies combined in one person. These human 
qualities lost by all the race to a greater or 
less extent will still belong to those of the 
Adamic seed who shall be fully resurrected out 
of the death-loss sustained in Adam's fall. But 
to the new seed, which is Christ (Head and 
members), God has promised a yet more glorious 
spirit-body, the wonders of which we but 
little comprehend as yet.— 1 John 3:2; 
1 Cor. 2:9-10. 

In verses 39-41, the Apostle introduces a description 



of the first or chief resurrection, in 
which the Church is especially interested, and 
shows that as there are various grades of earthly 
beings (fish, fowl, cattle and man), of which 
man is the lord or chief, so also in the spirit 
realm there are various degrees or grades of 
beings— the angelic being one, and the divine 
nature chief of all. So he reasons that as we 
can conceive of harmony and perfection, with 
variety, in the earth, perfect horses, dogs, cattle 
and men, so we can likewise conceive of similar 
variety in perfection amongst spirit beings. 
We may judge something of what human perfection 
will be by imagining all the wonderful 
powers of mankind exercised to the full by each. 
But although we know less about the spirit 
realm, we do know that spirits, powers and 
glories differ from human powers and glories. 
The glories yet diversities of the spirit world 
being well illustrated by those of the sun, moon 
and stars. 

THE FIRST RESURRECTION DESCRIBED. 



In verse 42 the Apostle fully reaches his topic 
saying, "Thus is the resurrection of the dead." 

Some who fail to see the two classes or orders 
in resurrection, and who claim that all will obtain 
spirit bodies in resurrection, urge that the 
above words apply to all who shall ever be resurrected, 
and that the description following is 
therefore applicable to all. But if the careful 
student will take his Emphatic Diaglott or any 
Greek New Testament he will see that the words 
"resurrection" and "dead" are both emphasized 
in verse 42; as though the Apostle would 
say, Thus will be the special or first resurrection, 
of the special class of the dead. To ignore 
this feature of the Greek is to blind one's 
self to the real force of God's Word. It may 

R1511 :page 107 

be asked, May it not have been a custom with 
the Apostle to use emphasis when speaking of 
the resurrection in general? We answer, No; 

R1512:page 107 

and refer the student to other instances of the 
use of the same expression without emphasis 
in the same chapter. (See verses 12,13,21.) 
And be it noticed that in each of these verses 
the words "resurrection" and "dead" do not 



refer to a special class and a special order of 
resurrection, as in verse 42. Furthermore, notice 
that whenever the Lord or the Apostles refer 
to the resurrection of the overcomers, the word 
resurrection is in every case made emphatic, and 
when the word occurs in a general way it is 
without emphasis. 

In the following texts anastasis is without the 
Greek article and hence shows no emphasis,— 
indicates no special peculiarity: Matt. 22:23; 
Mark 12:18; Luke 2:34; 20:27; John 5:29. 
(Here, instead of emphasizing the word anastasis 
by adding the article, the special resurrection 
is pointed out by calling it a resurrection 
of life, because those who share it will be perfected 
in life at once; the contrast being shown 
again in the statement that the others will come 
forth to a judgment-resurrection or a perfecting 
obtainable only through judgments, discipline, 
etc.); Acts 17:32; 23:6,8; 24:15-21. 
(As already noticed the Apostle is here showing 
that his faith in a resurrection or perfecting 
is not only for those now justified, but that it 
extends beyond this small class and includes a 
hope of perfecting for many now ignorant, sinful, 
unjustified), Acts 26:23; Rom. 1:4; 1 Cor. 15:12,13,21; 
Heb. 6:2; 11:35; 1 Pet. 1:3; 
3:21. 

In the following texts anastasis has the Greek 
article, showing emphasis and indicating that 
the first or special resurrection is surely meant: 
Matt. 22:28,30,31; Mark 12:23; Luke 14:14. 
(This text should not be understood to mean 
that Simon would be rewarded for his kind act 
by a share in the special resurrection, but that 
he would get a reward for it after the special resurrection 
of the Christ shall have introduced 
the new Kingdom— when Simon and the world 
in general will be granted full opportunity for 
life everlasting in and by a judgment-resurrection.); 
Luke 20:33,35,36; John 1 1:24,25; 
Acts 1:22; 2:31; 4:2,33; 17:18; Rom. 6:5; 
1 Cor. 15:42; Phil. 3:10,11; 2 Tim. 2:18; 
Rev. 20:5,6. 

Mark well that it is not our claim that anastasis 
without the article, never refers to the 
Lord's resurrection; but that the emphasis when 
used with anastasis always marks the statement 
as relating to the chief or spiritual resurrection. 
The apostles frequently spoke of our Lord's 
resurrection without calling attention to the 
fact that it was of a superior kind, just as we 
frequently do. They indeed often and properly 
enough use the word egeiro in speaking of 
our Lord's resurrection (as in Acts 5:30); but 
this word simply means, "to awaken, arouse, 



stir (Liddell & Scott). This word is used in 
speaking of the temporary awakenings of our 
Lord's miracles; as, for instance, in referring 
to the awakening of Lazarus (Jno. 12:1,9,17), 
of Jairus' daughter (Mark 5:41) and of the son 
of the widow of Nain (Luke 7:14). This word is 
also used without reference to dead people: for 
instance, when our Lord was asleep during the 
storm on the lake— the disciples "awoke [egeiro] 
him" and "he arose [egeiro] and rebuked the 
winds." (Matt. 8:25,26.) "It is high time 
to awake [egeiro] out of sleep," the Apostle 
urges. (Rom. 13:11.) And again he says, 
"Awake [egeiro] thou that sleepest." (Eph. 5:14) 
referring to the thoughtless. These comments 
apply also to the word anistemi frequently 
rendered arise, arose, etc., but never 
rendered resurrection. 

But not so with the word anastasis (resurrection): 
it is never used except with reference to 
the raising up of dead beings,— souls. And we 
hold that its use agrees in every instance with 
the thought of a full raising all the way up to 
perfection (and that it never refers to a mere 
reanimation or awakening) except it be in one 
instance out of the forty-three above noted. 
That one instance is in Heb. 1 1:35, where anastasis 
occurs twice, rendered raised to life again 
and resurrection. The first of these is generally 
understood to refer to the re-awakening of two 
children, by Elijah and Elisha; but we believe 
that had he referred to these the Holy Spirit 
would have guided the Apostle to the use of the 
word egeiro as in the case of Jairus' daughter 

R1512:page 108 

and the others awakened by our Lord. We 
prefer, therefore, to understand the word anastasis 
here the same as in the other forty-two uses 
of the word— a full raising up to perfection— 
and hence must suppose that the Apostle means 
that certain women, although not sharers in the 
battles, were sharers in the losses and the faith 
—their faith in God's promises permitting them 
to look into the future and to trust God for the 
resurrection of their dead ones; indeed, to sorrow 
not as others who have no such hope. This 
view finds support also in verse 39: "These all, 
whose faith was attested, did not obtain the 
promised blessing, God having provided a superior 
portion for us [the bride, the body of 
Christ], that they without us might not be made 
perfect. 

Finally, dear readers, let us remember that 
the reward, "Well done!" and the chief resurrection 



are not for those who have a clear 
knowledge and strong faith, merely, but for 
those who through their knowledge and faith 
become "overcomers" in deed and in truth. 
But the more clearly we see that a full, complete 
resurrection of being is freely provided for all 
of Adam's race in our great Redeemer's sacrifice, 
the more we can appreciate that sacrifice 
and the more we should love and esteem both 
the Giver and the Gift. And the more clearly 
we see that the attainment of the spiritual plane 
of perfect being, to which believers during this 
Gospel age have been called, is dependent on 
three things— (1) begetting of the spirit, under 
the sanctifying power of the word of his grace, 
(2) quickening to activity in God's service and 
to self-sacrifice by a still fuller appreciation and 
under the same sanctifying influences of the 
same spirit of the Truth, and (3) a resurrection-birth 
to the perfection of the new nature to 
which we were begotten and quickened— the 
more grace it will give us in considering what 
manner of persons we should be, as copies of 
our Redeemer, if we would make our calling 
and election sure. And the more clearly we 
see that a trial or judgment in the present life 
is essential to a part in the chief resurrection, 
the more reasonable it will appear that all of 
the world, who during the next age will be 
granted an opportunity for everlasting life under 
perfect conditions, must have a trial or judgment, 
and that therefore the period of Christ's 
reign is the thousand-year judgment-day and 
that a judgment-resurrection will progress therein 
—the willing and obedient obtaining perfection 
and life at its close, the disobedient, rejecting 
that gracious provision, being then "destroyed 
from among the people."— Acts 3:23. 

Let us who have been begotten of the Spirit, 
with the great Apostle, count all other prizes 
but as loss and dross that we may win Christ- 
win a membership in that glorious body— and 
be found in him; if by any means (by fellowship 
in his sufferings) we may obtain a share in 
his resurrection— the resurrection.— Phil. 3:8. 



R1521 :page 108 

THROUGH FAVOR OF OUR GOD. 



I'll live because Christ died for me, 
And lives again to set me free 



From imperfection and from death, 
Through favor of our God. 

No fear of death can bring me care, 
His robe of righteousness I wear; 
My sin is covered, praise the Lord, 
Through favor of our God. 

I've passed from death to newer life, 
I'm reckoned with the Bride, His wife, 
I wait the call to join the feast, 
Through favor of our God. 

I'll reap with Him while yet I may, 
And follow in the narrow way; 
From tares I'll separate the wheat, 
Through favor of our God. 

I'll see Him as He is, and reign 
With Him till thousand years shall wane, 
In giving life to countless dead, 
Through favor of our God. 

The "little flock," exalted then, 
With Christ, their Head, shall draw all men 
To Him, with golden cords of love, 
Through favor of our God. 

The King's highway of holiness, 

Will soon be opened up to bless 

The human race with lasting life, 

Through favor of our God. 

The earth like Eden then shall bloom, 
And sin and sorrow find no room, 
For one and all shall know the Lord, 

Through favor of our God.-HENRY FITCH. 



R1514:page 109 

ISRAEL RETURNING TO THE HOLY LAND. 



"There are now over 100,000 Jews in the 
Holy Land. The Jewish population there is 
larger than it has been at any time since the 
end of the first century of the Christian era. 
Nearly four-fifths of them have gone thither from 
other countries within the last few years, and 
they have been going thither this year more 
steadily than ever before. In former times only 
a small number of Jews were permitted to live 
in the country, but the restrictions upon their 



settlement in it and upon their ownership of 
land have been removed, and they are now at 
liberty to re-people it and take possession of it. 
The number of Jews who have returned to 
Palestine during the dozen years in which they 
have been free to enter has been greater than 
the number who returned after the Babylonian 
captivity, twenty-four centuries ago. 

"In the city of Jerusalem itself, according to 
a report of the British Consul there, the Jewish 
population is now fully 40,000, and a 
large part of the real estate in and around the 
city is in Jewish hands. The number of synagogues, 
schools of learning, hospitals, and other 
public institutions is constantly increasing, the 
water system has been improved, new streets 
have been opened beyond the walls, telegraphs 
and electric lights have been introduced, several 
factories have been set up, and the new 
railway to Jaffa has already stimulated the activity 
of the population in various ways. 'Palestine 
will soon be ready for the Jewish race,' 
says Rev. Dr. Kelt, of the Episcopal Church of 
Jerusalem, in a letter to the London Times. 

"The reports from the northern part of Palestine 
are favorable. There is activity at Acre 
and along the route to Damascus. The wheat 
raisers there are rejoicing in the prospect of 
finding markets for their crops; so are the raisers 
of olives and other fruits. The soil in that region 
is well adapted to the growth of cotton. 

"A number of important public works have 
been undertaken in various parts of the country 
between the river Jordan and the Mediterranean; 
and we hear of yet other projects in which 
the Hebrew capitalists of England and France 
are prepared to invest all the money that may 
be needed. 

"It will undoubtedly take a long time to regenerate 
Palestine, but we infer from the news 
received from Jerusalem that the work of regeneration 
has been begun. It must take a good 
many years to give the predominance to the 
Jewish element in Palestine; but if the number 
of Jews there should increase for the next ten 
years at the rate at which it has increased during 
the last ten years, the Jewish population in 
the Holy Land will run over a million very soon 
after the opening of the twentieth century. 

"The shutting out from this country of the 
Jewish as well as other European immigrants, 
has already had an influence upon the Palestinian 
movement." 

—New York Sun. 



R1513 :page 109 
TREASURES IN HEAVEN. 



Since we have become new creatures in Christ 
we are finding new treasures— treasures of divine 
knowledge which will never pass away, 
treasures of experience and wisdom developing 
in us what the Lord recognizes as precious 
graces of character, treasures of good works that 
shall not be forgotten when the day of final 
reckoning shall make them manifest, and treasures 
of heavenly friendships that shall never be 
severed while the years of eternity roll. 

O what joy there will be in heaven when we 
find our treasures there, all safely kept where 
moth and rust could not corrupt and where 
thieves could not break through and steal. 

When the heavenly Banker says, Well done, 
good and faithful servant, and the treasure of 
heavenly approval and love and commendation 
sinks down deep in our enraptured hearts, tell 
me, will we not feel that the measure of joy 
which began even here and was numbered 

R1513 :page 110 

among our choicest treasures has there gained 
compound interest? And when a precious 

R1514:page 110 

saint then glorified greets us with tender, grateful 
love, saying, You helped me hither, or You 
recovered me from falling when my feet had 
well nigh slipped; and when another and another 
of these treasures throng about us to bid 
us welcome to their midst, will we not indeed 
rejoice over the investment of toil or care or effort 
of any kind which has brought such results. 

Besides the treasures of friendship which will 
never die, there will be treasures of love that will 
never grow old, treasures of esteem for the sake 
of our work and personal sacrificing that will 
never be forgotten, treasures of experience that 
will serve us eternally, treasures of wisdom that 
will enrich us forever, treasures of divine approval 
that will wreath a halo of glory around 
us which shall never pale, and treasures of 
glory, honor and immortality beyond our present 
powers to fully appreciate. 

Let us heed the Master's words— "Lay not 
up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where 



moth and rust doth corrupt and where thieves 
break through and steal; but lay up for yourselves 
treasures in heaven, where neither moth 
nor rust doth corrupt and where thieves do not 
break through nor steal; for where your treasure 
is, there will your heart be also." 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1512:page 110 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



Mexico. 

The following letter, received by Brother 
Fuller, was recently sent us, and is of special 
interest as indicating the progress of the 
truth in Mexico. ~ 

My Dear Sir and Brother:— I have again 
to tender you my best thanks for your kind 
attention in sending me a number of "Zion's 
Watch Tower" and "Thy Word is Truth," 
which I received a few days ago. I read 
"The Plan of the Ages" with very great 
interest and pleasure: for it has confirmed 
many ideas I already possessed, and developed 
others which were latent and vague in 
my mind. I am happy and thankful to say 
that since my early youth, I was enabled to 
acquire, through God's grace and my dear 
father's instrumentality, much knowledge, 
which gave me much higher ideas of the 
Almighty's wisdom, justice and mercy than 
are generally possessed by nominal Christians. 
"The Plan of the Ages" did not come 
to me, therefore, as a revelation, but as a joy-giving 
confirmation of ideas I had already 
acquired. To a dear friend of mine, however, 
it has been a source of new light and 
of much comfort. He is delighted with it, 
and wishes to write to you on the subject. 

I enclose five dollars. Kindly take out one 
year's subscription for me to "Zion's Watch 
Tower" and for the remainder send me as 
many of the three volumes of "Millennial 
Dawn" as the money will buy, as I 
wish to send them to several friends both 
here and in Europe. I hope to find, in the 
"Watch Tower," articles which may do 
good in this country if translated and published 
in Spanish; I might even undertake 
the translation of the "Dawns," if I had the 
funds to have them published. 



I hope you will soon write to me again. 
Wishing you and yours abundant blessings 
in the new year, I remain, 

Yours fraternally, F. de P. STEPHENSON. 



Sing Sing Prison, New York. 
GENTLEMEN:— I have pleasure in acknowledging 
the receipt of three copies of the 
Tower, duplicate Tracts, etc., for which I 
have returned thanks to Him who bestows 
every good gift. I desire to say to Brother 

and Sister R that I received much light 

and strength in coming to the Lord, through 
the aid of The Plan of the Ages. It carries 
with it a substantial blessing to every reader 
who is seeking light and truth with a sincere 
heart. It takes away the hideous thought, 
that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 
is a monster of cruelty, ignorance and injustice, 

R1513 :page 110 

and reveals, instead, that he is wisdom, 
justice and love. Truly the light shines 
more and more unto the perfect day. 

Great and mighty works has he wrought 
in me, and he is doing the same for others 
here, all so quietly, yet surely. Through the 
power of God and the grace of our blessed 
Lord, I am free from bondage to the old nature. 
I know and fully realize why the 
Apostle with such vehemence urged upon 
all to put on the whole armor of God. As 
a man, I have been exercised until I look 
upon my past life with shudders of horror. 

R1513 :page 111 

Again, I bless the Lord that he is no respecter 
of persons. What he has done for 
me, he is ready and willing to do unto all 
who will come to him with a full surrender 
of soul and body. 

I hope to send you, shortly, the necessary 
amount for subscription and helps. In the 
meantime I want you, if you can, to keep an 
eye on this Prison; the Lord is working here. 

May the grace and peace of the Lord 
Jesus Christ be with both of you, with all 
of your fellow laborers, and with all them 
who love our blessed Lord in truth and sincerity. 
Yours in the faith, . 



Sing Sing Prison, New York. 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY: 

I received in due course your postal card 
and Tracts, for which I beg to express my 
thanks. The papers were carefully read, 
and, I am frank to say, made clear to me 
many things which formerly appeared dark 
and unmeaning. As soon as I possibly can, 
I shall arrange for a regular supply of your 
semi-monthly WATCH TOWER; and I mean 
to procure, as soon as I can, the present volumes 
of Dawn. 

I am fully convinced that my perusal of 
the first volume of DAWN opened my eyes 
to the truth. I read the book eagerly, and 
consulted nearly all the Scripture references 
as I went along. The result was an awakening. 
I thought much over it, and perceived 
at last what it was to walk in the 
way of life. The Bible became like a new 
revelation to me. I read it with feelings 
of delight. It is not now a labor or a duty, 
as once it was, but I turn to it with eagerness 
and joy. 

There are souls here inquiring for the way 
of life. I speak of those who, quietly, and 
without intending to inform any one of it, 
are seeking God. They give evidence of sincerity. 
These I try to reach, for I consider 
the soil to be such as will bear fruit. As for 
the others (the great majority) all that seems 
possible now is to hope and pray that God 
will open a way whereby their hearts can be 
reached. Yours in His name, . 



New York. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., GENTLEMEN:- 
For enclosure please send me The Time is 
at Hand and the Watch Tower commencing 
with the January number. I have read 
and studied The Plan of the Ages, until 
the facts therein stated are perfectly clear to 
my mind. At first I rebelled against its 
teachings, could not have it so and would 
not. Then I said, If this is the truth, I 
must take it, whether it is palatable or not 
—like bitter medicine to a sick body: hard 
to take, but good in its effects. Truth is 
what my sin-sick soul needs; and it shall 
have it is the decision of my sanctified will. 

I did not intend to write you a letter 
(nothing but an order), but I know it will 
cheer you to know that your book has done 



me good, and that I have lent it to several 
others who have read it with benefit. 

May God bless the work you are doing, 
and bring many to the truth as it is in Christ 
Jesus our Lord, is my prayer. 

Yours Respectfully, A. WHITE. 



As an illustration of the text, "The entrance 
of thy truth giveth light," we subjoin 
extracts from four letters received within 
five weeks from a Brother in Iowa. Each 
letter represents a growth in knowledge and 
love and zeal. 

This shows what two tracts may do, under 
God's blessing, when put into good hands. 

TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY:-I 
hereby acknowledge the receipt of your 
Tracts, Thy Word is Truth and The Wonderful 
Story. I read them over with interest 
and benefit; and now, according to your 
offer, I send for Tract No. 12 and any other 
you may be pleased to send. At first reading 
of "An Answer to Ingersoll" I thought 
it too liberal, but on reading "Pulpit Infidelity" 
I apologize for any uncharitable 
thoughts I might have entertained. I am a 
learner, and anything that will teach without 
injury I want: others I do not want. 



Thanks for samples of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER received. At first I suspected a snare, 
and was ready at the first appearance of the 
cloven hoof or wolf in sheep's clothing to 
"flee away;" for nowadays we have to watch. 
But I keep in mind that as I am Christ's, 
no man is able to "pluck me out of my Father's 
hand." So I send you $ 1 .00 for the 
three volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN and 
Tracts. Have read February TOWER; and 
though on first reading its doctrine seemed 
strange, I find that it clears up many passages 
of Scripture hitherto not understood. 



I hereby acknowledge the receipt of the 
DAWNS. I do not know how to express 
myself: I am so delighted with them and 
your other publications. It was really Providential 



R1513 :page 112 



that I saw your tract The Wages 

of Sin. First I thought it was too Universalistic; 

then I thought it was too Purgatorial; 

and I did not know what to do until my 

regular Bible lesson (Ezek. 15:44-45) confirmed 

the tract. I find it is just like Christ 

Jesus to be just to all men. Oh! praise his 

name! the Scriptures began to unfold to my 

poor, benighted mind. I know what it is to 

fellowship with him in joy and pleasure, 

and am learning (slowly to be sure) to suffer 

with him; and know that I am accepted 

in the Beloved. I stand alone in my community, 

but I cease not to do the work he 

has appointed me, nor will I. 



I have read the three DAWNS critically as 
I can, and I must say they have to a great 
extent revolutionized me; and, though your 
DAWNS struck me a little contrary at first, 
I soon got righted. Oh, the blessedness of 
this truth! He has led me in a way I know 
not, but he doeth all things well. I have 
fought a good fight up to the present time 
and have the armor on awaiting his orders. 

You may be and probably are spoken 
against; but I am with you: not that I have 
hastily adopted these teachings; but I was 
ready for the DAWNS. I did not know what 
I wanted, but they filled the aching void. 

I have since shown my faith by my works, 
by handing in my resignation to the church 
to which I belonged, and am now free. I 
want your prayers for me, that I may see 
you at the marriage of the Lamb. 

ISAAC HAMPTON. 



page 112 



England. 
DEAR BROTHER:-Thanks for the knowledge 
of which you are the channel. A few 
weeks ago I came across your MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. I., and at the time I was struck 
with the facts therein enunciated, but did 
not take hold of them. However, I could 
not get away from the thoughts induced by 
the first reading, and so determined to have 
another perusal; and how any rational being 
could fail to perceive that plan as set forth 
in the Scriptures I should be at loss to 
understand, if I had not had experience with 



the blinding effects of tradition. "Take 
hearsay for granted, and never mind searching 
the Book" was my motto— and is that 
of many at the present time. 

True, I called myself a Christian, and did 
believe in Christ as a Redeemer, but I had 
absolutely no idea of the extent and benefits 
of the Redemption. But now, thank God, 
I know in what my duty consists, and am 
striving to run the race, keeping only the 
goal in view. 

I am in daily contact with Spiritualists 
and others of similar beliefs, and some with 
no belief at all, and would ask for your 
prayers, that the light may shine, and that 
I may be given the requisite strength to 
keep my light shining— not burning, simply, 
but shining. I shall not forget you; and 
may you long be spared to continue the work 
the Master has given you to do. 

Yours faithfully, C. MAW. 



California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The DAWN 
series has brought great light and joy and 
peace to our home. We had been studying 
and groping for some time, to find what the 
second advent of Jesus Christ meant to the 
world; and since we have come to "understand," 
we have had the pleasure of helping 
to lead some others into the Truth. 

Will you please give us in the WATCH 
TOWER an explanation of the first chapter 
of John? [This will be explained in next 
TOWER.] 

Your brother in Christ, C. C. BELL. 



R1513 :page 112 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Some time 
since, I bought MILLENNIAL DAWN of one 
of your colporteurs, and have given the three 
volumes a careful reading; and though your 
ideas are somewhat different from my own, 
yet I feel drawn towards you, as one after 
my own heart. For many year past, I have 
been making myself ready for the appearing 
of the glorious Bridegroom, having been 
connected with those expecting his soon appearing 
since 1842. 

While I have been a believer in restitution 



and in the reign of Jesus and his bride 
over the restored earth, I have not attached 
such importance to the ransom-price paid by 
the blessed Redeemer for all mankind, as I 
ought to have done. Truly it is the goodness 
of God that should lead men to repentance, 
and not his supposed wrath. 

Dear Brother, everything I have is on the 
altar, and has been since I was called out, 
seventy-three years ago. I still holding myself 
ready to do my blessed Master's will, 
to follow him through evil as well as good 
report, and to say at all times, "Not my will, 
but thine be done." 

Your brother in hope, DANIEL PERINE. 



page 114 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, ASSOCIATE. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 

By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



INTERESTING ITEMS. 



R1515 :page 114 

CHURCH STATISTICS OF THE U.S. 

Dr. Carroll, Superintendent of religious statistics 
of the last census, presents some interesting 
facts. The membership of the Presbyterian, 
the Methodist Episcopal, the Reformed, 
the German Reformed, the Lutheran, the Congregational, 
the Disciples, the Roman Catholic 
and the Jewish churches shows a total of 12,487,382; 
while of this total the Roman Catholics 
are accredited with 6,250,045, or more than 
one half. These are the figures given by The 
Christian at Work. 

THE OUTLOOK. 

The Christian Union for April 1st, in the 
"Outlook," says, after speaking of the bitter 
opposition, by a member of the German Reichstag, 
to the Jews: "There are many indications 
that the anti-Semitic feeling in Germany is 
spreading." 

The same journal, speaking of affairs in Belgium 
—the working classes demanding universal 
suffrage— says, "In the event of a failure to 
make that concession, very serious industrial 
disturbances will undoubtedly take place." 

JEWISH RIOTS IN RUSSIA. 

A St. Petersburg dispatch, dated March 24, 
announces a peculiar riot. It says: "For the 
first time in the remembrance of Russia, Hebrews 
have assumed the role of rioters— in the 
town of Jarnitz." 

"The Hebrews residing in that part of Russia 
are, what with their own natural shiftlessness 
and the various late prohibitive laws which 
have kept them out of their regular easy and 
paying businesses, in a somewhat precarious 
condition anyway nowadays. They live mostly 
a from-hand-to-mouth existence, and have nothing 
to fall back upon in case of need. The 
late failure of the crops and the consequent 
famine have, therefore, come down with crushing 
force upon them, and their sufferings have 
been terrible. On top of this the winter has 
been extremely cold, and this suffering has been 
added to the others. At last the cold, hunger 
and need drove the poor inhabitants of the 
above mentioned town of Jarnitz, which may 



be taken as a sample of all the other towns of 
that region, to an extreme step. 

THE POOR IGNORED BY THE RICH. 

"On an appointed Saturday all the sufferers 
arranged to meet for a general consultation in 
the local synagogue. Once assembled there, 
for a long time they discussed their troubles 
and sought for some remedy. No one could 
suggest any remedy. At last it was decided 
that the local rich Hebrews had not done their 
duty and to make an appeal to them. The 
rich ones refused to pay any attention to the 
deputation, and ordered them away. 

"The result of this cold-blooded repulsion 
was almost electrical on the crowd. As one man 
they threw themselves into a street-riot. Honor, 
honesty, safety, all were forgotten under the terrible 
pangs of hunger and the stinging realization 
of the heartlessness of their co-religionists. 

"The riot lasted for five hours and was aimed 
exclusively at the houses of the rich. Windows 
and doors were broken in, all that could be was 
carried off, the rest destroyed. Nothing that 
could possibly be made away with was left. 

"Meanwhile the police had taken the alarm, 
but could at first do nothing in the face of the 
immense crowd. When, at last, help had arrived, 
the riot was nearly over. The Chief of 
Police was then about to take extreme measures 
and vowed to bring all the offenders to justice. 
When, however, upon investigation, he learned 
all the particulars, and that three Hebrews had 
died that same day from hunger, he decided 
that no further action was advisable in the 
matter. Not only that, but he himself started 
a subscription for the relief of the sufferers. 



R1514:page 115 
