Announcements
THE NEW WORLD SOCIETY NOW IN EVIDENCE
Christ’s followers, living as a New World society, turn away from the strife, greed, debauchery and crime of the old world in conforming to their Leader’s expression: “I am not of this [old] world.” To help others who look forward to the time when righteousness will fill the earth, Jehovah’s witnesses joyfully carry to the homes of the people Bible study aids. Three such books and booklets will be offered on a contribution of $1.50 during December, or the New World Translation of the Hebrew or Greek Scriptures with a book on a contribution of $2. To share in this activity write this office.
ORDER YEARBOOKS AND CALENDARS
The 1955 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses and the 1955 calendar may now be ordered. They will be found to be sources of inspiration as well as edification for every truth lover. Covering 150 lands, the Yearbook strikingly shows how the preaching work has progressed worldwide during the past service year and includes many thrilling accounts of how Jehovah God has been with his servants as they carried the good news of his kingdom far and wide. The daily text and comments will prove a source of daily strength and encouragement to all who desire to be faithful servants of Jehovah. The calendar sets forth the yeartext with appropriate illustration and on each calendar pad is given the monthly service theme. The Yearbook may now be ordered for 50c. Calendars are available at 25c, or five to one address for $1. Congregation servants should ascertain their needs and place an order for the congregation.
“THIS GOOD NEWS OF THE KINGDOM”
We need good news today, especially good news about a righteous government. Men’s schemes for governing themselves multiply, and their failures multiply at the same rate. But there is good news about a perfect government that will never fail, that will bring peace eternal. It is the news of Jehovah God’s government, of its establishment, how it will eliminate sin and death and the Devil, and how by dedication to Jehovah persons can be ransomed to everlasting earthly life under it, surviving the approaching end of this present sorrowful system of things. This is news that is good and timely and vital. It is stated clearly, in the simplest of language, in the new 32-page booklet entitled “This Good News of the Kingdom”. You will thrill to receive this good news, and give it to others, and even study it with others. To facilitate both private and group study, questions on each paragraph appear in the booklet. Individual copies are 5c, or to supply your friends and neighbors get 7 for 25c or 30 for $1. Congregations of Jehovah’s witnesses may order supplies for use during the Watchtower campaign, January through April.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 12: The Sacredness of Our Warfare, ¶1-16.
Week of December 19: The Sacredness of Our Warfare, ¶17-20; Priests with the Theocratic Army, and The Christian Warrior, ¶1-3.
Week of December 26: The Christian Warrior, ¶4-20.

