World Peace—by Whom?
PEACE, world peace, is what most of us talk about and almost all of us desire, but only a very few, comparatively speaking, actually know how, when and by whom it will come.
Down through the ages men have sought peace through various means, through leagues, pacts, conference tables and wars, but all to no avail. And today, despite our strenuous efforts and know-how, world peace appears no nearer solution than it ever has been. Just why is this?
The Bible, God’s Word of truth, remarkably tells us why. In fact, it foretells with amazing accuracy the moods and disposition of political ambassadors as they search for peace. For example, at Isaiah 33:7 it says: “The ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly.” This is because of the failure of their peace efforts, of course. Something further, it tells us that the propaganda in behalf of peace through world organizations and political nations is false. God through his prophet Jeremiah calls this to our attention, saying: “From the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely. They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.”—Jer. 6:13, 14.
Has not this been true? Have not both the religious and political prophets built the hopes of the people for peace, so much so that failure to bring it has caused many to doubt and lose faith? People today are saying the exact words that the prophet Jeremiah said they would: “We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of health, and behold trouble!” Has it not been that way especially since 1914? World Wars I and II were to be wars to end all wars, to make the world safe for democracy and to usher in the “four freedoms.” The League of Nations and the United Nations were to maintain the peace and preserve the harmony of the world. But what happened? Mussolini and Hitler changed the world scene shortly after World War I and now the Russian and Chinese rulers are dampening the hopes of the people.—Jer. 8:15.
In view of these facts, no doubt you have wondered why men have been so fruitless in their efforts to bring about world peace. The Bible tells us why. At Revelation 12:12 (NW) it exposes the one responsible for world woes, which exposé shows why men have been helpless to compete with world problems. Note what it says: “Woe for the earth and for the sea [the restless masses of humanity], because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.” There is your answer. Satan the Devil, invisible to and mightier than man, is responsible for world chaos, and not God.
These woes are bound to increase upon mankind until God brings to an end Satan the Devil and all his wicked supporters in the battle of Armageddon. This he promises he will do shortly. Paul helps us to appreciate this fact by saying: “For his part, the God who gives peace will crush Satan under your feet shortly.”—Rom. 16:20, NW.
After this takes place, there will be world peace; peace among all families of the earth, peace between man and animals, peace between man and God. And for how long? The psalmist answers: “In his days shall the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth.” (Ps. 72:7) So we ask the question again, World peace—by whom? By God, in his way and shortly.

