R731 : page 1 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING 
LETTERS. 

February 5, 1885. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Thank you very much for your 
quick and kind answer of my letter. The money I send, you may use 
for any purpose of spreading the grand news as you think best. How 
I long to have all the back numbers of the TOWER. Is there no way 
of procuring them? Any price ! I am preparing to work among my 
(German) countrymen, and would like to have them on that 
account. 

The glorious truth which since a year ago shone on my heart 
through the "Food," becomes brighter and brighter. I had the 
"Food" three years in my possession, but never found time nor 
opportunity to read it, but always saved it. Last winter I got poor 
and lean and all creeds and dogmas seemed to leave me. I searched 
and found "Food." No book ever took me like that. I forgot meals 
and all. I could not sleep for joy. O, the blessedness I have enjoyed 
since then. God is still revealing more and more to me by the 
TOWER and Scriptures. Diaglott and Young's Concordance are 
great helps to me. I would like 

R731 : page 2 

this glorious truth to be spread among my people. I find much 
opposition with some, but some take it readily. I am still in the 
Methodist Church (German), but preach and talk in private and 
openly of the glorious truth. What will become of me the Lord 
knows— I expect to be thrown out. I would much like to see you 
personally and talk to you about plans which I have. If any way 
possible I will see you. 



Yours in Christ, 



Kirbeyville. 

BRETHREN:-There are three of us- ministers of the Gospel- 
laying ourselves out for the spread of the glorious truths set forth in 
your publications. I have just come in from a preaching tour and 
expect to start again as soon as I have filled my present 
appointments, which will take me three weeks. I ask you to send me 
what publications you think best for distribution, so that we may 
give these grand truths to the people in this section of country. 
Hoping you can and will comply with our request, I remain, 

Yours in Christ, 



page 2 



Palmyra, 111. 

MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST.- When I received the 
February WATCH TOWER with the article "Two Baptisms" 
marked, and found the answer to my question given so plainly in it, 
I felt sorry I had troubled you when I had it in the house; and what 
is more, had read that very article repeatedly. Do you think I must 
have been very stupid? I think so too; but my dear brother, don't 
you know that I have had a Bible in the house all my life and have 
read it ever since I could read, have read it by daylight and lamp 
light, and by moon light, have learned whole chapters by heart, and 
even prided myself because of my knowledge of the Bible, and 
after all it remained for the TOWER, in the providence of God, to 
show me that I knew nothing about it. The knowledge I prided 
myself on was such knowledge as a parrot has; I knew the words 
but that was all. It remained for the TOWER to point out to me the 
grand, glorious, hidden manna there is in that blessed old book. 
And how I love it, and how every feast makes me hungry for more. 

I thank God every day that he has permitted us to feast at his table. 
Were it not that the cares of a family press upon me I think I should 
do little but study the Word. With Paul I can say "I have not been 
disobedient to the heavenly vision. " When I first saw the light, I 
thought that all we had to do was to show these things to our 
neighbors and friends and they would grasp them eagerly as we had 
done, but I found an indifference that astonished me. 

You told us that though these things were sweet in our mouth, yet 
after we ate them they would become bitter. I was full of the sweet 
and I did not see where there was any bitterness for me. After 
awhile what I supposed a cord, that bound me to the nominal 
Church, proved to be a chain, and it increased in weight so rapidly 



that I tried to shake it off, but it only bound the tighter. I began to 
long for true baptism. I had been sprinkled long ago, but now I saw 
a new beauty in baptism. I resolved to break the chain and to be 
baptized if I could find some one to do it without taking me into 
another Church, and then I found the bitterness, but I need not give 
details. I have thought often of writing you something of my 
experience for publication for the encouragement of others, but it 
would fill up the paper and not edify as much as the articles you 
give us in explanation of Scripture, which are manna indeed to our 
hungry souls. 

I thank our Father that though we have the bitter trials, yet in him 
we have a never-failing source of joy. And I thank him that he gave 
me strength to burst the chains and furnished one to give my 
husband and I the symbolic baptism; now we rejoice in the love and 
freedom of Christ. He is leading us and we desire to do his will. We 
are all sitting around the Lord's table and the TOWER is helping us 
to our food. May its supply be continually increased that we may all 
be filled and come into the unity of the faith, all praising God with 
one voice. 

As ever, your sister in the Lord. 



Fayettesville, N.C. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-During the last two months I have been 
laboring for the Master as best I could according to my ability. 
Preaching in public, and in private houses as well as by the way 
side, and by distributing Z.W. TOWER and tracts. I do not intend to 
shun to declare the whole council of God so far as I know it and am 
competent to do it. I travelled 250 miles nearly all on foot; have had 
many good meetings, and have had many what most men would 
call troubles, fatigued, and wet with rain, etc. Some times hungry 
and sometimes athirst, sometimes in comfortable quarters and 
sometimes otherwise. Yet I feel that I am made stronger by these, 
and more able to carry out my covenant of sacrifice. It is a great 
pleasure to hear from the many dear brethren and sisters by the 
letter extracts in the TOWER. 

I leave home to-morrow again. I pray an interest in the prayers of 
all the saints. 

Your brother in the love of Christ, 



Ulcely, England. 

DEAR SIR:— I was requested to give a reading, at what is called the 
Mutual Improvement Society composed of members from all sects 
in the town, the president knowing somewhat of my views asked 
that the title might be, Advanced Religious thought. I did not 
decline, and with the pamphlet, Food, and the various numbers of 
the TOWER which I have, I made quite a long essay. After the 



reading, a discussion was freely entered into and I was branded by 
all sorts of names, such as Materialist, Universalist, Calvinistic, 
Baptist, etc. Although the Wesleyan minister, who had the 
Scriptures in his hand, could not find any mis-quotations, he was 
surprised at the different light given to them to what they are used 
to give them. Others said I had given the best paper that had been 
given during all the sessions. I hope by God's help to speak at any 
time, the truths of the Scriptures as I have received light on them 
through the TOWER, so that I may be the means of turning some 
from errors of doctrine. 

I am, dear sir, yours teachable in Christ, 
R731 : page 2 



Newton Co., Texas. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER: -I have just finished reading a 
pamphlet, published by you, entitled, "Food for Thinking 
Christians," and have become very much interested in the subjects 
treated of. I wish to know more and more of these precious truths. 
Though a minister, I have been made to realize often while studying 
these pages, how true it is that many of us are "ever learning, but 
never come to a knowledge of the truth." Having received so much 
light from this pamphlet, I gladly avail myself of your proposition, 
"Ask and ye shall receive," so please send to me such reading 
matter as you deem best. 

Is ZION'S WATCH TOWER a paper? if so, send me a specimen 
copy, or subscription price, I must have it. 

Yours in hope, 



page 2 
Oakland, Cal. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have not forgotten you nor the glorious 
cause you represent. The blessed gospel has so permeated my soul 
that it seems I have forgotten all other themes. Politics used to 
enthuse me some while I was in "Babylon," but now such a 
glorious landscape has burst upon my enraptured vision that I can 
see nothing else, and wherever I am and whoever I address, this 
song of the world's ransom is on my tongue. Persecution and the 
cold shoulder of former friends and associates is nothing to me, the 
Lord is my shield and hiding place, and the rock of my salvation. 
His fellowship and his approving smile is all I crave. 

Truly your brother. 



Taunton, Mass. 

DEAR BROTHER: -Please erase my name from the poor list. 
Although poor in this world's Treasures, made richer in faith 
through reading the TOWER, I feel I must pay for the paper this 
year. I love to read it more and more and shall continue to use my 
influence in getting others interested. 

Yours in Christian hope, . 

R731 : page 2 



England, Feb. 14, 1885. 

DEAR SIR:— Having lately come into possession of a copy of your 
valuable "Food for Thinking Christians" and finding that it is taken 
from the bread of life, I have a strong desire that others should read 
it as well as myself. As a Missionary to the Seamen and Fishermen 
on the coast of England I apply to you for a few slices i.e. copies of 
your Food for free distribution among them, and any other crumbs 
from the Master's table will be most gratefully received, and 
willingly distributed among the hungry souls with whom I labor. 

I have about twelve miles of sea coast and three seaports, and 
seeing that by asking I might receive, it put me so much in mind of 
the grace and favor from the great Captain of our salvation, that I 
felt constrained to apply, and I believe I shall receive, and will be 
thankful for anything you may send. 

Yours in Christ Jesus. 



page 2 



Palestine, 111. Feb. 22, 1885. 

BRO. C. T. RUSSELL:-I am now thoroughly satisfied as to the 
Ransom, the Church, the Bride, the Little Flock, the Presence of 
Christ, the Coming Troubles upon the Nominal Church systems and 
world, and the deliverance of the Bride, the Restitution during the 
coming age in which "all men shall be saved and brought to a 
knowledge of the Truth" for its acceptance or rejection, when all 
that was lost in or by Adam will be restored in or by Christ- 
indeed, much more than that; for Christ's Bride shall be just like 
him, glorious, more brilliant than the sun, and immortal; and the 
balance of the race given an opportunity for a life grander than 
Adam's-everlasting; or a worse death than his-"the second"- 
"everlasting destruction." 

Light is looming up on these subjects plainer and plainer, and I now 
glory in the Cross of Christ in a way in which I never could before. 
I can now rejoice to know that "the Word" was changed to a perfect 
manhood, "made flesh" in order to die for man. 



I can rejoice that I now have opportunity to consecrate my life and 
being to God- to aid in filling up "the remainder of Christ's 
sufferings"-rendering my life "a living sacrifice to God, which is 
my reasonable service"— so that I might "reign with him." 

I do not glory in self-righteousness; I have none. "I have no 
confidence in the flesh," but all in my Ransom, the Sacrifice, the 
Atonement; but, to receive their glorious effects, I must die to sin 
and live to holiness. 

I am, too, satisfied that there are no churches, nor have been, since 
the apostacy, through which those consecrating can act; for, in all 
these, thus far shalt thou go, and no further-all are hindrances 
instead of aids, because attention is called to their church and 
teaching instead of the Christ and the infallible Word! 

That there are good and pious in all I do not doubt; hence the call, 
Come out of her my people, so that you may have no fellowship 
with her SINS, and that you receive not of her PLAGUES." 

I, as I wrote you before, was raised by Baptists, then was a 
"Campbellite" for over a quarter of a century, and preached the 
doctrine acceptably a good part of the time, then a member of "the 
Church of the Abrahamic Faith" for over fifteen years, preaching its 
doctrines acceptably. I was honest and sincere in both and had "a 
good conscience" in both, until it was better educated. As I never 
preached for money, neither would I now, and as I have a family to 
support and a business to sustain, I cannot do much; still that little I 
intend to do at all times and places practicable. 

Yours, in the blessed hope, . 



R732 : page 2 

YOUR HEAVENLY FATHER KNOWETH. 

"Be not anxious, saying, What shall we eat? or, what shall we 
drink? or, with what shall we be clothed? for after all these things 
do the Gentiles seek; and your Heavenly Father knoweth that ye 
have need of all these things."- Matt. 6:31,32. 

How happy and free from anxious care are the hours of childhood. 
Perfect trust in parental wisdom and love casts out all fear. In the 
absence of pride and the worldly and selfish ambitions which 
develop in later years, childhood makes the best of whatever 
circumstances it may be placed in, and meets every circumstance 
with a determination to find some good and some enjoyment in it. 
How many need to turn back to the simplicity of their earlier years. 

Why should we be anxious about anything when our Heavenly 
Father knoweth our need? To be anxious about our temporal affairs, 
is to be overcharged, and Jesus warns us, saying, "Be not 
overcharged with the cares of this life." But while he would not 
have us anxious or over-charged, he would not have us disregard 



the responsibilities of our maturer years. Our first, principal object 
in life should be to seek the kingdom of heaven, to seek to make 
our calling and election sure by following in our Leader's footsteps. 
This implies the taking of necessary time to search the Scriptures 
and to digest the instruction given. 

In these times, and especially in this country, where business 
competition pushes all to the extent of their physical strength and 
the occupation of every hour, it requires considerable determination 
to draw the line and say to business and the various responsibilities 
pressing upon us, Thus far shalt thou go and no farther. But having 
determined the line of duty, in childlike faith and simplicity we may 
dismiss all anxiety, remembering that our Heavenly Father knoweth 
our needs. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R731 : page 3 



A LITTLE WHILE. 



"He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly: 
Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus."— Rev. 22:20. 

Quickly," beloved! I know thine heart is beating 
With deep emotions to behold my face, 
But for "a little while" wilt thou not spread the tidings 
Of the sweet message of my love and grace? 

Fear not, beloved! mine eye is ever watching: 
Thy tears are numbered in my deep, deep love; 
Thy weary sighs, and all thine heart's deep yearnings 
Are registered by me in heaven above. 

Trust, trust, beloved! I know the world frowns coldly, 
But this should only drive thee nearer me. 
Earth's broken links make heaven's affection stronger, 
The cross will only make the crown more bright for thee. 

Look up, beloved! tread firmly on the billows, 

Thou canst not sink beneath life's troubled sea. 

Look up! then shalt thou learn the needful lesson meekly, 

How my own hand hath planned thy path for thee. 

Rest, rest, beloved! thine head upon my bosom; 
Lean on my arm, and tell thy griefs to me. 
My heart is thine in all the full perfection 
Of sympathy none else could give to thee. 

Weep not, beloved! because thou yet must tarry; 
Wilt thou not serve me heart and hand meawhile? 
Some hearts around thee pine in lonely sorrow; 
Couldst thou not give one kindly look or tender smile? 



Go forth, beloved! life's ministry is earnest, 
Crushed hearts throng round thee, in thy path below; 
Fond hopes once cherished, now by death are blighted; 
Knowest thou not a balm to soothe their woe? 

Yes, Yes, beloved! I read thine heart's glad answer; 
Yes, thou wilt do this work of love for me. 
Only "a little while," and earth's sad scenes of sorrow 
Shall change to glory bright-prepared by me. 

Then, then, beloved! heaven's songs of joy awaking, 
Triumphant "hallelujah" thou shalt raise, 
Then shalt thou gaze upon my face, and ever, 
"Knowing as known," pour forth thine endless praise. 



-Titbury. 



R732 : page 3 

IF THE WHOLE BODY WERE AN EYE. 

1COR. 12:12-27. 

A more apt illustration of the oneness of the true Church [whose 
names are written in heaven] can not be conceived of, than this 
which the Scriptures so frequently present-the human body made 
up of various and dissimilar members, yet unitedly constituting one 
body and each member dependent largely, upon each other 
member. 

What a loss to the human body is even one member. Though its loss 
does not cause the destruction of the body, it does impair its 
usefulness. And so with the body of Christ, the church: each 
member is necessary, and has a duty to perform toward other 
members, as well as blessings to receive by its fellowship with 
them: Hence the Apostle urges that there be "no schism in the 
body"- that is that there be no sectarian division of those who are 
the Lord's body. 

The body when complete and perfected, united with its Head and 
glorified, will be perfect, lacking no member; there will be no sect 
or division among the members. Only such as are fully under 
control of the one spirit, of the Head, will be members then. But not 
so now: Now some of the members are not fully submissive to the 
Head, and mislead by the blinding delusions of Satan, are 
separated, and in that proportion deprived of the blessings and 
privileges of the body, and the body is also deprived of their 
assistance and influence. And as in the human body, if certain 
members are absent, or refuse to fill their office, other members 
will endeavor to compensate to the body for the deficiency, so in 
the body of Christ, those who realize the necessities of the body 
should rejoice in the privilege of over-work for the benefit of all. 
There is danger to those members of the body who are failing to fill 



their office, of their being finally cut off from the body, and others 
more worthy being appointed in their place. Take heed, let no man 
take thy crown. (Rev. 3:11). "Every branch in me that beareth not 
fruit he taketh away." John 15:2. 

In the human body the eye, ear, hand, and foot represent the 
principal serving members. These are all needful and should work 
in harmony, under the control of the one will. The Eye discerns, 
and by it, we mostly judge; yet it frequently benefits by the hand's 
assistance in deciding of heat and cold, hardness and softness, 
roughness and smoothness; though the eye has ability to discern 
those things of itself, it is greatly assisted by the hand. 

The hand is very valuable. It can execute what the eye could not do, 
but what it points out as expedient or necessary, yet without the 
intelligence and guidance of the eye, how slow would be its work, 
and how much of it useless. 

The ear is useful to the body advising it of the harmony or discord 
of the immediate present; yet without the assistance of the Eye, how 
frequently it would mislead and deceive the body; every strange 
sound would fill it with dread when perhaps a blessing was in it, 
while every accustomed sound would pass unheeded though danger 
might be in it. 

The foot is an important member of great value in the service of the 
body. It aids the Eye and Hand and Ear in their service; it carries 
forward and in a measure "runs" the body. True the body could see 
and hear without the feet, and it could make progress slowly, but 
without feet the progress would be much retarded. Yet without the 
eye to guide, the feet would stumble and get the body entire into 
confusion and distress. 

Thus seen, every member is needful aye necessary to the body, yet 
perhaps the eye is the greatest servant, yet by no means independent 
of the other members. Without them its service would be of little 
value. The Eye represents the body; hence, when we address 
another, we do not look toward and address the hand, foot or ear, 
but we look to the Eye as the representative of the whole body. In 
Scripture the Eye is used as the representative of understanding or 
knowledge; and in all the world it is the symbol of intelligence. 

Using these members of the human body and their various degrees 
of usefulness as servants of the body, as an illustration, the Apostle 
urges each member of the Body of Christ, which is the Church, to 
find his true position of usefulness in the body and fill it: that each 
be not jealous or envious of other members, but endeavor to fill 
well whatever position he is best qualified for-that there be no 
schism in the body, but that its various members, each doing the 
part designed by our Lord and Head, shall thus accomplish His 
will-the edifying and building up of the body. 

Evidence is given to every member of this Body— that the Body is 
being led and taught of God; and though the special "gifts" are not 



bestowed upon every member, they do benefit every member i.e., 
"a manifestation of the spirit is given to every man [member] to 
profit withal" [thereby], v. 7. The early church was in danger of 
getting out of the Lord's order-all aspired to be teachers and 
prophets, etc., hence the Apostle reproves them saying: "You 
earnestly desire [covet] the more eminent gifts, and yet a more 
excellent way I point out to you" chap. 12:31-Diaglott. Then the 
more excellent way is described in Chap. 13. This method is, to 
cultivate deep broad Love for each member and for the Head, and 
to wait patiently for the Lord to exalt you to some position in which 
you can best serve the body in love. 

We should bear in mind that no one can constitute himself a gifted 
member any more than by taking thought he can add one cubit to 
his stature, though he may and should stir up and cultivate the gift 
that is in him. All must remember that the position of "greatest" in 
the kingdom, either now, or in glory, is of God's and not our 
appointment. He that would be greatest, let him become the willing 
loving servant of all the other members; willing to lay down his life 
for the sheep. Thus let us seek and "desire spiritual gifts" for the 
greater service and blessing to the body. 

In the true body, God attends to the arrangement of the gifts. He 
places the various servants, and we note the placement and bow to 
his wisdom. "God hath SET [placed or appointed] SOME in the 
church; first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after 
that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities 
of tongues." 1 Cor. 12:28. 

Of Apostles, there are but twelve (Paul being God's appointment to 
Judas' place) the ones specially appointed on and in the foundation. 
(Rev. 21:14.) The Prophets or expounders (see definition in 
Young's An. Concordance) are those who are used of the Lord in 
bringing forth (from the Scriptures) things new and old to the 
Church. This seems to be the EYE quality. Luther appears to have 
represented this eye quality for a short time. Through him as an 
instrumentality the body saw the doctrine of justification by faith. 
He was the expounder of that doctrine in modern times. An 
expounder is a special teacher, or a teacher of teachers— a see-er 
through whom hidden things may be manifested. Dr. Adam Clark is 
considered and treated as an EXPOUNDER by the M.E. Body, a 
prophet, seer, or discerner. Of the prophets of the nominal Church 
see what is written in Isaiah 29:10-14. 

Teachers, as referred to by the Apostle are the instructors, or what 
might be termed the HANDS of the body who carry the bread and 
water and feed the flock— the sheep and the lambs. They may be 
either public or private teachers or instructors of the body and 
others. 

Some of these gifts, such as speaking in unknown tongues, have 
measurably 

R733 : page 3 



passed away because the necessity for them has passed away. The 
Apostle foretold that these gifts will all pass away in time, for when 
the church complete is perfected, and when each member shall 
know even as he is known— perfectly— there will no longer be use 
for these gifts, as a means for edifying the body. 

The foot member of the body may not unreasonably represent some 
who have neither the Eye quality of discerning truth, nor the Hand 
quality of helping cleansing and feeding the church; but who can 
and DO, bear much of the weight and carry the body forward over 
obstacles. May not the foot then be the member possessed of money 
talent which uses it thus? 

If the entire Body could but recognize its oneness and each use the 
gift or gifts possessed, remembering that the gifts bestowed are not 
for itself, but for the BODY, how great would be the strength and 
vigor and present power of the Body. 

It is astonishing how many members desire to be EYES, and how 
few care to be FEET. Some will spend days and years to force 
eyesight: Determined that they must discover some new truth — 
some "new light." Many succeed in forcing something, but is it not 
more likely to be human darkness than divine light obtained in such 
a manner? If you are an EYE member you will see what is due to 
be seen without forcing, though not without studious care. And 
what you see will be so clearly seen, as to enable other members of 
the BODY to test and prove your exposition as harmonious with all 
other parts of God's Word. 

Besides do not those who attempt to exercise some other gift than 
the one they possess, usually neglect the gift they have and thus 
deprive the body of their assistance? Thus it was in Paul's day; he 
"labored," working with his hands, as well as in preaching and 
expounding the Scriptures. Because the other members were not 
exercising their gifts, Paul's love for the body and the truth, led him 
to attempt still greater service to make up for the deficiency of 
others. But who will say that some missed a grand opportunity for 
the exercise of the FOOT member's office or gift, when Paul 
needed to make tents to support himself. And who will say that the 
BODY was not injuriously affected to the extent that those 
members were derelict and unfaithful in the use of their talents? 
How many valuable suggestions and how many expositions of truth 
that church failed to get, because the member for that office was 
otherwise necessarily engaged, who can know? See Acts 18:3; 1 
Thes. 2:8,9; and 1 Cor. 4:12. 

The Apostle shows not only that it is not God's order that every 
member should be an EYE, but he shows the logical inconsistency 
of such a thing in the words at the head of this article-"If the whole 
body were an eye," where would be the other needful qualities? 
Where would be the mutual dependence of one member upon 
another which when properly recognized, cements and unifies all 



the members as one body, in which every member is needful and 
appreciated. 

The question arises: How shall we know the different members? 
We answer, In the same manner that you can decide whether you 
are right-handed or left-handed viz. by the adaptation to the work, 
by the relative ability to perform any particular service. Thus a 
teacher must be "apt to teach," i.e. have the gift or ability of making 
the truth plain, either in public or private; a "prophet," i.e. a 
discerner and EXPOUNDER of truth will be manifested by the 
clearness and force with which he will be enabled to bring forth 
from the Lord's store-house (the Bible) "things new and old," meat 
in due season for the household; and a Foot member will know of 
his talent or gift by the money talent he possesses-the "ability" 
which God giveth. 

In writing to the Romans (Rom. 12:3-8) of these gifts, the same 
apostle urges them also to remember, that "all members have not 
the same office," and that therefore having "gifts differing 
according to the grace that is given unto us," 

R733 : page 4 

each should fill his own appointment in the church, remembering 
that these gifts are of God who hath "set" [appointed] the various 
members in the body. 

In endeavoring to decide what gifts we possess, the Apostle 
suggests modesty saying: "I say.. .to every man that is among you, 
not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to 
think soberly, according as God hath DEALT to every man the 
measure of faith" [literally, capacity for faithfulness]. Ver. 3. 

This sober examination of our abilities (which if we are consecrated 
are all the Lord's) to ascertain how we may be acceptable to the 
Lord and best serve the Body, will affect some who under-value 
their talents, as well as those who think of themselves more highly 
than they ought. Some fear that they have no talents useful and 
needful to the service of the body; and some possessing several 
talents, use and seek to cultivate the lowest of these rather than the 
highest. 

To such, after showing that our ambition and pursuit should be 
love, and that if love for the Head and body is cultivated, such 
seekers will be honored and used because of love and service; the 
Apostle says, "Ardently pursue Love and be emulous of spiritual 
gifts-but rather that you may prophecy." 1 Cor. 14:1. 

In substance then, the duty and privilege of every member of the 
body of Christ is, to soberly, and honestly judge of his abilities; 
neither in pride overrating them, nor in false humility underrating 
them; that he may diligently and faithfully use them, earnestly 
hoping for his own increased efficiency in the service; not from 
self-love and vain glory, but from love of the body and of the Head. 



These thoughts were suggested by two discouraged ones who wrote 
that they were fearful of not being members of the body, because, 
though they could study out and prove by Scripture, the truths 
presented through various writers in the TOWER, they were unable 
to SEE or discern these truths from the Scriptures themselves, 
without having them pointed out. Such should conclude that they 
are not EYE members, but the fact that they are able to discern by 
the aid of the eye, should be considered a proof that such are fellow 
members and of the same body. Let such remember the Apostle's 
suggestion: "If the whole body were an eye" where would be its 
perfection and completeness; and how could the body edify itself in 
love? 

In the early days of the church the connection between the various 
members scattered abroad, was far less complete than now since the 
printing press and mails make it possible for all members to come 
into intimate communication with fellow members of the same 
body. Thus while we keep up our intercourse and communion with 
those members with whom we come personally in contact, giving 
and receiving edification. The whole body, though separated by 
oceans, is now by God's providence enabled to meet at one table, 
and feast together upon the rich promises and blessed hopes which 
our Father's Word supplies; and which, new and old, are meat in 
due season to the entire household. Thus not only do all feed and 
grow in grace and knowledge and love, but many are encouraged 
and strengthened also by the extracts from letters from all parts of 
the world; and each member is bound to each other member in that 
sympathy, oneness and love which is part of the spirit of our Head. 

In this manner the Lord our head has made it profitable and 
expedient for every member to fellowship every other member, and 
to assist in maintaining and perfecting the ONE BODY, because 
each is dependent on the other in some measure. None can sever the 
connection and be separated from it, and neglect its opportunities, 
without serious loss to himself. It has pleased God to edify, and 
instruct, and upbuild the BODY through the instrumentality of each 
other, and the one who thinks to draw supplies of grace otherwise, 
is, whether knowingly or ignorantly opposing God's arrangement, 
for God hath "SET" the members in "the body as it hath pleased 
him," FOR THE EDIFYING of the body of Christ-that thus the 
Bride may make herself ready for the marriage. Rev. 19:7. 

But let us take heed: these gifts are not inalienable. By neglect to 
use them, or by their abuse, they may be lost. If any member fails to 
use his gift, or using it, fails to use it to the Lord's glory and for the 
good of the body, but in pride attempts to use it for self-glory, his 
place can readily be filled by another, by him who places the 
members, exalting another to his place and taking from him that 
which he had failed to properly use. Matt. 25:14-30. 

"If the whole body were an eye"-"If they were all one member, 
where were the body?" 1 Cor. 12:17-19. 



R733 : page 4 

DEVELOPMENT IN THE MILLENNIUM. 

Says a brother in a recent letter: "Your views in regard to the Little 
Flock are plain and readily enough understood. I find, however, 
much difficulty in my researches relative to that other great 
company of mankind— those who may attain to everlasting life and 
perfect manhood. 

1st. Among this class, what will be the status and mode of 
development, if any, of those who have died in babyhood? 

2d. How can they be benefitted by evil, never having tasted evil? 
How can evil have taught them? If God designed that man should 
fall into evil that thereby man might be benefitted, infants and very 
young children who die in infancy and childhood would seem to be 
excluded from this course of schooling. 

3d. Again, will they marry and be given in marriage in this state of 
perfect 

R734 : page 4 

manhood and everlasting life? If so, where will the offspring of 
these perfect men and women find their school of evil and where 
will there be room for the ever increasing population in the 
multiplied centuries to come? Increase would not be diminished by 
death. These and kindred questions perplex me, and I earnestly 
desire light thereon." 

These questions are worthy of consideration and we suggest 
answers to them through the TOWER, because they may have 
presented themselves to other minds. We presume our Brother's 
difficulty is not so much that by his research he cannot find human 
restitution clearly taught in the Bible, but that he finds it difficult to 
harmonize what is clearly taught, with surrounding facts and his 
reasonings therefrom as to the future. 

In dealing with such questions, upon which God's revelation 
contains no direct communication of His plan, it becomes us to 
tread carefully and to avoid dogmatism. Things revealed belong to 
us, but things not revealed to God. Our Father tells us the great 
outlines of his plan, and evidently expects and demands confidence 
and trust on our part that His wisdom is sufficient for every detail. 
He declares to us His intention that all in their graves shall "come 
forth," and he gave us proof of His power to do this greatest of all 
wonders, though he does not explain to us the process or method by 
which being can be restored after dissolution. So also, He declares 
to us His purpose to restore all things— to save that which was lost, 
etc., and leaves a margin of mystery as to the process by which it 
shall all be accomplished. 



Hence without attempting to teach it for doctrine, or in any way 
enforce any particular ideas of how these things shall be, we may 
and do as below, attempt to lay what we know not positively, along 
side of and in harmony with what we do know. Therefore the 
answers below must be considered merely as suggestions. We 
number the answers to correspond with the questions. 

First: The manner of the resuscitation in the case of Jairus' daughter 
(Mark 5:43), may furnish us some idea of the future work which 
Jesus' miracles illustrated or showed forth. This case and that of 
Lazarus (John 11:44), indicate that the revived ones will require 
clothing, nourishment and assistance, and will acquire strength 
gradually. We infer the same of babes. We may not unreasonably 
infer that none of the worldly class will be called from their graves, 
until after the living generations shall have reached a measure of 
elevation morally and physically, and until the earth shall have 
begun to "yield her increase." 

The climate will probably gradually undergo a change also, such as 
will not only be favorable to man's comfort, but favorable as well to 
the usefulness of large tracts of country at present almost or quite 
uninhabitable. How this will be accomplished, we cannot at present 
say. But of one thing we are satisfied— He who is at the helm and 
has thus far ordered matters, is abundantly able to furnish mankind 
a fit and perfect home— an Eden, when the curse is removed. 

Of another thing we are satisfied, viz: That what scientists term the 
"laws of nature" are by no means as regular and fixed as they 
seemed at one time to imagine. As an illustration of this we note the 
fact that the telegraph brought word of severe cold and thousands of 
cattle destroyed in Texas while we at the North were having quite 
moderate weather. And we have known times in summer when the 
thermometer rose higher in Pittsburgh than in New Orleans. These 
things in addition to our trust in the Omnipotent, set at rest fears in 
regard to climate. As regards the helplessness and necessities of 
infants, we should bear in mind that every infant had a mother, and 
the mother as well as the babe will awake. 

Second: We must not forget that there will be evil in the Millennial 
Age. But instead of being active and in control, it will be under 
restraints like its prime mover Satan; it will not be totally blotted 
out, until the end of the Millennium. 

When we read of "the world to come wherein dwelleth 
righteousness", we must no more conclude that there is no evil 
there, than we should deny all righteousness now because this is 
called "the present evil world." As evil now reigns and rules and 
opposes good, so then righteousness will reign and rule and oppose 
all evil. And "He [Christ] must reign till he hath put all enemies 
[evil and every form of opposition] under his feet." (1 Cor. 15:25). 

Mankind is morally and physically impaired, or evil now, and the 
awakening will find them the same, and the object of Jesus in the 
coming age, is to help to life, liberty, and happiness everlasting, 



those whose right to release from death he purchased once for all. 
"The times [years] of restitution" in which evil will gradually be 
yielding, will furnish abundant opportunity to all for contrasting 
evil and imperfection with good and perfection. 

When we say that evil will continue during the Millennium, we 
need to guard the statement by remarking that not active evil, not 
stealing, lying, etc., but evil in the sense of imperfections with 
possibly unholy and imperfect desires which cannot be gratified 
because the penalty would be severe, as well as sure. These desires 
will give place to a proper recognition of holiness and desires in 
harmony therewith, as the being progresses in restitution towards 
perfection. Those in whom holiness of desire shall not rule by the 
close of the Millennium, are doomed with Satan as incorrigible and 
as his messengers, will be destroyed— their second death. 

Third: -They that attain to the spiritual condition and have part in 
the first or chief resurrection, will not marry, as saith the Lord. 
Matt. 22:30. But your question does not relate to these. If Adam 
and Eve were twain yet one before evil and the fall, is it not 
reasonable to suppose that they will be similarly paired when the 
perfect restitution has taken place? 

The command to "be fruitful and multiply" is limited-until the 
earth is "replenished," (literally "filled"-Leeser's Trans, of Gen. 
1:28.); consequently when the earth has been filled, the multiplying 
and fruitfulness should cease according to God's arrangement. If so, 
there would be no perfect children of perfect parentage born at a 
time when there will be no evil wherewith to prove them. 

It is probable that the fruitfulness will decrease as the race 
approaches perfection. It is a noticeable fact that an old, dying tree 
will sometimes put forth more blossoms and attempt more fruit 
which it is unable to bring to maturity, than when it was in its 
prime: So with the human family, early maturity and prolific 
offspring, weak, sickly and dying from the moment of birth, are 
marks of weakness and imperfection which will soon be reversed as 
the restitution work begins and the curse is being removed. See 
Gen. 3:16. 



R735 : page 4 



IT WAS TRUE. 



In October, 1883, the question was asked through the TOWER; 
"Are there any other papers than the TOWER which teach, as it 
does, that Jesus is now present?" And the answer was given: "We 
know of none other which teaches the personal presence of Christ 
Jesus," etc. 

If any reader knows of any journal which up to and at that date 
taught the presence of our Lord, they will confer a favor by sending 



us a copy of such paper with the article containing such teaching 
marked. We feel sure, that the above answer was correct. 



page 4 

Z.W.T. TRACT SOCIETY'S FLORIDA LAND. 

Of the forty plots of land of ten acres each, on Pinellas Peninsula, 
Hillsboro Co., Florida, donated to this Society's funds and offered 
for sale at ten dollars per acre cash; or two years' time to settlers; 
and described in our November Supplement; only the following 
numbers remain undisposed of, viz.: Plots numbered 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 
10, 11,23, 24, 33 and 36. 



R734 : page 5 

THEORIES, TRUE AND FALSE. 

In our January issue we criticized the peculiar and contradictory 
endeavors of an Inconsistent Contemporary Journal to hold on to 
Scriptural words and phrases, while denying the fact that we were 
bought with a price, even the precious blood of Christ. 

Its reply, is not a clear, bold, honest, advocacy of either side of the 
contradictory arguments which we criticised, but after an attempt at 
witticism in suggesting that the TOWER endeavors to fall on it, but 
that the fall of the TOWER would destroy itself, it proceeds to treat 
the criticism as a personal matter. We dealt not with a man, but 
with an inconsistent contemporary journal. Nor did we deal with its 
private affairs, but only with its utterances as a teacher. In this its 
course is childish. Every public teacher is open to public criticism 
and expects it. If this contemporary believed that its theory would 
stand criticism in the light of common sense and Scripture, it should 
have endeavored to show it. If its theory was manifestly 
incongruous and unsupportable, and its reasonings contradictory, it 
should abandon them. It is not manly, not Christ-like, but babyish, 
to seek to hide the justness of criticism by treating the matter as a 
personality. It is the error that we would overthrow, and not a man. 
We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with the darkness of error. 
It is the false theory of our contemporary that we would and do 
oppose. Truth invites criticism; the Author of truth says, "Come let 
us reason together." Fairness, candor, and reason, are the very life 
of truth— the spirit of it. Hence, our contemporary has either missed 
the truth, or the spirit of it, or, as we think, both. 

Our contemporary attempts to draw attention away from its 
inconsistent statements, by suggesting that it is not very particular, 
nor very important which view or theory is correct, saying:- 

"The truth that 'God was in Christ reconciling (atoning) the world 
unto himself,' is not dependent on, but superior to every theory as to 



how the work is done." And, it asks: "If a theory does not reconcile 
or save men, why plead for one?" 

This is an easy and a popular method of disposing of statements 
which will not bear investigation. Our subtle adversary, Satan, is 
ever anxious to delude, and to make use of those once engaged in 
disseminating truth, and is always anxious to be let alone, that he 
might weave his web of sophistry to ensnare the saints, without 
interruption, and without having any one point out its snares. 
Faithfulness to the Master, and to the flock, demands that these 
errors be exposed by those who realize them. 

R735 : page 5 

So error of every kind wants to be let alone. The Scribes and 
Pharisees and devils of Jesus' day, all wanted to be let alone; but 
Jesus and the Apostles would not let them alone. They exposed 
them, and declared it to be part of their mission to bear witness to 
the truth and let the light shine which reproved the darkness of 
error. Every member of the body of Christ should be controlled by 
the same spirit of opposition to error from love of truth and of those 
who are made to stumble by the errors. 

The term theory, as defined by Webster is:— (1st def.) "A doctrine 
or scheme which terminates in speculation." (2d def.) "An 
exposition of the general principles of any science: as, the theory of 
music." 

If by the term theory, the first definition is meant, we fully agree 
with the statement of our contemporary. The fact, the doctrine of 
the atonement, is superior to any mere speculation concerning it. 
But will our contemporary claim that its theory as to how the work 
is done, which is constantly endeavors to elaborate and emphasize, 
and to wrest the Scriptures to prove, is after all merely its 
"speculation"? Speculation is dangerous work on such important 
questions, and would be much better let alone. But we apprehend 
that it regards its theory as of rather more weight than the 
definition- speculation- would imply. 

If the second definition be taken- viz.: "an exposition of the general 
principles," then the statement that, "God was in Christ (or was 
working through Christ) reconciling the world unto himself," is not 
independent of, or superior to the theory. On the contrary it is a part 
of the theory, a part of the "exposition of the general principles" of 
God's plan- that his purposes are all to be wrought out in or 
through Christ; that He is the Alpha and Omega of it, the agent 
through whom Jehovah accomplishes all his will. The works of 
creation, redemption, and reconciliation-restitution, are all 
accomplished by Jehovah working in or through Christ. 

But this is not the whole of the theory, or exposition of God's plan 
which the inspired Word presents. No, the Lord himself states it; 
prophets foretell it; types foreshadow it; eye-witnesses confirm it; 
and inspired Apostles cover every point of objection which reason 



can bring against it. Since then, the Bible theory is an exposition of 
the general principles of God's plan, and since it requires the entire 
Bible testimony to complete this exposition or theory, it follows 
that no fragmentary statement of Scripture, could be, either 
independent of, or superior to the entire exposition-the Bible. And 
the mission of the faithful servant of God is to stand as an index 
finger, helping the household of faith to trace for themselves on the 
sacred page, the great principles as well as the minor details of that 
Divine exposition or theory. 

The idea that it matters not what we believe, if we only live right, 
is, alas, too popular to-day. Yet it is as absurd as to say, It matters 
not whether the Sun rises to-morrow, if we only have sunlight. It is 
as impossible to live up to the light, and opportunities, and 
privileges of our day without a correct understanding of the truth, as 
to have clear sunlight without the Sun. Truly the time has come 
when men will not endure sound doctrine -the Bible doctrine or 
theory-and if reproved and rebuked with patience and doctrine, and 
their theories shown to be absurd and contradictory, in their pride 
they regard the effort as a personal thrust, aimed by ill-will. 

"If a theory does not reconcile or save men," says our contemporary 
(assuming that it does not) "why plead for one?" We answer, 
Because we believe the true Bible theory does reconcile. It pleased 
God by the simple process of preaching the true theory of 
reconciliation through the death of His Son to reconcile and save 
them which believe. 1 Cor. 1:21. What should be preached but the 
truth— the true theory revealed in God's Word? What should be 
believed but the truth-the true theory? What will sanctify wholly, 
but a knowledge of the truth-the true theory? "Sanctify them 
through thy truth; thy word is truth," was Jesus' prayer. 

Our contemporary requests us to answer some questions. Certainly 
and with pleasure we will answer any questions bearing upon our 
faith in the teachings of God's Word, remembering and heeding the 
Apostle's injunction: "Be ready to give an answer to every man that 
asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and 
fear." 1 Pet. 3:15. 

It asks, "If he [Jesus] were only a man when he gave himself a 
ransom, how could it be the Lord that bought us?" For an answer 
we refer it to an article in our last issue-"The Lordship of Christ"- 
written by J.H. Paton. 

Its query, relative to "A corn of wheat," is also answered in our last 
issue in an article under that caption. 

It inquires why we did not refer to and refute its "reference to Acts 
20:28 and John 3:16, which show that God laid down his life for us 
and purchased us with his own blood." 

Ah! now we see what we failed to notice before: It is upon these 
two proof texts that it attempts to hang its new theory 
(speculation?) that the atoning blood was not the blood or life 



which was given for us by the man Christ Jesus, but the blood of 
God! Well, our dullness of comprehension is our only apology. The 
idea seems so absurd and far-fetched that it did not occur to us. We 
failed to get our contemporary's meaning before, but now it speaks 
plainly-the blood of God. We answer with Paul, "To us there is but 
one God -the Father, of whom are all things... and one Lord, Jesus 
Christ, by whom are all things" (1 Cor. 8:6); hence if our 
contemporary's theory is correct- if as it says, "God laid down his 
life for us and purchased us with his own blood," then truly we 
have been much in the dark, for we neither knew that spiritual 
beings have blood, nor did we know that God died ["laid down his 
life"]. If this be true light, we have been kept in ignorance and 
darkness by giving heed to the teachings of the Apostles, who said 
that God hath immortality, hence could not die; who also said that 
flesh and blood could not inherit the spiritual kingdom, and who 
plainly declared that Jesus became a man that he might redeem 
men, that we were "reconciled to God by the death of his Son," who 
"bought us with his own precious blood." And further, If this theory 
(speculation?) be correct, all the saints have hitherto been in 
darkness on this first principle of the doctrine, which our 
contemporary has just discovered (?) at this late hour-the harvest 
of the age. 

But is it possible that these two texts cited by our contemporary can 
overturn the numberless statements and types of Scripture which 
show Jesus as the Lamb slain? Let us examine these proof texts. 
We turn to 1 Jno. 3:16, and all is plain, for since childhood's days 
we have known that italicized words in the Bible indicate that such 
words are not in the original Greek, but have been supplied by the 
translators. As in this text the word God is in italics, it must be 
evident to the merest child, that this one of the mighty proof texts is 
harmless so far as overthrowing the remainder of the Scripture is 
concerned. 

We turn now to the other proof- text Acts 20:28 and find it in 
harmony with all other Scripture-God's theory still stands, 
harmoniously supported by the united testimony of the Bible. Our 
contemporary should possess and use a copy of the EMPHATIC 
DIAGLOTT and it would not fall into such an error as it has here 
done. Not in this text only, but in several others, the translators of 
the common version have been careless, and misled by their 
Trinitarian views, have given an imperfect translation. The Diaglott 
renders this-"To feed the church of God which he acquired by the 
blood of His own:" i.e. His own Son. 

Seeing that these are its proofs and claimed strong supports, will 
our inconsistent Contemporary give up a baseless theory? Will it 
believe that "the man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom 
[corresponding price] for all"? Or will it seek for new props for its 
theory, and cling to it while time and money and readers continue, 
and while there are fresh untried Scriptures to be wrested and 
misapplied? We fear that as in the past, its theory will still struggle 



for existence though every proof-text advanced be taken from under 
it. 

Yes, if answering our contemporary's questions will do good and 
help discover to it the baselessness of any theory that does not 
recognize in the death of Jesus, the ransom-the corresponding price 
for the sins of the Adamic race— we will be very truly glad to 
answer all that it may propound. We have no theory which we fear 
to have overthrown by Scripture. The Bible theory can never 
contradict or deny itself, nor can any overthrow it. 

While we have only love and good will toward all men, we cannot, 
dare not, from loyalty to our King, fellowship or bid God speed to, 
or in any way encourage or approve, any person or journal which 
denies that we were "reconciled to God by the death of His Son," 
"who gave himself a corresponding price [ransom] for all." See 2 
John 10,11. 



R736 : page 5 

THE CAUSE AND RESULT. 

We long since pointed out that when men would begin to think 
critically upon the dogmas of so-called Orthodoxy, they would not 
only throw away the errors, but the truths as well. As an illustration 
take the following extract from the sermon of the Rev. R. H. 
Newton of New York, preached Sunday, Jan. 25th, 1885: 

"What an utterly baffling arithmetical puzzle is the conventional 
dogma of the trinity; what a moral monstrosity is the God of 
Calvinism; how fiendishly wicked the decrees which predestinate a 
mass of men to unescapable damnation; how thoroughly 
commercial is the traditional doctrine of the atonement; how 
frightfully beyond the dream of insanity is the vision of the 
orthodox hell; how thoroughly unethical is the ordinary statement 
of justification by faith. These are the dogmas against which the 
sharp arrows of a merciless wit are leveled fair and straight. They 
deserve every blow they receive. As formulas of faith their best 
service now to mankind, is to gently die, and so leave room for a 
noble growth of thought around the heart of those old and sacred 
faiths." 

Here, as usual, doctrines unsupported by Scripture, are spread side 
by side with those which are so supported, and the bad odor and 
inconsistency of the false, attaches itself to the true, so that the 
whole becomes nauseous and is rejected together. For instance, the 
doctrine of the TRINITY is supported by only one text (part of 1 
John 5:7,8) which, as is known by all intelligent teachers, is an 
interpolation found in no manuscript written before the tenth 
century, and evidently thrust in there, because that doctrine had no 
Scriptural basis. 



"The vision of the orthodox hell" cannot be found in the Bible at 
all, and is only found in catechisms and hymn-books; and the only 
statements of the Bible which might be construed as favoring such 
a theory, are either found in the symbolisms not generally 
understood, or else are occasioned by the erroneous construction 
placed upon the Greek words hades and gehenna, by popular 
theology— self-styled "Orthodoxy." On 

R736 : page 6 

the other hand, the doctrine of the atonement by and as a result of 
the sacrifice of Jesus, in which he "bought us with his own precious 
blood," is taught either directly, typically, or symbolically by every 
book in the Bible. And all that could possibly be repulsive in the 
Bible teaching of a ransom for sin, is the result of a failure to 
apprehend the real penalty of sin and what Jesus gave on our 
behalf. On these subjects the Scriptures wisely appeal only to 
believers. The philosophy of the plan, and its wisdom and 
reasonableness, is not such as will be appreciated by the worldly 
wise— the reasons as yet are made clear only to the consecrated 
children of God. 

The teacher above quoted, wisely [from his standpoint] throws out 
the doctrine of "justification by faith." Though this like the 
atonement is interwoven with every part of Scripture, it would be 
absurd to believe in justification by faith if the ransom is denied. 
The two doctrines are really one, because there could be no 
justification by faith in a ransom if there were no ransom; there 
could be no righteousness of Christ imputed to us, if our sins could 
not be and were not imputed to him. We could not bear and be 
clothed in his righteousness, if he could not bear our sins in his own 
body on the tree. 

The same speaker further said in the same discourse:— 

"Let us look at another dogma of the Churches-original sin. This is 
a very charming subject to consider. Through the eating of the 
forbidden fruit our first parents became dead in sin and wholly 
defiled in all the faculties and parts of soul and body. They being 
the root of all mankind, the guilt of this sin was imputed and that 
same death in sin conveyed to all their posterity. This all looks like 
a nightmare dream to us in the light of our day. It lacks any 
historical ground. The vista of history through which our fathers 
looked back to an original Adam, who, 6,000 years ago, in his 
lovely eastern garden, ate an apple which not only disagreed with 
him so seriously, but continued to disagree fatally with all his 
innumerable posterity, has forever faded out in a vastly larger and 
grander vision of the past. We see now quite clearly, that in this 
traditional vision we were mistaking a poem for a fact. The God 
whose grandeur SCIENCE REVEALS to us, surely never thus 
started the human race on its career." 



Here the lecturer wanders still further, and tells us in so many 
words that he does not believe in the God which the Bible reveals, 
but in, "The God whose grandeur SCIENCE REVEALS TO US." 

We will not pause to see or inquire just what grandeur Mr. 
Newton's new scientific God has; but we cannot forget the wide 
differences in the teachings of so-called scientists on the subject; 
some of the most advanced claiming that Nature is the intelligent 
God which has been and is, by a system of "evolution" and "a 
survival of the fittest," creating all things. 

This teacher tells of a "nightmare dream" of a fall through Adam. 
Here, too, let us note the cause which turns the clear and emphatic 
statement of God's Word, repeated over and over by prophets and 
apostles as well as by Jesus, (Jer. 31:29; Ezek. 18:2; Rom. 5:17-19; 
Acts 3:21; Mat. 19:11;) into "a nightmare dream" in the scientific 
"light of our day," in the minds of some thinkers whose only 
dishonesty seems to be in yet calling themselves Christians. Is the 
cause not found in the expression used above- "dead in sin"? The 
general teaching of so-called orthodoxy has long been, that the 
wages of sin is DEATH IN SIN, a theory advanced in support of 
the doctrine that man's nature is undying, hence that when God said 
to man "Dying thou shalt die," and "The wages of sin is death," he 
did not mean really extinction of being, or ceasing to live. Their 
theory of a never-ending torture in a place called hell, implied the 
never-ending existence of the wicked, hence to hold to the doctrine 
of everlasting torture, the meaning of the word hades [grave] must 
be misrepresented; and not only so, but the original penalty, 
DEATH —the loss of existence— ceasing to be— was represented to 
mean, ceasing to be GOOD; endless existence in torture, "dead in 
sin," etc. 

Had the truth been held, viz., that man was a perfect being, put into 
a perfect garden on trial, in order that through his trial and fall not 
only God's Justice, Love, Power, and Wisdom should be 
manifested, but that mankind should ultimately be benefitted by the 
experience gained, and prepared the better to everlastingly choose 
good and shun evil, and to love and honor his Creator, then this 
Bible teaching of death (extinction) through one man's sin, and 
revival or restitution by one man's sacrifice, would not have 
appeared as "a nightmare dream"-in the light of truth. It is the false 
light which the Church has willingly received and cherished, that 
now blinds and staggers so many. Their judgment of Scripture is 
warped by the traditions of men which they have imbibed almost 
unconsciously, and held so long, because they neglected the true 
standard and tested themselves by their own standards— each 
deciding on the truth of any matter according to the "Standards" of 
his own sect, to the neglect of the only true standard of THE 
CHURCH-the Bible. 

Bear well in mind; "think it not strange"; the conclusions now 
reached by the above-quoted speaker, are but the legitimate fruit of 
the "traditions of the elders," when brought in contact with the light 



of to-day-reason unguided by the Divine Revelation. Only in two 
ways can general infidelity (such as the above) be obviated; either 
ignorance and bigotry must be cultivated and fostered, or the Bible 
must be studied in the light of itself, and the traditions of men 
rejected, totally. The last is the right way, but will not be followed. 
The former will not succeed, for knowledge is being increased and 
the masses will not long remain in ignorance; hence losing their 
bondage to tradition, and being without a true knowledge of the 
Bible, the mass of the nominal Church is hastening into infidelity, 
under the leading of false teachers who still cling to the name 
Christian, though they have rejected the doctrines of Christ. 



R736 : page 6 

EVOLUTION AND THE BRAIN AGE. 

An exchange giving a report of a recent lecture on Phrenology, 
says of it: "He showed how man had first been in a stage of 
existence in which his animal nature predominated, and the almost 
purely physical ruled him; then he slowly grew from one state to 
another until now, when the average man has attained to a condition 
in which it might be said, he is coming under the rule of the brain. 
Hence this age may be regarded and designated as the Brain Age. 
Brain pushes the great enterprises of the day. Brain takes the reigns 
of government; and the elements of the earth, air and water, are 
being brought under subjection. Man is putting his hand on all 
physical forces, and slowly but surely attaining such power over the 
domain of nature as gives evidence that ultimately he may exclaim, 
in the language of Alexander Selkirk, 'I am monarch of all I 
survey.'" 

The above is in perfect harmony with the latest discoveries of so- 
called scientific thought on the subject. Notably, within the past 
twenty years the theory of Evolution has been making rapid 
progress among all classes of thinking people, until now it is 
considered a mark of ignorance and "old fogyism" to think 
otherwise. 

Hence, were it not that we see a necessity for it we should not 
trouble to contradict or refute this, more than many other claims, 
"babblings and oppositions of science, falsely so called." 1 Tim. 
6:20. 

R737 : page 6 

The danger which we see is this: The suggestion seems to some 
minds reasonable and consistent, and in this day many seem 
inclined to reject the Bible, or place it on a level with heathen 
mythologies. The tendency is first to neglect and ignore its 
teachings on this subject; secondly, to claim a harmony between 
Scripture and the Evolution theory; and finally, either to so wrest 
and twist the Scriptures to make them conform to what is termed 



scientific knowledge, and thereby plant and water seeds of error, or 
else to the discarding of the whole or large portions of the Bible 
entirely as a parcel of "old wives' fables," as a New York Methodist 
minister of the gospel recently did. Perhaps now he should be 
known as a minister against the gospel; but the words "gospel," 
"minister," and "Christian," have become very popular, and even 
those who deny and belittle the Saviour, the ransom for sin which 
he gave, and the forgiveness of sin which in consequence he offers, 
would think it very unkind for any to say that they are not 
Christians, but ministers against the gospel of God's Word. 

The fact that at first glance a theory appears "reasonable" should 
not lead us hastily to accept it and attempt to twist the Bible into 
harmony with it. In a thousand ways we have proved the Bible, and 
know beyond peradventure that it contains a superhuman wisdom 
which makes its statements unerring. We should remember too, that 
while scientific research is to be commended, and its suggestions 
considered, yet its conclusions are by no means infallible. And what 
wonder that it has proven its own theories false a thousand times 
when we remember that the true scientist is a student attempting 
under many unfavorable circumstances and struggling against 
almost insurmountable difficulties to learn from the great book of 
Nature the history of man and his home. 

We would not then oppose or hinder scientific investigation, but in 
hearing the suggestions from these students of the book of nature, 
let us carefully compare their deductions, which so often have 
proved in part, or wholly erroneous, with our book of Divine 
Revelation— the Bible. Let us prove or disprove the suggestions of 
scientists by "the law and the testimony; if they speak not according 
to this word, it is because there is no light in them" (Isa. 8:20). An 
accurate knowledge of the teachings of both books will be 
harmonious, but until then God's revelation must to his children 
take precedence to and be the standard by which the supposed 
findings of fallible fellow men shall be judged. 

But while holding to this principle, let us see whether there be not 
some other reasonable solution of the increased knowledge and 
skill and power of man than the theory of Evolution, that originally 
developed from a very low order of being man has now reached the 
Brain Age. 

Perhaps after all we shall find that the inventions, conveniences, the 
general education and wider diffusion and increase of knowledge is 
not attributable to a greater brain capacity, but to more favorable 
circumstances for its use. That the brain capacity to-day is greater 
than in bygone ages we deny, while we freely admit, that owing to 
favorable circumstances, the use of what brain capacity men have 
to-day is more general than at any former period, and hence makes 
a much larger showing. 

Let us see: In the study of painting and sculpture do not the students 
of this "Brain Age" go back to the great masters of the past? Do 



they not thereby acknowledge a brain power and originality of 
design as well as a skill in working out their clear designs? Does 
not the present "Brain Age" draw largely upon the original designs 
of past ages for its architecture? Do not the orators and logicians of 
this "Brain Age" study and copy the methods and syllogisms of 
Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes and others of the past? Might not 
many of the public speakers of to-day well covet the tongue of a 
Mark Anthony or an Apollos, and much more the wonderful 
reasoning power of the Apostle Paul? 

To go still farther back, while we might well refer to the rhetorical 
powers of several of the prophets and to the sublime poetic 
paintings interspersed throughout the Psalms, we refer these "Brain- 
Age" philosophers to the wisdom and logic, no less than the fine 
moral sensibilities, of Job and his comforters. 

And what shall we say of Moses? "Learned in all the wisdom of the 
Egyptians" (Acts 7:22). The laws given through him have been the 
foundation for the laws of all civilized nations, and are still 
recognized. And it would be well for this "Brain Age" if the laws 
were more copied and observed to-day. Such, for instance, as the 
law of restitution in the Jubilee year. (See Lev. 25:23-41.) 

The exhuming of ancient buried cities shows a knowledge of the 
arts and sciences surprising to some of the philosophers of this so- 
called "Brain Age." And the ancient methods of embalming and of 
making elastic glass and Damascus steel are among the 
achievements of the remote past which the brain of the present age, 
with all its advantages is unable to comprehend and duplicate. 

Going back four thousand years to about Abraham's time, we find 
in the Great Pyramid of Egypt an object of wonder and amazement 
to the most learned scientists of to-day. Its construction is in exact 
accord with the most advanced attainments of this "Brain Age" in 
the sciences of mathematics and astronomy. It teaches positively 
what could only be approximated by the use of modern instruments. 
So striking and clear are its teachings that some of the foremost 
astronomers of the world have unhesitatingly pronounced it to be of 
Divine origin. 

And even if our Brain Age Evolutionists should admit that it is of 
Divine arrangement, and that its wisdom is superhuman, still they 
must admit that it is of human construction. And the fact that in that 
remote day any set of men had the mental capacity to work 

R737 : page 7 

out such a Divine arrangement as very few men to-day would be 
capable of doing with a model before them, and with all modern 
scientific appliances at hand, proves that our "Brain Age" develops 
more self-conceit than circumstances and facts warrant. 

If, then, we have proven that the mental capacity of to-day is not 
greater than in past ages, but probably less, how shall we account 
for the increase of general knowledge, modern inventions, etc.? We 



trust we shall be able to show this reasonably and in harmony with 
Scripture. 

The inventions and contrivances which are now proving so 
convenient and advantageous to mankind, and which the lecturer 
thought a proof that this is the Brain Age, are really very modern- 
nearly all within a century; and the most important are those of the 
last threescore years; among others the application of steam and 
electricity, in telegraphy, steam railroading, and the application of 
these principles to mechanics. If, then, these be evidences of 
increased brain power, the Brain Age must be only beginning, and 
the logical deduction would be that another century would witness 
every form of miracle as an every-day occurrence; and at the same 
ratio of increase where will it eventuate? 

But let us see: Are all men inventors? How few there are whose 
inventions are really useful and practical compared with the number 
who use an invention when put into their hand! Nor do we speak 
disparagingly of that very useful and highly-esteemed class of 
public servants, when we say that the smaller number of them are 
men of great brains. Some of the most brainy men in the world, and 
the deepest reasoners, are not mechanical inventors. And some 
inventors are so intellectually sluggish that you wonder how they 
ever stumbled into the discoveries they made. The great principles 
which many men in many years work out and improve upon time 
and again, were generally discovered by the merest accident, 
unsought. 

From a human standpoint we can account for modern inventions 
thus: The invention of printing, in A.D. 1440, may be considered 
the starting point. With the printing of books came records of the 
thoughts and discoveries of thinkers, which without this invention 
would never have been known to their successors on life's pathway. 
With books came a more general education, and finally common 
schools. Schools and colleges do not increase mental capacity, but 
they do make mental exercise more general. As knowledge became 
more general and books more common, the generation possessing 
these had a decided advantage over previous generations, not only 
in that there were now a thousand thinkers to one, but also in that 
this generation has, through books, the experience of yesterday and 
the past in addition to their own. 

Education and the laudable ambition which accompanies it, 
enterprise and a desire to achieve distinction and wealth, abetted by 
the record and descriptions of invention in the daily press, has 
stimulated and brightened man's perceptive qualities, and put each 
upon the alert to discover, if possible, some simple or useful 
method or agency for the convenience of society. Hence we suggest 
that modern inventions, looked at from a purely human standpoint, 
teaches not an increase of brain capacity, but a sharpened 
PERCEPTION from natural causes. 



But now we come to the Scriptures to see what they teach on the 
subject; for while we believe as suggested above, that invention and 
the increase of knowledge, etc., among men are the results of 
natural causes, yet we realize that these natural causes are all 
realized by Jehovah, and are permitted or hindered for a time, by 
the overruling providence of God, whereby he "worketh all things 
after the counsel of his own will." Eph. 1:11. 

According to God's plan, as revealed in his Word, he purposed to 
permit sin and misery to misrule and oppress the 

R738 : page 7 

world for six thousand years, and then in the seventh millennium to 
restore all things, and to extirpate, destroy, evil and its 
consequences by Jesus Christ, whom he hath afore ordained to do 
this work. Hence, as the six thousand years of the reign of evil 
began to draw to a close, God has permitted circumstances to favor 
discoveries, in the study both of his book of revelation and his book 
of nature, as well as in the preparation of mechanical and chemical 
appliances useful to the blessing and uplifting of mankind during 
the Millennial Age. That this was God's plan, approved as the 
counsel of his will, is clearly indicated by the prophetic statement: 
"O Daniel, shut up the words and seal the book, even to the time of 
the end: [then] many shall run to and fro, and knowledge [not 
capacity] shall be increased," "and none of the wicked shall 
understand [God's plan, etc.], but the wise shall understand," "and 
there shall be a time of trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation, even to that same time." Dan. 12:1,4,10. 

To some it may seem strange that God did not so arrange that the 
present inventions and blessings should sooner come to man to 
alleviate the curse. But God's plan has been to give mankind a full 
appreciation of the curse, that when the blessing shall come upon 
all, they may have forever decided upon the evil and 
unprofitableness of sin. Furthermore, God foresaw and has foretold 
what the world does not yet realize, viz., that God's choicest 
blessings would lead to and be productive of greater evils if 
bestowed upon those who are depraved, and whose hearts are not in 
accord with the righteous laws of the universe. Ultimately it shall 
be seen; that God's present permission of increased blessings is a 
practical lesson upon this subject, which may serve as an example 
of this principle for all eternity -to angels as well as restored man. 

How this can be we may suggest: First, So long as mankind is in his 
present fallen or depraved condition, without stringent laws and 
penalties and a government strong enough to enforce them, the 
selfish propensity must hold more or less sway over all. And with 
the varying capacities considered, it is impossible but that the result 
of the invention of labor-saving machinery must (after the first 
flurry occasioned by the manufacturing of machines) tend to make 
the rich richer and the poor poorer. The tendency is toward 
monopoly and self-aggrandizement, which places the advantage 



directly in the hands of those whose capacity and natural advantage 
is most favorable. 

Secondly: If it were possible to legislate so as to divide the present 
and daily increase of wealth evenly among all classes, which is not 
possible, still without human perfection or a supernatural 
government to regulate man's affairs, the results would be more 
injurious than the present condition. If the advantages of labor- 
saving machinery and all modern appliances were evenly divided, 
the result would, ere long, be a great decrease of the hours of labor 
and a great increase of leisure. Idleness is a most injurious thing to 
fallen beings. Had it not been for the necessity of labor and sweat of 
face, the deterioration of our race would have been much more 
rapid than it has been. Idleness is the mother of vice; and mental, 
moral, and physical degradation would ensue. 

Hence the wisdom and goodness of God in withholding these 
blessings until in his plan it was due time for their introduction as a 
preparation for the reign of blessing. Under the control of the 
supernatural government of the kingdom of God, not only shall the 
blessings be equitably divided among men, but when the leisure 
shall be so ordered and directed by the same supernatural 
government, that its results shall produce virtue and tend upward 
toward perfection, moral and physical. 

The present increase of inventions and other blessings of increasing 
knowledge, are permitted in this "day of preparation" to come about 
in so natural a way that men flatter themselves that it is because this 
is the "Brain Age;" but it will be permitted in great measure to work 
itself out, in a manner very much to the disappointment no doubt, of 
these wise philosophers. It is the very increase of these blessings 
that is already beginning to bring upon the world the time of 
trouble, which shall be such as never has been since there was a 
nation. 

The prophet Daniel, as quoted above, very properly links together 
the increase of knowledge and the time of trouble— the knowledge 
causes the trouble, as shown above, because of the depravity of the 
race. 

The blessing of KNOWLEDGE INCREASED, has not only given 
the world wonderful labor-saving machinery and conveniences, but 
it has led also to an increase of medical skill whereby thousands of 
lives are prolonged, and it has so enlightened mankind that human 
butchery, War, is becoming less popular, and thus thousands of 
lives are prolonged to still further multiply the race which is 
increasing more rapidly to-day, perhaps, than at any other period of 
history. Thus, while mankind is multiplying rapidly, the necessities 
for his labor are not increasing correspondingly, but diminishing. 
And the "Brain Age" philosophers have a problem before them to 
provide for the employment and sustenance of so large a class 
whose services (under present arrangements) can be dispensed 



with, which ultimately they must admit is beyond their brain 
capacity. 

Selfishness will continue to control the wealthy who hold the power 
and advantage, and will blind them to common sense as well as to 
justice, while SELF-PRESERVATION and an increased 
knowledge of their rights, will nerve some men and inflame others, 
and the result of the BLESSINGS will, for a time, prove to be 
terrible— a time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation. 
And this, because man in a depraved condition cannot properly use 
these blessings unguided. The "time of trouble" shall cease in due 
time, when he who spake to the raging Sea of Galilee shall likewise 
with authority command the raging sea of human passion, saying, 
"Peace be still!" The result shall be the same when this Prince of 
Peace shall "stand up" in authority- there shall be "a great calm." 
Then the raging and clashing elements shall recognize the authority 
of "Jehovah's Anointed," "the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, 
and all flesh shall see it together," and in him "shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." 

Then men will see that what they attributed to Evolution, natural 
development and the smartness of the "Brain Age," was instead, the 
flashings of Jehovah's lightnings (Psa. 77:18) in "the day of his 
preparation" for the blessing of mankind, and shall praise him Lord 
of all, exclaiming, "O the depth of the riches both of the knowledge 
and wisdom of God. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his 
ways past finding out. But as yet only the saints can see, and only 
the wise in heavenly wisdom shall understand this, for "the secret 
of the Lord is with them that fear him." "He will show them his 
covenant." (Psa. 25:14.) Thanks be to God, that while general 
knowledge has been increased, he has also ordered that his children 
need "not be unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord" and in the 
appreciation of his plans. And by this appreciation of his word and 
plans we are enabled to discern and withstand the vain philosophy 
and science, falsely so called, which contradicts the Word of God. 



R738 : page 7 

THINK IT NOT STRANGE. 

"Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to 
try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: But 
rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that 
when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with 
exceeding joy." 1 Pet. 4:12,13. 

Notwithstanding this exhortation very many of the beloved of the 
Lord do think it "strange" when the fiery trials strike them, 
doubtless because they do not appreciate the Lord's design. Let us 
look at it together. 



While we understand from Scripture that present evil in general, 
shall ultimately be over-ruled of God and made to minister good, 
yet we are far from thinking that "all's for the best," or that every 
thing which occurs in the world was foreordained of God and 
brought about by Him. No we must remember that since the "fall," 
the Eden paradise with its perfection and blessings suited to the 
perfect man have been done away, and the sin-cursed race has been 
condemned to the as yet unfinished and imperfect earth [The garden 
of Eden was a little spot finished beforehand, in order to provide a 
perfect trial to the perfect man Adam]. By the time man has been 
perfectly restored to manhood as represented in Adam, his home, 
the earth also shall have reached its perfection as represented in 
Eden. Meanwhile, the turbulence of nature, cyclones, earthquakes, 
etc., incident to the unfinished work, continue, and constitute part 
of the evil to which the entire race became subject through the sin 
of their representative Adam, and from which it has been redeemed 
and will shortly be released by their second representative, Jesus. 

But, in all this confusion of nature, Scripture teaches us that one 
class is under special supervision and to these nothing out of God's 
order could happen. This is the consecrated class, the members of 
the Anointed body-Christ. We know that all things work together 
for good to them that love God, who are the called according to His 
purpose." Rom. 8:28. 

R738 : page 8 

As it was with the nation of Israel in type, so it is with the Royal 
Priesthood, the holy nation of believers now, and so it shall be with 
the world in the coming age. Israel had as many captivities 

R739 : page 8 

and famines, etc., probably as other nations, but none of them were 
by accident; each was a chastisement, and they are so explained in 
Scripture. So now, many are the scourgings which the spiritual sons 
of God receive in order that they may not be condemned with the 
world. (1 Cor. 11:32.) And though no chastisement for the time 
seemeth joyous but grievous, nevertheless God knows and we are 
learning the peaceable FRUITS of righteousness which this pruning 
produces in those who are rightly exercised thereby. 

While it should be a cause of sorrow to us, that we need special 
chastisement to recall us to duty, yet we must remember that it is an 
evidence that we are still reckoned of God as among His sons, and 
such chastisements then are evidences of His love and his desire to 
have us make our calling and election sure, to the grand prize to run 
for which we consecrated. In view of this, if you receive such 
chastisements and correction, think it not STRANGE. 

But while such trials should not be thought strange the apostle Peter 
in the above statement evidently meant more than this, as expressed 
in the words "But rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings. " Christ did not suffer because of disloyalty or failure to 



keep his covenant. He did not suffer because of spiritual drowsiness 
and conformity to the world. He did not suffer because of self-will 
leading him to ignore the Father's will and word; nor because of a 
plan of his own which must needs be dashed to pieces. No, the 
sufferings of Christ were from no such causes. Hence to the extent 
that we share His sufferings, it must be not as chastisement for evil, 
nor in the renouncing of evil, but a suffering wrongfully- 
undeservedly. His was a suffering for well doing and for the truths' 
sake, and to be sharers or partakers of this suffering, on account of 
which we may rejoice and anticipate coming glory, we must take 
heed to the cause of the suffering. We only deceive ourselves if we 
count sufferings for sin as part of the sufferings for Christ, and on 
that account expect the glory to be revealed. 

We are well aware that this is "a hard saying", and that many will 
not let themselves believe it. The terms "sufferings of Christ" and 
"sacrifice" have long been misused. Many reckon themselves as 
sacrificers with Christ, because they have abandoned some practice 
which they considered evil, such as profanity, the use of stimulants 
or jewelry, or extravagant dressing, or dancing, etc., etc. If these 
things are wrong, you never had a right to them, hence it could not 
be a "sacrifice" with Christ to discontinue anything you believe to 
be wrong in and of itself. 

What then were the sufferings of Christ which we may endure that 
are of the same kind? 

The word Christ signifies anointed, and hence those sufferings 
could not have commenced with Jesus, before his anointing of the 
spirit after John had immersed him in the water, in emblem of his 
consecration to death. So too with us; none of us could share in the 
sufferings of the anointed, unless we had first consecrated and 
become members of the anointed (ecclesia) company. 

The sacrifice and sufferings of Christ Jesus, included every item of 
mental and physical pain and self-denial experienced as a RESULT 
of his consecration, until it was complete in death. It therefore 
included the denial of all laudable and proper human ambitions 
which Jesus as a perfect man must have experienced more than 
imperfect men, as well as the reproach which he bore from his 
fellow-men for the sake of truth, especially from the teachers of the 
nominal church of his day. It included also his weariness and 
exhaustion caused not only by preaching, but through giving off his 
own vital energy for the good of others in healing the sick, etc. See 
Mark 5:30. 

So too are the sufferings of Christ which we may well rejoice to 
have shared, when the time comes that "the glory shall be 
revealed." They start from the hour of consecration, and if faithful, 
end only in death. With us as with our Head and pattern, the 
sacrifice consists in denying ourselves things which are lawful and 
proper, in our endeavors to honor God, promote truth and do good 
in any way to any in need, especially to them of the household of 



faith. And apparently most of the "body like their 'Head'" will spend 
more of their sacrificed time and substance in supplying spiritual 
than physical wants of men, though the latter should not be 
neglected as we "have opportunity." 

You were ambitious in the exercise of legitimate business talent, 
but your consecration demanded time and thought for the careful 
study of God's word that you might know Him and His will 
concerning you, and that you might "communicate" the same to 
others. Your business ambition had to be curbed; your time and 
talent were no longer yours, but consecrated, hence though business 
was still needful it became secondary, and henceforth your 
"Father's business" was first and your former ambitions restricted to 
necessity and to the promotion of the "Father's business." 

You had taken great pleasure in making home elegant, in dressing 
self and family in elegance, and you said it was right because you 
had gotten the money righteously, and you felt sure that God loved 
beautiful things, and that His heavenly home and family are 
elegant; but now with time and money and all consecrated, you 
realize something of the pleasure of sacrificing with Christ by 
denying yourself such luxuries, and restricting your outlay of the 
Lord's time and money to the providing of things needful and 
decent. 

You were fond of company and passed many a pleasant, social hour 
in "Music," "Social chat," "Harmless dancing" and "Innocent 
amusements and games. " Now, while not condemning these 
innocent recreations in the world, your covenant of sacrifice with 
Christ demands that your time, money and influence formerly thus 
used, except so much as may come within the range of necessities 
or emergencies, shall be faithfully accounted for to God, your rights 
and privileges in these things sacrificed, and the time, money, and 
influence used according to your consecration, in God's service. 

You used to take a lively interest in "Politics," "The Temperance 
question," "The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Association," 
"The National Peace Congress Society," "The Prison Reform 
Association," "Labor Unions," etc., etc. Many an hour, many a 
dollar, and the full weight of your influence, you gave to such 
objects, and still, believe it well spent in an endeavor to do good. 
But now you find that your consecration compels a different course, 
and these which were your own will and plans for doing good must 
be sacrificed to God's plans, and you must follow the Leader. 

As you mark carefully His course, you perceive that he, though in 
sympathy with every moral reform, used his time and influence 
wholly in preaching the glad tidings. And as you came more fully 
to appreciate the Lord's plan, you realized that the moral reforms 
could and would be carried forward by the kind and benevolent of 
this world, just as well without you, but could never reach 
perfection until God's kingdom shall obtain control. Then you 
realized as you had not done at first, the necessity of the work 



which you should be engaged in: that the preaching of the "good- 
tidings of good" things coming, was God's method of developing 
you as well as others for a share in that great and successful Moral 
Reform which shall obtain throughout the world when the rightful 
King and his Bride are enthroned in glory and power. 

You not only used to love to do generously, "giving to everything" 
and "speaking favorably of all," but you also appreciated highly the 
good will and favor of all toward you. This showed a good spirit 
and a broad heart, and none can help admiring such. And such 
admiration is very sweet always. We may know that the perfect 
man Jesus would have enjoyed doing just so. But under his 
covenant of sacrifice he must and did deny himself this enjoyment. 
He must and did rebuke sin, error and hypocrisy and thus forfeited 
(sacrificed) the good opinion and admiration of the nominal Church 
of his day. Instead of quietly letting the Scribes and Pharisees 
alone, he must and did sacrifice his inclination for peace in order to 
advance the TRUTH, honor God, and bless the people. So you 
found it: You could no longer give to everything; by your covenant 
and sacrifice with Christ, you had already given ALL YOU HAD- 
to God, and now you are merely God's agent or steward and you 
can give nothing now, without consulting his directions, and 
ascertaining whether it will go to advance truth or error. You no 
longer have an option or choice, and of course some who once 
thought you "whole-hearted and generous" will now consider you 
"narrow-minded and bigoted." 

The same will apply to your treatment of doctrinal matters. Once 
you carelessly and ignorantly, though benevolently, supposed that 
all denominations of Christians believed alike, and took so many 
different routes to heaven appointed by God, so that each person 
might have a choice of form of worship, and your friends called 
you a broad-minded Christian. But after your consecration had led 
you to a study of God's plans in his Word you perceived your 
mistake. You had never in the full sense been a Christian before, 
and now you find that there are many doctrines of all 
denominations contrary to God's revealed purpose. You thus began 
to be what the world calls "narrow-minded," and were obliged to 
oppose certain systems as well as doctrines, and finally with a 
further search of your Father's plans you found that the systems 
calling themselves "Churches" and laying down rules and doctrines 
for faith and practice are ALL of them mere human arrangements 
and their doctrines self-arranged and self-binding, a mixture of truth 
and falsehood blinding and confusing both to saint and sinner. 
When you found that the Church mentioned by Jesus and his 
apostles was not one of these man-made systems nor 

R740 : page 8 

yet all of them together, but that the class who, having consecrated 
to God, were accepted through the Redeemer and had their names 
written in heaven, then came a fresh trial upon you. Would you or 



would you not, sacrifice your honor and standing and "good name" 
and "broad-minded" reputation, for the TRUTH? 

That was one of the severest of all your SUFFERINGS, yet you 
said with the Master: "Father, glorify thy name"; and as you saw 
the counterpart of this in the Lord's sacrifice, you heard him say: "It 
is sufficient that the servant should be as his Lord." It has occurred 
to you as I forewarned you: When they shall say all manner of evil 
against you falsely [and often ignorantly] for my sake, rejoice and 
be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven. In your 
rejoicing now you no longer think "strange" of the fiery trials that 
encompass you. Hereafter let us more and more rejoice in such 
sufferings-rejoicing that we are counted WORTHY to suffer for 
Christ's name. 



R740 : page 8 



THE SAME NIGHT." 



We again remind you that Sunday evening, March 29, will this 
year be the anniversary of the Lord's Supper-"The same night on 
which he was betrayed." (See last issue.) We anticipate a blessed 
season of communion on the part of all the dear members of the 
Body of Christ then. 

So many as can be present at the Allegheny meeting will be warmly 
welcomed and entertained as best we may be able. Come on the 
28th inst. to the TOWER office. Such as will require lodgings 
please send word beforehand that arrangements may be perfected. 


