From Our Readers
Broken Heart
The 16-year-old daughter of a woman I work with was very upset after breaking up with her boyfriend of 1 1/2 years. She would not talk to her girlfriends, and couldn’t even attend school for two weeks. I took the January 22, 1988, Awake! to her mother, pointing out the article “How Can I Get Over a Broken Heart?” The next day she was happy to report that immediately after reading it, her daughter put on some makeup, telephoned her two girlfriends and invited them over. The three of them sat around the kitchen table and discussed the article. The next day she went to school.
C. G., United States
I want to commend you for the splendid article. I have been able to reflect on the “good side” of breaking up, being able to analyze the situation and see that it was really best for both of us, and I have learned to adjust so that it won’t happen again.
S. B., Brazil
Extra Cautions Needed?
After reading the article “Earthquakes​—How You Can Prepare for Survival!” (December 22, 1987), I would like to point out a mistake in the advice offered. You advise turning off both gas and electricity at their sources as quickly as possible when gas is leaking from a broken pipe. But as a gas fitter, I would like to inform you that, under the circumstances, to operate an electrical switch on or off can cause a spark with the danger of an explosion.
T. C., England
I enjoyed “Cultivate Safe Driving Habits” (January 8, 1988), listing items one should check before every auto trip. However, you omitted a very important item. Oh, if only I had been told to check the brake fluid before driving, I wouldn’t have had to contend with having my brakes give out during rush hour on the turnpike. A reputable mechanic gave my car a complete safety check before the trip. I found out that most mechanics don’t do this important check, as evidenced by your article.
M. L., United States
I appreciated the Awake! article (May 22, 1988) on water safety. One more thing​—if there is a sign in the water that you can’t read or that is written in a language you don’t know, don’t swim in that area! That is most likely a warning sign. A child drowned here because the parents couldn’t read the English sign (warning of strong undertow), so they allowed the child to swim there anyway.
C. S., United States
We appreciate these extra cautions from our readers.​—ED.
War Memorial
Your reproduction of the inscription on the Evesham War Memorial (April 8, 1988, page 4) is of particular interest to me. In 1936 my father took a photograph of me and my mother, choosing that background deliberately to lecture me regarding the futility of all war. Only a few years later, I learned firsthand the horror, frustration and heartbreak of the second world war as a young infantryman, twice wounded and narrowly escaping death. Your publication helps redress a balance, showing people the correct alternatives to adopt, should they freely wish to do so. For that, I for one am grateful.
J. G., England

