What Hope for the Children?
IT IS already too late for millions of children in the so-called Third World. The procedures discussed herein would save millions​—if their parents could be reached and convinced to apply them. This being nothing short of impossible, millions of children will simply continue dying​—slowly, quietly, inevitably.
Highly touted large-scale projects hold out little hope. The UN, for example, sponsored the International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade (1981-1990) with the goal of “clean water and adequate sanitation for all by 1990.” With what result?
“Between 1980 and 1983,” reports World Health magazine, “an additional 32 million people in Africa were provided with water supply, and an additional 12 million people received improved sanitation.” Yet, there was only a very small increase in the percentage of people enjoying clean water and sanitation. Rapid population growth all but wiped out the impressive gains. Little wonder, then, that the goal of “clean water and adequate sanitation for all by 1990” has been called “a near impossible task.”
At times, though, relief efforts are impeded, not by a lack of funds or manpower, but by greed, poor judgment, and petty rivalries. Developing lands spend four times as much on weaponry and military expenditures as they do on health. Of the little spent on health care, the majority goes to provide high-technology care​—to the benefit of a privileged few.
Consider too the inexpensive Oral Rehydration Therapy. It is well known that this could save millions of lives. Yet, according to the UN Chronicle, “most doctors continue to prescribe a total of $400 million worth of anti-diarrhoeal drugs each year even though most are known to be useless, harmful or both.”
Or consider the devastating parasitic disease schistosomiasis that now affects 200 million people, especially children. “Science knows the cause of schistosomiasis, has tested the remedies in field trials, has developed an effective strategy that could reduce this infection dramatically in the years ahead,” writes June Goodfield in Quest for the Killers. Why, then, does the disease persist? “The problem is now political,” writes Goodfield.
Yes, children die, not simply because man lacks the knowledge or the resources to keep them alive but because he values political expediency and personal gain over human life. The words of Jeremiah 10:23 have proved true: “To earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” The only hope for the world’s children​—indeed for the whole human race—​is for God to take over the management of planet Earth. The Bible tells us that he purposes to do just that: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom [or government] that will never be brought to ruin. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms [contemporary governments], and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”​—Daniel 2:44.
Under God’s heavenly Kingdom, the children of the world will never again be threatened by disease or death. Jehovah’s Witnesses therefore eagerly await this divine takeover of earth’s affairs. They pray as Jesus taught them: “Let your kingdom come.” (Matthew 6:9, 10) The plight of the children of the Third World makes such God-fearing ones pray this all the more fervently.a
[Footnotes]
For further information, see the book “Let Your Kingdom Come,” published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., or write the publishers of this magazine. They will be pleased to arrange for you to be visited by one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.

