The World of the Patriarchs
STEPHEN began a famous speech with some geographic facts: “[Jehovah] appeared to our forefather Abraham while he was in Mesopotamia, before he took up residence in Haran, and he said to him, ‘Go . . . into the land I shall show you.’” (Ac 7:1-4) This laid a basis for key events in the Promised Land involving Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, events linked to God’s purpose to bless mankind.​—Ge 12:1-3; Jos 24:3.
God called Abraham (or, Abram) from Ur of the Chaldeans, a prosperous city then located on the east bank of the Euphrates River. What route would Abraham take? From Chaldea, a region also called Sumer or Shinar, it might seem easy to go due west. Why go way up to Haran?





Ur lay near the eastern end of the Fertile Crescent, a semicircle extending from Palestine to the basin of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. This area may formerly have had a more moderate climate. Below the curve of the crescent lay the Syro-Arabian Desert, marked by limestone hills and sandy plains. The Encyclopædia Britannica says that it was “a nearly impenetrable barrier” between the Mediterranean Coast and Mesopotamia. Some caravans might cross from the Euphrates to Tadmor and then to Damascus, but Abraham did not lead his family and herds through such a wilderness.
Rather, Abraham went up the Euphrates River valley to Haran. From there he could follow a trade route to a ford at Carchemish and then head south by Damascus and on to what came to be called the Sea of Galilee. The Via Maris, or “The Way of the Sea,” ran by Megiddo and on to Egypt. However, Abraham traveled through the mountains of Samaria, finally tenting at Shechem. In time, he continued down that highland route. Follow him as you read Genesis 12:8–13:4. Note other places that were part of his varied experience: Dan, Damascus, Hobah, Mamre, Sodom, Gerar, Beer-sheba, and Moriah (Jerusalem).​—Ge 14:14-16; 18:1-16; 20:1-18; 21:25-34; 22:1-19.
Understanding some of the geography illuminates events in the lives of Isaac and Jacob. For instance, while Abraham was in Beer-sheba, where did he send his servant to find a wife for Isaac? Way up to Mesopotamia (meaning, “Land Between Rivers”) to Paddan-aram. Then imagine Rebekah’s strenuous trip by camel to the Negeb, perhaps near Kadesh, to meet Isaac.​—Ge 24:10, 62-64.
Later their son Jacob (Israel) made a similar long trip to marry a worshiper of Jehovah. Jacob took a somewhat different route back to his land. After he forded the Jabbok near Penuel, Jacob wrestled with an angel. (Ge 31:21-25; 32:2, 22-30) Esau met him in that area, and then each went to reside in a different region.​—Ge 33:1, 15-20.





After Jacob’s daughter Dinah was raped at Shechem, Jacob moved to Bethel. Can you envision, though, how far Jacob’s sons went to pasture his flock and where Joseph eventually found them? This map (and pages 18-19) may help you to see the distance between Bethel and Dothan. (Ge 35:1-8; 37:12-17) Joseph’s brothers sold him to traders headed to Egypt. What route do you think they were taking in an event that set the stage for the Israelites’ move to Egypt and for the Exodus?​—Ge 37:25-28.
[Maps on page 7]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Abraham’s Travels (see publication)
Isaac’s Travels (see publication)
Jacob’s Travels (see publication)
Main Roads (see publication)
Patriarchs (overview)
A4  GOSHEN
A5  EGYPT
B4  SHUR
B5  PARAN
C3  Damascus
C3  Dan (Laish)
C4  Shechem
C4  Bethel
C4  Hebron (Kiriath-arba)
C4  Gerar
C4  Beer-sheba
C4  SEIR
C4  Kadesh
C5  EDOM
D1  Carchemish
D2  Tadmor
D3  Hobah
E1  PADDAN-ARAM
E1  Haran
F2  MESOPOTAMIA
G1  Nineveh
G2  FERTILE CRESCENT
G3  Babylon
H4  CHALDEA
H4  Ur
[Mountains]
C4  Moriah
[Bodies of water]
B3  Mediterranean Sea (Great Sea)
[Rivers]
E2  Euphrates
G2  Tigris
Patriarchs (in Promised Land)
CANAAN
Megiddo
GILEAD
Dothan
Shechem
Succoth
Mahanaim
Penuel
Bethel (Luz)
Ai
Jerusalem (Salem)
Bethlehem (Ephrath)
Mamre
Hebron (Machpelah)
Gerar
Beer-sheba
Sodom?
NEGEB
Rehoboth?
Beer-lahai-roi
Kadesh
Main Roads
Via Maris
King’s Road
[Mountains]
Moriah
[Bodies of water]
Salt Sea
[Rivers and streams]
Jabbok
Jordan
[Picture on page 6]
Euphrates River near Babylon
[Picture on page 6]
Abraham lived in Beer-sheba and pastured flocks nearby
[Picture on page 6]
Torrent valley of Jabbok

