From Our Readers
Religion and War  I am writing to express my appreciation for the informative series discussing religion in war. (April 22, 1997) The first article, “Killing in the Name of God,” really caught my attention. It was short and to the point, especially when presenting reasoning on why Jehovah God approved the killing of Canaanites by ancient Israelites.
S. J., United States
Ginger Klauss’ Story  Let me tell you how much I was encouraged by Ginger Klauss’ experience, “Now I’m Happy to Be Alive!” (April 22, 1997) Like her, I lost all self-confidence, feeling worthless and unloved. Being unable to cope with those emotions, I tearfully told God each day that I wanted to die. I saw death as a welcome relief. But one day I prayed, “If it is your will, please give me the encouragement to live.” Right after praying that way, I received this issue of Awake! When I saw this article, it hit me that God had answered my prayer. I learned from Ginger that keeping a sense of humor and not taking myself too seriously can help me maintain a positive attitude. I can definitely say that this one magazine has given me the inspiration to live.
M. K., Japan
I have just finished reading the article for the sixth time, and it will not be the last! I am 21 years old and am a full-time evangelizer. I have great admiration for Ginger Klauss because of the zeal she has for the preaching work despite being confined to a wheelchair. Her experience motivated me to do all I can to serve Jehovah.
S. Z., Italy
Infinite thanks for the beautiful experience. Because of muscular dystrophy, I am confined to bed for a large part of each day, and I experience no little difficulty in carrying out the preaching work in a wheelchair. Ginger’s experience greatly encouraged me and helps me to face those moments when I am a bit depressed because of my illness.
M. R., Italy
Why So Sick?  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Do I Have to Be So Sick?” (April 22, 1997) I am 21 years old and have sickle-cell anemia. I can relate to the feelings of the young people in this article. I often wonder if anyone will love me and want to marry me despite my having this health problem. But your article helped me because I now know that I’m not alone in feeling this way.
D. R., United States
Inseparable Friends  Thank you for the experience of Anne-Marie Evaldsson. (April 22, 1997) I was filled with admiration for the way this sister continues forward spiritually despite her disability. The account made me reflect. Many of us don’t appreciate what has been given to us to use in serving Jehovah. I’d like to commend the sister and her loyal friend. What a fine example!
R. A., Ecuador
To know that someone physically blind works, engages in the house-to-house ministry, conducts Bible studies, and attends Christian meetings each week is very encouraging. It made me feel that doing my utmost in the ministry, keeping it in first place, is worth the effort. The value of spiritual sight is indeed surpassing. I will remember Anne-Marie Evaldsson with deep love and appreciation.
J. O., Nigeria

