Announcements
MAKING THE FRAGRANCE OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD PERCEPTIBLE—2 Cor. 2:14, NW.
Today as never before ‘the odor of the knowledge of God is made perceptible in every place.’ The 1956 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses reports the declaring of the truth in 158 lands and islands of the seas. And what is the effect upon people? Twofold! To one group it is “an odor issuing from life to life” and to the other “an odor issuing from death to death.” (2Co 2 Verse 16) Christians have the responsibility of making known the sweet odor of Christ, and then it is the responsibility of the hearer to receive it favorably or unfavorably. This month in regular congregation territory Jehovah’s witnesses will publish the truth by word of mouth and by printed page by offering, on a contribution of $1.50, three revealing Bible study books and three booklets. The unassigned territory offer will be made by all privileged to serve isolated sections.
KEEP YOURSELF INFORMED
Do you admire someone who always seems to be well informed, who generally has substantial facts to impart to almost any kind of discussion? Even in these days of intense activity and extreme specialization you can be that well equipped. Many educated people are lost outside their own field because their everyday reading is confined to a few highly specialized publications. Solve this problem for yourself by obtaining and regularly reading Awake! magazine. All topics of general or specific interest are within its range. Yet it is written in language that you can readily adapt to your own speech. But most important for our day, it clearly and unmistakably draws the true pattern of our times and identifies its significance. Like its companion magazine, the one you now hold in your hand, it is published with a purpose. It helps you to recognize that, in spite of discouraging world events, hope for the future can be real. Send one dollar and it will be mailed to you twice a month for one year.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 2: Jehovah’s Message Against Gog of Magog. Page 460.
September 9: Delivering Satan’s Death Notice. Page 467.

