A Help That Is Readily to Be Found
 1. How can one’s spirituality weaken?
1 Anna, a sister with an unbelieving husband and a demanding work schedule, found it a struggle to attend Christian meetings regularly, participate in the ministry, and study God’s Word. Though she still loved Jehovah, she became inactive. Happily, she received spiritual assistance from concerned elders.
 2. In what way can all Christians prove to be a help that is readily to be found?
2 Accepting the spiritual help offered through the Christian congregation demonstrates reliance on Jehovah himself. In imitation of Jesus Christ’s loving care, the older men in the congregation seek opportunities to offer encouragement and practical assistance to those experiencing spiritual difficulty. (1 Thess. 5:14) Oftentimes, a kind word of encouragement centered on reassuring Scriptural passages can be just what is needed. Reaching out to support those in a temporarily weak condition is of concern to all Christians, not just the elders. No doubt each of us has experienced the power of a thoughtful “word spoken at the right time for it.”​—Prov. 25:11; Isa. 35:3, 4.
3, 4. What is involved in helping others, and how may we do so?
3 Take the Initiative: Showing loving interest in those who need help requires that we take the initiative, show fellow feeling, and be earnest. When Jonathan became aware of David’s distressing situation, he “rose up and went to David at Horesh, that he might strengthen his hand.” (1 Sam. 23:15, 16) Use a gentle approach to help others. Words motivated by genuine concern yield the best results. Furthermore, Jesus clearly illustrated that diligent, purposeful effort is involved in regaining a spiritual brother or sister. (Luke 15:4) Having an earnest desire to assist another person will move us to persevere in offering help even if progress is not quickly manifest.
4 How encouraging it is when we take the initiative to invite others, such as those in our book study, to accompany us in the ministry! As we assist a fellow servant of Jehovah to engage in the ministry, we may use the opportunity to strengthen that one’s hand. Such joyful times spent together in Jehovah’s service are especially encouraging to those who are recovering their spiritual balance.
 5. In some circumstances, what assistance may the elders offer?
5 A Loving Provision: Those who have not shared in the preaching work or associated with the congregation for some time may need additional help to build up their faith. A personal Bible study in a publication such as Worship the Only True God, Draw Close to Jehovah, or What Does the Bible Really Teach? may be just what is needed. Since the person is already baptized, generally the study need not be continued for a prolonged period. The Congregation Service Committee should be alert to observe who might benefit from this provision.​—See the November 1998 and November 2000 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Boxes.
 6. How did one sister regain spiritual strength?
6 Anna, mentioned earlier, gratefully accepted the elders’ offer to have a spiritually mature sister conduct a Bible study with her. It took just four study sessions to help her draw close to Jehovah once again. She resumed attending congregation meetings and rekindled her desire to praise Jehovah God publicly. The mature sister also helped her in the ministry by taking her on other Bible studies until she was sufficiently strengthened to preach from door to door. A helping hand was all that she needed to get going again!
 7. What benefits come from strengthening others spiritually?
7 Strengthening those in need brings blessings to all. The one being helped enjoys the happiness of drawing close to Jehovah and becoming involved with the activities of His organization. The elders rejoice to see such spiritual progress. (Luke 15:5, 6) The congregation is drawn together in unity as all show loving concern for one another. (Col. 3:12-14) What good reasons we have to imitate Jehovah, a help that is readily to be found!​—Eph. 5:1.

