Draw Attention to “the Light of the World”
 1. What great light was foretold in God’s Word, and what occasion draws special attention to this light?
1 Through the prophet Isaiah, Jehovah foretold: “The people that were walking in the darkness have seen a great light. As for those dwelling in the land of deep shadow, light itself has shone upon them.” (Isa. 9:2) That “great light” was seen in the works of God’s own Son, Jesus Christ. His work while on earth and the blessings resulting from his sacrifice uplifted those who were in darkness spiritually. Such light is what people need in these darkened times. The Lord’s Evening Meal provides a special opportunity for us to draw attention to “the light of the world.” (John 8:12) Last year, millions displayed a measure of faith by joining us in obeying Jesus’ command: “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” (Luke 22:19) As this year’s Memorial observance approaches, how can we share in calling attention to the great light that Jehovah has caused to shine forth?​—Phil. 2:15.
 2. How can we intensify our heart appreciation for the ransom sacrifice, and what effect will doing so have?
2 Build Heart Appreciation: The Memorial season is an opportune time to meditate on the great love that Jehovah and Jesus showed in providing the ransom sacrifice for mankind. (John 3:16; 2 Cor. 5:14, 15) Doing so will no doubt intensify our heart appreciation for this sacred occasion. All of God’s people will want to set aside time to read and meditate on the special Memorial Bible reading, as outlined in Examining the Scriptures Daily. Thinking of Jehovah’s matchless qualities, which are so gloriously revealed in his provision of the ransom, makes us proud to have him as our God. Reflecting upon what the ransom means for us personally intensifies our heartfelt love for God and his Son and motivates us to exert ourselves in doing God’s will.​—Gal. 2:20.
 3. How can we demonstrate our appreciation for the Memorial?
3 If we deepen our appreciation for Jehovah’s provision of salvation, our enthusiasm for the Memorial will radiate to Bible students, return visits, relatives, neighbors, schoolmates, workmates, and others whom we invite to this special occasion. (Luke 6:45) Therefore, make a special effort to invite all such ones, providing a printed Memorial invitation to serve as a reminder to them. So as not to forget anyone, many have found it practical to maintain a list of those they regularly invite to the Memorial, adding new ones annually. Taking an organized approach and earnestly following through in inviting interested ones would be a fine way of expressing our gratitude to Jehovah God “for his indescribable free gift.”​—2 Cor. 9:15.
 4. What can help us to increase our share in the ministry during March and April?
4 Increased Share in the Ministry: Can you increase your share in the ministry during March and April? Endeavoring to share with others “the glorious good news about the Christ” will surely have God’s blessing. Jehovah, as the Source of all spiritual enlightenment, has commanded: “Let the light shine out of darkness.” (2 Cor. 4:4-6) As needed, the elders will arrange to have meetings for field service at extra times and locations, taking the lead to support longer witnessing periods. This may include early-morning street work or arrangements to do business territory and telephone witnessing in the afternoon or early evening. As an aid to increasing your share in the ministry, set a reasonable goal of hours, and work hard to attain it. For many, giving Jehovah their best includes the privilege of auxiliary pioneering.​—Col. 3:23, 24.
 5. How are many benefiting from the reduced hour requirement for auxiliary pioneering?
5 Can You Auxiliary Pioneer? It has now been over seven years since the hour requirement for auxiliary pioneering was reduced. This adjustment has made it possible for many more to experience the blessings of auxiliary pioneer service. Have you tried it? Some make it their custom to do so each year. In many congregations dozens of publishers take up this form of service together, and it becomes a rewarding highlight of the congregation’s activity during the year. Can you make room for a joyful month of auxiliary pioneering during the Memorial season? April may be an especially good month for some, since it has five full weekends.
 6. What exciting provisions have been made available?
6 Is your congregation scheduled to have the visit of the circuit overseer during March or April? An added blessing may be open to you. As was previously announced, during the 2006 service year, all who are serving as auxiliary pioneers during the month in which the circuit overseer visits will be invited to attend the first half of the meeting held with the pioneers during the week of the visit. No doubt the spiritually strengthening information provided at this meeting will assist many auxiliary pioneers to reach out to become regular pioneers. In addition, during March we will have the joy of assisting people to come into the spiritual light by means of the new study publication What Does the Bible Really Teach? Why not make it your goal to start a Bible study in the new book?
7, 8. (a) What can help us to make a schedule to auxiliary pioneer? (b) How can family cooperation help, and how does the entire family benefit?
7 As you consider the auxiliary pioneer requirement of 50 hours, determine what schedule will allow you to shine forth the light of truth for about 12 hours each week. Talk it over with those who have successfully done so, as well as with others. This may encourage them to join you. With good planning, baptized publishers, young and old alike, have found that it was not too difficult to reach this commendable goal. Pray about it. Then, if possible, make your plans, and enjoy auxiliary pioneering!​—Mal. 3:10.
8 Many families have found that a well-coordinated effort can make it possible for at least one family member to attain this goal. One family decided that all five baptized members would enroll as auxiliary pioneers. Two other children who were not yet baptized made a special effort to increase their activity. How did the family benefit from making an extra effort? They wrote: “It was such an agreeable month, and we strongly felt that the family bonds were strengthened. We thank Jehovah for the wonderful blessing!”
 9. How can we let our light shine during this Memorial season?
9 Will our special activity during March and April prove to be stimulating, drawing us closer to our heavenly Father? Much will depend on the personal effort we put forth toward intensifying our love for God and his Son and increasing our share in the ministry. May our resolve be like that of the psalmist, who sang: “I shall laud Jehovah very much with my mouth, and in among many people I shall praise him.” (Ps. 109:30) Jehovah will bless our zealous activity this Memorial season. So may we let a great light shine forth so that many more can come out of darkness and “possess the light of life.”​—John 8:12.

