Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting February 13
Song 121
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to present the February 15 Watchtower and the February Awake! In one presentation, demonstrate witnessing in a public place.
10 min: Are You Keeping Pace With Jehovah’s Organization? A talk based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, pages 7-10.
25 min: “Draw Attention to ‘the Light of the World.’”a To be handled by the service overseer. Announce the names of those who have enrolled as auxiliary pioneers. Outline extra meetings for field service that have been arranged. Include comments on the sample auxiliary pioneer schedules on page 5 of the February 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry insert.
Song 224 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 20
Song 89
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Create Opportunities to Preach.”b Invite a publisher who has challenging circumstances to comment on how he or she has been able to create opportunities to witness.
20 min: “A Help That Is Readily to Be Found.”c To be handled by an elder. Include brief comments on the November 1998 and November 2000 Our Kingdom Ministry Question Boxes.
Song 1 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 27
Song 20
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for February. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to present either the March 1 Watchtower or the March Awake!
10 min: Local needs.
25 min: How to Offer the Bible Teach Book. During March we will offer the new book. Using the suggestions in the January 2006 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, pages 3-6, review and demonstrate several presentations that are well suited for the local territory. Invite audience to relate outstanding experiences they have enjoyed using the new book, especially Bible studies that have been started.
Song 148 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 6
Song 51
10 min: Local announcements. Because tracts are easy to carry and visually appealing, they are useful for starting conversations when engaging in the house-to-house ministry, when preaching in public places, and when witnessing informally. Demonstrate how to start a conversation using the new tract All Suffering Soon to End! Highlight one of the quoted scriptures on page 2 of the tract.
15 min: “Show Personal Interest​—By Being Prepared.”d Include a brief demonstration showing two publishers preparing to offer the Bible Teach book. They select a presentation from the January 2006 Our Kingdom Ministry insert and discuss how they can put it in their own words and adapt it to the local territory. The demonstration concludes as they are about to rehearse the presentation together out loud.
20 min: “Use Visual Aids That Teach.”e As you discuss each video mentioned in the article, show the cover and read a brief excerpt describing the contents. Ask the audience to relate experiences they have had in using videos in their ministry.​—See the 1997 Yearbook, p. 54, and the 1995 Yearbook, pp. 50-1.
Song 68 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

