Use Visual Aids That Teach
 1. How did Jehovah use visual aids to teach his ancient servants, and with what effect?
1 To convey important information to his ancient servants, Jehovah at times used visions and dreams. Think of Ezekiel’s vision of Jehovah’s celestial chariot. (Ezek. 1:1-28) Imagine how Daniel felt after receiving the prophetic dream depicting the march of world powers. (Dan. 7:1-15, 28) And what about the electrifying revelation presented “in signs” to the apostle John regarding things that would take place during “the Lord’s day”? (Rev. 1:1, 10) Jehovah taught them using vivid color and dynamic action, and it made a lasting impression on their minds.
 2. What visual aids can we use to teach others Bible truths?
2 If we want to convey Bible truths to others with an impact that will not easily be forgotten, we can likewise use our videos to teach. Our videos cover a wide range of topics and build confidence in the Bible, in Jehovah’s organization, and in principles that enhance Christian living. Consider a few ways we can use our videos to teach. The following are a sample of the videos that may be used.
 3. What can you use to direct a Bible student to the organization?
3 In the Ministry: Have you been telling a Bible student about our global Christian brotherhood? Show it to him with the video Our Whole Association of Brothers. Either lend it to him to watch before your next study or view it together during an upcoming session. Then discuss the review questions found in the June 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry.
 4. What teaching tools might a Witness youth use at school?
4 Youths, you might speak to your teacher about the possibility of showing your class the video documentaries Jehovah’s Witnesses Stand Firm Against Nazi Assault or Faithful Under Trials​—Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Soviet Union. Offer to prepare a question sheet, adapting for class discussion the questions in the June 2001 or the February 2003 Our Kingdom Ministry.
 5. What is available for parents to use on family studies?
5 With Family and Friends: Parents, think how much your children have grown since the video Young People Ask​—How Can I Make Real Friends? was first released. Why not watch it again at your next family study? The April 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry outlines questions for a lively and candid discussion.
 6. How could you arrange for an upbuilding time with friends?
6 Are there friends in the congregation you have wanted to invite to your home? Watching together the video Respect Jehovah’s Authority would make for an upbuilding evening, especially if afterward you review the lessons learned, using the questions listed in the September 2004 Our Kingdom Ministry.
 7. What possible opportunities can you think of for using our videos?
7 Other Opportunities: How else can you use our 20 different videos? Would showing one or two of them to someone you visit regularly help him to progress spiritually? Could you offer to show the videos at a local nursing home or a center for senior citizens? Would the videos help to win the respect of your non-Witness relatives, neighbors, and workmates? Our videos are impressive, instructive, and effective visual aids. Use them to teach.

