From Our Readers
Afterschool Jobs  I really enjoyed the articles on afterschool jobs. (November 22 and December 8, 1990) Although I am not ready for a job, your articles showed the importance of saving money for the future. They also helped me to see that if I get a job, I will need a schedule that includes time for spiritual activities. I will remember these articles in the future.
J. S., United States
My goal has been to be a pioneer [full-time evangelizer]. I wondered if I should first get a job and save up money. The articles helped me see that doing so could make me fall into the trap of materialism. So I have decided to work​—work on building up my spiritual foundation—​so that I will be good and ready for the pioneer service.
G. J., United States
Rain Forests  Your article about rain forests (March 22, 1990) was on a high scientific level. Everyone knows that the environment is deteriorating and that something should be done. But as a news correspondent here in Poland, I was wondering who would have the courage to write about the fundamental reasons for environmental negligence. You are the first ones to do so by pointing to egocentrism and desire for profit as the real reasons. Well done!
W. S., Poland
Bloody Films  A film I wanted to see, Die Hard 2, was mentioned in the “Watching the World” item “Bloody Films.” (December 22, 1990) I had even talked to my friends about going to see it. But when I read this item, I decided that watching this film would be like watching a horror movie and decided not to go. Actually, I still want to go, but for the sake of my own spiritual progress, I won’t.
M. T., Japan
Exercise  Thank you very much for the article “What Exercise Can Do for You.” (October 22, 1990) Every time we have physical education in school, we have to run one mile [1.6 km], and I’ve always hated it! Your article showed me that exercise can really benefit people.
L. B. D., United States
Thank you for your article. In September, because of having a regular exercise program, I was able to stop taking medication for high blood pressure. After nine weeks of bouncing on a minitrampoline, I told my doctor that I wanted to try coming off my medication. She instructed me on how to cut back gradually on the dosage. Now my blood pressure is normal, I feel great, and my husband is bouncing away trying to lower his!
G. Y., United States
Readers should note that if they have had significant health problems, or if they are older, they would be wise to consult a qualified health practitioner before beginning a vigorous exercise program. Consultation with such a health practitioner would also be wise when making any decision regarding prescribed medications.​—ED.
Home Vacations  Your article “Why Not Try a Vacation at Home?” (June 22, 1990) suggested collecting wildflowers. While I used to do so years ago, I have since learned the outdoor rule: ‘Take nothing but pictures; leave nothing but footprints.’ Where I live, it is against the law to pick certain wildflowers. But a well-exposed, sharply focused picture of a wildflower can be enjoyed for years!
W. K., United States
Taking photos is indeed a practical way to enjoy nature in areas where picking flowers, or similar activities, is against the law or could cause ecological damage. Thanks for the suggestion.​—ED.

