
Jehovah Is Training Us for This Work




 1. When Jehovah gives humans an assignment, what does he also do?
1 When Jehovah gives humans an assignment, he also gives them the help they need to carry it out. For example, when Jehovah told Noah to build an ark, something Noah had never done before, He also told him how. (Gen. 6:14-16) When the meek shepherd Moses was assigned to approach the older men of Israel and Pharaoh, Jehovah assured him: “I myself shall prove to be with your mouth and I will teach you what you ought to say.” (Ex. 4:12) When it comes to our assignment to preach the good news, Jehovah has not left us on our own. He is training us for this work by means of the Theocratic Ministry School and the Service Meeting. How can we benefit from this training?
 2. How can we benefit from the Theocratic Ministry School?
2 The Theocratic Ministry School: Consider the scheduled material before attending each meeting. Then as you see how the students develop this information in their talks, your understanding of how to teach will be sharpened. (Prov. 27:17) Bring your Ministry School book to the meeting and use it as a workbook. When the school overseer refers to it after each student talk, underline key points that you want to apply, and use the margins to make notes. The best way to benefit from this school, however, is to participate. Are you enrolled? When you receive a talk assignment, prepare well and apply the counsel you receive. When in the ministry, use what you have learned.
 3. What will help us to benefit from the Service Meeting?
3 The Service Meeting: We will better remember the suggestions presented during this meeting by reading over the material in advance and preparing to comment. If we keep our comments brief, more will be able to have a share. Pay close attention to the demonstrations, and use any suggestions that you feel will make your ministry more effective. Keep a copy of key articles from Our Kingdom Ministry for future reference.
 4. Why should we make good use of theocratic training?
4 Like the assignments given to Noah and Moses, our commission to preach the good news in all the inhabited earth is challenging. (Matt. 24:14) We can be successful if we rely on Jehovah, our Grand Instructor, and make good use of the training he provides.—Isa. 30:20.




