
Treasure Your Privilege of Service




 1. How do many in the world view our preaching work?
1 Many in Satan’s world consider our preaching work to be “foolishness.” (1 Cor. 1:18-21) If we are not careful, this distorted view can cause discouragement and diminish our zeal. (Prov. 24:10; Isa. 5:20) What reasons are there to treasure our privilege of being Jehovah’s Witnesses?—Isa. 43:10.
 2. Why can the ministry be called a “holy work”?
2 A “Holy Work”: The apostle Paul referred to the ministry as a “holy work.” (Rom. 15:15, 16) How is the ministry a “holy work”? Engaging in it makes us “fellow workers” with “the Holy One,” Jehovah, and contributes to the sanctification of his name. (1 Cor. 3:9; 1 Pet. 1:15) Jehovah views our preaching as “a sacrifice of praise,” so the ministry is a vital aspect of our worship.—Heb. 13:15.
 3. What makes preaching the good news a great honor?
3 Preaching the good news is a great honor that relatively few enjoy. The angels would gladly care for such an assignment and would no doubt do it extremely well. (1 Pet. 1:12) However, Jehovah has chosen us imperfect humans, “earthen vessels,” for this awesome privilege!—2 Cor. 4:7.
 4. How can we show that we treasure the ministry?
4 A Priority: Because we truly treasure our privilege, we view the ministry as one of “the more important things” in our life. (Phil. 1:10) Therefore, we schedule time each week to share in it. A musician who treasures his privilege to play in a world-renowned orchestra would prepare for each performance and work at developing his skill. Similarly, we will prepare before going in the ministry so that we can ‘handle the word of truth aright,’ and we will work at improving our “art of teaching.”—2 Tim. 2:15; 4:2.
 5. Our ministry is appreciated by whom?
5 Do not let the view of most people discourage you. Remember that there are still many in our territory who appreciate our visits. However, it is not the approval of humans that we seek. Far more important is how Jehovah feels, and he highly values our diligent efforts.—Isa. 52:7.




