Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
When one thinks of the United States, one thinks of an English-speaking country, and, of course, it is. But, interestingly, there are more than 36,000 publishers in our Spanish congregations too. We ship a tremendous amount of literature from Brooklyn to Spanish congregations all over this country, and, next to the English, the quantity of Spanish literature far exceeds anything else. You will be interested in knowing too that we have quite a few French and Italian congregations in the country, and a lot of literature in these languages is placed, not only by publishers who speak French or Italian, but by others when they meet people who would appreciate it. In addition to this, we ship out quite a bit of German, Greek and Portuguese literature. And the brothers who write the invoices here are amazed at the large quantities of Japanese and Chinese literature that continually go out for use in the field. These eight are the principal languages, other than English, that are used in the United States right now. It certainly is good to know that people coming from other countries are being reached and provided with literature in their own tongue.
Everyone has heard about recent events in Vietnam. A few of our Vietnamese brothers and sisters were able to leave as refugees and have come to America. Brothers in this country offered to sponsor them, and we understand that all of them have been cared for. Others, of course, remain in Vietnam. We are now trying to get into the camps housing those who left their country as refugees, to present these people with Bible literature or at least to give them talks. We have loving concern for these people who speak other languages.
You will be interested in knowing that Brother M.G. Henschel is on a trip to serve the branches in the northern part of Europe. He has visited Iceland, Ireland and England, and in all of these countries the Kingdom work is progressing nicely. Things are changing in Ireland. Many now have an ear to hear. Regardless of the language, the nationality, the location, Jehovah’s people are very much interested in getting the good news preached everywhere.
We hope that you are going to have an excellent time at the convention, if you have not already attended one, and may Jehovah’s rich blessing go with all of you.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE
[Blurb on page 4]
Are You Acquainted with Everyone in Your Congregation?

