Presenting the Good News​—With Warm Appeal from the Heart
1 A conversation that is open, honest, sincere, straightforward, we call a “heart-to-heart” talk. When each one is convinced that the other is sincere, there is a wholesome interchange. (Rom. 1:12) Good communication and better relations result because the heart responds to a warm appeal that is genuine. Inner emotions are touched, favorably influencing thoughts and actions. Sharing the good news with such a warm appeal is an ideal goal.
2 Reaching another’s heart depends largely on what is in your own heart. Ask yourself: Is my motive one of love, an unselfish interest in others? When I call at a home, am I there because I want to be, not just because I feel it is my duty? (1 Cor. 9:16) Do I feel a desire to help people? Is my attitude one of joy? Others are quick to sense our motives, and this profoundly affects their response to what we say.
3 Your manner of approach is also important. It is a reflection of your feelings. A householder’s opinion of the good news may be formed primarily on his impression of you as an individual. What kind of person does your manner show you to be?
4 A warm smile suggests a pleasant friend, while a stern look causes apprehension. Confidence is respected, but an overconfident, overbearing attitude repels. The ear will hear a businesslike tone of voice but is more likely to listen to one that is warm, inviting. A person will open up more freely in a conversational chat than he will in a formal discussion. Many times a less fluent person will achieve better results than someone eloquent. Why? Because, even though not especially fluent, he may speak sincerely from the heart. Sincerity of heart contributes toward a free flow of Jehovah’s spirit. A modest, well-groomed appearance adds dignity and encourages respect.
5 Good manners identify you as a thoughtful, sensitive person. A high regard for the feelings of others is universally appreciated. If your knock awakens a daytime sleeper, a sincere apology may result in a kindly reception. Someone truly inconvenienced by your call will think more highly of the good news if you tactfully suggest a visit at a later time. Willingness to be an attentive listener may give you more opportunities to speak effectively than would be open to one who monopolizes the conversation. Giving a sympathetic ear to a personal problem may lead to an extended witness. Thoughtfully remembering to close a screen door or a gate tells the householder that you are concerned about his interests.
6 Discernment in choosing the theme of your presentation can also add to the warmth of your appeal. With so much that is bad, everyone yearns to hear good news. An important aspect of our commission is to spread good news of hope. Recall that Jesus emphasized good news, saying that he had been anointed to “declare good news to the poor.” (Luke 4:17-21) You may want to try a cheerful presentation that highlights the marvelous prospects for endless life and peace. Perhaps you will find that you can reach another’s heart quickly with reassuring words that describe how he and his loved ones can realistically hope to enjoy good health and happiness in a secure future, provided he shows faith in God’s promises.
7 Of course, many have allowed bad influences to harden their hearts to such a degree that the word of truth cannot take root. (Luke 8:5, 12) Let this not discourage us. Rather, let us be like the “good man” Jesus described who “brings forth good out of the good treasure of his heart.” (Luke 6:45) Our efforts to do that in the disciple-making work will be rewarded with many more sheeplike hearts touched by the good news.

