Announcements
“CONTINUE IN THE THINGS YOU LEARNED”
In the book of life-giving knowledge, the Bible, is to be found this admonition: “Continue in the things you learned.” (2 Tim. 3:14, NW) The servants of the Almighty God, Jehovah, have learned from this source of knowledge the truths so vitally necessary to one’s gaining life. They have studied these truths and now want to unselfishly aid others to learn of this knowledge. During the month of July these faithful servants will offer to others this information by means of the book “This Means Everlasting Life”, together with a self-covered booklet. If you have learned these truths and are now happy in them, why not work along with Jehovah’s witnesses? Associate with others who are continuing in these same things and then report your activities to the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses, or send it to the Watchtower. A contribution of 35c is asked for the above combination of book and booklet.
READ THE “AWAKE!”
A companion magazine to The Watchtower is the Awake! There you will find a source of information that is able to keep you awake to the vital issues of the day. Its coverage is as broad as the world and, like The Watchtower, it is free to speak the facts in any and every field on which it reports. Its adherence to the principles of truth and righteousness, its fight for the liberties and freedoms of men of every kind bring comfort and strength and furnish hope to all men. Have the Awake! come to your home twice each month, regularly, for $1 a year.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
From August 4 to August 19 inclusive the Bethel home, offices and factory printing plant will be closed down to give the family a rest period. No mail or correspondence will be handled during this period. There will also be an unavoidable delay during all of August resulting from the accumulation of mail. Bear this in mind by making plans early and ordering needed supplies well in advance of this time.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 15: The Place of God’s Word in Our Lives.
Week of July 22: Free Moral Agency and the Word; also, The Spirit, the Organization, and the Word, ¶1-13.
Week of July 29: The Spirit, the Organization, and the Word, ¶14-34.

