Announcements
“YOU WILL RECEIVE THE UNFADABLE CROWN”
Those who read the October 1, 1960, issue of this magazine will recall the life story there published of Giovanni DeCecca. Brother DeCecca died on the morning of November 26, 1965, at the age of 85. Before immigrating to the United States in the year 1900, he had been a shepherd boy in Italy from the age of five. In 1906 he dedicated his life to Jehovah God and shortly thereafter began spending his full time in feeding sheeplike persons with Bible truths, particularly in Italian-speaking areas. He was called to the Watch Tower Society’s Brooklyn headquarters in 1909, where he continued to serve until his death. In 1918, he was among a group of eight principal members of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society who were unjustly sentenced to imprisonment in the United States penitentiary in Atlanta, Georgia. Along with the others, he was exonerated and released the following year. Thus for nearly sixty years Brother DeCecca faithfully served as a true shepherd of God’s sheep, as one of the anointed remnant of Christ’s followers. He trusted in the Scriptural promise that “when the chief shepherd has been made manifest, you will receive the unfadable crown of glory.” (1 Pet. 5:4) We rejoice with him in the fulfillment of this promise.
FIELD MINISTRY
One who has come to know Jehovah God through study of his Word, the Bible, knows that the worship of God ought to come first in his life. (Matt. 4:10; 6:33) To aid other sincere persons to appreciate the importance of wholehearted worship of the true God, throughout January Jehovah’s witnesses will be offering to all persons a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, with three Bible-study booklets, for $1.
HAVE YOU YOUR COPY?
Have you obtained your copy of the 1966 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses? It gives you a stirring account of how the growth in preaching activity of Jehovah’s witnesses has been attained and how these determined preachers have persisted in preaching from door to door and city to city, speaking freely from the Bible about God’s kingdom under Christ as the only hope for men of all kinds. Send also for the beautiful 1966 calendar. The Yearbook is 50c. The calendar is 25c. Send today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
February 13: The Value of Right Association Through Congregational Meetings. Page 41.
February 20: Guard Against Bad Association. Page 48.

