Jehovah’s Witnesses Around the World​—New Zealand
CAN islands praise Jehovah? Yes, according to Isaiah 42:10: “Sing to Jehovah a new song, his praise from the extremity of the earth, . . . you islands and you inhabiting them.” The islands that make up New Zealand certainly praise Jehovah. World renowned for lakes, fjords, towering mountains, glaciers, beaches, fern-decked rain forests, and lush pastoral landscapes, New Zealand speaks eloquently of the majesty and grandeur of the Creator of heaven and earth.
Since just after the turn of the century, more and more of New Zealand’s inhabitants have added their voices to praise Jehovah by turning to him in pure worship and sharing the good news of God’s Kingdom with others. Recently, a Witness who had heard a good experience about witnessing to relatives decided to make an effort with his family. He presented gift copies of the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth to several family members. The results thus far? He reports that one sister and one brother are now studying the Bible, a nephew has been baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and others are now more receptive to the truth of God’s Word. He still has a large field to work with; besides his parents, he has six brothers and nine sisters!
Praise to Jehovah also results when the Witnesses join forces to construct Kingdom Halls. For example, newspaper columnist Roy Perkins wrote in the Opotiki News of May 17, 1994: “Being a non-believer, I was greatly impressed by the works and effort by all the dedicated workers who put so much time and effort into the project for the love of their God.
“In all these work-hours put into the weekend I never saw or heard of one union dispute . . . Women were up on the scaffolding working alongside their men, pointing, lifting, carrying, all in a relaxed and happy mood.
“And not one minute lost while Tom, Dick or Harry had time-out to roll a cigarette. For all those people working in whatever capacity the air was pure and as clean as paint fumes and brick dust would allow.”
The Opotiki Congregation’s body of elders wrote: “The entire project has taken the town by storm. It seems as though everybody is talking about it. Several Bible studies have been started. One in particular that we find very exciting is a deeply religious couple who for many years have asked that we not call on them. They came to the site each day and then to the meeting. The husband said afterward, ‘I can see you are God’s people. Inside, I have been yearning all my life to associate with a people like this.’”
The previous year, a columnist for the Otago Daily Times said the following about a quickly built Kingdom Hall in Dunedin: “It was a remarkable performance, a remarkable example of motivation and self-help.” The same newspaper commented: “City folk watched with admiration as a large building grew before their eyes, and many must be reflecting what other transformations and positive projects can be accomplished if a similarly large pool of voluntary labour and lots of cooperative spirit were available. Kingdom Hall is a proud symbol of constructive effort achieving results.”
Of the many hundreds who visited the construction site, one gentleman observed that the Witnesses were building “churches” while his religious denomination was selling them because of dwindling membership. “If you had waited about another twelve months, you could have bought one of ours,” he ventured. “We have to sell one because we can’t keep up the payments. But, of course, you people don’t have paid clergy. . . . And then your buildings are low maintenance, not high buildings with steeples that are impossible to maintain.”
Clearly, islands can indeed praise God. May Jehovah’s praises continue to resound in this beautiful Pacific land​—and around the world!
[Box on page 9]
COUNTRY PROFILE:
1994 Service Year
PEAK NUMBER WITNESSING: 12,867
RATIO: 1 Witness to 271
MEMORIAL ATTENDANCE: 24,436
AVERAGE PIONEER PUBLISHERS: 1,386
AVERAGE BIBLE STUDIES: 7,519
NUMBER BAPTIZED: 568
NUMBER OF CONGREGATIONS: 158
BRANCH OFFICE: MANUREWA 
[Picture on page 9]
Pioneers off to the field about 1930
[Picture on page 9]
Branch facilities in Manurewa
[Picture on page 9]
Preaching the Kingdom message in Devonport, Auckland

