Their Light Did Not Go Out
IN BIBLE times there were faithful Witnesses of Jehovah who experienced setbacks and difficulties. They faced opposition and apparent failures. Still, they did not give up out of discouragement. In effect, their light did not go out.
For example, the prophet Jeremiah was given a commission to be God’s prophet to the apostate nation of Judah. He sounded the warning about the coming destruction of Jerusalem. (Jeremiah 1:11-19) As a result, Jeremiah had many confrontations with his fellow countrymen, who viewed him as a calamity howler.
The priest Pashhur, the leading commissioner in the house of God, once struck Jeremiah because of what he had prophesied and put him into stocks. With this seeming setback, Jeremiah said: “I became an object of laughter all day long; everyone is holding me in derision. For as often as I speak, I cry out. Violence and despoiling are what I call out. For the word of Jehovah became for me a cause for reproach and for jeering all day long.” The prophet was discouraged even to the point of saying: “I am not going to make mention of him [Jehovah], and I shall speak no more in his name.”​—Jeremiah 20:1, 2, 7-9.
However, Jeremiah did not succumb to discouragement. Speaking of “the word of Jehovah,” he declared: “In my heart it proved to be like a burning fire shut up in my bones; and I got tired of holding in, and I was unable to endure it.” (Jeremiah 20:8, 9) Strongly motivated to speak the pronouncements of God, Jeremiah was sustained by holy spirit and fulfilled his commission.
The apostle Paul also had a host of reasons for becoming discouraged, had he yielded to them. He endured natural disasters, shipwreck, persecution, and beatings. In addition, ‘what rushed in on him from day to day was the anxiety for all the congregations.’ (2 Corinthians 11:23-28) Yes, Paul daily had to deal with problems, worrying about new congregations that he had helped to establish. Moreover, he was imperfect and had to contend with “a thorn in the flesh,” possibly poor eyesight. (2 Corinthians 12:7; Romans 7:15; Galatians 4:15) Some even spoke against Paul behind his back, and this found its way to his ears.​—2 Corinthians 10:10.
Nevertheless, Paul did not allow discouragement to overwhelm him. No, he was not a superman. (2 Corinthians 11:29, 30) What kept his ‘internal fire’ burning? For one thing, he had supportive companions, some even accompanying him into Rome where he was kept under house arrest. (Acts 28:14-16) Second, the apostle viewed his situation in a balanced way. His persecutors and opposers were in the wrong, not Paul. Toward the end of his earthly life, he evaluated his ministry in a positive way and said: “From this time on there is reserved for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give me as a reward.”​—2 Timothy 4:8.
Above all, Paul regularly approached Jehovah God in prayer, and ‘the Lord stood near him and infused power into him.’ (2 Timothy 4:17) “For all things,” said Paul, “I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me.” (Philippians 4:13) Communication with God and fellow Christians, together with a positive evaluation of his ministry, helped Paul to keep going in Jehovah’s service.
God inspired Paul to write: “Let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due season we shall reap if we do not tire out.” (Galatians 6:7-9) Reap what? Everlasting life. So, then, be like Jeremiah, Paul, and the many other faithful witnesses of Jehovah mentioned in the Scriptures. Yes, be like them, and do not succumb to discouragement. Do not let your light go out.​—Compare Matthew 5:14-16.
[Pictures on page 25]
Paul and Jeremiah did not let their light go out

