From Our Readers
Help for Depression
To help with my husband’s serious depression and resulting family conflicts, my husband and I went to special therapy with a psychologist. During the six months of treatment, we kept checking the counsel we were given with that found in the September 8 and October 22, 1981, issues of “Awake!” We found that much of the same counsel we were paying for had already been in these magazines for free, but it confirmed that the professional counsel we were getting was sound. Then I read the January 8, 1986, issue on “Peace in the Family.” I thought to myself, ‘There is $2,000 worth of counseling bound up in the pages of this magazine.’ That magazine should be required reading for all married couples and those who are even contemplating marriage.
C. S., Missouri
Working Vacation
I want to thank you very much for the article “Would You Take a Working Vacation?” (February 8, 1986) It is inspiring to read of the faith and self-sacrificing spirit of these volunteers from around the country. However, I was disappointed at your failure to mention the self-sacrificing spirit of their wives and children. They no doubt wholeheartedly supported their husband’s and father’s decision to work there during their vacation, though it meant they would not be spending that time with their family.
C. T., Massachusetts
Our warmest expression of appreciation to all the wives and children of these volunteer workers. Without their wholehearted support, the sacrifice would not have been possible.​—ED.
Improve Your Reading
I am 15 years old, and I never did like reading. Then I read your article “Improve Your Reading​—You Can Do It!” (September 8, 1985) I was really lazy about reading, but now I appreciate that reading can really enrich our life.
G. A., Brazil
Cold Water for Burns
We want to offer our gratitude for the information provided in your article “What You Should Know About Burns.” (April 22, 1980) My daughter suffered burns from hot fat on her arm and got relief by packing the arm with crushed ice. My wife suffered scalding on her arm and hand from boiling bacon water, and she applied the ice-water treatment immediately. Dr. Stephen R. Lewis’ report stated that with the ice-water treatment the pain usually disappears within about three hours. In our daughter’s case, she had to persist for about 10 hours, and my wife continued the treatment for upwards of 15 hours. Anyone using this treatment should not give up too soon. In both cases, there were no blisters and no problems with healing.
M. and J. D., Wales
When Parents Yell
Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . What Can I Do When My Parents Yell at Me?” (November 22, 1985) It was a remarkable article to help us to get along with our parents, husbands, and others. All the articles I have read have given me courage to overcome the evil around us. If everyone would just read them and put in practice what is said, the world would truly be a paradise.
M. S., Portugal

