Young People Ask . . .
Is the Bible Relevant for Me?
“I DON’T want to hear anything from you,” the young man snapped. As Grace turned to leave, he emptied a basin of dirty water over her. She stiffened momentarily, then relaxed and calmly walked away.
But was not this young woman’s response to aggression foolish and perhaps weak? Should she not have retaliated? Grace thinks that the Bible’s counsel to be “peaceable with all men’’ is best. (Romans 12:17, 18) But what was the result of her following the Bible instead of angrily hitting back? We shall see.
Lydia, a 16-year-old student in Nigeria, tells of a classmate “who ran after boys and slept with the biology teacher.” This girl apparently felt that the Bible’s counsel to flee from sexual immorality was irrelevant. (1 Corinthians 6:18) She likely reasoned that youths should be left unfettered to do what they want. But what resulted from her actions?
The experiences of Grace and of Lydia’s classmate raise two important questions: Is the Bible still relevant? Or are present social doctrines and life-styles better for good living?
Modern-Day Standards
Consider the “liberation” movements and the “new morality.” These reject the Bible’s laws restricting sexual relations to married people​—between a husband and his one legal wife. (1 Corinthians 7:1, 2) Great changes in social attitudes have resulted. Sexual promiscuity has increased. Homosexuals and prostitutes demand acceptance and now practice their life-styles openly. Young couples simply live together without marriage. But has all of this produced better family life? Has it improved the quality of life in your community?
Reflect on this example of what can happen to permissive teenagers: Lydia’s classmate became pregnant by the biology teacher, a married man. She ruined her schooling and family life. Others have died in attempting illegal abortions. The deaths of teenagers and of unborn babies, the sexually transmitted diseases some have contracted, the breakdown in family life​—are these fruits of current social philosophy good fruits?
Perhaps you can think of other developments that raise a similar question. For example, the 20th century has seen the popularizing of doctrines like evolution and atheism, which reject the Bible’s authority. But in view of the wars, violence, and unrest of this same century, can it be said that those doctrines have offered something better? Actually, men are constantly changing their philosophies and theories. Social doctrines are often discarded. So how unwise it is for them to reject the Bible!
A Need for Guidance
What explanation would you give for the disappointing results that human ideas have led to? One could be that man is imperfect. So are his thinking and plans. As the Bible says, “It does not belong to man . . . even to direct his step.” (Jeremiah 10:23) We do need direction from the highest source, that is, from God. True, people say that he does not exist. But seeing how unreliable their ideas have been, we can hardly rely on that assertion, can we? On the other hand, being the Creator of man and having observed him throughout history, God absolutely knows the human makeup. Can you think of anyone more qualified to guide us? He tells us: “I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself.” (Isaiah 48:17, 18) But how does he teach us?
God’s Provision for Guidance
The Bible is Jehovah’s communication to us. (2 Timothy 3:16) It deals with real people and with concerns such as we have. It tells how and why God created us and how we can best live our lives. This is something that Eyo, a 16-year-old Efik-speaking youth, appreciates.a He says: “The Bible gives advice from past times, things that are relevant to youths. Even though its counsel seems restrictive sometimes, it does help me to avoid doing things that could harm me or damage my relationship with Jehovah.” Agreeing with him, Lydia adds: “The Bible teaches young people how to behave. I can see the difference between youths who follow the Bible’s counsel and those who do not.”
These young people believe that they need and are receiving help to develop wholesome personalities. They are supported by two older Nigerian youths​—Nicholas and Richard—​who say: “We are inexperienced and are living in a corrupt society.” “Jehovah knows more than the so-called wise ones of today. If we follow his advice, we will not regret it later.” This echoes Jehovah’s own assurance: “My ways are higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.” (Isaiah 55:9) Is it not wise to be guided by the thoughts of the Supreme Mind?
You Can Benefit Too
To illustrate the Bible’s value further, let us examine some of the people and situations it deals with, and the beneficial advice it gives.
Genesis tells about Dinah, Jacob’s daughter, who unwisely befriended Canaanite girls. These did not worship Jehovah as she did, nor did they live by the moral standards of her family. She soon attracted the attention of a young Canaanite man. The result? He sexually violated her! (Genesis 34:1-7) Do you see the lesson to be learned from this? Fittingly, the Bible counsels: “Keep your way far off from alongside” immoral persons, and “flee from fornication.” “Bad associations spoil useful habits.” (Proverbs 5:8; 1 Corinthians 6:18; 15:33) Remember what happened to Lydia’s classmate. Yet, by following the Bible’s advice, Lydia preserved her own human dignity and moral purity at school and earned the respect of others.
Think, too, about Cain, Adam’s first son. He became jealous of the favor shown his brother Abel and killed him in an act of unrestrained aggression. Yet, Jehovah had warned him that his wrong inclination would lead to grave sin if he did not “get the mastery over it.” Aggressively asserting his own desires, Cain disregarded God’s counsel. (Genesis 4:1-16) Are youths today much different? Perhaps some whom you know are like Alozie. This young Nigerian avoided opportunities to study the Bible. Lacking its influence in his life, he retaliated at the aggression of another youth. In the ensuing fight, he was seriously wounded with the jagged edge of a broken bottle. Would following the Bible’s counsel have worked out better for him? Very likely it would have. It did in the incident mentioned at the outset, involving Grace.
She was calling from house to house, discussing the Bible with people in her Nigerian town, when the young man poured water on her. Her self-control, though, impressed him, and he ran after her, apologized, and requested forgiveness. Grace arranged for him to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and now he is also a Christian. Yes, a person who can “get the mastery over” his emotions is strong, and such strength is a protection.
These, however, are just samplings of what the Bible offers. It is indeed relevant today, much of its counsel being directed to you. And it points out that, although you can choose to follow your own independent course, it would be wiser to follow God’s direction. Doing so, you will “ward off calamity from your flesh.” Such calamity could include sexually transmitted diseases, injury sustained in fighting, or other unpleasant things.​—Ecclesiastes 11:9–12:1.
So let the Bible guide your life. “Flee from the desires incidental to youth, but pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, along with those who call upon the Lord out of a clean heart.” This will earn you the blessing of a wholesome life now and of everlasting life in the future.​—2 Timothy 2:22; 3:16, 17; 1 Timothy 4:8.
[Footnotes]
Efik is a Nigerian language.
[Pictures on page 13]
Dinah’s unwise course had a bad outcome. The fruits of following the Bible’s guidance show it to be the wisest way

