“A Magnificent Companion”​—Aid to Bible Understanding
Could a book really be that? A lawyer who was in prison in Curaçao, Netherlands Antilles, thought so. He wrote the man who had provided him with the volume Aid to Bible Understanding:
“From the time that I received the Aid book from you I have found my stay in prison much easier to bear. That is because I have found in this book a magnificent companion that helps me to overcome the loneliness of this place. The Aid book is an endless source of historical and Biblical information that really helps me to understand words and passages from the Holy Scriptures. . . .
“Every day I feel myself more and more proud to be the owner of such an excellent book but even prouder the last week. Thanks to the Aid book I was able to intervene in a discussion that took place between some guards and prisoners concerning some Bible passages and their interpretation. Because the discussion was very heated, and it seemed that it would not come to a peaceful end, I ran from the yard to my cell and got the Aid book and looked up the words and passages under discussion and found their exact meaning, so the argument stopped.
“Well, the Aid book deserves praise because of the depth with which it deals with words, actions, and people mentioned in the Bible. From the moment I produced this book, there was no more argument between the guards and the prisoners because they all accepted and were pleased with the fine explanation of this encyclopedia. . . .
“I am writing you this letter because I want you to know that I appreciate the Aid book as something of great value, and I am using it not only for my own benefit but also for the benefit of others who are interested in knowing the Truth as contained in the Holy Scriptures.”
We are confident that you, too, will find this 1,700-page volume a magnificent companion. You can obtain your copy by filling in and mailing the accompanying coupon.
Please send, postpaid, Aid to Bible Understanding, for which I enclose $7 (U.S.). (Outside the U.S.A., write to local Watch Tower branch for information.)

