A Letter from Nicaragua
SHORTLY after the earthquake that devastated Managua late in December, the following letter was received from Brother Witherspoon, the Watch Tower Society’s branch overseer there. Many readers of The Watchtower are deeply concerned about the welfare of their Christian brothers in Managua, and they will find this report, dated December 25, to be of great interest. It was addressed to N. H. Knorr, president of the Watch Tower Society:
“I was able to hear you clearly in our telephone conversation this morning. Thank you, Brother Knorr, for your love and concern for us, and we thank Jehovah for the formation of such an organization of love that he has raised up in this critical period of time. The assistance that we received after the earthquake was swift.
“The first and most severe shock hit Managua about 12:40 in the early part of the new day of December 23. All the missionaries were in bed. When it stopped, we quickly went to the center of the street outside. Two more shocks struck in a short period of time afterward. Houses were falling all around us. We did not receive even so much as a cut, however. The city was blanketed in a thick cover of dust. After it cleared to allow a three-quarter moon to shine through, we obtained our first glimpse of the neighborhood. We did not know then that the devastation was the same all over Managua.
“Our neighbors were stunned and silent. Then, after a short period of time, cries of despair and wailing broke out. One half block away twelve people had been buried alive in one colonia. Rescue work was difficult due to a lack of tools. In surrounding blocks the story was the same: Three buried here, one there, twenty more three blocks over. Death surrounded us. A red glow over the downtown section informed us that fire was also following in the wake of the earthquake. As a chilly dawn broke over a devastated city we began to see the horror that had been produced.
“Our concern was for our Christian brothers, and their concern was for us too. The missionaries that were overseers set off to see about the brothers. I stayed at the branch waiting for reports and to see what would be needed. Anxious moments seemed like hours as slowly the reports came in. But, almost unbelievably, no deaths of brothers were reported. However, some of their parents or relatives did lose their lives, and one person who was to be baptized at our district assembly this week lost four of her children.
“In case after case the story of the brothers was the same. The house just collapsed on top of them and they had to dig out as best they could. Many were cut and bruised, but so far no one has reported having so much as a bone broken. What was uppermost in the minds of these brothers?
“Well, after inquiring first of all about us and the other brothers, they would ask in dismay how this would affect the forthcoming district assembly, fearing that it would be canceled​—this to them was the greatest tragedy, missing the assembly. No thoughts about the loss of their homes or material possessions. Believe me, Brother Knorr, that leaves a large lump in one’s throat.
“At ten o’clock in the evening of this same day of the earthquake, less than twenty-two hours afterward, the first material help arrived from the brothers in Honduras. This was Saturday evening. All of us spent the night in the street; in fact, everyone in Managua did. The shocks continued all night, some heavy, some light, but nothing to compare with the length or force of the first one on Saturday morning. We passed a very restless night. At 7 a.m. on Sunday, Brother Shepp (branch overseer) arrived from Costa Rica with more assistance. He also wanted to know what was needed so he could return immediately and set up arrangements for additional help. After we decided on the basic needs we took a two-and-a-half-hour tour of the city. We were shocked at what we saw. Managua has been destroyed! The Society’s branch office, in my opinion, was the least damaged building in the entire city.
“Before noon on Sunday more supplies arrived from El Salvador. They were also anxious to know what was needed, so a list was provided. The borders were being kept open for emergency relief vehicles to enter. No visas are required, so the brothers are able to make quick round trips. Yesterday, Sunday morning, we had the relief arrangements set up in the branch Kingdom Hall. The brothers were notified and started to arrive. As yesterday drew to a close we had been able to provide 578 brothers with enough food for two days. We were also able to provide sufficient water for this same amount by having it brought in by truck from areas outside Managua. Medical supplies are not needed. We have enough or will be able to obtain them.
“About 80 percent of the brothers have lost their homes. Nine Kingdom Halls have been nearly or totally destroyed. Managua is being evacuated. Work is under way to raze the entire downtown area, taking a strip fifteen blocks wide. Many bodies are still being discovered in this section. The stench is becoming quite strong. Due to contamination dangers, all are encouraged to avoid this area. The general hospital was so badly damaged that the patients were removed to the grounds outside. Earthquake victims were thus unable to be attended there and many were just turned away. We understand that tent units are now being set up outside the hospital to give more attention. The government has been under a heavy strain to provide for such an enormous undertaking.
“We will just have to wait to see what will be the most practical course to follow. But the brothers are calm and wait for instructions before acting.
“We have some funds on hand, but most of our money is in the bank, and the banks are not open. It may be days before they do so. But if we do need financial assistance that we cannot obtain here to aid the brothers, and it appears that this will be the case, then I will send word to Brother Allinger (branch overseer) in Honduras and to Brother Shepp in Costa Rica to buy supplies for us with their monies, send them to us and charge this to our branch until such time as our funds are released and/​or we can arrange the situation in a more satisfactory way. Or if we can buy what is needed here, then perhaps they could send us just the money. But as it is too early to know just what will develop, we will wait to see and do the best we can under the prevailing circumstances.
“We are encouraging all to keep active in the preaching work, to remain strong spiritually and to trust in Jehovah. As for the material assistance they are receiving, well, they can hardly hold back the tears. They appreciate so much the love and concern of the brothers in other parts of the world.”

