Why Honest-hearted Persons Want to Serve Jehovah
EACH year tens of thousands willingly take up the service of the God of the Bible, Jehovah. Often this means changing their whole way of life. Yet they are happy to do so. Why?
It is because they appreciate that Jehovah is the Supreme Sovereign and Creator of the universe. This vital reason has moved reverent men in all periods of human history to want to serve him.
One of these men, an inspired songwriter before the Christian Era, expressed his feelings as follows: “Jehovah is a great God and a great King over all other gods, he in whose hand are the inmost depths of the earth and to whom the peaks of the mountains belong; to whom the sea, which he himself made, belongs and whose own hands formed the dry land itself. O come in, let us worship and bow down; let us kneel before Jehovah our Maker.”​—Ps. 95:3-6.
Centuries later, the Christian apostle John, in vision, heard twenty-four elders declare: “You are worthy, Jehovah, even our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they existed and were created.” (Rev. 4:11) Certainly if anyone in all the universe merits our worship and service, it is Jehovah God.
Another powerful reason why honest-hearted ones want to serve Jehovah is the merciful, compassionate and loving way in which he has dealt with imperfect, sinful mankind.
The first man, Adam, by choosing to disobey God’s law sold himself and all his descendants into slavery to sin and death. The Bible says: “Through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and thus death spread to all men because they had all sinned.”​—Rom. 5:12.
No human, through his own efforts, could get released from this slavery. “Not one of them can by any means redeem even a brother, nor give to God a ransom for him; (and the redemption price of their soul is so precious that it has ceased to time indefinite) that he should still live forever and not see the pit.”​—Ps. 49:7-9.
Jehovah God could have turned his back on Adam’s offspring, for he does not need anything from anyone. But in his boundless love for mankind, Jehovah provided the needed ransom at great cost to himself. He transferred the life of his dearest heavenly Son to the womb of the Jewish virgin Mary so that this one could be born as a perfect man and could sacrifice his life in behalf of sinful, dying mankind. (Luke 1:26-37; John 1:14) Regarding this superlative expression of God’s love, the apostle Paul wrote: “Indeed, Christ, while we were yet weak, died for ungodly men at the appointed time. For hardly will anyone die for a righteous man; indeed, for the good man, perhaps, someone even dares to die. But God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.”​—Rom. 5:6-8.
The way in which Jehovah God has exercised his rulership has also appealed to the hearts of honest-hearted men and women. He does not force people to serve him but wants them to do so willingly because of their deep love for him and their appreciation for the rightness of his commands.​—Deut. 30:11-16; 1 John 5:2.
It should not be difficult for honest-hearted persons to discern that obedience to God’s law is in man’s best interests. Such obedience is not burdensome but refreshing. (1 John 5:3) This is because love, an unselfish concern and interest in others, is the basis for divine law governing all human relationships. Regarding the Mosaic law the apostle Paul wrote: “The law code, ‘You must not commit adultery, You must not murder, You must not steal, You must not covet,’ and whatever other commandment there is, is summed up in this word, namely, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’ Love does not work evil to one’s neighbor; therefore love is the law’s fulfillment.”​—Rom. 13:9, 10.
Would not human relationships be improved if people everywhere and at all times sought to do the loving thing in behalf of fellowmen? Would this not put an end to injustices and oppression? Would this not make for happiness, contentment and security in life? Surely!
Accordingly, sincere people should be able to see that those who adhere to the Bible’s commands are enjoying the best way of life now. This very factor is prompting many today to begin serving Jehovah God as his dedicated witnesses. One man observed: “The main point that drew me was the international unity Jehovah’s witnesses possessed among all races and finding out that this was possible only through strict adherence to Bible principles.” Another commented: “I was moved by the friendliness and warmth among Jehovah’s witnesses. I recognized that there should be peace, unity and love among those who knew the truth.” Still another said: “The love I saw in the families of Jehovah’s witnesses helped me to discern that these were true Christians.”
Truly honest-hearted persons have many good reasons for serving Jehovah. His position as Creator and Supreme Sovereign makes him completely deserving of such service. His way of ruling has always reflected love and has definitely been in the best interests of all his intelligent creatures. Although not lacking in anything, Jehovah God has taken the initiative in showing love by opening up to sinful mankind the opportunity to be liberated from slavery to sin and death and forever to enjoy the blessings of his righteous rule.
Does what Jehovah God is and has done stir you to want to serve him with a complete heart? If this is the case, you doubtless want to associate with others who have the same desire. We therefore encourage you to go to the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses nearest your home this week, if possible, and see for yourself whether those in attendance give evidence of the love and unity that you would expect to find among persons who, though imperfect, are serving the true God.

