Announcements
HOLDING FAST TO PUBLICLY DECLARING OUR HOPE
Why keep still when you have a wonderful hope and know that others may share the joy it brings by learning of it and accepting it? There is no reason why, you reply, and properly so. On that account, as well as because it is a responsibility laid upon them, Jehovah’s witnesses persist in telling others about their hope that a new world of righteousness is at hand. To have the things to tell correctly in mind they are commanded to attend congregation meetings regularly and then to use the information they learn teaching others. (Heb. 10:23, NW) Because of deep appreciation of the truth they treasure, they rejoice to pass it out in every possible way. During October they will do so by means of obtaining subscriptions for the helpful, Scriptural magazine Awake! A year’s subscription will be offered to the people at their doors, together with three booklets on absorbing Bible subjects, at the rate of $1. All persons of good will toward God are invited to share in this Christian activity. Write for details.
YOU MAY SURVIVE ARMAGEDDON INTO GOD’S NEW WORLD
Billions of dollars are being spent on collective security. Millions of people are being trained in civilian defense. Yet not one penny will profit, nor any such program provide safety in the final all-out war just ahead. Security with peace of mind is a priceless possession. It is possible! It can be yours! Where and how it is to be found is the engrossing subject of the new 384-page book entitled “You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World.” Pointing to the unmistakable evidence of the guilt of all creatures before Jehovah God, this book then opens the door to God’s own inspired Word and leads to the Bible’s promise of refuge from the storm of Armageddon’s war. It presents assurance for the future in a new system of things now being provided by the Maker of the new world, Jehovah God. Send for your copy on a contribution of 50c and learn how You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY
The Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society will hold its annual meeting of members on Saturday, October 1, 1955, at ten o’clock in the forenoon at the registered office of the Society, which is located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, comer of Parkman Avenue, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The members of the corporation will receive the usual letter of notice advising them of the meeting and sending them proxy forms. We should like to have all the proxies returned to the office of the secretary of the Society not later than the 15th of September. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not. Members of the corporation should be certain that the secretary’s office has the proper addresses to which to mail the notices of the annual meeting.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
October 23: What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? ¶1-22. Page 560.
October 30: What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? ¶23-46. Page 567.

