AIDS​—A Global Killer
SOME medical authorities feel that AIDS is on the verge of becoming a global catastrophe. “AIDS may be the health catastrophe of our lifetime,” claimed The New York Times. Dr. William O’Connor, a microbiologist, said: “What we’re dealing with is probably the greatest plague ever to hit the world.”
Dr. Halfdan Mahler of WHO (World Health Organization) stated: “We stand nakedly in front of a very serious pandemic as mortal as any pandemic there ever has been. . . . Everything is getting worse and worse in AIDS.”
With each passing year, the death toll increases. Soon, the death toll will likely be many times larger. And this may be the case even if not one more person were to be infected with the AIDS virus. Why? Because of the huge number of people who already have the virus, which stays with a person for a lifetime.
How many already have the virus? Some have said ten million worldwide. The report AIDS and the Third World estimates that before long, AIDS “will have infected 50-100 million people.”
That estimate is based on what has happened in Africa, Europe, and North America. But AIDS is also in Latin America and has entered Asia. Denmark’s Politiken observes: “What will happen if and when the epidemic breaks out in serious proportions in South America and Asia? . . . The number of infected will not be as low as 50-100 million.” Even if such figures are exaggerated, without a doubt there are millions of people already infected. And there will be many more millions in the years just ahead.
Also, the vast majority of those who now have the AIDS virus do not know that they have it. They are in apparent good health and yet can pass the virus on to others. So the number of people infected with the AIDS virus is certain to go much higher.
Surgeon general of the United States, C. E. Koop, said: “No previous disease has been at once so mysterious, so fatal, and so resistant to therapy and vaccine development.” He stated: “We do not yet have a cure, nor do we have a vaccine​—and we probably won’t have one generally available before the end of the century. Make no mistake about it. AIDS is fatal and it is spreading.” Dr. Koop also said: “I have been a surgeon for almost 50 years, and I have never seen such a threat as AIDS.”

