From Our Readers
Orthodox Church  As an Orthodox Christian, I was intrigued by your article “The Greek Orthodox Church—A Religion Divided.” (January 8, 1996) The next time you denigrate Orthodoxy, have the honesty to discuss its contributions, such as how it preserved Christianity during Islamic persecution and Soviet rule. Besides, separation of Church and State is not Biblical. Were King David’s or Solomon’s governments separate from the Church?
M. F., United States
We focused on the crisis currently facing the Orthodox Church—a matter well documented by the media in Greece. This crisis is the result of the church’s failure to obey Jesus’ command to be “no part of the world” and to remain neutral politically. (John 17:16)—ED.
Panic Attacks  Thank you for the article “Coping With Panic Attacks.” (June 8, 1996) I have had these attacks for 14 years and thought I was the only one with this problem. Sometimes the feelings even come over me at the Kingdom Hall. Although my problems may not go away, this article has really helped me.
C. C., Spain
It was with a flood of tears that I read the article on panic attacks. It will help me the next time that panic tries to pick a fight. I feel the article is an answer to my prayers.
M. B., Scotland
For almost 30 years, I’ve been unable to ride trains or buses or be surrounded by people. Meetings at the Kingdom Hall and conventions have been big challenges. So you can understand how this article has been a source of great encouragement and comfort to me. Thank you from the bottom of my heart for writing about this ailment in an upbuilding and comforting way.
Y. T., Japan
I am a full-time evangelizer, and I have had these terrible attacks since 1994. I lost my joy and did not want to leave my house. I thought these feelings were due to a lack of faith, but now I know that I am not the only Christian going through this.
S. A., Brazil
Waltzing Matilda  The song “Waltzing Matilda” brings back fond memories to me. Thank you for the article (June 8, 1996) that provided the background information on that song. Reading it has rekindled my interest in reading all the articles in Awake!
J. M., Germany
Telephone Manners  Thank you for the excellent article “How Are Your Telephone Manners?” (June 8, 1996) I work for a bank that provides client services by phone. I gave the article to my supervisor, and he told me that he found the article to be beneficial, timely, and practical. He asked me to have the article circulated among all 32 of our telephone operators.
N. J. S., Brazil
Having had difficulties in the past with unwanted callers who had criminal motives, we have long followed the telephone company’s recommendation to hang up if a caller refuses to identify himself after three polite requests. This has resulted in hurt feelings a few times when a friend has called and played the guess-who game mentioned in the article. Articles like this promote kindness and understanding even in such seemingly small areas.
G. A., United States

