
Corruption Will End!

“Hope in Jehovah and keep his way . . . When the wicked ones are cut off, you will see it.”—PSALM 37:34.



DO YOU, like many people, fear that corruption is inevitable and will never be completely eliminated? If so, that fear is understandable. Throughout history, humans have tried every conceivable form of government. Yet, they have never succeeded in permanently eliminating corruption. Is there any hope that a time will come when all people will deal honestly with one another?
Happily, the Bible’s answer is yes! It tells us that God will soon take action to rid our earth of corruption. How will he do so? By means of his Kingdom, a heavenly government that will completely transform our earth. This is the same Kingdom that Jesus taught his followers to pray for. In what is sometimes called the Lord’s Prayer or the Our Father, Jesus said: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth.”—Matthew 6:10, King James Version.
Concerning the Ruler of that Kingdom, Jesus Christ, the Bible foretells: “He will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. He will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, and the souls of the poor ones he will save. From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul.” (Psalm 72:12-14) Note that Jesus has empathy for those who are victims of corruption, and he will do something about oppression! Is that not comforting?
In the hands of that compassionate and powerful Ruler, God’s Kingdom will rid our earth of corruption. How? By eliminating the three causes of corruption.



The Influence of Sin

At present, we must all battle sinful tendencies, which incline us to act selfishly. (Romans 7:21-23) Still, there are good people who want to do what is right. They exercise faith in the ransoming value of Jesus’ shed blood, and they can receive forgiveness of their sins.a (1 John 1:7, 9) Such people stand to benefit from God’s greatest act of love, as we read at John 3:16: “God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.”
For faithful people, God will do something truly marvelous. In the coming new world, he will eventually remove all traces of sin, progressively raising faithful mankind to perfection and a righteous standing. (Isaiah 26:9; 2 Peter 3:13) Never again will the influence of sin cause anyone to act corruptly. Under the rule of God’s Kingdom, faithful humans “will be set free from enslavement to corruption.”—Romans 8:20-22.



The Influence of the Wicked World We Live In

Sadly, many today intentionally victimize others. They take advantage of the lowly and the poor, and they influence others to act corruptly as well. The Bible admonishes such individuals: “Let the wicked man leave his way, and the harmful man his thoughts.” If such corrupt individuals do repent, the Bible promises that God “will forgive in a large way.”—Isaiah 55:7.
However, God will have no choice but to remove those who stubbornly refuse to change their ways. By means of God’s Kingdom, the Bible’s promise will come true: “Hope in Jehovah and keep his way . . . When the wicked ones are cut off, you will see it.”b (Psalm 37:34) With the incorrigibly wicked gone, faithful worshippers of God will no longer be victims of corruption.



The Influence of Satan the Devil

Foremost among hardened sinners is Satan the Devil. How thankful we can be that Jehovah will soon restrict Satan, preventing him from influencing humans. Eventually, God will destroy Satan completely. Never again will that wicked monster be able to influence people to act corruptly.
Granted, the idea that God will do away with all causes of corruption may seem to be mere wishful thinking. You may wonder, ‘Does God really have the means to bring about such changes? If so, why hasn’t he done it already?’ Those are good questions, and the Bible provides satisfying answers.c We invite you to examine for yourself what the Bible teaches about the near future, when all corruption will be gone forever.



For more information on the ransoming value of Jesus’ death, see chapter 5 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Jehovah is God’s name as revealed in the Bible.
For more information, see chapters 3, 8, and 11 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?


