Announcements
● Literature offer for December: Young People Ask book for a contribution of $1.50, or Bible Stories or Live Forever for $3.00. January and February: Any 192-page book published prior to 1980 that the congregation has in stock for the reduced contribution of 50¢, with the following exceptions: Family Life, Great Teacher, This Life, Truth, and Youth. There is a limited supply of Commentary on James that may be ordered from Brooklyn. (For obtaining credit, elders should refer to the guidelines in the Society’s letter of December 21, 1988.) If the congregation has no stock of books to be offered at the reduced rate, the Worldwide Security book should be offered for a contribution of $1.00. These books may be ordered from Brooklyn. March: The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? for a contribution of $1.00.
● The Memorial date for 1991 will be Saturday, March 30, after sundown. This advance notice of the date for the 1991 Memorial celebration is given so that brothers may make necessary reservations or contracts for available halls when there are too many congregations using one Kingdom Hall and they must find other facilities.
● The Watchtower in Hungarian and in Samoan will become semimonthly editions starting with the January 1, 1990, issue.
● The Awake! magazine will begin as a monthly edition in the Hungarian, Sepedi, and Tswana languages starting with the January 8, 1990, issue. Additionally, Awake! in Zulu will become a semimonthly edition as of the January 8, 1990, issue.
● The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit the congregation’s accounts on December 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● Congregations should begin ordering bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! for 1989 on their December literature orders. (See the 1989 Cost List, paragraphs 7-10.) The bound volumes will be available in Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, and Spanish. Until the bound volumes are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Bound volumes are controlled stock items and will be charged at $6.00 each for congregation, public, and pioneers.​—See the Cost List, paragraphs 23-25.
● Some adjustments will be made in future printings of the Live Forever book. The only significant change is with regard to the Sodomites, on pages 178 and 179. This change appeared in the Revelation book, page 273, and in The Watchtower of June 1, 1988, pages 30 and 31. You may wish to note it in earlier printings that you have on hand.
● If congregations have not done so already, they should order Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1990 with their December literature order. (See the 1989 Cost List, paragraphs 7-10.) The booklets will be available in Arabic, Chinese, Croatian, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Iloko, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Samoan, Spanish, Swedish, Tagalog, Turkish, and Vietnamese. Until these booklets are available and shipments are made, they will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Examining the Scriptures booklets are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at 30¢ each, which is the publisher rate. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1989, may receive one free copy and obtain additional copies at 20¢ each. A separate entry should be made on the monthly remittance form (S-20), showing free copies to pioneers.​—See the 1989 Cost List, paragraphs 23-25.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—Large Print (set of four volumes)—​French
Comprehensive Concordance​—German, Italian
Reasoning From the Scriptures​—Hungarian
Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!​—Croatian, Hungarian
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Large and small sizes)​—Polish
The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?​—Danish, German, Norwegian, Swedish
Watch Tower Publications Index 1981-1985​—Dutch
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Croatian, German, Polish, Ukrainian
Victory Over Death​—Is It Possible for You?​—Tamil
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Listening to the Great Teacher (set of four cassettes and a book in an album; congregation and public: $10.00; pioneers: $7.50)​—Finnish, Norwegian

