Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 4
Song 51
10 min: Local announcements. Include comments on December magazines dealing with holiday celebrations. Mention specific points that can be featured in field service. Encourage support for Saturday magazine activity.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—To Youths.” Question-and-answer consideration. When covering paragraph 5, have demonstration of publisher presenting offer to teenager.
15 min: Elder and two or three qualified publishers discuss Young People Ask book. Briefly highlight the ten sections of book. Consider selected chapters. Note powerful illustrations, such as the picture on page 27. Encourage youths, parents, and others to consider the book’s timely counsel. All should prepare to use book in field service. Suggest ways to use it in family discussion.
Song 40 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 11
Song 138
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Include accounts report along with Society’s acknowledgment of contributions by congregation. Announce congregation’s field service arrangements.
20 min: “Helping Youths to Ward Off Calamity.” Question-and-answer consideration. When covering paragraph 8, have qualified publisher present Topic for Conversation and briefly offer publication.
15 min: Is Christmas a Celebration Based on the Bible? Two qualified brothers discuss subject from Reasoning book, pages 176-8. Call attention to fine article on Christmas traditions in December 8, 1989, Awake! Highlight need to respond tactfully when Christmas greetings are extended by householder. Suggest how publishers might take advantage of opportunities to give a witness during holiday season.
Song 183 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 18
Song 151
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Outline local arrangements for holiday witnessing.
17 min: “Offer Magazines at Every Opportunity.” Question-and-answer consideration. When considering paragraph 4, demonstrate how to approach a person waiting for public transportation or in similar situations. Highlight need to be conscious of offering magazines at every opportunity.
18 min: “Keeping Pace With Theocratic Increase.” Question-and-answer consideration of insert. Warmly commend publishers for supporting the Society Kingdom Hall Fund.
Song 53 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 25
Song 30
10 min: Local announcements. Mention literature offer for January, and inform congregation of what books are available locally. Call attention to weekend field service arrangements.
15 min: Demonstrating Good Manners While at the Kingdom Hall. Talk based on The Watchtower of June 15, 1989, pages 16-17. Highlight need to (1) arrive on time, (2) pay close attention to program, (3) take warm, personal interest in others.
10 min: The Duties of Attendants at Congregation Meetings. Consideration of Question Box by elder and one or two qualified attendants. Show need for all in congregation to cooperate with attendants.
10 min: “Corresponding With Prisoners.” Talk by elder, with audience participation. Include key points from the February 1982 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 7, and Society’s letter of December 1, 1981, to the elders.
Song 18 and concluding prayer.

