Offer Magazines at Every Opportunity
1 For more than a hundred years, The Watchtower has been championing the cause of Kingdom truth. It skillfully uses God’s Word as a sword in cutting through error and exposing false religious teachings. Its companion magazine Awake! also advocates the cause of truth. For righteously inclined people, it may arouse their interest in deep Scriptural material found in other Society publications. What can we do to get these magazines into the hands of more people?
2 The first step is to know the contents of the magazines. This means reading them as soon as they are received and then talking about the articles with others in the congregation. This will assist us in zealously offering the magazines to others and in maintaining a positive attitude as to their value.
3 The next step is to set aside time each week for offering the magazines to others. Make this a part of your regular schedule of activity. Are you alert to other opportunities to place magazines?
SPEAK TO PEOPLE
4 While in the door-to-door magazine work, you may find that many people are not at home. But you can talk to people where you do find them. Approach people as they walk along the street. Talk to those who are sitting in cars, working in the yard, waiting for public transportation, and so forth. Refer to a specific article and a point of interest. Make use of the excellent photographs and illustrations to stimulate their interest. Talk to people in a warm, friendly, positive manner, and sincerely present definite points you have gleaned from reading the magazines.
OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
5 These suggestions can be helpful also in working business territory. Take advantage of opportunities when the businesspeople are not occupied with customers. Many publishers find it is easier to place magazines in business territory than in regular door-to-door work.
6 Have you tried developing a magazine route? When you place magazines at homes or at businesses, let it be known that you would be happy to return in two weeks with the next issues. You may be surprised to find how many would be pleased with this personal-delivery arrangement. Remember, too, that each time you return and talk with the person or place literature with that person, you can report a return visit.
7 You might seek other opportunities to offer magazines, such as evening witnessing, talking to relatives, making return visits, or when traveling or shopping. Following through on all these suggestions may be the means of helping many become regular readers of our Bible publications and eventually praisers of Jehovah.

