Presenting the Good News​—To Youths
1 This modern age has proved to be a very difficult time for young people in general. Yet, centuries ago a man inspired by God wrote: “How will a young man cleanse his path? By keeping on guard according to your word.” (Psalm 119:9) Indeed, direction based on Jehovah’s Word is benefiting thousands of young people today.
2 After reading one of the “Young People Ask . . . ” articles in Awake!, a young man said: “I used to date regularly just because I thought it was the thing to do. I thought nothing of marriage. Then I read your Awake! magazine. It changed my values for the better. I stopped dating until I am ready to marry.” He obviously benefited from the practical counsel given. Now young people have easy access to a valuable source of Scriptural information that has been published in the form of a new book, Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work. What can you do to make it available to young people in your territory or youths in school?
TAKE AN INTEREST IN YOUNG PEOPLE
3 Persuading young people to appreciate the value of Jehovah’s Word can be challenging. (See Proverbs 22:15.) However, the apostle Paul said: “To the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain Jews.” (1 Cor. 9:20) Similarly, helping youths find and appreciate worthwhile spiritual direction requires that you understand young people and their problems. You need to think in terms of what interests young people and what their problems are in school or where they live or work. When witnessing to youths, this understanding should be reflected in your introductions, your comments, and your questions. The table of contents in the new book Young People Ask is an excellent source of ideas on what to talk about. By being familiar with these subjects, you will have insight into what many young people are thinking about today.
WHAT YOU CAN SAY
4 When going from house to house, observe where there are children. Explain that you are doing a public service to help people cope with everyday problems. In these homes you may be able to speak with the children themselves. Point out an example of the practical counsel found in the book. Keep in mind that your goal is to help them see the truthfulness of Psalm 119:9.
5 When you speak with a youth, be friendly and treat him with dignity. After an initial greeting, you may say: “I am engaging in a public service to help young people like you cope with the problems they face in this community. Do you ever find yourself being urged to do something you really don’t want to do? Or are you inclined to do things at times just because of what others are doing and not because of your own preference? Do you ever wonder how you can cope with such peer pressure?” After his response, open the book to chapter 9. Then say: “Please notice what this new publication says on page 77. [Read an appropriate paragraph.] Do you think a study of the Bible would help youths to cope with this problem? [Allow for a comment.] Note what the Bible says at Psalm 119:9. [Read.] This book shows you how the Bible can help young people cope with difficult situations, such as those listed in the contents. [Hand him the book.] It is yours for the contribution of $1.50.”
6 If you are a publisher still attending school, follow the suggestions given in the August 1989 issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. You will have many happy rewards as you do so.
7 Jehovah “does not desire any to be destroyed.” (2 Pet. 3:9) This includes youths. However, many young people will not survive Armageddon. May our efforts to preach to youths effectively result in the salvation of a good number of young people, to Jehovah’s praise.

