Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Covering Isolated Territory in Paraguay Bears Fruit
THE Paraguay branch of the Watch Tower Society is fully aware of the need to preach the good news of the Kingdom in all its territory. (Acts 1:8) This is the time for all to learn about the Kingdom and to serve Jehovah before he brings an end to this wicked system in the coming “great tribulation.” (Matthew 24:21, 22) The following experiences show what is being done to help people in unassigned territories. The branch reports:
Arrangements were made to cover all unassigned territory by means of temporary special pioneers. During the months November through January of the 1990 service year, 39 brothers and sisters covered a total of a hundred cities and small towns where there are as yet no Kingdom publishers. They were able to distribute 6,119 books, 4,262 booklets, and 5,144 magazines. As a result of this activity, new groups of publishers are being formed.
□ A woman accepted from a pioneer sister working in unassigned territory the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. The pioneer offered to conduct a Bible study with her, and she gladly accepted. When the pioneer returned, waiting for her were not only the lady but also her husband and their ten children. On the next visit, the family as well as their friends and neighbors were ready for the Bible study! The woman had invited them, saying that the study was very good and that the hope and blessings that Jehovah gives were wonderful. This was something that no one had ever told her before, so she felt that her neighbors and friends should also hear this good news.
Every time the pioneer conducted the study, there were so many in attendance that it appeared to be a small congregation. These interested persons asked many questions and shared in the study. When the pioneer explained that once the territory was worked, she would have to move on with her companions to a new area, the lady worriedly asked what would become of them. Arrangements were made with brothers from the nearest congregation to continue the study. Now special pioneers have been assigned to help these interested, sheeplike people.
□ While going from house to house in another unassigned territory, a pioneer sister found a man who some ten years previously had obtained the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. Since that time he had lost all contact with Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, he knew that Jehovah, whom he called Jehovah of armies, is the only true God and that He alone should be worshiped. On his own initiative, he had been talking about Jehovah to everyone he knew. In fact, every week he walked two miles [3 km] to visit an interested couple to talk to them about God because, as he put it, ‘If I stop visiting them, they will forget about Jehovah.’ In addition to this married couple, there were about ten others who wanted a Bible study​—all because this interested person had preached to them.
Remarkably, just a few days before the pioneer called on him, this same man would not let a local priest and his procession enter the house with an image of the virgin, explaining that he did not believe in images. The priest was furious. That night the man prayed to Jehovah for help. So imagine how excited and happy he was when the pioneer called! Arrangements were immediately made for a systematic Bible study, and the man continues to progress in association with the theocratic organization.
Truly, Jehovah is blessing the ingathering work in Paraguay as the brothers endeavor to give a thorough witness in these unassigned territories.​—Matthew 24:14.

