Questions From Readers
Was Zechariah, the father of John the Baptizer, made deaf as well as mute, as Luke 1:62 seems to indicate?
Some have concluded that Zechariah also became deaf. We read in the Bible account: “They were going to call [the child] by the name of its father, Zechariah. But its mother answered and said: ‘No, indeed! but he shall be called John.’ At this they said to her: ‘There is no one among your relatives that is called by this name.’ Then they went asking its father by signs what he wanted it to be called. And he asked for a tablet and wrote: ‘John is its name.’”​—Luke 1:59-63.
Nothing, though, in this account specifically says that Zechariah was unable to hear for a period of time.
Earlier the angel Gabriel had announced to Zechariah the coming birth of a son who was to be called John. Aged Zechariah found that hard to believe. The angel responded: “Look! you will be silent and not able to speak until the day that these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their appointed time.” (Luke 1:13, 18-20) The angel said that Zechariah’s speech, not his hearing, would be affected.
The account further says: “When he came out [of the sanctuary] he was not able to speak to [the people waiting], and they perceived that he had just seen a supernatural sight in the sanctuary; and he kept making signs to them, but remained dumb.” (Luke 1:22) The Greek word here rendered “dumb” conveys the thought of being blunted, in speech, hearing, or both. (Luke 7:22) What about Zechariah? Well, consider what occurred when he was healed. “Instantly his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed and he began to speak, blessing God.” (Luke 1:64) That reasonably leads to the view that only Zechariah’s ability to speak was impaired.
Why, then did others ask Zechariah “by signs what he wanted [the child] to be called”? Some translators even render this “in the language of signs” or “using sign language.”
Zechariah, who had been mute since the angel’s announcement, was often compelled to use gestures, a sort of sign language, to express himself. For example, he “kept making signs” to those at the temple. (Luke 1:21, 22) When he later asked for a tablet, he must have used signs or gestures. (Luke 1:63) It is possible, therefore, that those around him during his period of muteness were also inclined to use gestures.
There is, however, a more likely explanation for the signs mentioned at Luke 1:62. Elizabeth had just expressed herself about her son’s name. So, without contradicting her, they may simply have taken the next and proper step of getting her husband’s decision. They could do that with a mere nod or gesturing sign. The fact that they did not write their question for Zechariah to read might even be evidence that he had heard his wife’s words. Thus, a mere nod or comparable sign to him could have the force of, ‘Well, all of us (including you, Zechariah) heard her recommendation, but what is your final decision about the child’s name?’
And immediately afterward another miracle occurred, reversing the situation. “Instantly his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed and he began to speak.” (Luke 1:64) No mention needed to be made of his hearing if that had not been affected.

