Keep Bearing Fruit With Endurance
1 When writing to the congregation in Colossae, less than 30 years after the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, the apostle Paul could say that the truth of the good news was bearing fruit and increasing in all the world. (Col. 1:5, 6) On a much grander scale today, Jehovah’s Witnesses have literally reached “the most distant part of the earth” with the good news of the Kingdom. (Acts 1:8; John 14:12) During the 1989 service year, there was a 5.6-percent increase in the average number of Kingdom publishers worldwide, and we reached a new peak of 3,787,188 publishers in 212 countries!
2 In countries where preaching about God’s Kingdom is banned and reports are incomplete, an even greater increase of 7.6 percent was reported! Despite the many problems that exist in those lands, the publishers continue to “bear fruit with endurance.” (Luke 8:15) In some places the pressures have lessened, but difficult conditions continue unchanged in other countries.
3 In countries where there is greater freedom to carry on Kingdom-preaching activities, we face different problems. Much apathy and indifference is encountered, especially where there is material prosperity. Jehovah’s servants must be on guard not to adopt such attitudes. We do not want material interests, pleasures, recreation, and other distractions to encroach on our theocratic activities. Otherwise we could become indifferent and fail to appreciate the need to keep bearing fruit with endurance.​—Luke 21:34-36.
ENDURANCE AND EXERTION NEEDED
4 Endurance is a requirement whether we face opposition to the good news or have relative freedom to carry out our Christian responsibilities. In some lands, our brothers have been working under adverse conditions for decades. Their endurance under such adversity has worked out an approved condition, and they are now reaping rich blessings. (Rom. 5:3-5; Gal. 6:9) Whatever difficulties we may encounter, we want to keep on enduring. The Kingdom witness must be given, and all of us must continue to demonstrate our integrity. By endurance on our part, we will secure our soul, or life.​—Mark 13:10; Luke 21:19.
5 We can demonstrate that we do not take spiritual things for granted by exerting ourselves vigorously in Jehovah’s service, not tiring out in the preaching work. In some lands where transportation is more difficult, where material necessities are lacking, and where there are economic problems, there is no letup in preaching the good news. In a few such countries, congregation publishers regularly average 14 to 17 hours in field service each month. Their pioneer ranks are steadily increasing too. It makes those of us who have many material conveniences stop and think. Can we increase our regular share in the all-important Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work?
CAN WE DO MORE?
6 Spending more time in field service may require adjusting our schedules slightly. If we have been spending an hour in the field ministry on Sunday, could we perhaps lengthen that time by spending another hour making return visits or conducting a Bible study? Or if we conduct a Bible study, could we include an hour or so of house-to-house service or make a few return visits before the study? On Saturday after spending two hours in magazine activity, perhaps we could deliver magazines on a magazine route we have developed or try to make a few return visits. Those who live in an urban area may find it convenient to spend some time in street witnessing. In these or other ways, we may be able to increase our participation in the field service. Good results should increase proportionately.
7 More time in the field service making return visits would no doubt result in more Bible studies being conducted. In time this will mean more people coming into the truth and helping us to accomplish the Kingdom-preaching work.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
PRAYER ESSENTIAL
8 If we are to keep bearing fruit with endurance, we must seek Jehovah’s blessing and yield to the direction of his spirit. We must make our ministry a matter of prayer to Jehovah. When praying to Jehovah about our field activity, we are reminded that we are his fellow workers. (1 Cor. 3:9) With Jehovah’s help, we can endure in our ministry even when we do not see immediate results. In some areas, increase has come only after many years of faithful endurance on the part of Kingdom proclaimers. As we look to the future, it is necessary always to seek divine guidance and help in order not to give up but to accomplish our ministry fully. (2 Tim. 4:5) There is still much fruitage being produced in the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work.
9 Jesus stressed the need for us always to pray. (Luke 18:1) Paul exhorted: “Pray incessantly.” (1 Thess. 5:17) There are urgent reasons for us to persevere in prayer now. Many responsibilities are involved in caring for the growing flock year by year. We want to help others to bear fruit with endurance. Attention must be given to the various needs of individual publishers and of the organization as a whole. Seeing the need for donations to support the work and to make continued publication of Bible-based literature possible, we want to pray that Jehovah will keep on motivating God-fearing people to be generous in this regard.​—2 Cor. 9:8-11.
10 As portions of the worldwide field open up for theocratic development to a greater extent than ever before, the Scriptural exhortation at Colossians 4:2 becomes more meaningful: “Be persevering in prayer, remaining awake in it with thanksgiving.” Our prayers should be in behalf of our brothers everywhere that they continue to bear fruit, helping other sheeplike ones found in territories where witnessing has been more difficult in the past.
MANIFEST THANKFULNESS
11 How thankful we are for the abundant spiritual provisions we so much enjoy! We want to thank Jehovah for these, and we also pray for his continued blessing on the work of the faithful slave and its Governing Body. Their humble, untiring efforts in our behalf and in behalf of sheeplike ones around the world are very much appreciated.
12 In sowing Kingdom seed, a tremendous amount of literature has been placed. (Matt. 13:3-8, 18-23) Yet, there is a continuing demand for Bibles and Bible literature in the field. The world report indicates that a great deal of cultivating and watering in the form of return visits and home Bible studies has been done. As we continue to do our part in these important features of our ministry, we thank Jehovah for his continued blessing that makes things grow. Indeed, we pray for that blessing.​—1 Cor. 3:6, 7.
OTHER NEEDS
13 Because of being in the world though no part of it, Christians will continue to face tests and trials, and these will yet intensify in these last days. Some now are enduring persecution or other difficulties. Others must carry on their Christian activities in war-torn lands. Our brothers have experienced disasters such as earthquakes, typhoons, and hurricanes. When this happens, we should pray for our brothers in such locations. (Compare Acts 12:5; 2 Corinthians 1:11.) Sometimes it becomes necessary to approach or write to officials in high stations about bans on our work, persecution of our brothers, or other matters affecting Kingdom interests. Under such circumstances, we do what we can personally, and we offer prayer concerning these individuals that they may be favorably disposed toward our fellow servants.​—1 Tim. 2:1, 2.
14 There are many pressures brought upon families living in Satan’s wicked world. (2 Cor. 4:4) Married couples may be confronted with serious problems. They should be encouraged to pray for divine guidance, and we also may pray in their behalf. (1 Cor. 7:5; 1 Pet. 3:7) Family heads should appreciate that Jehovah will listen to their sincere prayers for direction in presiding well over their households. (Judg. 13:8; Phil. 4:6, 7) Young as well as old are faced with trying situations. This may be at school, on the secular job, when traveling, or in other circumstances. Prayer helps us to resist the spirit of this wicked world and to keep bearing fruit as we continue doing what is pleasing in God’s sight.​—Matt. 6:13; Eph. 6:13-18; 1 John 3:22.
15 Jehovah is the great Hearer of prayer. (Ps. 65:2) At all times we need to cast our anxieties upon him. (Ps. 55:22) We have opportunities to show our concern by means of prayer for all the Kingdom interests and for the welfare of our brothers everywhere. When reflecting on the work of those taking the lead in the congregation and those directing the worldwide expansion program, when dealing with those who are spiritually sick, or when caring for other problems small or great, all of us should keep such matters before Jehovah in prayer. (1 Thess. 5:25; Jas. 5:14-16) Yes, our anxieties should be cast upon Jehovah with full confidence that no matter what it is we ask in harmony with his will, he will hear us. (1 Pet. 5:7; 1 John 5:14) May we be zealous in Kingdom service and continually look to Jehovah to help us keep bearing fruit with endurance.

