Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 6
Song 30
12 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Read Question Box and comment briefly on importance of proper dress, grooming, and decorum when representing Jehovah’s organization. Encourage magazine witnessing for this Saturday.
18 min: “Be Zealous in Spreading the Kingdom Message.” Question-and-answer consideration. After discussing paragraph 6, demonstrate how to offer brochures as suggested in paragraph. Use Topic for Conversation. Highlight need to be zealous in the field service.
15 min: “Using the School to Improve Field Ministry.” School overseer discusses with the audience Study 19 in the Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook. Highlight ways in which the school contributes to our progress in the field ministry. Encourage those enrolled in the school to make settings and talks practical for use in the local territory.
Song 31 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 13
Song 211
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Read acknowledgments from the Society for contributions made to the Society’s worldwide work and to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund. Commend the brothers for such contributions and for support of local congregation. Encourage all to have a part in weekend field service activity.
18 min: “Keep Bearing Fruit With Endurance.” Talk based on the August Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Make local application of the material, encouraging all to view their personal circumstances from Jehovah’s viewpoint.
17 min: “Why You Should Want to Conduct a Bible Study.” Question-and-answer consideration. Briefly interview a publisher or pioneer who has assisted someone to the point of dedication and baptism. Ask what kind of relationship developed between him or her and the student(s) and what benefits were received by conducting studies.
Song 133 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 20
Song 29
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Highlight main points in “Become Holy in All Your Conduct.” Also, encourage participation in weekend field activity.
20 min: “Are Your Children Ready to Return to School?” Question-and-answer consideration with audience. Have paragraphs and scriptures read. If there are any local experiences that illustrate points made, these can be presented as time permits.
15 min: Local needs or talk on “‘Stand Firm’​—Do Not Stumble” in April 15, 1990, Watchtower, pages 26-8.
Song 191 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 27
Song 92
 7 min: Local announcements. Discuss May service report for the United States and any positive aspects of congregation’s report for that month. Mention importance of turning in field service reports promptly. Announce field service arrangements for Monday, September 3.
23 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Making Opportunities to Give an Informal Witness.” Question-and-answer coverage. After considering paragraph 3, ask audience for suggestions on other occasions that might be open to giving an informal witness. Point out how new school year affords youths the opportunity to speak about the truth. Following paragraph 6, briefly interview one or two publishers who have had success in informal witnessing. Ask: ‘On what occasions do they preach? Why do they find this avenue of preaching effective? How have they personally benefited?’ Encourage all to make it a goal to share good news every day. Conclude by emphasizing the need to show deep concern for people.
15 min: Feature the Creation book in September. Talk with demonstration. Discuss talking points from book that can be featured when offering the Creation book in September. Perhaps material in chapters 16 and 17 on “Why Would God Permit Suffering?” and “Can You Trust the Bible?” would appeal to householder. Have qualified publisher demonstrate offer, using scriptures such as Hebrews 3:4 and Revelation 4:11 to refute evolution theory and build faith in God as man’s Maker. Material in the Reasoning book under the heading “Creation” can be used as time permits. Announce congregation’s field service arrangements, and invite all to share.
Song 129 and concluding prayer.

