Presenting the Good News​—By Making Opportunities to Give an Informal Witness
1 Jesus instructed his disciples to let their light shine. (Matt. 5:14-16) He wanted them to tell others about the good news of God’s Kingdom on every appropriate occasion. In this regard, Jesus was a model. An example of this was when he seized the opportunity to speak the truth to a Samaritan woman at a well in Sychar. (John 4:5-30) What about us? Do we make such opportunities to give a witness?
2 Not all of us can engage in the field service every day. But there may be occasions nearly every day when we can give a witness. In what way? By informal witnessing. Many thousands have become acquainted with the truth in this way. If we are alert to recognize the opportunities and then make the effort, many more people can be reached.
TO WHOM CAN WE PREACH?
3 In addition to formal house-to-house witnessing, return visits, and Bible studies, we can witness to our workmates, schoolmates, business associates, relatives, and other acquaintances on an informal basis. When traveling by bus, train, or airplane, we may be able to strike up a conversation with fellow travelers. While on vacation, we might share the good news with hotel and motel personnel, service station attendants, restaurant workers, and taxi drivers. We could talk to others while waiting at a doctor’s office or public laundry. While at home, we can perhaps witness to neighbors, salesmen, or deliverymen. Even if we are hospitalized, we can witness to doctors, nurses, and other patients.
HOW TO GET STARTED
4 If we have an appointment and know we will have to spend some time waiting, we could take along the latest magazines and be prepared to discuss an article of interest with someone we meet. Or we could use a tract or brochure as a basis for starting a conversation. In such a setting, some have found it effective to begin the conversation by making a striking statement based on a current event and then asking for the person’s reaction. Others have found that asking a thought-provoking question regarding some current event can lead into a fine witness. In all cases, initiative is what is needed to make things happen.
WITNESSING AT WORK
5 Those who have secular jobs can make opportunities to witness to workmates. Two sisters in Georgia made a list of fellow workers they thought might be interested in the truth. By talking with those on the list and a few others, they were able to place over 65 Revelation Climax books and cultivate much interest.
6 In another case, a brother resolved that he would witness to the first person who sat down next to him during his 15-minute break at work. The man to whom he spoke knew about the truth but said that he did not want to pursue the matter. Nonetheless, our brother left literature where the man could easily pick it up. Within six months that man and his family were all baptized.
7 As “the light of the world,” Jesus made opportunities to give an informal witness. (John 8:12) If we are alert and willing to share our Bible-based hope, we too will not miss opportunities to give a witness. Thus, like Jesus’ disciples, we will ‘shine as illuminators in the world.’​—Phil. 2:15, 16.

