Question Box
● Why should we give special attention to our dress and grooming when visiting Brooklyn Bethel, Watchtower Farms, and all branch facilities throughout the world?
Christians are expected to maintain proper decorum. Our dress and grooming at all times should reflect the decency and dignity that befit servants of Jehovah God. This is especially true when visiting Brooklyn Bethel, Watchtower Farms, and branch offices and facilities around the world. In discussing the importance of proper dress and grooming, Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry comments on the need for physical cleanness and modest dress and grooming when engaging in the field ministry and attending Christian meetings. Then, on page 131, paragraph 2, it states: “The same would apply when visiting the Bethel home at Brooklyn or any of the Society’s branch offices. Remember, the name Bethel means ‘House of God,’ so our dress, grooming and conduct should be similar to what is expected of us when attending meetings for worship at the Kingdom Hall.”
The apostle Paul said that we are “a theatrical spectacle to the world, and to angels, and to men.” (1 Cor. 4:9) Therefore, our dress and grooming should have a positive influence on others as to how they view the true worship of Jehovah. However, it has been noted that some brothers and sisters, when visiting the Society’s branches, tend to be extremely casual in their dress. Such dress is not appropriate when visiting the branch facilities. In this matter, as in all other aspects of our Christian life, we desire to maintain the same high standards that distinguish God’s people as different from the world by doing all things for God’s glory. (Rom. 12:2; 1 Cor. 10:31) It is also good to speak with our Bible students and others who may be visiting Brooklyn Bethel or any of the Society’s branch offices for the first time to remind them of the importance of giving attention to proper dress and grooming.
So when visiting the Society’s facilities, ask yourself: ‘Is my dress and grooming modest? (Mic. 6:8) Does it reflect well on the God that I worship? Would others be distracted or offended by my appearance? Am I setting the proper example for others who may be visiting for the first time?’ May we always, by our dress and grooming, “adorn the teaching of our Savior, God, in all things.”​—Titus 2:10.

