Why You Should Want to Conduct a Bible Study
1 One of the most rewarding experiences for a Christian is to be used by Jehovah to help someone else become a disciple of Christ. (Matt. 28:19, 20; 1 Cor. 3:6, 9) For those we help in this way, it can mean everlasting life.
2 A very close relationship develops between the teacher and the one being taught. The spiritual growth of the student is indeed a source of great joy. (1 Thess. 2:11, 19, 20) Therefore, it should be the goal of each Christian to conduct at least one home Bible study with someone outside of his own household. Of course, it is the responsibility of each family head to conduct a meaningful, regular Bible study with his own family. In those households where the father is not a believer, the Christian mother will need to make appropriate arrangements for studying the Bible with the children.
PRAY FOR STUDIES
3 Since we are so far along in this time of the end, all should put forth efforts to conduct effective Bible studies. Regular prayer to Jehovah in this regard demonstrates our sincere desire to conduct a Bible study. It shows that we see the life-and-death issue involved. (Ezek. 33:7-9, 14-16) We may be assured of Jehovah’s blessing on our conscientious efforts.​—1 John 5:14, 15.
4 To become effective in making disciples, we must prepare well. It is also very helpful to observe others who are proficient in conducting Bible studies. In coming months, we will pass along suggestions from traveling overseers and others who have been successful in making disciples. A series of articles will highlight some practical ideas on how to start and conduct productive Bible studies.
FUTURE ARTICLES
5 What are some of these ideas that will be considered in future issues of Our Kingdom Ministry? We will discuss how various publishers and pioneers have started Bible studies and what teaching methods they have used to get to the hearts of their students. We will also share suggestions on building appreciation for Jehovah’s organization and cultivating a desire to share in the field service. There will also be suggestions on how to make your own family Bible study more meaningful so that your children will develop a close personal relationship with Jehovah.
6 During the past four service years, 959,834 persons have been baptized worldwide, and 172,659 of these were in the congregations in the United States. The vast majority of these people reached the point of baptism with the help of someone conducting a Bible study with them. Attendance at the Memorial and at our district conventions indicates there are many more who may be helped to progress to baptism. By continuing our efforts to start and conduct Bible studies with such ones, we may be able to help many more to become disciples and eventually enjoy everlasting life.​—1 Tim. 6:12, 19.

