Looking With Appreciation Upon the “House of God”
“ONE thing I have asked from Jehovah​—it is what I shall look for, that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the pleasantness of Jehovah and to look with appreciation upon his temple.”​—Psalm 27:4.
Appreciative King David looked with pleasure, or delight, upon Jehovah’s temple. Do you feel similarly about centers of true worship today? The more than 95 Bethel homes at branches of the Watch Tower Society are among the facilities that are associated with the worship of Jehovah in our time.
“Looking back over my many years of Bethel service fills me with deep gratitude and great appreciation, which has grown from year to year,” explains Helga, who commenced work at the home in Germany in 1948. Helga is one of the 13,828 joyful Bethel workers worldwide who in the 1993 service year ‘beheld the pleasantness of Jehovah.’ What exactly does the name Bethel mean? How can every one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, whether he serves God inside Bethel or outside, look with appreciation upon this arrangement?
A Name That Demands Devotion
“Bethel” is a most appropriate name, as the Hebrew word Behth-ʼElʹ means “House of God.” (Genesis 28:19, footnote) Yes, Bethel resembles a well-organized house, or ‘a household built up by wisdom,’ with God and his will holding center stage. (Proverbs 24:3) “It is like living in a family. We have a well-organized daily routine,” says Herta appreciatively. She has been serving at the same Bethel as Helga for over 45 years. Each member of this large family has his function and his place, allowing him to feel happy and secure. Consistent with the name Bethel, good arrangement and organization characterize each of the departments. This promotes peace, makes effective preaching of the good news possible, and gives the congregations sound reason to hold the “House of God” in the highest esteem.​—1 Corinthians 14:33, 40.
Why are such facilities necessary? This magazine, for example, was produced in a Bethel printery. The preaching of the Kingdom message and the distribution of spiritual food, both foreseen by Jesus Christ, make organizational arrangements like Bethel indispensable​—supported by willing workers and held in great regard by all worshipers of Jehovah.​—Matthew 24:14, 45.
Would you like to learn more about the workday routine here? Where Helga and Herta live, a melodious chime sounds a call in all residence buildings at 6:30 a.m., though many of the over 800 regular workers get up even earlier to prepare for the day. By 7:00 a.m., Monday to Saturday, the family is assembled in the dining halls for a discussion of the daily text, or morning worship. A nourishing breakfast follows. Each workday begins at 8:00 a.m. and lasts eight hours, interrupted only by a lunch break. (The family normally works half a day on Saturday.) Be it in the kitchen, printery, laundry, offices, workshops, bookbindery, or any other department, there is much to do.
During evenings and on weekends, members of the family associate with local congregations at meetings and in public preaching. Many Bethel brothers are elders or ministerial servants in these congregations. The local Witnesses truly appreciate this cooperation, both groups working together harmoniously as one body, with mutual respect and understanding. (Colossians 2:19) Each Bethel worker knows that his assignment in the “House of God” takes priority over other activities. However, enthusiasm for preaching and involvement with the congregation, coupled with a balanced attitude, strengthen the Bethel worker’s spirituality, increase his joy, and make him a more productive member of the family. How crucial these qualities are when working in a “house” whose name is linked with whole-souled devotion!
Making Bethel Service a Success
What has helped countless ones of Jehovah’s Witnesses to make a success of Bethel service? Bethel family members in France with experience going back many years comment as follows: “Love for Jehovah. Having the determination to persevere wherever he places us; humility, submission, and obedience to the direction given us by the Society.” (Denise) “I have noted how important it is to respect the principle mentioned by Paul at Romans 12:10: ‘In showing honor to one another take the lead.’ This scripture shows us the importance of not insisting that our personal opinion be accepted but, rather, taking into consideration the opinions of others. In other words, not seeking preeminence.” (Jean-Jacques) “Our respect for Bethel service could be ruined if we looked at things from a fleshly, human viewpoint,” says Barbara, “for this could lead us to lose sight of the fact that Jehovah is directing his organization. Such respect could be lost if we stumble over the imperfections of others.”
Everyone at Bethel is imperfect, so association needs careful thought. Young ones or recent arrivals do well not to limit their association solely to their peers. Those who might display a tendency to complain or to think negatively do not make for upbuilding company in Bethel or in the congregation. On the other hand, imitating the “wisdom from above,” described at James 3:17, brings blessings. This is “first of all chaste, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy and good fruits, not making partial distinctions, not hypocritical.” Such qualities, along with long-suffering and kindness, are noticeable in the “House of God,” making one’s stay there pleasant and stimulating. Even non-Witness visitors often express admiration for the good behavior, friendliness, and joyful spirit of the workers.
Anny, who is over 70 years of age and has been a member of the Bethel family in Germany since 1956, explains how she maintains her readiness to serve: “For my spiritual well-being, I put forth great effort to keep abreast with the Society’s publications, to attend meetings regularly, and to have a regular share in preaching. I also try to stay in good physical shape by doing exercises each morning, by refraining from use of the elevator most of the time, and by walking as often as possible, especially in field service.”
Many experienced in Bethel life would agree with Anny. They never cease to learn, never stop working. Physical health demands that they get sufficient sleep and some exercise and show moderation in eating and drinking. Most important of all, they do not neglect personal prayer and study of the Bible.
High Regard for Sacred Service in Bethel
“Where do you work?” is a query commonly put to members at Bethel. Work assignments are diverse, but each deserves to be held in high esteem by everyone. Why? Because each assignment​—whether operating a machine printing spiritual food, washing clothes, cooking and cleaning for the family, or performing office work—​constitutes sacred service. As mentioned above, Christians make no partial distinctions. Bear in mind that all necessary duties carried out by priests and Levites at the temple, in its courtyards and dining halls, were all considered sacred service to Jehovah. That included slaughtering and preparing animals for sacrifice, refilling oil lamps, even cleaning up and performing watchmen’s duties. Likewise, each assignment at Bethel is a satisfying and worthwhile activity “in the work of the Lord,” hence an exceptional privilege.​—1 Corinthians 15:58.
Consider briefly one trait that can prevent our looking with appreciation upon the “House of God.” Christians both in Bethel and outside need to be on guard against envy and jealousy, which are “rottenness to the bones.” (Proverbs 14:30) No one has reason to be envious of service privileges of Bethel workers. Moreover, there is no room within a Bethel family for jealousy, which is one of the works of the flesh. Wait humbly​—that is sound counsel for one who might seem to have been overlooked while others are granted greater privileges. What is more, persons of greatly differing financial backgrounds live close together in Bethel. How frustrating if one views his circumstances “in comparison with the other person”! Being satisfied with “sustenance and covering” has helped many to continue faithfully for decades in the “House of God.”​—Galatians 5:20, 26; 6:4; 1 Timothy 6:8.
Jehovah’s Witnesses and millions of others derive great benefit from the unpaid services performed at Bethel​—work done selflessly out of love for God and neighbor. The Bethel homes and printeries of the Watch Tower Society, like other theocratic facilities, are financed by voluntary contributions. (2 Corinthians 9:7) Like King David and the princes and chiefs of Israel, we can show our esteem and appreciation for the “House of God” by giving moral and financial support to the Society. (1 Chronicles 29:3-7) Let us now see how it is possible “to behold the pleasantness of Jehovah” at Bethel.
Blessings in the “House of God”
When attending an assembly, do you sense a deep contentment, surrounded as you are by happy worshipers of Jehovah? Just imagine, a Bethel worker has the privilege of serving Jehovah amid a group of brothers every day! (Psalm 26:12) What excellent prospects for spiritual growth that offers! A brother remarked that he learned more to help him shape his personality within one year at Bethel than he did in three years elsewhere. Why? Because nowhere else did he have the opportunity to observe and imitate the faith of so many mature Christian personalities.​—Proverbs 13:20.
At Bethel a person is surrounded by experienced counselors, as it were. In addition, there is the benefit of hearing well-prepared comments presented during morning worship and at the Bethel family Watchtower Study and when listening to lectures on Monday evenings. New arrivals get instruction in the Bethel Entrants’ School and are assigned to read the entire Bible within the first 12 months.
Reports and experiences from visitors from other countries offer further encouragement. Moreover, members of the Governing Body or their representatives pay visits to branch offices. “Although they have much to do,” reflects Helga, “the brothers always find time for a friendly word or a smile.” How encouraging to behold personally the refreshing and modest manner of such loyal men!
Especially at Bethel can one observe closely how God’s organization operates and how his holy spirit galvanizes willing hearts and hands into action. “At Bethel one feels nearer ‘the hub of the wheel,’” explains a brother, who has been serving at Bethel in France since 1949. He continues: “I can truly say that for me Bethel is the form of full-time service that allows me to devote the maximum amount of time and strength to Jehovah’s service and to serve the greatest number of brothers.” And is that not our real purpose in life​—to do the will of God? At Bethel one can “offer praise all day long.” What a blessing!​—Psalm 44:8.
As we have discovered, one working in a Bethel home can behold the pleasantness of Jehovah and find a wide range of blessings. (Hebrews 6:10) Could service at the “House of God” be something worthwhile for you? Those among Jehovah’s Witnesses who are at least 19 years of age, who enjoy good spiritual and physical health, and who, like Timothy, are “well reported on by the brothers” can apply to serve at Bethel. (Acts 16:2) Many have made Bethel service their life’s work, like those quoted above. For them the deep yearning of the psalmist​—to ‘dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of his life’—​has become reality.
Jehovah’s Witnesses have great respect for the self-sacrificing spirit shown by their brothers and sisters at Bethel, who carry out assignments both willingly and joyfully. Whether we serve Jehovah at Bethel or elsewhere, each of us has good reason to feel as did King David​—to look with appreciation, or delight, upon the “House of God.”
[Picture on page 31]
These Christians have taken pleasure in sacred service at Bethel in Germany for decades

