“Fishing” in the Waters of Fiji
FIJI​—the name evokes images of a South Seas paradise. Blue-green waters, coral reefs, swaying coconut palms, verdant mountains, tropical fish, exotic fruits and flowers. You can find all of these in abundance on this archipelago of 300 islands about 1,100 miles [1,800 km] north of New Zealand in the South Pacific. Hence, you might agree that Fiji could be everyone’s dream of a tropical paradise.
Fiji is fascinating in more than its natural beauty, however. Yes, just as there is great variety among the fish of the coral reefs, great variety is also found on land. The contrasts in Fiji’s ethnic mix are, perhaps, unequaled in the South Pacific. The two largest groups among its almost 750,000 inhabitants are the indigenous Fijians, who are of Melanesian origin, and Fiji-born Indians, descendants of workers brought in from India during the British colonial days. But there are also Banabans, Chinese, Europeans, Gilbertese, Rotumans, Tuvaluans, and others.
In this multicultural society, Jehovah’s Witnesses are busily engaged in a “fishing” work. (Mark 1:17) It is a challenge to preach the good news of God’s Kingdom in such a diversified community. First, there are the language and cultural barriers to overcome. Though English is the lingua franca, many times Fijian, Hindi, Rotuman, or other languages must be used.
Different approaches must also be taken to converse with those of different religious backgrounds. Most indigenous Fijians and other islanders belong to various Christian denominations. The Indian population consists of Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs, with Hindus being in the majority. Churches are plentiful in the towns and villages, but on Fiji’s two largest islands, the many Hindu temples and Muslim mosques provide a contrast.
Many local Witnesses have grown up speaking the three main languages​—English, Fijian, and Hindi. Having this skill is a great advantage in the “fishing” work. At times people are surprised to hear a Fijian speaking fluent Hindi and a Hindu speaking fluent Fijian. With cultural, religious, and language differences to cope with, it requires a versatile approach to be “a sharer of [the good news] with others.”​—1 Corinthians 9:23.
“Fishing” in a Fijian Village
The indigenous Fijians are a friendly, hospitable people. It is difficult to imagine that little more than a century ago, tribal warfare was rife. In fact, at the time of the first European contact, Fiji was known as the Cannibal Islands. Eventually, with the ascendancy of a paramount chief and his conversion, fighting and cannibalism died out. Tribal differences remain only in the many dialects that are found in the various provinces, although the Bauan dialect is widely understood.
In addition to Suva, the capital, there are many towns throughout Fiji. Most Fijians live in village communities under the control of a turaga ni koro, or head man. When entering a village to engage in “fishing,” it is customary to approach this man to seek permission to visit the various bures, or local homes. Only occasionally, usually because of opposition to Jehovah’s Witnesses by some village clergyman, is permission refused. What is it like calling at a Fijian home?
Entering the bure, we sit cross-legged on the floor. A carefully worded introduction, as used to capture interest in Western lands, is not needed here. Anyone coming to talk about God is welcome. When invited, the householder readily gets up and, with expressions of “tulou” (excuse me), reaches up to a shelf for a copy of the Bible in Fijian and eagerly reads various texts that the visiting minister mentions. However, the hospitable and respectful Fijian attitude presents a challenge in a different way. Considerable discernment and tact are needed to draw householders into the conversation, to encourage them to follow the line of reasoning being pursued, or to help them to see the need of comparing their own beliefs with the Bible’s teachings.
Fijian householders are generally more interested in discussing doctrinal topics than in talking about social conditions or issues. In fact, many of the more than 1,400 active Witnesses of Jehovah in Fiji became interested in Bible truth as a result of a discussion on such questions as, What sort of place is hell? Who goes to heaven? and Will the earth be destroyed? Following up on interest shown, however, requires adaptability and persistence. Returning at an agreed-upon time, one often finds that the householder has gone to the teitei (plantation) or somewhere else. No, it is not that they are unappreciative of the visit but just that their sense of time is different. Of course, to the local Witnesses, this does not seem unusual. They persevere by calling at another time. There are no street names or house numbers to write down, so one needs a good memory when calling back.
“Fishing” Polynesian Style
Now, let us go “fishing” with a traveling minister, or circuit overseer, as he visits the small congregation in Rotuma. This group of volcanic islands is 300 miles [500 km] north of Fiji. To reach it, we fly in a 19-seat aircraft. The main island is only 19 square miles [50 sq km] in area, with a total population of about 3,000. A sandy road runs along the coastline, connecting some 20 villages. Rotuma is administered by Fiji but has a different culture and language. Being of Polynesian origin, its people differ in appearance from the Melanesian Fijians. Religiously speaking, most are either Roman Catholics or Methodists.
As the aircraft descends and maneuvers for landing, we see the lush green vegetation of the island. The featherlike fronds of coconut palms can be seen everywhere. A large crowd is on hand to welcome the once-a-week flight. Among them is a group of Witnesses. We are warmly greeted, and several large green coconuts with the “eyes” opened are handed to us to quench our thirst.
After a short trip, we arrive at our accommodations. A meal baked in a ground oven has been prepared. Roast pork, chicken, fried fish, crayfish, and the local root crop, taro, are spread before us. What a feast, and what a paradisaic setting under the young coconut trees!
The next day we visit people in the villages, called ho’aga in Rotuman. As we approach the first home, a piglet that has escaped from one of the sties scampers past, squealing as it goes. The householder has seen us coming and with a smile opens the door, greeting us with “Noya!” in Rotuman, and then invites us to be seated. A plate of ripe bananas is placed in front of us, and we are also invited to drink from some green coconuts. Hospitality comes first in Rotuma.
There are no agnostics or evolutionists here. Everyone believes in the Bible. Subjects like God’s purpose for the earth capture their attention easily. The householder is surprised to learn that the earth will not be destroyed but will be inhabited by righteous people who will live on it forever. (Psalm 37:29) He follows along closely when Bible texts that establish this point are read, and he eagerly accepts the Bible literature we offer. As we prepare to leave, he thanks us for calling and offers us a plastic bag full of ripe bananas that we can eat along the way. One can easily put on weight preaching here!
Adapting to the Indian Community
Though many other island countries of the South Pacific are also multiracial, Fiji stands out in this respect. Alongside the Melanesian, Micronesian, and Polynesian cultures is one transplanted from Asia. Between 1879 and 1916, indentured laborers from India were brought in to work the sugarcane fields. This arrangement, called girmit (agreement), resulted in thousands of Indians coming to Fiji. The descendants of these workers make up a large segment of the country’s population. They have retained their culture, language, and religion.
On the leeward side of Fiji’s main island is the city of Lautoka. This is the center of Fiji’s sugarcane industry and is home to a large part of the country’s Indian population. Members of the three congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses here need to be very adaptable in their “fishing” work. When calling from house to house, one has to be prepared to change topics depending on the race and religion of the householder. Let us join a group of local Witnesses as they call at the homes scattered among the sugarcane fields just outside of Lautoka.
As we approach the first house, we notice some long bamboo poles with pieces of red cloth tied at the top in the front corner of the compound. This identifies the family as Hindu. Most Hindu homes are decorated with pictures of their gods. Many have a favorite god, such as Krishna, and often there is a small shrine.a
Most Hindus believe that all religions are good and are but different ways to worship. Thus, a householder may listen politely, accept some literature, offer refreshments, and feel that he has done his duty. To raise appropriate questions to draw householders into more meaningful discussions, it is often helpful to know some of the stories that are part of their belief. For example, knowing that some of their stories portray their gods indulging in acts that many people would question, we can ask: “Would you approve of such conduct by your wife (husband)?” The answer is generally: “No, definitely not!” Then, the question can be put to the person: “Well, should a god act like this?” Such discussions often open up opportunities for showing the value of the Bible.
The belief in reincarnation, another feature of Hinduism, is a fertile subject for discussion. One well-educated Hindu woman who had recently lost her father in death was asked: “Would you like to see your father again just as he was before?” She answered: “Yes, that would be wonderful.” From her response and the subsequent conversation, it was clear that she was not satisfied with the belief that her father was now alive in some other form and she would never know him again. But the Bible’s wonderful teaching of the resurrection touched her heart.
Some Hindus do have questions and are searching for satisfying answers. When a Witness called at a Hindu home, the man asked: “What is the name of your god?” The Witness read to him Psalm 83:18 and explained that God’s name is Jehovah and that Romans 10:13 says that to gain salvation we must call upon that name. The man was impressed and wanted to know more. In fact, he was desperate to know. He explained that his father, who was very devoted to their family idol, fell ill after worshiping before it and died shortly thereafter. The same thing had happened to his brother. Then he added: “That image is bringing us death, not life. So there must be something wrong with worshiping it. Maybe this God, Jehovah, can help us find the way to life.” So a Bible study was started with him, his wife, and his two children. They made rapid progress and were soon baptized. They have left their idols and are now walking in the way of Jehovah, the God of life.
We next come to the home of a Muslim family. The same hospitable spirit is evident, and soon we are seated with cool drinks in our hands. We see no religious pictures on the walls with the exception of a small framed verse in Arabic script. We mention that there is a common link between the Bible and the Koran, namely the patriarch Abraham, and that God promised Abraham that through his seed all nations would be blessed. This promise is to be fulfilled in Jesus Christ, His Son. Some Muslims will object to the thought that God has a son. Thus, we explain that just as the first man, Adam, is called God’s son because of his being created by God, in the same way, Jesus is God’s Son. God does not need a literal wife to produce such sons. Because Muslims do not believe in the teaching of the Trinity, we use this common ground to show that Jehovah God is supreme.
By now it is lunchtime, and the members of our group are coming back to the road, out from the sugarcane fields, to wait for the bus back to town. Though a little tired, all are enthused about the morning’s “fishing” activity. The effort made to adapt to the different situations and beliefs encountered was well worth it.
Fiji’s waters and reefs are endowed with many kinds of fish. To be successful, the Fijian gonedau (fisherman) needs to be skilled in his work. The same is true of the “fishing” work that Jesus Christ assigned to his disciples. Christian “fishers of men” must be skillful, adapting their presentation and argumentation to suit the varied beliefs of the populace. (Matthew 4:19) This is certainly needed in Fiji. And the results are evident at the annual conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses, where Fijians, Indians, Rotumans, and people of mixed ethnic backgrounds worship Jehovah God in unity. Yes, his blessing is upon the “fishing” work in Fijian waters.
[Footnotes]
See the book Mankind’s Search for God, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc., pages 115-17.
[Map on page 23]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Viti Levu
Vanua Levu
Suva
Lautoka
Nandi
0 100 km
0       100 mi
 18°
180°
[Picture on page 24]
A bure, or local home
[Picture on page 24]
A Hindu temple in Fiji
[Pictures on page 25]
Successful “fishing” for men in Fiji
[Picture Credit Line on page 24]
Fiji Visitors Bureau

