Kingdom Proclaimers Report
‘They Adorn the Teaching of Our God’
THE simplicity and clarity of Kingdom truth can be ‘adorned’ by those who proclaim it to others. How? By their good conduct. Notice how the apostle Paul showed this. Christian slaves were counseled to exhibit “good fidelity to the full, so that they may adorn the teaching of our Savior, God, in all things.” (Titus 2:10) The following experiences from Argentina demonstrate the practicalness of this counsel.
□ Six of Jehovah’s Witnesses were employed in a supermarket where the owner was considered to be very strict. When they asked for time off to attend the Memorial of Christ’s death, they were told, “Choose between your work and your meetings.” Although work was scarce, they chose to attend the Memorial. The next day, they went to work thinking that they would be fired. What a surprise they had when not only were they kept on but four of them who were temporary workers were given permanent jobs. And all six received an increase in pay! Later, two of them decided to become regular pioneers, so the supermarket owner gave them a shift arrangement for their convenience. His reason for being so considerate of them? He did not want his honest, diligent workers to quit.
So the honesty and good work habits of these six Witnesses ‘adorned’ their teaching to Jehovah’s honor.
□ A sister was working in a pharmacy, but because of the long hours, she was not attending all the Christian meetings, nor could she be a pioneer, which was her desire. The owner of the pharmacy would not give her the work schedule she wanted, so she left her job. She then worked as a maid, and this permitted her to auxiliary pioneer. A few months later, the pharmacy owner came to her house and offered her a job “with whatever working schedule she wanted.” Why? “Because of her excellent conduct,” says the report.
□ The good conduct of one Witness ‘adorned’ her teaching in a different way. The report from Argentina explains that when two Witnesses approached the door of a beautiful, luxurious house with a big, modern car outside, they felt a little afraid because of the evident show of wealth. How surprised they were to receive a cordial welcome. A two-hour discussion followed, answering questions. The Witnesses stated: “We agreed to return the following week. We left very happy but puzzled because we did not know the real reason for such a welcome. The following week we found out what that reason was.”
The lady of the house explained: “I used to live in Mar del Plata and knew a young woman who led a very wild life. In time she began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and immediately a change in her personality became evident. The neighbors and I could not believe the change in her because not a trace of her former wild personality was noticeable. She is now a respectable woman, the wife of an elder, as you call them, and now has a family that is an example to all.”
The changed conduct of this young person when she became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses now moved the lady to consider seriously the teachings of Jehovah’s Witnesses. A Bible study was arranged then and there with this couple, and they began to attend the meetings at the Kingdom Hall. The Witnesses concluded this experience by stating: “This shows that our conduct can also give a witness, all to the glory and honor of Jehovah’s name.”

