The Bible’s Answer Satisfied Them
MANY persons today are deeply distressed about world conditions. They just cannot understand why things are the way they are. Some who at one time felt this way finally learned the Bible’s answers and found them to be most satisfying.
A man from Virginia relates his experience:
“I hated this system of things and wanted to withdraw from it. The grandest hope imaginable was to live on a farm with my family and just be left alone by the ‘outside world.’ Raise our own food, make our own clothes, be independent from the systems of the world​—that was my wish.” Yet he realized that this would really not be the answer to his feeling of hopelessness.
“Marijuana and other drugs,” he continues, “seemed to be a relief from this hopelessness. One night, while under the influence of a drug, I stayed awake until dawn fighting to stay alive. I felt that I was dying. This made me realize how precious life is.
“A few weeks later, I decided that this frightening experience was due to my own unpreparedness, and not the fault of the drug. So I began to study different drug-oriented books. The next time I was going to get all the answers that I had asked: Who is God? What is supposed to be my relationship to him? This time I was going to ‘see’ or experience God. Also, to further prepare myself, I began reading the Bible. Of course, I didn’t understand it, but the most important thing that I did was to pray to God for his help in my search for him.
“In a few days a new electrician came to work at the company where I was employed, and I became his helper. When I learned that he was one of Jehovah’s witnesses and was considered to be a minister, I began deluging him with questions. He patiently tried to answer my questions, but, because of their nature, he told me that I needed to ‘learn to add and subtract before I could learn the multiplication tables.’”
This Witness thereafter arranged for a Witness couple to study the Bible with this man and his family. He now rejoices in having come to know that God’s kingdom by Christ will bring lasting relief to mankind. Regarding the change this brought to his life, he says: “After learning the truth, drugs were no longer used in our home. I now realize that Jehovah is all-wise and all-loving, and that he does answer the earnest prayer of searching people.”
A man from another part of the United States tells how he found satisfying answers to his questions:
“I believed in God but, because of the hypocrisy and materialism in my church and others, I didn’t think any of them represented God. I had tried to read the Bible. But the archaic language in the version that I used made it difficult to read, let alone understand.
“One night while walking to the local hangout, I was picked up by a couple of my friends who were driving by. I asked if they were doing anything. They said that later that night they were going over to Tom’s house to talk about the Bible. Tom was one of Jehovah’s witnesses. I had known him from a few years before and had been meaning to get in touch with him to find out what the Witnesses believed. When my friends invited me to come along, I readily accepted.
“We got to Tom’s house and we talked. My two main questions about God were: ‘What is his purpose for man? And why did he let things get so bad?’ Tom gave me a Bible and the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life and we set up a Bible study. I read the book by the following week. I was really glad finally to get answers that made sense.”
Shortly thereafter this man attended an assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses. He observes: “I was amazed at the total lack of prejudice, and at the orderliness, friendliness and love demonstrated by those in attendance. I was firmly convinced that this was God’s truth.”
If you, too, are still searching for an answer to the meaning of world conditions and God’s purpose for mankind, Jehovah’s witnesses will be happy to help you to find the Bible’s answers. We are confident that you, like others, will find these to be truly satisfying.

