Alligators​—Rare, White, and Blue-​Eyed!
THE following release prepared by Curt Burnette for Audubon Institute tells the story of the remarkable white alligators.
“The white-​skinned, blue-​eyed alligators are a genetic mutation of the American alligator and not a different species. This mutation is called leucism, therefore these are leucistic alligators. Albinos have white skin and pinkish-​yellow eyes. Leucistic animals have pigmented eyes. Albinism is rare but leucism is even more rare. Although leucism is known in a few other species of animals, the white gators are the first known leucistic alligators.
“There are 18 white gators, all discovered at the same nest site in late August, 1987. Three Cajun fishermen found them near Houma, Louisiana, southwest of New Orleans. They were approximately 1-2 weeks old when the first ones were brought to the Audubon Zoo on September 5, 1987. Besides the 18 whites, 7 normal-​colored siblings were captured and an undetermined number of normals escaped. The nest was located on land owned by the Louisiana Land and Exploration Company (LL&E). Although the nest area has been watched and eggs collected and hatched out, no further white gators have ever been discovered.
“All 18 white gators and their 7 normal siblings are male. This is possible because the sex of a baby alligator is determined by the temperature of the nest and so can be all male, all female, or a mix. As of this writing, the gators are reaching sexual maturity (5-6 years). The size of the 18 varies from about 5 feet and 50-60 pounds to over 8 feet and 250 pounds. This is a result of differing management techniques. Gators raised at LL&E’s alligator farm grow more rapidly.
“LL&E owns 14 of the white gators and graciously donated 4 to the Audubon Institute. The Institute currently displays 2 at its Audubon Zoo and 2 at its Aquarium of the Americas. Two alligators are rotated out on loan to other zoos and aquariums and have already been to over a dozen in the U.S. and one in Japan.
“The white gators have become famous and popular all over the world. Their discovery was broadcast worldwide by CNN. They have made numerous television appearances including the Today Show, the Nashville Network, the Tonight Show, CBS Morning News, Late Night with David Letterman, Christian Broadcast Network, MTV, and various foreign news and morning shows. Newspaper and magazine articles worldwide occasionally feature them. A few years back a French magazine ran an article and photos of them and the public response was so favorable they ran a sequel feature.
“How come there are so few white gators and no one had ever seen any before? Besides being rare mutations to begin with, leucistic and albinistic alligators are at a distinct and deadly disadvantage from normal alligators. When a baby gator hatches, it’s only 8-10 inches long. The mother gator guards the nest for a while but soon the little gators are on their own. Normal gator hatchlings are yellow and black striped and blend in well with their surroundings. A white hatchling would easily be spotted by and fall prey to many different predators.
“Two last interesting and unusual facts about the white gators: their black spots and their temperament. Only a very few of the white gators were hatched with black spots. Most had none at all. As they grew, however, more began developing some black areas. Almost all the spots developed around the head and neck only. It has made it easier to identify who is who, although some have never acquired any spots at all.
“And finally, it is agreed by everyone who has worked with the white gators, they are more feisty and temperamental than normal alligators. No one is sure why this is so, but they are treated as if they were fast and quick-​tempered crocodiles rather than relatively slower and more easygoing alligators. Yet another of the many mysteries that surround these white wonders of the swamp!”​—By Curt Burnette, Audubon Institute.
[Picture Credit Line on page 16]
Photos: Audubon Zoo, New Orleans

