From Our Readers
Magic  Now that I’ve read the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint . . . Is There Danger in Practicing Magic?” (September 8, 1993), I really understand why much magic is wrong. What one could call summoning up the spirits to foretell the future has recently become a fad at my school. The others say to me, ‘Won’t you join us?,’ and although I’ve refused, I’ve wondered why it’s wrong. I tried to find an answer but couldn’t find one that satisfied me. Just as I had given up searching, there was your article. It provided a satisfying answer. Thank you for publishing it.
M. K., Japan
Cartoons  I liked your article “Are Violent TV Cartoons Harmful?” (December 8, 1993) I really enjoyed it because a lot of little children are influenced by such violent programs. I’m 13 years old.
D. L., United States
Uniting the World  I was deeply moved by the series “What Will Unite the World?” (December 22, 1993) I was feeling sad at heart about the ongoing news from Bosnia and Herzegovina and from Somalia​—how people are being forced to live under the conditions of war, famine, and death. However, this series showed the true remedy and how it is actually working in the midst of this world’s misery. Having been a delegate at the international convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Poland back in 1989, I can see that the loving, united brotherhood Jehovah’s Witnesses enjoy is like a modern miracle.
H. K., Japan
Female Mutilation  I wish to express my sincere thanks to you for publishing the article on female circumcision (“Millions Are Suffering​—Can They Be Helped?”) in your April 8, 1993, issue. Since reading this article, I have felt deeply for the helpless victims of this practice. It is perpetuated by parents who are guided by misconceptions about female sexuality. But it is no love to subject children to this unreasonable practice that often has serious physical and psychological consequences.
J. O. K., Nigeria
Watching the World  I just wanted to write and tell you what a great job you are doing. The feature “Watching the World” has been a great help when I need to write short news reports for school.
J. W., United States
I am 14 years old, and I regularly read Awake! I thoroughly enjoy all the articles. One particular section that I’d like to thank you for, however, is “Watching the World.” I learn so many different things from it. It is always up-​to-​date, and I often find things in it that we are currently discussing at school. I also appreciate the fact that you never give your own opinions regarding these items. This makes it easier to share the information with other people without getting into an argument.
T. M., United States
Daydreaming  I am writing to thank you very much for the informative “Young People Ask . . .” articles on daydreaming. (“Is It Wrong to Daydream?,” July 8, 1993, and “How Can I Stop Daydreaming So Much?,” July 22, 1993) After reading the second article, I recognized that I have been a compulsive daydreamer for many years. My childhood was abusive, and my means of escape (daydreaming) gradually turned into a mental prison in adulthood. Daydreaming has impaired my performance at work and when driving. It has even detrimentally affected my marriage. Thanks to your articles, I have, with much discipline, effort, and prayer, begun to restore my powers of concentration and thinking ability.
L. G., United States

