The “Godly Fear” District Convention Is At Hand
A rewarding three days of Bible instruction awaits you at the “Godly Fear” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In the United States alone, over 165 conventions are scheduled during June, July, and August. So you will be able to attend one relatively close to where you live.
The convention will start with music at 10:20 a.m. on Friday, and the program will end that day at about five in the afternoon. On Saturday and Sunday, the sessions will begin at 9:30 a.m., and they will conclude at about five on Saturday afternoon and 4:15 p.m. on Sunday.
The keynote address Friday morning will not only show what godly fear is but identify the benefits to those who cultivate such fear. The entire convention program will highlight these benefits.
During an hour-​long symposium of talks and demonstrations Friday afternoon, you will hear how godly fear can strengthen marriage and family life, as well as how it can help young ones remain steadfast in their loyalty to God. Friday’s sessions will conclude with the heartwarming presentation “Comfort for the Bereaved.” You will appreciate the practical help provided during that talk to support those who have lost loved ones in death.
Saturday’s program will show how godly fear can fortify our adherence to Jehovah’s direction regarding the congregation and our ministry. The address “A People Not Forsaken by Jehovah” will describe how God’s promise not to forsake his people should affect them in today’s world. Later that afternoon, in the talk “Read God’s Word, the Holy Bible, Daily,” delegates will receive practical suggestions for reading and studying the Bible. Saturday’s program will conclude with an address on the interest-​arousing theme “Jehovah’s Fear-​Inspiring Day Is Near.”
A feature of Sunday’s program is the talk “There Will Be a Resurrection of the Righteous.” In the following address, “Saved Alive Through the Great Tribulation,” an explanation will be provided of Jesus’ marvelous promise regarding those who will never die at all.​—John 11:26.
The Sunday morning session will conclude with the thought-​provoking 40-​minute drama entitled The Choices You Face. The audience will be brought back to Joshua’s day and will see portrayed his firm resolve to serve Jehovah. They will also witness the fire test in the days of Elijah, and lessons will be drawn from both of these events that will help delegates demonstrate godly fear today.
A convention highlight Sunday afternoon will be the public discourse, “Why Fear the True God Now.” Surely you will benefit by being present all three days! You are cordially invited to attend. To find the location nearest your home, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses, or write the publishers of this magazine. You may also see the June 8 issue of Awake!, which will contain the addresses of all convention locations in the United States, Canada, Britain, and Ireland.
[Picture Credit Line on page 32]
T. Rosenthal/​SUPERSTOCK

