Do You Rely on God or on Men?
“OF COURSE I believe in God. I am no atheist!” Perhaps that would be your reply if someone asked you whether you believed in God or not. However, how deep is your belief in God? To what extent does it influence your thinking and conduct? Does it cause you to rely fully on divine wisdom?—2 Sam. 22:31.
For a moment, think about what you do when you are faced with a problem. Where do you turn for counsel? Do you rely on the wise sayings of worldly philosophers to guide you? Do you seek advice from your friends? Or do you turn to God by opening your copy of his Word, the Bible, to see what godly principles can be applied in the matter? Persons who believe in God rely on him and diligently seek to know and apply his wisdom in their lives. Do you?—Ps. 118:8, 9.
Consider your family life. Does your family apply Bible principles in their speech and conduct? Are God’s promises the topic of many of its conversations and discussions? Families that rely on God talk to him in prayer regularly. Does your family do these things?—Col. 4:2.
What about your employment? Does the prevalence of dishonesty cause you to follow suit? If you are in business for yourself, how do you conduct it? Do you rely on God’s principles? What about the temptations to cheat one’s customers or the insurance company or to violate fire or health regulations to save money? One who truly believes in God, relying on His wisdom, seeks to please him by doing the honest thing.—Heb. 13:18.
Analyze your outlook on the future. Has the fact that men have walked on the moon impressed you more than the heart-cheering promises of God to make this earth a lovely paradise? Do you feel that the evolutionary thinking of scientists is more reliable than God’s Word, the Bible? Do you firmly believe God’s promise to remove all wickedness from the earth?
But some may wonder how they can be sure that what the Bible says is really from God. If one truly believes in God, he should care enough to investigate. Have you personally read the entire Bible? Right in its pages you will find ample evidence that it truly is God’s Word and that all the things it foretells will come to pass. This magazine that you are reading is an aid to help you learn the Bible’s message. It will encourage you to rely fully on the only One who can bring everlasting peace to this earth, Jehovah God. Prove this to yourself by reading the articles that follow.

