What Basis for Hope?
DESPERATELY the people hope for things in the world to get better, but they wonder if it will ever happen. In this unstable world, almost every person hopes for a more stable, happier life.
Fluctuations in money’s value have often destroyed in days the wealth men spent their lives accumulating. Money did not prove a firm hope in Germany in 1923, where, if you had saved even a trillion marks (1,000,000,000,000), you would have seen that tremendous sum dwindle to the value of just one mark! And even in the United States money today does not have the value it had a few years ago. The cash that once could buy an automobile now pays for little more than the down payment. Money that a few years ago bought a suit of clothes today hardly pays for the pants. Inflation and deflation make money a very poor basis for hope.
Even further, money can be lost through war, theft, poor management, or in any of numerous other ways. Thus, while money is a defense, it is not a basis for real hope.
Other persons hope for a disarmament program to usher in a brighter future and happier life for the human family. But what basis have they for such a hope? None whatsoever. Because the very nations that are presently engaged in disarmament discussions are the ones geared for war. Their economy is a war economy. And the best of their resources is being used for arms, not to disarm. Certainly this is not an encouraging and hopeful outlook for those who look for a brighter future to come through the programs of men.
Others hope for a long life. They base their hope on the discoveries of scientists who make great promises regarding longevity. But these very men die.
Christians also hope for peace and everlasting life. What basis have they for their hope? They rest their hope in Jehovah, the immortal Life-giver. It is he who guarantees life to them through faith in Jesus Christ. Paul declared: “The gift God gives is everlasting life by Christ Jesus our Lord.” This promise is sure of fulfillment, because Jehovah is the Almighty God whose word does not return to him void. His promises are guaranteed of sure success. Jesus based his hope in Jehovah and gained everlasting life. Base your hope in the “God who gives hope” and you too will never be disappointed.—Rom. 6:23; 15:13; Isa. 55:11.

