“Let Your Will Come to Pass”
“Let your kingdom come. Let your will come to pass, as in heaven, also upon earth.”—Matt. 6:10.
 1. How has it been shown in the case of mighty world powers that nothing can prevent the fulfillment of the prayer, “Let your will come to pass, as in heaven, also upon earth”?
“LET your will come to pass, as in heaven, also upon earth.” Nothing that men or devils may do will keep that prayer, which Jesus Christ taught nineteen centuries ago, from being fulfilled. (Matt. 6:10) The mightiest governmental rulers in human history have all had to bow to the heavenly Father’s will. Mighty world powers, holding empire over large areas of the earth, have one after another bowed to the will of earth’s Creator in a forced confession that he is the strongest power in the universe. He still is, and what he wills is supreme and must come to pass.
 2. How had Nebuchadnezzar seemingly showed himself superior to Jehovah, and yet how did Jehovah abase that worshiper of false gods to the ground?
2 More than 2,500 years ago Nebuchadnezzar, the king of the Babylonian empire, had to bow before the Creator of heaven and earth and had to admit that the false gods of Babylon were powerless before our Creator. History records that Nebuchadnezzar was the first one permitted to do what no previous pagan ruler had done; he destroyed the holy city of the Jews, Jerusalem, and also their temple, which King Solomon had built to the name of the Most High God, whose name is Jehovah. Yet this God, over whom Nebuchadnezzar had seemingly showed himself superior, abased that proud worldly ruler to the ground and forced him to bow like a brute beast before Jehovah. For seven periods of time, or for seven years, Nebuchadnezzar imagined himself to be a wild beast. He left his throne of world domination to go out into the field, get down on all fours and chew on grass like a mere bull. This crazed condition came upon him, not accidentally, but in fulfillment of a dream from Jehovah twelve months previously, a dream that none of Babylon’s wise men could interpret, but only Jehovah’s prophet Daniel.
 3. What statement by the watcher from heaven concerning the Most High required the dream to come true, and what did Nebuchadnezzar’s boasting about Babylon show that he had not heeded?
3 In this troublesome dream Nebuchadnezzar saw that a “watcher who was also a holy one came down from heaven” and gave instructions and then said: “The sentence is by the decree of the watchers, the decision by the word of the holy ones, to the end that the living may know that the Most High rules the kingdom of men, and gives it to whom he will, and sets over it the lowliest of men.” (Dan. 4:10, Le; Da 4:17, RS) The dream, therefore, had to come true. The history written down and preserved proves that it did. Mighty as Nebuchadnezzar was permitted to become, yet he could not hold up the carrying out of the divine will. When feeling his greatest, he began to brag about his imperial city and say: “Is not this great Babylon, which I have built by my mighty power as a royal residence and for the glory of my majesty?” This boasting betrayed that he had not showed sense enough to heed the warning of the dream and follow Daniel’s advice: “Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to you; break off your sins by practicing righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the oppressed, that there may perhaps be a lengthening of your tranquillity.”—Dan. 4:27, RS.
 4. As a warning to all political rulers, what followed immediately upon Nebuchadnezzar’s boasting?
4 Let the political rulers of Great Britain and America and Communist Russia and other powerful nations take note of what befell Nebuchadnezzar, who had destroyed the typical kingdom of Jehovah God over the Jews. Yes, let all of us read the account: “While the words were still in the king’s mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, ‘O King Nebuchadnezzar, to you it is spoken: The kingdom has departed from you, and you shall be driven from among men, and your dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field; and you shall be made to eat grass like an ox; and seven times shall pass over you, until you have learned that the Most High rules the kingdom of men and gives it to whom he will.’ Immediately the word was fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar. He was driven from among men, and ate grass like an ox, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven till his hair grew as long as eagles’ feathers, and his nails were like birds’ claws.”—Dan. 4:28-33, RS.
 5. How were Nebuchadnezzar’s first imperial rulership and his return to rulership entirely dependent upon Jehovah God?
5 None of the mental health doctors could cure the king of Babylon of this insane lycanthropy. It had to run its course till the time that the Most High God, Jehovah, had set for it, that is, “seven times,” or seven years. Jehovah God had put down this then highest of earth’s rulers, and only Jehovah the Most High could put him back on the throne of Babylon. It was sheer mercy on Jehovah’s part that this position of rulership was preserved for him, just as Daniel had assured him, saying: “Your kingdom shall be sure for you from the time that you know that Heaven rules.” The mightiest and highest king of that ancient day could do nothing except it served within the purpose of the God of heaven, and thus God permitted it. The empire builder who had conquered so many nations and even the kingdom of Judah could not have the throne of the Babylonian world power unless God gave it to him by permitting him to come to the rulership and by giving him back enough soundness of mind to take up his imperial rulership again.
 6. To show that he had learned his lesson, what acknowledgment concerning Jehovah’s will and his works and ways did Nebuchadnezzar make?
6 Did Nebuchadnezzar learn the lesson that Jehovah had purposed for him to learn and for all of us to observe today? The king of Babylon himself has written his record and it has been preserved for us. It reads: “At the end of the days [the seven ‘times’ or years] I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted my eyes to heaven, and my reason returned to me, and I blessed the Most High, and praised and honored him who lives for ever; for his dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom endures from generation to generation; all the inhabitants of the earth are accounted as nothing; and he does according to his will in the host of heaven and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand or say to him, ‘What doest thou?’ At the same time my reason returned to me; and for the glory of my kingdom, my majesty and splendor returned to me. My counselors and my lords sought me, and I was established in my kingdom, and still more greatness was added to me. Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and honor the King of heaven; for all his works are right and his ways are just; and those who walk in pride he is able to abase.”—Dan. 4:34-37, RS.
 7. What was the only proper way for Nebuchadnezzar to comment on his experience, and what was the only proper mental attitude to take?
7 In the light of his dream from Jehovah God and in view of Daniel’s interpretation, the accuracy of which was proved by the later events, there was only this one God-honoring way for Nebuchadnezzar to comment upon his experience. There was only this one proper attitude of mind to take, giving the credit to whom it was due, Jehovah the Most High God, even if that was Daniel’s God.
 8. How did Nebuchadnezzar’s experience back there have to do with marking the beginning of the critical period in which the worldly nations now find themselves?
8 The big question of importance before us now is, What is the attitude of the rulers today in the Eastern and Western blocs of nations and in the neutral nations? Since the year 1914 and the end of World War I the nations have been living in a critical period. The reason for it has considerable to do with Nebuchadnezzar. How so? Back there, Nebuchadnezzar personally passed through “seven times,” or seven literal years, of insane beastliness. But with him also there began “seven times” of greater magnitude upon the nations of the world from his day until now. Those times were what Jesus Christ called “the appointed times of the nations.” He spoke of those “appointed times” in connection with the destruction of the Jewish capital, Jerusalem. Jesus prophesied: “Jerusalem will be trampled on by the nations, until the appointed times of the nations are fulfilled.” (Luke 21:24) Those “seven times” of the nations are many times longer than the “seven times” of the one man, Nebuchadnezzar. According to Jehovah’s timetable, they were 360 times as long as the seven years of Nebuchadnezzar, that is, 2,520 years long. They began in 607 B.C., when Nebuchadnezzar trampled down Jerusalem and Jehovah’s temple, and the land of Judah was desolated. Those “seven times” ended in the early fall of the year 1914 (A.D.), shortly after World War I had begun.
 9. What world powers dominated the earth both before and during the “appointed times of the nations”?
9 Previous to Nebuchadnezzar two political world powers had had much to do with Jehovah’s people, namely, Egypt the first world power of Bible history and Assyria the second world power. Babylon thus became the third world power. Others have followed. During the “appointed times of the nations” from 607 B.C. until A.D. 1914 the blood-splashed pages of history show that five world powers successively dominated our earth, namely, Babylon, Medo-Persia the fourth world power, Greece the fifth world power, Rome the sixth world power, and the British Empire together with the United States of America the seventh world power.
10, 11. (a) Since the end of the symbolic seven times in 1914, what comparisons is it now the right time for us to look for? (b) On what must all examiners of history agree in a comparison of Nebuchadnezzar and all the worldly nations?
10 Since seven symbolic times had passed over the nations and world powers by 1914, it became the right time for us to look for comparisons, if any exist. We have heard the expression of Nebuchadnezzar at the end of his “seven times” because of his mental comeback and his return to Babylon’s throne. Well, is there anything like this since 1914? Do the expressions of the rulers of worldly nations, particularly those of Christendom, compare with the expression made by the restored Nebuchadnezzar?
11 On one thing all honest examiners of world history must agree: that during the 2,520 years from Nebuchadnezzar’s destruction of Jerusalem till A.D. 1914 all nations, including Christendom, acted like Nebuchadnezzar did during his “seven times” of insanity, that is, just like brute beasts, without recognizing Jehovah God or considering his will as this is set down in the Holy Scriptures of the Bible. Well, then, had they by the end of their “seven times” of 2,520 years learned something?
12. What shows whether, by the end of the “seven times” in 1914, the nations had, like Nebuchadnezzar, come to sanity toward God?
12 Did the nations, like Nebuchadnezzar, come to sanity and then acknowledge the truth of Psalm 83:18: “That you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth”? The events of 1914 answer the question for us. At the end of the “seven times” about October 1, 1914, the nations of Christendom were engaged in the madness and beastliness of World War I.
13. (a) By that time what should the professedly Christian nations have done? (b) What shows whether they should have known by then that God would bring his kingdom to birth in 1914?
13 By that time the nations that professed to be Christian should have lived up to their claim. They should have shown themselves better than heathen Nebuchadnezzar and should have made an acknowledgment of Jehovah God as the Sovereign of the universe and the only rightful Ruler of the earth. Ah, but could it be that they did not know that in the fall of 1914 the Gentile times, or the “appointed times of the nations,” had run out? No! Rather, they should have known that at the expiring of those “times” about October 1, 1914, Jehovah would bring to birth his promised kingdom in the heavens by seating his anointed Son, Jesus Christ, on the throne of the Kingdom to rule in the midst of his enemies. They should have known this, not just because the Bible was on hand in millions of copies in many languages and because there were hundreds of thousands of clergymen paid to explain the Bible; but because, since 1877, the anointed remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses were proclaiming the coming of those things in 1914.
14. In view of the October 15, 1913, issue of The Watch Tower and the free exhibition of the Photo-Drama of Creation, why should Christendom have known the vital facts?
14 In its issue of October 15, 1913, The Watch Tower published the leading article entitled “Résumé of the Ending of the Times of the Gentiles.” In paragraph 2 of this it said: “Without dogmatizing, we are looking for certain events: (1) The termination of the Gentile Times—Gentile supremacy in the world—and (2) For the inauguration of Messiah’s Kingdom in the world. The kingdoms of the earth will come to an end, and ‘the God of Heaven will set up a Kingdom.’ (Daniel 2:44) The Scriptures do not say that the trouble will come in an hour, or in one day, or in one year. The intimation is that the catastrophe coming upon our civilization will be a very sudden one.” This was published in English, French, German, Swedish and Danish. Furthermore, the famous eight-hour-long Photo-Drama of Creation, which, by pictures and by sound reproduction, told of the same things, began to be exhibited in Christendom in January of 1914; and by October of 1914 it was being shown free to the public in North America, in Great Britain, in Germany, Switzerland, Finland, Sweden and Denmark, and in Australia and New Zealand. Surely, Christendom should have known!
15. To this very day, forty-four years since 1914, how do the nations show whether they have sanely learned what Nebuchadnezzar learned?
15 To this very day, forty-four years since the ending of the times of the Gentiles in 1914, the nations and their rulers have not come to Christian sanity to learn what Nebuchadnezzar learned, that “the Most High rules the kingdom of men, and gives it to whom he will, and sets over it the lowliest of men.” In cruel contrast, they are preparing for an international slaughter with weapons the power of which for killing masses of human creatures at one explosion is ghastly, besides poisoning air, land and water.
16. Why are the worldly rulers without excuse, and why do the nations today have no peace?
16 By the political rulers and modern scientists human society as a whole, with a civilization developed over many centuries, is put in the greatest peril of all time. The worldly rulers, particularly those of Christendom, are without excuse. They had opportunity to learn from God’s widely published Word, the Bible, and by means of his witnesses on earth what King Nebuchadnezzar decreed “to all peoples, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth,” at the end of his “seven times.” He decreed: “Peace be multiplied to you! It has seemed good to me to show the signs and wonders that the Most High God has wrought toward me. How great are his signs, how mighty his wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to generation.” (Dan. 4:1-3, RS) Ignoring that truth, the nations today have no peace!
17. Upon what recognition does the everlasting survival of this human race depend, and, to show our sanity, what must we find out about kingdom rulership over mankind?
17 Let the nations go on in their madness. Men who have come to sanity like Nebuchadnezzar’s now have sense enough to see this vital truth: That the everlasting survival of this human race depends, not upon military defense strong enough to check the enemy and to repay him with a retaliation of an equal or a greater amount of destruction. It depends upon our recognizing the everlasting kingdom of the Most High God and the continuance of his dominion from generation to generation. His kingdom and dominion do not confine themselves to just the invisible heavens. They take in also this visible earth with all the outer space around it. All people who want to remain among the living must recognize that the Most High rules also the kingdom of men and that he is higher than the kingdom of men and that he gives this kingdom over mankind to whom he wills as the Most High. To show our sanity, we must also find out precisely to whom the Most High God has willed to give the kingdom over mankind, because it is to be given to the “lowliest of men.” Then whatever the enemy world does or gets ready to do will not amount to anything, for no one on earth can stay the hand of Jehovah God or say to him, in challenge: “What doest thou?”
18. What does a look at history from the Bible standpoint show regarding the giving of the kingship over mankind, and how did Nebuchadnezzar’s own case illustrate that fact?
18 A look at world history from the Bible standpoint reveals the truthfulness of what was said by the “watcher,” the “holy one,” who came down from heaven, that the Most High God Jehovah gives the kingdom to whom he wills and not to whom the people will or a dictator wills. In the case of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, God used him as His executioner to bring due punishment upon the disloyal nation of ancient Israel. So God rewarded Nebuchadnezzar by letting him become the world ruler to start off the “appointed times of the nations.” The prophet Daniel informed Nebuchadnezzar so when he interpreted the meaning of the golden-headed image that Nebuchadnezzar saw in a dream but forgot on waking up. Daniel said: “You, O king, the king of kings, to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the power, and the might, and the glory, and into whose hand he has given, wherever they dwell, the sons of men, the beasts of the field, and the birds of the air, making you rule over them all—you are the head of gold.”—Dan. 2:36-38, RS.
19. In harmony with that saying, what did Jehovah say by Ezekiel to Zedekiah the king to show that the Most High does the giving of the kingdom over mankind?
19 In harmony with that saying, Jehovah gave his own typical kingdom in Judah to an overthrow by Nebuchadnezzar. Hence to King Zedekiah, who sat on the typical “throne of Jehovah” in Jerusalem, Jehovah said: “Remove the mitre, and take off the crown: this shall not be always so; exalt him [the non-Jew] that is low, and make him [the Jew] low that is high. Overthrown, overthrown, overthrown will I render it; also this shall not belong to any one, until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him.” (Ezek. 21:31, 32, Le; Eze 21:26, 27, AV) Jehovah God does the giving according to his own will.
CHANGING TIMES AND SEASONS
20. How did Jehovah, just as Daniel said in comment on Nebuchadnezzar’s forgotten dream, change the times and seasons in 607 B.C.?
20 Changes took place exactly as Daniel said after Jehovah God had revealed to him Nebuchadnezzar’s forgotten dream and its meaning. “Daniel said: ‘Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever, to whom belong wisdom and might. He changes times and seasons; he removes kings and sets up kings; he gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to those who have understanding; he reveals deep and mysterious things; he knows what is in the darkness, and the light dwells with him.’” (Dan. 2:20-22, RS) In 607 B.C. he changed the times and seasons. He changed the times from those of the typical kingdom of God on earth to the times of the supremacy of the non-Jewish world powers, “the appointed times of the nations.” He changed the “seasons” or the specified times. In the fall of 607 B.C. he began this change. During the 2,520 years that followed there was no interference with the Gentile world powers by a typical kingdom of David at Jerusalem. There was no successor to King David sitting on the “throne of Jehovah” at Jerusalem to do so.
21. How did Jehovah show ability to make changes in Nebuchadnezzar’s own case and that of his dynasty and in the case of Babylonian world domination?
21 As another example of Jehovah’s ability to make changes, he removed Nebuchadnezzar from the throne of Babylon for “seven times,” or seven literal years. Later, at his specified time, he removed from the throne of Babylon the dynasty of Chaldean rulers in the line of Nebuchadnezzar. At that time, in the year 539 B.C., he let the Babylonian Empire be overthrown by the very man whom he had foretold by name more than 185 years beforehand, the Persian King Cyrus the Great. Through the prophet Isaiah he said: “This is what Jehovah has said to his anointed one, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have taken hold of, to subdue before him nations . . . : ‘For the sake of my servant Jacob and of Israel my chosen one, I even proceeded to call you by your name; I proceeded to give you a name of honor, although you did not know me.’” (Isa. 45:1, 4) Thus the times of Babylonian domination changed to those of Persian domination.
22. How did Jehovah make changes right on time concerning the Jewish exiles and Judah’s desolation, and how did Cyrus’ decree show Jehovah’s responsibility in the matter?
22 In order that Cyrus the Great might serve the interests of Daniel’s people and might execute divine vengeance upon Babylon, Jehovah maneuvered him into the position of ruler of the Persian Empire. Exactly in the seventieth year from the destruction of Jerusalem and its temple Jehovah moved Cyrus to issue the decree for the captive Jews to go free from Babylon and return to their homeland and rebuild Jerusalem and the temple. The times of Jerusalem’s desolation and of Israel’s captivity to Babylon were thus changed, according to the divine will and at his season or specified time. (Isa. 44:28; 45:13; Jer. 25:12-14; 2 Chron. 36:22, 23) The temple decree revealed Jehovah’s responsibility for this, in that it said: “This is what Cyrus the king of Persia has said, ‘All the kingdoms of the earth Jehovah the God of the heavens has given me and he himself has commissioned me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoever there is among you of all his people, may his God prove to be with him. So let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and rebuild the house of Jehovah the God of Israel—he is The true God.’” (Ezra 1:1-3) Thus Cyrus was rewarded for his service rendered to Jehovah God.
23. The further changes of times and seasons that were due to come were to come according to what, and why so?
23 However, there were still further changes of times and seasons due, together with removals of kings and settings up of kings. These were due, not according to man’s will, but according to God’s will, for he permitted these changes in human affairs. In fact, he foretold them. Hence his divine foresight had to be proved right.
24. How in Daniel alone did Jehovah foretell the changes of world dominion to the sixth world power, and what notable birth during the sixth world power indicates the change was at Jehovah’s marked time?
24 In at least four prophecies in the book of Daniel alone, Jehovah foretold that the dynasty of the Persian Empire, the fourth world power, would come to an end and that the Macedonian or Grecian Empire would come to power as the fifth world power of history. This was to be in the days of a conspicuous Greek-speaking king, Alexander the Great, who would campaign with speed through the entire domains of the Persian Empire and annex it all. The divided empire that was to follow the death of this Macedonian world ruler was to be swallowed up in the course of time by the Roman Empire, the sixth world power. This too was to be at Jehovah’s marked time for changes, a change of conditions for his own people and a change for world rulers. Thus at the season that the Roman world power would issue a decree that would oblige the mother of Jesus to go to Bethlehem, the birthplace of David, the prophecy concerning the human birth of the Son of God was there to be fulfilled. (Mic. 5:2, AS; Matt. 2:1-6; Luke 2:1-20) All this is marvelous in magnifying the unerring forevision and the unfailing will of Jehovah God.
25. What further mighty change of world domination did Jehovah’s angel foretell to Daniel, and hence what most important decision would the world power have to make?
25 Yet, in a descriptive manner, Jehovah’s angel foretold to Daniel a further mighty change, that from the Roman Empire to the greatest earthly empire of them all, the British Empire together with its close associate the United States of America, these two political powers together forming the seventh world power. This world power, a so-called Christian world power, was to be the one that would be dominating the world in the year 1914. Hence it would have to make a most important decision concerning the kingdom of God that was established in the heavens in that eventful year.
26. What did Jehovah’s forevision foresee for the “time of the end” as to its world developments?
26 God’s forevision peered still farther, right into the “time of the end,” and foresaw the formation of the international peace organization, the League of Nations, its death, yes, also its rebirth in the United Nations. Jehovah’s angel foretold to Daniel even the growth of world communism to such a degree of strength that it would challenge both the mighty seventh world power and the eighth world power, the United Nations of the present time.
27. No matter how great and extensive the changes on the world stage, these all occurred according to what, as Daniel’s comment on Nebuchadnezzar’s dream shows?
27 In truth, all these shiftings of the world scenery through the centuries to its present setting on the world stage of action called for great, extensive changes. But all these were according to the foreknowledge of the Most High God, at his own times and seasons, inasmuch as he foresaw them all. He let nothing occur to block his purpose. Thousands of years ago these things were all dark to the human mind. Even concerning the prophecies that were given to him, with a partial explanation, Daniel said: “I heard, but I did not understand.” (Dan. 12:8, RS) Yet from what Jehovah God revealed to Daniel by the dramatic explanation of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream of the golden-headed image, Daniel got some penetration into the depth of God’s forevision. So Daniel said: “He knows what is in the darkness, and the light [concerning these things] dwells with him”; “he reveals deep and mysterious things” to his people.
28. In support of Jehovah’s rulership and ability to give rulership, what did Daniel say to foretell the greatest and grandest change on earth?
28 The most tremendous change of all lifts to a grand climax the truth that “the Most High rules the kingdom of men, and gives it to whom he will.” Daniel was inspired to foretell Jehovah’s making of the greatest and grandest change on earth in God’s time and at his season by saying: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed, nor shall its sovereignty be left to another people. It shall break in pieces all these kingdoms and bring them to an end, and it shall stand for ever.”—Dan. 2:44, RS.
29-31. Why could not the “lowliest of men” that is set up over the kingdom of men mean either the Anglo-American world power or world communism?
29 Over 2,500 years ago Daniel foretold this marvelous change. Today we are living in the very midst of it. In our day Jehovah sets up over the kingdom of men one who is called the “lowliest of men.” Who is this “lowliest of men”?
30 In our day democracy and communism are hotly contending with each other. Democracy is of the lowly common people. Yet this “lowliest of men” could never be the mighty champion of democracy, the Anglo-American world power. This seventh world power of history is stricken out as the “lowliest of men” by Jehovah’s prophecy, which said: “He shall speak words against the Most High, and shall wear out the saints of the Most High, and shall think to change the times and the law . . . [This world power] magnified itself, even up to the Prince of the host [of heaven]; and the continual burnt offering was taken away from him, and the place of his sanctuary was overthrown.”—Dan. 7:25; 8:11, RS.
31 On the other hand, Russian communism is claimed to be the rule of the proletariat, the unpropertied class. Yet the “lowliest of men” could never be the system of ungodly world communism. Striking out that political movement which persistently aims at world domination, Jehovah God’s angel said: “He shall exalt himself and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak astonishing things against the God of gods. . . . he shall magnify himself above all. He shall honor the god of fortresses instead of these; a god whom his fathers did not know he shall honor with gold and silver, with precious stones and costly gifts. He shall deal with the strongest fortresses by the help of a foreign god; those who acknowledge him he shall magnify with honor.” (Dan. 11:36-39, RS) Those prophetic descriptions foretold no lowliness of spirit in either the Anglo-American world power or in its modern-day challenger, communism.
32, 33. Who truly is this “lowliest of men,” and how was this fact proved?
32 The one who is truly the “lowliest of men” is without compare. He is no degraded man, although he is so lowly. No other creature in heaven or on earth could lower himself so deeply for the glory of God and for the everlasting good of man as this lowly one did. Why not? Because, before he showed how lowly in spirit he is, he was existing in God’s form as a spirit creature in heaven. He was God’s first-born and only-begotten Son, by means of whom all other creatures in heaven and earth were made.
33 In spite of his being first among all creatures of Jehovah God, he did not meditate on usurping God’s position and pretending to be equal with God. He did not try to magnify himself to the “Prince of the host” of heaven, nor did he “speak astonishing things against the God of gods,” Jehovah. To the contrary, says the sacred Record, “he emptied himself and took a slave’s form and came to be in the likeness of men. More than that, when he found himself in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient as far as death, yes, death on a torture stake.” (Phil. 2:5-8) He spoke honestly about himself when he invited the toiling, loaded-down ones to come to him for relief. Far from being overbearing and oppressive, he said: “I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart.” (Matt. 11:28, 29) In lowly submission to the will of his God and heavenly Father he taught his disciples to pray: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. Let your kingdom come. Let your will come to pass, as in heaven, also upon earth.”—Matt. 6:9, 10.

