Appearances Can Be Deceptive
“THERE is no trusting appearances,” said Irish dramatist Richard Sheridan. This is true of trees as well as people.
One day in late March in the year 33 C.E., Jesus Christ saw a fig tree as he and his disciples were walking from Bethany to Jerusalem. The tree was in full leaf, but closer inspection revealed that it had no fruit whatsoever. Jesus therefore said to it: “Let no one eat fruit from you anymore forever.”​—Mark 11:12-14.
Why did Jesus curse that tree since, as Mark explains, “it was not the season of figs”? (Mark 11:13) Well, when a fig tree bears leaves, normally it also produces early figs. It was unusual for a fig tree to have leaves at that time of year. But since it had leaves, Jesus rightly expected to find figs on it. (See the picture above.) The fact that the tree had borne only leaves meant that it would be unproductive. Its appearance was deceptive. Since fruit trees were taxed, an unfruitful tree was an economic burden and needed to be cut down.
Jesus used that unfruitful fig tree to illustrate a vital lesson regarding faith. The following day, his disciples were surprised to see that the tree had already withered. Jesus explained: “Have faith in God. . . . All the things you pray and ask for have faith that you have practically received, and you will have them.” (Mark 11:22-24) In addition to illustrating the need to pray in faith, the withered fig tree graphically showed what would happen to a nation lacking faith.
Some months earlier Jesus had compared the Jewish nation to a fig tree that had been unfruitful for three years and would be cut down if it remained unproductive. (Luke 13:6-9) By cursing the fig tree just four days before his death, Jesus showed how the Jewish nation had not produced fruits befitting repentance and thus was in line for destruction. Though that nation​—like the fig tree—​superficially appeared healthy, a closer look revealed a lack of faith that culminated in the rejection of the Messiah.​—Luke 3:8, 9.
In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus warned against “false prophets” and said: “By their fruits you will recognize them. Never do people gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles, do they? Likewise every good tree produces fine fruit, but every rotten tree produces worthless fruit; a good tree cannot bear worthless fruit, neither can a rotten tree produce fine fruit. Every tree not producing fine fruit gets cut down and thrown into the fire. Really, then, by their fruits you will recognize those men.” (Matthew 7:15-20) These words of Jesus and the account of the cursed fig tree clearly show that we need to be on guard spiritually, for religious appearances can also be deceptive.

