
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Initiating a Conversation in Order to Witness Informally




Why Important: When sharing in the house-to-house ministry, we often find that many people are not at home. However, we may come in contact with them when using public transportation, when waiting in a doctor’s office, when taking a break at work or at school, and so forth. It is Jehovah’s will that everyone has an opportunity to hear the Kingdom message. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Often, in order to give a witness, we must take the initiative to start a conversation.



How to Do It:
           Be selective. Does the person seem friendly and willing to talk? Do the circumstances allow for relaxed conversation? Some publishers first make eye contact with the person and then smile. If the person smiles back, they try to start a conversation.

            Say a brief, silent prayer if you lack the courage to speak.—Neh. 2:4; Acts 4:29.

            Start with a simple comment, perhaps a greeting. Jesus did not begin his conversation with the Samaritan woman by talking about the Kingdom. (John 4:7) Sometimes a conversation can be initiated by giving commendation: “Your children are so well-behaved!” Asking a question is another possible conversation starter: “Did you see that news report last night?”

            Once the conversation has started, look for an opportunity to introduce the good news, but do not be in a hurry. Allow the conversation to develop naturally. Perhaps you can make a statement that arouses the person’s curiosity and prompts an inquiry. For example, if the conversation is about family matters, you might say, “I found some reliable advice on raising children.” If you are discussing a news item, you could say, “I recently enjoyed reading some good news for a change.” Do not be discouraged if the conversation ends before you can give a witness.

            Carry tracts or other literature that you can give to someone who shows interest.




Try This During the Month:
 Each week try to start at least one conversation with the goal of witnessing informally.



