How Should Children Be Disciplined?
“Problems occur when children are told that they are great no matter what they do,” says Canada’s National Post newspaper. Some parents believe that this approach builds self-esteem in their children. However, according to psychologist Roy Baumeister, “high self-esteem is fine when it’s based on genuine achievement, but parents should concentrate on teaching children self-control.”
A parent who fears to correct his or her child when the child takes a false step is doing the young one harm. After all, correction is a method of instruction. As such, it teaches an erring child to avoid repeating mistakes. Of course, parents need to keep from giving correction in a way that is harsh and out of proportion to the wrong that has been committed. (Jeremiah 46:28) They should make sure that correction is not excessive. The Bible states: “You fathers, do not be exasperating your children, so that they do not become downhearted.”—Colossians 3:21.
In the Bible, correction is consistently linked with love and mildness, not with anger and brutality. The skillful counselor should be “gentle toward all, . . . restrained under evil, instructing with mildness those not favorably disposed.” (2 Timothy 2:24, 25) Therefore, parental correction should not be merely an emotional outlet for the parent. In no way does the Bible endorse using tactics that can harm a child.
Millions earth wide have benefited from the 192-page publication The Secret of Family Happiness. Among its instructive chapters are “Train Your Child From Infancy” and “Help Your Teenager to Thrive.” For your copy, please fill in the accompanying coupon and mail it to the address shown on the coupon or to an appropriate address listed on page 5 of this magazine. You will receive specific suggestions that can help to solve problems and make family life the delight that the Creator meant it to be.
□ Send me a copy of the book The Secret of Family Happiness.
□ Please contact me concerning a free home Bible study.

