Announcements
SHARING IN THE PROSPERITY OF GOD’S PEOPLE
In all the world today there is no sure and lasting prosperity among the nations. In sharp contrast with this condition, the organization of Jehovah God abounds in the prosperity that really counts, rich spiritual prosperity that brings salvation. No wonder the psalmist prayed to God for the opportunity of enjoying this prosperity with Jehovah’s chosen people. (Ps. 106:4, 5, AS) There are many persons of good will who will desire to share in the great spiritual prosperity of God’s people once they learn of it. To this end Jehovah’s servants will go forth in June with an offer of three bound books on a contribution of $1.50. Three booklets will be given free with each set of three books. Where there is opportunity to do so, go into isolated territory and visit people who do not regularly have opportunity to hear the good news. Take a good supply of tracts with you and use them during June in all your preaching activity.
THREE VALUABLE BOOKS
It is only natural to conclude that any books having reached a distribution of more than 16,000,000 (sixteen million) copies over a short period of just a few years must be books of interest to the general reading public. That is why we urge all readers of the The Watchtower to send for “Let God Be True”, “This Means Everlasting Life” and What Has Religion Done for Mankind? These three books, each of more than 300 pages, have a combined distribution of more than sixteen million copies, and the end is not in sight yet! They contain a wealth of information on the basic doctrines of the Bible, presenting scriptures to support the conclusions drawn. The history of both true and false religion comes in for detailed treatment. With attractive covers of brown, red and yellow, respectively, the three books are complete with scripture indexes, and two have subject indexes. Write today for these three books, asking for them by name and enclosing a remittance of $1.50 to cover costs.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
The Society’s offices, factory and Bethel home in Brooklyn, New York, will be closed from July 31 to August 10 for the annual vacation. The Bethel family will also be occupied with convention matters from July 19 to 26, although the home and factory will be open for four days following the convention, July 27 to 30, for inspection by visitors. This means that, in the period from July 19 through August 10, very little mail will be handled and few orders shipped. To avoid delays, anticipate your literature needs now and place your orders immediately.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 5: Predestination and Jehovah’s Foreknowledge; also, Foreknowledge Compatible with Free Will, ¶1-6.
Week of July 12: Foreknowledge Compatible with Free Will, ¶7-26.

