Do Good and Be Praised!
1 “They have a serenity about them that I have never seen in any other people.” “It is a pleasure to have this group.” These are typical of the many positive comments received from onlookers after last year’s district conventions, underscoring the fine reputation we have as an organization. (Prov. 27:2; 1 Cor. 4:9) Ultimately, such praise goes to Jehovah. (Matt. 5:16) Another excellent opportunity to praise God is now before us at this year’s “Teachers of God’s Word” District Convention.
2 Each year we receive kindly reminders regarding appropriate conduct at the convention. Why? Because as the attitude, dress, and behavior of the world continue to decay, we refuse to be swayed. We do not want our fine reputation marred. (Eph. 2:2; 4:17) Let us keep the following cautions in mind.
3 Do Good​—At Hotels: We are known as honest people. (Heb. 13:18) Hence, we should be truthful about the number of people staying in our hotel room. We must not cook in the room if this is not permitted. One manager commented that he was able to keep room prices down for Jehovah’s Witnesses because he never has to replace missing towels. He knows that the property will be well cared for. Surely we would not take “souvenirs” from the hotel. Rather, where customary, leave an appropriate tip to show appreciation for services rendered. And always be courteous and patient in dealing with hotel personnel.
4 Observers are impressed when they see our young ones behaving in a polite and obedient manner. (Eph. 6:1, 2) Parents, please supervise your children so that they do not become a disturbance to others, including when they use the swimming pool or other recreational facilities. All should avoid slamming doors or making loud noises, especially late in the evening.
5 We can do good by being considerate of non-Witness hotel guests who are also using the premises. Some hotels complain that convention delegates use all the ice in the ice machines to fill their coolers. Likewise, it is inappropriate to take complimentary food items or fill containers with coffee for later use. Never should we feel that we are an exception with regard to hotel policies.
6 Do Good​—At the Convention Site: It has been noted that some delegates have refused to cooperate with the attendants, even speaking to them in an unchristian manner. Because of failing to follow the instructions of the brothers and parking where not legally permitted, some delegates have had their cars towed away. Certainly, a me-first attitude does not identify one as a doer of good, nor does it bring praise to Jehovah God. Let us therefore be loving, patient, and cooperative.​—Gal. 5:22, 23, 25.
7 When the convention doors open at 8:00 a.m., some brothers and sisters can be seen running, pushing, and shoving to obtain the “best” seats. Injuries have resulted because of this type of behavior. While it has been suggested that we bring a light lunch to eat at noon, it is not appropriate to set up tables in the parking lot to serve a large meal. This would give the impression of the tailgate parties that are common at sporting events.
8 Do Good​—By Our Dress and Grooming: Following one of last year’s district conventions, the editor of a large metropolitan newspaper wrote: “More than anything else, it was the deportment of the Witnesses themselves that was most striking. How refreshing it was to see so many people carry themselves with such an air of dignity and respect. Dressed in their Sunday finest, hundreds of families representing the gamut of racial and ethnic backgrounds quietly streamed into the arena. Their behavior was in sharp contrast to that of most crowds that file into the arena. In fact, the Witnesses contrast greatly with most crowds in general. It’s become all too common to see rude public behavior. . . . Indeed, the crowd of Witnesses is refreshing.” May we never allow our dress and grooming or our conduct to detract in any way from the spiritual atmosphere of the convention.​—Phil. 1:10; 1 Tim. 2:9, 10.
9 Do Good​—At the Baptism: Baptismal candidates will want to treat this occasion with utmost dignity. Wearing modest bathing apparel will show appreciation for the sacredness of the occasion. It would be most beneficial for Bible study conductors to review with their students before attending the convention the “Questions From Readers” in the April 1, 1995, issue of The Watchtower.
10 Our decorum and godly conduct testify to our Christian beliefs and make it easier for honesthearted ones to recognize the truth. Let us, therefore, “keep doing good” and be praised while attending the “Teachers of God’s Word” District Convention.​—Rom. 13:3.

