Organized “Decently and by Arrangement”
1 For a district convention to be successful, there must be a merging of many efforts. The convention administration arranges a suitable meeting site as well as rooming contracts. Individuals and family groups make their travel and rooming plans. And congregations coordinate their volunteer efforts to staff the many departments needed to operate the convention. The goal is to have “all things take place decently and by arrangement.”​—1 Cor. 14:40.
2 As you coordinate your efforts with those of the convention organization, keep in mind that months​—sometimes years—​of preparation are needed. Hundreds of brothers spend much time getting things set up. This includes renting facilities, gathering equipment, and recruiting workers. This advance preparation results in spiritual blessings for all. What can we do to assist?
3 Cooperate With Rooming Arrangements: It is vital that all of us cooperate with convention arrangements. This is especially necessary when we arrange for our rooming accommodations. Literally hundreds of rooms are needed for each convention. The majority of our brothers have limited funds and must depend on inexpensive room rates. Extensive efforts have been made to negotiate the best possible hotel rates. We must lovingly consider the needs of others and ‘keep an eye, not in personal interest upon just our own matters, but also in personal interest upon those of the others.’​—Phil. 2:4.
4 Our adhering closely to convention guidelines for obtaining rooms results in benefits for all concerned. Ignoring these guidelines creates needless problems. How so? When we cooperate with these suggestions, hotels know in advance how many rooms they have booked and thus how many guests they will have. This helps them with their planning and can result in continued rate reductions in future years. If many of us cancel our reservations or make alternative plans, this inconveniences the hotel management as well as our brothers and sisters who may have wanted accommodations in the same facility. The management may make fewer rooms available for our conventions in the future, feeling that we will not honor our commitments. How much better it is when we are true to our word, letting our “Yes mean Yes”!​—Matt. 5:37.
5 Consider These Good Results: After one convention, a campsite manager observed: “I have noticed that Jehovah’s Witnesses are very honest in all they do. Last week I had 40 of them at my campsite, and they did not create any problems. On the contrary, they are the only ones who come and tell you if they have an extra person staying in their trailer or tent. As far as I am concerned, they are the best customers you can have.” How wonderful it would be if all those renting facilities to us could have such a fine experience! What a witness that would give!
6 The regional manager of a hotel chain once said: “I can’t recall ever having such a large group that exemplified their beliefs so tremendously as Jehovah’s Witnesses. We hope you will return.” This comment demonstrates that fine conduct is refreshing not only to us but also to many in the world who observe us.
7 Basic Ways We Can Cooperate: There are simple things that we can do to cooperate with the convention arrangement for making rooming reservations. (1) Do not reserve more hotel rooms than you plan to use. (2) Send the appropriate deposit to hold your room. (3) Do not abuse complimentary breakfast provisions that may be offered to guests. (4) Remember that hotel owners properly expect us to abide by their rules.
8 As servants of Jehovah God, we have the opportunity to reflect his personality in all that we do. This includes making arrangements for and attending conventions where God’s name is involved. Remember, he “is a God, not of disorder, but of peace.” (1 Cor. 14:33) Thus, let us be determined that all onlookers discern this quality about Jehovah from what they see in us​—our conduct and demeanor as we plan for and attend the “Teachers of God’s Word” District Convention. May honesthearted observers come to realize that Jehovah’s congregated throngs are organized “decently and by arrangement.”​—Ps. 68:26.

