Service Meeting Schedule
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer months. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the “Teachers of God’s Word” District Convention. Use 15 minutes on the last Service Meeting before attending the convention to repeat pointed counsel from this month’s insert that may be appropriate locally. During the month of October, an entire Service Meeting will be arranged to review convention highlights. In preparation for that discussion, all of us can take meaningful notes at the convention, including a list of the points that we wish to apply personally in our own life and in the field ministry. Then we can be prepared to explain how we have applied those suggestions since attending the convention. It will be mutually upbuilding to hear how we benefited from the good instruction that was received.
Week Starting May 14
Song 3
 6 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Consider the above note regarding Service Meeting adjustments and what is planned for a Service Meeting in October, when there will be a review of district convention highlights.
 9 min: What Are Your Plans for the Summer? An elder or a ministerial servant and his family discuss their plans for the summer months. They talk about attending all sessions of the district convention, auxiliary pioneering, and perhaps taking a vacation and enjoying some recreation. They all agree that they do not want to neglect theocratic activities, such as attending congregation meetings, sharing in field service, and having their family Bible study, even if they travel elsewhere. They will make sure that they report their field service activity to the secretary promptly, regardless of whether they are at home or out of town.
14 min: “Conventions​—Time for Rejoicing!” Talk by an elder. Explain why large gatherings of Jehovah’s people were held in Bible times and why they are equally beneficial today. These occasions provide strengthening association and vital spiritual food. Stress the importance of everyone being in attendance all three days of the district convention.
16 min: “Organized ‘Decently and by Arrangement.’”a Describe some of the extensive arrangements that must be made to organize a convention. Emphasize the importance of fully cooperating with the procedures that have been put into place for our benefit. Review ways that all of us can show proper respect and avoid needless problems.
Song 31 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 21
Song 52
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
17 min: “Listen and Take In More Instruction.” Talk and audience discussion. Explain why the instruction provided at conventions is vital spiritual food that we need. Comment on the tremendous time and effort required to put on such a program. Invite audience to comment on what each one can do to ensure the greatest benefit to himself and others. Stress the reasons why all of us should be in our seats when each session begins.
18 min: “Do Good and Be Praised!”b Explain why we attract much attention when we attend a large convention. Favorable comments from observers add to the Kingdom witness, while critical remarks can turn people away. Point out specific things we should do to demonstrate that we have Christian qualities that include genuine concern for others.
Song 105 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 28
Song 58
13 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for May. Review “Simplified Subscription Renewal Process.” Encourage all subscribers not to allow their Watchtower and Awake! subscriptions to expire.
15 min: Local needs.
17 min: “The Word of God . . . Exerts Power.”c Include two well-prepared demonstrations, showing how brief presentations can focus attention on God’s Word.
Song 79 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 4
Song 100
12 min: Local announcements and field service experiences.
15 min: “Share Fully in the Harvest.”d When discussing paragraph 4, include the example from the September 15, 1996, Watchtower, page 19, paragraph 10, showing what some are doing to expand their ministry.
18 min: “We Have Worked Our Territory Many Times!”e To be handled by service overseer. (Congregations having seldom-worked territory can review the article “Magazines Announce the Kingdom,” in the April 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry.) Discuss what can be done locally to give more thorough coverage when working territory. Relate experiences in the 1997 Yearbook, page 204, and the February 15, 1996, Watchtower, page 26. Stress importance of keeping good house-to-house records, following up not-at-homes, and making prompt return visits.
Song 142 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

