Share Fully in the Harvest
1 Jehovah’s prophets of old as well as Jesus Christ himself spoke of an ingathering work. (Isa. 56:8; Ezek. 34:11; John 10:16) Such a work is now being accomplished as the Kingdom good news is preached worldwide. (Matt. 24:14) The distinction between those serving God and those not serving him is becoming very evident. (Mal. 3:18) What does this mean for us?
2 A Personal Responsibility: We can learn from the example of Paul, who was fully involved in spearheading the Christian ministry. He felt a debt of responsibility to preach so that all people would have the opportunity to hear the good news and be saved. This moved him to labor incessantly in their behalf. (Rom. 1:14-17) In view of the perilous situation facing mankind today, do we not have an even greater responsibility to preach to those in our assigned territory?​—1 Cor. 9:16.
3 Time for Urgent Action: The preaching work can be compared to a search-and-rescue operation. People must be located and helped to safety before it is too late. Time is limited. Lives are at stake! No wonder that Jesus urged his disciples to “beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”​—Matt. 9:38.
4 Recognizing the urgency of today, many Kingdom workers have increased their share in this lifesaving activity. A teenager named Hirohisa lived in a single-parent home with four younger siblings. He supported his family by getting up at three o’clock in the morning to deliver newspapers. Even so, Hirohisa wanted to do more in the ministry, so he began regular pioneering. Are there ways that you could share more fully in this never-to-be-repeated work?
5 “The time left is reduced.” (1 Cor. 7:29) Therefore, may we do all we can in the most important work being carried out in the earth today​—preaching the Kingdom good news and making disciples. Jesus likened this ministry to a harvest work. (Matt. 9:35-38) By our sharing fully in the harvest, the fruits of our labor may include helping someone to become part of the great crowd of worshipers described at Revelation 7:9, 10.

