“The Word of God . . . Exerts Power”
1 “The word of God is alive and exerts power,” wrote the apostle Paul. (Heb. 4:12) What did he mean by that? God’s word, or message, found in the Bible can have a strong influence on people. The wisdom that the Bible contains has the power to change one’s life for the better. The comfort and hope that it offers draw humans to the Life-Giver, Jehovah God. Its message can start honesthearted ones on the road leading to eternal life. However, to see these effects, we must use the Bible when we witness to others.
2 Read a Scripture at Every Opportunity: It appears that many publishers have got out of the habit of using the Bible at the door. Is that true of you? Because many people do not seem to have time for a lengthy conversation, perhaps you have slipped into the routine of only offering literature or just paraphrasing a scripture. We encourage all publishers to make an earnest effort to read at least one verse from the Bible when presenting the good news, thus allowing the person to see that our message is indeed found in God’s Word.
3 Although few people make reading the Bible a practice, it is still generally respected. Even busy people will often spare a minute or two to listen to a message read directly from God’s Word. When an appropriate scripture is read with warmth and briefly explained, the power of Jehovah’s word can have a good effect on the listener. But how can you bridge the gap from your opening comments to reading a verse from the Bible?
4 Try This in Magazine Work: A traveling overseer makes effective use of the Scriptures when engaging in magazine work. He carries a small Bible in his pocket. After presenting the magazines and briefly featuring an article, he opens the Bible without hesitation and reads a verse that ties in with the article. This may be done by simply asking, “What do you think of this encouraging promise?” and then proceeding to read a selected scripture.
5 Make it your goal to share a verse or two from the Bible with every listener. Its motivating power can open the way for more people to be drawn to God.​—John 6:44.

