Presenting the Good News​—After Preparing with Practice Sessions
1 A great aid in these days to motivating the entire family to right works are home practice sessions. One circuit servant reports that he has been recommending to families discussion and practice sessions having to do with the field ministry, and with good results. One week, for ten or fifteen minutes following the family study, the family head could lead the family in discussing and practicing magazine presentations. Next week, they could discuss how to keep a neat house-to-house record. Next, what to have in one’s witnessing case. (Many of the younger publishers do not have one, but he has noticed that it helps some to have more of a personal interest in the work when they have a case of their own.) Next, how to dress presentably for the service. (In some instances the children are not dressed in a way that befits the Christian ministry. Sometimes the attire and grooming of teen-age publishers leave something to be desired.) Then, demonstrate and help one another to become effective in dealing with various objections, making back-calls, etc.
2 The Society recommends that when practice sessions are held they should simulate actual conditions that exist in the field. In this way greater discernment is gained, since we learn how to deal with common objections that actually do come up in the field. For example, in one practice session the following points were developed in connection with the objection: “I have my own church. I am not interested.” “Oh, I see,” the publisher replied. “Which church is it that you attend?” “How many attend at your church? “Have they said much lately at your church about what this world is coming to?” Usually their response to such questions is vague. But asking questions about their church often makes them forget their objection and shows that we are interested in their opinions, and these, of course, enable us to see how best to help them.
3 During home practice sessions we develop our ability to present the good news more effectively in the field. If you are not doing this yet as a family, why not plan on doing so shortly?

