Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MARCH 14
Theme: Preach the Word in Favorable Season. (2 Tim. 4:2) Song 90.
15 min: Introduction. Include text and handling of the Branch Letter.
15 min: “A New Field for You?” Demonstrate points.
15 min: “What Will This Memorial Season Bring?” Questions and answers. Demonstrate appropriate points.
15 min: Concluding comments. Congregation servant discusses progress of subscription campaign. Works in local experiences, showing how brothers are successful in getting subscriptions. Song 1.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 21
Theme: Serve Jehovah with Faith and Patience. (Heb. 6:10-12) Song 60.
10 min: Introduction, including text, Theocratic News and Announcements.
15 min: “Sharing What We Have.” Questions and answers. May want to enact one of the experiences in paragraph 4 or have someone relate one.
12 min: Talk on “Watchtower” articles on patience, pages 739-741, issue of December 15, 1970.
 8 min: How to Welcome and Assist Strangers When First Coming to Kingdom Hall. Demonstrate friendly greeting, introducing them to others, acquainting them with features of Kingdom Hall, etc. Discuss impact of hospitality and love on strangers.
15 min: Concluding comments. Overseer makes stirring appeal for all to assist others to attend special talk. Song 35.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 28
Theme: Preach God’s Kingdom with the Right Viewpoint. (Acts 28:31) Song 47.
 8 min: Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: Question Box. Highlight role played by publisher preparing student for the ministry, possibly demonstrating appropriate points.
22 min: Would You Like to Start More Bible Studies? Demonstration and audience discussion of direct approach.
(2 min.) Chairman: Would you like to start a Bible study during this “Watchtower” campaign? Experience has proved that it is quite effective to offer subscriptions whenever Bible study offer refused. In three-month period circuit servant and his wife started ninety Bible studies using the following presentation.
(17 min.) Capable publisher gives presentation to audience, using own words. Chairman interrupts at appropriate places to discuss briefly the whys and wherefores so all will clearly understand why this approach is so successful in getting and holding the attention of householders from the introduction all the way through to the conclusion. Highlight advantages. (Afterward have capable publisher demonstrate presentation with householder so brothers can see it from beginning to end.)
“Hello. I am calling on those who have a common concern for the future. Things are happening so fast in the world that person hardly knows what to think, isn’t that true? [Pause for householder’s answer after this and each of the following questions. Chairman can answer for audience.] Many changes are taking place, isn’t that right? You would like to see better conditions, wouldn’t you? Do you think they will ever come? If a wish could come true, what would you like to see take place more than anything else? [Usually householders say they would like to see peace or good health.]
“An artist drew a picture of what he believed the earth would be like some day. [While saying this take out “Truth” book and draw attention to picture on page 4.] Notice the title of the first chapter, ‘Grand Blessings from God Near at Hand!’ Does this sound a little presumptuous or possibly unrealistic, especially when we see conditions in the world worsening?” (Read first paragraph right through, up to question, “What does it all mean?” Then, without mentioning study, ask question on first paragraph, giving the householder your copy of the book with the answers neatly underlined so he can answer easily.)
Continue through paragraphs two and three, reading them or having them read. (Some are poor readers and it is best not to embarrass them by insisting they read.) Read scriptures and ask questions to help householder to get the sense of them and to see how they apply. Then ask: “Do you have time for just one more paragraph?” With permission you may consider paragraph four. (If you detect at the start that householder is very busy you may want to handle paragraph three only, as this has been found most practical in such cases.) In conclusion ask: “Well, how did you like it?” Very briefly review what has been learned and ask: “Are you usually home at this time? I would like to call next week at [state day and time] and cover a few more paragraphs with you, possibly even completing the chapter ‘Grand Blessings from God Near at Hand!’” If the Bible study is refused, you still have a fine basis for making the current offer.
(3 min.) Chairman: Emphasize following point: When making presentation in field, be sure to allow householder time to answer questions asked throughout presentation so as to draw him into discussion. Encourage brothers to practice this presentation with one another. The one acting as householder can realistically simulate situations and objections that come up in the territory. When practicing, try to make each “householder” different. Remind brothers that preparation is the key to a more enjoyable and successful ministry. If some have problems in keeping studies going, encourage them to review points in January “Kingdom Ministry,” page 2, column 3.
10 min: Inviting Those in School to Our Meetings.
(2 min.) Chairman briefly comments on the many opportunities open to youths in school to give a witness. They have a wonderful territory that others find difficult to reach. A fine way to give a witness is to invite interested schoolmates to our meetings.
(5 min.) Demonstration. In school cafeteria young sister remarks to two young brothers that a classmate’s mother is studying the Bible with the Witnesses. A brother asks if sister has witnessed to girl. ‘A little,’ she replies, ‘but does not seem very interested.’ Brother suggests inviting her to meeting. Refers to experience. (yb69, p. 134, par. 1) Second brother stresses need to invite all who show some interest, schoolmates or teachers. (yb63, p. 220, par. 1) Sister says she will invite classmate as soon as she sees her.
(3 min.) Chairman encourages youths to follow this good example. Discuss local experiences. Our young brothers in Africa and India are thinking of their schoolmates. (yb71, p. 113, par. 1; yb64, p. 177, pars. 1, 2) Inviting those in school to meetings will do much good and you will enjoy many blessings from Jehovah.
10 min: Concluding comments. Congregation servant encourages all to work hard for outstanding attendance at Memorial. Cites benefits and blessings. Song 54.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 4
Theme: Presiding in a Fine Manner over Our Households. (1 Tim. 3:12, 13) Song 86.
10 min: Introduction, text and comments with family head reviewing children on what they learned at text discussion that morning.
13 min: Presenting the Good News. Discussion and demonstration.
15 min: “Do You Remember?” Lively and informative discussion of points from January 1, 1971, “Watchtower,” pages 30 and 31.
10 min: Stirring talk on theme for April, setting stage and pace for delightful month’s activity. (See “Watchtower,” April 1, 1971.)
12 min: Concluding comments. Emphasize value of Memorial from aspect of spiritual blessings to be gained. Encourage all-out effort to aid others to attend Memorial. Song 118.

