From Our Readers
Motherhood  Thank you for the cover series “Motherhood—Does It Take a Superwoman?” (April 8, 2002) Many today feel that stay-at-home mothers are not as busy as working mothers. Your article helped your readers to see that all mothers are working mothers!
T. M., United States
The first thing that caught my eye was the picture of a superwoman on page 2. I wanted to read the article immediately. As a mother of two small children, I can say that the daily routine of a mother was realistically portrayed in the articles.
C. L., Germany
I am a 12-year-old girl, and when I got this magazine, I read it right away. I now realize what my mom does for my dad and me. I appreciate her and help her more now!
A. L., United States
Two years ago I had a baby boy. Until then, I had been a full-time evangelizer with a part-time job. Longing for my previous life-style, I felt unworthy of my role as mother. It was important for me to feel reassured, and that is what I felt as I read these articles.
S. T., Italy
Your admonition to make time for relaxation points out something I’ve just begun to recognize. I started doing this before reading these articles, but I felt guilty for doing it. Thank you for helping me to see that I need not feel guilty as long as balance is maintained.
C. C., United States
Some mothers feel that they do not receive sufficient recognition for their hard work. These articles gave them recognition they deserve. As a mother with four children, I know how difficult it is to achieve the balance between being a housewife and having a job. The fact that Jehovah used Solomon to pen thoughts about hardworking mothers gives me comfort and encourages me to do my best.
E. S., Germany
As the mother of a three-year-old girl, I deal with feelings of guilt because I am so tired all the time. These articles helped me to see that I am not alone in feeling this way, and they gave some very good suggestions as to what I can do to improve my situation.
K. J., United States
The cover of this magazine shows a mother holding her small baby. It appears that the baby is eating a hot dog. My wife and I just finished taking an infant/child CPR class. The instructor said that eating hot dogs is the number one cause of choking among babies and children. She strongly discouraged letting young children eat hot dogs.
G. E., United States
“Awake!” responds: We agree that eating hot dogs can cause choking in babies and small children. Actually, the child on our cover is sucking on a carrot while in her mother’s arms.
Animal Communication  Thank you so much for the article “Wild Language—The Secrets of Animal Communication.” (April 8, 2002) It made me laugh to read about the bizarre way the wildebeest, or gnu, confuses the enemy. On the other hand, the comment of Joyce Poole about observing a female elephant “mourning” for her stillborn baby moved me to tears. Such lively, appealing articles provoke thinking and help us realize that this “wild talk” brings “praise to the one who formed it, Jehovah God.” Keep writing such articles!
A. G., Poland

