From Our Readers
Aged Parents  My father-​in-​law is bedridden and needs to have everything done for him. Being worn-​out mentally and physically, I have at times lost patience and said things I later regretted. So when I read the articles on “The Challenge of Caring for Aged Parents,” (February 8, 1994), I felt as if my heart were going to burst! My deepest thanks to you for preparing this material. The articles will support me as I continue carrying out my duties.
T. H., Japan
I am 16 years old, and my grandmother now requires 24-​hour care. She lives about a hundred miles [160 km] away. Thus, a severe strain has been put on my family. I therefore want to thank you for the articles. They were very upbuilding.
M. R., United States
I work for a social service agency that provides services to those caring for aged parents. More often than not, my coworkers refuse any Bible-​based literature that I offer them. However, at a recent staff meeting, I gave each person a copy of that issue. Each one accepted! I found one worker reading it at her desk.
B. H., United States
You suggested directly asking one’s fleshly brothers and sisters for help in caregiving. I believed that once asked, no one would ever refuse. Well, I’m here to tell you that I have been the caregiver for my parents for over ten years, and when I asked my siblings for help, they wouldn’t provide it. We live in a cold, uncaring world. I just wish people would wake up and realize that caring for your parents is not a chore​—it’s a privilege!
M. D., United States
The Scriptures say that caring for family members is an obligation for Christians. “If anyone does not provide for those who are his own, and especially for those who are members of his household, he has disowned the faith.” (1 Timothy 5:8)​—ED.
I really appreciated the advice to make time for your mate and for yourself. I have failed to do this in the past, feeling that care of our parents came before time with my husband​—or time for myself. However, I see the wisdom in this counsel, and I am going to try to be more balanced in this regard.
M. O., United States
Moving  I am 14 years old and I would like to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Do We Have to Move?” (February 22, 1994) When I was nine, my dad, who is a congregation elder, was asked to move to a neighboring congregation. We have now been here for over four years and have grown to love the congregation very, very much. Now my dad has been asked to move to yet another congregation. The day we were asked to move, we received this magazine. It helped both my brother and me to cope better. It is a privilege to be asked to move, but it’s very hard to say good-​bye to all those we have grown to love.
L. B., England
Racism  Just now I had the good fortune to read your August 22, 1993, issue with the series “Will All Races Ever Be United?” I was astonished and impressed by your fair-​minded, insightful understanding of this complex problem. I recently concluded a college course on history. But in just nine pages, your magazine gave a concise history, explanation, and remedy! It surpassed a full semester of college textbooks and lectures.
R. J., United States

