Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 3
Song 205
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday. Demonstrate two one-minute magazine presentations. Feature current Watchtower in one and current Awake! in the other.
25 min: “Sharing Treasures and Increasing Wealth.” Question-and-answer discussion. After considering paragraph 5, arrange for two demonstrations using the current Topic for Conversation and show how an effective transition can be made to one of the older publications being offered. One demonstration should feature the Evolution book with a setting similar to what is described in paragraph 5. The other demonstration can highlight the Holy Spirit book, using the following suggested presentation: After introducing yourself, you could say, “Do you think lasting peace will ever come to this troubled world?” Allow for a reply and comment on some local happening that illustrates the concern over present world conditions. Then state, “History confirms that man’s efforts to bring about peace have failed. However, the Bible describes what a source higher than man will soon accomplish.” Then turn to page 181 of the Holy Spirit book and read Revelation 21:4 quoted in paragraph 35. Continue by saying, “This wonderful prospect can only be realized by means of God’s holy spirit. You can enjoy learning more about this force for everlasting peace. The book is yours for a contribution of $1.00.” Conclude by encouraging good preparation so as to be effective in using the books offered. Have participants prepare for this part well in advance.
10 min: Can You Auxiliary Pioneer? Enthusiastic talk by elder. With four full weekends left in March, it is not too late to enroll. Younger publishers are encouraged to share. If you cannot pioneer, work in field service to extent possible.
Song 150 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 10
Song 215
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
20 min: “Keep Doing This . . . ” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Have paragraphs read as time allows. Questions on paragraphs 3 through 6 should allow for personal expressions of what publishers, elders, and ministerial servants will do in implementing instructions. Chairman should encourage increased field ministry during April.
15 min: Encourage auxiliary pioneering during April. Relate the activity of auxiliary pioneers during last April. Interview some who auxiliary pioneered. How did various members of the family cooperate? How are personal and family responsibilities organized to accomplish it? Can youths take advantage of spring vacation period to pioneer? Encourage all to be supportive.
Song 181 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 17
Song 133
 7 min: Local announcements. Also, encourage all to share in magazine activity on fourth Saturday. Outline local arrangements. If time permits, cite articles in current magazines that may have special appeal in local territory.
10 min: “The ‘Other Sheep’ and the Lord’s Evening Meal.” Using Watchtower article beginning on page 15 of February 15 issue, capable publisher demonstrates how to encourage Bible student to attend Memorial. Can read paragraphs 20 and 21 and encourage student to prepare and to attend Watchtower Study when article is considered.
15 min: “Teaching at Home Bible Studies.” Talk with question-and-answer coverage of paragraphs 3-9.
13 min: Arrange locally according to need of congregation. Or, one or two members of Congregation Service Committee can discuss encouragement and benefits from most recent visit of circuit overseer.
Song 156 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 24
Song 143
15 min: Local announcements and “A Need for Help at Bethel.” Elder will conduct enthusiastic question-and-answer session. Have paragraphs read. Encourage those who qualify to seriously and prayerfully consider opportunities for Bethel service.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—To Relatives and Personal Acquaintances.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate a tactful approach that a publisher could use while visiting a relative. Also, demonstrate Witness sharing the truth with an acquaintance he has not seen since becoming one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
15 min: Looking Ahead to Memorial. Talk. Review local preparations for Memorial on Thursday, April 4, after sundown. Use Memorial invitations. Stress correct date and time, especially if more than one congregation will use hall. Everyone should try to arrive early. Also, announce adjustments in meetings for the week. Encourage all to do suggested Bible reading before Memorial.
Song 165 and concluding prayer.

