Presenting the Good News​—To Relatives and Personal Acquaintances
1 It is only natural that a person accepting the truth would be eager to share it with others, especially relatives and close acquaintances. After Andrew was invited to be Jesus’ follower, he found his brother Simon “early next morning” and declared, “We have found the Messiah.” Likewise, Philip without delay located his friend Nathanael and urged him to “come and see.”​—John 1:41, 45, 46; see Rbi8 footnote and Acts 10:24.
2 What about you? Are you seeking out opportunities to speak about the truth to your relatives and acquaintances? Perhaps you have hesitated to do so out of fear that they might reject the message and change their feelings toward you. Do not hold back. Neighbor love requires that you speak the truth joyfully and without fear. (Luke 10:27) Since they already know you, your relatives may be more willing to listen to you than to a stranger who calls at their door.
WHY? HOW?
3 Remember that all mankind not serving Jehovah are “alienated” from God and so are considered “enemies.” Their lives are at stake. (Col. 1:21) Jehovah keenly desires that all persons hear the truth and “attain to repentance.” (2 Pet. 3:9) We have the serious responsibility to tell everyone what the future holds. (Ezek. 33:7-9) Can you think of ways to help your family and acquaintances learn the truth? Persistent and tactful efforts will often bring gratifying results.
4 The 1985 Yearbook relates the experience of a woman in Japan who came into the truth as a result of a special pioneer patiently making return visits on her. She had been quite active in her former religion and had many relatives still in that religion. She began to witness to them, and within five years over 50 became Witnesses.
5 If your initial efforts produce little or no results, do not be discouraged. In many cases a favorable response is not realized until after months or even years of trying. Jesus said his sheep would hear his voice. But we need not expect them to do so at the first call. (John 10:16) For years they may have been battered by this old world, and it may require a generous use of the soothing oil of Bible truths before they will respond.
6 Philippians 2:15 indicates that for us to be “shining as illuminators” we have to be “blameless and innocent, children of God without a blemish.” So our family and acquaintances should be able to see that the truth has made a big change in our lives. The apostle Peter stressed the same point.​—1 Pet. 2:12.
7 More is needed, however, than just a good example if our relatives are to be motivated to serve Jehovah. A witness has to be given. (Rom. 10:14; Acts 8:31) To reach family members living far from you, well-thought-out and neatly written letters may be an effective means of sharing the good news. Your letters should not be critical, but positive, upbuilding, and friendly. They should radiate the joy and hope that is in your heart since learning the truth.
BE POSITIVE
8 Some sisters have been afraid that their husbands would strongly oppose them and so they have refrained from telling them about what they do in connection with the congregation. Of course, each one will have to make a personal decision in this matter. But, never should we overlook the value of fervent prayer to Jehovah when anticipating an opportunity to witness to family members and acquaintances. (Phil. 4:6; 1 Tim. 2:1) Adopt a positive attitude. Surely Jehovah will bless your sincere efforts to present the good news to your relatives and personal acquaintances.

