Sharing Treasures and Increasing Wealth
1 Many people today center their lives around acquiring material possessions​—houses, gold, silver, precious stones, and the like. However, more valuable to Christians than all these things are the spiritual treasures found in the Bible. No sum of money could ever compare to a knowledge of God’s purpose and the prospect of everlasting life! Appreciating the value of such priceless truths creates within us a desire to share them with others.​—Compare 1 John 2:15-17.
2 Jehovah has provided his people with bountiful spiritual food in the form of books and other Bible study aids. The knowledge of God, the meaning of prophecies, the wisdom of applying Bible principles in everyday life, and the significance of world events are but a few of the many treasures that have been uncovered. Truly each publication has proved to be a storehouse of spiritual truth. How can we increase our spiritual wealth and share these treasures with others?
INCREASING OUR WEALTH
3 Why not take the opportunity to study or review some of the older publications such as the Choosing and Holy Spirit books? Several years have passed since these were released, and perhaps newer publishers have not had a chance to examine their contents. The information in these books has strengthened the worldwide unity of Jehovah’s Witnesses and has contributed to our spiritual development. (1 Cor. 1:10) If you have not already done so, why not obtain such older publications for your own theocratic library?
SHARING TREASURES WITH OTHERS
4 During the months of March and April we will be offering one of the older books for a contribution of $1.00. The December 1984 Our Kingdom Ministry suggested which books to use. These God-given instruments have already proved their worth in helping many people to respond to the good news. Conscientious effort should be made to get more of them into the hands of interested people.
5 There are times when we meet individuals who doubt the Bible’s value or who even question the existence of God. By featuring the Evolution book, perhaps we can help them overcome their doubts. The information presented on pages 116-126 could accomplish this. If the person we talk to has experienced a death in the family, he may be comforted by thoughts in Is This Life All There Is? Perhaps we will meet a householder who shows concern over present world conditions. Accordingly, we may feel the Choosing book would be of particular interest.
6 In every case good preparation and flexibility are needed to be most effective. This means being familiar enough with a particular book to highlight specific points. Regardless of what publication is used, we will enjoy Jehovah’s blessings if we present the good news with sincerity and firm conviction.
7 Although the world places increasing emphasis on acquiring material things, we will continue to appreciate the Bible as the source of genuine wealth. During March and April we will share the spiritual treasures found in our older books and thereby increase the spiritual wealth of others.

