Teaching at Home Bible Studies
1 One of the most joyful experiences we can have in our ministry is teaching others to be true Christians, just as Jesus commanded us. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Are you experiencing this joy?
2 Although we strive to be teachers in every feature of our ministry, the home Bible study activity affords the greatest opportunity to teach. So, if you do not conduct a Bible study regularly, make the matter a subject of prayer and a goal toward which to work. By so doing, many have been blessed with Bible studies and have thereby been afforded fine opportunities to teach others to be true Christians.
CAN YOU DO IT?
3 It takes time and careful study for a person to become convinced of the Bible’s message about God’s Kingdom. (Matt. 10:11) For this reason we have the home Bible study arrangement. This features a comprehensive course of study covering many subjects, which are logically presented in the Society’s publications. By conducting a home Bible study regularly with the aid of one of our study publications, the majority of us can help sincere students to gain knowledge of God and Christ.​—John 17:3; 1 John 5:20.
4 Jesus Christ was a master teacher; therefore, we should learn and employ his methods. How did he teach? He asked discerning questions. (Matt. 17:24-26; Luke 10:25-36) Why did he do that? To help people to reason and examine themselves in the light of his teachings. With his questions he tactfully reached their hearts. Those he taught had to show whether they genuinely wanted to be his followers or whether their motives were insincere.​—Matt. 13:10-17; Mark 8:34-38.
5 Additionally, Jesus’ teaching featured illustrations and object lessons; and he used other effective methods. (Matt. 4:18, 19; Luke 15:3-10; John 13:2-16) Also, he presented matters with simplicity, brevity, and clarity. (Matthew, chapters 5-7) We can be thankful that the Society’s publications use the same teaching methods.
6 Prepare well for the study. Give thought to portions that may be hard for the students to understand, points where they will likely raise questions, and matters of special interest as well as those that apply to their everyday lives.
HOW TO TEACH AT A STUDY
7 An established study should be opened with prayer. Your prayer requesting Jehovah’s guidance and blessing will emphasize the seriousness and dignity of the study, as well as demonstrate your sincerity as a minister of God. A brief review of the preceding lesson may be appropriate, leading into the current study.
8 Many of the Bible study aids that we use in the ministry have questions for each paragraph. This feature is a teaching aid that can be used to help students to express themselves in their own words. When the correct answer to the question is not forthcoming, you may want to paraphrase the question. But, do not turn the study into a mere guessing game. Learning the truth is based on reason and logic.
9 Ordinarily, the study period will be about one hour. Often a chapter can be covered, but this depends on the aptitude of those studying. Encourage students to prepare in advance and give answers in their own words. Hold to God’s Word in your teaching. (Titus 1:9) It is God’s Word that has power and that will move people to action. (Heb. 4:12) Accordingly, as time allows, look up and read key Scriptures.
A MARVELOUS PRIVILEGE
10 Teaching others the truth about Jehovah God, Jesus Christ, and the Kingdom is a marvelous privilege. (1 Cor. 3:6-9) Last year in this country an average of 416,987 home Bible studies were conducted each month! Are you enjoying this marvelous privilege of service? May Jehovah God give ear to our prayers and bless our efforts to be teachers at home Bible studies.

