“Keep Doing This . . .”
1 Jesus commanded all Christians to memorialize his death. (Luke 22:19) This annual observance would serve as a reminder of the great sacrifice that he made on behalf of all mankind. This year Jehovah’s people worldwide will celebrate the Memorial of Christ’s death on Thursday, April 4, after sundown. Once again they will show their gratitude for God’s generous gift of his Son. Are you already making your plans to be there?
GETTING READY
2 Advance preparation is important. What will that involve? Individuals and family groups should plan to arrive on time. If some in your family are not believers, perhaps you can stimulate their interest in this most important event. Have you made personal plans to invite newly interested ones? If you are helping others to attend, have you planned to leave your home in time to arrive at the meeting before it begins? You may need to remind new ones of the importance of being there on time.
3 Our 1985 calendar outlines the Bible portions to be read beginning March 30 in preparation for the Memorial. Have you made plans to read over this material personally? Perhaps this could be done as a family group. Bible students can be informed of the portions to be read, and then they can be encouraged to read the Scriptures each day in anticipation of the Memorial observance.
4 Elders should look after the various details that will assure an orderly Memorial observance. Attendants need to be assigned, extra seating arranged, servers selected, emblems and utensils provided. Since a larger than normal attendance is expected, thought should be given to an orderly plan for entering and exiting, especially where more than one congregation may be using the same Kingdom Hall. Also, be alert to the need for proper ventilation.
OTHER THINGS TO DO
5 Jesus gave other commands concerning activities that we should keep obeying. One of the most important of these is to preach the good news of the Kingdom. (Mark 13:10) This lifesaving work needs to be done with urgency. Ours is a time for exceptional activity, intensified service requiring enlarged faith and zeal. Remember, one day soon will be our last day in this old system. Life now is short, fleeting. No one can be sure of being alive tomorrow. We have only a limited time in which to prove our faithfulness and integrity to God. (See Psalm 39:5; Luke 12:18-21.) So it would be fitting to ask ourselves: Am I satisfied with what I did today? Have I really made sufficient plans for this Memorial season to show Jehovah and Jesus Christ that I appreciate what they have done in opening up the way to everlasting life? Could I increase my participation in the field ministry during this Memorial season? Have I prayerfully given consideration to auxiliary pioneer service during April in order to do all that Jesus commanded me?
6 A most timely subject has been selected for the special talk to be given Sunday, April 14. It is: “Good News in a Violent World.” Be sure to invite those who come with you to the Memorial to return on this special occasion also. They need to increase their association with Jehovah’s people and grow in their appreciation of Jehovah and Jesus Christ. It would be good to arrive early for this talk and warmly greet all new ones present.
7 Knowing that we have reached the final part of “the last days” of this present system should move us to perform exceptional service. (2 Tim. 3:1) Let us show our appreciation for all that Jehovah has done for us by doing all we can in his service this Memorial season. Such will not go unnoticed by our heavenly Father.​—Heb. 6:10.

