Beware of the ‘Eyes of the River’!
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN AUSTRALIA
AN ADVENTUROUS vacationer was quietly paddling her canoe along a tributary of the East Alligator River in the wetland wonder of Australia’s Northern Territory, Kakadu National Park. Suddenly, what she thought was a harmless piece of driftwood began to thrash her canoe. It was a dreaded saltwater crocodile, and the tourist happened to be in its defined territory at the most dangerous time of the year.
Frantically, she paddled away to a group of trees. As she got her foot onto the first branches, the crocodile came out of the water, pulled her back down, and rolled her a total of three times. Each time the crocodile changed its grip, the woman tenaciously tried to climb up the muddy riverbank. On the third attempt, she managed to get up the bank, dragging herself a mile [2 km] until a ranger heard her desperate calls for help. Despite terrible wounds, the woman survived.
This near tragedy occurred in 1985. Two years later an American tourist was less fortunate. She ignored warnings from companions and decided to swim in crocodile-infested Prince Regent River, Western Australia. She was attacked and killed by a saltwater crocodile. Reports that there were young crocodiles in the water suggest that it was probably a female crocodile protecting her young.
Deadly ‘Eyes of the River’
All the estuary fisherman sees in the moonlight is the ripple effect of an insect landing on glassy water. Even so, the fisherman in the far north of Australia is ever conscious of the unseen—the ‘eyes of the river.’ If he was to shine his flashlight, crocodile eyes silently breaking the water’s surface would glow luminous red. He is an intruder in an ancient predator’s territory.
Australia’s saltwater crocodile, also found elsewhere, is one of the biggest and most dangerous of the world’s 12 crocodile species. It can grow up to 23 feet [7 m] in length. Unsuspecting prey see the gleaming eyes too late to escape its lunging attack and infamous death-roll drowning technique. Prey as large as buffalo, cattle, and horses have been attacked as they quenched their thirst at the water’s edge.
Luxury Threatens Their Survival
The ancient myth that a crocodile sheds hypocritical tears of grief over its victim has found its way into modern culture in the expression “crocodile tears.” But few human tears have been shed over the crocodile. Rather, this water-loving reptile has been hunted mercilessly for its valuable hide, or skin.
Many a crocodile has been strutted down a haute couture catwalk in the form of coveted leather goods, for the skin of the saltwater crocodile is considered by some to be the best leather in the world—the softest and most durable available. Recently a ladies’ handbag on sale in London was priced at $15,000. Crocodile skin is still a status symbol in many parts of the world.
The lure of big profits threatened the survival of the saltwater crocodile in Australia. Between 1945 and 1971, about 113,000 of these reptiles were killed in the Northern Territory alone. Crocodile hunting was limited in the early 1970’s to prevent their being wiped out, and the result was that by 1986, their numbers in the wild had recovered. The crocodile is therefore no longer endangered in Australia, although some argue that its habitat is.
For centuries the Australian Aboriginal population knowingly or unknowingly conserved the crocodile population. While some tribes were proficient crocodile hunters, other tribes for religious reasons prohibited their being hunted.
In recent years crocodile farming coupled with an emphasis on education has contributed to the conservation of crocodiles. Tourists now flock to crocodile farms, ensuring their financial viability, while breeding programs allow processing of crocodile skin and meat without impinging on wild populations.
One well-known Australian crocodile farmer believes that people only conserve things they love, understand, and grant some of their space and time. He commented: “So crocodiles don’t get much of a look-in. But their ecological value is equal to any of the pretty things.”
Visiting a crocodile farm is exhilarating as one views the swamp-colored leathery reptiles at close range—but from behind the security of a wire fence. Farmhands defy fear and get into enclosures with the crocodiles, inviting them to perform and rewarding them with fresh chicken and other meats. One farmhand, however, recently learned the hard way that a crocodile should never be taken for granted. Unexpectedly, the reptile suddenly lunged at him and completely ripped off his left arm!
On the other hand, holding a 12-month-old crocodile is quite an experience and very enlightening. The skin of its underbelly is remarkably soft, whereas bony plates on its back called osteoderms form hydrodynamic armor. Now it is understandable why their leather is so prized. But be careful with this “toddler.” Even a 12-month-old crocodile with its jaws securely tied is strong for its size.
Unhatched baby crocs delight audiences as they bark from inside their shells and suddenly break through with the aid of a temporary tooth on the tip of their little snout. Most agree that this would probably be the only time when a crocodile really looks cute!
Some Long-Held Myths Dispelled
Closely observing the behavior of these frightening reptiles as they grow up under cultivation on crocodile farms has helped dispel some long-standing myths. For years it was thought that a crocodile patiently stalks its prey for days, or even weeks, before striking unexpectedly with lightning speed. Current observation has revealed, however, that crocodiles are simply aggressive territorially during their mating season, the monsoon. If prey enters its territory during this time, the crocodile might aggressively go after it, whereas at another time of the year, the crocodile might just watch the same animal disinterestedly at a distance.
When sighted in recreational areas today, crocodiles are removed and relocated by professional crocodile hunters. Part of their technique is to noose the hinged lower jaw, raise it, and quickly tie the upper and lower jaws together. This renders the crocodile jaw virtually powerless, for while the lower jaw’s closing muscles are extremely powerful, the opening muscles are weak. If a hunter is not careful, however, he can easily be knocked to the ground by the crocodile’s powerful tail.
Not All Cruelty and Violence
The same jaws that can inflict serious injury are also capable of a deft touch. If unborn crocodiles are sluggish breaking out of their shells, the mother crocodile will roll her eggs ever so gently, stirring the hatchlings to action.
Crocodile teeth are designed to grip rather than to slice. If small enough, the prey is swallowed whole. Otherwise, it is ripped apart and consumed piece by piece. Autopsies on dead reptiles have revealed stones in their stomachs. Whether eaten deliberately or not, these stones are believed to act as ballast.
Visitors often observe crocodiles on riverbanks with their huge jaws agape. Most would probably assume this posturing signals aggression. On the contrary, the open-jaw position allows it to adjust to outside temperature. Like all reptiles, crocodiles are constantly adjusting their body temperature.
Quite surprisingly, although it is a reptile, a crocodile has a heart with four chambers, just like a mammal. However, when a crocodile dives, a change takes place, and the heart acts like one with three chambers.
The saltwater crocodile is distinguished from an alligator by a narrower snout and by teeth in the lower jaw that are visible when its jaws are closed. True crocodiles can be found from Africa, where the dwarf crocodiles live, across to India, and down through Asia to Papua New Guinea. They reside as far south as Australia and prefer mangrove coastal strips and tropical wetlands, for they build their nests close to the water’s edge. The natural disadvantage of this is that floodwaters often drown a large number of crocodile embryos. Because of predators, such as the adult crocodile, barramundi fish, and the nankeen bird, only 50 percent of crocodile hatchlings survive their first year.
Amazingly, crocodiles are born with their own food supply. They feed on a yolk sac within their bodies for the first few weeks of life. Nevertheless, almost as soon as their mother gently takes them in her mouth and moves them to the water’s edge, they begin exercising their snouts, snapping at anything within reach.
Why is the term ‘eyes of the river’ so appropriate? Because even as hatchlings, their little eyes shine red under artificial light at night. A layer of crystals behind the retina enhances night vision and causes the red glow.
Yes, the crocodile is truly an intriguing reptile—but always keep a respectful distance. And as any fisherman well knows, attempts to tame the leviathan are futile.
The poetry of Job fittingly describes the crocodile as “Leviathan”: “Can you draw out Leviathan with a fishhook, or with a rope can you hold down its tongue? Can you put a rush in its nostrils, or with a thorn can you bore its jaws? Will it make many entreaties to you, or will it say soft words to you? Will it conclude a covenant with you, that you may take it as a slave to time indefinite? Will you play with it as with a bird, or will you tie it for your young girls? Will partners barter for it? Will they divide it up among tradesmen? Will you fill its skin with harpoons, or its head with fish spears? Put your hand upon it. Remember the battle. Do not do it again.”—Job 41:1-8.
Wise words of caution, urging the unwary and the curious: Beware of the ‘eyes of the river’—the mighty, fearsome crocodile!
[Picture Credit Line on page 24]
By courtesy of Australian International Public Relations
[Picture on page 25]
When light is shone on the water at night, crocodile ‘eyes of the river’ glow red
[Credit Line]
By courtesy of Koorana Crocodile Farm, Rockhampton, Queensland, Australia
[Pictures on page 26]
Left: A baby croc suddenly breaks out of the egg
[Credit Line]
By courtesy of Koorana Crocodile Farm, Rockhampton, Queensland, Australia
Inset: An adult croc sunning itself on the muddy bank of the Mary River
[Credit Line]
By courtesy of Australian International Public Relations

