From Our Readers
Sacrifices Bring Rich Rewards
Thank you, particularly for the experience of Lynette Sigg, “Sacrifices Bring Rich Rewards.” (August 22, 1987) If I could only have the same mental attitude she displays. I am constantly complaining about what I don’t have instead of giving thanks for what has been given to me. I am arrogant and never give a thought to the One to whom I owe my life. I wanted you to know that from now on I am really going to be more sincere in my efforts. In this respect Lynette’s life story has been a help to me.
K. W., Japan
Masturbation
Thank you for your article on masturbation. (September 8, 1987) I always thought that masturbation would deaden sexual desires, but with the help of your article, I now realize that it does not. I am confident now that I have read your article that I will succeed in overcoming this bad habit and thus fulfill 2 Corinthians 7:1. Thank you again.
J. T., United States
The article on masturbation does a fine job of explaining why the habit is wrong but offers little actual help in how to avoid it. We are urged to ‘deaden our body members’ but are not told how to do this. A few practical suggestions on how to deal with the problem would be appreciated.
S. J., United States
This was the first of three articles to be published on the subject. The second one, which appeared in our issue of November 8, 1987, was entitled “Young People Ask . . . Why Is It So Hard to Avoid Masturbation?” The third, which will appear in our issue of March 8, 1988, is entitled “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Fight the Habit of Masturbation?” The second and third articles provide the practical suggestions requested.​—ED.
I became very upset when I read your article on masturbation. I never thought that it was wrong, since I never had any guilt feelings because of practicing it. That made me think: ‘If masturbation is wrong, how can those of us who are too young to marry relieve the sexual desires so common at our age? Further, what about the “didactic” value of masturbation, that is, the youth’s discovery of the natural functions of his organs by having an orgasm?’
T. D., Brazil
As shown in our first article, masturbation does not deaden but rather excites sexual desires. The Bible’s counsel is to ‘deaden your body members as respects sexual appetite,’ not excite to greater desires. (Colossians 3:5) The apostle Paul wrote at 1 Corinthians 9:27: “I pummel my body and lead it as a slave,” which does not allow for simply giving in to any fleshly desires. At Galatians 5:23-25, Christians are urged to cultivate the fruitage of the spirit, which includes self-control, not self-indulgence. Masturbation is not a necessary way for youths to learn about orgasm, since the body cares for this in a natural way. Parents should educate their children in advance regarding these bodily changes. Further, masturbation does not prepare one for marriage but, rather, centers attention on one’s own selfish satisfaction. It does not prepare one to give pleasure to a future marriage mate.​—ED.

