Follow Up the Interest in Kingdom News
1 During the last few weeks, we have been enjoying the privilege of distributing Kingdom News No. 35, entitled “Will All People Ever Love One Another?” Publishers everywhere are endeavoring to reach as many deserving ones as possible with this issue of Kingdom News. (Matt. 10:11) Although the campaign is scheduled to end Sunday, November 16, if there is still more territory to be covered, the elders may ask you to continue distributing Kingdom News No. 35 as long as the congregation’s supply lasts.
2 This issue of Kingdom News has stirred the interest of many people. They see that humans in general have lost their natural affection and therefore wonder what the future holds. (2 Tim. 3:3) We want to follow up the interest that has been generated.
3 Kingdom News Gets Results: During the 1995 campaign with Kingdom News, a woman who received a copy came to a meeting at the Kingdom Hall because she wanted to learn more about what Jehovah’s Witnesses believe. At that meeting she readily accepted a Bible study and thereafter rarely missed a meeting. Before long, she had written to her former church, terminating her membership!
4 By now, hundreds of people in the territory have read the message in Kingdom News No. 35. But what was their reaction to it? Even if they were favorably impressed by what they read, most will not take action until one of Jehovah’s Witnesses calls on them again. Are you making plans to return? Loving concern for our fellowman should move us to do so. All who have shown interest in Kingdom News should be visited again.
5 What Will You Say When You Return? You might make a few comments about the timeliness of the message in Kingdom News and then ask a thought-provoking question. Listen carefully as the householder expresses himself so that you can learn what is on his mind. Then draw attention to an appropriate point in the Require brochure, which was featured in Kingdom News. If you get a favorable response, try to start a Bible study then and there.
6 Here are some suggested presentations you could try when returning to those who showed interest in “Kingdom News” No. 35:
▪ “You may recall the printed information I left with you recently. Its message touches on a vital issue dividing mankind today​—a lack of love for others.” Draw attention to the evidence presented on page 2 of Kingdom News under the heading “Love of Neighbor Has Grown Cold.” Then ask, “Do you think it is God’s purpose for mankind to live this way?” Allow for response. Turn to lesson 5 in the Require brochure, and try to start a Bible study.
▪ “When we first met, I left you some information on the subject ‘Will All People Ever Love One Another?’ Do you think that such a world is possible?” Allow for response. Turn to lesson 6 in the Require brochure, and read paragraph 6. Then read God’s promise at Micah 4:3, 4. If the householder appears interested, offer the brochure and a study.
▪ “When I last visited you, I left some material entitled ‘Will All People Ever Love One Another?’ It contained an offer for a free home Bible study. I returned to show you the study aid that we use. [Show the Knowledge book.] This book clearly explains when all people will love one another, and it answers other questions that you may wonder about: Why do we grow old and die? Why does God permit suffering? What happens to our dead loved ones?” Then ask, “May I demonstrate the study course to you?” If the householder declines your offer, ask him if he would like to read the book on his own. If he would, leave a copy and explain that our worldwide Bible-educational work is supported by voluntary donations. Plan to return again.
7 Once the territory is thoroughly covered with Kingdom News No. 35, we may offer the Knowledge book during the remainder of the month. A fine selection of suggested presentations for this book can be found on the back page of Our Kingdom Ministry in the issues of December 1995; March, June, and November 1996; and June 1997.
8 This special distribution of Kingdom News should motivate all of us to intensify our efforts in the preaching work. With Jehovah’s help we can be confident that this campaign will have sure success, helping people see God’s purpose for all mankind to love one another. May Jehovah continue to bless our diligent efforts as we follow up the interest in Kingdom News.

