Service Meetings for November
Week Starting November 3
Song 48
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. “Good News on the Internet.” Comment on August field service report for the country and the local congregation.
15 min: “The Large Door to Activity Is Open.” Talk by an elder, including audience discussion. Encourage all who can to reach out for a greater share in the preaching work. Include some advice offered in the August 15, 1988, Watchtower, page 22.
20 min: “Follow Up the Interest in Kingdom News.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate presentations in paragraph 6. In one of them, show a Bible study being started.
Song 144 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 10
Song 51
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Inform congregation of what territory remains to be covered with Kingdom News No. 35. Encourage all to have a full share in this final week of the special campaign.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Reach Out to Non-Witness Mates.” Discussion between two elders who are concerned about getting to know more of the unbelieving mates on a personal level. They also consider suggestions offered in the May 15, 1989, Watchtower, pages 17-18, paragraphs 6-9. Include experiences from the October 1, 1995, Watchtower, pages 10-11, paragraphs 11-12.
Song 148 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 17
Song 53
10 min: Local announcements. Outline special field service arrangements for November 27. Share some local experiences from the Kingdom News No. 35 campaign.
20 min: Seize This Unique Opportunity! A talk based on the November 15, 1996, Watchtower, pages 21-3.
15 min: “What Will I Say?” Audience discussion. Read first paragraph on page 8 of the Reasoning book, explaining how the book is designed to help us witness effectively on a variety of Bible topics. Illustrate with one or two well-prepared demonstrations.
Song 151 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 24
Song 56
 8 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Good Manners at the Congregation Book Study. We appreciate the hospitality of families who open their home for a book study. This may involve considerable preparation and inconvenience. When attending, we should display good manners and show respect and consideration, which would include the following: (1) We should wipe our feet carefully before entering, to avoid soiling floors or carpets. (2) Parents should supervise their children, making sure that they are well behaved and stay in the area of the home designated for the book study. (3) While the group may be small and the atmosphere somewhat informal, this is a congregation meeting and we should dress as we do when going to the Kingdom Hall. (4) Association after the meeting should be kept brief so that the household can have private time for itself. (5) While the householder where the study is held might choose occasionally to serve a light refreshment after the study, all should understand that such is neither expected nor required.
22 min: Make Disciples, Teaching Them. Elder conducts discussion with panel of three or four publishers, answering questions based on Our Ministry book, pages 88-92: (1) Why is making return visits essential for an effective ministry? How can one meet the challenge of the return visit work? (2) Why do we put so much emphasis on starting Bible studies? How can we become skillful in conducting studies? (3) Why is it important to direct the students to the organization? How can we do this? Panel also relates how the recent Our Kingdom Ministry inserts of June 1996 and March and April 1997 have assisted them in these areas.
Song 160 and concluding prayer.

