The Large Door to Activity Is Open
1 As a zealous preacher of the good news, Paul eagerly searched out territories where the need was greater, one of which was the city of Ephesus. He had such fine success preaching there that he wrote to fellow Christians: “A large door that leads to activity has been opened to me.” (1 Cor. 16:9) Paul continued to serve in that territory and helped many Ephesians to become believers.​—Acts 19:1-20, 26.
2 Today, a large door leading to activity has been opened to us. We have an invitation to assist congregations that are not able to work all their territory thoroughly every year. Thus our efforts can offset the need that exists in certain areas.​—Compare 2 Corinthians 8:13-15.
3 Can You Serve Where There Is Greater Need? Have you prayerfully considered the possibility of serving elsewhere? You may be able to help a congregation in your own city. Why not speak to the circuit overseer about the matter and see what he suggests? Or it may be that within your own congregation’s territory, there is a large deaf or foreign-language population that no one has been able to care for. In order to meet this need, could you exert yourself to learn their language? Then again, perhaps there is already another language group or congregation nearby that has been ‘begging the Master for more Kingdom workers.’ (Matt. 9:37, 38) If so, are you able to help out?
4 In recent decades, thousands of Christian families have moved to other lands to have a fuller share in the harvest work. One couple who did this said: “We wanted to serve Jehovah where we could do the most good.” If you have this desire and find it possible to move elsewhere in this country or if you qualify to serve in another land, first discuss your prospects with the elders of your congregation.
5 If you wish to inquire of the Society about where a need exists, provide the Congregation Service Committee with a letter outlining your specific desire. They will attach their comments and send it to the Society. In any case, as long as the large door to activity remains open, may all of us continue to be busy in Jehovah’s service.​—1 Cor. 15:58.

