Do You Remember?
Have you read recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● Why was the prophet Jeremiah commanded to remain single?​—Jer. 16:2-4.
This served to confirm the fact that the fulfillment of Jehovah’s word regarding the destruction of Jerusalem was certain. The prophet would thus be spared fathering children that would experience calamity. Since Jeremiah was fully absorbed in his prophetic work, he heeded God’s command without voicing complaint.​—1/1 p. 19.
● What factors explain why God’s kingdom is not as yet controlling all of earth’s affairs?
Jehovah God does not impose his rule simply by force. He wants willing subjects who have been educated to know him. This education would take time, and time was also needed to select and train the ruling body. Furthermore, it has been God’s purpose to provide a firm basis for faith in his rulership, to reveal the principles of his government, demonstrate his qualities as universal Ruler and to furnish clear identification of the Messiah, the King who would rule in his name.​—1/15 pp. 15-17.
● What does it mean to fear God?
It means to have a wholesome dread of displeasing God. This is coupled with love, so that an individual will have no fear of approaching the Most High in prayer. Rather, he is confident that Jehovah God is interested in him as an individual and so does not hesitate to pray about the most intimate matters, including his sins.​—2/1 p. 26.
● How was the Moabitess Ruth richly rewarded for choosing Jehovah as her God and Israel as her people?
Ruth was highly favored in becoming a link in the line of descent leading to King David and terminating in Jesus Christ.​—2/15 p. 26.
● When will the memorial of Christ’s death cease to be celebrated?
This will be at the time when all members of Christ’s “bride” are united with him in the heavens for the purpose of serving as associate king-priests.​—3/1 p. 7.
● Who were ‘transferred into the kingdom of the Son of God’s love,’ and from what time onward?​—Col. 1:13.
The faithful disciples of Jesus Christ, spiritual Israelites, came under his rule starting with Pentecost of the year 33 C.E.​—3/1 p. 19.
● In what sense does “all fullness” dwell in Jesus Christ?​—Col. 1:19.
Jesus Christ occupies the foremost place in the Christian congregation as regards preeminence and authority. He also has the “fullness” of everything that Christians need for their guidance and instruction. His example and teachings are perfect, lacking nothing that must be supplemented by human philosophies and traditions. It was according to the good pleasure of Jehovah God that all fullness should thus dwell in his Son.​—4/1 pp. 17, 18.

