Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Spiritual Liberation in Colombia
FROM the time of the Spanish conquistadores, Catholicism has had a religious stranglehold on South America. In Colombia it has long been the official State religion. For the past 105 years, the Vatican has had a concordat with the Colombian government that protected the church and granted it special privileges in the fields of education and marriage.
In December 1990 the Colombian people elected a commission to draw up a new constitution, which was accomplished by mid-1991. The new constitution changes the religious situation in Colombia. All religions now have equal rights before the law, and religious instruction cannot be forced on children in public schools. The concordat with the Vatican is up for revision with these constitutional changes in mind.
This greater religious freedom will reduce the influence of the Catholic Church, making it easier for honesthearted ones to gain Bible knowledge and attain spiritual freedom.
In anticipation of this spiritual liberation, the 51,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses in the country have been making preparations to care for spiritual refugees. Their new branch complex with expanded facilities, which includes a high-speed full-color offset press, is nearing completion. Temporary special pioneers have been sent into smaller towns in search of Jehovah’s lost sheep and have accomplished a marvelous Bible educational work. In 63 towns, each with about 10,000 inhabitants, 47 new congregations and groups have been formed.
As Jehovah’s spirit continues to move honesthearted people, many youths are also responding. The publication Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work has proved to be an invaluable aid both to such young ones and to their parents. While going from door to door, a Witness met a man who had read portions of this book, a copy of which had been lent to him by a neighbor. He was very impressed by the practical wisdom it displays in discussing family problems. Chapter 4, “Why Did Dad and Mom Split Up?” especially impressed him, as he and his wife were on the brink of separation. He said the book saved him from a major tragedy. Now he and his family are studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses and are attending all the congregation meetings. They are very grateful for the practical wisdom Jehovah provides through the Bible and his organization.
This experience illustrates the spiritual liberation that is taking place in Colombia as Jehovah’s Witnesses help spiritually hungry ones to learn of Jehovah’s wonderful purposes and his new world, now near at hand.​—2 Peter 3:13.

