The Blessings of Gilead Education Spread Worldwide
EDUCATION in this old world has only limited value. Since it is based mostly on human ideas instead of on God’s truth, it cannot impart true purpose in life. But the Gilead School is different. In his introductory comments at the graduation of the 93rd class of Gilead, Theodore Jaracz of the Governing Body brought out that this school provides education with true substance. As Psalm 119:160 says, “the substance of [God’s] word is truth.” So it was with great excitement that an audience of nearly 6,000 listened to the graduation program on September 13, 1992.
The first talk of the morning, delivered by Lon Schilling of the Watchtower Farms Committee, was entitled “Go On Conquering the World and Its Ruler.” Brother Schilling focused on Revelation 12:11 and pointed out that the verse shows three ways of conquering: (1) through the blood of the Lamb, (2) by means of witnessing, and (3) by having a self-sacrificing spirit. He reminded the students that many of Jehovah’s servants have shown such a spirit and have even faced death willingly in order to preserve their loyalty and integrity.
“Guard Your Fine Trust” was the theme developed by John E. Barr of the Governing Body. In his characteristically warm tones, he compared the mutual trust between Jehovah and his servants to the trust developed in a good marriage. Using points from 2 Timothy 1:12, 13, he urged the students to guard their trust by holding dear “the pattern of healthful words” in the Bible. He emphasized making personal study a vital part of the daily schedule and kindly admonished the students never to let their comments at meetings become a matter of course but always to make them meaningful.
William Van De Wall of the Service Department Committee gave the next talk, “Demonstrate Loving Concern for Sheeplike Persons.” He asked the students what they would look for in a family doctor and urged them to cultivate the same empathy, compassion, and mercy that they would value.
Daniel Sydlik of the Governing Body spoke rousingly on the theme “All Things Are Possible With God.” He reminded the students that Abraham and Sarah had laughed at the seemingly impossible prospect of having a son in their old age. Many of God’s promises seem impossible from a human standpoint; but as the angel asked Abraham, “is anything too extraordinary for Jehovah?” (Genesis 18:14) Brother Sydlik exhorted the students to show faith in God’s ability to do the impossible, never to let that faith fade or waver, no matter what trials they might encounter.
Instructors Offer Counsel
The two Gilead instructors spoke next. First, Jack D. Redford developed the theme “Making a Good Name With God.” What makes a name good or bad, he reasoned, is the person who wears it. He contrasted such names as Adam, Nimrod, Jezebel, Saul, and Judas with such names as Noah, Abraham, Ruth, Paul, and Timothy. Each name carries a wealth of associations due to the life course of its bearer. He asked the students what kind of name they would have 10, 100, or even 1,000 years hence​—that of a quitter or a complainer or that of a faithful missionary? Focus on solutions and objectives rather than on problems, he counseled them.
“How Well Do You Guard Your Faith?” was the thought-provoking theme developed by Ulysses V. Glass. He likened strong faith to a good compass that always points the right way. A compass in an automobile may be affected by other magnetic fields besides that of the earth, and such fields need to be neutralized. Likewise, this old world produces many influences that can sway or weaken our faith if we let them. As he cautioned the class against such influences, Brother Glass also commended them for their delicate awareness of the attitudes and feelings of others.
The final talk of the morning was delivered by Albert D. Schroeder, a member of the Governing Body. He encouraged the students to “Maintain the Missionary Spirit,” commending them for showing the same missionary spirit as the first class did back in 1943, when he was serving as the registrar for the school. He noted that they were people-oriented, preachers by nature, who like to be guided by God’s spirit. Keep developing that spirit, making full use of the New World Translation in personal study, he urged. He concluded with a verse-by-verse discussion of Psalm 24 as an example.
Next, the Gilead students became Gilead graduates! They were handed their diplomas as their missionary assignments were read aloud, to much applause from the audience.
In the afternoon, Calvin Chyke of the Factory Committee conducted the Watchtower Study. A delightful student program followed, which touched on the students’ experiences in the field during the five-month course and also featured slides of some of the countries to which they were assigned. In addition, an older couple was interviewed, and they shared some of the wisdom and experience they had gained from many years as missionaries. The afternoon concluded with a timely drama entitled Do Not Be Misled or Mock God.
The audience left exhilarated, thrilled to see what education in God’s truth can do and delighted to know that the benefits of such education will continue to be felt worldwide. As these 48 missionaries disperse to their assignments, many prayers follow them, expressing heartfelt hope and confidence that these faithful ones will be a blessing to God’s people wherever they go.
[Box on page 19]
Class Statistics
Number of countries represented: 7
Number of countries assigned: 18
Number of students: 48
Number of married couples: 24
Average age: 32.8
Average years in truth: 15.3
Average years in full-time ministry: 10.4
[Box on page 20]
GILEAD EXTENSION CLASS GRADUATES
  On June 21, 1992, a group of 24 missionaries graduated from the fourth class of the Gilead Extension School in Selters/​Taunus, Germany. The class, composed of 11 married couples and 2 single sisters hailing from seven countries, averaged 32 years of age, 14 years since baptism, and 8.5 years of service in the full-time evangelizing work. Over 2,000 attended the graduation.
  Brother Jaracz opened the program with a discussion of Proverbs 11:24, which states: “There exists the one that is scattering and yet is being increased.” He noted that the students were about to be scattered and would certainly promote increase.
  Encouraging scriptural talks were delivered by Richard Kelsey, coordinator of the German Branch Committee; Wolfgang Gruppe of the Service Department; Werner Rudtke and Edmund Anstadt, also members of the Branch Committee; and the two instructors, Dietrich Förster and Lothar Kaemmer. Albert Schroeder of the Governing Body gave the interesting feature discourse entitled “Continue to Be Searchers for Spiritual Gems.” The climax of the program was the handing out of assignments to 11 countries in Africa, Central America, and Eastern Europe, after which one graduate read a letter from the class to the Governing Body expressing heartfelt appreciation.
[Picture on page 18]
93rd Graduating Class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead
In the list below, rows are numbered from front to back and names are listed from left to right in each row.
(1) Hitesman, C.; West, P.; Evans, D.; Hipps, M.; Simonelli, N.; Wood, S.; Corkle, M.; Flores, C.; Thomas, J. (2) Jones, M.; Nissinen, J.; Sponenberg, M.; Zachary, K.; Ravn, G.; Backman, M.; Wettergren, A.; Evans, D.; Flores, R.; Caporale, G. (3) Simonelli, N.; Rechsteiner, M.; Rechsteiner, M.; Ruiz-Esparza, L.; Gerbig, B.; Simpson, C.; Zanewich, C.; Zachary, B.; Ricketts, L.; (4) Simpson, J.; Backman, J.; Corkle, G.; Gerbig, M.; Ricketts, B.; Bagger-Hansen, L.; Jones, A.; Zanewich, K.; Ravn, J.; Hipps, C. (5) Sponenberg, S.; Hitesman, A.; Caporale, L.; Ruiz-Esparza, S.; Thomas, R.; Bagger-Hansen, B.; Wood, M.; West, M.; Wettergren, C.; Nissinen, E.

