Diligent in Declaring the Everlasting Good News
TODAY many persons are diligent. Politicians are diligent in seeking election or reelection. Bankers, businessmen and manufacturers are diligent in seeking to increase their power or profits or both. Medical researchers are diligent in seeking to find causes and cures for diseases. And many a parent is diligent in seeking to provide for his family.
If human reasoning and the wisdom of this world justify diligence in such endeavors, how much more reason do dedicated Christians have for being diligent in acting on the everlasting good news concerning which the apostle John wrote: “I saw another angel flying in midheaven, and he had everlasting good news to declare as glad tidings to those who dwell on the earth, and to every nation and tribe and tongue and people, saying in a loud voice: ‘Fear God and give him glory, because the hour of the judgment by him has arrived.’”—Rev. 14:6, 7.a
Of course, that ‘the hour of God’s judgment has arrived’ is not good news for Satan the Devil nor for any who have his spirit, but it is good news for all lovers of righteousness. It means an end of this wicked system of things with all its sorrow, pain, crying, sin and death, and the bringing in of a new order free from all such things. The enjoyment of that new order, however, is to be had only on God’s terms, and so only for those willing to comply with God’s terms is this indeed good news.—Rev. 21:4.
The fact that John saw an angel having this good news indicates that the preaching of it would be under the direction of angels, and this is what we could expect in view of the role the angels played in bringing to humankind the good news of Jesus’ birth nineteen centuries ago. (Luke 2:9-14) Moreover, did not Jesus prophesy that angels would accompany him when he returned? (Matt. 24:30, 31; 25:31, 32) Besides, are we not told that these angels are “spirits for public service, sent forth to minister for those who are going to inherit salvation”? It is indeed a great comfort and source of encouragement to know that God’s angels are guiding, backing up and protecting those who are declaring the everlasting good news.—Heb. 1:14.
What a grand privilege it is to declare the everlasting good news! It brings glory to God and life to those who accept it, as well as to ourselves. This being so, what if opposers, at peril to themselves, try to stop us or at least to slow us down? That is no reason for fear. Jehovah God is to be obeyed, not men! So let us speak out boldly and be diligent in doing so, for the time is short. When Babylon the Great goes down in destruction there will be no more opportunity for any hearers to take their stand on Jehovah’s side and find safety.
How can we manifest diligence in courageously declaring the good news? One way is by being diligent in equipping ourselves so as to be able to present the good news intelligently and convincingly. We want not only to ‘count time’ but to make time count! More than that, we must set aside time for this preaching work, for if we wait until we have nothing else to do we will never engage in declaring the good news. That means to “go on walking in wisdom toward those on the outside, buying out the opportune time for yourselves.” In other words, we must take time from other activities or affairs for use in declaring the everlasting good news.—Col. 4:5.
More than that, to be diligent in declaring the good news we must take care to see that the inhabitants of every home in our assignment have an opportunity to hear the good news, and that repeatedly. We also want to make certain that we call back on all persons manifesting interest and, wherever possible, start home Bible studies with interested lovers of righteousness, potential persons of goodwill.
We want to show not only courage and diligence in declaring the good news but also endurance. That endurance would be required is clear from the words reported by John in this connection: “Here is where it means endurance for the holy ones, those who observe the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.” While we know that the time is comparatively short, we do not know just how short. So it will require endurance on our part, a resolve to endure regardless of what we may be called on to endure and regardless of how long it may yet be until Jehovah calls a halt to the declaration of the good news.—Rev. 14:12.
During the month of October dedicated Christians will be declaring the good news by offering the Awake! magazine on a subscription basis, each issue of which has something to say about the everlasting good news.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, October 1, 1963.

