
Do You Remember?




Have you carefully read the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
When directions come from God’s organization, what attitude should brothers, such as circuit overseers and congregation elders, have?
They should be quick to obey. They can ask themselves: ‘Do I contribute to the spirituality of those around me? Am I quick to accept and support the directions received?’​—w16.11, p. 11.
When did true Christians come into Babylonian captivity?
This happened shortly after the apostles died. At that time, a clergy class began to appear. Church and State promoted apostate Christianity and tried to drown out the voice of wheatlike Christians. But in the decades leading up to 1914, anointed ones began to break free.​—w16.11, pp. 23-25.
Why was the work of Lefèvre d’Étaples significant?
During the 1520’s, Lefèvre translated the Bible into French to make it available to the common people. His explanation of Bible passages influenced Martin Luther, William Tyndale, and John Calvin.​—wp16.6, pp. 10-12.
What is the difference between “setting the mind on the flesh” and “setting the mind on the spirit”? (Rom. 8:6)
The one doing the former focuses on the desires and leanings of the imperfect flesh, constantly talking about and glorifying things of the flesh. A person doing the latter centers his life on things related to God and his thoughts; such a Christian is dominated by holy spirit. The former leads to death, the latter to life and peace.​—w16.12, pp. 15-17.
What are some practical ways to reduce anxiety?
Set appropriate priorities, have realistic expectations, daily make room for some quiet time, enjoy God’s creation, keep a sense of humor, and get regular exercise and enough sleep.​—w16.12, pp. 22-23.
“Enoch was transferred so as not to see death.” (Heb. 11:5) How?
It seems that God transferred Enoch gently from life to death without his being aware that he was dying.​—wp17.1, pp. 12-13.
Why is modesty still important?
Modesty involves having a proper estimate of ourselves and an awareness of our limitations. We need to be aware of how our behavior can affect others and not take ourselves too seriously.​—w17.01, p. 18.
What evidence is there that God directed the governing body in the first century just as he is directing those of the Governing Body today?
With the help of holy spirit, they grasped Scriptural truths. With angelic aid, they oversaw the preaching work, and they relied on God’s Word when providing guidance. These factors are true today too.​—w17.02, pp. 26-28.
What factors move us to view the ransom as precious?
Four factors are: Who gave it, why it was given, what sacrifice was involved, and what real need was filled. We should meditate on how those factors were involved.​—wp17.2, pp. 4-6.
After deciding a matter, could a Christian change his mind?
We should keep our word. Yet, sometimes a decision deserves reconsideration. After the people repented, God changed his decision about Nineveh. On occasion, new circumstances or information may require our doing similarly.​—w17.03, pp. 16-17.
Why is negative gossip so dangerous?
It can cause a problem to get out of control, making the problem worse. Whether we are right or wrong, engaging in hurtful speech will never improve matters.​—w17.04, p. 21.




