Announcements
GIVE JEHOVAH EXCLUSIVE DEVOTION—Ex. 20:5, NW.
There is only One who can claim our exclusive devotion as a right. That One is our Creator and God, whose name alone is Jehovah. He tolerates no rivals and desires willing and joyful devotion on the part of those who wish to serve him. His name people, Jehovah’s witnesses, continuously want to give Jehovah exclusive devotion, and prove it by making room in their lives to preach the good news of Jehovah’s kingdom for the purpose of a witness to all nations. After they give to all receptive householders a three-to eight-minute Bible sermon, the opportunity will be given to the householder to subscribe for this magazine, The Watchtower. A year’s subscription is only $1. To all new subscribers will be given the very valuable 96-page booklet What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? Join the ranks of happy Watchtower readers and distributors and enjoy learning and then giving to Jehovah exclusive devotion.
AN INDELIBLE SERVICE RECORD
The year 1956 is gone but by no means forgotten. In the short remaining time before the climax of this world’s affairs at Armageddon each year leaves its indelible record of service activity performed to Jehovah’s praise. The good news that Jehovah’s kingdom has been established in our day has now reached 162 lands! Every month this past memorable year 591,556 ministers were busy with this message, an increase of 20,000 over the year previous! But results are not to be counted in numbers alone. You will want to obtain and read the 1957 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses, which gives you a stirring account of how this growing activity has been attained and how these determined preachers have persisted in preaching from door to door, city to city, through jungle fastnesses and urban areas, on the streets, in public parks, in the homes and native huts of people of good will, speaking freely from the Bible of God’s kingdom under Christ as the only hope for men of all kinds. Send also for the colorful 1957 calendar illustrating the expansion of praise. The Yearbook is 50c; the calendar is 25c, or $1 for 5.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
February 3: “Where Your Treasure Is There Your Heart Will Be,” ¶1-13. Page 9.
February 10: “Where Your Treasure Is There Your Heart Will Be,” ¶14-30. Page 14.
February 17: “Feed My Little Sheep.” Page 20.

