Announcements
“THEOCRACY’S INCREASE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The International Assembly for 1950 at New York city! This starts off the Testimony Period entitled “Theocracy’s Increase”. And so many from all parts of the earth will begin August, the Testimony month, with attendance at the Assembly. But whether at the assembly or not, all adherents of The Theocratic Government will loyally take part in the world-wide testimony. The book “Let God Be True”, now published in 17 languages, will be the leading offer for the month, on a contribution of 35c. Where it is not available, another bound book to correspond should be offered to the people. Surely our readers will want to work for The Theocracy to increase its devoted subjects by circulating the literature which advertises that Government and thus help others to come under its benign sway. Let any reader write us who wants assistance to get started witnessing and needs references and instructions. We count on the report of every participant in the Testimony Period. So make your report at the close of August and thus give proof in your case of The Theocracy’s general increase.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 30: “Feasts to Jehovah,” ¶1-23 inclusive, also “The Real Feast of Ingathering Under Way”, ¶1-7 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1, 1950.
Week of August 6: “The Real Feast of Ingathering Under Way,” ¶8-29 inclusive, The Watchtower July 1, 1950.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
From August 26 to September 5 inclusive the Bethel home and factory printing plant will be closed down to give the family a rest period. No mail or correspondence will be handled during this period. This announcement is made now so that all company servants and pioneers can make plans early and order needed supplies before that time.
The Bethel family will be busy during the entire convention period, but the factory and home will be opened for visitors the Monday and the days following the convention and will be operating for three weeks thereafter until the vacation period begins, on August 26, 1950.
CONVENTION TRAILER CAMP
The Society is well pleased to be able to announce that, from information at hand at the time of going to press with this issue of The Watchtower, it appears that there will be a trailer camp for the 1950 International Assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses. Negotiations are being completed for a site in Middlesex county, New Jersey, south of the city of Plainfield. It is about 40 miles from the Yankee Stadium. Good roads and express highways to New York are in the vicinity. While the distance is considerable, it is better than not having a trailer camp at all.
Conventioners coming to the International Assembly can plan on such accommodations’ being available. More information will be mailed to companies of Jehovah’s witnesses soon. Also see the next issues of The Watchtower and the Informant for details.

