From Our Readers
CPR
Thanks to your article about a method of artificial respiration called CPR, or cardiopulmonary resuscitation (February 8, 1979), I was able to help another man save the life of a boy about seven years old who had drowned in a pool. I made the compressions on his chest, and although it took time for him to recover, he has improved and is already able to lead a normal life.
S. U. P., Spain
Job Interviews
Your article “Young People Ask . . . How Do I Handle a Job Interview?” (February 8, 1983) was especially helpful. Seventeen of us applied for two vacancies in a large firm here. After the first test, all were eliminated except four, and after the final interview, two of us were approved for the jobs. Both of us who got the jobs had read and put into practice the fine suggestions given in that magazine article!
N. W. and M. M., Brazil
Work a Pleasure?
Since at the moment I am in prison, I have a great deal of time to meditate. Several days ago I received your magazine with the fine article “Work Can Be a Pleasure​—Is Yours?” (September 8, 1983) This article prompted me to reflect upon my past. My work used to be so important to me that I completely forgot my family. Arguments at home became more frequent, until one day divorce proceedings were started. Then my criminal activity began. Had I made contact with your publication and Jehovah’s Witnesses at that time, I certainly would have been spared many things. I would have had a completely different view of family life. Many a problem can be solved much more easily by sticking to the Bible.
G. S., Germany
Cocaine
Thank you for your article on cocaine. (August 8, 1983) Not only did you write the truth about the harmful drug but you told people how to get off it. The majority of cocaine articles just tell you the harmful effects and leave you hanging. Most people know about the effects but just want to know how to stop. It is encouraging to see that there are those who give truthful answers, and who do not make people think one is just weak willed.
V. C., Illinois
Alcoholism
I am a doctor and for more than a year I have been working with the problem of alcoholism. One day a patient gave me a copy of your magazine with a series of articles on alcoholism (July 8, 1982), and I found it most interesting. I congratulate you for your efforts and I will do what I can to make known the work you are doing. Kindly send me any other issues dealing with this subject, especially the one dealing with “An Alcoholic in the Family​—What Can You Do?” (December 8, 1982), as announced in the January 8, 1984, issue [Portuguese] that I have received.
H. U., Brazil

