Why Should I Read the Bible?
THIS is a reasonable question. One might answer by asking in return: Why does a person read any book? Most probably, either to be entertained or to be informed, or possibly for both reasons. This can be equally true when reading the Bible.
“Great literature” is entertaining, and the Bible is sometimes placed in this category. A person interested in literary entertainment can find it by reading the works of reputable writers​—and even more so by turning to what is commonly known as the Book of books.
Besides, reading stories about people is usually fascinating. The Bible contains many. Furthermore, its personal accounts offer valuable and practical information on how to live lives that will be meaningful and happy.
The Bible also serves to inform. As the world’s oldest history book, it tells us about our ancient forefathers, their habits, customs and religious beliefs. It provides information about events that have affected all of us.
But is the Bible accurate? Once again, one might answer by asking: How does a person determine the accuracy of any book? First of all, by finding out exactly what it says. Only then can a person determine whether it has the ring of truth, and only then can he draw his own conclusions, not relying upon the opinions of others. But just how many people have read the entire Bible​—all 66 books, 1,189 chapters, over 31,000 verses? Have you?
Do not let the size of the Bible frighten you. You need not try to read it all at once. Remember, it is not one big book. It is a collection of 66 small books. Just start anywhere​—perhaps with the Gospels. Then discipline yourself into reading regularly. To help them do this, Jehovah’s Witnesses, for example, have designed a program that includes reading a certain portion of the Bible each week and then discussing some of its highlights at one of their weekly meetings. You, too, would benefit from such a program of regular Bible reading. It takes only a few minutes daily and might help you reach conclusions similar to those expressed in the accompanying box headed “How Others Have Felt About the Bible.”
While concurring with such statements, Jehovah’s Witnesses go even further. They consider the Bible to be the Creator’s revelation of himself and his purposes to man. You may not agree. But if their claim is valid, just think how important it would be to read the Bible to find out what God has to say to you!
Perhaps you want to know how Jehovah’s Witnesses have arrived at this conviction. If so, then obtain from them, or the publishers of this magazine, the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? and read it.
Getting the Most Benefit
Reading the Bible to gain general background knowledge or to enjoy “great literature” can be beneficial. But accepting its counsel and living according to its fine standards of conduct are of even greater benefit. Notice how the following excerpts from letters received by the publishers of this journal bear this out.
“I was so addicted to drugs that I was unable to satisfy my needs with the financial means at my disposal. So I had to get them some other way​—a way that landed me in prison. . . . There I decided to learn more about the Bible, and later I even agreed to have a regular Bible study. This helped me forget my former way of life and freed me from many harmful practices.”​—W. G.
“Everything I learned [from reading the Bible] was logical and clear. I got information about problems that for some time had weighed heavily upon me. My mind’s vacuum was filled with beneficial thoughts. The Bible taught me the purpose of life and how to change my way of thinking.”​—R. K.
“I thought either there is a God or there is none. Should there be none, then I could live my life my own way. But I wanted to avoid later regrets by making sure. I hoped that a study of the Bible might help me make the right decision.” It evidently did, because this young lady said that at times “20 minutes spent studying the Bible in a parking lot” gave her “strength for an entire week.” She concludes: “My life today is much richer, more satisfying and more balanced.”​—I. K.
You may feel that the Bible is simply an entertaining book full of useful information and wise counsel. Or you may feel that it is a gift from God for man’s guidance and enlightenment. In either case, you will benefit by reading it. We encourage you to do so. Perhaps your own experience then will prove to be the best answer to your question: Why should I read the Bible?
[Box on page 9]
THAT AMAZING BOOK CALLED THE BIBLE
What other book
   ​—was written by some 40 men from several countries on three  different continents in three languages over a period of  1,600 years?
   ​—has inspired some of the world’s greatest art, literature,  music and architecture, while also having a profound influence on  law?
   ​—mentions scientific truths discovered and utilized by man only centuries later?
   ​—contains hundreds of prophecies already fulfilled and a number of others now undergoing fulfillment?
WOULD IT NOT BE WORTH WHILE TO LEARN MORE ABOUT IT?
[Box on page 10]
HOW OTHERS HAVE FELT ABOUT THE BIBLE
  “The Bible is worth all other books which have ever been printed.”​—Patrick Henry, American statesman
  “I am convinced that the Bible becomes even more beautiful the more one understands it. Let culture and science go on advancing, and the mind progress as it may, it will never go beyond the elevation and moral culture of Christianity, as it glistens and shines forth in the Gospels.”​—Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, German writer
  “I find more sure marks of authenticity in the Bible than in any profane history whatever.”​—Sir Isaac Newton, British scientist
  “ . . . probably the most influential collection of books in human history. Whatever one may think of the Bible’s contents, its role in the development of western culture and in the evolution of many eastern cultures makes at least some acquaintance with its literature and history an indispensable mark of the educated man.”​—The Encyclopædia Britannica
  “It is the best book that ever was or will be in the world, because it teaches you the best lessons by which any human creature who tries to be truthful and faithful can possibly be guided.”​—Charles Dickens, English author
[Box on page 11]
GETTING MORE BENEFIT FROM BIBLE READING
  You may have started​—perhaps repeatedly—​only to stop again when you found that you were unable to understand everything you were reading. If so, the following suggestions may be of help:
  1. Choose a reliable translation in modern-day language.
  2. Keep a good dictionary handy and look up any unfamiliar words.
  3. Check names of people and places in a Bible dictionary or atlas.
  4. When reading, ask yourself: How does this apply to me? What can I personally learn from the material?
  5. Meditate on what you read; better still, discuss it with others.
  Many Bible readers have discovered that keeping these points in mind makes their Bible reading not only more informative but also more entertaining.

