Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MAY 1, 1917 


No. 9 


PASTOR RUSSELL 

' Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name 's sake, said : Let the Lord be glorified ; but he shall appear to 

your joy, and they shall be ashamed." — Isaiah 66:5. 
WHY LOVED BY THE COMMON PEOPLE! WHY HATED BY THE CLBRGYI 

find that the life and experiences of our Lord Jesus shed a 
great flood of light upon the matter. 

THE MASTER— "DESPISED AMD REJECTED OP MEN" 

The greatest man that ever lived upon the earth was 
Jesus of Nazareth. He was the greatest Reformer of all times. 
Above all, he was the Redeemer and Savior of the world. Yet, 
he was "despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and 
acquainted with grief." Why? We give the answer here 
that we may show why those who have stood for righteousness 
have always been bitterly persecuted and maligned. 

Eighteen centuries before Jesus came in the flesh, God had 
made a covenant with the nation of Israel. He favored them 
above all other peoples of the earth. He gave them a code 
of perfect laws. He sent his prophets to teach them. He 
blessed them far above their neighbors. But he made the perpetuation
 of these blessings dependent upon their obedience to 
him. Many times their leaders became disloyal and led the 
people away from God, and for this he punished them. When 
they repented, he would again bless them, and again they would 
become unmindful of his Messing. Near the close of the long 
period of God's favor toward them he said, through his Prophet, 
"You Only have I recognized of all the families of the earth : 
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities." 

In addition to giving them the Law, God instituted amon^t 
the Jews the Levitical priesthood. It was the duty of the 
priests to instruct the people in the way of righteousness, and 
to keep them in mind of the coming Seed of Abraham, through 
which they would receive a lasting blessing. Jehovah did not 
authorize any sect or division amongst them. 

When Jesus came to earth he found a marked departure 
from the teachings that had been given to Israel through the 
holy prophets. Gradually, near the close of the age, there had 
come into existence certain religious sects, to wit: Pharisees, 
Sadducees, Essenes and Cyreneans. These sects had mixed 
with the true Word of God doctrines which they had borrowed 
from heathen philosophers. They were given over to great 
formalism. They pretended to worship God, worshiping him 
with their lips, while their hearts were removed far from htm. 
Their leaders were proud, high-minded, heady, self-willed and 
egotistical. They practised fraud and deceit upon the people. 
The Pharisees would stand in the streets and utter long prayers
. They publicly thanked God that they were better than 
other men. They loved to be called Rabbi, Master, Father, 
etc. They oppressed the widows and orphans, making their 
burdens grievous to be borne. They knew well that the Scriptures
 taught the coming of Messiah ; but they reasoned that tf 
he should come, he would select them above all others as his 
chief ones, because of their greatness of learning, and tbeir superiority
 to the common people. 


Man's greatness is properly measured by the amount of good 
he accomplishes on benalf of his fellowmen. The good accomplished
 is not to be determined in money value, but must be 
measured by the amount of true happiness brought into the 
lives of the largest number. The man who attains to this 
position of greatness must do so through adversity, and for 
this there is a reason. 

Since Adam and Eve forfeited the joys and beautieB of 
Eden, there have been two opposing forces contending in the 
universe — good and evil. God is the perfect expression of 
goodness; Satan, the very personification of evil. AH of the 
sorrows of the human race are traceable to the machinations 
of Satan and his coadjutors. 

Every human being that has lived upon the earth has 
fought either under the banner of the Lord of righteousness 
or under the leadership of the evil one — Satan, Every one in 
the world today is fighting under the one or the other standard. 
All who have fought under the Lord's banner of righteousness 
have done so willingly. The Lord coerces the will of no man. 
But the great mass of the soldiers of the adversary have fought 
under him unwillingly. They have been the bond-slaves of evil, 
enslaved by the wrongful act of the first man, and unable to 
extricate themselves from this slavery. 

REMARKABLE TEIBtTTE TO PASTOR RUSSELL'S WORTH 

It follows, therefore, that every man who achieves real 
greatness must be a brave and valiant soldier of righteousness
. An apostle of light, he is often made to appear evil 
by his adversaries; whereas the great adversary and hi3 
coadjutors often appear in the garb of angels of light, thereby 
deceiving many. Century after century history has repeated 
itself in this respect. Why? We answer, Because the same 
great forces are constantly warring against each other, the 
evil always opposing the right. 

The world has produced some great men. Some men, 
by reason of their untiring struggles, have become great; 
while some have attained greatness by reason of God's special 
favor. Not since the days of the Apostle Paul has there lived 
in the world a greater and better man; than Pastor Russell. 
We say this advisedly, because in that time no man has been 
so wonderfully used to bring lasting blessings to so large a 
number of people. He, as a servant of the Lord, brought to 
them in clear terms the glad tidings of salvation found in the 
Scriptures, which Jesus first began to speak upon this earth. 
For centuries the adversary and his coadjutors have beclouded 
the message of salvation, but during the last half century the 
Lord has caused greater light to shine upon this message, and 
he used Pastor Russell as his special instrument in directing to 
that light. If Pastor Russell was a follower of Jesus (and 
no one who knew him could doubt it), why should any one 
hate him ? Searching for the true answer to this question, we 


E6078] 


May 1, WI7 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(133-133) 


PHARISAICAL CLEEGY DOOMED TO DISAPPOINTMENT 

But these religious rulers were doomed to disappointment. 
Instead of coming with great pomp and ostentation. Messiah 
came meek and lowly of heart, giving his Father all the glory 
for what he said and did. He taught the people how they 
might attain life everlasting in a state of happiness. "He 
spake aa never man spake" before, in fulfilment of the prophetic 
statement, "Grace was upon his lips"; and his message brought 
gladness to the hearts of the sincere. "The common people 
heard him gladly." They followed him from place to place; 
they thronged about him; they rejoiced to be in his presence. 

Seeing that the people were forsaking them and following 
the lowly Nazarene, these various sects, composed largely of 
the Jewish hierarchy, or clergy, were incensed against our 
Lord and began a systematic and wicked persecution of him. 
They were blind instruments of Satan. They first sought to 
destroy him by vile epithets and slander. They publicly called 
in question the legitimacy of his birth and the chastity of his 
mother; they denounced him as a liar, as a sinner, a-s the 
chief of devils and as a blasphemer of God. Finally they paid 
their ill-gotten money to have him cruelly murdered. Thirtyseven
 years later the Jewish nation fell, to rise no more until 
their "double" of disfavor should be fulfilled. 

CLASS WHICH CAUSED JESUS' DEATH FOWEBFUL NOW 

St. Paul produced the evidence that the Jewish age finds 
it* parallel in this Gospel age. The Biblical testimony further 
shows that in the Gospel age we would find a parallel not only 
in time, but in the events that would transpire, and that the 
same class of men who were prominent and powerful then — 
the clergy class — would be prominent and powerful now. 

Today we are in the closing hours of the Gospel Age. At 
the close of the Jewish *ge we saw a class of men who separated
 themselves from the common people, fittingly spoken of 
as "the clergy." These had forsaken their God-given duty of 
teaching the Truth to the people, and the Lord Jesus denounced 
them as frauds and hypocrites. (Mark 7:6-8) At the close 
of the Gospel age, we like-wise find a distinct class, apart from 
the common people, designating themselves "the clergy," the 
majority of whom have departed from the teachings of Jesus 
and the Apostles, teaching instead either doctrines borrowed 
from the heathen philosophers, or else doctrines of Higher 
Criticism and Evolution, thereby destroying the faith of the 
people in the Bible and blinding them to God's plan of salvation
. Mark, then, the parallel of events of the two ages, observing
 always the virulent and persistent opposition of the 
evil to the good. 

NEITHER JESUS NOB THE APOSTLES EVEB CLAIMED TO BB 
CLERGYMEN 

The Gospel age opened with the introduction of the great 
Master, Christ Jesus, who declared that every man who would 
become his true follower, and would continue as such, would 
receive persecution similar to that which he received. He said, 
"If they have called the Master of the house the prince of 
devils, how nruch more will they call them of his household V 9 
(Matthew 10:25) Again he said, "Ye are not of the world; if 
ye were of the world, the world would love its own; but because
 ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of 
the world, therefore the world hateth you." — John 15:19. 

Jesus pointed out that the great objective of the Christian 
was to be the kingdom of God, and to this end he taught his 
followers to pray, "Thy kingdom come.*' He emphasized the 
fact that his second coming would mark the beginning of the 
blessings to mankind which God had promised through the 
mouth of all his holy prophets, and that these blessings could 
come in no other way or time. Neither Jesus nor the apostles 
ever laid claim to being clergymen. Such a thing does not appear
 in church history until the apostles had all disappeared 
from the stage of earthly activity. 

When the great apostate system was organized, the pope 
became its head, and around him he gathered cardinals, archbishops
, bishops and priests, thus forming "the clergy" class; 
and these alone claim to be members of the church. All others 
who follow are called "children of the church." The Protestant 
Reformers were themselves persecuted ; but now, in their names, 
their followers in turn become persecutors. 

When Luther protested against the false doctrines taught 
by the Papacy, he was excommunicated, denounced and bitterly
 persecuted — likewise every reformer, both those who preceeded
 and those who followed him. Call to mind the experiences
 of Huss, Wycliffe, Knox, Wesley, Campbell, and 
others. The spirit of intolerance has been manifested in all 
ages, and while more refined methods of persecution are employed
 at present than in the past, this spirit is fttlll as wicked 
as ever. PASTOB BUS SELL'S BOYHOOD BATS 

Let ub now return to the man whose career we are here 
to examine. It is due that we tell something of his boyhood. 


Sixty-five years ago, in the city of Pittsburgh, Charles Taze 
Russell was born. His parents were of the Calvinistic faith, 
and he was reared in that environment and influence. Naturally 
of a reverential mint!, he enrly entered religious work. His 
young mind was so impressed by the teachings of the clergy 
that he felt in duty bound to do what he could to save mankind
 from what he had been taught was a burning hell of torment
. As a youth , he was engaged throughout the day in business
 in his father's store, and after a hard day's work was 
often found going about the city with colored chalk, marking 
upon the- walls of buildings where men congregated, words of 
warning against the hell of eternal torture. Relying upon the 
high standard of the clergy in the community, he had been induced
 to believe these doctrines which they taught, and this 
led him to take this strenuous course. 

THE TEACHINGS OF THE CLERGY 

What have been the teachings of the clergy? They have 
taught, and generally still teach, that every man has an immortal
 soul; that when a man dies he is not in reality dead; 
but more alive than ever; that the very "rood, at death, go immediately
 to heaven — a state of everlasting bliss; and that all 
others go immediately at death either to purgatory, a place of 
torment, limited in duration, or to hell, a place of endless 
torture in fire and brimstone. 

The Calvinistic branch of Protestantism has taught, and 
still teaches, that God foreordained a few to be saved and all 
others to be forever damned; that every child, even before its 
birth, has its destiny eternally sealed; that nothing that any 
one could do would alter its foreordained destiny, and that 
Jehovah had made this arrangement. 

Another system of theology has taught, and yet teaches, 
that man's sins may be forgiven by pope or priest upon a 
money consideration. At least, this is the way the teaching 
works. 

Practically all the church systems, Catholic and Protestant, 
have taught, and still teach, that all who are saved go to 
heaven, that there is no other place of salvation; that at 
Christ's second coming the earth will be utterly destroyed, together
 with every one upon the earth who is unsaved. They 
claim to be followers of the Prince of Peace, yet urge rulers 
and people to engage in war. 

These have further taught, and still teach, the unauthorized 
and wholly untenable doctrine that no one is authorized to 
preach except he be first ordained by a body of clergymen, 
designated by them for that purpose. When plied with questions
, the clergy have, as a rule, waved them aside, intimating, 
"These questions are too deep for you; just have faith in what 
we tell you." 

DRIVEN TO UNBELIEF 

Young Russell believed that the Bible taught these theories, 
because the clergy taught them. Up to that time he had not 
given the Bible a careful study. As he brooded over the condition
 of the unfortunate race, he reached the conclusion that 
a just, wise and loving God could not be the author of such 
an arrangement; and while still believing in God, he discarded 
the Bible on the supposition that it taught these awful doctrines
. 

Charles Russell then turned his mind to the examination of 
heathen religions, only to find them wholly unsatisfactory. 
While wandering from one religious teaching to another searching
 for truth, until he was thoroughly dissatisfied with all, 
he yet retained a belief in God. He said, "Surely a good and 
wise God, who has made man, must have provided Borne way 
for man to gain a knowledge concerning himself. Probably the 
Bible does not teach what I have understood it teaches; I will 
search the Scriptures carefully myself and ascertain." 

As a young man still in his teens, young Russell then began
 a careful and prayerful study of the sacred pages of 
God's Word, and when he found that the Bible does not teach 
that God is a fiend who will torture his creatures eternally, 
but that its teachings are entirely consistent with the character
 of a just and loving Creator, he then resolved to devote 
all of his time, strength, energy and means to telling the people
 the true teachings of the Scriptures and to putting these 
teachings forth by every means in his power, that others might 
know; and this he did up to his last hourfon earth. 

WHY EBROB OPPOSES TRUTH "DARKNESS HATETH THE 
LIGHT" 

Darkness always opposes the light. As the light progresses 
it exposes the darkness, and causes the disciples of error to 
fight the instruments holding forth the light*. This is illustrated 
in every branch of science, aa well as in religion. To illustrate : 
A doctor has been practising according to the methods adopted 
a century ago; he Knows no other methods and makes his livTG
079] 


(133-134) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


ing by those methods. ' Modern scientists bring forth new 
methods of treating diseases, and the doctor sees that the new 
methods will not only destroy his theories, but will likewise 
deprive him of a livelihood. The spirit of selfishness that is 
in every man to a greater or less degree manifests itself, and 
causes him to resent the new methods. On the other hand, the 
people who have proved the benefit of the new methods, would 
gladly receive them. 

This has been true of all professions. It is not necessary 
for us to suppose that those who oppose progress and enlightenment
 are always men who are wilful wrong- doers, but 
the charitable, and we believe the more proper, way to look 
at the matter is that self-interest blinds many to real advancement
. 

The clergy for centuries have been following the teachings
 which we have outlined. The ruts of error have been 
made deep, and it is difficult for them to get out. The majority
 of these have been content to follow this course; their 
collections come at regular intervals and their livelihood and 
prestige depend upon holding the people in subjection to their 
manner of thinking. 

WHAT PASTOR RUSSELL TAUGHT— TTONED HOSE ON HELL 
OF THE CREEDS AND PUT OUT FIRE 
When Pastor Russell ascertained the beautiful and harmonious
 teachings of Jesus and hi a apostles, and that all these 
harmonized fully with the Old Testament, he began to turn 
the great searchlight of truth upon the error; and naturally 
this exposed these erroneous theories which had been adopted 
and long followed by the clergy class. As one good preacher 
put it, "Pastor "Russell turned the hose on hell and put out 
the fire." And that knocked down the chief prop of the clergy. 
He did not attack men, but merely attacked the erroneous 
doctrines by teaching the true ; and this he had a perfect right 
to do; while his opponents attacked him personally. 

THE BIBLE TEACHINGS PASTOR RUSSELL'S TEACHINGS 
We now give the Bible teaching upon these great questions 
at issue, by the citation of Scriptural authority; and what the 
Bible teaches is what Pastor Russell believed and taught the 
people for more than forty years. 

Gcd has a wonderful plan, foreknown and prearranged by 
him before the foundation of the world, which plan he is 
working out to his own glory and for the blessing of his creatures
. From his Word we learn that God created man in his 
own image and likeness— perfect in organism, perfect in mind. 
This embraced the power to discern between right and wrong. 
God did not give man a soul; he made man a soul. (Genesis 
2:7) As the Scriptures set forth, all animal creatures are 
souls ; none possess souls. A cow is a soul ; it does not have a 
soul. (Numbers 31:28) There is quite a distinction between 
being a thing and having that thing. The union of the breath 
of life with the elements composing the body produce a third 
thing; namely, a living, moving, breathing being, which we 
call "a soul." 

Adam and his wife, Eve, were given a perfect home — Eden — 
and God gave to them his law, wherein he stated, "In the day 
that you disobey, dying you shall die." (Genesis 2 : 17) Stated 
in other phrase, God informed them that they might enjoy the 
beauty and perfection of Eden forever (gradually extending 
this Eden until it should cover the whole earth), on the condition
 that they would obey his law; but that to disobey would 
mean death. He did not say that if they disobeyed he would 
send them to eternal torture. No such statement can be found 
in the Scriptures. He did not say that their souls were immortal
 and could never die. It was Satan who said to Mother 
Eve, "Ye shall not die." (Genesis 3:1-5) Concerning this 
Jesus declared that this falsehood of Satan's was the first lie 
ever told, and that from it all other lies and false doctrines 
emanated. 

The Genesis account sets forth that Adam did violate God's 
law and, in harmony with the penalty of that law, Jehovah 
sentenced him to death — not to an eternity of torture. He 
sentenced him to hell ; but the hell of the Bible is not a place 
of eternal torment, but of oblivion. 

THE BIBLE HELL— TATOHT BY PASTOE RUSSELL 
For more than fifteen centuries the people have been in 
darkness concerning the meaning of hell, because the true teachings
 of the Bible were taken away in the third century by the 
then corrupt chnrch leaders, and the theories of men were 
substituted therefor. We have now come to the close of the 
Gospel age, to the time when greater light than ever before 
is shining upon all things, and when every hidden thing is being
 uncovered. This has been true during the past forty years, 
and as time has advanced the light has grown brighter and 
brighter. Within this comparatively brief period more light* 
has been turned upon the true teachings of the Bible than during
 ail the centuries since the days of the apostles. Briefly, 
we give the Bible teaching concerning hell: 


The only word in the Hebrew Old Testament translated 
hell is sheol. Every educated minister knows that sheol is not 
a place of eternal torture, but that the word means the tomb, 
or the condition of death. Jacob declared: "I will go down 
into hell (sheol) to my son mourning." Surely Joseph wag 
not in eternal torment! "If evil befall him (Benjamin) by 
the way, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow 
to the grave" (sheol). (Genesis 37:35; 42:38) Job, after 
losing all his earthly possessions and his children, and then 
being afflicted with a loathsome disease, prayed to God that he 
might go to hell — the grave, sheol — and there rest in 
silence. (Job 14:13) The Psalmist, speaking prophetically of 
Jesus, stated that Jesus went to hell (Psalm 16:10) ; and the 
Apostle explains this in Acts 2:29-34 to mean the tomb. 

In the New Testament the Greek word hades is translated 
hell, and has the same meaning as sheol in the Hebrew. The 
word Gehenna is also translated hell. It has not the thought 
of conscious torment, but represents the condition of complete 
annihilation, eternal death, from which there is to be resurrection
.— Matthew 10:28. 

The clergy teach that the dead are more alive after death 
than before, whereas the Scriptures teaeh exactly to the contrary
. The Psalmist says: "What man is he that liveth and 
shall not see death! Shall he deliver his soul from the tomb?" 
(Psalm 89:48) "In death none shall praise thee; in hell 
(sheol, the grave) who shall give thee thanks V (Psalm 6:5) 
"The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into 
silence." (Psalm 115:17) "His breath goeth forth; he returneth
 to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish." 
(Psalm 146:4) "The living know that they shall die, but the 
dead know not anything." "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to 
do, do it with thy might; for there is~no work, nor device, nor 
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave (sheol) whither thou 
goest." — Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10. 

RESURRECTION— "EARTH HOLDS SO MANT DEAD" 

Except for God's love manifested toward humankind, all 
would have perished forever, for the reason that "the wages 
of sin is death," not eternal torture (Romans 6:23) ; and dearth 
means the complete cessation of life. The fear of eternal torture
 has brought horror to millions of minds, causing them 
to shun Jehovah as a fiend and to repudiate his Word as a 
mockery. The Prophet plainly tells us that such doctrines are 
taught by the precepts of men and are not in harmony with 
the Lord*s word, the Bible. — Isaiah 29:13. 

For six thousand years there has been great sorrow in the 
earth, and that sorrow is now greatly intensified. Billions 
have gone into death after much suffering. The clergy have 
held out no message of comfort to the vast majority of these, 
before they died, or to their loving friends who remained behind
 to mourn them. Truly the poet has said : 
"The earth is, old with centuries, 
But not for this she bows her head ; 
Close to her heart the sorrow lies — 
She holds so many dead! 

But Jehovah through his prophets has held out hope of a 
resurrection (Jeremiah 31:15-17; Isaiah 26:1S); Hosea 13:14) ; 
and when Jesus was born the angels of heaven announced that 
the great Savior of men had come, and that these glad tidings 
must go to all. God sent Jesus to the earth to become a man 
and to die, that mankind might not perish, but have everlasting 
life. When Jesus came he brought "glad tidings of great joy 
to all people." He said: "All that are in their graves shall 
hear the voice of the Son of God and shall come forth." — John 
3:16; 5:28, 29, R. V. 

The resurrection of all men is made possible because of 
this fact: A perfect man sinned and through him condemnation
 came upon all. Through the willing and substitutionary 
sacrifice of another perfect man — Ohrist Jesus — the opportunity
 for life comes to all. (Romans 5:12, 15-21) 1*his was 
the only means whereby man could justly be released from the 
(penalty resulting from Adam's sin. No man on earth could 
meet this requirement; and for this reason, the Scriptures 
inform us, Jesus "was made a little lower than the angels, 
for the suffering of death, that he, by the grace of God, should 
taste death for every man." — Hebrews 2:9. 

In being made lower than the angels, Jesus took upon himself
 the form and nature of man. (Philippians 2:5-10) "He 
was made flesh and tabernacled among us." (John 1:14) He 
partook of flesh and blood, in order that he might become the 
Redeemer of mankind. (Hebrews 2:14) "He gave his life a 
ransom for all, to be testified (to all) in due time." (1 
Timothy 2:3-6) He was put to death a human being and 
raised from the dead a divine being. (1 Peter 3:18, Diaglott; 
1 Corinthians 15:3, 4) The death and resurrection of Ohrist 
Jesus is a guarantee that all the dead shall in due time be 
awakened out of death, and that all shall be given a fair trial 


[6080] 


May 1, 1917 


THE W A TCH TOW E K 


(135 13ft) 


for life. (Acta 24:15; 17:31; John 5:28; 1 Corinthians 

15:12-22) But before mankind at large can experience this 

blessing 1 another part of God's plan must first be carried out. 

"THE CHURCH WHICH IS THE BODY OF CHRIST" 

Long centuries ago Jehovah gave an oath -bound promise 
to Abraham, and renewed it to Isaac and to Jacob, saying, "In 
thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." (Genesis 12:3; 26:4; 28:14} Who was to constitute
 this seed was a complete mystery to all until Pentecost
, and is still a mystery to all except those who have fully 
consecrated themselves to the Lord. (Colossians 1:26, 27) 
The seed, according to the promise, is Christ, and Christ is 
composed of Jesus Christ the Head, and the true church, his 
body.— Galatians 3:10, 20; Colossians 1:18. 

All who have been baptized into Christ — that is to say, 
all who during the present age have been immersed into Christ's 
death by a full consecration to do the Father's will — have 
put on Christ; and these, continuing faithful unto the end, 
•■.hull have part in the first, or chief resurrection, and together 
with Christ Jesus shall constitute the seed of Abraham acenrding
 to promise, and shall reign for a thousand years for 
the purpose of bestowing God's promised blessing upon mankind
. — Galatians 3:29; Revelation 20:6. 

MESSIAH'S GLORIOUS KINGDOM 

Our Lord Jesus taught his disciples to pray for the coming
 of his kingdom, and made known the fact that its establishment
 would mark the beginning of the blessings to all mankind
. The word "kingdom" is used in a two-fold sense. It 
means, first, the royal family, or reigning house; second, the 
realm, or dominion, including the subjects, over which the 
royal family reign. The word "kingdom" i3 a name applied 
in the Scriptures to the ruling seed of Abraham — Jesus Christ 
the Head, and the glorified church, his body — as well a a to 
the earthly domain over which they shall hear rule. 

The whole Gospel age has been devoted to the gathering out 
of the true followers of the Master, who are to compose the 
kingdom class; and as he was despised and rejected of men, 
by those who held to the errors of the sects, so his followers 
were to have similar experiences. 

The second advent of Christ has been the great event to 
which the Master's true disciples have long looked forward; 
tliey have hoped and prayed for its coming. We are today 
in the closing hours of the period allotted by God for the selection
 of the church, and "the kingdom of heaven is at hand"! — 
now in the full sense of its establishment in the earth. The 
institutions of "this present evil world" are passing away in 
a great time of trouble, and soon the Lord will establish his 
kingdom of righteousness, which will deal out justice to all 
humanity. 

All these Bible truths Pastor Russell taught for forty years, 
and always without money and without price. "Seats free 
and no collection!" was an eyesore to his sectarian opponents, 
and drew from thehi much bitter criticism during all these 
years in which he pointed to the nearness of Messiah's kingdom
 ; and time and again, orally and through the public press, 
he announced to the peoples of earth that the age was now 
closing and would pass away with a great time of trouble, 
due to begin, according to Bible chronology, in 1914, and that 
this trouble would eventuate in the greatest revolution and 
most destructive anarchy the earth has ever known, to be followed
 immediately by the setting up of Messiah's kingdom of 
everlasting peace, which would bring blessings to all the peoples 
of the world — living and dead. 

THE KING PRESENT— "COMB AS A THIEF" 

It can readily be seen how these great truths set forth in 
the Bible, and taught by the Lord's special servant of these 
last days, upset all the theories and doctrines that have been 
taught by the clergy for the past 1500 years. It is likewise 
easy to see that those not having the spirit of the Lord, those 
clergymen who regard their profession as one for personal 
profit, either in money or in the plaudits of men, would be 
blind to the great purposes of God, and hence would vigorously 
oppose the light of present truth. 

The Apostle Peter (2 Peter 3:3, 4) points out the->e verv 
men, at the end of the age, and denominates them scoffers, 
saying that they would scoff at those who would make known 
the great event" of the Lord's second presence. Thousands of 
Christian people have witnessed the fulfilment of the numerous
 lines of testimony brought forward during the past quarter 
of a century in regard to the Lord's parousia, presence, and the 
consequent nearness of his kingdom, and have at the same 
time witnessed the fulfilment of this prophecy of the Apostle 
with reference to the scoffing of the clergy due to the announcement
 of the presence of the long-promised King, who has come 
as a thief, as foretold. 


HE TAUGHT THE PEOPLE 

The clergy of Jesus' day not only opposed the teachings of 
Jesus, but ajso tried to prevent the people giving heed to 
these teachings. Rebuking them for their coiir«<\ the Master 
said, "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye 
shut up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye neither 
go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering 
to go in."— Matthew 23:13. 

When the clergymen of that day sent their officers to arrest 
Jesus and they returned and reported the wonderful words 
that fell from 'his lips, declaring that ''never man spake like 
this man," the Pharisaical clergy sarcastically said, "Are ye 
also deceived? Have any of the rulers or the Pharisees believed
 on him?"— John 7:45-48. 

Every follower of the Master who has taught the people 
the truth has received similar treatment at the hands of that 
portion of the clergy element who have not possessed the spirit 
of the Lord, but the spirit of the adversary. When certain 
of the diseiples of JesU3 were preaching the truth after Pente 
cost, and were arrested at the instance of the Clergy element, 
Nt. Luke assigned tlris reason, "being grieved that they taught 
the people and pi cached through Jesus the resurrection of the 
dead." — Acts 4:1-4. 

Pastor Russell printed hundreds of millions of tracts set 
ting forth the message of the kingdom of Messiah, and theso 
have been distributed throughout the world, free of charge. 
The clergy have constantly persecuted him for so doing. More 
than four thousand newspapers from time to time published hi* 
sermons. As an example of how this affected the clergy, one 
of their number angrily remarked, "I cannot open my morning 
paper without Pastor Russell's face staring at me." The religious
 department of one of our great publications, which iunfriendly
, contained the following: 

"Pastor Russell's writings are said to have greater 
newspaper circulation every week than those of any other 
living man; a greater, doubtless, than the combined circulation
 of the writings of all the priests and preacher* 
in North America; greater even than the work of Arthur 
Brisbane, Norman Hapgood, George Horace Lorimer, Dr. 
Frank Crane, Frederick Haskins, and a dozen other of the 
best known editors and syndicate writers put together." 
The olergy naturally were unable to answer the great hip* 
sage of the truth which Pastor Russell delivered. They hated 
him and persecuted him for the same reason that the agents 
of the adversary hated and persecuted the Lord and the 
apostles. (John 15:18-21) No one who indulges in such persecutions
 has the spirit of the Lord, but the spirit of the adversary
. *In the Scriptures we read, "Whosoever hateth his 
brother is a murderer." (1 John 3:15) "They shall reproach 
you and cast out your name as evil." (Luke 6:22) "Deceit
 ia in the heart of them that imagine evil." (Proverbs 
12:20) "An evil man out of the evil treasure (of his heart) 
bringeth forth evil things." (Matthew 12:35) "Speak not 
evil one of another, brethren." "Speak evil of no man." — 
James 4:11; Titus 3:2. 
NO PERSON EVER GAVE TESTIMONY AGAINST HIS MORAL 
CHARACTER 
Not being able to answer Pastor Russeira arguments concerning
 God's plan of salvation, the clergy of evil and cornipt 
winds indulged in slander and libelous attacks against hi* 
character. One of the best evidences of the falsity of their 
charges is the fact that no person was ever produced who 
gave testimony against the moral character of Pastor Russell, 
To his dying day he was able to say, what probably very few 
men aside from the Lord could say, that he had lived a life of 
absolute celibacy. 

Time will not permit the examination here of each of 
the charges the olergy made against him, but they all have 
been answered fully and clearly in a little pamphlet entitled, 
"A Great Battle in the Ecclesiastical Heavens," which 
the author wrote from personal observation and knowledge of 
the facts, and which can be obtained from the office of the 
Watch To web Bible and Tract Society, 17 Hicks St. Brook - 
Ivn, N". Y., by merely sending a post-card request therefor. 
DARKNESS AND DAWNING 
At this time the whole world is torn by war, pestilence, 
famine and distress, and the clergy urge the rulers on to more 
war and trouble, and have also urged the embroilment of these 
United States — now accomplished. Long has it been the desire 
of honest hearts amongst the people to have peace. Jehovah 
declares that after this great shaking and overthrow of the 
nations peace will come, and through the Prophet gives a beautiful
 picture of the reign of Christ Jesus and the blessings 
that will follow for the people, saying, "From the rising of 
the sun (the Sun of Righteousness, The Christ, which will rise 
at the beginning of the age with healing in his beams) unto 
the going down of the same (the end thereof), my name shall 


[6081] 


(136 147) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


B«ooklyh. N. Y. 


be great among the nations ; and in every place incense shall be 
offered unto my name, and a pure offering; for my name shall 
be great among the nations, saith the Lord of Hosts." — Malachi 
1:11. 

St. John the Revelator, depicting in vision the blessings 
that will come to mankind, says: 

"And I saw a new heaven and a new earth (new order 
of things) ; for the first heaven and the first earth were passed 
away, and there was no more sea (turbulent, anarchistic 
masses). And I, John, saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem 
(the church glorified), coming down from Cod out of heaven, 
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a 
great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God 
15 with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall he his 
people, and God himself shall be with them and "be their God. 
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there 
shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying; neither shall 
there be any more pain ; for the former things are passed away. 
And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all 
things new. And he said unto me, Write, for these words are 
true and faithful." — Revelation 21:1-5. 

HUMAN RACE TO BE RESTORED TO PERFECTION 

As a sample of the Scriptural message of sweetness and 
comfort which Pastor Russell taught the people, we quote 
from Volume I of his Studies ik the* Sceipttjhes, pages 191 
and 192: 

"The Apostle Peter, our Lord, and all the prophets 
since the world began, declare that the human race is to 
be restored to glorious perfection, and is again to have 
dominion over earth, as its representative, Adam, had. 

"It is this portion that God has elected to give to the 


human race. And what a glorious portion I Close your 
eyes for a moment to the scenes of misery and woe, degradation
 and sorrow that yet prevail on account of sin, and 
picture before your mental vision the glory of the perfect 
earth. Not a stain of sin mars the harmony and peace of a 
perfect society; not a bitter thought, not an unkind look 
or word; love, welling up from every heart, meets a 
kindred response in every other heart, and benevolence 
marks every act. There sickness shall be no more; not 
an ache nor pain, nor any evidence of decay — not even 
the fear of such things. Think of all the pictures of comparative
 health and beauty of human form and feature 
tli at you have ever seen, and know that perfect humanity 
will be of still surpassing loveliness. The inward purity 
of mental and moral perfection will stamp and glorify 
every radiant countenace. Such will earth's society be; 
and weeping bereaved ones will have their tears all wiped 
away, when thus they realize the resurrection work complete
. — Revelation 21:4." 
It must be evident to every fair-minded person that he 
who could bring forth from the Scriptures such words of beauty 
and sweetness as set forth in the foregoing paragraph was 
controlled by the Spirit of the Lord, fighting for rignteousness 
under the banner of Christ. Likewise it must be evident to 
all fair-minded persons that he who opposes such a message 
and the man who gave it is controlled by the spirit of the 
adversary and fighting under the banner of the adversary. 

To put it in a few words, Pastor Russell was hated by the 
clergy because he taught the people the tbtjth and disregarded 
their creeds and human traditions. He was loved by the common
 people because he brought to them the truth, a message 
of hope which has filled the hearts of many with joy. 


JESUS THE TRUE VINE 

This article was a Teprint of that entitled "The True Vine and Its Fruit," published in issue of April 15, 1905, which please 

see.] 


"Branches in Christ the Vine! 
O union blest! Nor tongue nor pen can give 
All that this wondrous thought doth comprehend; — 

How glorious in Jesus thus to live! 

"His fruit we bear; our Husbandman 
Doth prune his vine, that more and more our life 


May yield rich fruitage to our Father's praise; 
And so we bow submissive to his knife, 

"Our life, our strength, our joy, 
We find in Christ; He is our all in all; 
His pulsing life through all our being flows; 

To him we're bound in Love's overmastering thrall." 


THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF-CONTROL 

[This article was a Teprint of that entitled "The Wkie of False Doctrine/' published in issue of March 15, 1907, which please 

see.] 


IN RE MILITARY LAW 


A Bill is now pending before Congress which, if passed, 
will regulate selective conscription for Military service. Many 
of the friends are inquiring about this. In due time The 
^V T ATCH Tower will contain a statement advising the friends 
of the conditions upon which exemption may be granted by 
the Government from Military service, and what steps will be 
neoessary to obtain such exemption. 

Our statement in the April 15th issue of The Watch 


Tower related only to State laws. If a Federal law is enacted, 
application for exemption should be made according to its 
provisions. 

We have confidence that Congress will give due consideration
 to conscientious objectors. In most of the States all 
will be required to register. There is no objection to this, and 
there is no reason why any one should hesitate to register and 
answer the questions as required. Let ua be law abiding. 

