Good News Reaches the Rurals of South Africa
ANGRY mobs, riot police, tear gas. In recent years, South African towns and cities have been torn by such strife. Even the beautiful rural areas​—where more than 40 percent of the population lives—​have not escaped the ravages of political violence. In the midst of all of this, however, Jehovah’s Witnesses have continued to declare “the good news of peace.”​—Ephesians 6:15.
For years the Witnesses have conducted an annual three-month preaching campaign specifically aimed at the rural population. For example, in 1990 over 12,000 Kingdom publishers from 334 congregations took part in the campaign. Naturally, many obstacles must be overcome to reach these scattered rural dwellers of southern Africa.
Among other things, the Witnesses must deal with a great variety of cultures and languages. And what a varied mixture it is! For example, there are English- and Afrikaans-speaking farmers, as well as Pedis, Sothos, Tsongas, Tswanas, Vendas, Xhosas, and Zulus. Each group has its own distinctive culture and language. There are also great distances and bumpy roads. All of this calls for the spirit of self-sacrifice and the expenditure of considerable time and money. Yet, Jehovah has richly blessed the efforts made. Let us tell you a little about the hardships and successes of this unique feature of the preaching work.​—Compare Malachi 3:10.
A “Sunday School” in Zululand
In the very heart of semitropical Zululand lies the deep valley of the Umvoti River. From the cliffs, one can see clusters of thatched Zulu huts (homesteads) stretching into the distance. One Sunday in 1984, two Kingdom publishers came into the valley on the winding, dusty road. It is so hot and humid there that the area has the nickname Kwa-Sathane (Place of Satan)​—an obvious allusion to the false doctrine of a hellfire stoked by the Devil!
Drenched in perspiration, the brothers approached a woman named Doris, who was conducting a Sunday school class. After hearing the Kingdom message, Doris immediately invited the Witnesses to address her group of about 40 youths. The result? The brothers returned the following week with 70 copies of the publication My Book of Bible Stories for use at the local school. Within a few weeks, the Sunday school atmosphere was changed to that of a Bible study group. Instead of church hymns, Kingdom songs were sung in the African way, with delightful natural harmony. Soon the group grew to over 60. One brother exclaimed: “What a heartwarming experience it was to share in transforming this Sunday school into a place of true worship!”
In the Dusty Bushveld
Because of the churches’ involvement in the political unrest, many white farmers are cautious or even suspicious about anyone approaching them with a Bible message. Note this report by a group from Johannesburg that traveled about 400 miles [640 km] to preach the good news in a portion of the Transvaal.
“We have been traveling north across the rolling bushveld for close to four hours now. A mirage dances on the straight road shimmering under the African sun. Suddenly, the tar gives way to dirt, rutted and full of potholes. At last, a sandy track leads us to a farm.
“‘Good morning, Meneer [Sir],’ we say in greeting a burly farmer.
“‘Morning,’ comes his gruff reply. ‘Can I help you?’
“After introducing ourselves, we explain the reason for our call. The words are hardly out of our mouths when he screams: ‘My dominee [minister] warned me about you people! You are all Communists and Antichrists. Get off my property at once before I . . . !’
“The farmer’s posture indicates that he could become violent at any moment. Having little option, we decide to take our leave and ‘shake the dust off our feet.’ (Matthew 10:14) There is enough dust to do this quite literally.
“At the next farm, the response is the same. Then it occurs to us that the local telephone line has been busily engaged by the resident Dutch Reformed minister, who has been warning ‘his flock’ about the impending ‘danger’ in the neighborhood. At last we meet a farmer who, although not interested himself, says: ‘Yes, you can speak to my laborers.’
“We have been waiting for just that. Clumped together next to some wattle trees are about ten humble small terra-cotta huts. We sense curious eyes peeping out of the huts as we stack neat piles of literature on the bonnet [hood] of our car. One pile of Bibles, another pile of the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, a stack of My Book of Bible Stories, and various brochures complete the display. One of the local boys runs to inform the villagers of our arrival. Soon a crowd of about 30 is assembled around the car to hear the message.
“A prerecorded sermon is played to them in Tswana. How happy these people are to hear in their own language the good news of God’s Kingdom and the Paradise hope! There is much excited chatter when the publications are offered. Before long, we can hardly keep up with the placements. One old man even puts in an offer for the tape recorder. We feel deeply moved as appreciation for the good news is reflected in many small ways​—a shy smile, a touch, a soft ‘thank you.’
“Spontaneously, the children form a ragged line and sing a traditional farewell song. Suddenly, the dusty, rutted roads and the sometimes negative responses pale into insignificance. It has been worth every bit of the effort!”
A Chief Issues a Decree!
One congregation from Soweto had an assignment to preach in a tribal area near the eastern town of Piet Retief. Custom there dictates that a visitor first state his business to the induna (chief) of the area. The brothers complied with that arrangement. What a surprise when the chief welcomed them warmly and even offered them accommodations in his own home! Additionally, using his official stamp, he wrote a note of introduction for the publishers to carry from door to door. It said: “These are the preachers of God’s Kingdom. Take them into your home, and listen to them.”
The response was so overwhelming that the Witnesses arranged to have a public talk given in the yard of the chief’s house that Sunday afternoon. The open-air “hall” was packed to capacity, and the meeting was opened and closed with song and prayer. Similar experiences with favorably disposed ones have been enjoyed in other rural areas.
One such person was Nathaniel, in the little village of Pitsedisulejang in a drought-stricken corner of Bophuthatswana. He was a community developer engaged in a program to teach the local people to grow produce effectively. He dreamed of turning this barren place into a paradise. But when he learned that a global paradise would soon come about, his eyes sparkled. He eagerly wrote down every scripture the publishers showed him. Nathaniel was quickly put in touch with the nearest congregation, some 20 miles [30 km] away.
Joyfully Helping Many Truth Seekers
“Jehovah showed us that poverty does not prevent a spiritually hungry person from learning the truth,” says Monika, a pioneer, or full-time Kingdom proclaimer. She was part of a pioneer group that preached from farm to farm across the open plains of the Orange Free State in the central part of the country. How did the pioneers feel about expending themselves in taking the good news to these people? “Who can put a price on the things we have experienced?” they responded. Indeed, the pioneers were well rewarded spiritually for their efforts.
Even inability to read does not prevent a spiritually hungry person from learning Scriptural truth. The well-illustrated brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! is particularly well received by those who are illiterate or who can read very little. Young and old alike are fascinated with the colorful pictures of Paradise. One full-time worker who assists in printing such material observed: “This brochure helps people to see Paradise as a reality and enhances their natural reverence and awe for the Bible.”
For this same reason, the publication My Book of Bible Stories has been immensely popular. In a remote tribal area of Lebowa, two of our spiritual sisters were surprised to find that an old, partially blind man and his wife had a copy of this book in the Sepedi language. This couple used it as their textbook for teaching the local children. In fact, the book had been so well studied and marked that it was falling apart. How delighted they were to obtain a new copy!
So it is that true Christian publications are filling a great need in helping those hungering for the truth. Interestingly, a large portion of all printed material in many of the local languages of southern Africa is produced by the Watch Tower Society. In 1990 alone, 113,529 books, brochures, and magazines published by the Society were distributed in the rurals of South Africa.
Fruitage of the Labor
Have these fine experiences and literature placements produced lasting fruitage in the rurals of South Africa? They certainly have. Since 1989 four congregations and nine isolated groups have been formed as a direct result of proclaiming the good news in the rurals of South Africa. Temporary special pioneers and regular pioneers spearheaded much of this work.
Do you remember Doris and her Sunday school in that faraway valley in Zululand? Today, she is a dedicated, baptized Witness of Jehovah. Moreover, a thriving group of nine Kingdom publishers continues to make spiritual progress there. Many new ones are attending the meetings held in the home of Doris, and seven persons with whom she conducted Bible studies were baptized at the district convention held in Durban in December 1990.
Such fruitage is a heartwarming stimulus to the Kingdom publishers in South Africa. They take to heart the apostle Paul’s words: “As long as we have time favorable for it, let us work what is good toward all.” (Galatians 6:10) Yes, Jehovah’s servants are determined to reach all honesthearted people, including those who live in the rurals of this “distant part of the earth.”​—Acts 1:8.
[Maps/​Pictures on page 24]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Lebowa
TRANSVAAL
Soweto
Piet Retief
Bophuthatswana
ORANGE FREE STATE

