Society Uses Many Means to Expand Preaching
THE Watch Tower Society was chartered primarily to make extensive use of the printed page, but it was also to make use of “all other lawful means” that the directors would deem expedient.
In addition to using its own publications, the Society arranged to have sermons of Charles Taze Russell published in newspapers. In cooperation with the Society a syndicate of brothers was formed that regularly supplied Brother Russell’s sermons to many newspapers throughout the United States, Canada and Europe. According to The Watch Tower of December 1, 1916, “More than 2,000 newspapers, with a combined circulation of fifteen million readers, at one time published his discourses.”
Other means of reaching the people were used. In 1912 work was begun on what has been called “the first epic motion picture.” This was the “Photo-Drama of Creation.” It appeared 13 years before other sound pictures were produced, and offered a combination of motion and still pictures synchronized with a recorded lecture. It was presented in a series of four two-hour sessions.
The Photo-Drama presented the explanation of Bible truth from the time of creation, the fall into sin, the promises of God to redeem man and His dealings through history until the millennial restitution. It is believed to have been viewed by more than 9,000,000 people throughout North America and Europe, as well as many others in places around the world. It took two years and $300,000 to complete the project, many of the scenes being hand colored. Yet admission was free and no collections were taken.
By 1922 radio stations were beginning to broadcast daily. That year the president of the Watch Tower Society, Joseph F. Rutherford, began to make use of the radio to spread the truth, the first broadcast lecture being “Millions Now Living Will Never Die.” In February of 1924 the Watch Tower Society began operating its own radio station, WBBR, on Staten Island, New York. Its broadcasts were devoted exclusively to Bible, and Bible-related, subjects.
Soon other stations were used to spread Bible truths. By 1933 the Society’s president was likely the best known speaker on radio. Now 408 stations were being used to carry the truth to six continents—including the countries of Argentina, Australia, Canada, China, Cuba, France, South Africa, Estonia, Uruguay, Alaska, Hawaii, Philippines as well as the United States. In that year, 23,783 Bible talks were transmitted.
However, religious opposition increased, and this had great influence on broadcasting stations, making continued effective use of radio broadcasting nearly impossible. Finally, the Society voluntarily withdrew its general use of the radio, though WBBR continued its broadcasting of the truth in the New York City area. Throughout its 35 years of radio broadcasting the Society never once solicited donations.
The 1930’s witnessed other means used to spread the Kingdom message. Portable electrical transcription machines were developed to reproduce radiobroadcast recordings at public and private gatherings. Sound cars were used to send forth the Kingdom truth along the streets and in public places. And, finally, lightweight, portable phonographs were developed to play specially produced 4 1/2 minute recorded Bible lectures, and these were used by the Witnesses in their house-to-house visits. Reports show that in 1938 there were a total of 430,000 discs with lectures in 16 languages in use on 19,600 sound machines, reaching out to 13,070,426 listeners.
However, for the last 40 years the greatest emphasis has been placed on the personal ministry, with each one of Jehovah’s Witnesses being qualified to witness directly to people at their homes and on the streets. A limited use has been made of movie and slide presentations in recent years, but the personal ministry is what has been emphasized.
In order to bring Bible truths to those who are blind or who have very poor eyesight, the Watch Tower Society has set up a Braille department that regularly produces The Watchtower in Braille. There has also been produced a Braille edition of the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures, as well as a number of books dealing with Bible subjects. In addition, a large-print edition of the study articles of The Watchtower is published.
Since 1978 the Watch Tower Society made use of yet another technological advance to spread Bible knowledge—tape recordings and cassettes. The Society operates a recording studio and has set up tape duplication departments in Brooklyn and other countries, and to date these have produced over 18 million cassettes containing recordings of the Bible and books explaining Bible teachings.
[Picture on page 24]
Photo-Drama projection system
[Picture on page 24]
Hand-colored slides, Photo-Drama
[Picture on page 24]
J. F. Rutherford broadcasting from WBBR
[Picture on page 25]
Phonographs used in house-to-house ministry
[Picture on page 25]
Sound cars send out public message
[Picture on page 25]
The Kingdom message in Braille
[Picture on page 25]
Cassette recordings spread Bible knowledge

