Watch Tower Society Arranges Conventions
FOR years the first conventions were held when Bible Students in Pittsburgh invited other Watch Tower readers to have fellowship with them in the spring in connection with observing the Memorial of Christ’s death. Special train fares were arranged, and local Bible Students themselves provided lodging and meals for the visitors. As the number grew, needed rooming accommodations and meals were arranged at very reasonable rates.
These conventions were encouraging periods of spiritual refreshment, intensive Bible instruction being provided for several days. They continued to grow in size until in 1892 a total of about 400 met together from 20 different states and a province of Canada. In 1893 it was decided to hold a national convention on August 20-24, in Chicago, Illinois, at the same time that the Columbian Exposition, or world’s fair, was scheduled. Reduced rail fares were available then.
The Chicago program pattern of morning and afternoon meetings, with discourses and answering of Bible questions, is still basically being followed. A total of 360 attended and 70 were baptized. Baptism by total immersion had become a regular feature at conventions.
After the turn of the century the Society began to arrange for several conventions around the country to serve the needs of the growing number of Bible Students. These were served by Russell, who traveled from city to city in a special railroad car. Later it was arranged for a larger number of brothers to accompany Brother Russell to these conventions on a special train and these participated in convention publicity. A great public witness was given by these conventions through the years, and all the brothers were built up and greatly strengthened.
Charles Taze Russell died on October 31, 1916, and was succeeded as president of the Watch Tower Society by Joseph Franklin Rutherford of Missouri. During the following years the Bible Students were severely tested by persecution, including the wrongful imprisonment of eight responsible brothers associated with the Society.
By 1919 these brothers had been released and a convention was scheduled for Cedar Point, Ohio, September 1-7, 1919. Over 6,000 brothers assembled, and the convention proved to be a great occasion for strengthening and encouragement. Those in attendance were reminded of their obligation to announce the incoming glorious Kingdom of Messiah.
Another convention was held at Cedar Point, Ohio, September 5-13, 1922. At this convention J. F. Rutherford, president of the Society, boldly exposed the recently established League of Nations as a human scheme doomed to failure and urged all to put their trust in God’s Kingdom in the hands of the invisible reigning King from heaven, Christ Jesus. He urged all to “advertise, advertise, advertise, the King and his kingdom.”
The series of annual conventions held from 1922 through 1928 gave great impetus to the preaching work, and resulted in seven striking resolutions expressing God’s judgments against elements of Christendom and this world. Millions of copies of these were distributed throughout Christendom.
At Columbus, Ohio, in 1931, the long-remembered feature of the convention was the enthusiastic adopting of the new name “Jehovah’s Witnesses.” At Washington, D.C., in 1935, the witnesses cried for joy to learn that the “great crowd” mentioned at Revelation chapter 7 was a class to be gathered out from the old world now, to survive the great tribulation and to gain everlasting life on earth.
In 1942, 51 convention cities were tied in with the key city of Cleveland, Ohio, at a time when it might seem that World War II would climax in Armageddon. However the thrilling talk, “Peace—Can It Last?” given by the Watch Tower Society’s third president, Nathan H. Knorr, pointed forward to a postwar period of comparative peace and increased activity for Jehovah’s Witnesses.
The international convention at Cleveland, Ohio, in 1946, emphasized the evidence of expansion of Bible education on all continents. At this time the Consolation magazine, which had previously succeeded The Golden Age, was replaced by Awake! to awaken people further to the significance of the times in which we are living.
In 1950, 1953 and 1958 the Society arranged for large international conventions, all held at New York’s Yankee Stadium. The Polo Grounds stadium was also included in 1958. The number in attendance grew from 123,707 in 1950 to 253,922 in 1958, the largest convention in one location ever to be arranged by the Society. The number of countries represented in attendance was 67 in 1950, but 123 in 1958.
The purpose of all these conventions has been to strengthen Jehovah’s people, train them in organization and expand the public preaching. The pattern of the program and organization of these conventions was followed in other countries.
Arranging of international series of conventions, where delegates from many countries travel from one convention to another, has also been featured. Beginning in 1951, these international convention series have been held every few years and have served greatly to strengthen the understanding and the unity of God’s people all around the earth.
All these conventions have been arranged under the supervision of the Pennsylvania Watch Tower Society, and the work of operating these conventions is done by voluntary, non-salaried workers and supported by voluntary contributions.
[Picture on page 16]
Chicago, Illinois, 1893
[Picture on page 16]
Convention trains, 1913
[Picture on page 16]
Cedar Point, Ohio, 1922
[Picture on page 16]
Columbus, Ohio, 1931
[Picture on page 16]
Washington, D.C., 1935
[Picture on page 17]
St. Louis, Missouri, 1941
[Picture on page 17]
Cleveland, Ohio, 1946
[Picture on page 17]
New York, New York, 1953
[Picture on page 17]
Nuremberg, Germany, 1955
[Pictures on page 17]
New York, New York, 1958
Polo Grounds
Yankee Stadium
[Picture on page 18]
“Kingdom Increase” District Convention, San Diego, California, 1984

