Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
The Bethel family was abuzz on Monday morning after returning from some of the first eastern conventions at Jersey City, Boston, Pittsburgh and other cities. What fine talk there was about spiritual food provided and the excellent dramas that were put on. How very upbuilding the “Men of Goodwill” District Assembly proved to be!
Of course, everyone was interested in how many were at the first group of conventions. For the eleven cities we had reports on, the attendance came to be 180,928 for the public meetings. But think of those baptized! 3,512! There is no slowing down on persons taking their stand, is there?
What a surprise to get the deluxe New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. They moved fast, even at $3.00 per copy. We learned that there were 120,000 deluxe Bibles sent to the various conventions in the United States and now, beginning August 1, congregations will be able to order their requirements for those brothers who were not able to get a copy at the convention if they want one. As someone here said: “We hope congregation servants will only order deluxe Bibles for those who really want one, or who want to give it as a gift to someone. We do not have enough to store them on shelves.” Anyway, we would like to distribute these deluxe Bibles as far as we can around the world among the English-speaking brothers who need a deluxe Bible. This Bible release, along with the public meeting booklet, was very much appreciated.
The feeling at Bethel is that everyone attending the Convention went away happy, delighted and built up spiritually. What a marvelous climax to the 1970 service year! If you have not been able to get to an assembly as yet, do everything you can to do so. It is certainly worth it.
Everyone feels the urgency of the times, and the need for the preaching of the Kingdom good news with all diligence. We can tell that by what all of you did in June. Almost unbelievable! But a new peak in publishers was enjoyed, namely 383,773. That is an increase of 3,223 over last April, and not only that, you place 738,587 bound books. It is simply wonderful!
Now we are beginning our final month of this 1970 service year, and all of us are confident that Jehovah will make it the grandest year ever of praise to him by His men of goodwill. May Jehovah’s blessing go with you, as we together show our deep appreciation for Jehovah’s goodness to us.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

