Builders of Spirituality
1 A key role in the steady spiritual growth of each one associated with a congregation of Jehovah’s people is played by the congregation book study servant. When he is alert to his privileges he makes a fine contribution to both the spiritual and numerical growth of the congregation.
2 There are many things a book study servant does to build up his brothers. For example, he knows that, just as it is important for him to emphasize the urgency of our times when conducting a home Bible study with interested persons, it is also beneficial to keep this before his brothers during the congregation book study. (2 Pet. 1:12; 3:1, 14) He recognizes that the pressures of this system of things progressively make greater demands on our time and energy. Therefore, he is interested in helping each one in his group to maintain a balanced view toward spiritual pursuits. Thus they will be aided to continue growing in love for Jehovah and in appreciation for his spiritual provisions. The book study servant is to take a keen interest in the spiritual needs of each publisher and interested person associated with his group. When conducting the book study he is not merely to try to cover a certain amount of material. It should be his aim to see that each one benefits spiritually from the study, growing in depth of appreciation for Jehovah and drawing closer to him. He wants all to benefit from the book study in some way each week. Would you say his responsibility is light? By no means!
3 But there is more to be done, and he willingly gives of himself. If some do not understand the material at the study, it is his responsibility to determine the reason and apply the remedy. Perhaps they just do not know how to study. If that is so, then he may call on the individual or family group personally and consider with them a few paragraphs in the material for the coming book study. He may teach them how to prepare an answer for some of the paragraphs so they will be able to comment during the study. What a blessing he can be to the group in this way, helping them to ‘make public declaration of their hope,’ and how upbuilding this is, not only to the one commenting, but to all in attendance! (Heb. 10:23-25) Indeed, he tenderly cares for those Jehovah has entrusted to him and they in turn love him for it. How easy it is to follow Paul’s counsel at Philippians 2:29 to “keep holding men of that sort dear”!
4 The book study servant knows that “with the heart one exercises faith for righteousness, but with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.” (Rom. 10:10) While most of those in his group no doubt have the right heart appreciation, some probably need help in preparing Scriptural presentations for the house-to-house ministry. If he cannot give personal attention to each one, he knows there are reliable brothers and sisters in his group who are willing to offer assistance, so he may call upon them for help. Thus the entire group works together so all can serve Jehovah effectively, adding to their joy and resulting in many blessings. Too, he lovingly makes appointments to work with those needing encouragement to take part in field activity. Such appointments may be made before or after the book study or by speaking with the individuals at one of the other meetings during the week.
5 What a fine privilege the book study servant enjoys! What opportunities there are to build up his brothers and other interested persons! True, he has much responsibility, but the joy and satisfaction he receives as he faithfully discharges this responsibility and observes the steady spiritual growth of those in his group make it all worth while. How much all of us appreciate these undershepherds and their hard work!
[Blurb on page 1]
Deep appreciation for Jehovah’s sacred things.

