Declaring the Good News in All Our Territory
1 “I started a study with a man, and there he was at the meeting on Sunday. What a thrill!” Would you like to get that kind of joy from your ministry? Many brothers are reporting excellent results from their studies in the Truth book, with people responding quickly to invitations to come to meetings and into the service. It is just such ones that we want to find and help to appreciate the truth. But how can we do it? One way is by covering our territory thoroughly.
2 When Jesus and his disciples began the Christian ministry, there was plenty of territory to cover, and the account says, “They went through the territory from village to village, declaring the good news.” (Luke 9:6) Now, of course, in many places the territory is getting well covered. The Society’s territory desk reports that this year will be the best for covering isolated territories throughout the country. About 500 congregations, along with approximately 100 pioneers who are serving temporarily as special pioneers, are sharing in working isolated areas to accomplish this work.
3 In some cities with many publishers in a small area, there seems to be a shortage of territory, or the brothers say that the same territories are worked often. What can be done in such a case? Can we stretch our territory? In some ways we can. First of all, let us use and follow up on all not-at-home records. A territory is not completely worked unless this is done. Do you use these not-at-home records and personally follow up on them? It is always good to keep two records, one for the interest found and the other for recording not-at-homes. One brother who followed up three “not-at-homes” recently reported placing two books and starting a study.
4 If you have large apartments where you are not permitted to work, have you tried writing to the occupants of the apartments, perhaps sending a tract along with an invitation? Some brothers have left magazines with the doorman to be distributed to the occupants or to be left where the ones living in the building can pick up copies, along with an invitation for them to do so. Some brothers report that street work outside such large restricted apartments has also provided personal contacts for later calls.
5 Are you thoroughly working the business territory as well as the residential? Do you try working your territories at different times to reach different members of the family? Evenings provide excellent opportunities to find working people and students at home. Sometimes there is a language barrier. If so, have you tried using the “Preach the Word” booklet? When you meet blind persons, do you contact the Society for Braille literature or call back to read to them to ascertain their interest?
6 We will enjoy using the Truth book again during August. It presents the good news in such an appealing way. Many people we meet may already have this book, so our next objective should be to start a study with them.
7 Do not feel that you call too often. Obviously the better we know the people the more we can talk to them and the more we can accomplish our objective of declaring the good news. We need to get on a friendly basis with the people to be effective in our ministry. Show concern for them and get to know them by name. Soon they will not be fearful when they see you coming, and you may find that more doors are open for you. In this way more studies will be started, and you too may enjoy the thrill of seeing some of these newly interested ones come to meetings for the first time.
[Blurb on page 4]
Thoroughly search for sheeplike ones.

