Presenting the Good News​—Do You Return?
1 Have you often told householders with whom you place literature, “I look forward to returning to talk to you again and seeing how you enjoyed the publication”? While many of these people may not have any particular interest, others are sincerely looking forward to our return, as our own experiences and those from the Yearbook have shown. We do not want to fail them.
2 When we do return, if we simply ask, “How did you like it?” we are throwing the burden on them. How much better it is to be prepared with something to stimulate their interest. It has been suggested that when we place a copy of the Truth book we ought to give them at least one opportunity to accept a home Bible study. But some people may decide that they can read it for themselves and do not want to be obligated for something as difficult as a “study” may seem to be. However, suggesting a brief demonstration of our arrangement to learn about the Bible at home may help in getting a study started.
3 At times other methods work better. After all, we cannot start a baby out on a full-course meal, so we may have to do a little coaxing, as it were, to get some who are spiritual babes started on a diet for their spiritual strength. Just as many have found that a thought-provoking question on a subject will arouse interest in taking the magazines, so a variety of subjects may apply to different ones in getting a study started. Instead of asking, “Would you like to have a Bible study?” you might say: “People have so many different ideas on religious subjects, it is good to see just what the Bible has to say. Many have asked why God has permitted wickedness so long; others wonder why we grow old and die, or how to pray and be heard by God. Which Bible subject interests you?” In other words, we do not ask if they would like to study, but rather ask them which question interests there. Often such a positive choice helps, and we will then have the opportunity to refer them to the chapter in the Truth book dealing with the subject and to show them how the question can be answered.
4 If time does not permit studying the chapter with them, we may still answer the question briefly, perhaps using the Sermon Outlines booklet. Then, before leaving, try selecting another topic they would like to discuss on another occasion. The important thing is to get and hold the interest of the people, and careful thought and preparation will help us to do that. As in all teaching, the key is keeping it simple, emphasizing the main points. Then when we get done we can ask the person the question under discussion and have him tell us, for example, why God has permitted wickedness.
5 Emphasizing how much can be learned in a few minutes, and how quickly the discussion has brought out the information will be encouraging to them to continue the discussion or study on another occasion, perhaps with more in the family sharing. Why not try it? If we make the effort, then we can be assured that Jehovah will make the interest grow in right-hearted ones.

