Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Bible Truth Changes Lives
SAUL OF TARSUS was very sincere in his religion when he persecuted true Christians even “to the death.” (Acts 22:4; 26:10, 11) But he did this in ignorance. (1 Timothy 1:13) Many sincere but religiously blinded persons today are just like Saul and oppose true Christianity. But even as Saul became a Christian after learning the truth, many today are turning away from false religion and embracing the true faith.
□ For example, a deacon of the Tahitian Protestant Church in New Caledonia and his wife, who was a deaconess, disowned their daughter and her husband who became Jehovah’s Witnesses. When the youngest children became interested in the Bible as taught by Jehovah’s Witnesses, the parents gave this ultimatum: “Leave the house or leave the Witnesses.” They left the house.
The parents then wondered if their attitude was proper. So the father decided to investigate the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The discussion with his Witness son-in-law lasted for hours. The result? The father recognized the real truth of the Bible and said that he had waited 60 years for it. He and his wife resigned from the church, began attending meetings of the Witnesses regularly with the rest of their family, and along with them they are now spreading the teachings of the Bible from house to house.
If this man had not humbled himself and taken the time to investigate, he would not have found the truth. Now the whole family is happily serving Jehovah. Bible truth changed their lives.
□ Another experience from New Caledonia also emphasizes the fact that Bible truth changes lives. An ethnic group known as the Wallisian people are strong Catholics. Usually they shun any discussion with Jehovah’s Witnesses. But one lad talked with the Witnesses and became interested in what he learned from the Bible. His sister was studying with Catholic monks, but one day she sat in on a Bible discussion between her brother and Jehovah’s Witnesses. What was the result? “She got answers to questions she had been asking the priests and the monks for years. It took a year to study the Trinity doctrine, but the result was not satisfactory. This time, with the Witnesses, she had the clear answer within a few hours,” says the report. She soon quit the Catholic Church, and she and her brother witnessed to their family. Their mother resigned from the “Légion de Marie” and burned her statues and medals, saying: “You have been fooling me for years!” The brother and sister are now baptized Witnesses, and a total of ten people in the family are attending the meetings. The mother, three sons and one daughter are regular Kingdom publishers.
What a joy to see sincere, honest-hearted ones turn from the darkness of false religion to the light of truth that Jehovah God provides through the Scriptures! Bible truth truly has power and changes lives.​—Hebrews 4:12.

