





COVER SUBJECT
Is There a God? What Difference Does It Make?




The question of whether God exists seems to be either unanswerable or irrelevant to many. Hervé, who grew up in France, says: “Although I don’t define myself as atheist or agnostic, I am not a believer. For me, the best way to live is to use common sense. That doesn’t require belief in a deity.”
Others may feel as did John, in the United States. He said: “I was raised by parents who did not believe in God. As a young man, I had no position on whether God exists. Still, at times I would wonder about it.”
Have you ever wondered if there is a God and, if there is, whether there is a larger purpose to life? Perhaps you have encountered facts that are difficult to explain without the existence of a Creator, such as scientific data on the finely tuned balance in nature that makes life on our planet possible and evidence that life does not come from lifeless matter.—See the box “Examine the Evidence.”
Consider the significance of the facts mentioned above. They are like signposts pointing to a treasure. If you find convincing evidence that God exists, along with trustworthy information about him, you will have much to gain. Here are four examples.



1. THE MEANING OF LIFE






If there is a larger meaning to life, we want to know what it is and to understand our place in it. After all, if God exists and we are unaware of it, then we are living without knowing the most fundamental truth in the universe.
The Bible says that God is the Source of all life. (Revelation 4:11) How can knowing this give our lives meaning? Consider what the Bible teaches on the matter.
Among all of earth’s creatures, humans are unique. According to the Bible, we were created by God to be like him, to reflect his personality. (Genesis 1:27) Furthermore, the Bible teaches that humans can become God’s friends. (James 2:23) Nothing can give our life more meaning than to have such a relationship with our Creator.
What does it mean to be God’s friend? Friends of God can express themselves directly to him. And he promises that he will listen to them and act in their behalf. (Psalm 91:15) As friends of God, we can come to know his thoughts on many matters. This can give us reliable insight into the deepest questions about our lives.
If God exists and we are unaware of it, then we are living without knowing the most fundamental truth in the universe




2. PEACE OF MIND






For example, some find it difficult to believe in God because of the suffering they see worldwide. They ask, ‘Why would an all-powerful Creator permit suffering and evil?’
The Bible’s comforting answer is that God never intended for humans to suffer. At the time of man’s creation, human life was free from suffering. Even death was not part of God’s original purpose for mankind. (Genesis 2:7-9, 15-17) Is this hard to believe? A fantasy? No. If there is an all-powerful Creator and if love is indeed his foremost quality, then this is exactly the kind of life that we would expect him to purpose for humans to have.
What brought about mankind’s current situation? The Bible explains that God created humans with the ability to exercise free will. We are not robots, forced to obey God. The first human couple, from whom all others have descended, chose to reject God’s guidance. Instead, they selfishly pursued their own will. (Genesis 3:1-6, 22-24) We now experience the painful results.
We can gain great peace of mind from knowing that human suffering is not part of God’s purpose. But, naturally, we also want relief. We need hope for the future.



3. HOPE






Immediately after mankind rebelled, God promised that he would in time fulfill his original purpose for the earth. Because he is almighty, nothing can prevent him from doing so. (Isaiah 55:11) Soon, God will undo all the consequences of the rebellion against him, and the earth and mankind will be brought in line with his original purpose.
What can this mean for you? Consider just two of the many promises God has made for our future, as found in the Bible.
            PEACE EARTH WIDE AND WICKEDNESS REMOVED. “Just a little while longer, and the wicked will be no more; you will look at where they were, and they will not be there. But the meek will possess the earth, and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”—Psalm 37:10, 11.

             SICKNESS AND DEATH ELIMINATED. “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’” (Isaiah 33:24) “He will swallow up death forever, and the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces.”—Isaiah 25:8.


Why can we trust the promises of God found in the Bible? Because numerous prophecies recorded there have already been verifiably fulfilled. Yet, the hope of future relief from suffering does not remove the difficulties of life now. What additional help does God provide?



4. HELP WITH PROBLEMS AND DECISIONS






God provides guidance to help us cope with problems and make good decisions. Many decisions are small, but others have lifelong consequences. No human can offer us wisdom as effective as the wisdom that our Creator can provide. He has a timeless perspective and is the very Source of human life. So he knows what is best for us.
The Bible contains the thoughts of Jehovah God, as he inspired various human writers to record them. In the Bible, we find this statement: “I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself, the One guiding you in the way you should walk.”—Isaiah 48:17, 18.
God has unlimited power, and he is willing to use his power in our behalf. The Bible describes God as a loving father who wants to help us. It says: “The Father in heaven [will] give holy spirit to those asking him!” (Luke 11:13) This power from God can guide and strengthen us.
How can you obtain such help from God? The Bible answers: “Whoever approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.” (Hebrews 11:6) To become convinced that God exists, you need to examine the evidence for yourself.



WILL YOU INVESTIGATE?

It takes time to seek out the truth about God, but clearly you can benefit from doing so. Consider the experience of Xiujin Xiao, who was born in China and now lives in the United States. He says: “Although I believed the theory of evolution, I was curious about the Bible. So I began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. In my last year of college, I got so busy that I had little time for what I was learning from the Bible. But I was less happy. When I again made my Bible study a priority, I found inner joy.”
Would you like to learn more about our Creator, Jehovah God? Why not take time to investigate for yourself?



What Does the Bible Say About God?
The Bible’s message about God is simple yet thought-provoking—and to some it is surprising.
  Our Creator is not an impersonal force. God has a personality and a name, Jehovah.a—Isaiah 42:8.

  Jehovah God’s existence has no beginning and will have no end.—Psalm 93:2; Isaiah 40:28.

  God is not a stern judge, as he is portrayed by some religions. Rather, his foremost quality is love.—1 John 4:8.

  God is interested in humans and has communicated his purpose for our lives.—Ecclesiastes 12:13; Micah 6:8.


Does the Bible reveal everything about God? Of course not. The Bible itself says that we know “just the fringes of his ways.”—Job 26:14.
Many Bibles use the title “LORD” to represent the Hebrew transliteration YHWH, which is commonly translated in English as “Jehovah” or “Yahweh.”



Examine the Evidence
The following publications present evidence that an intelligent Creator exists. 





The Origin of Life—Five Questions Worth Asking
Available in 47 languages
From page 12: “The theory of evolution tries to account for the origin of life on earth without the necessity of divine intervention. However, the more that scientists discover about life, the less likely it appears that it could arise by chance.”






Was Life Created?
Available in 80 languages
From page 24: “Many people claim that science disproves the Bible’s account of creation. However, the contradiction is, not between science and the Bible, but between science and the opinions of Christian Fundamentalists.”




