Part 8
God’s Purpose Moves Toward Fulfillment
 1, 2. How has God been making provision to do away with suffering?
THE rulership of rebellious men and demons has been dragging the human family downward for many centuries. Yet, God has not ignored our sufferings. Rather, during all the centuries, he has been making provision to release humans from the grip of wickedness and suffering.
2 At the time of the rebellion in Eden, God began to reveal his purpose to form a government that would make this earth a paradise home for people. (Genesis 3:15) Later, as God’s chief spokesman, Jesus made this coming government of God the theme of his teaching. He said it would be mankind’s only hope.—Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:9, 10; 12:21.
 3. What did Jesus call the incoming government for earth, and why?
3 Jesus called that incoming government of God “the kingdom of the heavens,” since it was to rule from heaven. (Matthew 4:17) He also called it “the kingdom of God,” since God would be its Author. (Luke 17:20) Over the centuries God inspired his penmen to write down prophecies about those who would make up that government and what it would accomplish.
Earth’s New King
 4, 5. How did God show that Jesus was his approved King?
4 It was Jesus, nearly two thousand years ago, who fulfilled the many prophecies about the one who would be King of God’s Kingdom. He proved to be God’s choice for Ruler of that heavenly government over mankind. And after his death, God resurrected Jesus to life in heaven as a powerful, immortal spirit creature. There were many witnesses to his resurrection.—Acts 4:10; 9:1-9; Romans 1:1-4; 1 Corinthians 15:3-8.
5 Jesus then “sat down at the right hand of God.” (Hebrews 10:12) There he awaited the time when God would empower him to take action as King of God’s heavenly Kingdom. This fulfilled the prophecy at Psalm 110:1, where God tells him: “Sit at my right hand until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”
 6. How did Jesus show that he qualified to be King of God’s Kingdom?
6 While on earth, Jesus showed that he qualified for such a position. Despite persecution, he chose to maintain his integrity to God. By doing so, he showed that Satan had lied when he claimed that no human would be faithful to God under test. Jesus, a perfect man, the ‘second Adam,’ showed that God was not mistaken in creating perfect humans.—1 Corinthians 15:22, 45; Matthew 4:1-11.
 7, 8. What good things did Jesus do while on earth, and what did he demonstrate?
7 What ruler ever accomplished as much good as Jesus did in the few years of his ministry? Empowered by God’s holy spirit, Jesus healed the sick, the crippled, the blind, the deaf, the speechless. He even raised the dead! He demonstrated on a small scale what he would do for mankind on a global scale when he came into Kingdom power.—Matthew 15:30, 31; Luke 7:11-16.
8 Jesus did so much good while on earth that his disciple John said: “There are, in fact, many other things also which Jesus did, which, if ever they were written in full detail, I suppose, the world itself could not contain the scrolls written.”—John 21:25.a
 9. Why did honesthearted persons flock to Jesus?
9 Jesus was kind and compassionate, having very great love for people. He helped the poor and the downtrodden, but he did not discriminate against those of wealth or position. Honesthearted people responded to the loving invitation of Jesus when he said: “Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will find refreshment for your souls. For my yoke is kindly and my load is light.” (Matthew 11:28-30) God-fearing persons flocked to him and looked forward to his rulership.—John 12:19.
Associate Rulers
10, 11. Who will share with Jesus in ruling over the earth?
10 Just as human governments have associate administrators, so does God’s heavenly Kingdom. Others besides Jesus are to share in ruling over the earth, for Jesus promised his close associates that they would rule with him as kings over mankind.—John 14:2, 3; Revelation 5:10; 20:6.
11 Hence, together with Jesus, a limited number of humans are also resurrected to heavenly life. They make up the Kingdom of God that will bring eternal blessings to mankind. (2 Corinthians 4:14; Revelation 14:1-3) So down through the ages, Jehovah has laid the groundwork for a rulership that will bring everlasting blessings to the human family.
Independent Rule to End
12, 13. What is God’s Kingdom now poised to do?
12 In this century God has taken a direct hand in earth’s affairs. As Part 9 of this brochure will discuss, Bible prophecy shows that God’s Kingdom under Christ was set up in 1914 and is now poised to crush Satan’s entire system. That Kingdom is ready to “go subduing in the midst of [Christ’s] enemies.”—Psalm 110:2.
13 In this regard the prophecy at Daniel 2:44 says: “In the days of those kings [now existing] the God of heaven will set up a kingdom [in heaven] which shall never be destroyed, nor shall its sovereignty be left to another people [human rule never again to be permitted]. It [God’s Kingdom] shall break in pieces all these kingdoms and bring them to an end, and it shall stand for ever.”—Revised Standard Version.
14. What are some benefits that will come as a result of the end of human rule?
14 With all rulership independent of God taken out of the way, God’s Kingdom rule over the earth will be complete. And because the Kingdom rules from heaven, it can never be corrupted by humans. Governing power will be where it was in the first place, in heaven, with God. And since God’s rule will control all the earth, no longer will anybody be misled by false religions or unsatisfactory human philosophies and political theories. None of those things will be allowed to exist.—Matthew 7:15-23; Revelation, chapters 17 through 19.
[Footnotes]
For a full coverage of the life of Jesus, see the book The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived, published in 1991 by the Watchtower Society.
[Picture on page 18]
While on earth Jesus healed the sick and raised the dead to show what he would do in the new world
[Picture on page 19]
God’s heavenly Kingdom will crush out of existence all forms of rule independent of him

