Part 10
The Marvelous New World of God’s Making
 1, 2. What will happen after the cleansing war of Armageddon?
AFTER God’s cleansing war of Armageddon, what then? Then a glorious new era will begin. The Armageddon survivors, having already proved their loyalty to God’s rule, will be ushered into the new world. What a thrilling new period of history that will be as marvelous benefits flow from God to the human family!
2 Under the direction of God’s Kingdom, the survivors will begin to develop a paradise. Their energies will be devoted to unselfish pursuits that will benefit all then living. The earth will begin to be transformed into a beautiful, peaceful, satisfying home for mankind.
Righteousness Replaces Wickedness
 3. What immediate relief will be felt just after Armageddon?
3 All of this will be made possible by the destruction of Satan’s world. No more will there be divisive false religions, social systems, or governments. No more will there be satanic propaganda to deceive people; all the agencies producing it will go down with Satan’s system. Just think: the entire poisonous atmosphere of Satan’s world cleared away! What a relief that will be!
 4. Describe the change in teaching that will take place.
4 Then the destructive ideas of human rule will be replaced by the upbuilding teaching that comes from God. “All your sons will be persons taught by Jehovah.” (Isaiah 54:13) With this wholesome instruction year after year, “the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.” (Isaiah 11:9) People will no more learn what is bad, but “righteousness is what the inhabitants of the productive land will certainly learn.” (Isaiah 26:9) Upbuilding thoughts and actions will be the order of the day.—Acts 17:31; Philippians 4:8.
 5. What will happen to all wickedness and wicked people?
5 Thus, there will be no more murder, violence, rape, robbery, or any other crime. No one will have to suffer because of the wicked deeds of others. Proverbs 10:30 says: “As for the righteous one, to time indefinite he will not be caused to stagger; but as for the wicked ones, they will not keep residing on the earth.”
Perfect Health Restored
 6, 7. (a) What hard reality will Kingdom rule bring to an end? (b) How did Jesus demonstrate this while on earth?
6 In the new world, there will be a rolling back of all the evil effects of the original rebellion. For example, Kingdom rule will eliminate sickness and old age. Today, even if you enjoy a measure of good health, the hard reality is that as you grow old, your eyes dim, your teeth decay, your hearing dulls, your skin wrinkles, your internal organs break down, until finally you die.
7 However, those distressing effects that we inherited from our first parents will soon be a thing of the past. Do you remember what Jesus demonstrated regarding health while he was on earth? The Bible relates: “Great crowds approached him, having along with them people that were lame, maimed, blind, dumb, and many otherwise, and they fairly threw them at his feet, and he cured them; so that the crowd felt amazement as they saw the dumb speaking and the lame walking and the blind seeing.”—Matthew 15:30, 31.
 8, 9. Describe the happiness that will come in the new world when perfect health is restored.
8 What great happiness will come in the new world as all our ills are eliminated! The suffering that results from poor health will never again torment us. “No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’” “At that time the eyes of the blind ones will be opened, and the very ears of the deaf ones will be unstopped. At that time the lame one will climb up just as a stag does, and the tongue of the speechless one will cry out in gladness.”—Isaiah 33:24; 35:5, 6.
9 Will it not be thrilling to wake up each morning and realize that you now enjoy vibrant health? Will it not be gratifying for elderly persons to know that they have been restored to the full vigor of youth and will achieve the perfection that Adam and Eve originally enjoyed? The Bible’s promise is: “Let his flesh become fresher than in youth; let him return to the days of his youthful vigor.” (Job 33:25) What a delight it will be to throw away those eyeglasses, hearing aids, crutches, wheelchairs, and medicines! Hospitals, doctors, and dentists will never again be needed.
10. What will happen to death?
10 Persons who enjoy such vibrant health will not want to die. And they will not have to, for mankind will no longer be in the grip of inherited imperfection and death. Christ “must rule as king until God has put all enemies under his feet. As the last enemy, death is to be brought to nothing.” “The gift God gives is everlasting life.”—1 Corinthians 15:25, 26; Romans 6:23; see also Isaiah 25:8.
11. How does Revelation summarize the benefits of the new world?
11 Summing up the benefits that will flow from the caring God to the human family in Paradise, the last book of the Bible says: “And [God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”—Revelation 21:3, 4.
The Dead Return
12. How did Jesus demonstrate his God-given power of resurrection?
12 Jesus did more than cure the sick and heal the lame. He also brought back persons from the grave. He thus demonstrated the wonderful power of resurrection that God had given to him. Do you recall the occasion when Jesus came to the house of a man whose daughter had died? Jesus said to the dead girl: “Maiden, I say to you, Get up!” With what result? “Immediately the maiden rose and began walking.” On seeing that, the people there “were beside themselves with great ecstasy.” They could hardly contain their happiness!—Mark 5:41, 42; see also Luke 7:11-16; John 11:1-45.
13. What types of people are going to be resurrected?
13 In the new world, “there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.” (Acts 24:15) At that time Jesus will use his God-given power to raise the dead because, as he said, “I am the resurrection and the life. He that exercises faith in me, even though he dies, will come to life.” (John 11:25) He also said: “All those in the memorial tombs [in God’s memory] will hear his [Jesus’] voice and come out.”—John 5:28, 29.
14. Because death will be no more, what things will be done away with?
14 Great will be the joy earth wide when group after group of dead persons come back to life to join their loved ones! No longer will there be obituary columns to bring sadness to the survivors. Instead, there may well be just the opposite: announcements of newly resurrected ones to bring joy to those who loved them. So no more funerals, funeral pyres, crematoriums, or cemeteries!
A Truly Peaceful World
15. How will Micah’s prophecy be realized in the fullest sense?
15 True peace in all areas of life will be realized. Wars, promoters of wars, and the manufacturing of weapons will be things of the past. Why? Because divisive national, tribal, and racial interests will disappear. Then, in the fullest sense, “they will not lift up sword, nation against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”—Micah 4:3.
16. How will God see to it that wars become impossible?
16 This may seem astonishing in view of man’s bloodthirsty history of constant war. But that has come about because mankind has been under human and demon rule. In the new world, under Kingdom rule, this is what will happen: “Come, you people, behold the activities of Jehovah . . . He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth. The bow he breaks apart and does cut the spear in pieces; the [war] wagons he burns in the fire.”—Psalm 46:8, 9.
17, 18. In the new world, what relationship will exist between man and the animals?
17 Man and beast will also be at peace, as they were in Eden. (Genesis 1:28; 2:19) God says: “For them I shall certainly conclude a covenant in that day in connection with the wild beast of the field and with the flying creature of the heavens and the creeping thing of the ground, and . . . I will make them lie down in security.”—Hosea 2:18.
18 How extensive will that peace be? “The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, and the calf and the maned young lion and the well-fed animal all together; and a mere little boy will be leader over them.” Never again will the animals be a threat to man or to themselves. Even “the lion will eat straw just like the bull”!—Isaiah 11:6-9; 65:25.
Earth Transformed Into a Paradise
19. The earth will be transformed into what?
19 The entire earth will be transformed into a paradise home for mankind. That is why Jesus could promise a man who believed in him: “You will be with me in Paradise.” The Bible says: “The wilderness and the waterless region will exult, and the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron. . . . For in the wilderness waters will have burst out, and torrents in the desert plain.”—Luke 23:43; Isaiah 35:1, 6.
20. Why will hunger never again afflict mankind?
20 Under God’s Kingdom, hunger will never again afflict millions. “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” “The tree of the field must give its fruitage, and the land itself will give its yield, and they will actually prove to be on their soil in security.”—Psalm 72:16; Ezekiel 34:27.
21. What will happen to homelessness, slums, and bad neighborhoods?
21 No more will there be poverty, homeless people, slums, or neighborhoods overrun with crime. “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage. They will not build and someone else have occupancy; they will not plant and someone else do the eating.” “They will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble.”—Isaiah 65:21, 22; Micah 4:4.
22. How does the Bible describe the blessings of God’s rule?
22 Humans will be blessed with all these things, and more, in Paradise. Psalm 145:16 says: “You [God] are opening your hand and satisfying the desire of every living thing.” No wonder Bible prophecy declares: “The meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace. . . . The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”—Psalm 37:11, 29.
Undoing the Past
23. How will God’s Kingdom undo all the suffering that we have experienced?
23 God’s Kingdom rule will undo all the damage done to the human family for the past six thousand years. The joys at that time will far outweigh any suffering that people have experienced. Life will not be disturbed by any bad memories of previous suffering. The upbuilding thoughts and activities that will be the everyday life of people will gradually erase the painful memories.
24, 25. (a) What did Isaiah foretell would happen? (b) Why can we be sure that memories of past suffering will fade?
24 The caring God declares: “I am creating new heavens [a new heavenly government over mankind] and a new earth [a righteous human society]; and the former things will not be called to mind, neither will they come up into the heart. But exult, you people, and be joyful forever in what I am creating.” “The whole earth has come to rest, has become free of disturbance. People have become cheerful with joyful cries.”—Isaiah 14:7; 65:17, 18.
25 So by means of his Kingdom, God will completely reverse the bad situation that has lasted so long. Throughout eternity he will show his great care for us by showering down blessings that will far more than make up for any hurt that we received in our past. The previous troubles we have experienced will fade to a dim memory then, if we care to remember them at all.
26. Why will God compensate us for any past suffering?
26 That is how God will compensate us for the suffering we may have endured in this world. He knows that it was not our fault that we were born imperfect, for we inherited imperfection from our first parents. It was not our fault that we were born into a satanic world, for if Adam and Eve had been faithful, we would have been born into a paradise instead. So with great compassion God will more than make up for the bad past that was inflicted upon us.
27. What prophecies will see their marvelous fulfillment in the new world?
27 In the new world, mankind will experience the freedom foretold at Romans 8:21, 22: “The creation itself also will be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God. For we know that all creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain together until now.” People then will see the complete fulfillment of the prayer: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matthew 6:10) The marvelous conditions on the Paradise earth will reflect the conditions in heaven.
[Pictures on page 23]
In the new world, the elderly will return to the vigor of youth
[Picture on page 24]
All sicknesses and disabilities will be eliminated in the new world
[Picture on page 25]
In the new world, the dead will be resurrected to life
[Picture on page 26]
‘They will not learn war anymore’
[Pictures on page 27]
Humans and animals will be at total peace in Paradise
[Picture on page 27]
‘God will open his hand and satisfy the desire of every living thing’
[Picture on page 28]
God’s Kingdom will more than make up for all the suffering we have endured

