Part 11
The New World’s Foundation Now Being Formed
 1, 2. In fulfillment of Bible prophecy, what is happening before our very eyes?
WHAT is also marvelous is the fact that the foundation of God’s new world is being formed right now, even as Satan’s old world degenerates. Before our very eyes, God is collecting people from all nations and forming them into the foundation of a new earthly society that will soon replace today’s disunited world. In the Bible, at 2 Peter 3:13, this new society is called “a new earth.”
2 Bible prophecy also says: “In the final part of the days [the time in which we now live] . . . , many peoples will certainly go and say: ‘Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah [his true worship], . . . and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.’”—Isaiah 2:2-3.
 3. (a) Among whom is Isaiah’s prophecy being fulfilled? (b) How does the last book of the Bible comment on this?
3 That prophecy is now being fulfilled among those who submit to ‘God’s ways and walk in his paths.’ The last book of the Bible speaks of this peace-loving international society of people as “a great crowd . . . out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues,” a true global brotherhood serving God unitedly. And the Bible also says: “These are the ones that come out of the great tribulation.” That is, they will survive the end of this evil system of things.—Revelation 7:9, 14; Matthew 24:3.
A True International Brotherhood
 4, 5. Why is the worldwide brotherhood of Jehovah’s Witnesses possible?
4 Millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses sincerely try to live in harmony with God’s instructions and ways. Their hope of eternal life is anchored in God’s new world. By conducting their daily lives in obedience to God’s laws, they show him their willingness to submit to his way of ruling both now and in the new world. Everywhere, regardless of their nationality or race, they obey the same standards—those set out by God in his Word. That is why they are a true international brotherhood, a new world society of God’s making.—Isaiah 54:13; Matthew 22:37, 38; John 15:9, 14.
5 Jehovah’s Witnesses do not take the credit for their being a unique global brotherhood. They know that this is the result of God’s powerful spirit working on people who submit to his laws. (Acts 5:29, 32; Galatians 5:22, 23) It is God’s doing. As Jesus said, “the things impossible with men are possible with God.” (Luke 18:27) So the God who made possible the enduring universe is the one who also makes possible the enduring new world society.
 6. Why can the brotherhood of Jehovah’s Witnesses be called a modern miracle?
6 Thus, Jehovah’s way of ruling in the new world can already be seen in what he is producing in the foundation for the new world that is now being formed. And what he has done with his Witnesses is, in a sense, a modern miracle. Why? Because he has built Jehovah’s Witnesses into a true worldwide brotherhood, one that can never be broken by divisive national, racial, or religious interests. While the Witnesses number into the millions and live in over 200 lands, they are bound together as one in an unbreakable bond. This worldwide brotherhood, unique in all history, is indeed a modern miracle—God’s doing.—Isaiah 43:10, 11, 21; Acts 10:34, 35; Galatians 3:28.
Identifying God’s People
 7. How did Jesus say his true followers would be identified?
7 How can it be further determined who the people are that God is using as the foundation for his new world? Well, who fulfill Jesus’ words at John 13:34, 35? He stated: “I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, that you also love one another. By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.” Jehovah’s Witnesses believe Jesus’ words and act on them. As God’s Word instructs, they “have intense love for one another.” (1 Peter 4:8) In addition, they “clothe [themselves] with love, for it is a perfect bond of union.” (Colossians 3:14) So brotherly love is the “glue” that holds them together worldwide.
 8. How does 1 John 3:10-12 further identify God’s people?
8 Also, 1 John 3:10-12 says: “The children of God and the children of the Devil are evident by this fact: Everyone who does not carry on righteousness does not originate with God, neither does he who does not love his brother. For this is the message which you have heard from the beginning, that we should have love for one another; not like Cain, who originated with the wicked one and slaughtered his brother.” Thus, God’s people are a nonviolent, global brotherhood.
Another Identifying Feature
 9, 10. (a) By what work would God’s servants be identified in the last days? (b) How have Jehovah’s Witnesses fulfilled Matthew 24:14?
9 There is another way to identify God’s servants. In his prophecy about the world’s end, Jesus told of many things that would mark this period of time as the last days. (See Part 9.) A basic feature of this prophecy is mentioned in his words at Matthew 24:14: “This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.”
10 Have we seen that prophecy being fulfilled? Yes. Since the last days began in 1914, Jehovah’s Witnesses have preached the good news of God’s Kingdom throughout the world in the manner ordered by Jesus, namely, at the homes of the people. (Matthew 10:7, 12; Acts 20:20) Millions of Witnesses call on people in every nation to talk to them about the new world. This has led to your receiving this brochure, as the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses includes printing and distributing billions of pieces of literature about God’s Kingdom. Do you know of anyone else who preaches about God’s Kingdom from house to house throughout the world? And Mark 13:10 shows that this preaching and teaching work must be done “first,” before the end comes.
Answering the Second Great Issue
11. What else do Jehovah’s Witnesses accomplish by submitting to God’s rule?
11 By submitting to God’s laws and principles, Jehovah’s Witnesses accomplish something else. They show that Satan was a liar when he claimed that humans could not be faithful to God under test, thus answering the second great issue, which involves human integrity. (Job 2:1-5) Being a society of millions of people from all nations, the Witnesses demonstrate, as one body, loyalty to God’s rule. Although they are imperfect humans, they uphold God’s side of the issue of universal sovereignty, despite satanic pressure.
12. By their faith, whom do the Witnesses imitate?
12 Today, these millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses add their testimony to that of a long line of other witnesses in times past who demonstrated loyalty to God. Some of those were Abel, Noah, Job, Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Jacob, Deborah, Ruth, David, and Daniel, to mention just a few. (Hebrews, chapter 11) They are, as the Bible says, a ‘great cloud of faithful witnesses.’ (Hebrews 12:1) These and others including Jesus and his disciples maintained integrity to God. And Jesus himself provided the greatest example by maintaining perfect integrity.
13. What words of Jesus about Satan have proved to be true?
13 This proves that what Jesus said about Satan to the religious leaders is true: “But now you are seeking to kill me, a man that has told you the truth that I heard from God. . . . You are from your father the Devil, and you wish to do the desires of your father. That one was a manslayer when he began, and he did not stand fast in the truth, because truth is not in him. When he speaks the lie, he speaks according to his own disposition, because he is a liar and the father of the lie.”—John 8:40, 44.
What Is Your Choice?
14. What is happening to the foundation of the new world now?
14 The foundation of the new world now being formed by God in the international society of Jehovah’s Witnesses is getting stronger and stronger. Each year hundreds of thousands of people are using their free will, based on accurate knowledge, to accept God’s rule. They become part of the new world society, uphold God’s side of the issue of universal sovereignty, and prove Satan a liar.
15. What separating work is Jesus carrying out in our day?
15 By choosing God’s rule, they qualify to be put on the “right hand” of Christ as he separates “the sheep” from “the goats.” In his prophecy about the last days, Jesus foretold: “All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. And he will put the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left.” The sheep are humble people who associate with and support Christ’s brothers, submitting to God’s rule. The goats are stubborn people who reject Christ’s brothers and do nothing to support God’s rule. With what result? Jesus said: “These [the goats] will depart into everlasting cutting-off, but the righteous ones [the sheep] into everlasting life.”—Matthew 25:31-46.
16. What must you do if you want to live in the Paradise to come?
16 Truly, God cares for us! Very soon he will provide a delightful earthly paradise. Do you want to live in that Paradise? If so, show your appreciation for Jehovah’s provisions by learning about him and acting upon what you learn. “Search for Jehovah, you people, while he may be found. Call to him while he proves to be near. Let the wicked man leave his way, and the harmful man his thoughts; and let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy upon him.”—Isaiah 55:6, 7.
17. Why is there no time to waste in choosing whom to serve?
17 There is no time to waste. The end of this old system is very near. God’s Word counsels: “Do not be loving either the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him . . . Furthermore, the world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.”—1 John 2:15-17.
18. What course of action will enable you to look forward confidently to living in God’s marvelous new world?
18 God’s people are now being trained for everlasting life in the new world. They are learning the spiritual and other skills needed to develop a paradise. We urge you to choose God as Ruler and support the lifesaving work he is having done throughout the earth today. Study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and come to know the God who really cares about you and who will bring an end to suffering. In this way you too can become part of the foundation of the new world. Then you can confidently look forward to gaining God’s favor and living forever in that marvelous new world.
[Picture on page 31]
Jehovah’s Witnesses have a true international brotherhood
[Picture on page 32]
The foundation of God’s new world is now being formed

