VOL. XIV. FEBRUARY 1 & 15, 1893. -DOUBLE NUMBER. NOS. 3 & 4. 

WHAT SAITH THE SCRIPTURE ABOUT HELL? 



THE AWFUL THEORY OF MEN.-ITS INCONSISTENCIES.- 

ITS BANEFUL RESULTS. -THE TRUE SCRIPTURE TEACHING. 

-HELL IN THE OLD TESTAMENT-"SHEOL."- 

HELL IN THE NEW TEST AMENT-"HADES. "-"GEHENNA." 

-"TARTAROO."-"THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS." 

-"WAILING AND GNASHING OF TEETH."- 

"THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS. "-"KOLASIN"- 

"EVERLASTING DESTRUCTION."-"THE LAKE OF 

FIRE AND BRIMSTONE."-"TURNED INTO HELL." 

-GOD'S VERDICT.-"THE SECOND DEATH." 



Some will say, "I don't care to think about 
the awful place, for I don't expect to go there 
—I have no interest in it." Yet, if the "orthodox" 
view of it be true, that all except the 
saints of God go there,— that hell is the penalty 
for Adam's sin, that all of Adam's posterity 
are under that penalty except those few 
faithful believers in Christ who escape it,— 



then it follows that you, and I, and all, ought to 
be deeply interested in finding out all we can 
about that which is represented as the surest 
and most awful and most general calamity to 
which our poor race is exposed. If you and I 
do expect to escape, we should be anxious on 
behalf of the others; for in proportion to the 
world's population even in this enlightened 
day, the faithful believers in Christ are but as 
one out of a thousand. Nor will it do to excuse 
one's self with the idea that "My friends 
and relations will all escape." You know that 
many, yea, most of your friends and relatives 
are not faithful believers; and, as you look 
back over the pages of history, it is not a great 
way back that you find that your great-great, 
grandparents were heathen idolaters who knew 
not of the Redeemer, and hence could not have 
been justified by faith in him. Besides, are 
not all mankind our relatives? and are not all 
brethren?— children of one common father, 
Adam? 

Subjects like slavery, intemperance, pestilence 
or epidemics, affecting only a part of the 
human family, we see hundreds, yes, thousands, 
of men and women spending time and talent 
and money in examining, and in arranging for 
the relief and safety of their fellows. Yet there 
is no comparison between human slavery, etc., 
and everlasting torture in misery and anguish, 
which human tongue, we are told, cannot describe. 
The most terrible human sufferings of 
the present, which soon end life and thus bring 
relief, are really pleasurable moments in comparison 
to what we are told of hell, which, besides, 
will never end while the years of eternity roll. 

Now what is being done about this monstrous 
evil before which all others combined 
pale into insignificance— anything? 

Oh, yes, there are thousands of clergymen 
who are supposed to have studied all about 
this awful subject, who weekly meet with about 
two millions of the fourteen hundred millions 
of the earth's present population, to consider 
this very subject which they claim is all-important. 
They meet in comfortable and elegant 
buildings, expensively attired, and are entertained 
by music and oratory; and if the subject 
they claim as the all-important cause of 
their assembling is mentioned at all, it is to 
assure the hearts of those present that they have 
nothing to fear; for though God will deal most 

R1498 : page 36 

awfully with others, he will deal kindly with 



them, and instead of delighting to torture 
them to all eternity, God will be glad to have 
such genteel people as attend their entertaining 
church services and participate in the usual 
suppers, fairs, etc., to adorn heaven. Why 
will God thus favor them? Not because of 
good works, they admit; nor because of great 
faith, we would claim, for they know little of 
God or his Word, and hence cannot believe 
much or firmly. Their hopes must therefore 
be built mainly upon their morality, because 
they are civilized, and specially because they 
have joined an earthly church and assented to 
a creed which they do not know, nor understand, 
nor believe— in a word because they are 
thus deceiving themselves and others with a 
form of godliness without the real power thereof. 
Do these people really believe 

THIS AWFUL DOCTRINE 

concerning hell? Surely not! To us their 
actions speak louder than words. They even 
count the "Salvation Army" people fools and 
fanatics, because they, less intelligent and less 
learned, believe the story of the clergy about 
this awful place they describe hell to be, and 
honestly act out their belief. 

Of all the people in the world to-day who 
profess to believe this awful doctrine of eternal 
torment, the "Salvation Army" alone acts 
reasonably and consistently. And their wildest 
freaks and fancies are tame compared with 
what might be expected if they were fully convinced 
of the truth of the doctrine. The men 
and women who have ever fully believed the 
doctrine are undoubtedly those hundreds who 
have gone insane from sympathy with their 
fellows: the effort to save others from everlasting 
torture unbalanced their reason. We cannot 
imagine how sincere believers of this terrible 
doctrine go from day to day about the 
ordinary affairs of life, or meet quietly in elegance 
every Sunday to hear an essay on the 
peculiar subjects often advertised. Could they 
do so while really believing all the time that 
fellow mortals are dying at the rate of one 
hundred a minute, and entering 

"That lone land of deep despair," where 
"No God regards their bitter prayer." 

They could not complacently sit there and 
think of those hurrying every moment into 
that awful state described by the good, well-meaning, 
but terribly deluded man, Isaac 
Watts (whose own heart was infinitely warmer 
and larger than that he ascribed to the great 



Jehovah), when he wrote that sweet (?) hymn, 
which, thank God, sensible people have ceased 
to love, and almost ceased to sing:— 
"Tempests of angry fire shall roll 

To blast the rebel worm, 
And beat upon the naked soul 
In one eternal storm." 

Surely men and women believing thus would 
rush frantically to the heathen and to all unbelievers 
everywhere, would describe hell, and 
make people join their churches or set them 
crazy with fear, or both. Mothers, fathers and 
children have become insane from anguish, 
when their loved ones have been caught in a 
burning building, though they knew that their 
pain would endure but a few minutes; yet they 
pretend to believe that God is less loving than 
they, and that he can look with indifference, 
if not with delight, at billions of his creatures 
enduring an eternity of torture far more terrible, 
which he prepares for them and prevents 
any escape from, forever. Not only so, but 
they expect that they will get literally into 
Abraham's bosom, and will then look across 
the gulf and see and hear the agonies of the 
multitudes (some of whom they now love and 
weep over), and will be so changed (become so 
like their present idea of God), so hardened 
against all pity and so barren of love and sympathy, 
that they will delight in such a God and 
in such a plan. 

It is wonderful that otherwise sensible looking 
and acting men and women, who love 
their fellows, establish hospitals, orphanages, 
asylums, and societies for the prevention of 
cruelty to even the brute creation, are so unbalanced 
mentally that they can believe and 
subscribe to such a doctrine, and yet be so indifferent 
about investigating the subject of 
"everlasting torture." 

Only one exception can we think of— those 
who hold the ultra-Calvinistic doctrine; who 
believe that God has decreed it thus, that 

R1498 : page 37 

all the efforts they could put forth could not 
alter the result with a single person, and that 
all the prayers they could offer would not 
change that awful plan they believe God has 
marked out for his and their eternal pleasure. 
These indeed could sit still, so far as effort for 
their fellows is concerned, but why sing the 
praises of such a God and such a plan. They 
who hold this view of their own unconditional 
and unalterable election could surely afford to 



be honest, since they think that they could 
not be rejected. Why should not these, instead 
of singing the praises of such a plan and 
keeping quiet, hide their faces in shame 
for their God, express their true heart-sympathy 
for the people, and, instead of singing, weep 
and lament. It would be far more creditable 
to their faith and their hearts;— would it not? 

Why not rather begin to doubt this "doctrine 
of devils," this blasphemy against the 
great God, hatched in the "dark ages," when 
a crafty priesthood thought it right to do evil, 
that good might result. The doctrine of eternal 
torment was introduced by Papacy to compel 
pagans to join her system and support her 
priesthood. It flourished at the same time that 
"bull fighting" and gladiatorial contests were 
the public amusements most enjoyed, when the 
Crusades were called "holy wars," and when 
men and women were called "heretics" and 
slaughtered for thinking or speaking contrary 
to the teachings of Papacy; at a time when the 
sun of gospel truth was obscure, when the 
Word of God had fallen into disuse and was 
prohibited to be read by any but the clergy, 
whose love of their neighbors was often shown 
in torturing heretics to induce them to recant 
and deny their faith and their Bibles— to save 
them, if possible, they explained, from the more 
awful future of heretics, eternal torture. They 
did not borrow this doctrine from the heathen, 
for no heathen people in the world have a doctrine 
half so terrible, cruel, fiendish and unjust. 
Find it, whoever can, and show it up in all its 
blackness, that, if possible, it may be shown 
that the essence of barbarism, malice, hate and 
ungodliness, has not been exclusively appropriated 
by those whom God has most highly 
favored with light from every quarter, to whom 
God has committed the only oracle— his 
Word. Oh! the shame and confusion of face 
that will cover many even good men (who 
verily thought that they did God service while 
propagating this misrepresentation of the devil), 
when they awake in the resurrection, to learn 
of the love and justice of God, and when they 
come to know that the Bible, for which some of 
them would lay down their lives, does not teach 
this God-dishonoring, love-extinguishing, truth-beclouding, 
saint-hindering , sinner-hardening , 
damnable heresy. 

But we repeat that in the light and moral 
development of this day, sensible people do not 
believe this doctrine. However, since they 
think that the Bible teaches it, every step they 
progress in real intelligence and godlikeness of 



mind, which hinders such belief, is in most 

cases a step away from God's Word, which they 

falsely accuse of this teaching. Hence this second 

crop of evil fruit, which the devil's engraftment 

of this error is producing. The intelligent, 

honest thinkers are thus driven from 

the Bible into vain philosophies and sciences, 

falsely so-called, and into skepticism. Nor do 

the "worldly" really believe this doctrine. 

It does not restrain from crime: theft, murder, 

suicide, immorality and drunkenness are more 

common by far in the countries where this 

doctrine is taught, than in other lands. Mohammedan 

and Buddhist countries are much 

more moral than those misnamed "Christendom." 

True, some instances are known where 

murderers nearing death's door, under pressure 

of fear or sickness, confess a faith under the 

teaching that to doubt it is to make sure the 

penalty. But their lives of disregard, as well 

as their profanity, show that if this doctrine 

ever restrained men, it does not now. 

But did the error not do real good? Have 
not many been brought into the churches by 
the preaching of this doctrine in the past? 

No error, we answer, ever did real good, but 
always harm. Those whom error brings into 
a church, and whom the truth would not move, 
are an injury to the church. The thousands 
terrorized, but not at heart converted, which 
this doctrine forced into Papacy, and which 
swelled her numbers and her wealth, diluted 

R1498 : page 38 

what little truth was held before, and mingled 
it with their unholy and ignorant sentiments, 
so that, to meet the changed condition of things, 
the "clergy" found it needful to add error to 
error, and to resort to methods, forms, etc., not 
taught in the Scriptures and useless to the truly 
converted whom the truth controls. Among 
these were pictures, images, beads, vestments, 
candles, grand cathedrals, altars, etc., to help 
the unconverted heathen to a form of godliness 
more nearly corresponding to their former 
heathen worship. 

The heathen were not benefited, for they 
were still heathen in God's sight, deluded into 
aping what they did not understand or do from 
the heart. They were tares to choke the wheat, 
without being profited thereby themselves. 

The same is true of those who assume the 
name "Christian" to-day, who are not really 
at heart converted by the truth, but merely 
frightened by the error, or allured by promised 



earthly advantages of a social or business kind. 

Such add nothing to the true Church: by their 

ideas and manners they become stumbling-blocks 

to the truly consecrated, and by their 

inability to digest the truth, the real food of 

the saints, they lead even the few true pastors 

to defraud the true sheep in order to satisfy 

the demands of these goats for something pleasing 

to their unconverted tastes. No: in no 

way has this error accomplished good, but in 

every way harm. Let us now inquire:— 

WHAT DOES THE BIBLE TEACH? 

Seeing, then, the unreasonableness of man's 
view, let us leave human creeds and dogmas 
and come to the oracle of God, that we may 
hear his own Word on this subject, fully convinced 
that 

"Blind prejudice is sure to err, 
And scan his Word in vain. 
God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain." 

In the first place, let none forget that the English 
translation of the Bible was not inspired, 
but that the inspired Scriptures, which "holy 
men of old wrote as they were moved by 
the holy Spirit," were written, the Old Testament 
in the Hebrew and the New Testament 
in the Greek language. We know, further, 
that the translators were not inspired of God 
so as to prevent mistakes creeping in; for all 
scholars recognize some mistakes in the English 
translations. 

Admitting that the translators were honest 
men who reverently desired to serve God and 
the Church by giving English readers a faithful 
translation from the original, all who have a 
knowledge of more than one language, and who 
have ever tried translating from one to another, 
well know they had a difficult task, the range 
of both languages making it often possible to 
translate a word by any one of several words, 
all having slightly different shades of meaning; 
besides which the idiomatic differences, the 
peculiarities in the construction of sentences 
in both languages, must be taken into account. 
This makes it necessary for a translator frequently 
to use his judgment both in deciding 
which of several words he would best use, and 
also as to their arrangement to reproduce faithfully 
the original thought. And, if the translators 
have certain false ideas fixed in their 
minds, they are almost sure at times to color 
their renderings, without wrong intention. 

Now, no matter how little hell is talked or 



thought or sung about to-day, there is no other 
point of doctrine more firmly held by Christian 
people, who feel sure that to deny hell would be 
to deny the Bible, and yet who know little of 
what the Bible says about hell. So, in coming to 
the English Bible to examine the subject, do not 
forget to exercise charity toward the translators 
when we show that their translation has helped 
forward the wrong ideas generally held. You 
will be far more justifiable in feeling unthankful 
toward the "pastors" and "shepherds," 
whom you have for years helped to support and 
educate. But remember that not all ministers 
know of the errors of the translators. Not all 
deliberately cover and hide those errors from 
the people who are paying them for the information. 
Many, the great majority, indeed, do 
not know, having merely swallowed the theories 
of their seminary professors. It is the professors 
and learned ones who are most blameworthy. 
These have kept back the truth about 
"hell" for several reasons. Firstly, there is 

R1498 : page 39 

a sort of understanding or etiquette among 
them, as among physicians, that if they wish to 
maintain their standing in the "profession" 
they "must not tell tales out of school"— 
must not divulge professional secrets to the 
"common people," especially to the "laity." 
Secondly, they all fear that to let it be known 
that they have been teaching an unscriptural 
doctrine for years would bring disgrace and 
disreverence upon them, their denominations 
and their schools, and unsettle confidence in 
their wisdom. And oh! how much depends 
upon confidence and reverence for men, when 
God's Word is so generally ignored. Thirdly, 
they know that many of the members of their 
sects are not constrained by "the love of 
Christ" (2 Cor. 5:14), but merely by the fear 
of hell, and they see clearly therefore that to 
let the truth be known would soon cut loose 
the names and the dollars of many in their 
flocks; and this, to those who desire to make 
a fair show in the flesh (Gal. 6:12), would be 
terrible in the extreme. 

Nevertheless, it has for some years been seen 
that knowledge is increasing among the people 
(Dan. 12:4), and the "Revised English Version" 
of the Bible was gotten out— in great 
part to patch up this hell doctrine. But the 
revisers had not the courage to come out and 
give a correct translation: that, as we have 
shown, would be too serious a matter to be 



thought of; so they merely refused to translate 
the word at all, and put the Hebrew word 
sheol and the Greek word hades into the English 
text. They well knew that the English 
reader would know little difference between 
"hell" and sheol or hades, and would soon 
come to use them synonymously. And this is 
the case. The learned professors and pastors 
consider, therefore, that they are justified by 
the course of the revisers, though they never 
explain the meaning of the Greek word hades; 
but by their use of the word, without saying so 
directly, they give their confiding flocks to understand 
that it means a place of torture, a 
lake of fire. But what will be the judgment of 
the Great Jehovah, whose character and plan 
are traduced by the blasphemous doctrine 
which this mistranslated word helps to support? 
Will he commend them? Will he justify their 
course? Will the Chief Shepherd call these 
his beloved "friends?" Will he make known 
unto them his further plans (John 15:15), that 
they may misrepresent them also, to preserve 
their own dignity and reverence? Will he continue 
to send forth "things new and old," 
"meat in due season" to the household of 
faith, by the hand of these unfaithful servants? 
Nay, such shall not continue to be his mouth-pieces: 
he will spew them out of his mouth. 
(Rev. 3:16.) He will choose instead, as at the 
first advent, from among the laity— "the common 
people"— mouth-pieces, and will give 
them words which none of the chief priests shall 
be able to gainsay or resist. (Luke 21:15.) 
And, as foretold, "the wisdom of their wise 
men shall perish, and the understanding of 
their prudent men shall be hid."— Isa. 29:9-19. 
Consider first, then:— 

HELL IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

The word "hell" occurs thirty-one times in 
the Old Testament, and in every instance it is 
sheol in the Hebrew. It does not mean a lake 
of fire and brimstone, nor anything at all resembling 
that thought: not in the slightest degree! 
Quite the reverse: instead of a place of 
blazing fire it is described in the context as a 
state of "darkness;" instead of being a place 
where shrieks and groans are heard, it is described 
in the context as a place of "silence;" 
instead of representing in any sense pain and 
suffering, or remorse, the context describes it 
as one of forgetfulness. "There is no work, 
nor device, nor knowledge, in the grave [sheol] 
whither thou goest."— Eccles. 9:10. 



The meaning of sheol is, the hidden state, 
as applied to man's condition in death, in and 
beyond which all is hidden, except to the eye 
of faith; hence, by proper and close association 
the word was often used in the sense of 
the grave— the tomb, the hidden place, or place 
beyond which only those who have the enlightened 
eye of the understanding can see resurrection, 
restitution of being. And be it 
particularly noted that this very same word 
sheol is translated "pit" and "grave" thirty-four 
times in our common version by the same 

R1498 : page 40 

translators*— more times than it is translated 
"hell;" and twice, where it is translated 
"hell," it seemed so absurd, according to the 
present accepted meaning of the English word 
"hell," that, in the margin of modern Bibles, 
the publishers explain that it means grave. 
(See Isa. 14:9 and Jonah 2:2.) In the latter 
case, the hidden state, or grave, was the belly 
of the fish in which Jonah was buried alive, 
and from which he cried to God. 

BELOW WE QUOTE ALL THE PLACES WHERE SHEOL 
IS TRANSLATED HELL. 

(1) Amos 9:2.— "Though they dig into 
hell, thence shall mine hand take them." [A 
figurative expression; but certainly pits of the 
earth are the only hells men can dig into.] 

(2) Psa. 16: 10.— "Thou wilt not leave my 
soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy 
One to see corruption." [This refers to our 
Lord's three days in the tomb. See Acts 2:31; 
3:15.] 

(3) Psa. 18:5 and 2 Sam. 22:6— margin.— 
"The cords of hell compassed me about." [A 
figure in which trouble is represented as hastening 
one to the tomb.] 

(4) Psa. 55:15.— "Let them go down quick 
into hell"— margin, "the grave." 

(5) Psa. 9:17.— "The wicked shall be turned 
into hell, and all the nations that forget God." 
[This text should read, "The wicked shall be 
re-turned into hell"— into the state of death— 
the "second death." See explanation of this 
passage farther on in this issue.] 

(6) Psa. 86:13.— "Thou hast delivered my 
soul from the lowest hell"— margin, "grave." 

(7) Psa. 116:3.— "The sorrows of death compassed 
me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon 

me." [Sickness and trouble are the figurative 
hands of the grave to grasp us.] 



(8) Psa. 139:8.-"If I make my bed in hell, 
behold, thou art there." [God's power is unlimited: 
even those in the tomb he can and 

will control and bring forth.] 

(9) Deut. 32:22.— "For a fire is kindled in 
mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest 

hell." [A figurative representation of the destruction, 
the utter ruin, of Israel as a nation— 
"wrath to the uttermost," as the Apostle 
called it, God's anger burning that nation to 
the "lowest deep," as Leeser translates the word 
sheol here.] 

(10) Job 11:8. -"It [God's wisdom] is as 
high as heaven; what canst thou do? deeper 
than hell [than any pit]; what canst thou 
know?" 

(11) Job 26:6. -"Hell [the tomb] is naked 
before him, and destruction hath no 
covering." 

(12) Prov. 5:5.— "Her feet go down to 
death; her steps take hold on hell" [i.e., lead 
to the grave]. 

(13) Prov. 7:27.— "Her house is the way to 
hell [the grave], going down to the chambers 
of death." 

(14) Prov. 9: 18. -"He knoweth not that 
the dead are there, and that her guests are in 
the depths of hell." [Here the harlot's guests 
are represented as dead, diseased or dying, 



*To the credit of the translators of the Common Version 
(the King James Version) it should be stated that 
the English word "hell" has gradually come to have a 
very different meaning from what it once had, and that 
when used by them in the sixteenth century the word 
still retained much of its original meaning, which made 
it a fair equivalent of the Greek and Hebrew words they 
translated by it. There is no such excuse, however, for 
modern translators and teachers, for the original meaning 
has entirely passed from the word, except as found occasionally 
in old books, giving place to the "hell fire" idea. 

The word "hell" is Anglo-Saxon, and in old English 
usage meant a place of concealment— the hidden, or secret, 
or covered place. Its transitive verb was hele or hill 
meaning to hide, to conceal, to cover, to roof. In old 
English books you will find numerous instances of the 
use of this word, in connection with roofing houses, 
planting, hilling, hiding, etc. To hele a house did not 
mean to burn it, or torture it, but to cover or thatch it; to 
hele potatoes did not mean to burn them, but to conceal 
them in a pit; and so, likewise, when men were heled 
there was no thought of fire, torture and pain, but of covering, 
concealing, etc. Both good and bad were thus 
heled or buried. 



"Conceal" is the corresponding word from the Latin. 
See Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, under hell, hele, 
hill and conceal. From this it will be seen that the use 
of the word "hell" by the translators of the King James' 
Version was at a time when its meaning had not become 
so changed as at present. Yet modern translators and 
ministers, who well know that the word "hell," as now 
used, does not cover the thought of hades of the Greek, 
or sheol of the Hebrew, refuse to enlighten their credulous 
flocks. 

R1498 : page 41 

and many of the victims of sensuality in premature 
graves from diseases which hurry off 
their posterity also to the tomb.] 

(15) Prov. 15:11.— "Hell and destruction 

are before the Lord." [Here the grave is associated 
with destruction and not with a life of 
torment.] 

(16) Prov. 15:24.-"The path of life (leadeth) 
upward for the wise, that he may depart 
from hell beneath." [The hope of resurrection 
from the tomb.] 

(17) Prov. 23:14. -"Thou shalt beat him 
with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from 
hell" [i.e., wise corrections will save a child 
from vicious ways which lead to premature 
death, and may possibly prepare him to escape 
the "second death" also]. 

(18) Prov. 27:20. -"Hell [the grave] and 
destruction are never full: so the eyes of man 
are never satisfied." 

(19) Isa. 5:14.— "Therefore hell hath enlarged 
herself and opened her mouth without 
measure." [Here a symbol of destruction.] 

(20) Isa. 14:9.— "Hell [margin, grave] from 
beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy 
coming."— Verse 15. "Thou shalt be brought 
down to hell" [the grave— so rendered in 
verse 11.] 

(21) Isa. 57:9. -"And didst debase thyself 
even unto hell." [Here figurative of deep 
degradation.] 

(22) Ezek. 3 1:15-17. -"In the day when 
he went down to the grave,. ..I made the 
nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when 
I cast him down to hell with them that descend 
into the pit.. ..They also went down into 

hell with him, unto them that be slain with the 
sword." [Figurative and prophetic description 
of the fall of Babylon into destruction, 
silence, the grave.] 

(23) Ezek. 32:21.— "The strong among the 
mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of 
hell with them that help him." [A continuation 



of the same figure, representing Egypt's 
overthrow as a nation to join Babylon in 
destruction.] 

(24) Ezek. 32:27. --"And they shall not lie 

with the mighty that are fallen of the uncircumcised, 
which are gone down to hell with 
their weapons of war: and they have laid their 
swords under their heads; but their iniquities 
shall be upon their bones, though they were the 
terror of the mighty in the land of the living." 
[The grave is the only "hell" where fallen ones 
are buried and lie with their weapons of war 
under their heads.] 

(25) Hab. 2:5.— "Who enlargeth his desire 
as hell [the grave] and as death, and cannot 
be satisfied." 

(26) Jonah 2:1,2.— "Then Jonah prayed 
unto the Lord his God, out of the fish's belly, 
and said, I cried by reason of mine affliction 
unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the 
belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my 
voice." [The belly of the fish was for a time 
his grave.] 

(27) Isa. 28:15-18.— "Because ye have said, 
We have made a covenant with death, and with 
hell [the grave] are we at agreement; when the 
overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall 
not come unto us, for we have made lies our 
refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves: 
Therefore, saith the Lord,... Your 

covenant with death shall be disannulled, and 
your agreement with hell [grave] shall not 
stand." [God thus declares that the present 
prevalent idea, by which death and the grave 
are represented as friends rather than enemies, 
shall cease; and men shall learn that death is 
the wages of sin and that it now is in Satan's 
power (Rom. 6:23; Heb. 2:14), and not an 
angel sent by God.] 

ALL OTHER PLACES WHERE SHEOL OCCURS- 
RENDERED GRAVE AND PIT. 

Gen. 37:35.— "I will go down into the grave 
unto my son." 

Gen. 42:38.— "Then shall ye bring down 
my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave." [See 
also the same expression in 44:29,31.] 

1 Sam. 2:6.— "The Lord killeth, and maketh 
alive: he bringeth down to the grave, and 
bringeth up." 

1 Kings 2:6,9.— "Let not his hoar head go 
down to the grave in peace." "His hoar head 
bring down to the grave with blood." 

Job 7:9.— "He that goeth down to the 
grave." 



R1498 : page 42 

Job 14:13.— "Oh, that thou wouldst hide me 
in the grave, that thou wouldst keep me secret, 
until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldst appoint 
me a set time, and remember me" [resurrect 
me]! 

Job 17:13.— "If I wait, the grave is mine 
house: I have made my bed in the darkness." 
[Job waits for resurrection— "in the morning."] 

Job 21:13.— "They spend their days in 
mirth, in a moment go down to the grave." 

Job 24:19,20.— "Drought and heat consume 
the snow waters: so doth the grave those 
which have sinned." [All have sinned, hence 
"Death has passed upon all," and all go down 
to the grave. But all have been redeemed, 
by "the precious blood of Christ," hence all 
shall be awakened and come forth again in God's 
due time— "in the morning."] 

Psa. 6:5.— "In death there is no remembrance 
of thee: in the grave who shall give 
thee thanks?" 

Psa. 30:3.— "O Lord, thou hast brought up 
my soul from the grave: thou hast kept me 
alive, that I should not go down to the pit" 
[—recovery from danger of death]. 

Psa. 31:17.— "Let the wicked be ashamed; 
let them be silent in the grave." 

Psa. 49:14,15, margin.— "Like sheep they 
are laid in the grave; death shall feed on them; 
and the upright [the saints— Dan. 7:27] shall 
have dominion over them in the morning [the 
Millennial morning]; and their beauty shall 
consume, the grave being an habitation to every 
one of them. But God will redeem my soul 
from the power of the grave." 

Psa. 88:3.— "My life draweth nigh unto the 
grave." 

Psa. 89:48.— "Shall he deliver his soul from 
the hand of the grave?" 

Psa. 141:7.— "Our bones are scattered at the 
grave's mouth." 

Prov. 1:12.— "Let us swallow them up alive 
as the grave; and whole, as those that go down 
into the pit" [i.e., as of an earthquake, as in 
Num. 16:30-33]. 

Prov. 30:15,16.— "Four things say not, It is 
enough: the grave," etc. 

Eccl. 9:10.— "Whatsoever thy hand findeth 
to do, do it with thy might; for there is no 
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, 
in the grave, whither thou goest." 

Job 17:16.— "They shall go down to the 
bars of the pit, when our rest together is in the 



dust." 

Song of Solomon 8:6.— "Jealousy is cruel 
as the grave." 

Isa. 14:11.— "Thy pomp is brought down 
to the grave." 

Isa. 38:10.— "I shall go to the gates of the 
grave: I am deprived of the residue of my 
years." 

Isa. 38:18.— "The grave cannot praise thee, 
death cannot celebrate thee: they that go down 
into the pit cannot hope for thy truth." 

Num. 16:31-33.— "The ground clave asunder 
that was under them, and the earth opened 
her mouth and swallowed them up, and their 
houses, and all the men that appertained unto 
Korah, and all their goods. They and all that 
appertained to them went down alive into the 
pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they 
perished from among the congregation." 

Ezek. 31:15.— "In the day when he went 
down to the grave." 

Hosea 13:14.— "I will ransom them from 
the power of the grave; I will redeem them 
from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; 
O grave, I will be thy destruction. Repentance 
shall be hid from mine eyes." [The 
Lord did not ransom any from a place of fire 
and torment, for there is no such place; but 
he did ransom all mankind from the grave, 
from death, the penalty brought upon all by 
Adam's sin, as this verse declares. And shortly 
now, we trust, he will destroy death and the 
grave, and every vestige of Adam's penalty, 
as is also declared in this verse. This sheol, 
hell or grave shall be destroyed, that all may 
come to a full knowledge of the truth, and if 
they then will (by obedience), they may live 
forever.] 

The above list includes every instance of the 
use of the English word "hell" and the 
Hebrew word sheol. From the examination it 
must be evident to all readers that the Old 
Testament, covering God's revelation for four 
thousand years, contains not a single hint of 
"hell," as the word is now understood. 

R1498 : page 43 

HELL IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



In the New Testament, the Greek word hades 
corresponds exactly to the Hebrew word sheol. 
As proof see the quotations of the Apostles 
from the Old Testament, in which they render 



it hades. For instance, Acts 2:27, "Thou wilt 

not leave my soul in hades," is a quotation 

from Psa. 16:10, "Thou wilt not leave my soul 

in sheol." And 1 Cor. 15:54,55, "Death is 

swallowed up in victory. O death, where is 

thy sting? O hades [grave], where is thy victory?" 

is an allusion to Isa. 25:8, "He will 

swallow up death in victory," and to Hos. 13:14, 

"O death, I will be thy plagues: O sheol, I 

will be thy destruction." 

IN THE FOLLOWING CASES "HELL" IS FROM THE 
GREEK WORD "HADES." 

Matt. 11:23.— "And thou, Capernaum, 
which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be 
brought down to hell." Luke 10:15: "Shalt 
be thrust down to hell." [In privileges, etc., 
the city was highly favored, or, figuratively, 
exalted to heaven; but because of misuse of 
God's favors, it would be debased, or, figuratively, 
cast down to hades, overthrown, destroyed. 
It is now so thoroughly buried in 
oblivion, that even the site where it stood is a 
matter of dispute. Capernaum is certainly 
destroyed, thrust down to hades.] 

Luke 16:23.— "In hell he lifted up his eyes, 
being in torments." [A parabolic figure. See 
article, "The Rich Man and Lazarus."] 

Rev. 6:8.— "And behold a pale horse: and 
his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell 
followed with him." [Symbol of destruction or 
the grave.] 

Matt. 16: 18. -"Upon this rock I will build 
my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail 
against it." [Here the tomb is represented 
as a great prison with strong doors. 
The Lord's assurance is that though his Church 
may seem to be forever locked up in the tomb, 
yet its strong gates will not hold her when the 
due time comes and her Lord breaks the bars 
and by his resurrection power sets at liberty the 
captives, the result of the ransom which he gave 
once for all. Compare Luke 4:18; Isa. 61:1.] 

CHRIST IN "HELL" (HADES) AND RESURRECTED 
FROM "HELL. "-ACTS 2:1,14,22-31. 

"And when the day of Pentecost was fully 
come, ...Peter. ..lifted up his voice 
and said.. ..Ye men of Israel, hear these 
words:— Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of 
God among you, ...being delivered by the 
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God 
["He was delivered for our offences"], ye 
have taken and by wicked hands have crucified 



and slain: whom God hath raised up, having 
loosed the pains [or bands] of death, because 
it was not possible that he should be holden 
of it [for the Word of Jehovah had previously 
declared his resurrection]; for David speaketh 
concerning him [personating or speaking for 
him], 'I [Christ] foresaw the Lord [Jehovah] 
always before my face; for he is on my right 
hand, that I should not be moved. Therefore 
did my heart rejoice and my tongue was glad; 
moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope, because 
thou wilt not leave my soul in hell [hades] 
neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see 
corruption. Thou [Jehovah] hast made known 
to me [Christ] the ways of life'" [thy plan]. 
Here our Lord, as personified by the prophet 
David, expresses his faith in Jehovah's promise 
of a resurrection and in the full and glorious 
accomplishment of Jehovah's plan through 
him, and rejoices in the prospect. 

Peter then proceeds, saying— "Men and 
brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the 
patriarch David, that he is both dead and 
buried, and his sepulcher is with us unto this 
day [so that this prophecy could not have referred 
to himself personally; for his soul was 
left in "hell" [hades], and his flesh did see corruption]: 
Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing 
that God had sworn with an oath to him, that 
of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, 
he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; 
he, seeing this before [prophetically], spake of 
the resurrection of Christ [out of "hell"— 
hades— to which he must go for our offences], 
that his soul was not left in hell [hades— 
the death state], neither his flesh did see corruption." 
Thus Peter presents a strong, logical 
argument, based on the words of the prophet 
David— showing firstly, that Christ, who 

R1498 : page 44 

was delivered by God for our offences, went to 

"hell," the grave, the condition of death, destruction 

(Psa. 16:10); and secondly, that according 

to promise he had been delivered from 

"hell," the grave, death, destruction, by a RESURRECTION 

—a raising up to life, being created 

again, the same identical being, yet more 

glorious, and exalted even to the express image 

of the Father's person. (Heb. 1:3.) And now 

"this same Jesus" (Acts 2:36), in his subsequent 

revelation to the Church, declares— 

Rev. 1:18.— "I am he that liveth, and was 
dead, and, behold, I am alive forevermore, 
Amen; and have the keys of hell [hades, the 



grave] and of death." Amen! Amen! our 
hearts respond; for in his resurrection we see 
the glorious outcome of the whole plan of 
Jehovah, to be accomplished through the power 
of the resurrected one who now holds the keys 
of hell and of death, and in due time will release 
all the prisoners— who are therefore called 
the "prisoners of hope."— Zech. 9:12. No 
craft or cunning can by any possible device 
wrest these scriptures entire and pervert them 
to the support of that monstrous and blasphemous 
papal tradition of eternal torment. Had 
that been our penalty, Christ, to be our vicarious 
sacrifice, must still and to all eternity endure 
it— which is not the case, as these scriptures 
affirm. But death was our penalty, and 
"he died for our sins," and "also for the sins 
of the whole world."— 1 Cor. 15:3; 1 John 2:2. 

Rev. 20:13,14.— "And the sea gave up the 
dead which were in it; and death and hell 
delivered up the dead which were in them: 
and they were judged, every man, according 
to their works. And death and hell were cast 
into the lake of fire: this is the second death." 
[The lake of fire is the symbol of final and everlasting 
destruction.] 

OTHER OCCURRENCES OF THE WORD "HELL.' 



Having examined the word sheol, the original 
and only word in the Old Testament for "hell," 
and the word hades, most frequently rendered 
"hell" in the New Testament, we now notice 
every remaining instance in Scripture where the 
English word "hell" occurs. In the New Testament 
there are but two other words than hades 
rendered "hell," namely, gehenna and tartaroo, 
which we will consider in the order named. 

GEHENNA. 

This word occurs twelve times. It is the 
Grecian mode of spelling the Hebrew words 
which are translated "the Valley of Hinnom." 
This valley lay just outside the city of Jerusalem, 
and served the purpose of sewer and 
garbage burner to that city. The offal, garbage, 
etc., were emptied there, and fires were 
kept continually burning to consume utterly all 
things deposited therein, brimstone being added 
to assist combustion and insure complete destruction. 
But a living thing was never cast 
into gehenna. The Jews were not permitted 
to torture any creature. 



When we consider that in the people of Israel 
God was giving us object lessons illustrating 
his dealings and plans, present and future, 
we should expect that this Valley of Hinnom, 
or gehenna, would also play its part in illustrating 
things future. We know that Israel's 
priesthood and temple illustrated the Royal 
Priesthood— the Christian Church as it will be, 
the true temple of God— and we know that 
their city was a figure of the New Jerusalem, 
the seat of kingdom power and centre of authority 
—the city (government) of the Great 
King, Immanuel. We remember, too, that 
Christ's government is represented in the book 
of Revelation (Rev. 21:10-27) under the figure 
of a city— the New Jerusalem. There, after 
describing the class permitted to enter the 
privileges and blessings of that kingdom— the 
honorable and glorious, and all who have right 
to the trees of life— we find it also declared 
that there shall not enter into it anything that 
defileth, or that worketh abomination, or lies; 
but only such as the Lamb shall write as 
worthy of life. This city, representing the 
redeemed world in the end of the Millennium, 
was typified or represented in the earthly 
city, Jerusalem; and the defiling, the abominable, 
etc., the class unworthy of life, who do 
not enter in, were represented by the refuse and 
the filthy, lifeless carcasses cast into gehenna 
outside the city, for utter destruction. Accordingly, 
we find it stated that those not found 

R1498 : page 45 

worthy of life are to be cast into the fire (Rev. 20:15) 
—fire here, as everywhere, being used as 
a symbol of destruction. 

Thus we see that while gehenna served a useful 
purpose to the city of Jerusalem as a place for 
garbage burning, it, like the city, illustrated the 
future dealing of God, when the refuse and impure 
elements will be forever destroyed and prevented 
from contaminating the holy and pure, 
after that age of judgment, or trial, has proved 
all— which are sheep and which are goats. 

Gehenna, then, was a type or illustration of 
the second death— final and complete destruction. 
Strictly speaking, none could be in any 
danger of the second death while as yet under 
the first or Adamic death, and while as yet no 
ransom from it had been given. Consequently 
no one could have been liable to the second 
death before the coming of our Lord, who 
brought to light the plan of God (to be accomplished 
through Christ) for the resurrection of 



all from the first death, and a second trial of 
all men individually for the eternal continuance 
of that life, by obedience to the law of 
Christ. The penalty of failure to comply with 
those just and righteous conditions is to be the 
second death— condemnation a second time to 
death, for failure the second time, and this 
time individually. Nor is the world in general 
now liable to this penalty: none but consecrated 
believers could possibly incur it yet; because 
no others have escaped (even reckonedly) 
the condemnation that is on the world— the 
first death, for Adam's sin. The consecrated 
have escaped it reckonedly, the sin of Adam 
being no longer imputed to them.— Rom. 8:1; 
4:6-8. 

But remember that Israel, though they were 
not, and could not be, actually ahead of other 
men in this matter, were, for the purpose 
of being used as types of God's future dealing 
with the race, typically treated as though 
the ransom had been given before they 
left Egypt, though only a typical lamb had 
been slain. When Jerusalem was built, and the 
Temple— representative of the true temple, the 
Church, and the true kingdom as it will be 
established by Christ in the Millennium— that 
people typified the world in the next age. 
Their priests represented the glorified Royal 
Priesthood, and their Law and its demands of 
perfect obedience represented the Law and 
conditions under the New Covenant, to be 
brought into operation for the blessing of all 
the obedient, and for the condemnation of all 
who, when granted fullest opportunity, will not 
submit to the righteous ruling and laws of the 
Great King. 

Seeing then that Israel's polity, condition, etc., 
prefigured those of the world in the coming age, 
how appropriate that we should find the valley 
or abyss, gehenna, a figure of the second death, 
the utter destruction in the coming age of all 
that is unworthy of preservation; and how aptly, 
too, is the symbol, "lake of fire burning 
with brimstone" (Rev. 19:20), drawn from this 
same gehenna, or Valley of Hinnom, burning 
continually with brimstone. The expression, 
"burning with brimstone," adds force to the 
symbol, "fire," to express the utter and irrevocable 
destructiveness of the second death; 
for the latest deductions of scientists are that 
burning brimstone is the most deadly agent 
known. How reasonable, too, to expect that 
Israel would have courts and judges resembling 
or prefiguring such courts and judges in the 
next age; and that the sentence of those (figurative) 



courts of that (figurative) people under 
those (figurative) laws, to that (figurative) abyss, 
outside that (figurative) city, would largely 
correspond to the real sentences of the real 
court and judges in the next age. If these 
points are kept in mind, they will greatly assist 
us in understanding the words of our Lord in 
reference to gehenna; for though the literal 
valley just at hand was named and referred to, 
yet his words carry with them lessons concerning 
the future age, and the antitypical gehenna 
—the second death. 

MATT. 5:21,22. 

"Ye have heard that it was said by them of 
old time, 'Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever 
shall kill shall be amenable to the judges:' but 
I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with 
his brother [without a cause] shall [future— 
under the regulations of the real kingdom] be 
amenable to the judges; and whosoever shall 

R1498 : page 46 

say to his brother, 'Raca' [villain], shall be in 
danger of the High Council; but whosoever 
shall say 'Thou fool,' shall be in danger of 
hell [gehenna] fire." 

To understand these references to council 
and judges and gehenna, all should know 
something of Jewish regulations. The "Court 
of Judges" consisted of seven men (or twenty-three, 
—the number is in dispute), and had 
power to judge some classes of crimes. The 
High Council, or Sanhedrin, consisted of 
seventy -one men of recognized learning and 
ability. This constituted the highest court of 
the Jews, and its supervision was over the 
gravest offences. The most serious punishment 
was death, but certain very obnoxious 
criminals were subjected to an indignity after 
death, being refused burial and cast with the 
carcasses of dogs, the city refuse, etc., into 
gehenna, to be there consumed. The object 
of this burning in gehenna was to make 
the crime and the criminal detestable in the 
eyes of the people, and signified that the 
culprit was a hopeless case. It must be remembered 
that Israel hoped for a resurrection from 
the tomb, and hence they were particular in 
caring for the corpses of their dead. Not 
realizing the fulness of God's power, they 
thought he needed their assistance to that extent. 
(Exod. 13:19; Heb. 11:22; Acts 7:15,16.) 
Hence the destruction of the body in 



gehenna after death implied to them the loss 
of hope of future life by a resurrection. Thus 
it represented the second death in the same 
figurative way that they as a people represented 
or illustrated a future order of things under 
the New Covenant. 

Now notice that our Lord, in the above 
words, pointed out to them that their construction 
of the Law, severe though it was, was far 
below the real import of that Law, as it shall 
be interpreted under the real kingdom and 
judges which theirs only typified. He shows 
that the command of their Law, "Thou shalt 
not kill," reached much farther than they supposed; 
that malicious anger and vituperation 
"shall be" considered a violation of God's Law, 
under the New Covenant; and that such as, 
under the favorable conditions of that new age, 
will not reform so thoroughly as to fully observe 
God's Law would be counted worthy of 
that which the gehenna near them typified— 
the second death. However, the force and 
severity of that Law will be enforced only in 
proportion as the discipline, advantages and 
assistance of that age shall enable each to comply 
with it, and yet be disregarded. 

The same thought is continued in 

MATT. 5:27-30. 

Here again the operation of God's Law under 
the New Covenant is contrasted with its operation 
under the Old or Jewish Covenant, and the 
lesson of self-control is urged by the statement 
that it is far more profitable that men should 
refuse to gratify depraved desires (though they 
were dear to us as a right eye, and as convenient 
and almost indispensable as a right hand) 
than that they should gratify these, and lose, 
in the second death, the future life provided, 
through the atonement, for all who will return 
to perfection, holiness and God. 

These expressions of our Lord not only serve 
to show us the perfection (Rom. 7:12) of God's 
Law, and how fully it will be defined and enforced 
in the Millennium, but they served as a 
lesson to the Jews also, who previously saw, 
through Moses' commands, only the crude exterior 
of the Law of God. Since they found 
it difficult in their fallen state to keep inviolate 
even the surface significance of the Law, they 
must now see the impossibility of their keeping 
the finer meaning of the Law, revealed by 
Christ. Had they understood and received 
his teaching fully, they would have cried out, 
Alas! if God judges us thus, by the very 



thoughts and intents of the heart, we are all 

unclean, all undone, and can hope for naught 

but condemnation to gehenna (to utter destruction, 

as brute beasts). They would have 

cried, Show us a greater priesthood than that 

of Aaron, a priest and teacher able fully to appreciate 

the Law, and able fully to appreciate 

and sympathize with our fallen state and inherited 

weaknesses, and let him offer for us "better 

sacrifices," and apply to us the needed 

greater forgiveness of sin, and let him as a 

great physician heal us and restore us, so that 

R1498 : page 47 

we can obey the perfect Law of God from our 
hearts. Then they would have found all their 
needs in Christ. 

But this lesson they did not learn, for the 
ears of their understanding were "dull of 
hearing;" hence they knew not that God had 
already prepared the very priest and sacrifice 
and teacher and physician they needed— who 
in due time redeemed those under the typical 
Law, as well as all not under it, and who also 
"in due time," shortly, will begin his restoring 
work— restoring sight to the blind eyes of 
their understanding, and hearing to their deaf 
ears. Then the "vail shall be taken away"— 
that vail of ignorance, pride and human wisdom 
which Satan now uses to blind the world 
to God's true law and true plan of salvation 
in Christ. 

And not only did our Lord's teaching here 
show the Law of the New Covenant, and teach 
the Jew a lesson, but it is of benefit to the 
Gospel Church also. In proportion as we learn 
the exactness of God's Law, and what would 
constitute perfection under its requirements, 
we see that our Redeemer was perfect, and that 
we, totally unable to commend ourselves to 
God as keepers of that Law, can find acceptance 
with the Father only under the merit of 
our Redeemer, while none can be of that 
"body," covered by the robe of his righteousness, 
except the consecrated who endeavor to 
do only those things well pleasing to God, 
which includes the avoiding of sin to the extent 
of ability. Yet their acceptability with God 
rests not in their perfection, but upon the perfection 
of Christ, so long as they abide in him. 
These, nevertheless, are benefited by a clear 
insight into the perfect Law of God, even 
though they are not dependent on the perfect 
keeping of it. They delight to do God's will 
to the extent of their ability, and the better 



they know his perfect Law, the better they are 
able to rule themselves and conform to it. So, 
then, to us also the Lord's words have a lesson 
of value. 

The point, however, to be noticed clearly is 
the mistake commonly made, of supposing the 
gehenna which the Jews knew, and of which 
our Lord spoke to them, to be a lake of fire to 
be kept burning to all eternity, into which all 
would be cast who get "angry with a brother" 
and call him a "fool," or who "look upon a 
woman to lust." Nay, the point is that gehenna 
symbolizes the second death— utter, 
complete and everlasting destruction. This is 
clearly shown by its being contrasted with 
life as its opposite. "It is better for thee to 
enter into life halt, or maimed, than otherwise 
be cast into gehenna." It is better that 
you should deny yourself sinful gratifications 
than that you should completely lose all future 
life, and perish in the second death. 

MATT. 10:28; LUKE 12:5. 

"Fear not them which kill the body, but 
are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear 
him which is able to destroy both soul and body 
in hell" [gehenna]. [See also another account 
of the same discourse by Luke— 12:4,5.] 

Here our Lord pointed out to his followers 
the great cause they had for bravery and courage 
under the most trying circumstances. 
They were to expect persecution, and to have 
all manner of evil spoken against them falsely, 
for his sake, and the sake of the "good tidings" 
of which he made them the ministers 
and heralds; yea, the time would come, that 
whosoever would kill them would think that he 
did God a service. Their consolation or reward 
for this was to come, not in the present 
life, but in a life to come. They were assured, 
and they believed, that he had come to give 
his life a ransom for many, and that all in their 
graves must in consequence, in due time, hear 
the Deliverer's voice and come forth, either to 
reward (if their trial was passed in this life successfully), 
or to trial, as it must be to the great 
majority who had not, in the present life, come 
to the necessary knowledge and opportunity 
constituting the new trial. 

Our Lord here speaks of the present life and 
the life to come (which he was about to secure 
for all by the ransom-sacrifice he was giving). 
He calls that future condition the real "soul" 
or being ("soul" signifies being), while the present 
life (which is really a dying rather than a 



living state) he designates or indicates by the 
word "body." His bidding then is, Fear not 

R1498 : page 48 

them which can terminate the present (dying) 
life in these poor dying bodies, which, full of 
frailties and weaknesses and aches, you received 
from dying Adam. Care little for it, 
its food, its clothing, its pleasures, in comparison 
with that future existence or being which 
God has provided for you, and which, if secured, 
may be your portion forever. Fear not the 
threats, or looks, or acts of men, whose power 
can extend no farther than the present being, 
who can harm and kill these bodies, but can 
do no more. Rather have respect and deference 
to God, with whom are the issues of life 
everlasting— fear him who is able to destroy 
both the present dying existence and the future 
existence, in gehenna— the second death. 

Here it is conclusively shown that gehenna, 
as a figure, represented the second death— the 
utter destruction which must ensue in the case 
of all who, after having fully received the opportunities 
of a future being or existence through 
our Lord's sacrifice, prove themselves unworthy 
of God's gift, and refuse to accept it, by refusing 
obedience to God's just requirements. 
For it does not say that God will preserve soul 
or body in gehenna, but that he can and will 
destroy both in it. Thus we are taught that 
any who are condemned to the second death 
are hopelessly and forever blotted out of 
existence. 

MATT. 18:9; MARK 9:43-47. 

[Since these two refer to the same discourse, 
we quote from Mark— remarking that verses 
44 and 46, and part of 45, are not found in 
the oldest Greek MSS., though verse 48, which 
reads the same, is in all manuscripts. We quote 
only what is in the ancient MSS.] "If thy 
hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee 
to enter into life maimed, than having two 
hands to go into gehenna, into the fire that 
never shall be quenched. And if thy foot offend 
thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to 
enter halt into life, than having two feet to be 
cast into gehenna. And if thine eye offend 
thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter 
into the kingdom of God with one eye, than 
having two eyes to be cast into gehenna, 
where the worm dies not and the fire is not 
quenched." 



After reading the above, all must agree with 
the prophet that our Lord opened his mouth in 
figures and obscure sayings. (Psa. 78:2; Matt. 13:35.) 
No one for a moment supposes that our 
Lord advised the people to mutilate their bodies 
by cutting off their limbs, or gouging out their 
eyes. Nor does he mean us to understand that 
the injuries and disfigurements of the present 
life will continue beyond the grave, when we 
shall "enter into life." The Jews whom he 
addressed must have understood him better 
than many do to-day; because at that time the 
Jews had no conception of a place of everlasting 
torment, and knew the word gehenna to refer 
to the valley outside their city, which was not 
a place of torment (nor a place where any living 
thing was cast), but a place for the utter destruction 
of whatever might be cast into it; so that 
when they saw the Lord's expression regarding 
limbs and eyes to be figurative, they knew 
that the gehenna mentioned was not the valley 
of destruction, but a destruction which it prefigured 
or illustrated. 

The Lord meant simply this: The future life, 
which God has provided for sin-cursed, defiled 
and condemned man, is of inestimable value. 
It will richly pay you to make any sacrifice to 
receive and enjoy that life. Should it even 
cost an eye, a hand or a foot, so that to all 
eternity you would be obliged to endure the loss 
of these, yet life would be cheap at even such 
great cost. That would be better far than to 
retain your members and lose all in gehenna. 
Doubtless, too, the hearers drew the lesson as 
applicable to all the affairs of life, and understood 
the Master to mean that it would richly 
repay them to deny themselves many comforts 
and pleasures and tastes, dear as a right hand, 
precious as an eye and serviceable as a foot, 
rather than by gratification to forfeit the life to 
come and be utterly destroyed in gehenna— the 
second death. 

But what about the worms and the unquenchable 
fire? 

We answer, In the literal gehenna, which is 
the basis of our Lord's illustration, the bodies 
of animals, etc., frequently fell upon ledges of 
rocks and not into the fire kept burning below. 
Thus exposed, these would breed worms and be 

R1498 : page 49 

destroyed, as completely and as surely as those 
which burned. No one was allowed to disturb 
the contents of this valley; hence the worm 
and the fire together completed the work 



of destruction— the fire was not quenched and 
the worms died not. This would not imply a 
never-ending fire, nor immortal worms— the 
thought is that the worms did not die off and 
leave the carcasses there, but continued and 
completed the work of destruction. So with the 
fire also: if not quenched, it burned on until 
all was consumed, just as we might say, if a 
house were on fire and it could not be controlled 
or quenched, but burned until the building 
was destroyed— it would be an "unquenchable 
fire." 

Our Lord wished to impress the thought of 
the completeness and finality of the second 
death. All who go into the second death will 
be thoroughly and completely and forever destroyed; 
no ransom will ever again be given 
for any (Rom. 6:9); and there will be no occasion, 
for none worthy of life will be cast therein 
—but only those who love unrighteousness 
after coming to the knowledge of the truth. 

Not only in the above instances is the second 
death pointedly illustrated by gehenna, but it 
is evident that the same Teacher used the same 
figure to represent the same thing in the symbols 
of Revelation, though there it is not called 
gehenna, but a "lake of fire." 

The same valley was once before used as the 
basis of a discourse by the Prophet Isaiah. (Isa. 66:24.) 
Though he gives it no name, he describes 
it; and all should notice that he speaks, 
not as some with false ideas might expect, of 
billions in flames and torture, but of the carcasses 
of those who transgressed against the 
Lord, who are thus represented as utterly destroyed 
in the second death. 

The two verses preceding show the time, and 
it is in perfect harmony with the symbols of 
Revelation: it is in the new dispensation or 
the Millennium, in the "new heavens and 
new earth" condition of things. Then all the 
righteous will see the justice as well as the wisdom 
of the utter destruction of the incorrigible, 
wilful enemies of right— as it is written: "They 
shall be an abhorring unto all flesh." 

GEHENNA OCCURS BUT ONCE MORE.- 

JAMES 3:6. 

"So [important] is the tongue among our 
members, that it defileth the whole body, and 
setteth on fire the course of nature when it is 
set on fire of gehenna." 

Here, in strong symbolic language, the 
Apostle points out the great and bad influence 



of an evil tongue— a tongue set on fire (figuratively) 

by gehenna (figurative). For a tongue 

to be set on fire of gehenna signifies that a 

tongue may be set going in evil by a perverse 

disposition, self-willed, selfish, hateful, malicious, 

the sort of dispositions which, in spite 

of knowledge and opportunity, unless controlled 

and reformed, will be counted worthy 

to be destroyed— the class for whom the 

"second death," the real "lake of fire," the 

real gehenna, is intended. One in that attitude 

may by his tongue kindle a great fire, a destructive 

disturbance, which, wherever it has 

contact, will work evil in the entire course of 

nature. 

TARTAROO RENDERED HELL. 

The Greek word tartaroo occurs but once in 
the New Testament, and is translated hell. It 
is found in 2 Pet. 2:4, which reads thus:— 

"God spared not the angels who sinned, but 
cast [them] down to hell [tartaroo] and delivered 
them into chains of darkness to be reserved 
unto judgment." 

Having examined all other words in the Bible 
rendered "hell," and all the texts in which 
they occur, we conclude the subject with this, 
which is the only instance in which the word 
tartaroo occurs in the Scriptures. In the above 
text, all the words shown in Italic type are 
translated from the one Greek word tartaroo. 
Evidently the translators were at a loss how to 
translate the word, but concluded they knew 
all about where the evil angels must be, 
according to "orthodoxy," and so they made 
bold to put them into hell, though it took six 
words to twist the idea into the shape they had 
predetermined it must take. 

The word tartaroo, used by Peter, very closely 
resembles tartarus, a word used in Grecian mythology 
as the name for a dark abyss or prison. 

R1498 : page 50 

But the word tartaroo seems to refer more to 
an act than to a place. The fall of the angels 
who sinned was from honor and dignity, into 
condemnation and dishonor. Hence we prefer 
to translate the sentence thus: "God spared 
not the angels who sinned, but degraded them 
and delivered them into chains of darkness." 
This certainly agrees with the facts known 
to us through the Scriptures; for these fallen 
spirits frequented the earth in the days of our 
Lord and the apostles. Hence they were not 



down in some place, but "down" in the sense 
of being degraded from former honor and 
liberty, and restrained under darkness, as by a 
chain. Whenever these fallen spirits, in spiritualistic 
seances, manifest their powers through 
mediums, pretending to be dead human beings 
whom they simulate, they must always do 
their work in the dark, because darkness is the 
chain by which they are bound until the great 
Millennial day of judgment. Whether this 
implies that in the immediate future they will 
be able to materialize, etc., in daylight, is difficult 
to determine. If so, it would greatly increase 
Satan's power to blind and deceive for 
a short season— until the Sun of Righteousness 
has fully risen. 

Thus we close our investigation of the Bible's 
use of the word "hell." Thank God, we 
find no such place of everlasting torture as 
the creeds and hymn-books, and many pulpits, 
erroneously teach. Yet we have found a 
"hell," sheol, hades, to which all were condemned 
through Adam's sin, and from which 
all are redeemed by our Lord's death; and 
that "hell" is the tomb— the death condition. 
And we find another "hell" (gehenna— the 
second death— utter destruction) brought to 
our attention as the final penalty upon all who, 
after being redeemed and brought to the full 
knowledge of the truth, and to full ability to 
obey it, shall yet choose death by choosing a 
course of opposition to God and righteousness. 
And our hearts say, Amen. True and righteous 
are thy ways, thou King of nations. Who 
shall not venerate thee, O Lord, and glorify thy 
name? For thou art entirely holy. And all 
nations shall come and worship before thee, because 
thy righteous dealings are made manifest. 

THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS. 



LUKE 16:19-31. 

The great difficulty with many is that though 
they call this a parable, they reason on it, and 
draw conclusions from it, as though it were a 
literal statement. To regard it as a literal 
statement involves several absurdities: for instance, 
that the rich man went to "hell" because 
he had enjoyed many earthly blessings 
and gave nothing but crumbs to Lazarus. Not 
a word is said about his wickedness. Again, 
Lazarus was blessed, not because he was a sincere 
child of God, full of faith and trust— not 



because he was good— but simply because he was 
poor and sick. If this be interpreted literally, 
the only logical lesson to be drawn from it is, 
that unless we are poor beggars full of sores, 
we will never enter into future bliss; and that 
if now we wear any fine linen and purple, and 
have plenty to eat every day, we are sure of 
future torment. Again, the coveted place of 
favor is "Abraham's bosom;" and if the whole 
statement be literal, the bosom must also be 
literal, and it surely would not hold very many 
of earth's millions of sick and poor. 

But why consider absurdities? As a parable, 
it is easy of interpretation. In a parable the 
thing said is never the thing meant. We know 
this from our Lord's own explanations of his 
parables. When he said "wheat," he meant 
"children of the kingdom;" when he said 
"tares," he meant "the children of the 
devil;" when he said "reapers," his servants 
were to be understood, etc. (Matt. 13.) These 
same classes were represented by different symbols 
in different parables. Thus the "wheat" 
of one parable are the "faithful servants" 
and the "wise virgins" of others. So, in this 
parable, the "rich man" represents a class, and 
Lazarus represents another class. 

In attempting to expound a parable such as 
this, an explanation of which the Lord does 
not furnish us, modesty in expressing our opinion 
regarding it is certainly appropriate. We 
therefore offer the following explanation without 
any attempt to force our views upon the 
reader, except so far as his own truth-enlightened 
judgment may commend them as in accord 

R1498 : page 51 

with God's Word and plan. To our understanding 
the "rich man" represented the 
Jewish nation. At the time of the utterance 
of the parable, and for a long time previous, 
they had "fared sumptuously every day"— 
being the especial recipients of God's favors. 
As Paul says: "What advantage then hath 
the Jew? Much every way: chiefly, because 
to them were committed the oracles of God" 
[Law and Prophecy]. The promises to Abraham 
and David invested the people with royalty, 
as represented by the rich man's "purple." 
The typical sacrifices of the Law constituted 
them, in a typical sense, a holy (righteous) nation, 
represented by the rich man's "fine linen," 
—symbolic of righteousness.— Rev. 19:8. 

Lazarus represented the outcasts from divine 
favor under the Law, who, though sin-sick, 



hungered and thirsted after righteousness. Although 
these included "publicans and sinners" 
of Israel, in the main they were Gentiles 
—all nations of the world aside from the 
Israelites. These, at the time of the utterance 
of this parable, were entirely destitute of those 
special divine blessings which Israel enjoyed. 
They lay at the gate of the rich man. No rich 
promises of royalty were theirs; not even typically 
were they cleaned; but, in moral sickness, 
pollution and sin, they were companions of 
"dogs." Dogs were regarded as detestable 
creatures in those days, and the typically clean 
Jew called the outsiders "heathen" and 
"dogs," and would never eat with them, nor 
marry them, nor have any other dealings with 
them. (John 4:9.) As to how these ate of 
the "crumbs" of divine favor which fell from 
Israel's table of bounties, the Lord's words to 
the Syro-Phoenician woman give us a key. He 
said to this Gentile woman— "It is not meet 
[proper] to take the children's [Israelites] 
bread and give it to the dogs" [Gentiles]; 
and she answered, "Truth, Lord, but the dogs 
eat of the crumbs that fall from their master's 
table." (Matt. 15:26,27.) Jesus healed her 
daughter, thus giving the desired crumb of 
favor. But there came a time when the typical 
righteousness ceased— when the promise of 
royalty ceased to be theirs, and the kingdom 
was taken from them to be given to a nation 
bringing forth the fruits thereof.— Matt. 21:43. 
The "rich man" died to all these special advantages, 
and soon he (the Jewish nation) found 
himself in a cast-off condition,— in trouble, 
tribulation and affliction. In such condition 
that nation has suffered from that day to this. 

Lazarus also died: the condition of the humble 
Gentiles and the "outcasts" of Israel underwent 
a change, and from them many were carried 
by the angels (messengers— apostles, etc.) to 
Abraham's bosom. Abraham is represented as 
the father of the faithful, and receives all the 
children of faith, who are thus recognized as 
the heirs of all the promises made to Abraham. 
For the children of the flesh are not the children 
of God, "but the children of the promise 
are counted for the seed" (children of Abraham); 
"which seed is Christ;"— and "if ye be 
Christ's, then are ye [believers] Abraham's 
seed [children] and heirs according to the 
[Abrahamic] promise."— Gal. 3:29. Yes, the 
condition of things then existing terminated 
by death— the dissolution for the time of the 
favors which Israel had long enjoyed. There 
the Jew was cast off and has since been shown 



"no favor," and the poor Gentiles, who before 
had been "aliens from the commonwealth 
[the promises] of Israel and without God and 
having no hope in the world," were then "made 
nigh by the blood of Christ" and "reconciled 
to God."— Eph. 2:13. While the people of 
Judea at the time of our Lord's utterance of 
this parable are repeatedly called "Israel," 
"the lost sheep of the house of Israel," "cities 
of Israel," etc., because all of the tribes were 
represented there, yet actually the majority of 
the people were of the two tribes— Judah and 
Benjamin— while the masses of the ten tribes 
did not return from Babylon under Cyrus' 
general permission. And if the nation of the 
Jews (chiefly two tribes) were represented in 
the one "rich man," it would be a harmony 
of numbers to understand the five brethren to 
represent the ten tribes scattered abroad. 
The request relative to them was doubtless 
introduced to show that all special favor of 
God ceased to the ten tribes, as well as to the 
two more directly addressed. It seems to us 
evident that Israel only was meant, for no other 

R1498 : page 52 

nation than Israel had "Moses and the prophets" 
as instructors. 

In explanation of the statements, "In hell 
he lifted up his eyes, being in torments," and 
"There is a great gulf fixed:" The "gulf" 
is the wide difference between the Gospel 
Church and the Jew— the former enjoying 
free grace, joy, comfort and peace, as true 
sons of God, and the latter holding to the 
Law, which condemns and torments him. Prejudice, 
pride and error, from the Jewish side, 
form the bulwarks of this gulf which hinders 
the Jew from coming into the condition 
of true sons of God by accepting Christ and 
the gospel of his grace. The bulwark of this 
gulf which hinders true sons of God from going 
into bondage with the Jew— under the Law 
—is their knowledge that by the deeds of the 
Law none can be justified before God, and 
that if any man keep the Law (put himself under 
it to try to commend himself to God by 
reason of obedience to it) Christ shall profit 
him nothing. (Gal. 5:2-4.) So, then, we 
who are of the Lazarus class will not attempt 
to mix the Law and the Gospel, knowing that 
they cannot be mixed, and that we can do no 
good to those who still cling to the Law and 
reject the sacrifice for sins given by our Lord. 
And they, not seeing the change of dispensation 



which took place, argue that to deny the 
Law as the power to save would be to deny 
all the past history of their race, and to deny 
all of God's special dealings with the "fathers" 
(promises and dealings which through pride 
and selfishness they failed rightly to apprehend 
and use); hence they cannot come over to the 
bosom of Abraham, into the true rest and peace 
—the portion of all the true children of faith.— 
John 8:39; Rom. 4:16; Gal. 3:29. 

True, a few Jews probably came into the 
Christian faith all the way down the Gospel 
age, but so few as to be ignored in a parable 
which represented the Jewish people as a whole. 
As Dives represented the orthodox Jews and 
not the "outcasts of Israel" at the first, so 
down to the close of the parable he continues 
to represent a similar class, and hence does not 
represent such Jews as have renounced the Law 
Covenant and embraced the New Covenant. 

With the end of the Gospel age comes the 
end of this parable. It is now ending, and soon, 
therefore, the Jew will get out of the torment in 
which he has been for eighteen hundred years. 
The torment has not only been as above described 
—the torment of a Law which none of 
them ever did or ever could keep perfectly (except 
the one perfect man— Christ), but also a 
torment of another kind, viz., persecution. 
The Jew has for centuries been bitterly persecuted 
by Pagans, Mohammedans and professed 
Christians, but is now gradually rising to political 
freedom and influence; and as a people 
they will be very prominent among the nations 
in the beginning of the Millennium. The vail 
of prejudice still exists, but will be gradually 
taken away as the light of the Millennial morning 
dawns; nor should we be surprised to hear 
of great awakenings among the Jews, and many 
coming to acknowledge Christ. They are thus 
leaving their hadean state (national death) and 
torment and coming, the first of the nations, 
to be blessed by the true seed of Abraham, 
which is Christ. Their bulwark of race-prejudice 
and pride is falling in some places, and 
the humble, the poor in spirit, are beginning 
already to look unto him whom they pierced, 
and to inquire, Is not this the Christ? And as 
they look the Lord pours upon them the spirit 
of favor and supplication. (Zech. 12:10.) Therefore, 
"Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and 
cry unto her that her appointed time is accomplished. 
— Isa. 40:1,2, margin. 

In a word, this parable seems to teach precisely 
what Paul explained in Rom. 11:19-31. 
Because of unbelief the natural branches were 



broken off, and the wild branches grafted into 
the Abrahamic promises. The parable leaves 
the Jews in their trouble, and does not refer 
to their final restoration to favor— doubtless 
because it was not pertinent to the feature of 
the subject treated; but Paul assures us that 
when the fulness of the Gentiles— the Bride- 
be come in, "they [the Israelites] shall obtain 
mercy through your [the Church's] mercy." 
He assures us that this is God's covenant with 
fleshly Israel (who lost the higher— spiritual- 
promises, but are still the possessors of certain 
earthly promises), to become the chief nation 

R1498 : page 53 

of earth, etc. In proof of this statement, he 
quotes from the prophets, saying: "The deliverer 
shall come out of Zion [the glorified 
Church], and shall turn away ungodliness from 
Jacob" [the fleshly seed]. "As concerning 
the Gospel [high calling], they are enemies 
[cast off] for your sakes; but as touching the 
election, they are beloved for the fathers' 
sakes." "For God hath concluded them all 
in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon 
all. O the depths of the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God!"— 
Rom. 11:26-33. 

PARABLE OF THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS. 



MATT. 25:31-46. 



It has been truly said that "Order is Heaven's 
first law;" yet few, we think, have realized 
how emphatically this is true. In glancing 
back over the plan of the ages, there is nothing 
which gives such conclusive evidence of a 
Divine Director as the order observed in all 
its parts. 

As we have seen, God has had definite and 
stated times and seasons for every part of his 
work; and in the end of each of these seasons 
there was a finishing up of that work and a 
clearing off of the rubbish, preparatory to the 
beginning of the new work of the dispensation 
to follow. Thus in the end of the first dispensation 
(from creation to the flood), which, as 
we have seen, was placed under the control of 
the angels, there was a finishing work— an exhortation 
through Noah to forsake sin and turn 



to righteousness, and a warning of certain retribution. 

And when the full end of the time 

allotted for that dispensation had come, there 

was a selection and saving of all that was worth 

saving, and a clean sweeping destruction of all 

the refuse; and with that which remained a 

new dispensation began. 

In the end of the Jewish dispensation the 
same order is observed— a harvesting and complete 
separation of the wheat class from the 
chaff, and an entire rejection of the latter class 
from God's favor. With the few judged worthy 
in the end of that age, a new age, i.e., the Gospel 
dispensation, began; and now we find ourselves 
amidst the closing scenes (the harvest) 
of this dispensation. The wheat and the tares 
which have grown together during this age are 
being separated. And with the former class, 
of which our Lord Jesus is the Head, a new 
dispensation is about to be inaugurated, and 
these are to reign as kings and priests in that 
new dispensation, while the tare element is 
judged as utterly unworthy of that favor. 

As a skilled mechanic or artisan puts on the 
finishing touches and brushes away the refuse 
materials from one part of his work preparatory 
to the beginning of another part, so God 
has made a full end of each dispensation, preserving 
the finished work and casting off the 
refuse. 

While observing this order with reference 
to the dispensations past and the one just closing, 
our Lord informs us through the parable 
under consideration that the same order will be 
observed with reference to the dispensation to 
follow this. 

The harvest of the Jewish age was likened to 
the separation of wheat from chaff; the harvest 
of this age to the separation of wheat from 
tares; and the harvest of the Millennial age 
to the separation of sheep from goats. 

That the parable of the sheep and the goats 
refers to the Millennial age is clearly indicated 
in verses 31 and 32— "When the Son of man 
shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels 
with him, THEN shall he sit upon the throne of 
his glory, and before him shall be gathered all 
nations; and he shall separate them one from 
another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from 
the goats." As in the present age every act 
of those on trial (the Church) goes to make a 
part of that character which, in due time, will 
determine the final decision of the Judge in our 
case, so will it be with the world (the "nations") 
in the age to come. As in the present 
age the trial of the majority of the individual 



members of the Church ends, and the decision 
of their case is reached, long before the end of 
the age (2 Tim. 4:7,8), so under the Millennial 
reign the decision of some individual 
cases will be reached long before the end of 
the age (Isa. 65:20); but in both ages there is 
a harvest or general separation time in the end 
of the age. 

In the dawn of the Millennial age, after the 
"time of trouble," there will be a gathering of 
the living nations before Christ, and, in their 
appointed time and order, the dead of all nations 
shall be called to appear before the judgment 
seat of Christ— not to receive an immediate 
sentence, but to receive a fair and impartial 
trial, under the most favorable circumstances, 
the result of which trial will be a final 
sentence, as worthy or unworthy of everlasting 
life. 

The scene of this parable, then, is laid after 
the time of trouble and after the exaltation of 
the "little flock" to the throne, when the nations 
have been subdued, Satan bound (Rev. 20:2) 
and the authority of Christ's kingdom 
established. Ere this, the Bride of Christ will 
have been seated with him in his throne, and 

R1498 : page 54 

will have taken part in executing the judgments 
of the great day of wrath. Now the Son of Man 
appears (is made manifest) to the world "in his 
glory," and together Jesus and his Bride "shine 
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father." 
-Matt. 13:43. 

Here is the New Jerusalem as John saw it 
(Rev. 21), "that holy city [symbol of government] 
...coming down from God out of 
heaven." During all the time of trouble it 
was coming down, and now it has touched the 
earth. This is the stone cut out without hands 
(but by the power of God), and now it has become 
a great mountain (kingdom), and has 
filled the whole earth (Dan. 2:35), its coming 
having broken to pieces (Dan. 2:34,35) the 
evil kingdoms of the Prince of darkness. 

Here is that glorious city (government), prepared 
as a bride adorned for her husband (Rev. 21:2), 
and the nations are beginning to walk in 
the light of it. (Verse 24.) These may bring 
their glory and honor into it, but "there shall 
in no wise enter into it [or become a part of it] 
anything that defileth," etc. (Verse 27.) Here, 
from the midst of the throne, proceeds a pure 
river of water of life (truth unmixed with error), 
and the Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and 



take it freely. (Rev. 22:17.) Here begins 

the world's probation, the world's great judgment 

day— a thousand years. 

But even in this favored time of blessing and 
healing of the nations, when Satan is bound, 
evil restrained, mankind released from the 
grasp of death, and when the knowledge of 
the Lord fills the earth, two classes will be developed, 
which our Lord, in this parable, likens 
to sheep and goats. These, he tells us, he will 
separate. The sheep class— those who are meek, 
teachable and willing to be led, shall, during 
the age, be gathered at the Judge's right hand 
—symbol of his approval; but the goat class, 
self-willed and stubborn, always climbing on 
the rocks— seeking prominence and approval 
among men— and feeding on miserable refuse, 
while the sheep graze in the rich pastures of the 
truth furnished by the Good Shepherd, these 
are gathered to the Judge's left hand opposite 
the position of favor— as subjects of his disfavor 
and condemnation. 

In the end of the Millennial age, in the final 
adjustment of human affairs, Christ thus addresses 
his sheep: "Come, ye blessed,. ..inherit 
the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world." What kingdom? 
Was not the kingdom under the whole heavens 
given to the saints?— Dan. 7:22. 

Yes: as we have heretofore seen, a "little 
flock," "the saints," the overcoming "sheep" of 
the Gospel age, having followed the Lamb 
(Jesus) whithersoever he went, through evil and 
through good report, even to the sacrificing of 
the human life, with him have been exalted to 
the divine nature, and to the throne of the spiritual, 
unseen kingdom, and "He [the Christ, 
Head and body] must reign till he has put all 
enemies under his feet." (1 Cor. 15:25.) The 
saints shall reign with Christ a thousand years. 
-Rev. 20:6. 

Jesus calls believers of the Gospel age, who 
know and obey his voice, his sheep. But he 
says, "Other sheep I have which are not of 
this fold [referring to those who should become 
his followers in the Millennial age]: Them 
also I must lead [into truth and righteousness 
during that age];. ..and there shall be one 
fold and one shepherd." (John 10:16.) The 
Lord Jesus and the "little flock," the Bride, 
united as one, will be the Good Shepherd, who 
will lead mankind into the one fold of safety- 
harmony with God. 

This gradual work of separating sheep and 
goats will require all of the Millennial age 
for its accomplishment. During that age, each 



individual, as he comes gradually to a knowledge 
of God and his will, takes his place, by 
conforming or not conforming thereto, at the 
right hand of favor or the left hand of disfavor, 
according as he improves or misimproves the 
opportunities of that golden age. By the end 
of that age, all the world of mankind (not the 
present Church) will have arranged themselves, 
as shown in the parable, into two classes. As 
in nature sheep are far more numerous than 
goats, so we doubt not that with the perfect 
knowledge then possessed, the sheep company 
will far outnumber the goats. 

The end of that age is the end of the world's 
trial or judgment, and final disposition is made 
of the two classes. The goats, who have not 
developed the element of love— the law of God's 
being and kingdom— are counted not worthy 
of life, and must be destroyed; while the sheep, 
who will have developed God-likeness (love), 
and exhibited it in their characters, are to be 
installed as the joint-rulers of earth for future 
ages. 

The work of restitution will not be quite 
complete until the great mass of mankind, having 
been restored to the perfect condition, is 
re-invested with the dominion of earth as possessed 
by Adam before sin entered, as God had 
said— "After our likeness let them have dominion 
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl 
of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the 
earth, ...and over every living thing that 
moveth upon the earth"— a ruler over earth, 
like as God is ruler over all things. And the 
Psalmist expresses the same idea, saying, "Thou 

R1498 : page 55 

hast made man a little lower than the angels, 
and hast crowned him with glory and honor; 
thou madest him to have dominion over the 
works of thy hands." (Psa. 8:5-8.) The dominion 
is not to be over one another, for when 
the law of love controls human hearts, there 
will be no necessity for dominion over one 
another, though by mutual consent, prompted 
by love, regulations may be made among 
themselves for the common good and blessing 
of all. 

This, then, is the kingdom that has been in 
preparation for mankind from the foundation 
of the world. It was expedient that man should 
suffer six thousand years under the dominion 
of evil, to learn its inevitable results, misery 
and death, and in order by contrast to prove 
the justice, wisdom and goodness of God's law 



—love. Then it requires the seventh thousand 
years under the reign of Christ, to restore him 
from ruin and death, to the perfect condition, 
thereby fitting him to inherit the kingdom 
prepared for him from the foundation of the 
world. 

That kingdom in which all will be kings will 
really be a grand, universal republic, whose stability 
and blessed influence will be assured, by 
the perfection of its every citizen; a result now 
much desired but an impossibility. The kingdom 
of the saints during the Millennium will 
be, on the contrary, a Theocracy, which will 
rule the world (during the period of its imperfection 
and restoration) without regard to its 
consent or approval. 

But the righteous inquire why they are 
crowned with such glory, honor and dominion. 
And the Lord replies: I was hungry, and you 
fed me; thirsty, and you gave me drink; I 
was a stranger, and you took me in; naked, 
and you clothed me; I was sick, and you 
visited me; in prison, and you came unto me. 

Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, 
Lord, when saw we thee hungry, and fed thee? 
or thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw 
we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, 
and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, 
or in prison, and came unto thee? "And the 
King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I 
say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto 
one of the least of these my brethren, ye have 
done it unto me." 

Let us notice who these are that the Lord 
calls his brethren, and in what sense the evils 
here named may be true of them. We observe, 
first, that he is addressing all the sheep 
or the righteous class in the end of the Millennial 
age. Then all of that class will have had 
opportunity to minister to the necessities of the 
Lord's brethren. He calls the Church of the 
Gospel age his brethren (Matt. 12:49,50); but 
all of the sheep class then addressed will not 
have had opportunity to minister to these brethren. 
Millions of the sheep class will be of 
those who lived before the Gospel Church had 
an existence; others of them will have come 
to maturity during the Millennial age, after 
the Gospel Church has been exalted and no 
longer needs their ministry. 

The brethren of the Gospel Church, then, 
are not the only brethren of Christ. All who 
at that time will have been restored to perfection, 
will be recognized as sons of God— sons 
in the same sense that Adam was a son of God 
(Luke 3:38)— human sons. And all of God's 



sons, whether on the human, the angelic or 
the divine plane, are brethren. Our Lord's 
love for these, his brethren, is here expressed. 
As the world will now have opportunity to 
minister to those who are shortly to be the divine 
sons of God, and brethren of Christ, so 
they will have abundant opportunity during the 
age to come to minister to (each other) the 
human brethren. 

The dead nations when again brought into 
existence will need food and raiment and shelter. 
However great may have been their possessions 
in this life, death will have brought all 
to a common level: the infant and the man of 
maturer years, the millionaire and the pauper, 
the learned and the unlearned, the cultured 
and the ignorant and degraded; and all will 
have an abundant opportunity for the exercise 
of benevolence, and thus they will be privileged 
to be co-workers with God. We are here reminded 
of the illustration given in the case of 
Lazarus: Jesus only awakened him from death, 
and then permitted the rejoicing friends to 
loose him from his grave clothes and to clothe 
and feed him. 

Further, these are said to be "sick and in 
prison" (more properly, under ward or watch). 
The grave is the great prison where the millions 
of humanity have been held in unconscious 
captivity; but when released from the 
grave, the restoration to perfection is not to be 
an instantaneous work. Being not yet perfect, 
they may properly be termed sick and under 
ward. They are not dead, neither are they yet 
perfect; and any condition between those two 
is properly called sickness. And they will continue 
to be under watch or ward until made 
well— physically, mentally and morally perfect. 
During that time there will be abundant opportunity 
for mutual helpfulness, sympathy, instruction 
and encouragement. 

Since all mankind will not be raised at once, 
but gradually, during the thousand years, each 
new group will find an army of helpers in those 

R1498 : page 56 

who will have preceded it. The love and benevolence 

which men will then show to each 

other (the brethren of Christ) the King will count 

as shown to him. No great deeds are assigned 

as the ground for the honors and favors conferred 

upon the righteous: they have simply 

come into harmony with God's law— love— 

and proved it by their works. "Love is the 

fulfilling of the law" (Rom. 13:10), and "God 



is love." So, when man is restored again to 
the image of God— "very good"— man also will 
be a living expression of love. 

To the sheep it is said, "Inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of 
the world." But though God gave it to man 
at first, and designs restoring it to him when 
he has prepared him for the great trust, we are 
not to suppose that God intends man to rule 
it except as under or in harmony with his supreme 
law. "Thy will be done in earth as 
in heaven," must forever be the principle of 
government. 

Man thenceforth will rule his dominion in 
harmony with the law of heaven— delighting 
continually to do his will "in whose favor is 
life, and at whose right hand [condition of 
favor] there are pleasures forevermore." (Psa. 16:11.) 
Oh! who would not say, "Haste thee 
along, ages of glory," and give glory and honor 
to him whose loving plans are blossoming into 
such fulness of blessing. 

Then follows the message to those on the left 
—"Depart from me, ye cursed" (condemned)— 
condemned as unfit vessels for the glory and 
honor of life, who would not yield to the 
moulding and shaping influence of divine love. 
When these my brethren were hungry and 
thirsty, or naked, sick, and in prison, ye ministered 
not to their necessities, thus continually 
proving yourselves out of harmony with the 
heavenly city (kingdom); for "there shall in 
no case enter into it anything that defileth." 
The decision and sentence regarding this class 
is— "Depart from me into everlasting fire 
[symbol of destruction] prepared for the devil 
and his angels." Elsewhere (Heb. 2:14) we 
read in plain language that Christ "will destroy 
...him that had the power of death, 
that is, the devil." 

"And these [the goats] shall go away into 
everlasting [Greek, aionios— lasting] punishment, 
but the righteous into life eternal" [Greek, 
aionios— lasting.] The punishment is as lasting 
as the reward. Both are everlasting. 

EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. 



The everlastingness of the punishment being 
thus established, only one point is left open for 
discussion, namely, of what sort or kind will 
the punishment be? Take your Concordance 
and search out what saith the great Judge regarding 
the punishment of wilful sinners who 



despise and reject all his blessed provisions 
for them through Christ. What do you find? 
Does God there say— All sinners shall live in 
torture forever? We do not find a single text 
where life in any condition is promised to that 
class. 

God's declarations assure us that ultimately 
he will have a clean universe, free from the 
blight of sin and sinners, when the plan of redemption 
has separated the sheep from the goats. 

But while we do not find one verse of the 
Bible to say that this class can have life, in 
torment or in any other condition, we do find 
hosts of passages teaching the reverse. Of these 
we give a few merely as samples— "The wages 
of sin is death." (Rom. 6:23.) "The soul that 
sinneth, it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) "All 
the wicked will God destroy." (Psa. 145:20.) 
The wicked shall "perish." (Psa. 37:20.) 
Thus God has told us plainly of what sort the 
everlasting punishment of the wicked shall be 
—that it will be death, destruction. 

The false ideas of God's plan of dealing with 
the incorrigible, taught us from our cradles 
ever since the great "falling away" which 
culminated in Papacy, are alone responsible 
for the view generally held (that the punishment 
provided for wilful sinners is a life of torture) 
in the face of the many clear statements 
of God's Word that their punishment is to be 
death. Hear Paul state very explicitly what 
the punishment is to be. Speaking of the same 
Millennial Day, and of the same class, who, despite 
all the favorable opportunities and the 
fulness of knowledge then, will not come into 
harmony with Christ, and hence will "know 
not God," and obey not, he says— "Who shall 
be punished." Ah, yes! but how punished? 
He tells us how: They "shall be punished 
with everlasting destruction from the presence 
of the Lord and from the glory of his power." 
-2 Thes. 1:9. 

Thus the meaning and reasonableness of this 
statement concerning everlasting punishment 
are readily seen when looked at from the correct 
standpoint. The fire of the parable, by 
which the punishment (destruction) is to be accomplished, 
will not be literal fire, for the 
"fire" is as much a symbol as the "sheep" 
and the "goats" are symbols. Fire here, as elsewhere, 
symbolizes destruction, and not in any 
sense preservation. 

We might well leave this subject here, and 
consider that we have fully shown that the 
everlasting punishment of the goat class will 



R1498 : page 57 

be destruction; but we would direct attention 

to one other point which clinches the truth 

upon this subject. We refer to the Greek 

word kolasin, translated "punishment" in verse 46. 

Its signification is to cut off, or prune, or 

lop off, as in the pruning of trees; and a secondary 

meaning is to restrain. Illustrations 

of the use of kolasin can easily be had from 

Greek classical writings. The Greek word for 

"torment" is basinos, a word totally unrelated 

to the word kolasin. 

Kolasin, the word used in Matt. 25:46, occurs 
in but one other place in the Bible, viz., 1 John 4:18, 
where it is improperly rendered "torment" 
in the common version, whereas it 
should read, "Fear hath restraint." Those 
who possess a copy of Young's Analytical Concordance 
will see from it that he (a ripe scholar 
and a Presbyterian) gives as the definition of 
the word kolasis (page 995) "pruning, restraining, 
restraint." And the author of the Emphatic 
Diaglott, that valuable translation of 
the New Testament, after translating kolasin 
in Matt. 25:46 by the words "cutting off," says 
in a foot note: 

"The common version and many modern 
ones render kolasin aionion 'everlasting punishment,' 
conveying the idea, as generally interpreted, 
of basinos, torment. Kolasin in its 
various forms occurs in only three other places 
in the New Testament: --Acts 4:21; 2 Pet. 2:9; 
1 John 4:18. It is derived from kolazoo, which 
signifies, 1. To cut off; as lopping off branches 
of trees, to prune. 2. To restrain, to repress. 
The Greeks write— 'The charioteer restrains 
[kalazei] his fiery steeds.' 3. To chastise, to 
punish. To cut off an individual from life, or 
from society, or even to restrain, is esteemed 
as a punishment; hence has arisen this third or 
metaphorical use of the word. The primary 
signification has been adopted [in the Diaglott], 
because it agrees better with the second member 
of the sentence, thus preserving the force 
and beauty of the antithesis. The righteous 
go to life, the wicked to the cutting off from 
life, death.-2 Thes. 1:9." 

Now consider carefully the text, and note 
the antithesis or contrast shown between the 
reward of the sheep and that of the goats, 
which the correct idea of kolasin gives— the 
one class goes into everlasting life, while the 
other is everlastingly cut off from life— forever 
restrained in death. And this exactly agrees 
with what the Scriptures everywhere else declare 



concerning the wages or penalty of wilful 
sin. 

Consider for a moment the words of verse 41: 
"Depart from me, ye cursed [once redeemed 
by Christ from the Adamic curse or 
condemnation to death, but now condemned 
or cursed, as worthy of second death, by the 
one who redeemed them from the first curse], 
into everlasting fire [symbol of everlasting destruction], 
prepared for the devil and his messengers" 
[servants]. 

Remember that this is the final sentence at 
the close of the final trial— at the close of the 
Millennium. And none will then be servants 
of Satan ignorantly or unwillingly, as so many 
now are; for the great Deliverer, Christ, grants 
a Jubilee, and sets all free from the weaknesses 
and besetments within and without, which now 
prevail as a result of Adam's fall— from which 
he has redeemed all by his own precious blood. 
These "goats" who love evil and serve Satan 
are the messengers ("angels") of Satan. For 
these and Satan, and for no others, God has 
prepared the everlasting destruction— the second 
death. Fire will come from God out of 
heaven and consume them. Consuming fire and 
devouring fire all can appreciate, unless their 
eyes are holden by false doctrine and prejudice. 
No one ever knew of a preserving fire; and as 
fire never preserves but always consumes, God 
uses it as a symbol of utter destruction.— 
Rev. 20:9. 

THE LAKE OF FIRE AND BRIMSTONE, WHICH 
IS THE SECOND DEATH. 

-REV. 21:8.- 

Several prophetic pen pictures of the Millennial 
age and its work, in chapters 20 and 2 1 of Revelation, 
clearly show the object and result 
of that age of trial, in harmony with the 
remainder of the Scriptures as noted in the preceding 
articles. 

Chapter 20, verses 2,4,11, with verses 1,2,10,11 of chapter 21, 
show the beginning of 
the age of judgment, and the restraining of 
blinding errors and misleading systems. The 
beast and the false prophet are the chief symbols, 
and represent organizations or systems of 
error which we will not here pause to explain. 
(The Lord willing, we will do so in some future 
volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN.) This judgment 
against the "thrones" of the present time, and 
against "the beast and the false prophet" 
systems, follows speedily upon the introduction 



of this Millennial judgment reign. The thrones 
of present dominion of earth will be "cast 
down," and the dominion transferred to the 
great Prophet and Judge, "whose right it is." 
(Compare Dan. 7:9,14,22; Ezek. 21:27.) And 
the systems of error will be speedily judged 
worthy of destruction, the lake of fire, the second 
death.-Rev. 19:20. 

Thus the second destruction (or death) begins 
quite early in the new judgment— with the 

R1498 : page 58 

systems of error. But it does not reach men as 
individuals until they have first had full trial, 
with full opportunity to choose life and live forever. 
Chapters 20:12,13 and 21:3-7 indicate 
the blessed, favorable trial in which all, both 
dead and living (except the Church, who, with 
Jesus Christ, are kings, priests, joint-heirs and 
judges), will be brought to a full knowledge of 
the truth, relieved from sorrow and pain and 
freed from every blinding error and prejudice, 
and tried "according to their works." 

The grand outcome of that trial will be a 
clean Universe. As the Revelator expresses 
it, "Every creature which is in heaven and on 
the earth. ..heard I saying, Blessing and 
honor and glory and power be unto him that 
sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb 
forever." But this result will be accomplished 
in harmony with all God's dealings past and 
present, which have always recognized man's 
freedom of will to choose good or evil, life or 
death. 

We cannot doubt that when, in the close of 
the Millennial age, God will again for a "little 
season" permit Evil to triumph, in order thereby 
to test his creatures (who will by that time 
have become thoroughly acquainted with both 
good and evil and the consequences of each, 
and have had his justice fully demonstrated to 
them), that those who finally prefer and choose 
evil will be cut off— destroyed. Thus God will 
for all eternity remove all who do not love 
righteousness and hate iniquity. 

We read, regarding that testing, that Satan 
will endeavor to lead astray all mankind, whose 
numbers will then be as the sand of the sea for 
multitude; but that many of them will choose 
evil and disobedience, with past experience before 
them, and unhampered by present weaknesses 
and blinding influences, we do not suppose. 
However, when God does not tell us 
either the number or the proportion of those 
found worthy of life, and those judged worthy of 



death (the second death), we may not dogmatize. 
Of one thing we may be confident, God 
willeth not the death of the wicked, but would 
that all should turn to him and live; and no 
one will be destroyed in that "lake of fire and 
brimstone" (figurative of utter destruction, as 
gehenna) who is worthy of life, whose living 
longer would be a blessing to himself or to 
others in harmony with righteousness. 

That utter and hopeless destruction is intended 
only for wilful evil doers, who, like 
Satan, in pride of heart and rebellion against 
God, will love and do evil notwithstanding the 
manifestations of God's disapproval, and notwithstanding 
their experience with its penalties. 
Seemingly the goodness and love of God in 
the provision of a ransom, a restitution, and 
another opportunity of life for man, instead of 
leading these to an abhorrence of sin, will lead 
them to suppose that God is too loving to cut 
them off in the second death, or that if he did so 
he would give them other and yet other future 
opportunities. Building thus upon a supposed 
weakness in the divine character, these may be 
led to try to take advantage of the grace (favor) 
of God, and to use it as a license for wilful sin. 
But they shall go no further, for their folly 
shall be manifest. Their utter destruction will 
prove to the righteous the harmony and perfect 
balance of Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power 
in the Divine Ruler. Such are called the angels 
(messengers, followers, servants) of Satan. And 
for such, as well as for Satan, the utter destruction 
(the second death) is prepared by the 
wise, loving and just Creator. And so, in the 
parable of the sheep and the goats, the latter 
are called messengers or servants of Satan. 

The true character of the goat class is portrayed 
in Rev. 21:8. "The fearful and unbelieving 
[who will not trust God], the abominable, 
murderers [brother haters], whoremongers, 
sorcerers, idolaters [such as misappropriate 
and misuse divine favors, who give to self 
or any other creature or thing that service 
and honor which belong to God], and all 
liars"— "whosoever loveth and maketh a lie" 
[in a word, all who do not love the truth and 
seek it, and at any cost defend and hold it] 
—"shall have their part in the lake which 
burneth with fire and brimstone [gehenna, symbol 
of utter destruction], which is the Second 
Death." Such company would be repulsive to 
any honest, upright being. It is hard to tolerate 
them now, when we can sympathize 
with them, knowing that such dispositions are 
now in great measure the result of inherited 



weakness of the flesh. We are moved to a 

measure of sympathy by the remembrance that 

in our own cases, often, when we would do 

good, evil is present with us. But in the close 

of the second Judgment, when the Lord, the 

righteous Judge, shall have given every advantage 

and opportunity of knowledge and 

ability, this class will be an abhorrence and detestation 

to all in harmony with the King of 

Glory. And we shall rejoice when, the trial 

being ended, the gift of life, of which these 

shall have proved themselves unworthy, shall 

be taken from them, and the corrupters of the 

earth, and all their work and influence, shall 

be destroyed. 

Rev. 20:9 tells of the destruction of those 
who join with Satan in the last rebellion; and 
verse 15 tells of that same destruction in other 
words, using the symbol "lake of fire." They 

R1498 : page 59 

are devoured or consumed in fire. This being 
the case, verse 10 cannot refer to these human 
beings. Hence the question narrows down to 
this, Will Satan and a false prophet and a beast 
be tortured forever? and does this verse so teach? 

We answer in God's own words, "All the 
wicked will he destroy." Concerning Satan, 
the arch enemy of God and men, God expressly 
advises us that he will be destroyed, 
and not preserved in any sense or condition. 
SeeHeb. 2:14. 

The beast and false prophet systems, which 
during the Gospel age have deceived and led 
astray, will be cast into a great, consuming 
trouble in the close of this Gospel age. The 
torment of those systems will be aionion, i.e., 
LASTING. It will continue as long as they last, 
until they are utterly consumed. So at the 
end of the Millennial age the system of error 
which will then manifest and lead to destruction 
the "goats" will also be consumed. That deceiving 
system (not specified as to kind, but 
merely called Satan, after its instigator) will 
be cast into the same sort of trouble and destruction, 
in the end of the Millennial age, as 
the beast and false prophet systems are now 
being cast into, in the end of the Gospel age. 

Rev. 19:3, speaking of one of these systems, 
says, "Her smoke rose up forever and ever." 
That is to say, the remembrance of the destruction 
of these systems of deception and error 
will be lasting, the lesson will never be forgotten 
—as smoke, which continues to ascend 
after a destructive fire, is a testimony that the 



fire has done its work. 

Of Rev. 14:9-11 we remark, incidentally, 
that all will at once concede that if a literal 
worshiping of a beast and his image were meant 
in verse 9, then few if any in civilized lands 
are liable to the penalty of verse 11; and if 
the beast and his image and worship and wine 
and cup are symbols, so also are the torments 
and smoke and fire and brimstone. 

Rev. 20:14 says: "And death and hell 
[hades— the tomb] were cast into the lake of 
fire [destruction]. This is the second death, 
the lake of fire."-Sinaitic MS. 

"Death and hell" [hades] is used several 
times in this book as expressive of the first 
death. Hades is the state or condition of death, 
and is sometimes translated the grave. It is 
called a great prison house, because those who 
enter it, though actually extinct, are reckoned 
as not extinct, but merely confined for a time, 
and to be brought forth to life, liberty and a 
new trial by him who ransomed them from the 
penalty of the first trial. It is in view of God's 
purpose and promise of a restitution of all, and 
a second trial, that the tomb is spoken of as a 
great "prison house," in which the captives 
of death (the Adamic or first death) await deliverance. 
Though dissolved in death, the 
identity of each being is preserved in the mind 
and power of God, and will be reproduced in 
due time by resurrection power. Hades, the 
prison, the tomb, is referred to by the prophets, 
the Master himself, and the apostles. (Hos. 13:14; 
Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18; John 5:28; 1 Cor. 15:55.) 
The grave is really a memorial of 
hope; for we would not speak of it as a prison 
house were it not for our hopes of resurrection. 
If we believed that death ended existence forever, 
all hope of the release of the dead would 
vanish, and we would not think of them as in 
prison, nor indicate our hope by a mound. 

Apply this thought to the verse under consideration, 
and it implies this:— The first death 
and the hopes of resurrection, which, by God's 
favor, were attached to it, will pass away or be 
utterly destroyed in the second death. From 
that time forth there will be no such thing as 
death under the first sentence, because of 
Adam's sin, and a hope of resurrection from it. 
That will all have been accomplished: every 
prisoner will have been set free from all the 
guilt, condemnation and penalty of the first 
trial; and the sentence of the second trial, 
whether to second life or second death, will 
have fully swallowed up and destroyed the penalty 
of the first sentence, as well as the hopes 



which attached to it. Hades is never associated 

with the second death, because those 

who go into the second death are in no sense 

"prisoners of hope;" they are utterly destroyed, 

extinct, without hope of any deliverance by resurrection. 

Hence the propriety of hades being 

destroyed. 

The destruction of the first death and hades 
commences with the beginning of the Millennial 
reign and continues to its close. It is a 
gradual process of casting into destruction. 
This is in harmony with Paul's explanation (1 Cor. 15:54,55) 
of Isaiah's prophecy, "Then 
[when the little flock, "we," have been changed 
to the full divine nature and likeness and 
begun to reign and bless the world— then] shall 
be brought to pass the saying that is written 
[Isa. 25:6-8], 'He will destroy [cast into destruction, 
or in symbol "the lake of fire"] 
in this mountain [symbol of the "Kingdom 
of God" or the "New Jerusalem"] the face 
of the covering cast over all people [death] and 
the vail [ignorance] that is spread over all 
nations. He will swallow up [the first] death 
victoriously.'" 

So, then, the casting of death and the grave 
into destruction during the Millennial age is a 
part of the second destruction which will include 

R1498 : page 60 

every improper, injurious and useless 
thing. -Isa. 11:9; Psa. 101:5-8. But the second 
death, the sentence of that second trial, 
will be final: it will never be destroyed. And 
let all the lovers of righteousness say, Amen; 
for to destroy the second death, to remove the 
sentence of the second trial, would be to let 
loose again all the evil systems and Satan, and 
all who love and practice wrong and deception, 
and dishonor the Lord, to oppose, offend 
and endeavor to overthrow those who love and 
desire to serve him and enjoy his favor. We 
rejoice that there is no danger of this, but that 
divine justice unites with divine wisdom, love 
and power to bring in everlasting righteousness 
on a permanent basis. 

TURNED INTO HELL. 



"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations 
that forget God. "-Psa. 9:17. 

This statement of the Lord recorded by the 



Psalmist we find without any qualification 
whatever, and we must accept it as a positive 
fact. If the claims of "Orthodoxy" were 
true this would be indeed a fearful thought. 

But let us substitute the true meaning of the 
word sheol, and our text will read: "The 
wicked shall be turned into the condition of 
death, and all the nations that forget God." 
This we believe; but next, Who are the wicked? 
In one sense all men are wicked, in that all are 
violators of God's law; but in the fullest sense 
the wicked are those who, with full knowledge 
of the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the 
remedy provided for their recovery from its 
baneful effects, wilfully persist in sin and refuse 
the remedy. 

As yet few— only consecrated believers- 
have come to a knowledge of God. The world 
knows him not, and the nations cannot forget 
God, until they are first brought to a knowledge 
of him. The consecrated have been enlightened, 
led of the Spirit through faith to 
understand the deep and hidden things of 
God, which reveal the glory of God's character, 
but which, though expressed in his Word, 
appear only as foolishness to the world. 

As we have hitherto seen, this will not be so 
in the age to come, for then "The earth shall 
be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the 
waters cover the sea." (Isa. 11:9.) Much 
that we now receive by faith will then be demonstrated 
to the world by sight. When he who 
has ransomed man from the power of the grave 
(Hos. 13:14) begins to gather his purchased 
possessions back from the prison-house of death 
(Isa. 61:1), when the sleepers are awakened 
under the genial rays of the Sun of Righteousness, 
they will not be slow to realize the truth 
of the hitherto seemingly idle tale, that "Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for 
every man." 

We have also seen that the gradual ascent 
of the King's Highway of Holiness in that age 
will be easy and possible to all, because all 
the stones— stumbling-blocks, errors, etc.— will 
have been gathered out, and straight paths 
made for their feet. It is in that age that this 
text applies. Those who ignore the favoring 
circumstances of that age, and will not be obedient 
to the righteous Judge or Ruler— Christ 
—will truly be the wicked. And every loyal 
subject of the Kingdom of God will approve 
the righteous judgment which turns such a one 
again into sheol— the condition of death. Such 
a one would be unworthy of life; and were he 
permitted to live, his life would be a curse to 



himself and to the rest of mankind, and a 
blemish on the work of God. 

This will be the second death, from which 
there will be no resurrection. Having been 
ransomed from the first or Adamic death (sheol) 
by the sacrifice of Christ, if they die again on 
account of their own sin, "there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for sin." (Heb. 10:26.) 
"Christ dieth no more; death hath no more 
dominion over him." (Rom. 6:9.) The second 
death should be dreaded and shunned by 
all, since it is to be the final end of existence 
to all those deemed unworthy of life. But in 
it there can be no suffering. Like the first 
death, it is the extinction of life. 

It is because mankind had, through sin, become 
subject to death (sheol, hades) that Christ 
Jesus came to deliver us and save us from death. 
For this purpose Christ was manifested, that 
he might destroy death. (1 John 3:8; Heb. 2:14.) 
Death is a cessation of existence, the 
absence of LIFE. There is no difference between 
the condition in the first and second 
deaths, but there is hope of a release from the 
first, while from the second there will be no 
release, no return to life. The first death sentence 
passed upon all on account of Adam's 
sin, while the second death can be incurred 
only by wilful, individual sin. 

That the application of our text belongs to 
the coming age is evident, for both saints and 
sinners go into sheol or hades now, and this 
scripture indicates that, in the time when it 
applies, only the wicked shall go there. And 
the nations that forget God must be nations 
that have known him, else they could not forget 
him; and never yet have the nations been 
brought to that knowledge, nor will they until 
the coming time, when the knowledge of the 
Lord shall fill the whole earth, and none shall 

R1498 : page 61 

need to say unto his neighbor, Know thou the 
Lord, for all shall know him, from the least to 
the greatest of them. (Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34.) 
In further proof of this, we find that the Hebrew 
word shub, which in our text is translated 
"turned," signifies turned back, as to a previous 
place or condition. Those referred to 
in this text have been either in sheol or liable 
to enter it, but, being redeemed by the precious 
blood of Christ, will be brought out of 
sheol. If then they are wicked, they, and all 
who forget God, shall be turned back to sheol. 



CHOOSE LIFE THAT YE MAY LIVE. 



"I have set before thee this day life and good, death 
and evil." "I have set before you life and death, blessing 
and cursing; therefore choose life, that both thou and 
thy seed may live."— Deut. 30:15,19. 

We come now to the consideration of other 
Scripture statements in harmony with the conclusions 
set forth in the preceding articles. 

The words here quoted are from Moses to 
Israel. To appreciate them we must remember 
that Israel as a people, and all their covenants, 
sacrifices, etc., had a typical significance. 

God knew that they could not obtain life by 
keeping the Law, no matter how much they 
would choose to do so, because they, like all 
others of the fallen race, were weak, depraved, 
through the effect of the sour grape of sin 
which Adam had eaten, and which his children 
had continued to eat. (Jer. 31:29.) Thus, 
as Paul declares, the Law given to Israel could 
not give them life because of the weaknesses or 
depravity of their fallen nature.— Rom. 8:3; 
Heb. 7:19; 10:1-10. 

Nevertheless, God foresaw a benefit to them 
from even an unsuccessful attempt to live perfectly, 
namely, that it would develop them, as 
well as show them the need of the better sacrifice, 
the ransom which our Lord Jesus gave, 
and a greater deliverer than Moses. And with 
all this their trial furnished a pattern or shadow 
of the great second trial insured to the whole 
world (which Israel typified) and secured by 
the better sacrifices for sin— which were there 
prefigured, to be accomplished by the great 
prophet of whom Moses was but a type. 

Thus seeing that the trial for life or death 
presented to Israel was but typical of the great 
second trial and its issues of life and death- 
second (or restored) life and second death- 
may help some to see that the great thousand-year-day 
of trial, of which our Lord Jesus has 
been appointed the Judge, contains the two issues, 
life and death. All will then be called 
upon to decide, under that most favorable opportunity, 
and a choice must be made; and 
the verdict in the end will be in harmony with 
the choice expressed by the conduct of each during 
that age of trial. 

The second trial, its sentence and its result 
are also shown in the words of Moses quoted 
by Peter (Acts 3:22,23): "A Prophet shall 
the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 



brethren, like unto me. Him shall ye hear in 
all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. 
And it shall come to pass that every soul [being] 
which will not hear [obey] that Prophet 
[and thus choose life] shall be destroyed from 
among the people." In few words this draws 
our attention to the world's second trial, yet 
future. It shows the great Prophet or Teacher 
raised up by God to give a new judgment or 
trial to the condemned race which he has redeemed 
from the first condemnation. It shows, 
too, the conditions of the second trial to be 
righteous obedience, and that with the close 
of that trial some will be adjudged worthy of 
the second or restored life, and some worthy 
of destruction— second death. 

Our Lord Jesus, having redeemed all by his 
perfect and precious sacrifice, is the Head of 
this great Prophet; and during the Gospel age 
God has been selecting the members of his 
body, the little flock, who with Christ Jesus 
shall be God's agents in judging the world. 
Together they will be that Great Prophet or 
Teacher promised. "Do ye not know that 
the saints shall judge the world?"— 1 Cor. 6:2. 

The Lord briefly presents the same matter 
in Matt. 25:31-46. There he shows the trial 
of the world (not the Church, which as members 
of his body are with him in glory during 
that Millennial reign— judging, ruling and blessing 
the world), and, concluding the illustration 
of the second trial, he also shows the same 
two classes noted above, and their opposite rewards 
—the one class, who obey and come into 
harmony with his arrangement, enter fully into 
the blessing of the second life, and are therefore 
called "blessed." The other class, who 
with every opportunity obey not, experience 
the second condemnation of death, the "second 
death," and are thus "cursed" or condemned 
again. 

The first trial was of mankind only, and hence 
its penalty or curse, the first death, was only 
upon man. But the second trial is to be much 
more comprehensive. It will not only be the 
trial of fallen and imperfect mankind, but it 
will include every other thing and principle and 
being out of harmony with Jehovah. "God 
will bring every work into judgment, with every 
secret thing." 

The "Judgment to come" will include the 
judgment to condemnation of all false systems 

R1498 : page 62 

—civil, social and religious. These will be 



judged, condemned and banished early in that 
Millennial day, the light of truth causing them 
to come into disrepute and finally to flee away. 
This judgment comes first in order, that the 
trial of man may proceed unhindered by error, 
prejudice, etc. It will include also the trial 
of "the angels which sinned"— those angels 
"which kept not their first estate" of purity 
and obedience to God. Thus it is written by 
the Apostle of the members of the body of the 
great Prophet and High Priest who is to be 
Judge of all— "Know ye not that the saints 
shall judge angels?"— 1 Cor. 6:3. 

This being the case, the condemnation of the 
second trial (destruction, second death) will 
cover a wider range of offenders than the penalty 
or curse for failure under the first trial. 
In a word, the second destruction at the close 
of the second trial is an utter destruction of 
every being and every thing which will not glorify 
God and be of use and blessing to his general 
creation. Thus the second death will be 
to the perfect future age what gehenna, the 
Valley of Hinnom, was to the typical city and 
kingdom of Israel. It will destroy and consume 
totally whatever is cast into it. 

Thus seen, the second death does not mean 
simply to die or be destroyed a second time; for 
some things will be destroyed in the "second 
death" which were never before destroyed; for 
instance, Satan never yet died, so it could not 
mean death a second time to him. So, too, some 
of the systems of error which will be destroyed 
in that gehenna, which is the second death, were 
never before destroyed. Hence this second 
death in which they will be destroyed cannot 
be considered as their destruction a second time. 
The second death, or destruction, is the name 
of the destruction which will come upon every 
evil thing as the result or verdict of the second 
judgment, the "judgment to come." 



page 62 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1498 : page 62 

REBUILDING THE WALL OF JERUSALEM. 



I. QUAR., LESSON VIII., FEB. 19th, NEH. 4:9-23. 

Golden Text— "We made our prayer unto God, and 
set a watch against them."— Neh. 4:9. 

In our last lesson we saw the earnestness 
of Nehemiah, and noted his appeal to the 
right quarter for guidance and help. His 
appeal to Artaxerxes was blessed of the 
Lord— his prayer was answered. He was 
granted permission to go to Jerusalem, and 
become its Governor, with authority to act 
in the name of the Persian monarch. Upon 
his arrival at Jerusalem his first work was to 
reconnoiter the walls of the city and lay out 
a plan for rebuilding them. He had awakened 
the zeal of all the people, and the work 
of rebuilding the wall was well advanced 
at the point where this lesson begins. The 
jealousy of the neighboring rulers was awakened 
by this activity, and they had come 
against Jerusalem to attack it and spoil and 
stop the work of repairs, fearing that, after 
all, it might succeed. This compelled Nehemiah 
and those who co-operated with him to 
divide their attention between building and 
defending. Their opponents were strengthened 
by "false brethren," Jews from the surrounding 
country whose interest and sympathies 
were with these other peoples, who 
sought all they could to discourage the workers 
and to stop the work. But watching and 
praying and working they succeeded. 

This lesson seems to enforce and exemplify 
the Apostle's description of a true 
Christian course— "Not slothful in business, 
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord." It 
would be valuable to many of God's people 
to-day, if it led them to resolve that they, 
like Nehemiah, would henceforth do with 
their might what their hands find to do. 

The building of the wall, the opposition 
of enemies and relatives and so-called friends, 
and the necessity for fighting as well as 
building, furnish a good illustration of the 
experience of all who turn from sin to righteousness. 
They find the gates and fortresses 
of their nature weak and broken down. 



And the moment they start to repair and 
build up good character they find enemies 
within and without to hinder. Persecution 
and ridicule will first be used (as in the above 
case) and if these fail to overthrow the good 
resolutions force will be employed. There 
is no way of avoiding a battle if you would 
proceed with your character-building. Each 
must at least do as did this band— i.e., put on 
the armor and watch and pray and build. 

R1498 : page 63 

READING THE LAW. 



I. QUAR., LESSON IX., FEB. 26th, NEH. 8:1-12. 

Golden Text— "Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold 
wondrous things out of thy Law."— Psa. 119:18. 

By the Law here mentioned, the writings 
of Moses are meant. The Law Covenant was 
made with Israelites at Sinai, and the basis 
of it was in the Ten Commandments engraved 
upon the two tables of stone, which were 
handed down to them. As heretofore shown, 
that was not the fullest possible statement 
of the divine will, but a provisional arrangement, 
adapted as much as possible to Israel's 
degraded condition. It was a statement to 
the house of servants in terms which they 
could best appreciate. But when the time 
came to express the divine law to the house 
of sons, "his own house," our Lord expressed 
the matter not only more concisely but more 
exactly, in the perfect law of love. 

As the Israelites returned from Babylon 
were blessed by the reading and understanding 
of "Moses' Law," much more those who 
are now returning to the Lord, out of bondage 
to "Babylon the Great, the mother of 
harlots" (Rev. 17:1-6), are being greatly 
blessed by a fuller appreciation of the divine 
law, Love, granted to the house of sons. 
They are learning that God's Law is of the 
essence of his own nature, and that his dealings 
with his creatures are on the lines of that 
law; for God is love, and love worketh no 
ill to his neighbor. And, searching the entire 
Word of God, which in a larger sense 
is God's Law, his faithful followers learn 
that God's plans as therein stated are all plans 
of love and justice— love to those who love 
righteousness, and a just recompense of everlasting 



destruction in the second death for all 

others,— and a full provision for all to come 

to this second trial for life, through Christ, 

our Lord, who redeemed all from the condemnation 

of Adam, the result of the first trial. 

-1 Cor. 15:21,22. 

R1498 : page 63 

KEEPING THE SABBATH. 



I. QUAR., LESSON X., MAR. 5th, NEH. 13:15-22. 

Golden Text— "Remember the Sabbath day, to keep 
itholy."-Exod. 20:8. 

While from this scrap of history we learn 
of the worthy zeal of Nehemiah for the observance 
of the Sabbath day by Israel, in accordance 
with the law of Moses— the provisional 
statement of the law of God— it is 
necessary to remember that we are living in 
a different dispensation. The Jewish or Law 
Covenant having passed away (Col. 2:14), 
we are now living under the provisions of 
the "New Covenant"— a covenant of life, 
not through the keeping of the Mosaic law, 
but through faith in Christ, whose righteousness 
is imputed to us by faith.— Rom. 3:20-26. 

This "New Covenant," unlike the Law 
Covenant, does not stipulate that in order 
to prove ourselves worthy of everlasting life 
we shall not kill, nor steal, nor bear false 
witness, nor that we must keep the seventh 
day as a Sabbath or day of rest from labor, 
etc., etc. But it does stipulate that, while 
we humbly trust in the provisions of the New 
Covenant for our justification through the 
precious blood of Christ, we must follow 
after "the law of the spirit of life"— the law 
of Love— supreme love to God, and love to 
the neighbor as to self. (John 15:12-14; 
1 John 3:23,24; Rom. 8:2; Jas. 2:8; Gal. 6:2; 
5:14; Heb. 8:10; 10:16; Jas. 1:25.) 
According to this New Covenant, all who, accepting 
of the redemption provided through 
Christ, have a disposition or spirit in harmony 
with God's perfect law of love are 
reckoned of God to be worthy of life, regardless 
of the inability of their fallen, imperfect 
human nature to fully express that 
spirit or disposition. This New Covenant, 
with these gracious and merciful provisions 
for the weaknesses of our flesh, and this benevolent 



discernment of the willingness of 

our spirits to conform fully to the perfect 

will or law of God, is secured and made possible 

by the fact that Christ died for us, to 

liberate us from the curse of the law, Jews 

being set free from the condemnation resulting 

from failure to obey the law given 

by Moses, others being released by the same 

sacrifice from the condemnation inherited 

through Adam, the penalty of the original 

sin against God's law or command in Eden. 

And our Lord's resurrection became our assurance 

of the acceptableness of his sacrifice, 

and that in due time he will be the Deliverer 

of all that obey him, from the bondage of sin 

as well as from death, its penalty. 

The law of love is not given to all the 
world now, but merely to those who enter 

R1499 : page 63 

the bonds and cover of the New Covenant: 
just as the Mosaic Law Covenant was not 
upon all the world, but merely upon those 
who came under that Covenant— Israel after 
the flesh. Strictly speaking, the world is under 
no law except that of their own consciences 
—even though the light of conscience 
be greater in some and less in others. Since 

R1499 : page 64 

the world failed (representatively— in Adam's 
failure to obey the supreme law of Love 
to God, which implied obedience) it has been 
"without God and without hope" (Eph. 2:12), 
and without any law except what remained 
of the originally perfect law of nature, 
—conscience. 

While the New Covenant, which went into 
force after being sealed with the precious 
blood of Christ, was declared to be for ALL, 
it really applies only to those who have come 
under it, by knowledge of, faith in, and obedience 
to it and its Mediator,— Christ Jesus, 
our Lord. Such alone are under the Law 
of the New Covenant— Love. And to all 
such it is as useless to impose the Sabbath of 
the Law of Moses as to warn them not to 
blaspheme God's name, nor to worship other 
gods, nor to kill, steal, bear false-witness, etc. 
If they are under the New Covenant nothing 
so gross will apply to them: the only law 
which will reach their case will be the finer 
requirements of the Law of Love; and no 
Sabbath of mere cessation from labor will 



be real rest to them, but rather the rest of 
faith in Christ's finished work of redemption 
and coming work of rescue. Such, under 
the terms of the New Covenant, may do 
any work of service for God or men on any 
day of the week; and such would be prohibited 
from any violation of its law of Love 
on any day. The only laws governing those 
under the New Covenant, on the question 
of abstinence from good works on any day, 
would be the civil laws of the world. And 
these laws are peculiarly favorable to any 
good works of necessity or mercy or worship. 
In any case we are to "be subject to 
the powers that be" in all matters which do 
not conflict with the law of the New Covenant 
—Love. 

The Law of Love is the real law of God. 
(Rom. 13:10.) It was this law or principle 
that was originally written in the perfect 
nature of the first perfect man, when he was 
created in God's likeness and image. The 
Mosaic Law Covenant, with all its forms and 
ceremonies— its typical sacrifices, its feasts 
and its new moons and sabbath days— has 
passed away: no one is longer under its dominion. 
Therefore, says the Apostle Paul, 
"Let no man judge you in meat, or in drink, 
or in respect of a holy day, or of the new 
moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a 
shadow of things to come."— Col. 2:16,17. 

Thus we are taught to consider the Jewish 
Sabbath as typical of some higher blessing, 
realized during the Gospel dispensation; 
and the next question is, What did it foreshadow? 
The term "Sabbath" signifies 
rest, and the fourth commandment in the 
Law given by Moses was that this day of 
rest shall be kept holy unto the Lord. And 
as such it beautifully prefigured the worshipful 
rest of faith, and freedom from the 
bondage of Satan and sin, into which 
all believers come, on entering the New 
Covenant. 

This antitype is not a rest of one day out 
of seven, but a continual rest, to be enjoyed 
every day; and the fact of the observance 
of this rest among the Jews on the seventh 
day, after the six days of labor, is further 
typical of the fact that the fulness of the 
antitype will not be realized until the six 
thousand-year-days of evil and toil under 
the curse of sin are ended and the seventh 
or Millennial day has begun. 

When the early Church began to realize 
its freedom from the Law Covenant, gradually 



the seventh-day Sabbath ceased to be 

observed, and the first day of the week began 

to be observed; not as a Sabbath or 

special rest day, but as a day of worship and 

praise, commemorative of our Lord's resurrection 

and of the new and blessed hopes 

inspired by it. It was not regarded by them 

as taking the place of the Jewish Sabbath, 

and was never observed with that scrupulous 

exactness which was required for the 

Seventh day under the Jewish dispensation. 

The restoration of the proper observance 
of the Jewish Sabbath and the various other 
reforms instituted by Nehemiah and Ezra 
indicated a commendable zeal for that Law 
Covenant then in force which the Lord surely 
appreciated. And while it is not our 
part to similarly seek to bind the obligations 
and penalties of the Jewish law upon those 
whom God hath made free from the law, we 
may have a similar zeal for God in those 
things which he does require of us now, 
under the New Covenant. With a similar 
zeal we should seek to cultivate and manifest 
in ourselves and others that which our Lord 
defined as the spirit of the divine law- 
Love. This law of love is of universal and 
eternal application, and its blessed outcome 
of harmony, peace, happiness and joy will 
fully repay the protracted effort of obedience. 

"Love is the fulfilling of the law:" "Let 
love be unfeigned:" "Love worketh no ill 
to its neighbor:" "There is no fear in love, 
but perfect love casteth out fear." 



page 66 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION, FOR ONE YEAR, 
TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY" (TRACTS), QUARTERLY, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



THE DAILY FOOD 1893 CALENDARS, announced 
in our January 15th issue, met with a large 
demand. We have secured another lot at the 
same price,— 15 cents including postage. 



OUR FEBRUARY ISSUE. 



Our double number for February seems to 
have been generally well thought of by our 
readers; and the offer to supply extra copies 
of it at five cents a copy was taken advantage 
of quite freely,— some ordering as many as a 



hundred. 

As we printed quite a large edition, we still 
have plenty and will continue the half -rate offer. 
If more convenient for you, send us the addresses, 
plainly written, and we will attend to 
the mailing of them. 

We have already heard from a number of 
ministers of various denominations and others 
relative to this TOWER, and believe that good 
results must follow. 



THE CHANGE APPROVED. 



While a few have written of their disappointment 
in connection with the cancellation of the 
Allegheny Spring Meeting arrangements, we 
have heard from a far larger number who approve 
the program and favor a Chicago meeting. 
And we trust that eventually we may all see 
that the Lord has guided in the matter for the 
general good. 

Several have written from the far West, expressing 
great satisfaction; and saying that 
they hope to get to Chicago at the reduced 
rates; but never expected to get to Allegheny. 



Do not forget the Missionary Envelopes. We 
have a new lot and supply them now at the reduced 
price of 25 cents per hundred, and $2.00 
per thousand. This includes free delivery to you 
at your Postoffice. 



A WORD TO CORRESPONDENTS. 



Letters containing money or orders should 
be addressed to the Tower Publishing Co. 
Private letters to the Editor may be enclosed, 
sealed, in the same envelope. Make no allowance 
for our remembering previous orders and 
explanations. Make each letter complete in 
itself. When changing your address give the 
old as well as the new one. Remit by Draft, 
Money Order or Registered letter. Give your 
full address at the beginning of each letter. 



TRACTS IN SWEDISH AND NORWEGIAN. 



Tract No. 1, "Do the Scriptures Teach that 
Eternal Torment is the Wages of Sin?" has 
been translated into Swedish, which is Tract 
No. 9; and into Norwegian, which is Tract 
No. 13. We do not send these out except when 
specially ordered. Any who can use these 
judiciously are welcome to order them— freely. 
These, as well as Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,10 and 
14, are supplied in quantities without charge- 
out of the Tract Fund. 



BINDERS FOR 1893-1894. 



Patent Binders of a size suitable for the 
TOWER for two years' issues, and with the name 
of our journal and the dates 1893-1894 stamped 
in gilt on the side, are now ready. Those 
therefore who hereafter order Binders should 
specify whether they want these for coming 
years or those for 1891-1892 which have no 
dates stamped on them. These are extremely 
desirable for preserving your TOWERS in a convenient 
form for future reference. Price fifty 
cents each. 



R1499 : page 67 
