From Our Readers
Protection Against Thievery
I want to thank you for helping me to save money, which I would have lost if I had not followed the advice in the Italian edition of Awake! for April 8, 1980. [English issue of October 22, 1979, “Wise Counsel Protects Against Crime.”] Recently my home was visited by thieves who stole some money. Thanks to your advice to keep valuables in different places I was able to save some of it.
E. B., Italy
We are pleased to hear that our articles are helpful. On this point, please read “There Are Ways to Avoid Robbery” in our issue of January 22, 1983.​—ED.
Video Games
I really enjoyed your article on ‘Video Games.’ (November 8, 1982) I have decided to study it together with my 10-year-old daughter. We should see this side of what most people consider a harmless game. Only one thing bothers me. You state: “What starts out as innocent fun turns out to be an addictive, compulsive game that controls the players.” Would it not have been more in line with truth to have said that such may turn out to be addictive, instead of saying it will always be the case?
L. R., Colorado
We agree that readers should understand what was said as merely a general statement and not interpret it as meaning it will always be the case, without exception. But people can be benefited by knowing the dangers and how others have been affected.​—ED.
Just a few short years ago I shook my head in dismay at the enormous amount of time and money my little brother was spending at the local arcade. Now due to the many new and eye-catching games that have been produced I find myself becoming a slave to these very same things. Make no mistake about it, video games can become addictive. I’ve even found that during my meditation in prayer I start to see the video game in my mind’s eye, and right there during the prayer I begin playing the game! What a damaging effect this has had on my spirituality! The video game can’t be all to blame for this, I know, but it nevertheless plays an important role.
B. J., Massachusetts
Drug Addiction
I want to thank you for the advice on tranquilizers and depression. (May 22, 1981, and October 22, 1981) I must admit that, at first, these articles upset me. This was because I had never thought of myself as a drug addict, although I had been prescribed Valium for over 10 years. I believed it would be impossible for me to stop taking these pills. After much thought and prayer I decided to try again slowly to reduce my intake of this drug. It has not been easy, but after eight months I am now free from these dreadful tablets. I felt that, if I made an earnest effort, Jehovah would back me up and strengthen me. I feel now, after three full months clear of these tablets, that I have been helped every step of the way. If you had not published these articles, I would still be taking Valium.
S. L., England

