Let’s Taste Some Delicious Mexican Dishes!
Lunch is being served! How we appreciate the arrangement our Creator has made for us to fortify our bodies with good, wholesome food!
Here in Mexico we have a very simple but tasty dish. We call it molletes. It’s simple because all you need is a crisp French roll, refried beans, cheese and a delicious Mexican hot sauce. We know you will like refried beans even if you don’t use them for the molletes. You must cook the beans until they are well done. Now put a little oil in a frying pan and strain the beans and pour them into the hot oil and begin mashing them until they become as a paste or of the proper consistency for spreading on a roll. If your appetite has been whetted already you can simply eat this dish just as it is, and it is delicious.
But you say no, you want molletes, well, then, let’s continue. You must split the French roll in half lengthwise and spread the refried beans on both pieces and then sprinkle it with a soft cheese. Put it into the oven for 10 minutes and now it is piping hot and ready to be eaten by adding hot sauce according to one’s taste. There are a number of ways to make different hot sauces, but most of us prefer what we call typical Mexican sauce, which we prepare by finely chopping a couple of tomatoes, an onion and a hot chili or two, according to taste. Let me warn you​—go easy on the hot sauce. Some even make the sauce omitting the hot chilies, but we Mexicans enjoy our hot sauce, so come on with the chilies! Hm-m, please serve one more mollete!
Here in Mexico one of the main staples is corn. There are many ways to prepare it so as to make it appetizing as well as nutritious. If hominy is available where you live you will find Pozole a very easy dish to prepare. You must cook the hominy seasoned with salt until it bursts (as if it were popcorn). While it is cooking we can cut the chicken or pork in small pieces and boil them until they are well done. Strain the hominy now and add it to the meat and broth and cook them together for 15 minutes. Now arrange separately on a plate cayenne powder, oregano, chopped onions, shredded lettuce and quartered lemons. Each will be served a deep bowl of hominy and meat; add the seasoning desired, along with the onions, lettuce and the juice of the lemons. This dish can also be garnished with sliced radishes if you like. We like it very much since we have our soup, meat and salad all in one meal and, oh, it is so good!

