Origami—The Art of Folding Paper
BY AWAKE! WRITER IN JAPAN
IMAGINE a single piece of paper transformed into a beautiful, three-dimensional crane. Its wings are proudly extended, and rising from the bird’s graceful body is a long slender neck, crowned by an elegant head and a distinctive beak. Amazingly, this crane is created by folding a square piece of paper in a precise 12-step process.
The making of a stunning array of shapes by folding, opening, and bending a flat piece of paper is a Japanese art form called origami. The term itself means “folded paper.” Although its origins are not clearly known, origami in Japan can be traced back to ancient times when formal documents were elaborately folded. It is thought that during the Edo period (1603-1867), origami developed as a form of leisure activity that anyone could enjoy. It was then that new techniques of folding were developed. This art has been handed down from one generation to another as parents have taught their children and grandchildren. Many Japanese fondly recall that as children they would stare in astonishment while their mother nimbly folded paper, creating delightful objects for them.
Based on the shapes created, there are basically two classifications of origami. One is called traditional origami, which involves forming paper cranes, frogs, boats, balloons, insects, and plants. The other is called creative origami, which departs from the traditional techniques that have been used for centuries. Large dinosaurs, elaborate insects, and other intricate designs are created in this type of origami.
In modern times a number of professional fields, such as architecture, have applied the principles of origami in the design of a wide variety of functional products. Origami has also been used by health providers as an effective rehabilitation exercise for the elderly and the handicapped.
Making Your Own Origami
How can you make origami? Traditional origami is not difficult. It requires no special tools or training—just care and your powers of observation. Of course, you need appropriate paper and the rules for folding. Anyone who patiently and faithfully folds the paper can transform it into an attractive shape.
You may use any paper on hand, including newspaper, advertisement fliers, or decorative wrapping paper. You can decide the size, quality, and color of your paper according to what you wish to make. If you want to make something really pretty, however, you should consider the color of the paper carefully. The attractiveness of your creation will depend not only on the way you fold the paper but also on the kind of paper you use. It would be good to use paper made specifically for origami. You may even want to use washi, Japanese handmade paper.a
For most shapes it is essential that the paper be a perfect square. You can check if the paper is square by bringing the opposite corners together and folding the paper into a triangle. If all the edges match perfectly, then the paper has been cut correctly.
To produce a beautiful end result, you have to fold the paper so that corner matches corner and edge matches edge precisely. Also, the folds must be tight. When folding the paper in half to form a triangle, hold the two diagonal corners together firmly and exactly between your thumb and first finger, and then fold the base with your other hand. When folding the paper in half to form a rectangle, make sure that both top corners match perfectly, and then hold the top edges together firmly while you fold the base.
Some origami shapes require that the paper be folded and then unfolded, producing a crease in preparation for the next step. The paper is at times curled, pleated, rolled over, pinched, pushed in, blown open, turned over—all in order to shape it for different effects.
Origami can be enjoyed anywhere, anytime. After learning this art, basically all you need is paper. By just using your fingers, you can make a variety of traditional shapes or even create new ones of your own. Expect some level of frustration if you try to learn origami from a chart of drawings. But if you happen to meet someone who knows origami, take advantage of the opportunity to learn this art of folding paper.
[Footnote]
See the article “Washi—Japan’s Ancient Handmade Paper,” published in the January 8, 1992, issue of Awake!

