Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will probably find it interesting to recall the following:
□ How does the Bible’s record of Jehovah’s battles give us confidence in facing the “great tribulation”? (Matthew 24:21)
Always in control, Jehovah has demonstrated that he can outthink his enemies and maneuver circumstances for the salvation of his people.​—8/15, page 27.
□ What must parents be willing to do to maintain communication between themselves and their children?
Parents must spend time with their children. Also, they must be willing to make sacrifices in behalf of their children for the sake of their mental, physical, and spiritual growth.​—9/1, page 22.
□ What meaning does Jesus’ transfiguration have for us today? (Mark 9:2-4)
The transfiguration can build faith in Jehovah’s prophetic word and strengthen our belief in Jesus Christ as God’s Son and promised Messiah. It can also fortify our belief in Jesus’ resurrection to spirit life and increase our faith in God’s government.​—9/15, page 23.
□ What is the meaning of “for a while” at Isaiah 11:6?
A careful rendering of this verse shows that the wolf and the lamb will not constantly be around each other in the new world. It is probable that such animals will still have distinct habitats and so come under the categories of ‘domestic animals and wild beasts’ as existed in the original Paradise. (Genesis 1:24) However, animals will be at peace with one another, able to be around one another without risk.​—9/15, page 31.
□ What is the key to real Christianity?
Love is the key to real Christianity. Faith, works, and right association are indispensable, but without love their value is not realized. This is so because Jehovah is preeminently a God of love. (1 Corinthians 13:1-3; 1 John 4:8)​—10/1, page 20.
□ Does the expression “a time for birth and a time to die” at Ecclesiastes 3:2 support the idea that God has predetermined our time of death?
No. Solomon was simply discussing the continuing cycle of life and death that afflicts imperfect humanity. Ecclesiastes 7:17 states: “Do not be wicked overmuch, nor become foolish. Why should you die when it is not your time?” What sense would this counsel make if one’s time of death were predetermined?​—10/15, pages 5-6.
□ What argues against the apostle Peter’s being the first bishop of Rome?
There is no proof that Peter ever visited the city of Rome; nor did Peter ever refer to himself as anything more than one of Christ’s apostles. (2 Peter 1:1)​—10/15, page 8.
□ Is it right for Christians to send flowers for a funeral?
If it is well-known that a custom (or a design, such as a cross) presently has a religious meaning in one’s area, it should be avoided. So Christians would not send flowers in the form of a cross or use them in some formal way that definitely has a false religious meaning. However, at this time in many lands, the custom of providing flowers without religious links is widespread. Some Christians have sent flowers to add a note of cheer to a sad occasion and to show sympathy and concern.​—10/15, page 31.
□ What do official definitions make clear about the Trinity?
They make it clear that the Trinity doctrine is not a simple idea. Instead, it is a complex set of ideas that have been brought together over several centuries and locked into one another. Many scholars, including Trinitarians, admit that the Bible actually does not contain the doctrine of the Trinity.​—11/1, pages 21-2.
□ Why is 29 C.E. a pivotal date in Bible history?
Because by combining precise Biblical information with the secular dating of Tiberius’ reign, Bible students can calculate that John’s ministry began in the spring of 29 C.E. and that six months later, in the autumn of 29 C.E., John baptized Jesus.​—11/15, page 31.
□ What did “worship” mean to Hebrew-speaking people, and how does this apply to Jehovah’s Witnesses today?
The Hebrew equivalent of the word “worship” can be translated “service.” In the Hebrew mind, therefore, worship meant service. This is what it means to Jehovah’s people today, so a very important mark of true religion is the godly service of preaching.​—12/1, page 19.

