How Will They Hear?
 1. Why may the preaching work be challenging, and why do we persist?
1 With Jehovah’s day fast approaching, there is an urgent need to assist yet countless others in obtaining an accurate knowledge of God and his purpose for mankind. (John 17:3; 2 Pet. 3:9, 10) This may be challenging at times, since many are apathetic or may ridicule us because of our preaching work. (2 Pet. 3:3, 4) Nonetheless, we have every reason to believe that there are still those in our territory who will accept the good news once they hear it. How will such ones hear without someone to preach?​—Rom. 10:14, 15.
 2. How does the example of the apostle Paul encourage us?
2 Facing Opposition: For the sake of those willing to hear the Kingdom message, we must not be deterred. Philippi was the first city in Europe to hear the apostle Paul preach the good news. When false accusations were leveled against him and Silas, both were beaten with rods and thrown into prison. (Acts 16:16-24) However, that painful experience did not cause Paul to shrink back in fear. When he visited Thessalonica, the next city on his missionary tour, he ‘mustered up boldness by means of God.’ (1 Thess. 2:2) Does not Paul’s example illustrate the reason for our ‘not giving up’?​—Gal. 6:9.
 3. What may cause some to have a change of heart though previously not interested?
3 Many who have refused to listen for years have experienced a change of heart. Economic reversal, illness, a death in the family, or reports of disturbing events on the world scene may prompt such a change. (1 Cor. 7:31) Some whose parents were opposed have become adults and are willing to listen. Our continued preaching gives such ones the opportunity to ‘call on the name of Jehovah’ before it is too late.​—Rom. 10:13.
 4. What motivates us to continue in the ministry “without letup”?
4 “Without Letup”: Our love for God and neighbor will motivate us to continue “without letup” in the preaching and disciple-making work, just as the apostles did in the first century. (Acts 5:42) Many today are “sighing and groaning over all the detestable things” now taking place. (Ezek. 9:4) What hope and relief such ones receive when they hear the good news! Even when most people refuse to listen, we have Scriptural assurance that Jehovah is well pleased with our efforts.​—Heb. 13:15, 16.

