“Keep Yourselves in God’s Love”
 1. For what purpose was “Keep Yourselves in God’s Love” published?
1 How keenly we anticipate considering the new book “Keep Yourselves in God’s Love” at the Congregation Bible Study beginning the week of February 23! The letter that the Governing Body addressed to each lover of Jehovah concludes with these words: “It is our sincere hope that this publication will help you to continue to apply the truth in your life and thus keep yourself ‘in God’s love . . . with everlasting life in view.’​—Jude 21.”
 2. In what areas of life will this new book help us?
2 What to Anticipate: How do Bible principles apply in areas such as association, entertainment, respect for authority, personal habits, marriage, speech, and customs? Our consciences will be molded according to the lofty standards of righteousness revealed in God’s Word. (Ps. 19:7, 8) As our understanding of Jehovah’s way of thinking increases, our obedience in all areas of life will be motivated by a desire to please him.​—Prov. 27:11; 1 John 5:3.
 3. Why should we do our best to participate in each week’s lesson?
3 Be Determined to Participate: As you prepare, make it your goal to praise God among his congregated people. (Heb. 13:15) The entire congregation will consider this new study publication together. The smaller portion of material will allow all of us to prepare thoroughly, giving us confidence to share what we have learned. Our well-prepared, concise comments will incite others to love and fine works and will contribute to a lively, meaningful consideration of the material. (Heb. 10:24) Also, our joy will be made full as we individually make expressions of our faith.
 4. Why is it imperative that we observe Jehovah’s commandments?
4 On his final night on earth as a human, Jesus linked observing Jehovah’s commandments with remaining in God’s love. (John 15:10) With the assistance of the “God’s Love” book, we will be more resolved than ever to apply Bible principles in everyday life and to ‘keep ourselves in God’s love.’​—Jude 21.

