Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JUNE 15, 1917 


No. 12 


FAITH AND ITS REWARD 

'Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life."— Revelations 2:10. 


At this momentous hour the truly consecrated this side the 
\eil await the completion of the church, looking eagerly for 
evidence as to the consummation of their hopes. All these 
faithful ones fully realize that the church is now in a time 
of crucial trial and testing. And many such are asking, "How 
long will it be until the trials are ended, and we may see our 
Lord face to face?" Some having a greater degree of imagination
 than others state with positiveness that the completion 
of the church in glory will be at a certain date, which they 
proceed to set forth; and their opinion thus expressed is accepted
 by some as absolute truth. Others, however, require 
a greater degree of evidence, and confidently wait upon the 
Lord to give the desired information in his own "due time." 
What is the cause of this difference in the attitude of Christian
 brethren seeing that all such are consecrated unto the 
Lord? We answer that some of the dear friends have a 
greater degree of faith or something like unto it than others, 
and that we are now in a time of special trial of faith. In 
this connection we are reminded of two texts; viz., "That the 
trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold 
that perisheth, though it be tried by fire, might be found 
unto praise and honor and glory at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ"; and "according to your faith be it unto you." — 1 
Peter 1:7; Matthew 9:29. 

These texts suggest a testing of the faith of all Christians, 
and imply that according to faith exercised will be the degrees
 of reward. In order to appreciate the importance of this 
test upon the church, it is necessary to mark the distinction 
between credulity and faith. Some Christians have much 
credulity and little faith, while others have little credulity and 
much faith. From the foregoing texts and many others it is 
evident that the faith of all must be tried, and that the trial 
will be severe. 

THE CHURCH NEARING THE HAVE* OF BEST 

When a mariner is nearing what he believes to be the en* 
trance of a haven and finds the fog so thick that he is unable 
to tell definitely his location, he applies the mariner's test. 
Carefully referring to his log, charts and compass, he determines
 approximately his location, and then moves cautiously 
on, keeping cool and sober, and watching with great carefulness
. 

The evidence is strong and clear that the church is now 
nearing the entrance to the haven of her eternal rest; but 
having no positive knowledge as to the exact date, we might 
properly say that the fog obscures our getting a clear view. 
It is, therefore, a time for solemn and sober consideration. 
While it' does not please the Lord to show us the exact day 
of the church's complete glorification, we can confidently wait 
upon him and joyfully sing: 

"I know not what awaits me; 
God kindly veils mine eyes; 
And o'er each step of mine onward way 
He makes new scenes to rise. 

"One step I see before me — 

'Tis all I need to Bee; 
The light of heaven more brightly shines 

When earth's illusions flee; 
And sweetly through the silence comes 

His loving ^Follow me.'" 

Having referred to the divine Word and helps which the 


Lord has provided and which constitute our log, chart and 
compass, and having determined that we are on the right 
course, then we are encouraged to move on with reasonable 
speed. Relying upon the exceeding great and precious promises
 of God's Word, the burden of the Christian beconjes 
lighter, his journey easier, and joy fills his heart. 

CREDULITY AND FAITH DISTINGUISHED 

As we have said, some have mistaken credulity for faith. 
What is the difference? Credulity is a disposition to believe 
something upon slight or no legal evidence. It i3 a conclusion 
reached oy relying upon opinion-evidence, upon supposed 
proof, which does not come from an absolutely reliable source. 

Faith is a positive or definite conclusion reached by relying
 upon competent evidence, which comes from a reliable 
and truthful source. 

A small amount of information suffices for credulity; but 
accurate knowledge is essential to faith. Credulity is usually 
based upon the mere opinion of a finite mind. Faith results
 from reliance upon the testimony of the infinite God. 
Credulity has a poor foundation; faith has a sure foundation
. The stronger our faith, the greater is our ability to 
withstand the storms which beat upon us and the fiery trials 
through which we must pass. 

PROGRESSIVE STEPS OF FAITH 

A strong faith is not acquired instantaneously, but is a 
matter of gradual growth. As a man of intelligence looks 
about him, beholding the wonders of creation, he marks the 
myriads of stars, the moon, the sun, alJ moving noiselessly 
in their orbits without jar or disturbance, .Then he reasons, 
"Surely there is a great First Cause, who created these countless
 worlds and holds them in their places!" He beholds the 
wonders of the earthly creation, apd observes man, the highest
 of earth's creatures, "fearfullv and wonderfully made." 

The reverential mind, meditating upon the beauty and order
 of nature, says: "If there is a great Creator should not 
we expect to find that he has given us some revelation concerning
 his purposes toward man?" He finds that the Bible 
claims to be just such a revelation. A careful examination 
reveals the fact that **holy men of old spake as they were 
moved by the holy Spirit" of God — that the Bible came from 
a reliable source, from Jehovah, through his spokesman — 
and sets forth a plan so wonderful and so beautiful that 
nothing short of the divine mind could have arranged it. 
Believing it to be God's Word, given to man for his instruction
 in righteousness, the reasoning mind who examines its 
contents begins to have faith. As his knowledge of the W T ord 
and his appreciation thereof increase, he finds that he has a 
sure foundation upon which to build. 

Defining faith the Apostle says: "Faith is the substance 
of things noped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews
 11:1) The word "substance" may be properly rendered, 
standing under — understanding. The word 'evidence" means 
proof. Then, analyzing the Apostle's words, we would say, 
"Faith is the* understanding of things for which we hope, and 
the proof of things which our natural eyes do not see." 

What is the desire of all sane men ? We answer, To 
live everlastingly in a state of happiness and peace. But do 
mankind generally have a hope of such a life and such conditions
! They do not, for the reason that they have nothing 
upon which to base that hope. What is the desire and hope 
of the Christian? We answer, To have life everlasting on the 
divine plane, associated forever with the King of kings, and 


[6098] 


Ju»* 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(1B0-181) 


serving to the glory of Jehovah in ruling the world for its 
blessing and uplift. How could any imperfect being dare to 
entertain such a hope? We answer. The basis of such hope 
is faith in God's Word. 

FAITH'S SORE FOUNDATION 

Every intelligent man realizes that he is imperfect. Evolutionists
 tell us that this imperfection is due to the fact that 
we have not been progressing for a sufficient length of time; 
that man was once of a much lower order, but that by processes
 of evolution he is gradually rising and will some day 
reach perfection. Whoever believes this has a vast amount 
of credulity, but absolutely no faith; for there is no real evidence
 that man has evolved from the lower creation. From 
God's Word, we learn that human imperfection is the result 
of Adam's disobedience to God's law; that mankind as descendants
 of Adam have inherited the penalty of sin, death; 
and that for this reason the whole human race is in a dying 
condition. We further learn that God graciously provided 
an atonement for this sin of Adam, through the death and 
resurrection of his beloved Son ; that "Whosoever believeth 
on him shall not perish, but have everlasting life." Believing 
thpse statements, hope begins to spring up in our minds that 
we may live, and this hope is based upon faith. 

Faith has two component elements: first, an intellectual 
understanding and appreciation of the Word of God; and 
second, a confident reliance upon that Word, Both elements 
are necessary to constitute a faith that is pleasing to God. 
One might have an intellectual understanding of the Bible 
and might appreciate it in a sense as the Word of God; but 
unless he relied upon it he would have no faith. He could 
not rely upon it, however, unless he had the knowledge. 
Hence the necessity for both intellectual understanding and 
confident reliance. 

From the Bible we learn that to share with Jesus in his 
glory one must deny himself, take up his cross and follow 
the Master. He must become a footstep follower of Jesus. 
(Matthew 16:24; 1 Peter 2:21) Having this knowledge, and 
relying upon it, we make a full consecration to do the will of 
God, before entering upon the course of following in the 
footsteps of the Master. 

NEW CREATURES NOW 

Our consecration being accepted, we are begotten of the 
holy Spirit and are now new creatures in Christ Jesus. How 
do we know that we are new creatures! We know it because
 of our faith in the exceeding great and precious promises
 of God set forth in his Word, and through his manner 
of dealing with us* "His Spirit beareth witness with our spirit 
that we are the children of God; and if children, then heirs, 
heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, if so be that 
we suffer with him." (Romans 8:16, 17) He assures us 
through his Word that we are begotten to a hope of life on 
the highest plane. "If any man be in Christ he is a new 
creature." — 1 Peter 1:3-5; 2 Corinthians 5:17. 

Having the witness that the Lord gives us, we may now 
hope to live with Christ. (Colossians 3:3, 4) This hope is 
not based upon works. Our justification did not come to us 
through works. Jesus did all the work for us, and our justification
 was the result of his merit imputed to us when we 
fully surrendered ourselves to God, and he counted us righteous
 by reason of this imputed merit of Jesus. 

THE WORKS OF THE HEW CREATURE 

But now, as new creatures, we must perform some works 
before we can gain the crown of life. By these works we 
must demonstrate that we have a real hope of life, that we 
appreciate the prize of immortality set before us, and that 
we are willing to give everything that we have for it. "Faith 
without works is dead." (James 2:20) By our works we 
prove our faith. 

One enters a school to be trained in physical culture. His 
teacher provides him with books of instruction, teaches him 
how to understand these books and shows him what exercises 
he must perform in order to develop physical strength. Suppose
 the pupil sits quietly by and says, "Yes; I believe &H 
that you say and all that the books say; and I approve of 
what I see you do"; but he does no work. It is manifest that 
he will not develop at all. 

As new creatures in Christ we enter the school of Christ, 
to be trained for the position of kings and priests for his 
kingdom. If we really believe that so great a prize is set 
before us, we will prove our faith by our works. God's Word 
is our book of instruction, and Christ Jesus is our great 
Teacher. If we would progress as new creatures we must 
acquire a knowledge of the Word, confidently rely upon that 
Word, and prove our reliance by doing what the Word tells 
us to do. For this reason the Lord permits to come to us 
various experiences. He is seeking for those who are willing
 and anxious to have their faith developed. !He permits 
discouragements, discomforts, trials and tribulations to come 
to his children begotten to the divine nature, in order that 
full faith may be developed and that they may grow up into 
the full stature of men in Christ. It is therefore apparent 
that the faith of such an one must be tried, and that according 
to our faith shall the trial result unto us. 

TIME OP SEVEREST TRIAL 

Written aforetime for our learning are the words: *The 
Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the 
Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul." 
(Deuteronomy 13:3) Again, the Apostle Paul enjoins, "Examine
 yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your 
own selves. Know ye not your own selves how that t/esus 
Christ is in you, except ye are without proof?" — 2 Cor. 13:5. 

Is there any reason to believe that the trial would be 
more severe at one period of the church's history than another
? We answer, Yes. It is clear that the crucial test 
will be during the time of the presence of the Lord at his 
second coming. In Daniel 12:10 the Prophet, speaking of 
the time of the end, says: "Many shall be purified and made 
white and tried." The purification comes by the washing of 
the Word. They are made white by reason of the robe of 
Christs righteousness; and then comes the trial. In Malachi 
3:2, 3, the Prophet says, "Who may abide the day of his 
coming, and who shall stand when he appeareth? For he 
is like a refiner's fire and like fuller's soap; and he shall sit 
as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the 
sons of Levi and purge them as gold and silver; that they 
may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." 

In 1 Corinthians 3:13 we read, "Every man's work shall 
be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it shall 
be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work 
df what sort it is." As we have observed, woVks are built 
upon faith; and it is manifest, therefore, that that which is 
put to the crucial test is our faith, though the superstructure 
of many will be "burned." The Apostle Peter corroborates 
this, saying, "That the trial of your faith, being much more 
precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried by 
fire, may be found unto praise and honor and glory at the 
revelation of Jesus Christ." — 1 Peter 1:7. 
HOW FAITH IS TRIED 

There being two component elements of faith, as we have 
observed, it follows that we shall be tried respecting both of 
these; namely, our intellectual understanding and appreciation
 of the Word of God, and our confident reliance upon that 
Word. This trial fully tests our loyalty to God, and it Is reasonable
 to conclude that this trial would be more severe near 
the end of our journey than when we first believed. Even as it 
would be impossible to destroy a house by fire before the 
house was built, so it is impossible to try tne character of a 
Christian built upon faith .until after that character is developed
. If we should become negligent in the study of God'e 
Word, the knowledge thereof would gradually slip away. If 
we had that knowledge and failed to rely upon it, our faith 
would grow weaker. If our faith is strong, our hope of 
entering into the kingdom will be proportionately strong; and 
if we have this good hope within us we will strive to know 
the rules governing such entrance into the kingdom and seek 
to conform ourselves to those rules. This we will do in proportion
 as we have strength of faith. Every trial that comes 
to a Christian is a trial of his faith; and in the results of 
these trials his loyalty to the Lord is demonstrated. 
ABIDING IN THE DOCTRINE 

Jehovah, through Christ Jesus, has provided the spiritual 
food for the household of faith. Concerning such the Apostle 
Paul declares, "If any man teach otherwise and consent not 
to wholesome words, even the words of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and to the doctrine which is according to holiness, he is 
proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes 
of words whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, 
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds and destitute of 
the truth, supposing that gain is godliness; from such withdraw
 thyself." — 1 Timothy 6:3-5. 

Our Lord Jesus promised that during his second presence 
he would gird himself and make his followers to sit down 
to meat, and that he would come forth and serve them. (Luke 
12:37) Furthermore, he promised that he would provide a 
"faithful and wise servant," whom he would make ruler over 
all his household, to give them meat in due season. (Matthew
 24:45) The Scriptural proof is abundant that the Lord 
is now present in his second advent, and has been present 
for more than forty years; that he has during that time had 
one faithful and wise servant, through whom he has provided
 meat in due season for the household; that all who 


[6099] 


(181-182) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N\ Y 


have a knowledge of present truth received it through this 
channel and from no other source. 

If the food upon the table provided by the Master through 
his servant was essential to bring us to a knowledge of the 
truth and establish us in the faith, then it is manifest that to 
abide in the faith wo must adhere to that doctrine which was 
taught us through his chosen channel. Any one departing 
therefrom would prove his la-ck of faith in the Scriptural declaration
 above quoted. 

If the Berean Bible Studies have been needful for the 
household to develop strength and faith in the Lord, they 
are still necessary to maintain strength and faith in the Lord. 
A departure therefrom would show lack of faith and would 
mean a consequent loss of strength. 

FMDE THE CHRISTIAN'S ENEMY 
Pride is a great enemy of the new creature. It results 
from a failure to have a proper appreciation of one's Belf. and 
a proper appreciation of the Lord. If one who has been some 
time in the narrow way, and has made progress in the knowledge
 of the Lord's Word, should reach the point of believing 
that the Lord really needs him, that his wisdom far exceeds 
that of many others in the body, that without his aid it 
would be difficult for the class to make progress, that his 
ability to teach is such that it should have recognition — such 
an one would be developing pride. This condition would show 
that his faith was on trial, and that the trial was going against 
him. The Scriptures declare, " Pride goeth before destruction, 
and a haughty spirit before a fall"; "God resisteth the proud, 
but giveth grace to the humble." — Proverbs 16:18; 1 Peter 5:5. 
If such an one knew that these admonitions were contained 
in the Bible and did not rely upon them, this test of faith 
would manifest his weakness. If he did not know they were 
there, it would show a deficiency in the knowledge of the 
Lord's Word, and therefore a lack of faith. He must see 
tbat pride would lead to the destruction of the new creature, 
and if his hope is strong of gaining the kingdom, he will 
war against pride as a deadly enemy. How shall he do this? 
The Apostle answers, "Humble yourselves therefore under 
the mighty hand of .God, that he may exalt you in due time." 
JUDGING THE BRETHREN 
It is not an unusual thing to find some brother or sister 
judging another by calling in question his motives. Such a 
course demonstrates that the one who is judging another is 
having his faith tested, and that the trial is resulting adversely 
to his own interest; for the Scriptures advise, "Judge nothing 
before the time." (1 Corinthians 4:5) "Who shall lay anything
 to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justineth." 
(Romans 8:33) We have no authority to appear as judges 
against our brethren. There is only one Judge who has access 
to Jehovah's court — the Great Master, who appears for us 
and not against us. Appreciating this fact and relying upon 
these Scriptures, one would refrain from judging another. 
SELFISHNESS VS. LOVE 
The natural tendency of man is selfish; he is inclined to 
do many things from a motive of self-interest. When he becomes
 a new creature in Christ he finds this natural tendency 
warring against the new mind. If we find ourselves inclined 
to yield to selfish desires and to have our own way, unmindful
 of the rights and privileges of others ,we may know that 
our faith is being severely tested; and according as we govern 
ourselves shall we come forth from the fiery test. The antithesis
 of selfishness is love, which is an unselfish desire to do 
good to others. Selfishness is the fruit of the mind of the 
flesh, while love is the fruit of the Spirit. 

If we are not developing in love, then our faith is not increasing
. W 7 e base this conclusion upon the Word of the 
Lord, which says: "Though I speak with the tongues of men 
and of angels, and though I have the gift of prophecy and 
unde/stand all mysteries; and though I have all knowledge, 
and have faith sufficient to remove mountains; and though I 
bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and give my body to 
be burned, and have no love, it profiteth me nothing." (1 
Corinthians 13:1-4) "And besides all these things, put on 
love, which is the bond of completeness." (Coloasians 3:14, 
Diaglott) Seeing that we must both know these Scriptures 
and confidently rely upon them in order to have faith, then it 
follows that our faith is weak or strong in proportion as we 
know and confidently rely thereupon. 

WOBBT VS. PEACE 
Sometimes we are incl ined to worry, to become much 
exercised about our business affairs or about the harvest 
work or the manner in which it is being conducted by others; 
etc. Worry drives away the peace of mind; and when we 
find ourselves in this disturbed condition of mind we may 
know that our faith is being tried; and in proportion as our 
faith is strong shall we be able to overcome the disposition to 


worry and to leave all in the Lord's hands. The opposite of 
worry is peace, repose and tranquility. As proof that worn 
indicates a trial of faith, we note the following: "Be careful 
(over-anxious, unduly exercised) for nothing; but in even - 
thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your 
requests be made known unto God; and [as a result] the peacr 
of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your 
hearts and minds through Christ Jesus." — Philippians 4:6, 7. 
If, after having done all that we can do, we have full confidence
 in the promises of the Lord and rely thereupon, our 
minds should be at rest; we should have a" rest of faith an 
God. The Lord has given us many precious promises in lu< 
Word, and he invites us to rely upon them that our faith 
may be strong. For instance, he says: "Rest in the Lord 
and wait patiently for him; fret not thyself because of him 
who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth 
wicked devices to pass." (Psalm 37:7) If our enemies persecute
 us unjustly, we are not to be disturbed, but to calmly 
rest in the Lord. Again, we have the injunction, "Wait on 
the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine 
heart; wait, I say, on the Lord." (Psalm 27:14) In this 
last Scripture the word "wait" means to lay hold upon, to 
trust implicitly our heavenly Father. Again the Lord gi veils
 a remedy to drive away worry and enthrone peace in our 
hearts, saying, "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose 
mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in thee." 

In the testing of the Christian's faith he sometimes finds 
himself in fear. An opportunity of service is presented; he 
fears he cannot do it. If his faith is strong, he will chase the 
fears away, remembering the words of the Apostle: "I can 
do all things through Christ, who strengtheneth me." (Philippians
 4:13) It is a good thing not to have too much confidence
 in ourselves, but to have full and confident reliance 
upon the Lord. Doubts in our minds increase fear; doubt > 
and fears undermine the faith of the Christian and cause hi* 
hope to grow faint. At times the thought may arise in the 
Christian's mind as to whether or not he belongs to the Lord 
and whether or not the Lord loves him. He realizes that he 
has been trying to serve the Lord, but, being displeased with 
himself, he doubts that the Lord could be pleased with him. 
INCENTIVES TO HOFBFTONESS 
Because of the seeming delay in the establishment of Messiah
's kingdom, some have feared that "the door is shut" and 
the opportunity for them to enter the kingdom forever closed. 
All of this results from weakness of fiuth. The trial of faith 
has come; the Lord is permitting us to be tested as to 
whether or not we will rely fully upon him. Nowhere in 
his Word has he told us the hour when we shall enter into 
the kingdom. He has positively told us through the words 
of the Apostle, however, "that of the times and seasons ye 
have no need that I write unto you; for yourselves know 
perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the 
night; .... but ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that 
day should overtake you as a thief." — 1 Thessalonians 5:1-4. 
All about us we see the fulfillment of prophecy in that the 
kingdoms of this earth are passing away ; and the Lord Jesu« 
says to us, "When ye see these things begin to come to pass, 
then look up, lift up your heads, for your deliverance draweth 
nigh." (Luke 21:28) He has given us numerous promises 
in his W 7 ord by which we can determine upon examination 
whether or not we are his children. If we find that we 
have the zeal which is peculiar to the house of the Lord 
(Psalm 69:9); that we understand and appreciate the mystery
 of God (Colossians 1:26, 27; 1 Corinthians 2:14, 9, 10; 
Romans 8:16, 17) ; that we love the brethren (1 John 3:14) ; 
that we have opportunities for service, which the Lord is still 
permitting us to use (John 4:36) ; and that we are keeping 
his commandments with a joyful heart — these, together with 
the clear fulfillment of prophecy daily being manifested, should 
make our faith strong, and all doubts and fears should vanish. 
TWO COMMON BESETMENTS OF THE NEW OBEATUSE 
It has been truly said that one/ of our most crucial tests 
is patient endurance of the hardships, tribulations and trials 
that daily come to the child of God. Upon examination how 
do we find that we are receiving these trying experiences — 
patiently or impatiently? If we are chafing under the trial, 
murmuring under the hardships, or complaining that our lot 
is harder than that of some one else; if we are discontented, 
it means that our faith is on trial and that we are failing 
under the test. On the other hand, if these hardships and 
trials are calmly received and are permitted to work out in 
us a sweet and submissive disposition, with the realization 
that they are all being permitted by the Lord for our good, 
then our faith is increasing and the trial is resulting beneficially
 to us. If we have in mind the precious words of the 
Master and the Apostles and are relying upon these words, 


[6100] 


Jim; 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(182-183) 


then we must have faith. It was our Lord Jed as who said, 
"Jn your patience possess ye your souK" In harmony with 
this, the Apostle Paul writes: "Cast not away your confidence
, which hath great recompense of reward; for ye have 
need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye 
might receive the promise." 

In tears some of the Lord's deaT children are fighting the 
good fight of faith, often expressing disappointments because 
of their own fleshly weaknesses; many times having failures, 
until despair overtakes them and they are inclined to say, 
"What is the use of my trying further? 1 might as well give 
up the fight.' 1 Here again" is a severe test to their faith; for 
the words of the Lord spoken to St. Paul apply to each of 
iid, "My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made 
perfect in weakness."- — 2 Corinthians 12:9. 

Again, many of the consecrated have spent practically all 
their earthly substance; their homes and lands are gone, and 
family responsibilities still devolve upon them; they had hoped 
that ere this they would need no earthly substance; they become
 fearful for the future and almost reach the point of 
despair. This is a severe test of faith; but God's Word gives 
full assurance to his children through our Lord and the 
Apostles, saying, "Be content with such things a3 ye have; 
for .... I 'will never leave thee nor forsake thee" (Hebrews 
13:5); "Casting all your care upon him, for he careth for 
you" {1 Peter 5:7); "He that endureth unto the end, the 
name shall be saved" (Matthew 24:13) ; "Let us not be weary 
in well doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint 
not" (Galatians 6:9) ; "Hold that fast which thou hast, that 
no man take thy crown." — Revelation 3:11. 

FIERY TESTS UPON GOD'S PEOPLE 

As thpse tests grow in severity we can understand why 
the Apostle said that the trial of our faith is a fiery one. The 
fires are now burning; and everyone that is being hurt by the 
fire has something of the mind of the flesh — the dross which 
the Lord desires to be burned away, that the character of the 
new creature may stand fully approved before him. This 
trial is precious in his sight; for he desires to see his children
 win the victory. 

Viewing ourselves in the light of God's Word, we see that 
it is impossible for us to live perfect lives. We cannot be perfect
, in the absolute sense, in the expression of love, perfect 
in loving actions towards others. Nor can our words or even 
our thoughts be perfect. But we can have a perfect purpose 
and a perfect faith. The true sentiment of our heart should 
find expression in the words of the Prophet Job: "Though 
lie slay me, yet will I trust in him." (Job 13:15) This is 
the kind of faith we desire; this is the faith that is pleasing 
to the Lord. 

"Oh, for a faith that will not shrink, 

Though pressed by every foe; 
That will not tremble on the brink 
Of any earthly woe!" 

We observe, then, from these examples, that all the trials that 
tome to the Christian test his knowledge and appreciation of 
God and his confident reliance upon God, and are therefore 
tests of his faith, 

PRECIOUS IN GOD'S SIGHT 

Why is this trial of faith spoken of as being more precious 
than gold? It is because gold and silver cannot purchase such 
faith. God has been developing this new creation for many 
centuries. He foreordained it long before the beginning of 
its development. These sons are precious in his sight; for 
they will be recipients of his choicest blessings. The church 
is the bride of Christ. The Bridegroom has watched her for 
nearly nineteen centuries as she has journeyed through "the 
valley of the shadow of death," undergoing many trials and 
hardships and much suffering, all. of which have been designed
 to develop a faith that is pleasing to the Father. 

The trial of this faith is very precious in his sight. It is 
precious in the sight of the intelligent hosts of heaven who 
have remained in harmony with God, These have beheld the 
development of those Christians who have had promise of 
being exalted, if faithful, to a high position with the Lord in 
glory, and they have ministered to this end. It is precious to 
those who are running for the prize and that faith if held 
firmly will result in the greatest riches that God has at 
his disposal for any of his creatures. For this cause it is a 
wonderful privilege to undergo the trial of faith. 
HOW SCAT FAITH BE INCREASED? 

How, then, shall we be able to hold on to these precious 
things with which God has provided us? Let us always keep 
t>efore our minds the foundation of our faith — God's Word. 
It was necessary to acquire a knowledge of that Word before 


we could have faith. Manifestly, then, it follows that if our 
faith is to be increased and kept strong we must constantly 
feed our minds upon the Word and confidently rely upon its 
precious promises. Nothing could give us greater strength 
than to go often to that Word, and find it reassuring us of 
the interest which the Lord manifests in our behalf. When 
depressed, when undergoing a trial, let us go to the Bible 
and the helps which have been divinely provided to understand
 that Bible, and fill our minds therewith and rely upon 
their statements and then mark the joy that will fill our heart. 
Music tends to soothe the passions and fears of earthly 
creatures. Jesus has likened the Word of God to a harp 
strung for harmonious inu*>it\ {Revelation 15:2, tf) That 
Harp of God is perfectly attuned — the Law and the Prophets, 
the Gospels and Epistles constitute its many strings, ^y 
God's grace we are able to use that harp and produce harmony
. The Spirit of the Lord is jn its strings; and when 
these are swept by the fingers of one who is devoted to the 
Lord and who searches for his truth and relies thereupon, 
it yields the sweetest music that ever fell on mortal ear. Praise 
God, then, for this wonderful melody that enables U3 to sing 
and to appreciate the "Song of Moses and the Lamb"! 

Those who have brushed away the cobwebs of the dark 
ages, who have gained the victory over the beast and it3 
image, who have destroyed credulity and established a sound 
faith, by permitting the glorious truth of God's Word to 
shine daily into their hearts, are now, amidst the great confusion
 of the nations of earth, standing, as it were, upon "a 
sea of glass," and beholding the melting of the elements; and 
they are striking their harps in unison in one grand anthem 
to the praise of the present Bridegroom, and are confidently 
and trustfully waiting until their full union with him is consummated
 in the first resurrection. 

WHEN SHALL OTJB GLORIFICATION COME7 
How long shall we continue to fight this good fight ot 
faith? When may we expect to end the journey and enter into 
the glory of the Lord? By reading the 11th chapter of Hebrews
 we draw the conclusion as to how long. St. Paul there 
set forth a long list of faithful ones whom God approved. 
Be it noted that each, of these died faithful. God's Word 
abounds with promises of reward to the faithful overcomer. 
To tho^e ancient worthies were given good promise?; but 
to the Christian arc given "Exceeding great and precious 
promises." The ancient worthies had to die in faith and 
wait for the coming of tneir reward. All faithful Christians 
now living will receive their reward at the death of their 
humanity. Therefore Jesus promised, "Be thou faithful unto 
death, and I will give thee the crown of life." Our faithfulness
 and loyalty must continue until the end in order to 
receive the glorious reward. Mark, the text says, "until death," 
which means that each one who has entered into a covenant 
with the Lord by sacrifice must be faithful and loyal to his 
part of the covenant, or contract, until his sacrifice is fully 
consumed in the complete death of the human being. It means 
constant holding fast the beginning of our confidence and rejoicing
 even unto the end. 

THE NATUKE OF THE ItEWABD 
Since Jesus has promised that all who continue faithful 
unto death shall reiceive the crown of life, this means lifton
 the very highest plane — the divine nature, like unto our 
glorious Lord and Master. But St. Paul points out that there 
will be different degrees of glory even in the kingdom — "as 
star differeth from star in glory." (1 Corinthians 15:41) 
The Master in the parable of the pounds holds forth the 
same thought. (Luke 19:17-19) The degree of faithfulness 
will mark the degree of shining forth in the kingdom. "According
 to your faith be it unto you." 

Those who have been faithful in all that has been committed
 to them — faithful in the performance of their covenant. 
faithful to God, faithful to his Word, faithful to the brethren, 
faithful in the performance of the little things — if they permit 
all the trials that come to them to properly exercise them concerning
 God's will, such will be more like the Lord and nearer 
to him in the kingdom. It is not the one who is most 
favored this side the veil with service or honors or plaudits, 
but the one who grows most in the likeness of the Master, 
who will shine the brightest in his kingdom. 

The evidence is clear, cogent and convincing that the 
kingdom of the Lord i3 near at hand. Believing this to be 
true, let us do that which will bring us the approval of the 
Lord, that we may have an abundant entrance therein. If 
there is anything we are not doing that will help us on this 
way to glory, let us do it now. If we are striving to enter in. 
putting forth our best efforts, then may we at the close of each 
day be able to say with St. Paul, 'T have fought a good 
fight, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for 


[6101] 


(185-187) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


me a. crown ox righteousness, v>luch the Lord, the righteous 
Judge, will give to me at that day, and not to me only, but 
unto all them who love his appearing." 

Surely we have not fought a losing fight' if we have been 
fighting faithfully! Ours has been a good fight, even though 
we have been ever so weak in ourselves and unable to meet 
the onslaughts of our enemies. No matter what the trials 
may he surrounding us — the mists may be thick, the storms 
raging and the billows roaring with great fierceness— now 
is the time for us to heed the words of the Apostle and to 
"gird up the loins of our mind and be sober and hope to the 


end." {1 Peter 1:13) A little while and the fight, will be 
over and our journey ended; a little while and we shall see 
our glorious Bridegroom face to face; and then, when we 
have proven our loyalty to the last and our faith has successfully
 withstood the fiery trials, the result will be to the 
praise and honor and glory of him who bought us with his 
own precious blood. 

"Beyond the river's brink we'll lay 

The cross that here is given, 
And bear the crown of life away 

And praise the King of heaven." 


THE PURPOSE OF JOHN'S GOSPEL 


[This article was a reprint of that entitled "Lovest Thou Me More Than These?' ' published in issue of June 1, 1908, which please 

see.] 


"Haste thou on from grace to glory, 
Armed by faith and winged by prayer 

Heaven's eternal day before thee, 

God's own hand shall guide thee there. 


"Soon shall close thine earthly mission, 
Soon shall pass thy pilgrim days; 
Hope shall change to' glad fruition, 
Faith to sight and prayer to praise." 


ISAIAH'S CALL TO HEROIC SERVICE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled "The Prophet Isaiah's Vision, " published in issue of October 15, 189S, which please 

see.] 


*HE CARETH FOR THEE' 


"No anxious thought upon thy brow 
The watching world should see; 

No carefulness! O child of God, 
For nothing care- full be! 

But cast thou all thy care on him 
Who always cares for thee. 

"It is thy Word, it is thy will — 
That is enough for me! 
Henceforth no care shall dim my trust, 


For all is cast on thee; 
Henceforth my inmost heart shall praise 
The grace that set me free. 

"I want to praise, with life renewed, 

As I never praised before; 
With voice and pen, with song and speech, 

To praise thee more and more, 
And the gladness and the gratitude 

Rejoicingly outpour!" 


AHAZ, THE FAITHLESS KING 

jult 8. — II Chronicles 2S. 

AHAZ BEGINS HIS REIGN — HB REIGNS IN JERUSALEM FOE SIXTEEN YEARS — HE DOES EVIL IN THE LORD 'S SIGHT — THEREFORE SMITTEN 
BY SYRIA AND ISRAEL — ALSO BY EDOMITES AND PHILISTINES — JUDAH BROUGHT LOW — ALLIANCE WITH ASSYRIA — AHAZ DISTRESSED, 
INCREASES TRANSGRESSION — RUINED— BURIED IN DISGRACE — OUR LESSON — HOW TO DISPLEASE THE LORD — THE RESULT? — HOW TO 
PLEASE THE LORD— THE RESULT— GOD *S OVER-RULING PROVIDENCE — SUN-DIAL OF AHAZ AN ILLUSTRATION. 

" Without faith it is impossible to be well-pleasing unto him." — Hebrews 11: ft 

God of his father David, nor seek to do his will, as was maniSaul
, the first king over Israel, reigned 40 years in Jerusalem
. He was succeeded by David, who also reigned 
40 years, seven in Hebron and thirty-three in Jerusalem. 
Solomon succeeded in Jerusalem. Then came the division of 
Israel into two parts. Because of Rehoboam's harsh answer 
to the children of Israel the ten tribes revolted and chose 
Jeroboam for their king, who reigned at Samaria. Rehobgam, 
as king of Judah, reigned at Jerusalem. This division continued
 until both kingdoms were taken into captivity. David's 
line continued through or in Judah, the eleventh king from 
Rehoboam being Ahaz, who reigned in Jerusalem 16 years 
and was succeeded by his son, the good King Hezekiah. 

THE FAITHLESS KINO 

The name Ahaz means possessor or grasper. It is quite 
evident from our lesson today that Ahaz was a self-server. 
It was not necessary for him to do anything to become king, 
for the reason that he was of the royal line of David and 
succeeded to the throne at the death of his father Jotham. 
But while the record does not indicate any action on his part 
to achieve this object, yet the quality of covetousness was 
there, as evidenced by what he did after he came into office. 
Covetousness. is idolatry — the idolatry of self. It is the opposite
 of faith in God and his plans, which makes God and 
his will first. 

Ahaz was quite young when his father died — only twenty 
— consequently his covetous disposition had not had time to 
ripen into unlawful acts to attain his desires. However, the 
sixteen years during which he was in office were sufficient to 
manifest that his name was not a misnomer. He was a 
grasper— a possessor — and a holder of what he possessed at 
all odds. At no time did he ever display any real faith in the 


fested in the life and the work of the sweet singer of Israel. 
Read 2 Kings 16. 

AHAZ' 3 ACCESSION TO THE THRONE 

The country of the two-tribe kingdom was prosperous and 
conditions were favorable for a glorious reign. His grandfather
, the good King Uzziah, had reigned well for fifty- two 
years — ruling in the fear of God, although near the close of 
his life he made a sad blunder — that of failing to observe 
the proper limitations of his kingly office. Over-stepping for 
a moment into the priestly office, he burned incense unto the 
Lord, for which he was smitten with leprosy in the forehead, 
indicating a leprosy of the mind, resulting from a single act 
of exceeding his authority. Otherwise, however, he was a 
wise, prosperous, God-fearing ruler. He had subdued Edom 
on the south and Philistia on the west, and had done much 
for the kingdom inwardly. He had taken Elath on the northern
 shore of the gulf of Akaba— -an arm of the Red sea — and 
had populated it with Jews. 

King Uzziah was succeeded by his son Jotham, who did 
what was pleasing in the sight of the Lord. Therefore the 
land was prosperous for another sixteen years — making a period
 of about 70 years of prosperity — when Ahaz, the grasper, 
came into power. It is true, Rezin and Pekah were assuming 
a threatening attitude; nevertheless the kingdom of Judah 
was in a good and prosperous condition, so that there was 
nothing to fear, providing that the nation would walk in the 
way of David. But, alas, while Alias; had ascended to the 
throne of Judah, he had not enthroned God as the ruler of 
his heart! Trouble was therefore ahead, and a great opportunity
 for doing good was missed. How often is this the case 
among both rich and poor, high and low, saint and sinner! 


[6102] 


Juw* IS, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(187-188) 


CHARACTERISTICS OF HIS REIGN 

Faith is a tender plant and cannot thrive in an idolatrous, 
selfish heart. The experience of his predecessors should have 
led him to have faith in God, but the cruel king of selfishness 
strangled the promptings to trust in and obey the God of his 
fathers* Unbelief is a plant that finds congenial soil in such 
a heart, and when the dictates of unbelief are obeyed, it inevitably
 leads rapidly down tho broad way. Such was the 
case with this faithless king of Judah, Ahaz. 

"He did not that which was right in the sight of the Lord 
like David his father." (V. 1) Faith is the eye of the soul 
and enables one to walk before the Lord with the thought, 
"Thou, God, seeest me." But unbelief is blind and darkens the 
soul by saying, "God has forsaken us; he cares not for us, 
neither does he sec u 6 *." 

"He walked in the ways of the kings of Israel," (V. 2) 
The kings of Israel, beginning with Jeroboam at Samaria, 
had a rebellious spirit. Instead of walking according to the 
words of God, as spoken by the Prophet Isaiah, the seventh 
to the twelfth chapters of whose prophecy were given to 
guide and encourage King Ahaz, he walked in the ways of 
his own worldly wisdom. Thus he walked contrary to the 
Lord, as did the kings of the ten tribes. The Lord was represented
 by David and those in harmony with him. When 
therefore Ahaz failed to follow the example and advice of 
David and went the way that he chose, he thereby rebelled 
against the Lord, as did the kings of Israel. 

This led him to follow the ways of the more idolatrous 
nations surrounding Israel and Judah. There was a valley to 
the south and east of Jerusalem called "the Valley of the 
Son of Hinnom"; and this valley wa3 so given over to heathen 
practices and idolatrous worship that in time it became a 
place of abomination. It was used later on as a place of fire 
into which dead animaU, refuse from the city, and, at times 
the bodies of dead criminals, were cast. Consequently, it was 
used by New Testament writers to illustrate hell-fire (Gehenna
), the second death, "everlasting destruction," under 
the symbolic term, "the lake of fire with brimstone." This 
faithless king was therefore typically pointing out by his 
example the way into the second death, by sinning against 
light — against the holy Spirit. 

He even had molten images of Baalim made and set up 
in Judah. Baal was the supreme male deity of the Phoenicians
 and Canaanites. The name Baal means lord, in the 
sense of possessor, so that the position ascribed to this god 
by the idolators of that time, among the gods — that is, demons, 
fallen spirits — was the same spirit that Ahaz had, as supreme 
ruler in Judah. A true worshipper of Jehovah has the spirit 
of Jehovah, the same as a true Christian has the spirit of 
Christ — the spirit of love, joy, peace, long-suffering, etc., as 
contrasted with the spirit of the adversary, which prevails 
in the world — the spirit of malice, hatred, war, murder, etc. 

Even worse, King Ahaz "burnt his children in the fire, 
after the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord had 
cast out before the children of Israel/' (V. 3) So an early 
evangelist in this country used the expression, "There are 
thousands of children a span long in hell," which is the 
modern way of burning little children in the fire unto the god 
Satan. It was the king's unbelief which caused him to set 
such a terrible example before the people of Judah, and which 
caused them to do many things that were an abomination in 
the sight of the Lord. 

THE RESULT 07 HIS FAITHLESSNESS 

Because of his rebelliousness, God delivered him, (1) to 
Rezin, the king of Syria. Rezin reigned over Syria at Damascus
; and because of the unfaithfulness of King Ahaz God 
permitted the Syrians to carry a great multitude of the people
 of Judah captive to Damascus. In a similar manner, disloyalty
 to Christ leads his followers to be taken captive by 
the world, the flesh and the adversary. 

Again, because of King Ahaz's rebelliousness, God delivered
 him (2) to Pekah, king of Israel. Pekah reigned at 
Samaria, and came with Rezin against Ahaz. In one day 
their combined armies Blew 120,000 valiant men of Judah, 
because they had forsaken the Lord. Among the slain were 
the one next to the king, the governor of his house and his 
own son. Besides this, 200,000 men, women and children 
with much spoil were taken to Samaria. What terrible results
 follow the path of unbelief, faithlessness, rebelliousness, 
disloyalty! It is far better to follow the Lord. 

BEEPER TRANSGRESSION OK THE PABT OF THE KOTO 

Not having Jehovah as his friend and helper, therefore in 
his time of greatest need, he leaned on an arm of flesh, in the 
person of Tiglath-Pileser, king of Assyria, with whom he 
made an alliance, He made thr «amo mistake that manv of 


the kings and rulers of the earth are making today. In their 
hour of need, they are allying themselves one with another, 
instead of looking to God and his Son, Jesus Christ, as Lord 
and King. Ahaz, not having profited by the chastisements 
which Jehovah had sent him through Syria and Israel, was 
further punished through the Edomites and Philistines. 
Having been smitten in the north and the east, he was next 
smitten in the south and the west. Thus from every quarter 
Jehovah would teach him the foolishness and wickedness of 
rebellion and unbelief. 

But instead of growing better and profiting by these increased
 judgments, King Ahaz even took money from the 
city treasury, and also consecrated money from the Temple, 
and gave it to the Assyrian king as his paTt of this unholy 
alliance. Any highly favored country that will take both the 
people's money and the money that should be devoted to God 
in the way of Christian service, and will use it to seal an alliance
 with nations that have forsaken the Lord, must, like 
Ahaz, be plunged into a great time of trouble! Ahaz went so 
far as to close the Lord's house, and to sacrifice to the 
heathen god3 on the altar at Damascus. In fact, there was 
nothing too extreme for him to do to further his own selfish 
ends and promote his unholy purposes. 

OBEATEB CONSEQUENCES OF HIS DISLOYAL COURSE 

Since the kings of Judah were representatives of Jehovah, 
it is no wonder that our lesson tells us that the Lord was 
angered with King Ahaz. Judah was consequently brought 
low, financially, politically and religiously, so much so that 
the Scriptures say it became naked. Thus we see Ahaz 
ruined the country over which he reigned, reduced the people 
to great straits, caused many thousands to be slain, and many 
more to be taken captive. Moreover, by his course of unbelief
 and faithlessness, he ruined his own family as well as 
himself. Finally he was buried in Jerusalem in disgrace, 

LESSONS FOB OUB DAY 

The course of unbelief is ever downward, leading one 
further and further away from God and from Christ. Its influence
 is bad, not only upon ourselves, but upon our own loved 
ones in our homes, and upon our companions and friends. 
"If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established!" 

Faith in God leads upward. The first step in turning 
away from sin to faith in Christ is an upward one and leads 
towards peace. Faith in him as the ransom-3acrifice brings 
one out of the condition of condemnation to a condition of 
peace with respect to sin. Progress in the life of faith leads 
one to put away defilements of the flesh and of the spirit. 
It will further lead to a consecrated life, a justified life, a 
spirit-begotten life when one becomes a new creature in 
Christ. It will lead one to put on Christ more and more 
and to grow up in him as the Head of all things. This course 
will terminate in heavenly glory. "Be thou faithful unto 
death; and I will give thee the crown of life." 

King Ahaz was moved like the trees of the wood, through 
the blowing of the winds of the confederacy of Syria and 
Israel against him; still he refused to believe the word of 
safety spoken to him by the Lord through the Prophet Isaiah; 
nor would he ask the Lord for a sign for professedly religious
 reasons; yet the Lord overruled all this unbelief and 
self-will, and used it to give the church two important truths: 

( 1 ) The Lord gave the sign of the virgin with child in 
the form of a prophecy, which has greatly assisted the eye of 
faith to identify Jesus as the Messiah. 

(2) The inclination of King Ahaz to make friends with 
Damascus and Samaria and to ally himself with Assyria 
through unbelief in the promises of Jehovah became the 
means whereby the Prophet Isaiah lias pointed out to the 
church of the present time that it should not join the Confederacy
 of the churches in close alliance with the Governments
 of the world, but rather to remain loyal to Christ as 
the only Head of the church and the one King over all kings. 
believing his promise that "if we suffer (.with Mm] we shall 
also reign with him." The federated churches of America 
and the world are closely allied with the governments of 
earth and constitute the greatest power of the present time. 
Consequently they will win the allegiance of any and all except
 "the very elect," who refuse to bow the knee to Baal, 
and receive not "the mark of the, beast," because they will 
-worship God only and prize above all things the "sealing of 
the saint3 in their foreheads." 

SUN-DIAL OF AHAZ— AN ILLUSTRATION— ISAIAH 38:8 
The sun shining upon the face of the dial indicates the 
time of the day by means of the shadow cast. The sun now 
shines upon the pages of Holy Writ, and by means of certain 
marked-off periods, indicates to an illuminated mind the, time 
of the day — "the great day of God Almighty" — in which we 


[6103] 


(188-169) 


T HE WA T C H T O W E R 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


now live. This 13 one of the great blessings which the eye 
of faith now brings to the consecrated children of God and 
which enables them to walk in the light of the presence of 
God's dear Son. Shortly The Christ — Head and body— will 
arise as the Sun, with healing in his beams for the blessing 
of the troubled nations of earth. The times of the Gentiles 
have closed. The kings of earth have had their day; and 
soon Immanuel will take possession and bring peace and gladness
 everywhere. "The night is far spent; the day is at hand.'* 
After the war, which, according to present signs and "the 


sure word of prophecy," will be followed by revolution and 
anarchy, the Prince of Peace, now present but unseen, will 
take possession of earth's affairs, and then the prayer, "Thy 
kingdom come," shall be answered. 

"The 'Gentile times' are closing, for their kings have had 

their day; 
And with them sin and sorrow will forever pass away; 
For the tribe of Judah's Lion now comes to hold the sway; 
Our Kixg is Marching On!" 


BROOKLYN ACADEMY OF MUSIC— JUNE 3 


The first public meeting held in Brooklyn under the 
auspices of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society since 
the death of our dear Pastor, was the afternoon of Sunday, 
June 3, in the Academy of Music, in which Brother Russell 
spoke once a month prior to the completion of the Temple in 
New York City. Brother Russell always spoke to large 
audiences in the Academy, and many have been the requests 
for another series of discourses there. The meeting proved 
to be such a success that at its conclusion announcement was 
made for another discourse the following Sunday. The 
auditorium was crowded to the roof, about 2,500 being present 
Excellent attention was given throughout the discourse, and 
many favorable expressions were heard among outsiders respecting
 the beautiful tribute paid to the man who for 40 
years stood as a beacon light proclaiming a time of trouble 
at this time, preparatory to the inauguration of Messiah's 
Millennial kingdom for the blessing of all mankind. Practically
 all the Brooklyn newspapers, including The Brooklyn 
Daily Eagle^ spoke favorably of the service. Following is 
one of the published reports: 


*\J. F. Rutherford, addresbing an audience which crowded 
the Academy of Music yesterday afternoon, arraigned Billy 
Sunday with having appropriated to his own use Pastor Russell
's published views on the second coming of Christ. The 
speaker charged the evangelist with preaching questionable 
theology, declaring it wholly inconsistent. 

"'Are we at the End of the World? 1 was the subject of 
Mr. Rutherford's address This was his first public appearance
 in Brooklyn since the death of Pastor Russell. 

** 'Criticism of a man is hardly the proper course for a 
Christian,* he said, 'but criticism of a man's teachings is always
 proper. A man who addresses the heavenly Father and 
our Redeemer in familiar terms, silch as Old Pal, is irreverent 
toward God and the Lord Jesus. Such conduct and such 
word3 lead to irreverence on the part of the people.' 

"The present world- war, the threatening famine and pestilence
, the fomenting revolution in various parts of the world, 
all are evidences of the passing away of the present un 
righteous order." 


"To follow where an unseen Captain leads, 
To heed commands unheard by mortal ear, 
To battle with a known, yet unseen foe — 
Ah! This is faith. 

'To choose the right when others think you wrong, 
To stand for Truth while Error laughs in scorn, 
To tread the lonely way unto the end — ■ 
Yes! This takes faith. 


FAITH 


l *To wear a smile where you receive but frowns, 
To kiss the hand that wounds your poor heart so, 
And pray for those who fain your life would take — 
Ah! This is faith. 

"To fix your eyes on 'that within the veil/ 
Your heart's devotion set on things above, 
To wait with patience till God calls you home — 
Faith's victory won!" 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


STJFTEBING FOB RI0HTEOttSHBSS' SAKE 

Dear Bbethben: — 

You will perhaps know that the address which I give you 

is actually another name for the famous Prison. There 

are about 900 Conscientious Objectors here, mostly working 
on the land. At present there are nearly 70 of our brothers; 
and we have very helpful times together, both at work 
and in fellowship at our studies. We have elected elders 
and deacons, and have a series of meetings, just like an 
ordinary ecclesia. It is a remarkable fact that quite a large 
number of the brothers have served the Lord in their local 
classes in the capacity of elders and deacons. 

You may be sure that the Lord's blessing is with us, in 
spite of certain restrictions of onr liberty, in that we are 
mostly hundreds of miles away from our loved ones and allowed
 to visit home only twice a year, We are fed, clothed, 
and paid 4/s per week. However, we who realize the Lord's 
guiding hand in all of our affairs are quite content and glad 
to submit to these things for conscience' sake. At present 
the local and the London papers are making violent attacks 
upon us, in many instances misrepresenting our position, probably
 to further prejudice public opinion against us, which is 
already very bitter. Fellows who have ventured to enter 
nearby towns have been mobbed and attacked several times, 
and others have had narrow escapes from being "ducked" in 
a river, etc. There is no clear distinction at present between 
the truth Friends and other C. O.'s who have received service
 here for a variety of reasons, many merely socialistic 
and anarchistic. But when the Lord's due time comes for 
us to suffer especially for the truth's sake, then and not before
, the dividing line will be manifest. 

You will perhaps like to know a little about one's experience
 in prison. As this letter will be censored, I cannot tell 
you all details. It will suffice to say that having the truth 
makes all the difference in the world. By the inspiration, by 
the 'spirit of power" which the truth gives, one is enabled 
to bear patiently and unmurmuringly things which are much 
harder for others to bear, and which often have the effect of 
making them bitter and anarchistic. We, however, who have 


learned to trust in the precious promises, we who cast our 
burden on the Lord, can rejoice in our privilege of suffering 
a little for his dear name's sake, and can indeed be content. 
We seek contentment, and have it, by his favor. The prison 
diet weakens one physically, of course; but an outdoor openair
 life is healthful; and one can thus pull up his strength 
when he leaves prison and comes here or wherever the home 
office sends him. 

One of the greatest blessings obtained from these recent 
trials is the privilege of having a fair amount of quiet for 
prayer, meditation and study; and the London office has 
placed the volumes in the prison library now. I had such 
a delightful feast on Vol. V and VI, and continually lifted 
up my heart for all God's blessings. Truly, our dear heavenly 
Father is never limited in his ability to cause all things 10 
work together for our good, as long as we love him su 
premely, which is ever the desire of our hearts! So we can 
all say, "Bless the Lord, my soul; and all that is within me. 
bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, my sou., and forget 
not all his benefits."— Psalm 103:1, 2. 

It is such a privilege to be permitted to suffer a little for 
his dear name's sake, and to prove his faithfulness all the 
way along. Surely we can trust hhn firmly to the end, ever 
trusting, not in self, but in the Lord! As far as the brothers 
of military age are concerned, harvest work seems to be at a 
standstill, and our chief lesson seems to be to learn to love 
one another. The final polishing is the test of whether or not 
we truly love the brethren. Fellowship is very sweet ; and 
we can live above the various circumstances of life which nmj 
be unpleasant to us. 

Ever your loving brother, by his grace, 

Stanley W. Willis, — Bug. 
CLAD IK THE BLOOM OF IMMOETAL GLOEY 
Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings from the church at Dublin, Ireland! We desire 
to convey to the members of the Bethel Family at Brooklyn 
our sincerest Christian love. We deeply sympathize with you 
in the great loss you have sustained, as a result of our dear 
Pastor's death. 


[6104] 


Juwa 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(189 190) 


We rejoice to realize that his sufferings are all over, and 
that he is now a partaker of the divine nature — the highest 
spirit nature in the universe. He now knows in the very 
fullest sense of the word all that it meana to be "made like 
him," the dazzling brilliance of whose glory outshone the 
sun in its meridian splendor. 

How supremely happy he is now is beyond our power to 
comprehend) He has long ere this come into direct personal 
contact with the Lord Jesus and all the apostles, besides an 
innumerable company of the glorified saints. 

What a sublime experience it must have been for our 
dear Pastor when he entered the presence of our Lord clad 
in the bloom of immortal youth! What a noble example our 
dear brother left us! He was surely a pattern worthy of 
imitation! He was truly the greatest man of our day — great 
not merely mentally, but also morally and spiritually! 

May it be our great joy to soon meet him again, under 
grander and far happier conditions, at the supremely grandest 
of all gatherings — the general assembly of the church of the 
first-borns, whose names are written in heaven! 

With warmest Christian love, and assuring you of our 
loyal support, we are 

Yours in the Master's service, 

Dublin Church. — Ireland. 
FBOM OLD-TIME FRIEND OF BROTHER RUSSELX 
Dear Friends: — 

I read the newspaper story of Mr. Russell's death. I had 
known him forty years, and had followed his most remarkable 
career with esteem and affection. I had seen him but twice 
in many years, but I have a keen recollection of our cordial 
relations in the long ago. I would like to know more of his 
recent years and about his most lamentable departure. He 
seems to have died on the battle line. The newspaper accounts 
were all too brief for such a life as his. 

Perhaps you have some more complete account that you 
can give me. A memoir of him should be an inspiration to 
those, of whom there must be many, who desire anxiously to 
know the truth as to our Father's purposes toward his children
. I had been feeling my way, more or less blindly, through 
books and men and nature, when I met Mr. Russell, both of 
us young men, I the older. In coming years he helped me 
greatly. 

We had occasional business relations, I visiting Pittsburgh 
frequently, but we always talked of religion far more than of 
business. One day we met on the street and after a long talk 
I said of one or two points under discussion that I was not 
sure about them. With that wonderfully brilliant and sweet 
smile and his assured but gentle tones he said, "If you would 
study you would know." 

I made my home many years ago in an interior town in 
New York. I attended the (Dutch) Reformed church, my 
wife being a member. I did not believe in any hopeless hereafter
. The minister was from Maryland, a pupil of a famous 
Kentucky theologian, whose daughter he had married. He was 
in middle life. Some of his uncompromising "hell" sermons 
irritated me. Many years after I spent an evening with him. 
He had always been a student. His daughter said once that if 
Gabriel should call her father almost any time he would be 
found with a Hebrew Bible in one hand and a Greek Testament
 in the other. 

Well, as we talked after those many years, he surprised 
me by his Millennial views. At length I said, "Much that you 
have said reminds me of Russell's teaching in Millennial 
Dawn." "Yes," he said, "I am not quite in agreement with 
him as to the person of Christ, but otherwise I think he is 
about right." That iseemed to me as great a triumph as any 
writer or preacher could achieve. I Telt surer that he was 
right because he had convinced about the last man I wbuld 
have expected. 

Sincerely and cordially yours, J. Albert Stowe. — A T . J. 

A NOTE OF WARNING 

Dear Brethren of The Watch Tower: — 

I feel that it is my duty to the interests of the Lord's work 
to mention two matters that are being continually brought to 
my attention during my visits from place to place. The first 
is the tendency of some of the friends to speculate upon various
 matter in Revelation and Ezekiel. I have observed since 
the death of our Pastor that quite a number of the frienda 
are trying to "dig" out "new" things, and are probing the 
pilgrims along this line, and I regret to say that some of the 
pilgrims even are giving "private" interpretations of these 
prophecies. To me, dear brethren, this seems to be more confusing
 than helpful to the friends. I wish some way were 
possible to remind the pilgrims and all the dear friends that 
we are just as obligated to be loyal to the wishes of our dear 
Pastor as we were when he was with us in the flesh. Surely, 


this is a time when the Lord's people are to be tested along 
this line! If there are any things to be brought out respecting 
Revelation and Ezekiel, etc., do we not expect them from the 
proper source, the home office? I would be glad if you saw 
fit to assist the dear friends along this line. 

The second matter is in respect to other publications than 
The Watch Toweb. Wherever we go, questions are asked 
in regard to this paper and that, etc. I am mindful of the 
kindly way in which our Pastor always treated these things. 
All the pilgrims doubtless remember that in special conferences
 with us he never was much in favor of other publications
 than those from the home office. Of late in some of 
these outside papers have appeared articles that are not in 
fullest support of the truth as taught by our Pastor and, in 
one instance, advertisements were there, and when some of the 
dear friends responded they received messages derogatory to 
our Pastor. Can you recommend anything that can be done ? 
As one illustration, dear brethren, one little pamphlet published
 by a brother, seemingly in full harmony with the truth. 
was widely circulated. Perhaps subscriptions to the extent of 
over a thousand dollars were given to that pamphlet. Is it 
penurious for me to feel that the dear friends could have more 
profitably Bpent that thousand dollars in helping the Tract 
Fund? Our dear Pastor has written so much we can still read 
that it seems to us that we have quite enough with his words 
and The Watch Tower. 

We hope that nothing in this message seems to have other 
than the kindliest feeling toward those who no doubt prompted 
by zeal have been writing or publishing such articles, for we 
believe the best intentions have no doubt governed much, if 
not all, of it, but we also feel that the friends can be helped 
by some suggestion from Brooklyn especially along this line. 
Please pardon my taking so much of your time. May the dear 
Lord continue to guide and direct you is my prayer. With 
fervent love and greeting, I am, by his favor, 

Your brother, W. H. Bundy. 

"A WORD TO THE WISE" 
My Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings and much love in Christ! There are just a few 
things which I feel led to write you about: 

( 1 ) Having the privilege of attending the Scripture study 
meetings, both as chairman and otherwise, I notice that there 
is often a lack of ventilation in the rooms. The one in 
charge is sometimes very sensitive when the subject is 
broached, and so I was thinking that a bint from you would 
be a word in season. Many are misled into thinking that to 
stop up every crevice will prevent a draught, which will in 
turn prevent taking colds; but they do not consider the dangers
 of foul air and the more serious chill likely to accrue 
through passing out of a hot room into the cold atmosphere! 

(2) I should like also to tell you of the blessing realized 
from the class study of the volumes in conjunction with the 
Question Books. I must admit that once I favored Bible 
study alone; but the dear Lord has led me to see the several 
advantages of the former method, one of which is that both 
question and answer are before the student, therefore any 
new thought or question arouses the mental activity of all. 

It is wonderful to my mind how lucid and reasonable the 
answers are in the volumes! and as one and all are led to 
that same conclusion, the spirit of oneness and sweetness of 
fellowship becomes apparent which is not attainable in the 
usual denominational Bible study classes. 

(3) The elders, deacons and workers have been an inspiration
 as they have quietly and earnestly labored together 
in the various departments of service ; and I know, dear 
Brethren, that we have your prayers for a continuance of this 
blessed unity. — Psalm 133. 

Yours in that wondrous favor, 

Frederick Lardent. — Eng. 

ADVERSARY SPEEDING UP— HIS TIME SHORT! 
Dear Friends: — 

Some time ago some of our class received copies of enclosure
 marked No. 1. After careful perusal of it we thought 
a gentle criticism might be in order, so we composed and 
forwarded a reply (which we also enclose and mark No. 2). 
In reply we received enclosure marked No. 3. 

We then thought to let the matter drop; but on second 
thought I have decided to forward this correspondence to you. 
The reason why I am doing so is because there seems to bo 
a growing tendency on the part of some to put out publications
 of this kind. We know of one man near here who 
claims to have more light than Pastor Russell had. Doesn't 
it seem strange that no one else has yet discovered this, although
 he has thought so for years? 

Also, there is a great tendency on the part of friends to 
patronize these various publications, and while they get some 


[«105] 


(190-191) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


BftOOKLYN, N. Y. 


truth, aa from the creeds, they are in grave danger of falling
 into the snares of the adversary. 

There seem to be many people who are conversant with 
the contents of the Studies, but who never have affiliated with 
the classes, and who now advance the Pastor's doctrines, 
claiming them as their own. I heard such an one a few davs 
ago and asked him where he learned it all. He stated that he 
had been a very earnest "Bible student from childhood and the 
Lord, had shown him these things. But after some quizzing 
he finally admitted that he had read Pastor Russell's books. 

The adversary seems to be speeding up a little in these 
perilous times! The great personal pronoun "I" is getting 
large and is one of his chief weapons. 

Let me suggest that if the money spent on these various 
publications were to be sent to the Society it would do much 
more good. 

Yours in the Master's service, Edward Barker. — Pa. 

BEDEEMEB MADE HIM OP SO MUCH SERVICE 

Dear Bbethben: — 

My heart was made solemn and filled with the sadness 
that comes with the knowledge of the loss of a blessed association
, by the death of our beloved Brother Russell. 

How thankful we ought to be to our heavenly Father 
for the knowledge that it has been the unseen presence and 
supervision of our dear Redeemer himself that made his 
servant such a source of comfort, help and instruction to us 
all, and so we need not be disturbed at his taking him away 
as it hath seemed to him good. 

How fitting it was that our dear Lord should at this time 
remove every earthly prop supporting ua and compel us to 
lean wholly upon himself and his Word, so that we might 
become strong in him "and in the power of his might" in 
order to be able to endure in his strength, steadfast and 
faithful unto the end! 

Please extend my loving Christian greetings to the dear 
ones at the Bethel Home, for whom it has been my daily 
privilege to pray nearly eighteen years, commending them 
to our heavenly Fathers care in the words of our beloved 
Brother Paul: "Unto him that is able to keep you from 
falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of 
his glory, with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our 
Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power both now 
and ever, Amen!" 

Sincerely your brother in Christ, Chas. Owens. — Tenn. 
CONFIDENCE AND TEUST 
Dear Bbethben in Chbist: — 

We assure you, dear brethren, that the passing of our beloved
 Brother Russell beyond the veil has not had a tendency 
to slacken our zeal for the truth and its service, but has, 
on the other hand, increased it, and we are more determined 
than ever before to be faithful, that we too may have some 
part and lot in the kingdom so soon to be set up. 

We assure you of our confidence and trust in whatever arrangements
 Brother Russell has made for furthering the 
harvest work, realizing that he was "that servant/* especially 
chosen of the Lord, and that the "meat in due season" which 
he has been putting forth for about forty years will continue 
to go forth through the same channel, 'The Watch .Tower. 
Assuring you of our unreserved co-operation in the work, and 
of our desire to continue to do with our might what our 
hands may find to do, we remain, 

Yours in the Master's service, 
Union Meeting of Associated Bible Students. — Joplin, Mo. 

A BEAUTIFUL LIFE — A MARVELOUS EXAMPLE 
Dear Bbethben: — 

I returned to my home from Winsted, Conn., and learned 
of Brother Russell's death. I am deeply grieved at his passing
 away. We have lost a dear, helpful and most valuable 
minister of the Gospel. It seems as though we do need him 
so much. But God knoweth best, and doeth all things well. 

I am so thankful that the dear Lord permitted me to receive
 Brother Russell's written words. They have taught me 
concerning the Scriptures what God has in store for those 
who love and obey him. I feel in my mind and heart that 
I should never have known otherwise that it was my privilege
 to strive for the bride class, and that I must live the 
Christ life in order to be a member of the church of the 
living God, a member of Christ's body (the opportunity is 
so great and good!), had I not received Brother Russell's 
sermons, Towek, Dawns, and his other writings. 

I thank and praise the dear Lord and Brother Russell for 
all these. How could I live without them? I have prayed 
that the Lord would raise up some one to carry on the work 
he has laid down. What a great reward he will receive for 
his untiring efforts in the Lord's work for humanity — and so 
a My performed! It seems to me that he stands above all men 


or persons, next to Christ — so much like his Savior. What a 
beautiful Yifel What a marvelous example to Christiana and 
the world I No wonder we all loved him, and love him still! 

While in Winsted, Conn., I received the package of Watch 
Towebs you so kindly sent me. Thank you a thousand times! 
I appreciate and love them. The Bible Students Monthly 
was left at my door this week, and I am very thankful for it 
(I am going to order it soon). In it I notice that to any 
one wishing a copy of "Facts Foil the Assassination of Pastor
 Russell's Character," it will be sent on request. Who 
could doubt his purity?. I should like one, because I cannot 
understand how any one can say a word against the pure, 
Christ-like person that he was. Yet they did the same to 
Jesus, and crucified him. 

Please send me a copy and accept many thanks. I do not 
doubt his splendid life. His enemies were jealous of him. 
Truly these are trying times for the saints; but God's promises
 are great and true — "Great peace have they that love 
thy l&w, and nothing shall offend them." Brother Russell's 
God is our God, and his Bible our Bible, 

Dear people, you who have known Brother Russell so 
intimately, you have my sympathy in this hour of separation 
and loneliness. May the* dear Lord bless and comfort, sustain
 and keep you all through this present life, and give you 
an abundant entrance into his kingdom, is my prayer. 

Hoping and praying that I may he an "over comer/'* and 
may sit with Jesus on his throne with his redeemed ones, 
I remain, 

Truly your sincere sister in Christ, 

Mbs. J. E. Morris. — Conn. 
PBAYEBS FOB INCREASED TJNDEBSTANDING OF GOD'S WILL 
Dear Bbethben: — 

We desire to assure you of our willingness to co-operate 
with you as may be, and to have you know that we have 
had constantly in mind those who have been so intimately associated
 with" our dear Pastor and who now, by his physical 
absence, are required to walk more steadfastly by faith rather 
than by sight. 

We have remembered you in our prayers at the throne of 
grace, asking for fou increased perception and understanding
 of the Father's will in the conduct of the many interests 
of the harvest work! We pray the continued manifestations
 of God's love and care for all who are striving to carry 
forward the work begun by God's special servant. 

Humbly in his service, Bloomfield Fcclesia. — N. J. 

HIS MEMOBY WILL ASSIST IN THE TIGHT 07 FAITH 
Deab Bbethben in Chbist : — 

We take this time and means to convey to you our sincerest
 sympathy in our mutual bereavement, and also to rejoice
 with you for him who, we believe, has already heard 
that sublime welcome, "Well done, good and faithful servant
 ! " Furthermore, we testify that the remembrance of 
his faith, zeal, loyalty and love will be a great help to us to 
keep up the "good fight" and to continue to show forth the 
praises of our dear Redeemer and Lord, to the end that our 
heavenly Father's name may be glorified. 

Yours in the fellowship of the One "altogether lovely," 

Auboba Ecclesia, — Hi. 
CANADIAN'S VIEW OF VOW AND BE SOLVE 
Deab Bbethben: — 

It seems expedient that I should write you a few words 
regarding the Resolve and the Vow. 

The more I examine the principles of thought contained 
in these helps, the more do they appear to be meat indeed for 
the household. 

There is one thing that appeals to me very much. It is the 
concise form in which these principles are stated. While 
concise and brief, the language is comprehensive and sufficient. 
For example, take the first thought of the Resolve, "My 
earliest thought." This gives us a good start. Likewise with 
all the other features. 

I have often thought of the paragraph on trust as taking 
out a life insurance policy with Jehovah, without any premium 
to pay, except the exercise of the faculty of trust. 

The Vow also contains pearls of great price, special treasures
 to the kingdom class. First, I note that it is a vow 
unto Jehovah our Father, the Maker and Sustainer of the 
boundless universe. Coming unto him in the name of his 
Son our Lord, with reverence, one desires his law to rule 
in his heart, believing in his faithfulness to perform that 
which he has promised. 

The mutual tie of Christian fellowship and oneness of the 
church is displayed in the second paragraph, and recalls to 
my mind instances in the history of the early church when 
the prayers of some ascended to the heavenly Father for the 
blessing of the fellow servants. 


[6106] 


June 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(178-195) 


The more I aerutinize paragraph 3, the more- am I convinced
 that divine wisdom guided in the insertion of that 
clause. There is an unfathomed mine of truth and wisdom 
in those words. Some day in the Lord's providence I hope to 
tome up to the standard there set forth. A retrospective 
view convinces me of the need of scrutinizing carefully one's 
thoughts, words and acts. 

All these helps are beneficial to the new creature in his 
efforts to be conformed to the image of God's dear Son, by 
the renewing of the mind. 

Praying Jehovah's blessing on the Bethel Family, and in 
the fellowship of his So,i and the saints, I remain 

Your brother in Christ, Eenest H. Walker. — Ont. 

HEAVENLY FATHER'S WISDOM MANIFESTED 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

Our heavenly Father has, in his infinite wisdom, seen 
fit to call our beloved Pastor to his long-needed rest. Most 
naturally we now turn our attention, our sympathies and our 
prayers toward The Watch Tower and the dear brethren 
upon whose shoulders has fallen the responsibility of carrying
 on the work from which our Brother Russell has been 
taken, and that of the I. B. S. A. in general. 

We have felt that we could see significance and wisdom 
in the expressed wish of our Pastor, several years ago; 
namely, that The Tower be regarded as the Lord's servant, 
rather than himself. The earnest, heartfelt prayers of our 
class, dear Brethren, are being offered up to the God of all 


grace on your behalf and on that of the tender interests of 
the Lord's "little flock," scattered throughout the world. "The 
Kternal God is our refuge; and underneath are the Everlasting 
Arms." Shall we not "speak to the children of Israel, that 
they go forward?" May we not prove henceforth that our 
dear Pastor has succeeded in accomplishing the greatest desire 
and effort of his life-work — the leading of all truth-hungry 
hearts coming under his influence to Christ and the Bible 
instead of to himself? 

Your brethren in Christ, Waukesha Ecclesia. — Wis. 
HASTENING COMPLETION OX BRIDE OT CHRIST 
Dear Brethren ix the Lord: — 

We convey to you and all the dear roJahorers our mutual 
sympathy in the passing of our beloved Pastor from his 
labors of love in the flesh to a full realization of that divine, 
immortal nature which awaits those who have made their 
calling and election sure. Our sorrow is turned into gladness 
as we realize that he whom we have every reason to believe 
was true and faithful has passed beyond the veil, thus hastening
 the completion of the "bride of Christ," who ^vw ill soon 
rejoice with her Lord in bringing deliverance to all the captives
 of death. 

We assure you, dear brethren, of our hearty co-operation 
in all your efforts and labors of love, trusting that whatever 
is done in thought, word or deed may be done with an eye 
single to the honor and ,glory of God. 

With Christian love, Meaford Ecclbsia. — Canada. 


PICTURES OF BROTHER RUSSELL FOR CLASSES 

Intern atonal Bible Student's Ass'n with one of these 
photographs* provided the class is organized and has a definite 
meeting-place. All requests must be Bent by the Class Secretary
, and addressed to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society, Brooklyn, N. Y. The picture is a splendid likeness. 


September 10 last, about two months before Brother Russell
's death, Brother Mitchell, of Los Angeles, made some 
photographs of Brother Russell which have been much appreciated
 by those who have seen them. Brother Mitchell 
now advises us that he desires to present each class of the 

