





A Simple Question That Anyone Can Ask




Mary and her husband, John,a live in a part of the world where the good news can be shared with many foreign workers from the Philippines. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Mary successfully started Bible studies not only in the country where she lives but also in other places in the world. How did she do it?
Mary would ask her Bible students, “Do you know anyone else who would like to study the Bible?” If they said yes, she would ask to be introduced to them. Asking this simple question often has good results. Why? Because people who appreciate God’s Word usually want to share what they learn with family members and friends they care about. What has been the result of asking this question?
Mary’s Bible student Jasmin introduced her to four new Bible students. One of them, Kristine, enjoyed her study sessions so much that she asked Mary to study with her twice a week. When Mary asked if she knew anyone else who wanted to study the Bible, Kristine said, “Yes, I will introduce my friends to you.” Within a few weeks, Kristine introduced Mary to four friends who wanted to study. Later, Kristine introduced her to other friends, some of whom repeated the process with still others.
Kristine also wanted her family in the Philippines to learn about the Bible. So she spoke to her daughter, Andrea. Initially, Andrea thought, ‘The Witnesses are a cult, they do not believe in Jesus, and they use only the Old Testament.’ But after just one study, her misconceptions cleared up. During her studies, she would exclaim, “As long as the Bible says so, it must be true!”
In time, Andrea introduced Mary to two friends and a workmate who started studying. Also, unknown to Mary, Andrea’s blind aunt, Angela, was listening in on their studies. Then one day, Angela asked Andrea to introduce her to Mary and requested her own Bible study. Angela loved what she was learning. Within a month, she memorized many scriptures and wanted to study four times a week! With Andrea’s help, Angela started to attend the meetings regularly via videoconferencing.
When Mary learned that Kristine’s husband, Joshua, was lingering in the background during Kristine’s studies, Mary asked him if he would like to join. Joshua remarked, “I will just listen, but don’t direct any questions to me; if you do, I will walk out.” Within the first five minutes of the study, he asked more questions than Kristine did and wanted to continue with the Bible discussions.
Mary’s simple question led to numerous Bible studies. With several of them, she made arrangements for the students to be helped by fellow Witnesses. In total, Mary started 28 Bible studies in four different countries.
Jasmin, the first student mentioned in this experience, got baptized in April 2021. Kristine got baptized in May 2022 and has returned to the Philippines to be with her family. Two other students who had been introduced to Mary by Kristine also got baptized. Angela got baptized a few months later and now serves as a regular pioneer. Kristine’s husband, Joshua, and their daughter, Andrea, as well as several other students are making good progress.





In the first century, the good news spread quickly between family members and friends. (John 1:41, 42a; Acts 10:24, 27, 48; 16:25-33) Why not ask your Bible students and other interested ones, “Do you know anyone else who would like to study the Bible?” Who knows how many studies could be started as a result of this simple question that anyone can ask?



a Names have been changed.

