
How to Be a True Friend




HAVE you ever felt that you had to face your problems alone? We are living in “critical times hard to deal with” that can make us feel discouraged and isolated. (2 Tim. 3:1) However, we do not have to deal with life’s challenges on our own. The Bible highlights the value of having true friends in “times of distress.”​—Prov. 17:17.



HOW TRUE FRIENDS CAN HELP





Despite being under house arrest, the apostle Paul accomplished his ministry thanks to the loyal support of his friends



The apostle Paul benefited from the friendships that he had with his traveling companions. (Col. 4:7-11) When Paul was imprisoned in Rome, his friends performed tasks that Paul was unable to do himself. For example, Epaphroditus supplied Paul with needed items that the brothers and sisters in Philippi sent. (Phil. 4:18) Tychicus delivered Paul’s letters to different congregations. (Col. 4:7; see study note.) With the support of his friends, Paul carried out his ministry despite being under house arrest or being isolated in prison. How can you be a true friend today?
Modern-day examples show the value of being a true friend. Consider a sister who proved to be a friend for Elisabet, a regular pioneer in Spain. When her mother was diagnosed with terminal cancer, the sister sent Elisabet many encouraging text messages based on Bible verses. “These messages,” says Elisabet, “empowered me to face each day without feeling alone.”​—Prov. 18:24.
We can strengthen our friendships with fellow believers by supporting them in congregation activities. For example, could you offer to drive an elderly brother or sister to the meeting or out in the ministry? If you do, you will likely enjoy an interchange of encouragement. (Rom. 1:12) However, some Christians are unable to leave their home. How can we be a true friend to them?



BE A TRUE FRIEND TO THOSE WHO ARE HOUSEBOUND

Some fellow believers have health issues or other circumstances that prevent them from attending meetings in person. Consider the example of David, who was diagnosed with lymphoma. For over six months, he received chemotherapy. Throughout the treatment, David and his wife, Lidia, attended meetings virtually.
What support did they receive from their friends in the congregation? After each meeting, some of those at the Kingdom Hall would make an effort to talk to David and Lidia via videoconference. In addition, when David and Lidia gave comments, they later received encouraging text messages from fellow believers. The result? David and Lidia felt less isolated.




Involve those who are housebound in your ministry



Could we include those who are housebound in our ministry? With some small adjustments, we can show that we have not forgotten those who face such limitations. (Prov. 3:27) Why not schedule some time with them to do letter writing or telephone witnessing? Those who are housebound may be able to tie in to meetings for field service by videoconference. David and Lidia appreciated this arrangement. David explains, “Just being with our preaching group for a brief discussion and prayer gave us a massive boost.” Further, if circumstances make it safe and fitting to do so, could you from time to time arrange to bring a Bible student to a housebound publisher’s home to conduct the study there?
When we work along with our housebound brothers and sisters and observe firsthand their endearing qualities, we draw closer to them. For instance, when you share in the ministry with such publishers and you take notice of how they skillfully use God’s Word to reach someone’s heart, you likely feel drawn to them even more. When you support fellow believers in spiritual activities, you may well enlarge your circle of friends.​—2 Cor. 6:13.
Paul found comfort in having his friend Titus with him. (2 Cor. 7:5-7) This account reminds us that we can provide comfort not only by expressing sympathy for those in need but also by being with them and doing what we can to support them.​—1 John 3:18.



BE A TRUE FRIEND DURING TIMES OF PERSECUTION

Our brothers and sisters in Russia have set a beautiful example in showing support for one another. Consider the experience of Sergey and his wife, Tatyana. After their home was searched by the police, they were taken for questioning. Tatyana was released first and returned home. Sergey relates: “As soon as [Tatyana] arrived home, one brave sister showed up at our door. More friends came and helped us with getting our apartment back in order.”
Sergey adds: “I have always liked Proverbs 17:17, where it says: ‘A true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress.’ These words have taken on even greater meaning to me during this time of persecution when I am unable to cope on my own. Jehovah has provided friends who are fearlessly at my side.”a
As we face ever more difficult situations, we need friends to lean on. We will need them even more during the great tribulation. So let us make every effort to be a true friend now!​—1 Pet. 4:7, 8.



a See on jw.org the article “Jehovah Has Provided Friends Who Are Fearlessly at My Side.”

