





Reject the Selfish Spirit of Today’s World




HAVE you noticed that many people in the world feel that they are entitled to special privileges, rights, or treatment? No matter how much they get, they believe that they deserve more. This thinking is rooted in the selfish and unthankful attitudes that mark the last days.​—2 Tim. 3:2.
Of course, selfishness is not new. Adam and Eve decided to choose for themselves what was good and what was bad, with disastrous consequences. Centuries later, King Uzziah of Judah thought that he was entitled to present incense at the temple, but he was badly mistaken. (2 Chron. 26:18, 19) Similarly, the Pharisees and Sadducees believed that they deserved God’s special favor just because they descended from Abraham.​—Matt. 3:9.
We are surrounded by people who are selfish and egotistical, and their attitude could influence us. (Gal. 5:26) We might start to think that we deserve to receive a certain privilege or get special treatment. How can we avoid this way of thinking? To begin, we should get Jehovah’s view of the matter. Two Bible principles will help us.
Jehovah determines what we should receive. Consider some examples.
  In the family arrangement, a husband needs to feel respected by his wife and a wife needs to feel loved by her husband. (Eph. 5:33) Marriage mates should receive the exclusive romantic interest of their spouse. (1 Cor. 7:3) Parents rightly require the obedience of their children, and children should receive ample love and support from their parents.​—2 Cor. 12:14; Eph. 6:2.

  In the congregation, hardworking elders are worthy of our respect. (1 Thess. 5:12) However, they do not have a right to dominate their brothers and sisters.​—1 Pet. 5:2, 3.

  God has given human governments the right to demand taxes and to receive honor from their subjects.​—Rom. 13:1, 6, 7.


Jehovah lovingly gives us far more than we deserve. Because of our sinful nature, we deserve only to die. (Rom. 6:23) Yet, Jehovah grants us many blessings out of his loyal love for us. (Ps. 103:10, 11) Each blessing or privilege that we receive from him is by his undeserved kindness.​—Rom. 12:6-8; Eph. 2:8.



HOW TO AVOID DEVELOPING A SELFISH, EGOTISTICAL SPIRIT

Beware of the world’s attitude. Without realizing it, we might begin to think that we deserve more than others. Jesus showed how easily such thinking can arise by using the illustration of the workers who were paid a denarius. Some workers started early in the morning and worked all day under the hot sun; others worked for just one hour. The first group assumed that they were entitled to a higher wage because of the work they had done. (Matt. 20:1-16) In applying this illustration, Jesus showed that his followers should be satisfied with what God is pleased to provide.




The men who had worked all day thought that they were entitled to a higher wage



Be thankful, not demanding. (1 Thess. 5:18) Imitate the apostle Paul, who did not ask for material support from the brothers in Corinth even though he had a right to do so. (1 Cor. 9:11-14) We should appreciate each blessing that we receive and avoid a demanding spirit.




The apostle Paul did not demand financial support



Cultivate humility. When someone thinks too much of himself, he usually starts to feel that he is entitled to more than he has. Humility is the antidote to such poisonous thinking.




The prophet Daniel’s humility made him precious to Jehovah



The prophet Daniel set a fine example in showing humility. His family background, good looks, intelligence, and abilities could have led him to feel that he deserved the special treatment and privileges he received. (Dan. 1:3, 4, 19, 20) However, Daniel remained humble, and this quality made him precious to Jehovah.​—Dan. 2:30; 10:11, 12.
Let us reject the selfish, egotistical spirit so prevalent in today’s world. Instead, may we continue to find joy in each blessing that Jehovah gives us through his undeserved kindness.



