
April
Friday, April 1

The things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction.​—Rom. 15:4.



Are you suffering through a difficult trial? Perhaps someone in the congregation has hurt you. (Jas. 3:2) Or maybe your workmates or schoolmates ridicule you for serving Jehovah. (1 Pet. 4:3, 4) Or family members are possibly trying to stop you from attending meetings or from talking to others about your faith. (Matt. 10:35, 36) If a trial is especially painful, you may feel like giving up. But you can be confident that no matter what challenge you face, Jehovah will give you the wisdom to deal with it and the strength to endure it. In his Word, Jehovah included detailed descriptions of how imperfect individuals dealt with difficult trials. Why? So that we can learn from them. That is what Jehovah moved the apostle Paul to write. Reading these accounts can bring us a measure of comfort and hope. However, to benefit, we need to do more than just read the Bible. We must allow the Scriptures to mold our thinking and to touch our hearts. w21.03 14 ¶1-2




Saturday, April 2

View the fields, that they are white for harvesting.​—John 4:35.



Do you view the people to whom you preach as being like grain that is ripe for harvesting? If so, three things will prove true. First, you will preach with more urgency. A harvest period is limited; there is no time to waste. Second, you will be happy as you see people respond to the good news. The Bible says: “People rejoice in the harvesttime.” (Isa. 9:3) And third, you will see each person as a potential disciple, so you will adapt your approach to appeal to his or her interests. Jesus did not write off the Samaritans, as his followers may have done. Instead, he saw them as potential disciples. We too need to see the people in our territory as potential disciples of Christ. The apostle Paul set an outstanding example for us to follow. He knew something about the beliefs of those to whom he preached, discerned their interests, and saw them as potential disciples of Jesus. w20.04 8-9 ¶3-4




Sunday, April 3

The Grave and the place of destruction are in full view of Jehovah. How much more so the hearts of men!​—Prov. 15:11.



Rather than judge another person’s actions, do your best to understand how he feels. The only person who fully understands us is Jehovah. So ask him to help you to see in others what he sees and to understand how to show compassion for them. You cannot pick which brothers and sisters deserve your tender compassion. All of them face problems, many of which are similar to those that were experienced by Jonah, Elijah, Hagar, and Lot. In a number of cases, they have brought the problems on themselves. Realistically, all of us have done that at some point. It is reasonable, then, for Jehovah to ask us to show fellow feeling for one another. (1 Pet. 3:8) When we obey Jehovah, we add to the unity of our remarkable and diverse global family. So when dealing with one another, may we be determined to listen, learn, and show compassion. w20.04 18-19 ¶15-17




Monday, April 4

Christ suffered for you, leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.​—1 Pet. 2:21.



Jesus set the perfect example of obeying Jehovah. So one important way that we obey Jehovah is by following Jesus’ steps as closely as possible. (John 8:29) To keep walking in the truth, we must be convinced that Jehovah is the God of truth, that everything he tells us in his Word, the Bible, is true. And we must also be convinced that Jesus is the promised Messiah. Many today doubt that Jesus has been anointed as King of God’s Kingdom. John warned that there were “many deceivers,” who could mislead those who were not prepared to defend the truth about Jehovah and Jesus. (2 John 7-11) John wrote: “Who is the liar but the one who denies that Jesus is the Christ?” (1 John 2:22) The only way we can avoid being deceived is by studying God’s Word. Only if we do that will we come to know Jehovah and Jesus. (John 17:3) And only then will we be convinced that we have the truth. w20.07 21 ¶4-5




Tuesday, April 5

Be determined not to put a stumbling block . . . before a brother.​—Rom. 14:13.



One way we can avoid becoming “a stumbling block” to our fellow runners is by yielding to their preferences whenever possible instead of insisting on our rights. (Rom. 14:19-21; 1 Cor. 8:9, 13) In this important way, we are not like a runner in a literal race who strives to gain the prize just for himself. Those runners think primarily about their own interests. So they may try to push their way to the front of the pack. By contrast, we are not competing against one another. (Gal. 5:26; 6:4) Our goal is to help as many as possible to cross the finish line with us and gain the prize of life. So we try to apply the inspired counsel to “look out not only for [our] own interests, but also for the interests of others.” (Phil. 2:4) In the race that we run, Jehovah has kindly offered his people a guaranteed reward for completing the race​—everlasting life either in heaven or on a paradise earth. w20.04 28 ¶10; 29 ¶12




Wednesday, April 6

These are the ones who come out of the great tribulation.​—Rev. 7:14.



Millions of Christian men and women will survive into the new world. Those survivors on earth will be eyewitnesses to another victory over death​—the resurrection of billions of people who died in the past. Just imagine the joy when that victorious event occurs! (Acts 24:15) And all those who prove completely loyal to Jehovah will be victorious even over inherited death. They will be able to live forever. Every Christian now alive should be grateful for the reassuring words that Paul wrote to the Corinthians regarding the resurrection. We have every reason to show that we accept Paul’s urging to be fully occupied now “in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) If we loyally and actively share in that work, we will put ourselves in line to experience a future filled with joy. That future will be more wonderful than anything we can imagine. It certainly will confirm that our labor has not been in vain in connection with the Lord. w20.12 13 ¶16-17




Thursday, April 7

Their armies gathered together to wage war against the one seated on the horse and against his army.​—Rev. 19:19.



If we view the prophecies of Ezekiel 38:10-23; Daniel 2:43-45; 11:44–12:1; and Revelation 16:13-16, 21 as speaking about the same time period and events, it appears that we can expect the following developments. Sometime after the start of the great tribulation, “the kings of the entire inhabited earth” will form a coalition of nations. (Rev. 16:13, 14) That coalition becomes what the Scriptures call “Gog of the land of Magog.” (Ezek. 38:2) That coalition of nations will make one final all-out assault on God’s people. Speaking of this time, the apostle John saw a storm of unusually large hailstones raining down on God’s enemies. That symbolic hailstorm may take the form of a hard-hitting judgment message delivered by Jehovah’s people that provokes Gog of Magog into attacking God’s people with the intention of wiping them off the earth.​—Rev. 16:21. w20.05 15 ¶13-14




Friday, April 8

If you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!​—Luke 11:13.



God’s active force is a gift we should treasure. We can deepen our appreciation for holy spirit by reflecting on what that spirit has accomplished in our day. Before Jesus ascended to heaven, he told his disciples: “You will receive power when the holy spirit comes upon you, and you will be witnesses of me . . . to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8) With the backing of holy spirit, some eight and a half million worshippers of Jehovah have been gathered from every corner of the earth. Also, we enjoy a spiritual paradise because God’s spirit helps us to cultivate beautiful qualities, such as love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, and self-control. These qualities make up “the fruitage of the spirit.” (Gal. 5:22, 23) What a precious gift holy spirit is! w20.05 28 ¶10; 29 ¶13




Saturday, April 9

Since death came through a man, resurrection of the dead also comes through a man.​—1 Cor. 15:21.



For a number of reasons, we can assume that those greeting resurrected individuals will be able to recognize their loved ones. For instance, based on resurrections that have already occurred, it seems that Jehovah will re-create people so that they look, speak, and think in the same way as they did shortly before they died. Remember that Jesus likened death to sleep and the resurrection to being awakened from sleep. (Matt. 9:18, 24; John 11:11-13) When people awaken from sleep, they look and sound the same as when they went to sleep, and they retain their memory. Consider the example of Lazarus. He had been dead for four days, so his body had begun to decay. Yet, when Jesus resurrected him, his sisters immediately recognized him, and Lazarus obviously remembered them.​—John 11:38-44; 12:1, 2. w20.08 14 ¶3; 16 ¶8




Sunday, April 10

Salvation we owe to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb.​—Rev. 7:10.



The difference between the anointed and the other sheep is not their value to God. Both groups are equally precious to him. After all, he paid the same price, the life of his dear Son, to purchase both the anointed and the other sheep. The difference between the two groups is that they have different hopes. Both groups must remain loyal to God and Christ. (Ps. 31:23) And remember, God’s spirit can work with equal force on all of us. This means that Jehovah supplies his holy spirit to each individual according to what is needed. Jehovah has given each of his dedicated servants a wonderful hope for the future. (Jer. 29:11) The Memorial of Christ’s death gives each of us a grand opportunity to praise God and Christ for what they have done for us so that we can enjoy unending life. The Memorial is without question the most important occasion for true Christians to meet together. w21.01 18 ¶16; 19 ¶19




Monday, April 11

Keep doing this.​—1 Cor. 11:25.



The vast majority who attend the Memorial have the earthly hope. Why, then, do they attend? For the same reason that people attend a friend’s wedding. They want to show their love and support for the couple who are getting married. Thus, those of the other sheep attend the Memorial because they want to show their love and support for Christ and the anointed. The other sheep also attend to show their appreciation for the sacrifice that the Memorial commemorates, a sacrifice that makes it possible for them to live forever on earth. Another important reason why the other sheep attend the Memorial is in order to be obedient to Jesus’ command. When Jesus instituted that special meal with his faithful apostles, he told them: “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” (1 Cor. 11:23-26) So they continue to attend the Lord’s Evening Meal as long as some anointed ones are alive here on earth. w21.01 17-18 ¶13-14



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 9) John 12:12-19; Mark 11:1-11


Tuesday, April 12

By this the love of God was revealed in our case, that God sent his only-begotten Son into the world so that we might gain life through him.​—1 John 4:9.



For love to be real, it must be backed by actions. (Compare James 2:17, 26.) For example, Jehovah loves us. (1 John 4:19) And he expresses his love through the beautiful words recorded in the Bible. (Ps. 25:10; Rom. 8:38, 39) However, we are convinced that God loves us not just because of what he says but also because of what he does. Jehovah allowed his beloved Son to suffer and die for us. (John 3:16) Can there be any doubt that Jehovah really loves us? We prove that we love Jehovah and Jesus by obeying them. (John 14:15; 1 John 5:3) And Jesus specifically commanded us to love one another. (John 13:34, 35) We must not only express our love for our brothers and sisters in words but also show that we love them by what we do.​—1 John 3:18. w21.01 9 ¶6; 10 ¶8



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 10) John 12:20-50


Wednesday, April 13

I have called you friends.​—John 15:15.



Those who are anointed with holy spirit have the hope of being with Jesus forever, serving as joint heirs of God’s Kingdom. They will actually be with Christ​—see him, speak with him, and spend time in his company. (John 14:2, 3) Those with the earthly hope will also receive Jesus’ love and attention. Even though they will not see Jesus, their bond with him will grow ever stronger as they enjoy the life that Jehovah and Jesus make possible for them. (Isa. 9:6, 7) When we accept Jesus’ invitation to become his friends, we gain many blessings. For example, we benefit from his love and support right now. We are given the opportunity to live forever. And most important, our friendship with Jesus will lead us to the finest treasure of all​—a close, personal relationship with Jesus’ Father, Jehovah. What a privilege we have to be called Jesus’ friends! w20.04 25 ¶15-16



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 11) Luke 21:1-36


Thursday, April 14

In the Christ all will be made alive.​—1 Cor. 15:22.



The apostle Paul’s letter was written to anointed Christians in Corinth, who would be resurrected to life in heaven. Those Christians were “sanctified in union with Christ Jesus, called to be holy ones.” And Paul mentioned “those who have fallen asleep in death in union with Christ.” (1 Cor. 1:2; 15:18; 2 Cor. 5:17) In another inspired letter, Paul wrote that those “united with [Jesus] in the likeness of his death” will “be united with him in the likeness of his resurrection.” (Rom. 6:3-5) Jesus was raised as a spirit and went to heaven. So that will be the outcome for all “in union with Christ,” that is, all spirit-anointed Christians. Paul wrote that Christ was raised as “the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep in death.” (1 Cor. 15:20) Jesus was the first one ever to be raised from the dead as a spirit and to receive everlasting life. w20.12 5-6 ¶15-16



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 12) Matthew 26:1-5, 14-16; Luke 22:1-6


MEMORIAL DATEAfter SundownFriday, April 15

We will always be with the Lord.​—1 Thess. 4:17.



Anointed ones who today finish their earthly course are instantly raised to life in the heavens. This is confirmed by the apostle Paul’s words recorded at 1 Corinthians 15:51, 52. Upon their resurrection, these brothers of Christ will have complete joy. The Bible tells us what work those who are changed “in the blink of an eye” will do in heaven. Jesus says to them: “To the one who conquers and observes my deeds down to the end, I will give authority over the nations, and he will shepherd the people with an iron rod so that they will be broken to pieces like clay vessels, just as I have received from my Father.”​—Rev. 2:26, 27. w20.12 12 ¶14-15



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 13) Matthew 26:17-19; Mark 14:12-16; Luke 22:7-13 (Events after sunset: Nisan 14) John 13:1-5; 14:1-3


Saturday, April 16

Christ has been raised from the dead.​—1 Cor. 15:20.



By calling Jesus “the firstfruits,” the apostle Paul implied that others thereafter would be raised from death to heavenly life. The apostles and others “in union with Christ” would follow Jesus. (1 Cor. 15:18) In due time, they would experience a resurrection similar to that of Jesus. The heavenly resurrection for those “in union with Christ” had not yet begun to occur at the time Paul wrote to the Corinthians. Rather, Paul pointed to a future time: “Each one in his own proper order: Christ the firstfruits, afterward those who belong to the Christ during his presence.” (1 Cor. 15:23; 1 Thess. 4:15, 16) Today we are living during that foretold “presence” of Christ. Yes, the apostles and other spirit-anointed Christians who died had to await that presence to receive their heavenly reward and be “united with [Jesus] in the likeness of his resurrection.”​—Rom. 6:5. w20.12 5 ¶12; 6 ¶16-17



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 14) John 19:1-42


Sunday, April 17

It is sown in corruption; it is raised up in incorruption.​—1 Cor. 15:42.



The apostle Paul was referring to a person who is resurrected with a heavenly body, that is, “a spiritual one.” (1 Cor. 15:43, 44) When Jesus walked the earth, he had a fleshly body. But when he was resurrected, he “became a life-giving spirit” and returned to heaven. Likewise, anointed Christians would be resurrected to spirit life. Paul explained: “Just as we have borne the image of the one made of dust, we will bear also the image of the heavenly one.” (1 Cor. 15:45-49) Note that Jesus was not resurrected with a human body. Paul pointedly said: “Flesh and blood cannot inherit God’s Kingdom” in heaven. (1 Cor. 15:50) The apostles and other anointed ones would not be resurrected to heaven with corruptible bodies of flesh and blood. w20.12 10-11 ¶10-12



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 15) Matthew 27:62-66 (Events after sunset: Nisan 16) John 20:1


Monday, April 18

Death, where is your victory? Death, where is your sting?​—1 Cor. 15:55.



God inspired some of Jesus’ disciples in the first century to write about the heavenly hope. The apostle John explained: “We are now children of God, but it has not yet been made manifest what we will be. We do know that when he is made manifest we will be like him.” (1 John 3:2) So anointed Christians do not know what they will be like when they are raised to heaven with spirit bodies. However, they will see Jehovah when they receive their reward. The Bible provides some information about it. The anointed will be with Christ when he brings “to nothing all government and all authority and power.” That includes “the last enemy, death.” Finally, Jesus​—along with his corulers—​will subject himself and all things to Jehovah. (1 Cor. 15:24-28) What a climax that will be! w20.12 8 ¶2



Memorial Bible reading: (Daytime events: Nisan 16) John 20:2-18


Tuesday, April 19

I have hope . . . that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.​—Acts 24:15.



Loyal Christians who do not have the hope of living in heaven with Christ also have the hope of a resurrection. The Bible says that the apostle Paul and others who go to heaven share in “the earlier resurrection from the dead.” (Phil. 3:11) Does that not suggest that another resurrection would follow? That would be in harmony with what Job said about his future. (Job 14:15) “Those who belong to the Christ during his presence” will be in heaven with Jesus when he brings to nothing all governments and all authority and power. Even “the last enemy, death,” will be brought to nothing. Certainly, inherited death will no more afflict those raised to heaven. (1 Cor. 15:23-26) Those with an earthly hope can derive hope from Paul’s words as found in today’s text. Clearly, no unrighteous person can enter into heaven, so those words point to a future resurrection on earth. w20.12 6-7 ¶18-19




Wednesday, April 20

[Christ] loved me and handed himself over for me.​—Gal. 2:20.



We may wonder, ‘How can I know for sure that Jehovah has not given up on me?’ In a sense, by asking that question, we also answer it. Decades ago, The Watchtower stated: “We [may] find ourselves stumbling and falling many times over some bad habit that has bitten more deeply into our former pattern of life than we had realized. . . . Do not conclude you have committed the unforgivable sin. That is just how Satan would like you to reason. The fact that you feel grieved and vexed with yourself is proof in itself that you have not gone too far. Never weary of turning humbly and earnestly to God, seeking his forgiveness and cleansing and help.” Before becoming a Christian, the apostle Paul committed a number of serious sins. Paul remembered what he had done. (1 Tim. 1:12-15) But he viewed the ransom as a personal gift to him. Paul thus avoided the trap of excessive guilt and focused on giving Jehovah his best from that point forward. w20.11 27 ¶14; 29 ¶17




Thursday, April 21

If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching, and it will be given him.​—Jas. 1:5.



Satan presents us with many temptations to do wrong. How do we respond? It is easy to rationalize. For example, we might reason: ‘Well, I would not be disfellowshipped for doing this, so it must not be that serious.’ Such reasoning is deeply flawed. We do better to ask ourselves such questions as these: ‘Is Satan trying to use this temptation to divide my heart? If I give in to wrong desires, would I bring reproach on Jehovah’s name? Would this action draw me closer to my God, or might it distance me from him?’ Meditate on such questions. Pray for wisdom to answer them honestly, without self-deception. Doing so can be a real protection. It can help you to reject temptation firmly, as Jesus did when he said: “Go away, Satan!” (Matt. 4:10) Remember, a divided heart is of little value. w20.06 12-13 ¶16-17




Friday, April 22

I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think, but to think so as to have a sound mind.​—Rom. 12:3.



We humbly submit to Jehovah’s standards, realizing that Jehovah always knows what is best for us. (Eph. 4:22-24) Humility moves us to put Jehovah’s will above our own and to consider others superior to us. As a result, we enjoy good relationships with Jehovah and fellow believers. (Phil. 2:3) If we are not careful, though, we could be influenced by people in Satan’s system who are proud and selfish. Apparently, this was a danger to some in the first century C.E., for the apostle Paul wrote to the Romans: “I tell everyone there among you not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think, but to think so as to have a sound mind.” Paul acknowledged that we need to think something of ourselves. However, humility will help us to keep a balanced view of ourselves and will help us avoid thinking too much of ourselves. w20.07 2 ¶1-2




Saturday, April 23

The land had no disturbance and there was no war against him.​—2 Chron. 14:6.



In King Asa’s day, the time of peace eventually came to an end. A huge military force​—one million strong—​came from Ethiopia. Its commander, Zerah, was confident that he and his army could defeat Judah. However, Asa trusted, not in numbers, but in his God, Jehovah. Asa prayed: “Help us, O Jehovah our God, for we are relying on you, and in your name we have come against this crowd.” (2 Chron. 14:11) Although the Ethiopian army had almost double the number of soldiers, Asa acknowledged Jehovah’s power and ability to act in behalf of His people. And Jehovah did not disappoint him; the Ethiopian army suffered a humiliating defeat. (2 Chron. 14:8-13) Although we do not know in detail what the future holds for us as individuals, we do know that any time of peace God’s people enjoy will be temporary. In fact, Jesus foretold that in the last days, his disciples would “be hated by all the nations.”​—Matt. 24:9. w20.09 17-18 ¶14-16




Sunday, April 24

I take pleasure . . . in insults.​—2 Cor. 12:10.



None of us like to be insulted. However, if our enemies do insult us and we are overly concerned with what they say, we can become discouraged. (Prov. 24:10) How, then, should we view the insults of opposers? Like the apostle Paul, we can “take pleasure . . . in insults.” Why? Because insults and opposition are signals that we are genuine disciples of Jesus. (1 Pet. 4:14) Jesus said that his followers would be persecuted. (John 15:18-20) That proved true in the first century. Back then, those influenced by Greek culture viewed Christians as unintelligent and weak. And among the Jews, Christians were considered to be “uneducated and ordinary,” like the apostles Peter and John. (Acts 4:13) Christians seemed to be weak; they had no political influence or military power, and people viewed them as outcasts of society. Did those early Christians allow the negative view of their opposers to stop them? No. w20.07 14-15 ¶3-4




Monday, April 25

Let us continue loving one another, because love is from God, and everyone who loves has been born from God and knows God.​—1 John 4:7.



The apostle John felt a deep, loving concern for the spiritual welfare of his brothers, and that feeling is clearly reflected in the counsel he gave in his three inspired letters. How encouraging it is to know that men and women, like him, are anointed to be corulers with Christ! (1 John 2:27) May we take to heart the counsel he gave. Let us be determined to walk in the truth, obeying Jehovah in all aspects of our life. Study his Word, and put your trust in it. Build strong faith in Jesus. Reject human philosophies and apostate teachings. Resist the pressure to live a double life and to give in to sin. Live by Jehovah’s high moral standards. And let us help our brothers remain strong by forgiving those who hurt us and helping those in need. Then, despite the struggles we face, we will keep walking in the truth. w20.07 24-25 ¶15-17




Tuesday, April 26

God has arranged each of the body members just as he pleased.​—1 Cor. 12:18.



Jehovah has lovingly given each of his faithful servants a place in his congregation. Although our roles are different, we are all valuable and we all need one another. The apostle Paul emphasized that none of us can look at another servant of Jehovah and say “I do not need you.” (1 Cor. 12:21) If the congregation is to function peacefully, we must value one another and work together. (Eph. 4:16) When we work together in unity, the congregation thrives and is built up in love. All elders in the congregation are appointed by Jehovah’s holy spirit. Yet, each one has different gifts and abilities. (1 Cor. 12:17) Some may be newly appointed and relatively inexperienced. Others may be limited because of age and health. Yet, no elder should look at any of his fellow elders and, in effect, say “I do not need you.” Instead, each elder should follow the counsel of Paul as recorded at Romans 12:10. w20.08 26 ¶1-2; 27 ¶4




Wednesday, April 27

The scene of this world is changing.​—1 Cor. 7:31.



Jehovah guides us on the road to life by means of the earthly part of his organization. No doubt, we readily follow the Bible-based direction we receive regarding doctrinal or moral matters. But how do we react when God’s organization makes a change that affects other aspects of our life, such as selling the Kingdom Hall we attend? We will maintain our joy if we remember that we are working for Jehovah and that he is directing his organization. (Col. 3:23, 24) King David set a good example when donating funds to build the temple. He said: “Who am I and who are my people that we should be in a position to make voluntary offerings like this? For everything is from you, and we have given to you what comes from your own hand.” (1 Chron. 29:14) When we donate funds, we too are giving to Jehovah what has come from his own hand. Even so, Jehovah appreciates the time, energy, and resources that we donate to support the work he wants done.​—2 Cor. 9:7. w20.11 22-23 ¶14-16




Thursday, April 28

The one who looks at the clouds will not reap.​—Eccl. 11:4.



As Witnesses of Jehovah, we do not judge our success by the number of people we bring into God’s organization. (Luke 8:11-15) As long as we endure in preaching the good news and teaching others, Jehovah will view us as being successful. Why? Because we are being obedient to him and his Son. (Mark 13:10; Acts 5:28, 29) We have this additional incentive to preach now: The end of this system is fast approaching! The time left to share in this lifesaving work is greatly reduced. Do not delay or feel that you have to wait for the perfect circumstances to take part in this vital activity. Act now to strengthen your motivation, deepen your knowledge of the Bible, build your courage, and cultivate self-discipline. Join the more than eight million fishers of men, and you will experience the joy of Jehovah. (Neh. 8:10; Luke 5:10) Be determined to have a full share in this work and to see it through to completion. w20.09 7 ¶18-20




Friday, April 29

Guard what has been entrusted to you.​—1 Tim. 6:20.



We cannot afford to become distracted by a desire for more material things. “The deceptive power of riches” could choke our love for Jehovah, our appreciation for God’s Word, and our desire to share it with others. (Matt. 13:22) If we are to safeguard the things that Jehovah has entrusted to us, we need to act quickly when we see danger. We can rehearse beforehand what we will do if we suddenly encounter an immoral scene, graphic violence, or apostate material while using the Internet or while watching a movie or TV program. If we prepare for what might happen, we can act quickly to escape spiritual harm and remain clean in Jehovah’s eyes. (Ps. 101:3; 1 Tim. 4:12) We must guard the valuable things that Jehovah has given to us​—precious Bible truths and the privilege of teaching them to others. When we do, we will have a clean conscience, a life that has real meaning, and the joy of helping others come to know Jehovah. w20.09 30 ¶16-19




Saturday, April 30

You will see your Grand Instructor with your own eyes.​—Isa. 30:20.



Are you baptized? If so, you have publicly expressed your faith in Jehovah and your willingness to serve with his organization. Today, Jehovah directs his organization in a way that reflects his personality, purpose, and standards. Note three of Jehovah’s attributes that are reflected in his organization. First, “God is not partial.” (Acts 10:34) Love moved Jehovah to give his Son as a “ransom for all.” (1 Tim. 2:6; John 3:16) Jehovah uses his people to preach the good news to all who will listen, thereby helping as many as possible to benefit from the ransom. Second, Jehovah is a God of order and peace. (1 Cor. 14:33, 40) Therefore, we should expect that his worshippers serve him as an orderly, peaceful group. Third, Jehovah is the “Grand Instructor.” (Isa. 30:21) Thus, his organization focuses on teaching his inspired Word, both in the congregation and in the public ministry. w20.10 20 ¶1-3




