
August
Monday, August 1

Apart from me you can do nothing at all.​—John 15:5.



Only those who have a close friendship with Jesus will benefit from his ransom sacrifice. Jesus said that he would “surrender his life in behalf of his friends.” (John 15:13) Faithful people who lived before Jesus came to earth will have to learn about him and come to love him. Such men and women will be resurrected, but even these righteous servants of Jehovah will need to form a friendship with Jesus in order to gain everlasting life. (John 17:3; Acts 24:15; Heb. 11:8-12, 24-26, 31) We have the joy of working along with Jesus in preaching and teaching the good news of the Kingdom. When Jesus was on earth, he was a teacher. And since his return to heaven, Jesus, as head of the congregation, has continued to direct the preaching and teaching work. He sees and appreciates your efforts to help as many as you can to come to know him and his Father. In fact, the only way we can accomplish this work is with the help of Jehovah and Jesus.​—John 15:4. w20.04 22 ¶7-8




Tuesday, August 2

These two kings . . . will sit at one table speaking lies to each other.​—Dan. 11:27.



The titles “king of the north” and “king of the south” were initially given to political powers located north and south of the literal land of Israel. (Dan. 10:14) Until Pentecost 33 C.E., the literal nation of Israel was God’s people. From then on, however, Jehovah made it obvious that he viewed Jesus’ faithful disciples as his people. Therefore, much of the prophecy recorded in Daniel chapter 11 involves, not the literal nation of Israel, but Christ’s followers. (Acts 2:1-4; Rom. 9:6-8; Gal. 6:15, 16) And the identity of the king of the north and the king of the south changed over time. Even so, several factors remained constant. First, the kings interacted with God’s people in a significant way. Second, they showed by their treatment of God’s people that they hated the true God, Jehovah. And third, the two kings engaged in a power struggle with each other. w20.05 3 ¶3-4




Wednesday, August 3

I Will Become What I Choose to Become.​—Ex. 3:14.



Jehovah makes things happen by becoming whatever is needed in order to fulfill his purpose. Jehovah can also cause his imperfect human servants to become what is needed in order to serve him and fulfill his purpose. (Isa. 64:8) In these ways, Jehovah causes his will to be carried out. Nothing can stop him from causing his purposes to be fulfilled. (Isa. 46:10, 11) We can build our appreciation for our heavenly Father by meditating on what he has done and what he has enabled us to do. For instance, when we meditate on the wonders of creation, we are filled with awe at what Jehovah has accomplished, what he has caused to come into existence. (Ps. 8:3, 4) And when we meditate on what Jehovah has caused us to become so that we can do his will, we develop deep respect for him. The name Jehovah really is awe-inspiring! It includes all that our Father is, all that he has done, and all that he will do.​—Ps. 89:7, 8. w20.06 9-10 ¶6-7




Thursday, August 4

God . . . gives to all people life and breath.​—Acts 17:24, 25.



Oxygen is a life-sustaining gas that is used by some living things, including us. It has been estimated that living creatures breathe in a hundred billion tons of oxygen in a year. These same creatures breathe out a waste product called carbon dioxide. Yet, these living creatures never consume all the oxygen, and the atmosphere never becomes choked with the “waste” gas, carbon dioxide. Why not? Because Jehovah also created organisms​—from large trees to tiny algae—​that take in carbon dioxide and give off oxygen. In a very literal way, the oxygen cycle confirms the words of today’s text. How can we develop appreciation for our amazing planet and all that it supplies? (Ps. 115:16) One way is by meditating on the things Jehovah has made. That will motivate us to thank Jehovah each day for the good things he gives us. And we show that we appreciate the earth by keeping the part of it where we live as clean as possible. w20.05 22 ¶5, 7




Friday, August 5

I will certainly sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the nations.​—Ezek. 36:23.



Jehovah handled Satan’s challenge with wisdom, patience, and justice. He has also shown his almighty power in countless ways. Above all, his love shines through in all that he does. (1 John 4:8) Jehovah has worked unceasingly to sanctify his name. Satan is still slandering God’s name today. He fools people into doubting that God is powerful, just, wise, and loving. For example, Satan tries to convince people that Jehovah is not the Creator. And if people do accept that God exists, Satan attempts to make them believe that God and His standards are restrictive and unfair. He even teaches people that Jehovah is a heartless and cruel God who burns people in a fiery hell. When they believe such slander, they are more likely to take the next step​—rejecting Jehovah’s righteous rule. Until Satan is completely defeated, he will target you as well. Will he succeed? w20.06 5 ¶13-15




Saturday, August 6

There is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, foreigner, Scythian, slave, or freeman; but Christ is all things and in all.​—Col. 3:11.



In many congregations, there will be brothers and sisters who are struggling to learn a new language. It might be difficult for them to express their thoughts. Yet, if we look beyond their language skills, we will see their love for Jehovah and their desire to serve him. If we see these beautiful qualities, we will deeply value and respect these brothers and sisters. We will not say “I do not need you” simply because they do not speak our language fluently. (1 Cor. 12:21) Jehovah has given us the wonderful privilege of having a place in his congregation. Whether we are male or female, single or married, young or old or we speak a certain language well or hardly at all, we are precious to Jehovah and to one another. (Rom. 12:4, 5; Col. 3:10) Let us always look for ways to treasure our place and the place of others in Jehovah’s congregation. w20.08 31 ¶20-22




Sunday, August 7

Some men joined him and became believers.​—Acts 17:34.



The apostle Paul did not give up on the Athenians, even though their city was filled with idolatry, sexual immorality, and pagan philosophy; nor did he let their insults discourage him. Paul himself became a Christian, although he had been “a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man.” (1 Tim. 1:13) Just as Jesus saw the potential in Paul, so Paul saw the potential in the Athenians. And his confidence was not misplaced. (Acts 9:13-15) In the first century, people of all backgrounds became Jesus’ disciples. When Paul wrote to Christians living in the Grecian city of Corinth, he said that some members of that congregation had at one time been criminals or had lived shockingly immoral lifestyles. And then he added: “That is what some of you were. But you have been washed clean.” (1 Cor. 6:9-11) Would you have seen that those people had the potential to change and become disciples? w20.04 12 ¶15-16




Monday, August 8

It is enough! . . . Take my life away.​—1 Ki. 19:4.



Elders should not be quick to judge those who begin to question the benefits of serving Jehovah. Rather than condemn them, elders must try to understand why they speak and act the way they do. Only then can the elders draw attention to the specific Scriptural encouragement that is needed. The prophet Elijah fled from Queen Jezebel. (1 Ki. 19:1-3) He felt that his work had served no purpose, and he wanted to die. (1 Ki. 19:10) Rather than condemn Elijah, Jehovah assured him that he was not alone, that he could trust in God’s power, and that there was still much work for him to do. Jehovah kindly listened to Elijah’s concerns and gave him new assignments. (1 Ki. 19:11-16, 18) The lesson? All of us, especially the elders, should treat Jehovah’s sheep kindly. Whether a person expresses bitterness or feels unworthy of Jehovah’s mercy, elders will listen to him as he pours out his heart. Then they will try to assure the lost sheep that Jehovah values him. w20.06 22 ¶13-14




Tuesday, August 9

A true friend shows love at all times.​—Prov. 17:17.



Jehovah made us to enjoy pleasant association with friends and family members. (Ps. 133:1) Jesus had good friends. (John 15:15) The Bible describes the benefits of having true friends. (Prov. 18:24) And it tells us that it is not good for us to isolate ourselves. (Prov. 18:1) Many feel that social media is a way to have a lot of friends and to avoid feeling isolated. However, we need to be cautious about using this method of communication. Studies have found that people who spend a lot of time scrolling through social media postings might actually end up feeling lonely and depressed. Why? One possible reason is that people often post on social media photos that depict the highlights of their lives, showing selected images of themselves, their friends, and the exciting places they have been. A person who views those images might conclude that, by comparison, his or her own life is ordinary​—even dull. w20.07 5-6 ¶12-13




Wednesday, August 10

The apostles and the elders gathered together to look into this matter.​—Acts 15:6.



The Watchtower of October 1, 1988, stated: “Elders will recognize that Christ, by means of the holy spirit, can direct the mind of any elder on the body of elders to provide the Bible principle needed to cope with any situation or make any important decision. (Acts 15:7-15) No one elder has the monopoly of the spirit within the body.” An elder who respects his fellow elders does not always try to speak first at elders’ meetings. He does not dominate the discussion, and he does not believe that his opinion is always right. Instead, he states his viewpoint humbly and modestly. He listens carefully to the comments of others. More important, he is eager to share Scriptural principles and to listen to direction from “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45-47) As elders discuss matters in an atmosphere of love and respect, God’s holy spirit will be present, and it will guide them to reach the right decisions.​—Jas. 3:17, 18. w20.08 27 ¶5-6




Thursday, August 11

Keep conquering the evil with the good.​—Rom. 12:21.



The apostle Paul’s enemies were vastly more powerful than he was. Often, they had him beaten and thrown into jail. Also, Paul was treated badly by people who should have been friends. Some in the Christian congregation even opposed him. (2 Cor. 12:11; Phil. 3:18) But Paul conquered all who fought against him. How? He continued preaching despite opposition. He remained loyal to his brothers and sisters even when they disappointed him. And above all, he was faithful to God to the end of his life. (2 Tim. 4:8) He overcame great odds, not because he was physically strong, but because he relied on Jehovah. Do you have to deal with insults or persecution? Your goal is to embed God’s Word in receptive minds and hearts. You can achieve that goal by relying on the Bible to answer people’s questions, by being respectful and kind to those who treat you badly, and by doing good to all, even your enemies.​—Matt. 5:44; 1 Pet. 3:15-17. w20.07 17-18 ¶14-15




Friday, August 12

Your humility makes me great.​—2 Sam. 22:36.



Can we really say that Jehovah is humble? Yes, we can, as David acknowledged above. (Ps. 18:35) Perhaps David was thinking of the day when the prophet Samuel came to the house of David’s father to anoint the future king of Israel. David was the youngest of eight boys; yet, he was the one whom Jehovah chose to replace King Saul. (1 Sam. 16:1, 10-13) David would certainly agree with the sentiments expressed by a psalmist who said of Jehovah: “He stoops down to look on heaven and earth, raising the lowly from the dust. He lifts up the poor . . . to make him sit with nobles.” (Ps. 113:6-8) Jehovah proves that he is humble by how he deals with imperfect human worshippers. Not only does he accept our worship but he also views us as his friends. (Ps. 25:14) In order to make friendship with him possible, Jehovah took the initiative by providing his Son as a sacrifice for our sins. What mercy​—what compassion—​he has shown us! w20.08 8 ¶1-3




Saturday, August 13

[Jehovah] does not desire anyone to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.​—2 Pet. 3:9.



Jehovah has a fixed day and hour when he will bring an end to this old system. (Matt. 24:36) He will not become impatient and act before that time. He has a longing to resurrect the dead, but he is patient. (Job 14:14, 15) He is waiting until the right time arrives to raise them to life. (John 5:28) We have good reasons to appreciate Jehovah’s patience. Just think: Because Jehovah is patient, many people, including us, have had time “to attain to repentance.” Jehovah wants as many people as possible to have the opportunity to gain everlasting life. So let us show that we appreciate his patience. How? By earnestly looking for those who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life” and helping them to love Jehovah and serve him. (Acts 13:48) Then they will benefit from Jehovah’s patience, just as we have. w20.08 18 ¶17




Sunday, August 14

Make me know your ways, O Jehovah; teach me your paths.​—Ps. 25:4.



What a student learns on a Bible study should appeal not just to his mind but also to his heart. Why? Our heart​—which includes our desires, emotions, and feelings—​motivates us to action. Jesus used logical reasoning that appealed to the mind. But people followed him because he also stirred their heart. (Luke 24:15, 27, 32) Your student needs to see Jehovah as a real Person, someone with whom he can develop a relationship, and to see Him as his Father, his God, and his Friend. (Ps. 25:5) During the Bible study, make our God’s personality come alive. (Ex. 34:5, 6; 1 Pet. 5:6, 7) Regardless of the topic you are discussing, focus attention on the kind of Person Jehovah is. Help the student to appreciate Jehovah’s beautiful qualities​—his love, kindness, and compassion. Jesus said that “the greatest and first commandment” is to “love Jehovah your God.” (Matt. 22:37, 38) Try to instill deep love for God in your student’s heart. w20.10 10 ¶12




Monday, August 15

Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.​—John 11:5.



Jesus treated all women with dignity. (John 4:27) Jesus, however, had special regard for women who did the will of his Father. Significantly, he viewed them as sisters and mentioned them along with the men whom he viewed as part of his spiritual family. (Matt. 12:50) Jesus also was a true friend to them. Consider his friendship with Mary and Martha, both of whom were apparently single. (Luke 10:38-42) By his words and actions, Jesus obviously made them feel comfortable. Mary felt welcome to sit at his feet as a disciple. And Martha, disturbed because Mary was not helping, felt free to tell Jesus what was on her mind. In that informal setting, Jesus was able to help both women spiritually. And he showed his care for these women and their brother, Lazarus, by visiting with them on other occasions. (John 12:1-3) It is no wonder that when Lazarus fell seriously ill, Mary and Martha knew that they could turn to Jesus for help.​—John 11:3. w20.09 20 ¶3; 21 ¶6




Tuesday, August 16

They thought that the Kingdom of God was going to appear instantly.​—Luke 19:11.



Jesus’ disciples hoped that the Kingdom would “appear instantly” and rescue them from Roman oppression. We yearn for the day when God’s Kingdom will remove wickedness and usher in the new world of righteousness. (2 Pet. 3:13) However, we need to be patient and wait on Jehovah’s appointed time. Jehovah allowed Noah sufficient time to build the ark and to serve as “a preacher of righteousness.” (2 Pet. 2:5; 1 Pet. 3:20) Jehovah listened as Abraham repeatedly questioned him about His decision to destroy the inhabitants of the wicked cities of Sodom and Gomorrah. (Gen. 18:20-33) For centuries, Jehovah was extraordinarily patient with the unfaithful nation of Israel. (Neh. 9:30, 31) We see evidence of Jehovah’s patience today as he allows time for all whom he draws “to attain to repentance.” (2 Pet. 3:9; John 6:44; 1 Tim. 2:3, 4) Jehovah’s example gives us good reason to exercise patience as we continue to preach and teach. w20.09 10 ¶8-9




Wednesday, August 17

There is going to be a resurrection.​—Acts 24:15.



When Jehovah resurrects people, he will restore their memories and the personality traits that made them who they were. Just think of what that implies. Jehovah loves you so much that he is keeping track of all that you think, feel, say, and do. So if he had to resurrect you, he would easily be able to restore your memories, attitude, and personality traits. King David was aware of just how interested Jehovah is in each one of us. (Ps. 139:1-4) In what way can understanding how well Jehovah knows us affect us now? When we meditate on how well Jehovah knows us, we should not feel worried. Why not? Remember that Jehovah deeply cares for us. He cherishes the traits that make each one of us unique. He carefully notes the experiences in our life that make us who we are. What a comforting thought! Never should we feel that we are alone. Each minute of every day, Jehovah is right beside us, looking for opportunities to help us.​—2 Chron. 16:9. w20.08 17 ¶13-14




Thursday, August 18

I will give you insight and instruct you in the way you should go.​—Ps. 32:8.



Jehovah takes great pleasure in educating his people. He wants them to know him, to love him, and to live forever as his beloved children. All of this would be impossible without the education he provides. (John 17:3) Jehovah used the first-century Christian congregation to educate his people. (Col. 1:9, 10) Holy spirit​—the “helper” that Jesus had promised—​played a major role. (John 14:16) It gave the disciples more insight into God’s Word, and it brought back to their mind the many things Jesus said and did, as later recorded in the Gospels. This knowledge strengthened the early Christians’ faith as well as their love for God, for his Son, and for one another. Jehovah foretold that “in the final part of the days,” people of all nations would flock to his figurative mountain to be instructed about his ways. (Isa. 2:2, 3) We are seeing that prophecy being fulfilled. w20.10 24 ¶14-15




Friday, August 19

A man of understanding acquires skillful direction.​—Prov. 1:5.



What could cause someone to reject good counsel from a loving friend? Pride. Proud people like “to have their ears tickled.” They “turn away from listening to the truth.” (2 Tim. 4:3, 4) They have an inflated view of their own opinion and worth. However, the apostle Paul wrote: “If anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he is deceiving himself.” (Gal. 6:3) King Solomon summed up the matter well. He wrote: “Better is a poor but wise child than an old but stupid king, who no longer has enough sense to heed a warning.” (Eccl. 4:13) Note the example set by the apostle Peter when he was publicly corrected by the apostle Paul. (Gal. 2:11-14) Peter could have resented what Paul said, focusing on the way he said it and where he chose to say it. But Peter was wise. He accepted the counsel and did not nurse a grudge against Paul. Instead, he later referred to Paul as a “beloved brother.”​—2 Pet. 3:15. w20.11 21 ¶9, 11-12




Saturday, August 20

Make disciples . . . , teaching them.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.



What will greatly help Bible students to make spiritual progress? Attending our Christian meetings. The Scriptural instruction given at the meetings will deepen their knowledge, strengthen their faith, and help them to grow in their love for God. (Acts 15:30-32) Also, a publisher may tell the student how his own growing love for Jehovah moved him to obey God’s commandments. (2 Cor. 7:1; Phil. 4:13) And when Bible students get to know a variety of faithful publishers, the students learn from their examples what it means to observe Christ’s command to love God and neighbor. (John 13:35; 1 Tim. 4:12) They see that publishers deal with challenges that are similar to the ones they face and learn that the changes they need to make to become a disciple of Christ are within reach. (Deut. 30:11) Each one in the congregation can contribute in various ways to the spiritual progress of Bible students.​—Matt. 5:16. w20.11 5 ¶10-12




Sunday, August 21

I have fought with wild beasts at Ephesus.​—1 Cor. 15:32.



Perhaps the apostle Paul was alluding to his fighting real animals at an arena in Ephesus. (2 Cor. 1:8; 4:10; 11:23) Or he may have been referring to hostile Jews and others who were like “wild beasts.” (Acts 19:26-34; 1 Cor. 16:9) Whichever it was, Paul faced serious perils. Yet, he still had a positive outlook on the future. (1 Cor. 15:30, 31; 2 Cor. 4:16-18) We are living in dangerous times. Some of our brothers have been victims of crime. Others live in war-torn areas where their safety is far from guaranteed. Still others serve Jehovah at the risk of their life or freedom in lands where the preaching work is restricted or even banned. Yet, all these brothers and sisters persevere in their worship of Jehovah, becoming examples for us. They are secure in the knowledge that even if they lose their life at the present time, Jehovah has something far better in mind for them in the future. w20.12 9 ¶3-4




Monday, August 22

We are God’s fellow workers. You are God’s field under cultivation, God’s building.​—1 Cor. 3:9.



Have you at some point felt discouraged because your territory seems to be unproductive or because few people are found at home? In such a situation, what can be done to maintain or increase our joy? It is important to have the right view of the ministry. What does that involve? Keep your focus on proclaiming God’s name and Kingdom. Jesus made it plain that relatively few will find the path to life. (Matt. 7:13, 14) When we are in the ministry, we have the honor of working with Jehovah, Jesus, and the angels. (Matt. 28:19, 20; Rev. 14:6, 7) Jehovah draws those who are deserving. (John 6:44) So if a person does not respond well to our message this time, he may listen the next time we call. “Discouragement can be a formidable weapon used by Satan,” notes a sister named Deborah. But Satan’s weapons are no match for Jehovah God. w20.12 26 ¶18-19; 27 ¶21




Tuesday, August 23

Let us continue loving one another, because love is from God.​—1 John 4:7.



Many loyal Christians must work at secular jobs full-time so that they can support themselves and their families. Even so, these faithful publishers support God’s organization in any way they can. For instance, some are able to provide disaster relief, others can work on construction projects, and everyone has the opportunity to donate funds to the worldwide work. They do these things because they love God and their fellow man. Each week, we prove that we love our brothers and sisters by attending congregation meetings and participating in them. Although we may be tired, we are present at those meetings. Although we may be nervous, we comment. And although we all have problems of our own, we encourage others before or after the meeting. (Heb. 10:24, 25) How grateful we are for the work done by our fellow publishers! w21.01 10 ¶11




Wednesday, August 24

Let us not become egotistical.​—Gal. 5:26.



Proud people find it difficult to commend others, preferring that they themselves receive praise. They are more likely to compare themselves with others and to promote a spirit of competition. Rather than training others and giving them authority, they are likely to say, “If you want something done right”​—the way that pleases them—​“you have to do it yourself.” A proud person is often ambitious and jealous. If we detect that we have a problem with pride, we should earnestly pray for Jehovah’s help to ‘make our mind over’ so that this bad trait does not become deeply rooted within us. (Rom. 12:2) How thankful we are for Jehovah’s example! (Ps. 18:35) We see his humility in how he deals with his servants, and we want to imitate him. In addition, we want to imitate the fine examples found in the Bible of modest people who had the privilege of walking with God. May we always give Jehovah the honor and the glory that he deserves.​—Rev. 4:11. w20.08 13 ¶19-20




Thursday, August 25

Those who [marry] will have tribulation in their flesh.​—1 Cor. 7:28.



Marriage is a perfect gift from God, but people are imperfect. (1 John 1:8) That is why God’s Word warns married couples that they will face challenges that are described as “tribulation in their flesh.” Jehovah expects Christian husbands to care for the spiritual, emotional, and material needs of their family. (1 Tim. 5:8) However, married sisters have to take time from their busy schedule each day to read God’s Word and meditate on it and to turn to Jehovah in earnest prayer. This can be a challenge. Wives are busy, but it is vital that they take the time. Why? Because Jehovah wants each one of us to develop and maintain a personal relationship with him. (Acts 17:27) Understandably, a wife may have to work hard to be submissive to her imperfect husband. However, she will find it easier to fulfill the assignment Jehovah has given her if she understands and accepts the Scriptural reasons why she should be submissive. w21.02 9 ¶3, 6-7




Friday, August 26

This tested quality of your faith produces endurance.​—Jas. 1:3.



Trials can be likened to the fire that is used to forge a blade of steel. When the blade is heated and cooled, the steel becomes stronger. Similarly, when we endure trials, our faith is strengthened. That is why James wrote: “Let endurance complete its work, so that you may be complete and sound in all respects.” (Jas. 1:4) When we see that our trials make our faith stronger, we can endure them with joy. In his letter, James also identifies some of the things that could cause us to lose our joy. One challenge is not knowing what to do. When undergoing a trial, we want to look to Jehovah for help to make choices that please him, benefit our brothers and sisters, and help us to keep our own integrity. (Jer. 10:23) We need wisdom to know what course to take and what we should say to those who oppose us. If we do not know what to do, we may feel that we are helpless victims of our circumstances, and we could quickly lose our joy. w21.02 28 ¶7-9




Saturday, August 27

Love one another intensely from the heart.​—1 Pet. 1:22.



Jehovah sets the example for us. His love is so intense that if we are loyal to him, nothing can break that bond. (Rom. 8:38, 39) The Greek word rendered “intensely” conveys the idea of stretching outward​—even straining. At times, we may need to “stretch” and “strain” in order to have tender affection for a fellow believer. When others upset us, we need to continue “putting up with one another in love, earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.” (Eph. 4:1-3) We will look beyond our brothers’ faults and try our best to view our brothers as Jehovah does. (1 Sam. 16:7; Ps. 130:3) It is not always easy to show tender affection for our brothers and sisters, especially when we are aware of their faults. Apparently, this was a challenge for some first-century Christians, as was the case with Euodia and Syntyche. The apostle Paul urged them “to be of the same mind in the Lord.”​—Phil. 4:2, 3. w21.01 22-23 ¶10-11




Sunday, August 28

I write you, young men, because you are strong and the word of God remains in you and you have conquered the wicked one.​—1 John 2:14.



Older ones deeply appreciate you young men who serve Jehovah “shoulder to shoulder” with them! (Zeph. 3:9) They love your zealous spirit and the energetic, enthusiastic way you do the work you are given. You have found favor in their eyes. Young brothers, never forget that Jehovah loves and trusts you. He foretold that during the last days, there would be an army of young men who would offer themselves willingly. (Ps. 110:1-3) He knows that you love him and want to serve him to the best of your ability. So be patient with others, and be patient with yourself. When you make mistakes, accept the training and discipline that you receive, viewing it as coming from Jehovah. (Heb. 12:6) Diligently care for any assignments you are given. And above all, in everything you do, make your heavenly Father proud of you.​—Prov. 27:11. w21.03 7 ¶17-18




Monday, August 29

If you become discouraged in times of trouble, your strength will be meager.​—Prov. 24:10, ftn.



We can become discouraged by many things​—some internal, some external. The causes may include imperfections, weaknesses, and ill health. They may also include our not receiving a desired assignment in Jehovah’s service or our having to witness in a territory that seems unresponsive. It would be easy for us to develop an unbalanced view of our imperfections and weaknesses. As a result, we might believe that because of our failings, Jehovah would never welcome us into his new world. Such an attitude can be harmful. The Bible reveals that, with the exception of Jesus Christ, all humans “have sinned.” (Rom. 3:23) But the Bible’s Author is not a faultfinder or perfectionist. Rather, he is a loving Father who wants to help us. He is also patient. He sees how we struggle to fight our weaknesses and overcome an unbalanced view of ourselves, and he is ready to help us.​—Rom. 7:18, 19. w20.12 22 ¶1-3




Tuesday, August 30

Finally, brothers, continue to rejoice, to be readjusted.​—2 Cor. 13:11.



All of us are on a journey. Our destination, or goal, is to live in the new world under Jehovah’s loving rulership. Each day, we try to follow the path that leads to life. But as Jesus said, that road is cramped and at times difficult to follow. (Matt. 7:13, 14) We are imperfect, and it is easy for us to stray from this path. (Gal. 6:1) If we are to stay on the cramped road to life, we must be willing to adjust our thinking, attitude, and actions. The apostle Paul encourages us “to be readjusted.” When we try to examine our own thoughts and feelings, we face a challenge. Our heart is treacherous, and that can make it difficult for us to know where it might be leading us. (Jer. 17:9) It is easy to deceive ourselves with “false reasoning.” (Jas. 1:22) So we must use God’s Word to examine ourselves. God’s Word reveals what we are on the inside, the innermost “thoughts and intentions” of our heart.​—Heb. 4:12, 13. w20.11 18 ¶1-3




Wednesday, August 31

In showing honor to one another, take the lead.​—Rom. 12:10.



When we are humble and modest, we are more likely to be joyful. Why so? When we are aware of our limitations, we will be grateful and happy for any help that we receive from others. For example, think of the occasion when Jesus healed ten lepers. Only one of them returned to thank Jesus for curing him of his dreadful disease​—something the man could never have done on his own. This humble and modest man was thankful for the help he received, and he glorified God for it. (Luke 17:11-19) Humble, modest people tend to get along well with others and are more likely to have close friends. Why? They willingly acknowledge that other people have fine qualities and show confidence in them. Humble and modest ones are happy when others succeed in whatever assignment they receive and are quick to commend them and honor them. w20.08 12 ¶17-18




