
December
Thursday, December 1

The one who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven by the wind and blown about.​—Jas. 1:6.



From time to time, we might have difficulty understanding something in God’s Word. Or Jehovah may not answer our prayers the way that we had hoped for. This may give rise to doubts. If we ignore our doubts, they will weaken our faith and damage our relationship with Jehovah. (Jas. 1:7, 8) And they could even make us lose our hope for the future. The apostle Paul likened our hope for the future to an anchor. (Heb. 6:19) An anchor stabilizes a ship during a storm and stops it from drifting onto rocks. But an anchor is useful only if the chain that attaches it to the ship does not break. Just as rust weakens an anchor chain, so unresolved doubts weaken our faith. When tested by opposition, a person who has doubts could lose faith that Jehovah will fulfill his promises. If we lose our faith, we lose our hope. A person in that position is unlikely to feel any joy at all! w21.02 30 ¶14-15




Friday, December 2

Abraham put faith in Jehovah.​—Jas. 2:23.



Abraham was likely over 70 when he and his family left Ur. (Gen. 11:31–12:4) And for some one hundred years, he lived in tents, roaming the land of Canaan. Abraham died when he was 175. (Gen. 25:7) But he did not see Jehovah fulfill His promise to give the land he walked on to his descendants. And he did not live to see the city, God’s Kingdom, established. Even so, Abraham is described as dying “old and satisfied.” (Gen. 25:8) Despite all the challenges he had to deal with, Abraham maintained strong faith and was content to wait on Jehovah. Why was he able to endure? Because throughout Abraham’s life, Jehovah protected him and treated him as a friend. (Gen. 15:1; Isa. 41:8; Jas. 2:22) Like Abraham, we are awaiting the city having real foundations. (Heb. 11:10) We are not waiting for it to be built, however. God’s Kingdom was established in 1914 and has already taken complete control of heaven. (Rev. 12:7-10) But we are waiting for it to take complete control of the earth. w20.08 4-5 ¶11-12




Saturday, December 3

The thoughts of a man’s heart are like deep waters, but the discerning man draws them out.​—Prov. 20:5.



To listen attentively to others, we need to be humble and patient. It is worth the effort for at least three reasons. First, we will be less likely to jump to wrong conclusions about people. Second, we can discern feelings and motives in our brother, and that will help us to be more empathetic. And third, we may help the person to learn something about himself. Sometimes we do not really understand even our own emotions until we express those emotions in words. Some of our brothers and sisters find it difficult to talk about their feelings because of their background, culture, or personality. It may take time for them to feel comfortable speaking to us, but only when they do will we be able to discern their true feelings. If we imitate Jehovah by being patient, we can earn their confidence. Then, when they are ready to share their feelings, we should listen attentively. w20.04 15-16 ¶6-7




Sunday, December 4

You will be catching men alive.​—Luke 5:10.



Fish usually stay in an area where the water conditions suit them and where there is plenty of food. Does it matter at what time a fisherman does his work? Regarding the best time to catch literal fish, note what a local Witness on a Pacific island said when he invited a missionary to go fishing. The missionary said, “I’ll meet you at nine o’clock tomorrow morning.” The brother replied, “You do not understand. We go when it is the right time for the fish, not when it is the right time for us.” Likewise, fishers of men in the first century went to places where the “fish” would be and at a time when they were likely to be there. For example, Jesus’ followers preached at the temple and in the synagogues, from house to house, and in the marketplace. (Acts 5:42; 17:17; 18:4) We too need to be familiar with the habits of people who live in our assigned territory. We need to be flexible and preach where and when we are most likely to find people.​—1 Cor. 9:19-23. w20.09 4 ¶8-9




Monday, December 5

Speaking the truth, let us by love grow up in all things into him who is the head, Christ.​—Eph. 4:15.



One way to build a friendship with Jesus is to support the arrangements of the Christian congregation. We strengthen our connection to Jesus as the head of the congregation when we cooperate with those who are appointed to care for us. (Eph. 4:16) For example, we are now trying to make sure that all Kingdom Halls are used to full capacity. To that end, some congregations have been merged with other congregations. This arrangement has resulted in considerable savings of dedicated resources. At the same time, however, it has required that some publishers adjust to the new circumstances. Those faithful publishers may have served with a certain congregation for many years and may have grown close to the brothers and sisters there. But now they are being asked to serve in a different congregation. How pleased Jesus must be to see these loyal disciples cooperate with this arrangement! w20.04 24 ¶14




Tuesday, December 6

The king of the south will lock horns with him.​—Dan. 11:40; ftn.



The king of the north and the king of the south continue to compete for world domination. For example, consider what happened after World War II when the Soviet Union and its allies gained influence over much of Europe. The actions of the king of the north forced the king of the south to form an international military alliance, known as NATO. The king of the north continues to compete with the king of the south in an expensive arms race. The king of the north fought his rival in proxy wars and insurgencies in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. In recent years, Russia and its allies have spread their influence across the globe. They have also engaged with the king of the south in cyber warfare. The kings have accused each other of using destructive computer programs in an effort to damage their economies and political systems. And as foretold by Daniel, the king of the north continues his attack on God’s people.​—Dan. 11:41. w20.05 13 ¶5-6




Wednesday, December 7

I myself will search for my sheep, and I will care for them.​—Ezek. 34:11.



“Can a woman forget her nursing child?” That was a question Jehovah asked in the days of the prophet Isaiah. “Even if these women forget, I would never forget you,” God told his people. (Isa. 49:15) He does not often compare himself to a mother. However, he did so on that occasion. Jehovah used the bond between a mother and her child to reveal how deeply he is attached to his servants. Most mothers can relate to what a sister named Jasmin says, “When you nurse your child, you form a very special bond that lasts a lifetime.” Jehovah takes note when even one of his children stops associating with the Christian congregation and engaging in the preaching work. Many of these dear brothers and sisters who have become inactive do come back to the congregation, where they are most welcome! Jehovah wants them to come back, and so do we.​—1 Pet. 2:25. w20.06 18 ¶1-3




Thursday, December 8

Keep [your] eyes . . . on the things unseen. For the things seen are temporary, but the things unseen are everlasting.​—2 Cor. 4:18.



Not all treasures can be seen. In fact, the greatest treasures are unseen. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus mentioned heavenly treasures that are vastly superior to material possessions. Then he added this truth: “Where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.” (Matt. 6:19-21) Our heart will move us to pursue the things we treasure, or value highly. We store up “treasures in heaven” by gaining a good name, or standing, with God. Such treasures, Jesus explained, can never be destroyed or stolen. The apostle Paul urges us to “keep our eyes . . . on the things unseen.” (2 Cor. 4:17, 18) These unseen things are treasures that include the blessings we will enjoy in God’s new world. Do we show that we appreciate these unseen treasures? w20.05 26 ¶1-2




Friday, December 9

My instruction will fall as the rain.​—Deut. 32:2.



What Moses taught the Israelites nourished and refreshed them, like gentle rain on vegetation. How can we make sure that our teaching is like that? When we are in the door-to-door work or the public ministry, we can use our Bible to show people God’s personal name, Jehovah. We can offer them beautiful literature, excellent videos, and material on our website that honor Jehovah. At work, at school, or while traveling, we may find opportunities to talk about our beloved God and what he is like. When we tell those we meet about Jehovah’s loving purpose for mankind and the earth, we are giving them a view of Jehovah that may well be completely new to them. As we tell others the truth about our loving Father, we are adding to the sanctifying of God’s name. We are clearing up some of the lies and slander about Jehovah that others may have been taught. We offer people the most nourishing, refreshing teachings available.​—Isa. 65:13, 14. w20.06 10 ¶8-9




Saturday, December 10

Return to me, and I will return to you.​—Mal. 3:7.



What qualities must we have if we are to help those who want to return to Jehovah? Note some lessons we can learn from Jesus’ illustration of the wayward son who left home. (Luke 15:17-24) The son finally came to his senses and decided to return home. The father ran to meet his son and gave him a warm embrace, assuring the son of his love. The son had a troubled conscience and felt unworthy of being called a son. The father felt empathy for his son, who poured out his feelings. The father then took practical steps to assure his son that he was welcome back home as a cherished member of the family. To prove the point, the father arranged a feast and provided fine clothes for his repentant son. Jehovah is like the father in that illustration. He loves our inactive brothers and sisters and wants them to return to him. By imitating Jehovah, we can help them to return. This calls for patience, empathy, and love on our part. w20.06 25-26 ¶8-9




Sunday, December 11

If you remain in my word, you are really my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.​—John 8:31, 32.



Jesus said that some would accept the truth “with joy,” but their faith would wither when tested. (Matt. 13:3-6, 20, 21) Perhaps they did not realize that following Jesus would involve challenges and hardship. (Matt. 16:24) Or maybe they thought that being a Christian meant living a trouble-free life​—one with only blessings, no challenges. But in this imperfect world, there will be challenges. Circumstances can change, causing our joy to diminish for a time. (Ps. 6:6; Eccl. 9:11) The vast majority of our brothers and sisters prove that they are convinced that they have the truth. How? Their conviction does not waver even if a fellow believer hurts them or gets involved in unchristian conduct. (Ps. 119:165) With each test, their faith grows stronger, not weaker. (Jas. 1:2-4) We must build that type of strong faith. w20.07 8 ¶1; 9 ¶4-5




Monday, December 12

If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God.​—Jas. 1:5.



Before you start reading the Bible, ask Jehovah to help you to see how you can benefit from what you read. For example, if you are looking for counsel on how to deal with a problem, ask Jehovah to help you find principles in his Word that can guide you. (Phil. 4:6, 7) Jehovah has given us the amazing faculty of imagination. To help you bring a Bible account to life, try to imagine the scene and see yourself in the place of the key character. Try to see the things he or she saw and to feel the emotions that the character might have felt. Next, meditate. Meditation means thinking carefully about what you read and about how the information applies to you. It helps you to connect thoughts and gain a deeper understanding of a subject. Reading the Bible without meditation is like looking at pieces of a jigsaw puzzle on a table without assembling them. Meditation helps us to see the whole picture. w21.03 15 ¶3-5




Tuesday, December 13

I am grateful to God, . . . never ceasing to remember you in my supplications night and day.​—2 Tim. 1:3.



The apostle Paul could have focused on the past, thinking that if he had made different choices, he might not have been arrested. He could have become bitter with the men in the district of Asia who had abandoned him, and he might have adopted a cynical attitude toward his other friends. But Paul did not do any of those things. Even with the threat of death hanging over him, Paul did not lose sight of the big issue​—that of bringing glory to Jehovah. And he continued to think about how he could encourage others. He relied on Jehovah through regular prayer. Rather than focus excessively on those who had abandoned him, he expressed deep gratitude for the loving support of his friends who loyally helped him in practical ways. In addition, Paul continued to study God’s Word. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17; 4:13) Most important, he had absolute confidence that Jehovah and Jesus loved him. w21.03 18 ¶17-18




Wednesday, December 14

Just as the weeds are collected and burned with fire, so it will be in the conclusion of the system of things.​—Matt. 13:40.



At some time during the second century C.E., the true Christian congregation began to be overrun by false Christians, who had adopted pagan teachings and who were hiding the truths found in God’s Word. From that time until the late 19th century, there was no organized group of God’s servants on earth. The weeds of false Christianity flourished and hid the identity of true Christians. (Matt. 13:36-43) Why is that fact significant? It indicates that what we read in Daniel chapter 11 about the king of the north and the king of the south could not apply to rulers or kingdoms that held power from sometime in the 2nd century to the second half of the 19th century. There was no organized group of God’s people for them to attack. However, we can expect that the king of the north and the king of the south would reappear in the late 19th century. w20.05 3 ¶5




Thursday, December 15

A nation has come up into my land.​—Joel 1:6.



Joel foretells that a plague of locusts will devastate the land of Israel, devouring everything in sight! (Joel 1:4) For many years, we have applied that prophecy symbolically to the way in which Jehovah’s people, like an unstoppable swarm of locusts, engage in their preaching activity. We understood that this activity has devastating effects on the “land,” or the people who are under the control of the religious leaders. However, when we consider the prophecy in its context, we see that a different understanding is appropriate. Notice Jehovah’s promise with regard to the plague of locusts: “I will drive the northerner [the locusts] far away from you.” (Joel 2:20) If the locusts represent Jehovah’s Witnesses as they obey Jesus’ command to preach and make disciples, why would Jehovah promise to drive them away? (Ezek. 33:7-9; Matt. 28:19, 20) Clearly, Jehovah is driving away, not his faithful servants, but something or someone who is hostile to his people. w20.04 3 ¶3-5




Friday, December 16

If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God.​—Jas. 1:5.



How should we react if we feel that Jehovah does not answer our prayer immediately? James says that we should “keep asking” God. Jehovah is not annoyed when we keep asking him for wisdom. He will not reproach us. Our heavenly Father “gives generously” when we pray for the wisdom to endure our trials. (Ps. 25:12, 13) He sees our trials, he has empathy, and he is eager to help us. Certainly, that is a cause for joy! How, though, does Jehovah give us wisdom? By means of his Word. (Prov. 2:6) To gain that wisdom, we must study God’s Word and Bible-based publications. But we need to do more than just accumulate knowledge. We must put God’s wisdom to work in our life by acting on his advice. James wrote: “Become doers of the word and not hearers only.” (Jas. 1:22) When we apply God’s counsel, we become more peaceable, reasonable, and merciful. (Jas. 3:17) Those qualities help us to deal with any trial without losing our joy. w21.02 29 ¶10-11




Saturday, December 17

Each respective member . . . contributes to the growth of the body.​—Eph. 4:16.



A Bible student is more likely to make steady progress toward baptism when he receives help from others in the congregation. Each publisher can contribute to the increase of the congregation. A pioneer notes: “It has been said that it takes a village to raise a child. I think the same is true about making disciples; it usually takes a congregation to bring someone into the truth.” Family members, friends, and teachers all play a role in helping a child to progress to maturity. They do this by encouraging the child and teaching him important lessons. Similarly, publishers can advise, encourage, and set a good example for Bible students, helping them to progress to baptism. (Prov. 15:22) Why should the publisher who conducts the Bible study welcome the help that other publishers can give the student? Because many can contribute to the student’s spiritual progress. w21.03 8 ¶1-3




Sunday, December 18

If we make the statement, “We have no sin,” we are misleading ourselves.​—1 John 1:8.



All Christians, young and old, must resist the pressure to live a double life. The apostle John pointed out that we cannot be walking in the truth and at the same time be living an immoral life. (1 John 1:6) If we are to have God’s approval now and in the future, we need to behave as if everything we do were under a spotlight. In a sense, there is no such thing as a secret sin because everything we do is visible to Jehovah. (Heb. 4:13) We have to reject the world’s view of sin. In John’s day, apostates claimed that a person could deliberately follow a course of sin and still have a relationship with God. Today, we are living among people who have a similar view. Many claim to believe in God, but they do not agree with Jehovah’s view of sin, especially when it involves the subject of sex. What Jehovah views as sinful conduct they call a personal preference, or an alternative lifestyle. w20.07 22 ¶7-8




Monday, December 19

Love . . . in deed and truth.​—1 John 3:18.



Do you speak up for your spiritual sisters when they need it? Consider the following scenario. Some publishers see that a sister in a divided home often arrives late to the meetings and leaves right away at the end. They note that she seldom brings her children along. So they question why she does not take a more forceful stand with her unbelieving husband, and they criticize her. However, the reality is that the sister is doing the best she can. She does not have complete control over her schedule; nor does she have the final say over her children. If you commend the sister and mention to others what she is doing well, you may stop the negative talk. Elders know that it matters to Jehovah how such ones are treated. (Jas. 1:27) They therefore imitate Jesus’ reasonableness, not making rules when it would be more appropriate to make exceptions. (Matt. 15:22-28) Elders who take the initiative to render aid make their sisters feel supported. w20.09 24-25 ¶17-19




Tuesday, December 20

[God] has made known to King Nebuchadnezzar what is to happen.​—Dan. 2:28.



The prophet Daniel always humbly looked to Jehovah for guidance. For instance, when he was used by Jehovah to interpret Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, Daniel did not take credit for the interpretation. Rather, he modestly gave all the glory and credit to Jehovah. (Dan. 2:26-28) What is the lesson for us? If brothers enjoy listening to our talks or if we have a measure of success in the ministry, we want to remember to give all the glory to Jehovah. We should modestly acknowledge that we could not do these things without Jehovah’s help. (Phil. 4:13) When we have this attitude, we are also imitating Jesus’ fine example. Jesus depended on Jehovah. (John 5:19, 30) He never tried to grab authority from his heavenly Father. Philippians 2:6 tells us that Jesus “gave no consideration to a seizure, namely, that he should be equal to God.” As a submissive Son, Jesus understood his limitations and respected his Father’s authority. w20.08 11 ¶12-13




Wednesday, December 21

Run in such a way that you may win.​—1 Cor. 9:24.



Some who are running on the road to life are dealing with personal circumstances that others cannot see and may not understand. If you live with limitations and feel that you are misunderstood, you may be able to draw strength from the example of Mephibosheth. (2 Sam. 4:4) He had to deal with being infirm, and he was misjudged by King David. Yet, he did not allow himself to become negative; he appreciated the positive things in his life. He was thankful for the kindness David had shown him in the past. (2 Sam. 9:6-10) So when David misjudged him, Mephibosheth saw the complete picture. He did not allow David’s mistake to make him bitter. And he did not blame Jehovah for what David had done. Mephibosheth focused on what he could do to support Jehovah’s appointed king. (2 Sam. 16:1-4; 19:24-30) Jehovah had Mephibosheth’s excellent example recorded in His Word for our benefit.​—Rom. 15:4. w20.04 26 ¶3; 30 ¶18-19




Thursday, December 22

We are God’s fellow workers.​—1 Cor. 3:9.



Some in the congregation may be appointed to serve as missionaries, special pioneers, or regular pioneers. They have made preaching and disciple-making their full-time career. Although these full-time evangelizers usually have few material things, Jehovah has rewarded them with a life filled with blessings. (Mark 10:29, 30) We treasure these dear brothers and sisters, and we are grateful that they are part of the congregation! Are appointed brothers and those in the full-time ministry the only ones to have a place in the congregation? Not at all! Every publisher of the good news is important to God and to the congregation. (Rom. 10:15; 1 Cor. 3:6-8) In fact, one of the most important goals of the congregation is to make disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ. (Matt. 28:19, 20; 1 Tim. 2:4) All who are associated with the congregation, both baptized and unbaptized publishers, try to make this work a priority.​—Matt. 24:14. w20.08 21 ¶7-8




Friday, December 23

I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.​—Matt. 28:20.



As shown in the words of today’s text, when we face challenges, Jesus will support us. In fact, Jesus’ words are a source of strength for us. Why? Because some days are difficult for us to endure. For instance, when a loved one dies, we must deal with that pain not just for a few days but likely for many years. Others must deal with the difficult days that come with old age. Still others face days on which they are overwhelmed by feelings of depression. Even so, we find the strength to go on because we know that Jesus is with us “all the days,” including the darkest days, of our life. (Matt. 11:28-30) God’s Word assures us that Jehovah helps us by means of his angels. (Heb. 1:7, 14) For example, angels give us support and guidance as we preach the “good news of the Kingdom” to people of “every nation and tribe and tongue.”​—Matt. 24:13, 14; Rev. 14:6. w20.11 13-14 ¶6-7




Saturday, December 24

The thoughts of a man’s heart are like deep waters, but the discerning man draws them out.​—Prov. 20:5.



We want our student to understand that what he is learning comes from God’s inspired Word. (1 Thess. 2:13) How can we do that? Encourage the student to talk about the things he is learning. Instead of always explaining Bible texts to the student, ask him to explain some of them to you. Help the student to see how God’s Word applies to him personally. Ask leading and viewpoint questions that draw him out​—what he thinks and feels about the scriptures he reads. (Luke 10:25-28) For example, ask him: “How has this scripture helped you to see one of Jehovah’s qualities?” “How can you benefit from this Bible truth?” “How do you feel about what you just learned?” What matters most is, not how much a student knows, but how much he loves and applies what he knows. Let the Bible do the teaching. You must be humble if you are to improve your teaching skills. w20.10 15 ¶5-6




Sunday, December 25

Sow your seed in the morning and do not let your hand rest until the evening.​—Eccl. 11:6.



We can be sure that the Kingdom-preaching work will be completed with no delay. Consider what happened in the days of Noah. Jehovah proved that he is the perfect Timekeeper. Some 120 years in advance, Jehovah fixed the time for the Flood to begin. Decades later, Jehovah commissioned Noah to build the ark. For perhaps 40 or 50 years before the Flood began, Noah continued to work hard. Despite facing an unresponsive audience, he kept preaching the warning message until Jehovah said that it was time to enter the ark. Then, right on time, “Jehovah shut the door.” (Gen. 6:3; 7:1, 2, 16) Soon Jehovah will bring the Kingdom-preaching work to a conclusion; he will “shut the door” on Satan’s system of things and usher in a righteous new world. Until then, may we imitate Noah and others who have not let their hand rest. May we stay focused, be patient, and maintain strong faith in Jehovah and his promises. w20.09 13 ¶18-19




Monday, December 26

Let all things take place decently and by arrangement.​—1 Cor. 14:40.



Without the clear-cut role of headship, Jehovah’s family would become disorganized and unhappy. For example, no one would know who should make final decisions and who should take the lead in carrying out those decisions. If God’s arrangement for headship is such a good thing, why do so many women today feel oppressed by it? Because many men ignore Jehovah’s standards for the family and choose instead to follow local customs or traditions. They may also abuse their wives to satisfy some selfish desire. For example, a husband might dominate his wife in an attempt to boost his self-respect or to prove to others that he is a “real man.” He may reason that he cannot force his wife to love him, but he can make her fear him. And he may use that fear as a way to control her. That type of thinking and conduct clearly deprives women of the honor and respect to which they are entitled, and it is directly opposite to what Jehovah wants.​—Eph. 5:25, 28. w21.02 3 ¶6-7




Tuesday, December 27

Throw all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you.​—1 Pet. 5:7.



Christians who are under pressure can find relief when they turn to Jehovah in earnest prayer. In answer to your prayers, you can receive “the peace of God that surpasses all [human] understanding.” (Phil. 4:6, 7) Jehovah calms our anxious thoughts by means of his powerful holy spirit. (Gal. 5:22) When approaching Jehovah in prayer, open your heart to him. Be specific. Tell him what the problem is, and explain to him how you feel about it. If there is a possible solution, ask him for the wisdom to find it and the strength to implement it. If the answer to your problem is beyond your control, ask Jehovah to help you not to be unduly worried about it. When you are specific in your prayers, in time you will see more clearly how Jehovah has answered them. If the answer does not come immediately after you have been praying, do not give up. Jehovah wants you to be not only specific but also persistent in your prayers.​—Luke 11:8-10. w21.01 3 ¶6-7




Wednesday, December 28

[Jesus] said to them: “Not all men make room for the saying, but only those who have the gift.”​—Matt. 19:11.



The congregation today includes married couples and families. Yet, it also includes many brothers and sisters who are not married. How should we view those who are single? Consider how Jesus viewed singleness. During his earthly ministry, Jesus did not marry. He remained single and focused his time and attention on his assignment. Jesus never taught that it was a requirement to get married or to be single. However, he did say that some Christians would choose not to marry. (See study note on Matthew 19:12.) Jesus respected those who were not married. He did not view single people as inferior or lacking in some way. Like Jesus, the apostle Paul carried out his ministry as a single person. Paul never taught that it would be wrong for a Christian to marry. He recognized that this was a personal matter. w20.08 28 ¶7-8




Thursday, December 29

God is love.​—1 John 4:16.



The apostle John had a long, eventful life. He faced all types of challenges that could have weakened his faith. But he always did his best to observe Jesus’ commandments, including the order to love his brothers and sisters. As a result, John was sure that Jehovah and Jesus loved him and that they would give him the strength to overcome any trial. (John 14:15-17; 15:10) Nothing that Satan or his system did could stop John from feeling, expressing, and showing love. Like John, we live in a world dominated by Satan, the hateful god of this system. (1 John 3:1, 10) While he wants us to stop loving our brothers and sisters, he cannot make that happen unless we allow him to do so. May we be determined to love our brothers and sisters, to express that love by what we say, and to prove that love by what we do. Then we will have the satisfaction of being part of Jehovah’s family, and life will truly be worth living.​—1 John 4:7. w21.01 13 ¶18-19




Friday, December 30

God . . . supplies endurance.​—Rom. 15:5.



Life in this world controlled by Satan can be hard to deal with, even overwhelming at times. (2 Tim. 3:1) But we do not need to be anxious or afraid. Jehovah knows what we are going through. When we fall, he promises to hold on to us with his strong right hand. (Isa. 41:10, 13) With full confidence in his support, we can gain strength from the Scriptures and overcome any challenge. Our videos and audio dramas and the series “Imitate Their Faith” help bring Bible events to life. Before you watch, listen to, or read these accounts, ask Jehovah to help you find specific points that you can apply. Imagine yourself in the place of the main character. Meditate on what these dear servants of Jehovah did and how he helped them to overcome difficulties. Then apply the lessons to your own situation. Thank Jehovah for the help he is already giving you. And show that you appreciate the help by looking for opportunities to encourage and support others. w21.03 19 ¶22-23




Saturday, December 31

Sons are an inheritance from Jehovah.​—Ps. 127:3.



If you are a married couple and would like to have children, ask yourselves: ‘Are we the kind of humble, spiritually-minded people whom Jehovah would choose to care for a precious new life?’ (Ps. 127:4) If you are already a parent, ask yourself: ‘Am I teaching my children the value of hard work?’ (Eccl. 3:12, 13) ‘Do I do my best to protect my children from the physical and moral dangers that they may encounter?’ (Prov. 22:3) You cannot shield your children from all challenges. But you can progressively and lovingly prepare them for the realities of life by teaching them how to turn to God’s Word for advice. (Prov. 2:1-6) For example, if a relative chooses to reject true worship, help your children to learn from God’s Word why it is so important to remain loyal to Jehovah. (Ps. 31:23) Or if death claims a loved one, show your children how to use God’s Word to cope with grief and to find peace.​—2 Cor. 1:3, 4; 2 Tim. 3:16. w20.10 27 ¶7




