
February
Tuesday, February 1

With humility consider others superior to you.​—Phil. 2:3.



Get to know your brothers and sisters better. Talk with them before and after meetings, work with them in the ministry, and if possible, invite them for a meal. When you do, you may learn that a sister who seems unfriendly is actually shy, a brother whom you thought to be materialistic is hospitable, or a family that often comes late to the meetings is enduring opposition. (Job 6:29) Of course, we should not become “meddlers in other people’s affairs.” (1 Tim. 5:13) However, it is good to know something about our brothers and sisters and the circumstances that have shaped their personality. When you get to know the background of a fellow Christian whom you find irritating, you are more likely to feel empathy for that one. It takes effort to get to know your brothers better. Still, when you follow the Bible’s counsel to open your heart wide, you imitate Jehovah, who loves “all sorts of people.”​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4; 2 Cor. 6:11-13. w20.04 16-17 ¶10-12




Wednesday, February 2

No one has love greater than this, that someone should surrender his life in behalf of his friends.​—John 15:13.



On the night before he died, Jesus reminded his disciples to love one another. He knew that self-sacrificing love would help them to stay united and to endure the world’s hatred. Consider the example of the congregation in Thessalonica. From the time it was formed, its members were persecuted. Yet, the brothers and sisters there became examples of integrity and love. (1 Thess. 1:3, 6, 7) Paul encouraged them to continue showing love, even “in fuller measure.” (1 Thess. 4:9, 10) Love would move them to console the depressed and support the weak. (1 Thess. 5:14) They followed Paul’s instructions, for in his second letter, written about a year later, Paul could say to them: “The love of each and every one of you is increasing toward one another.” (2 Thess. 1:3-5) Their love helped them to endure hardship and persecution. w21.03 22 ¶11




Thursday, February 3

Let us run with endurance the race that is set before us.​—Heb. 12:1.



If we want to receive the prize of everlasting life, we must follow the Christian course, or way of life. (Acts 20:24; 1 Pet. 2:21) However, Satan and those who follow his example want us to make a different choice; they want us to “continue running with them.” (1 Pet. 4:4) They ridicule the course of life we follow and claim that the path they are on is better, that it leads to freedom. But their claim is false. (2 Pet. 2:19) How important it is that we choose the right road to follow! Satan wants all of us to stop running on the cramped road that is “leading off into life” and cross over to the spacious road that most people in this world are on. That road is popular and is easier to travel. But it is “leading off into destruction.” (Matt. 7:13, 14) To remain on the right road and not be sidetracked, we must trust in Jehovah and listen to him. w20.04 26 ¶1; 27 ¶5, 7




Friday, February 4

I urge that supplications, prayers, intercessions . . . be made . . . so that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with complete godly devotion.​—1 Tim. 2:1, 2.



In recent years, Russia and its allies have also entered into “the land of the Decoration.” (Dan. 11:41) How? In 2017, this current king of the north banned the work of Jehovah’s people and threw some of our brothers and sisters into prison. He also banned our publications, including the New World Translation. Further, he confiscated our branch office in Russia as well as Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls. After these actions, in 2018 the Governing Body identified Russia and its allies as the king of the north. However, even when Jehovah’s people are severely persecuted, they refuse to participate in any action to subvert or change human governments. Rather, they follow the Bible’s counsel to pray for “all those who are in high positions,” especially when such ones are making decisions that could affect freedom of worship. w20.05 14 ¶9




Saturday, February 5

Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.​—1 Tim. 4:16.



Parents, if your children are to be convinced that they have the truth, they need to have a personal relationship with God and to be convinced of the truthfulness of what the Bible teaches. If you are to teach your children the truth about God, you must set the example by being good students of the Bible. You must take time to meditate on what you learn. Then you will be able to teach your children to do the same. You need to teach your children to use our Bible study tools, just as you teach one of your Bible students. In doing so, you will help your children to appreciate Jehovah and the channel he uses to dispense spiritual food​—“the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45-47) Do not settle for teaching your children only basic Bible truths. Help them develop strong faith by teaching them about “the deep things of God” to an extent that is appropriate to their age and ability.​—1 Cor. 2:10. w20.07 11 ¶10, 12-13




Sunday, February 6

Jehovah detests a devious person, but His close friendship is with the upright.​—Prov. 3:32.



How many imperfect humans today enjoy a close friendship with Jehovah? There are millions. This friendship is possible because of their faith in Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. On that basis, Jehovah kindly allows us to dedicate ourselves to him and get baptized. When we take these important steps, we join the millions of dedicated, baptized Christians who are enjoying “close friendship” with the greatest Person in the universe! How can we show that we treasure God’s friendship? Like Abraham and Job, who remained faithful to God for well over a hundred years, we must remain faithful​—no matter how long we have been serving Jehovah in this old system. Like Daniel, we must value our friendship with God more than life. (Dan. 6:7, 10, 16, 22) With Jehovah’s help, we can endure any trials we face and thus keep our close bond with him.​—Phil. 4:13. w20.05 27 ¶5-6




Monday, February 7

Unify my heart.​—Ps. 86:11.



King David saw another man’s wife bathing. He knew Jehovah’s standard: “You must not desire your fellow man’s wife.” (Ex. 20:17) Yet, evidently he kept looking. His heart became divided between his desire for the woman, Bath-sheba, and his desire to please Jehovah. Although David had long loved and feared Jehovah, he gave in to his selfish desire. In that instance, David pursued a very bad course. He brought reproach on Jehovah’s name. David also brought terrible harm to innocent people, including his own family. (2 Sam. 11:1-5, 14-17; 12:7-12) Jehovah disciplined David, and he recovered. (2 Sam. 12:13; Ps. 51:2-4, 17) David remembered the trouble and misery that resulted when he let his heart become divided. His words recorded at Psalm 86:11 may also be rendered: “Give me an undivided heart.” Did Jehovah help David make his heart whole, or undivided? Yes, for Jehovah’s Word later refers to David as a man whose “heart was . . . complete with Jehovah his God.”​—1 Ki. 11:4; 15:3. w20.06 11 ¶12-13




Tuesday, February 8

I kept drawing them, with the cords of love.​—Hos. 11:4.



The Bible describes Jehovah’s love for his people as a cord, or rope. In what sense is God’s love like a rope? Consider this illustration: Imagine that you are drowning in rough seas and someone throws you a life vest. Surely you would appreciate the help because that may ease your struggle to stay afloat. But a life vest will not be enough to keep you alive. The water is cold, and you will not survive unless you can reach a lifeboat. You need someone to throw you a rope and to pull you toward the lifeboat. As Jehovah said in the words of today’s text, he lovingly “kept drawing” the Israelites who had gone astray. God feels the same way today about those who have stopped serving him and who are drowning in problems and anxiety. He wants them to know that he loves them, and he wants to draw them to him. And Jehovah can use you to express his love to them. It is important to assure inactive ones that Jehovah loves them and that we love them too. w20.06 27 ¶12-13




Wednesday, February 9

Happy is the man who keeps on enduring trial.​—Jas. 1:12.



When the disciple Stephen was murdered, many Christians fled from Jerusalem and “were scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria,” eventually as far away as Cyprus and Antioch. (Acts 7:58–8:1; 11:19) We can only imagine the hardship the disciples had to endure. Still, they eagerly preached the good news wherever they went, and congregations were established throughout the Roman Empire. (1 Pet. 1:1) But far more turbulent times lay ahead for the early Christians. For instance, about the year 50 C.E., Roman Emperor Claudius ordered all Jews to leave Rome. So Jews who had become Christians were forced to abandon their homes and relocate elsewhere. (Acts 18:1-3) About 61 C.E., the apostle Paul wrote that his fellow Christians had been publicly reproached, put in prison, and plundered. (Heb. 10:32-34) And just like other people, Christians had to endure poverty and sickness.​—Rom. 15:26; Phil. 2:25-27. w21.02 26-27 ¶2-4




Thursday, February 10

The Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing that he has a short period of time.​—Rev. 12:12.



There is nothing that Satan or those influenced by him can do that will destabilize a Christian who has strengthened his own faith. (2 John 8, 9) We must expect to be hated by the world. (1 John 3:13) John reminds us that “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.” (1 John 5:19) As this system draws to an end, Satan’s anger grows hotter. He uses more than subtle forms of attack, such as the lure of immorality or the lies of apostates. He will also use brute force. Satan knows that he has only a short period of time left to try to stop our preaching work or to break our faith. It is no surprise, then, that our work is restricted or banned in a number of countries. Even so, our brothers and sisters in those lands are enduring. They are proving that no matter what the wicked one throws at us, we can be victorious! w20.07 24 ¶12-13




Friday, February 11

The gift God gives is everlasting life by Christ Jesus our Lord.​—Rom. 6:23.



Jehovah intended for the human family to enjoy everlasting life on the beautiful planet that he had created. But when Adam and Eve rebelled against their loving Father, sin and death cast a shadow over the earth. (Rom. 5:12) How did Jehovah respond? Immediately, he stated how he would rescue mankind. (Gen. 3:15) Jehovah purposed to provide a ransom that would make it possible for Adam and Eve’s children to be freed from sin and death. He could then allow each person to choose to serve Him and to receive everlasting life. (John 3:16; 1 Cor. 15:21, 22) When Jehovah through his Son resurrects countless millions, we may assume that not all of them will come back to life at the same time. Why not? Because an explosion in the earth’s population would likely cause chaos. And Jehovah never does anything in a disorganized, chaotic way. He knows that for peace to last, order must be maintained.​—1 Cor. 14:33. w20.08 14 ¶3; 15 ¶5




Saturday, February 12

Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching.​—1 Tim. 4:16.



A student should understand that the purpose of the Bible study is to help him to start serving Jehovah as one of His Witnesses. Step-by-step, a sincere Bible student can reach the goal of baptism! First, the student comes to know and love Jehovah and put faith in Him. (John 3:16; 17:3) The student then forms a relationship with Jehovah and begins to bond with the congregation. (Heb. 10:24, 25; Jas. 4:8) Eventually, the student rejects bad practices and repents of his sins. (Acts 3:19) Meanwhile, his faith impels him to share the truth with others. (2 Cor. 4:13) Then he dedicates himself to Jehovah and symbolizes his dedication by getting baptized. (1 Pet. 3:21; 4:2) And what a joyous day that is for everyone! As the student takes each step toward his goal, be generous with sincere commendation and encourage him to continue his progress in the right direction. w20.10 17-18 ¶12-13




Sunday, February 13

If the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I am no part of the body,” that does not make it no part of the body.​—1 Cor. 12:15.



If you compare yourself with others in the congregation, you may be blinded to your own value. Some in the congregation may be gifted teachers, good organizers, or skilled shepherds. Perhaps you feel that you do not have those gifts to the same degree. This shows that you are humble and modest. (Phil. 2:3) But be careful. If you constantly compare yourself with those who have outstanding talents, you will be disappointed in yourself. You may even feel, as the apostle Paul mentioned, that you have no place in the congregation at all. Jehovah gave some first-century Christians miraculous gifts of the holy spirit, but not all Christians received the same gifts. (1 Cor. 12:4-11) Yet, each Christian was valuable. Today, we do not have the miraculous gifts of the holy spirit. But the principle still applies. We may not all have the same talents, but all of us are valuable to Jehovah. w20.08 23 ¶13-15




Monday, February 14

Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid.​—Ps. 118:6.



When you pray for courage and boldness, Jehovah will answer your prayers and never abandon you. (Acts 4:29, 31) He is always there to give you support. Think about how he has helped you overcome challenges and given you the strength to make changes in your lifestyle. Certainly the One who led his people through the Red Sea can help you to be a disciple of Christ. (Ex. 14:13) Maintain the same conviction as did the psalmist who said the words of today’s text. Jehovah can also help new publishers to be courageous. Note the experience of a sister named Tomoyo. When she started to preach from house to house, the first householder she met shouted: “I don’t want anything to do with Jehovah’s Witnesses!” and slammed the door. Tomoyo courageously told her companion: “Did you hear that? I didn’t have to say a word, and she recognized me as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I’m so happy!” Tomoyo now serves as a regular pioneer. w20.09 6 ¶13-14




Tuesday, February 15

Asa did what was good and right in the eyes of Jehovah his God.​—2 Chron. 14:2.



Asa told the people that it was Jehovah who had “given [them] rest all around.” (2 Chron. 14:6, 7) Asa did not feel that this period of peace was a time to relax. On the contrary, he set out to build cities, walls, towers, and gates. He told the people of Judah: “The land is still at our disposal.” What did Asa mean? He meant that the people could move about freely in their God-given land and build without opposition from enemies. He urged the people to take advantage of this time of peace. Asa also used the time of peace to strengthen his military force. (2 Chron. 14:8) Does this mean that he did not trust in Jehovah? No. Rather, Asa knew that it was his duty as king to prepare the people for the troubles they might face in the future. Asa knew that the period of peace that Judah enjoyed likely would not last indefinitely, and this proved true. w20.09 15 ¶4-5




Wednesday, February 16

Do not go beyond the things that are written.​—1 Cor. 4:6.



With good intentions, an elder might make rules that he hopes will protect God’s sheep. However, there are significant differences between the role of an elder and the role of a family head. For instance, Jehovah has assigned the elders to act as judges, and he has given them the responsibility of removing unrepentant sinners from the congregation. (1 Cor. 5:11-13) On the other hand, Jehovah has given family heads some authority that he has not given to elders. For instance, he has authorized a family head both to make and to enforce rules for his family. (Rom. 7:2) For example, a family head has the right to decide at what time his children should arrive home at night. He also has the authority to discipline his children if they fail to obey that rule. (Eph. 6:1) Of course, a loving family head consults with his wife before making rules in the household; after all, the two of them are “one flesh.”​—Matt. 19:6. w21.02 16-18 ¶10-13




Thursday, February 17

[Wisdom] is more precious than corals; nothing you desire can compare to it.​—Prov. 3:15.



One reason why the truths found in God’s Word are precious is that Jehovah reveals them only to humble ones who are “rightly disposed.” (Acts 13:48) Such individuals accept the channel he uses to dispense those truths today. (Matt. 11:25; 24:45) We cannot learn these truths on our own, and nothing else is anywhere near as valuable. (Prov. 3:13) Jehovah has also entrusted us with the privilege of teaching others the truth about him and his purposes. (Matt. 24:14) The message we bear is invaluable because it helps people become part of Jehovah’s family and gives them the opportunity to gain everlasting life. (1 Tim. 4:16) Whether our personal share in the ministry is large or small, we are supporting the most important work being done at this time. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) What an honor it is to be God’s fellow workers!​—1 Cor. 3:9. w20.09 26-27 ¶4-5




Friday, February 18

We found brothers and were urged to remain with them.​—Acts 28:14.



During his journey to Rome, the apostle Paul time and again received help that Jehovah provided by means of his fellow believers. For example, two faithful companions of Paul, Aristarchus and Luke, decided to travel with him to Rome. They willingly risked their lives to be with Paul, although it does not appear that either of them had received a personal assurance from Jesus that they would reach Rome. Only later, during the rough voyage, did they learn that their lives would be spared. When they reached the port city of Sidon, Julius permitted Paul “to go to his friends and enjoy their care.” (Acts 27:1-3) And later, in the city of Puteoli, Paul and his companions “found brothers and were urged to remain with them for seven days.” While the Christians in those places cared for the needs of Paul and his companions, Paul no doubt brought great joy to his hosts by sharing upbuilding experiences.​—Compare Acts 15:2, 3. w20.11 15-16 ¶15-17




Saturday, February 19

Godly devotion . . . holds promise of the life now and the life that is to come.​—1 Tim. 4:8.



Parents, teach your children in word and action that you love Jehovah deeply. Realize that the greatest gift that you can give them is the opportunity to love Jehovah. And one of the most valuable lessons that you can teach them is how to keep a good spiritual routine of study, prayer, meetings, and participation in the ministry. (1 Tim. 6:6) Of course, you must give your children the material things they need. (1 Tim. 5:8) But remember that it will be your children’s close relationship with Jehovah, not their material possessions, that will help them to survive the end of this old system and make it into God’s new world. (Ezek. 7:19) How heartwarming it is to see so many Christian parents who are making good spiritual choices for their families! Children who are raised in such families often continue with the good habits they learned, and they have no regrets!​—Prov. 10:22. w20.10 28-29 ¶10-11




Sunday, February 20

You will not have this happen to you at all.​—Matt. 16:22.



On occasion, the apostle Peter said or did things that he later regretted. For instance, when Jesus told his apostles that he would suffer and die, Peter rebuked him, saying the above. (Matt. 16:21-23) Jesus then corrected Peter. When a mob came to arrest Jesus, Peter acted rashly, cutting off the ear of a slave of the high priest. (John 18:10, 11) Again, Jesus corrected the apostle. In addition, Peter had boasted that while the other apostles might stumble in connection with Christ, he would never do so! (Matt. 26:33) But that overconfidence gave way to fear of man, and Peter denied his Master three times. Deeply discouraged, Peter “went outside and wept bitterly.” (Matt. 26:69-75) He must have wondered if Jesus could ever forgive him. However, Peter did not allow himself to be overwhelmed by discouragement. After stumbling, he recovered, and we later find him with the other apostles.​—John 21:1-3; Acts 1:15, 16. w20.12 20 ¶17-18




Monday, February 21

You husbands, . . . continue dwelling with them according to knowledge. Assign them honor as to a weaker vessel, the feminine one.​—1 Pet. 3:7.



A family head can show humility in many ways. For example, he does not expect perfection from his wife and children. He listens to and considers the opinions of family members, even when they do not agree with his. In addition, a humble husband is willing to do household tasks, even if in his community these tasks are viewed as women’s work. That can be a challenge. Why? “Where I come from,” says a sister named Rachel, “if a husband helps his wife wash dishes or clean the home, his neighbors and relatives will question if he is a ‘real man.’ They will think that he cannot control his wife.” If that attitude is common where you live, remember that Jesus washed the feet of his disciples, even though it was viewed as a slave’s job. A good family head is concerned, not about making himself look good, but about making his wife and children feel good. w21.02 2 ¶3; 4 ¶11




Tuesday, February 22

One thing is certain: Forgetting the things behind and stretching forward to the things ahead, I am pressing on toward the goal.​—Phil. 3:13, 14.



Good memories are a blessing from Jehovah; but no matter how good our life was in the past, our future in the new world will be better. Others may hurt us, but when we choose to forgive, we are able to move forward. Excessive guilt can prevent us from serving Jehovah with joy. But, like the apostle Paul, we need to believe that Jehovah has forgiven us. (1 Tim. 1:12-15) We have the prospect of living forever. And in God’s new world, we will not be plagued with regrets about the past. Regarding that time, the Bible says: “The former things will not be called to mind.” (Isa. 65:17) Just think: Some of us have grown old in Jehovah’s service, but in the new world, we will be young again. (Job 33:25) Let us, therefore, be determined not to live in the past. Rather, let us look to the future and live for what is ahead! w20.11 24 ¶4; 29 ¶18-19




Wednesday, February 23

I saw . . . a great crowd . . . And they keep shouting with a loud voice, saying: “Salvation we owe to our God . . . and to the Lamb.”​—Rev. 7:9, 10.



What lies ahead? During the great tribulation, Jehovah will save us in two amazing ways. First, he will save his loyal servants during the time when he causes the kings of the earth to destroy Babylon the Great, the empire of false religion. (Rev. 17:16-18; 18:2, 4) Then, he will save his people when he annihilates the remaining elements of Satan’s world at Armageddon. (Rev. 16:14, 16) When we remain close to Jehovah, Satan can do us no lasting harm. In fact, he is the one who will suffer permanent harm. (Rom. 16:20) So put on the complete suit of armor​—and leave it on! Do not try to fight the battle on your own. Support your brothers and sisters. And follow Jehovah’s direction. If you do, you can be confident that your loving heavenly Father will strengthen you and protect you.​—Isa. 41:10. w21.03 30 ¶16-17




Thursday, February 24

Your strength will be in keeping calm and showing trust.​—Isa. 30:15.



How might we show our trust in Jehovah? By applying the direction that Jehovah gives. The Bible contains many accounts that highlight the value of keeping calm and putting our trust in Jehovah. As you study these accounts, notice what helped God’s servants to remain calm in the face of extreme opposition. For example, when the Jewish supreme court ordered the apostles to stop preaching, they were not intimidated. Instead, they boldly declared: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.” (Acts 5:29) Even after being flogged, the apostles did not panic. Why? Because they knew that Jehovah was on their side. He was pleased with them. Thus, they continued preaching the good news. (Acts 5:40-42) Likewise, when the disciple Stephen faced death, he remained so peaceful and serene that his face looked “like an angel’s face.” (Acts 6:12-15) Why? Because he was assured of Jehovah’s approval. w21.01 4 ¶10-11




Friday, February 25

They have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.​—Rev. 7:14.



This signifies that they have a clean conscience and a righteous standing before Jehovah. (Isa. 1:18) They are dedicated, baptized Christians, who exercise strong faith in Jesus’ sacrifice and who have a relationship with Jehovah. (John 3:36; 1 Pet. 3:21) Thus, they qualify to stand before God’s throne to render him “sacred service day and night” in the earthly courtyard of his spiritual temple. (Rev. 7:15) Even now, they zealously perform the greater part of the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work, putting the interests of God’s Kingdom ahead of their own. (Matt. 6:33; 24:14; 28:19, 20) The great crowd who come out of the great tribulation are assured of God’s continued care, for “the One seated on the throne will spread his tent over them.” The promise that the other sheep have longed to see fulfilled will be fully realized: “[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes.”​—Rev. 21:3, 4. w21.01 16 ¶9-10




Saturday, February 26

I will pour out some of my spirit on every sort of flesh, and your sons and your daughters will prophesy.​—Acts 2:17.



We love being part of Jehovah’s family, and we do our best to respect the headship arrangement that Jehovah has put in place. The Bible indicates that Jehovah values women as well as men. For instance, it reveals that in the first century, Jehovah gave holy spirit to women as well as to men and empowered them to perform miraculous works, such as speaking in different languages. (Acts 2:1-4, 15-18) They both have been anointed by holy spirit with the prospect of ruling with Christ. (Gal. 3:26-29) Women as well as men will receive the reward of everlasting life on earth. (Rev. 7:9, 10, 13-15) And both men and women are assigned to preach and teach the good news. (Matt. 28:19, 20) In fact, the book of Acts recognizes the work of a sister named Priscilla who, along with her husband, Aquila, helped to explain the truth more correctly to the well-educated man Apollos.​—Acts 18:24-26. w21.02 14 ¶1; 15 ¶4




Sunday, February 27

Pay attention to yourselves and to all the flock . . . Shepherd the congregation of God.​—Acts 20:28.



Elders, you have the weighty responsibility of helping publishers to be effective in their ministry, including their Bible study work. If someone is shy about conducting a Bible study in your presence, offer to conduct the study. Elders can do a great deal to encourage and to motivate the teachers to persevere. (1 Thess. 5:11) Even if we do not presently conduct a Bible study, we can still help someone to grow spiritually. Without taking over, we can with our well-prepared comments support the teacher during a study session. We can befriend the students when they come to the Kingdom Hall, and we can serve as good examples for them. And elders can encourage the students by making time for them and the teachers by training and commending them. Really, what greater joy could we have than knowing that we played even a small part in helping someone come to love and serve our Father, Jehovah? w21.03 13 ¶18-19




Monday, February 28

Close friendship with Jehovah belongs to those who fear him.​—Ps. 25:14.



David proved to be responsible and reliable. For example, as a young man, he diligently looked after his father’s sheep. That turned out to be a dangerous assignment. David later explained to King Saul: “Your servant became a shepherd of his father’s flock, and a lion came, also a bear, and each carried off a sheep from the flock. I went out after it and struck it down and rescued it from its mouth.” (1 Sam. 17:34, 35) David felt responsible for the welfare of the sheep. Young brothers can imitate David by diligently fulfilling any assignment they are given. Young David developed a close, personal relationship with Jehovah. That relationship was more important than David’s courage or his skill with a stringed instrument. Jehovah was not only David’s God but also his Friend​—his close Friend. Young brothers, the most important thing that you can do is to strengthen your relationship with your heavenly Father. w21.03 3 ¶4-5




