
July
Friday, July 1

All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth.​—Matt. 28:18.



We must have a relationship with Jesus in order for our prayers to be answered. This calls for doing more than simply adding the phrase “in Jesus’ name” to our prayers as a formality. We must recognize how Jehovah uses Jesus in answering our prayers. Jesus told the apostles: “Whatever you ask in my name, I will do this.” (John 14:13) Although Jehovah is the one who hears and answers our prayers, he has given Jesus the authority to carry out His decisions. Thus, before God answers our prayers, he sees if we have applied the counsel Jesus gave. For example, Jesus said: “If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; whereas if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.” (Matt. 6:14, 15) How important it is, then, that we treat others in the same kind way that Jehovah and Jesus treat us! w20.04 22 ¶6




Saturday, July 2

We are declaring the good news to you, for you to turn from these vain things to the living God.​—Acts 14:15.



The apostle Paul discerned the interests of his audience, and then he adapted his presentation. For example, the crowd he spoke to in Lystra had little or no knowledge of the Scriptures. So Paul used arguments that they could relate to. He spoke of fruitful harvests and the ability to enjoy life. He used words and examples that his listeners could readily understand. Use insight to discern the interests of people in your territory and adapt your presentation. How can you find out what a person is interested in as you approach him or his home? Be observant. Perhaps he is gardening, reading a book, repairing a vehicle, or engaging in some other activity. If appropriate, why not use what he is doing to engage him in conversation? (John 4:7) Even a person’s clothing may say something about him​—perhaps it indicates his nationality, occupation, or favorite sports team. w20.04 11 ¶11-12




Sunday, July 3

Throw all your anxiety on [God], because he cares for you.​—1 Pet. 5:7.



Because of severe anxiety, some brothers and sisters feel very nervous and self-conscious in everyday social situations. They may find it difficult to be in large groups, but they continue to attend congregation meetings, assemblies, and conventions. They find it a challenge to speak to strangers, yet they talk to others in the field ministry. If that is true in your case, be assured that you are not alone. Many deal with similar struggles. Remember that Jehovah is pleased with your whole-souled efforts. The fact that you have not given up is proof that he is blessing you and giving you the strength you need. (Phil. 4:6, 7) If you are serving Jehovah despite enduring physical or emotional limitations, you can be confident that you are pleasing Jehovah. Many of us have physical limitations, yet we are enduring. (2 Cor. 4:16) With Jehovah’s help, we will all run the race to the finish! w20.04 31 ¶20-21




Monday, July 4

His invisible qualities are clearly seen . . . by the things made.​—Rom. 1:20.



God’s wisdom is clearly seen in the way he constructed our home, the earth. (Heb. 3:4) The earth is unique because it has all the right conditions to sustain human life. In some respects, the earth is like a boat floating in the vast ocean of space. But there are key differences between a man-made boat, full of people, and our earth. For example, how long would the occupants of a literal boat survive if they had to produce their own oxygen, food, and water and if they could not throw any waste products overboard? The people in that boat would soon die. In contrast, the earth supports billions of living creatures. It produces all the oxygen, food, and water we need, and we do not run out of those vital supplies. Its waste products are not ejected into space; yet, the earth remains beautiful and habitable. How is that possible? Jehovah designed the earth with the ability to recycle resources. w20.05 20 ¶3-4




Tuesday, July 5

You certainly will not die.​—Gen. 3:4.



Satan was in effect telling Eve that Jehovah is a liar. Satan thus became a devil, or slanderer. Eve was thoroughly deceived; she believed Satan. (1 Tim. 2:14) She put more trust in him than in Jehovah. That made it easier for Eve to make the worst possible decision. She decided to disobey Jehovah. She began eating of the fruit that Jehovah had forbidden her to eat. Afterward, she gave some to Adam. (Gen. 3:6) Think for a moment about what Eve should have said to Satan. Imagine that she had said something like this: “I do not know who you are, but I know my Father, Jehovah, and I love and trust him. He has given Adam and me everything we have. How dare you say anything bad about him? Go away!” How delighted Jehovah would have been to hear such loyal words from a loving daughter! (Prov. 27:11) But Eve did not have loyal love for Jehovah; neither was Adam guided by that quality. Lacking such love for their Father, Adam and Eve failed to defend his name against slander. w20.06 4 ¶10-11




Wednesday, July 6

The women proclaiming the good news are a large army.​—Ps. 68:11.



Our sisters deserve to be commended for all they do in Jehovah’s service. That service includes constructing and maintaining buildings, supporting foreign-language groups, and volunteering at Bethel facilities. They assist in disaster relief work, help to translate our publications, and serve as pioneers and missionaries. In addition, wives help their husband to carry a heavy load in the congregation and in the organization. These responsible brothers would not be able to serve so fully as “gifts in men” were it not for the support of their wife. (Eph. 4:8) Wise elders realize that sisters are “a large army” of willing workers and that they are often among the most capable preachers of the good news. In addition, elders recognize that faithful, mature sisters are effective in helping younger sisters deal with challenges. (Titus 2:3-5) Certainly, our sisters deserve to be appreciated! w20.09 23-24 ¶13-14




Thursday, July 7

It is not a desirable thing to my Father who is in heaven for even one of these little ones to perish.​—Matt. 18:14.



Jehovah does not forget those who once served him but who have temporarily stopped associating with his people; nor does he forget the work they did in his service. (Heb. 6:10) The prophet Isaiah recorded a beautiful illustration to show how Jehovah cares for his people. “Like a shepherd he will care for his flock,” Isaiah wrote. “With his arm he will gather together the lambs, and in his bosom he will carry them.” (Isa. 40:11) How does the Great Shepherd feel when one of his sheep strays from the flock? Jesus revealed Jehovah’s feelings when he asked his disciples: “What do you think? If a man has 100 sheep and one of them strays, will he not leave the 99 on the mountains and set out on a search for the one that is straying? And if he finds it, I certainly tell you, he rejoices more over it than over the 99 that have not strayed.”​—Matt. 18:12, 13. w20.06 19-20 ¶8-9




Friday, July 8

If a man is reaching out to be an overseer, he is desirous of a fine work.​—1 Tim. 3:1.



We view it as a privilege to serve Jehovah in any way we can. (Ps. 27:4; 84:10) If a brother is able to make himself available for a special privilege of service, that is commendable. However, when he receives an assignment, he should not think more of himself than is necessary. (Luke 17:7-10) His goal should be to serve others humbly. (2 Cor. 12:15) The Bible contains warning examples of people who thought too much of themselves. Diotrephes immodestly sought to have “the first place” in the congregation. (3 John 9) Uzziah proudly tried to perform a task that Jehovah had not assigned him to do. (2 Chron. 26:16-21) Absalom slyly tried to win the support of the public because he wanted to be king. (2 Sam. 15:2-6) As those Bible accounts clearly show, Jehovah is not pleased with people who seek their own glory. (Prov. 25:27) In time, pride and ambition lead only to disaster.​—Prov. 16:18. w20.07 4 ¶7-8




Saturday, July 9

Each one will carry his own load.​—Gal. 6:5.



Some Christian families have moved to another country to seek refuge or to find employment. In such cases, their children may now be educated in the main language of their new country. The parents may also need to learn the main language in order to find employment. What if there is a local congregation or group in their mother tongue? Which congregation should the family attend? Should it be a congregation in which the main language of the country is spoken or a congregation in which the family’s mother tongue is spoken? The family head must decide which congregation his family will attend. Because this is a personal matter, he must consider what is in the best interests of his family. We need to respect the decision of the family head. Whatever he decides, let us accept his decision and welcome the family as a valued part of our congregation.​—Rom. 15:7. w20.08 30 ¶17-18




Sunday, July 10

God chose the weak things of the world.​—1 Cor. 1:27.



If we want to gain power from Jehovah, we must not think that physical strength, education, cultural background, or material wealth determine how valuable we are. These things are not what make us useful to Jehovah. In fact, not many of God’s people are “wise in a fleshly way, not many powerful, not many of noble birth.” (1 Cor. 1:26) So do not view any supposed disadvantages as obstacles to serving Jehovah. Instead, view them as opportunities, a chance to see Jehovah’s power working through you. For example, if you feel intimidated by those who try to make you doubt your beliefs, pray for Jehovah to give you boldness when defending your faith. (Eph. 6:19, 20) If you are struggling to cope with a chronic disability, ask Jehovah to give you the strength you need to stay as busy as you can in his service. Each time you see Jehovah help you, your faith grows and you become stronger. w20.07 16 ¶9




Monday, July 11

[Seek] first the Kingdom.​—Matt. 6:33.



If we are to put the Kingdom first in our lives, we must be like Abraham, who willingly made sacrifices to please God. (Mark 10:28-30; Heb. 11:8-10) Do not expect your life to be trouble-free. Even those who devote their entire life to serving Jehovah must still deal with problems. (Jas. 1:2; 1 Pet. 5:9) Today, we have more reason than ever to focus on the future. World events clearly show that we are in the final part of the last days of this system of things. Among the many blessings we will enjoy under Kingdom rule will be that of seeing our loved ones raised from the dead. At that time, Jehovah will reward Abraham for his faith and patience by bringing him and his family back to life on earth. Will you be there to welcome them? You can be if you, like Abraham, are willing to make sacrifices for God’s Kingdom, if you keep your faith despite problems, and if you learn to wait patiently on Jehovah.​—Mic. 7:7. w20.08 5-6 ¶13-14; 7 ¶17




Tuesday, July 12

Prove yourself faithful even to death, and I will give you the crown of life.​—Rev. 2:10.



We know that if our enemies kill us, Jehovah will restore us to life. We are convinced that nothing they do can sever our attachment to Jehovah. (Rom. 8:35-39) What remarkable wisdom Jehovah has shown by giving us the resurrection hope! By means of it, he disarms Satan of one of his most effective weapons and at the same time arms us with unbreakable courage. If enemies of Jehovah threaten you with death, will you be willing to entrust him with your life? How can you know? One way is to ask yourself, ‘Do the small decisions I make each day give evidence that I trust in Jehovah?’ (Luke 16:10) Another question could be, ‘Does my lifestyle prove that I trust in Jehovah’s promise to care for my material needs if I seek his Kingdom first?’ (Matt. 6:31-33) If the answer to those questions is yes, you will be prepared for any trial that comes your way.​—Prov. 3:5, 6. w20.08 17-18 ¶15-16




Wednesday, July 13

Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God, a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.​—2 Tim. 2:15.



We need to become skillful in handling God’s Word. We can learn some of these skills at our meetings. But if we are to convince others that Bible truth is truly valuable, we need to stick to a regular routine of personal Bible study. We need to use God’s Word to strengthen our faith. This involves more than just reading the Bible. It requires that we meditate on what we read and do research in our publications so that we can correctly understand and apply the Scriptures. (1 Tim. 4:13-15) Then we will be able to use God’s Word to teach others. Again, this involves more than just reading a Bible text. We want to help our listeners to understand the verse and how it applies to them. By sticking to a regular schedule of personal Bible study, we can improve in our ability to use God’s inspired Word to teach others.​—2 Tim. 3:16, 17. w20.09 28 ¶12




Thursday, July 14

Consider closely [Jesus] . . . , so that you may not get tired and give up.​—Heb. 12:3.



We can stay focused on the preaching work if we reflect on how much Jehovah is doing to help us. For example, he is providing an abundance of spiritual food in the form of printed and digital publications, audio and video recordings, and Internet broadcasts. Just think: On our official website, information is available in over 1,000 languages! (Matt. 24:45-47) Another way we can stay focused on preaching is by following Jesus’ example. He allowed nothing to distract him from bearing witness to the truth. (John 18:37) He was not enticed when Satan offered him “all the kingdoms of the world and their glory”; nor was he tempted when others wanted to make him king. (Matt. 4:8, 9; John 6:15) He was not swayed by a desire for material riches; nor was he deterred by fierce opposition. (Luke 9:58; John 8:59) When we face tests of our faith, we can stay focused if we remember the apostle Paul’s counsel in today’s text. w20.09 9-10 ¶6-7




Friday, July 15

Become imitators of me, just as I am of Christ.​—1 Cor. 11:1.



How grateful we are to have so many sisters working hard in the congregation! They participate at the meetings and in the ministry. Some share in maintaining the Kingdom Hall, and they show personal interest in fellow worshippers. Of course, they face challenges. Some provide care for elderly parents. Others endure opposition from family members. And still others who are single parents work hard to provide for their children. Why focus on giving support to sisters? Because the world does not always treat women with the dignity that they deserve. In addition, the Bible encourages us to give them support. For instance, the apostle Paul alerted the congregation in Rome to welcome Phoebe and “give her whatever help she may need.” (Rom. 16:1, 2) Paul came from a culture that treated women as being inferior. But as a Christian, he imitated Jesus and treated women with dignity and kindness. w20.09 20 ¶1-2




Saturday, July 16

Make disciples . . . , teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.



To help Bible students to develop the desire to share the good news with others, we might ask them such questions as these: “How has accepting the Kingdom message changed your life for the better? Do you think that others need to hear this message? What can you do to help them?” (Prov. 3:27; Matt. 9:37, 38) Keep in mind that Jesus instructed us to teach others “to observe all the things” he commanded. That certainly includes the two greatest commands​—to love God and to love neighbor—​both of which are closely connected to the preaching and disciple-making work. (Matt. 22:37-39) In fact, love is the principal motive for sharing in the preaching work. Understandably for some Bible students, the thought of sharing in the preaching work may cause fear. But we can assure such students that with Jehovah’s help they will gradually be able to overcome the fear of man.​—Ps. 18:1-3; Prov. 29:25. w20.11 3 ¶6-8




Sunday, July 17

We have never stopped praying for you.​—Col. 1:9.



When preparing for a Bible study, pray to Jehovah about the student and his needs. Ask Jehovah to help you teach from the Bible in a way that will reach the person’s heart. Keep in mind that your goal is to help him progress to baptism. The student also needs to communicate with Jehovah. How? By listening to and talking to Jehovah. He can listen to God by reading the Bible daily. (Josh. 1:8; Ps. 1:1-3) He can talk to Jehovah by praying each day. So offer heartfelt prayers at the beginning and at the end of each study session, praying with and for your student. As he listens to your prayers, he will learn how to pray from his heart and sincerely address his prayers to Jehovah God in the name of Jesus Christ. (Matt. 6:9; John 15:16) Imagine how reading the Bible daily (listening to Jehovah) and praying (talking to Jehovah) will help your student draw ever closer to God!​—Jas. 4:8. w20.10 8 ¶8; 9 ¶10-11




Monday, July 18

Maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.​—Eph. 4:3.



The desire for order and peace that marked the early Christians is evident in Jehovah’s organization today. (Acts 16:4, 5) To illustrate: If you were to attend a Watchtower Study in another congregation​—even in another land—​you would know how the study would be conducted and which article would be considered. Immediately, you would feel at home! What else but God’s spirit can account for this precious unity? (Zeph. 3:9, ftn.) What can you do? Ask yourself: ‘Do I promote unity and peace in the congregation? Am I obedient to those taking the lead? Can others depend on me, especially if I have responsibilities in the congregation? Am I punctual, helpful, and eager to serve?’ (Jas. 3:17) If you see room for improvement, pray for holy spirit. The more you allow it to mold your personality and influence your actions, the more your brothers and sisters will love you and value you. w20.10 23 ¶12-13




Tuesday, July 19

Become doers of the word and not hearers only.​—Jas. 1:22.



God’s Word can act as a mirror for us. (Jas. 1:23-25) Most of us look in a mirror each morning before we leave home. That way, we can see if we need to make an adjustment before others see us. Similarly, when we read the Bible each day, we will see ways that we can adjust our thinking and our attitude. Many find it helpful to read the daily text each morning before they leave home. They allow what they read to affect their thinking. Then throughout the day, they look for ways to apply the counsel from God’s Word. In addition, we must have a study routine that includes reading and thinking about God’s Word each day. This may sound simple, but it is one of the most important things we can do to help us stay on the cramped road to life. In a sense, God’s Word acts like an X-ray machine, enabling us to see what is inside. But we must be humble if we are to benefit from the counsel we receive from the Bible or from God’s representatives. w20.11 18 ¶3; 20 ¶8




Wednesday, July 20

The congregations continued to be made firm in the faith and to increase in number day by day.​—Acts 16:5.



Although the first-century Christians were often persecuted, they also enjoyed periods of peace. How did the disciples use those opportunities? Those faithful men and women preached the good news without letup. The account in Acts says that they “walked in the fear of Jehovah.” They kept on preaching the good news, and as a result, they “kept on multiplying.” Jehovah obviously blessed their zealous preaching during times of peace. (Acts 9:26-31) The first-century disciples took every opportunity to spread the good news. As one example, when the apostle Paul recognized that a large door was opened to him while in Ephesus, he took advantage of the opportunity to preach and to make disciples in that city. (1 Cor. 16:8, 9) The disciples put forth great effort to declare “the good news of the word of Jehovah.” (Acts 15:30-35) What resulted? Today’s text tells us. w20.09 16 ¶6-8




Thursday, July 21

Death came through a man.​—1 Cor. 15:21.



When Adam sinned, he brought disaster on himself and his descendants. We still feel the tragic effects of his disobedience. How different is the outcome made possible because God raised his Son! “Resurrection of the dead also comes through a man,” Jesus. “For just as in Adam all are dying,” the apostle Paul reasoned, “so also in the Christ all will be made alive.” (1 Cor. 15:22) What did Paul mean when he said that “in Adam all are dying”? Paul had in mind Adam’s descendants, who inherited sin and imperfection from Adam and thus are in a dying condition. (Rom. 5:12) Adam is not among those who “will be made alive.” Christ’s ransom does not cover him, for Adam was a perfect man who willfully disobeyed God. The outcome for Adam is the same as what is ahead for those whom “the Son of man” will judge as “goats,” namely, “everlasting cutting-off.”​—Matt. 25:31-33, 46; Heb. 5:9. w20.12 5 ¶13-14




Friday, July 22

Jehovah . . . takes note of the humble.​—Ps. 138:6.



If we do not get a certain assignment, think of the example of the faithful angels. During King Ahab’s reign, Jehovah invited the angels to suggest ways to fool the wicked king. A number of angels responded by offering ideas. But God chose one angel and told him that his suggestion would succeed. (1 Ki. 22:19-22) Did the other faithful angels become discouraged, perhaps thinking, ‘Why did I bother?’ We have no reason to believe that they did. The angels are truly humble and want all honor to go to Jehovah. (Judg. 13:16-18; Rev. 19:10) Fix in mind the privilege we have to bear God’s name and to announce his Kingdom. Assignments are not what make us precious to God. It is when we are modest and humble that we become truly lovable to Jehovah and to our brothers. So beg Jehovah to help you remain modest and humble. Reflect on the many fine examples of modesty and humility that are recorded in his Word. Willingly serve your brothers in any way you can.​—1 Pet. 5:5. w20.12 26 ¶16-17




Saturday, July 23

Accept the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, that is, God’s word.​—Eph. 6:17.



The helmet of salvation is the hope Jehovah gives us​—the hope that he will save us from death and will reward all those who do his will. (1 Thess. 5:8; 1 Tim. 4:10; Titus 1:1, 2) The hope of salvation protects our thinking ability. It keeps us focused on God’s promises and helps us to see problems in the right perspective. We wear this helmet by keeping our thinking in harmony with God’s thoughts. For example, we place our hope, not on uncertain riches, but on God. (Ps. 26:2; 104:34; 1 Tim. 6:17) The sword of the spirit is God’s Word, the Bible. That sword has the power to cut through deception and to liberate people from being enslaved to false teachings and harmful habits. (2 Cor. 10:4, 5; 2 Tim. 3:16, 17; Heb. 4:12) We learn to use that sword properly through personal study and through the training we receive from God’s organization.​—2 Tim. 2:15. w21.03 27 ¶4; 29 ¶10-11




Sunday, July 24

I . . . was on the island called Patmos for speaking about God and bearing witness concerning Jesus.​—Rev. 1:9.



Even while confined for preaching about Jesus, the apostle John proved that he was thinking of others. For example, he recorded the revelation that he received and had it sent to the congregations so that they would know what “must shortly take place.” (Rev. 1:1) Then, likely after he was released from Patmos, John wrote his Gospel account of Jesus’ life and ministry. He also wrote three letters in order to encourage and strengthen his brothers and sisters. You can imitate John’s self-sacrificing life course and prove that you love people by what you choose to do with your life. Satan’s system would have you spend all your time and energy on yourself, trying to make money or to make a name for yourself. Instead, self-sacrificing Kingdom proclaimers all over the world spend as much time as they can preaching the good news and helping people to draw close to Jehovah. w21.01 10 ¶9-10




Monday, July 25

Jonathan began to love him as himself.​—1 Sam. 18:1.



Jonathan could have been jealous of David. As King Saul’s son, Jonathan could have insisted that he was the rightful heir to the throne. (1 Sam. 20:31) But Jonathan was humble, and he was loyal to Jehovah. So he fully supported Jehovah’s choice of David as future king. He was also loyal to David, even when this incurred the wrath of Saul. (1 Sam. 20:32-34) Jonathan had tender affection for David, so he did not view him as a rival. Jonathan was a skilled archer and a courageous warrior. He and his father, Saul, had a reputation for being “swifter than the eagles” and “mightier than the lions.” (2 Sam. 1:22, 23) Therefore, Jonathan could have boasted about his own heroic exploits. However, Jonathan was not competitive or resentful. On the contrary, Jonathan admired David for his courage and reliance on Jehovah. In fact, it was after David killed Goliath that Jonathan began to love David as himself. w21.01 21 ¶6; 22 ¶8-9




Tuesday, July 26

The head of a woman is the man.​—1 Cor. 11:3.



All Christians come under the perfect headship of Jesus Christ. However, when a Christian woman gets married, she comes under the headship of an imperfect man. That can present a challenge. So when considering a potential marriage mate, she would do well to ask herself: ‘What indication do I have that this brother will be a good family head? Do spiritual activities play an important role in his life? If not, what makes me think that he will be a good spiritual head after we get married?’ Of course, a sister also does well to ask herself: ‘What qualities will I bring to the marriage? Am I patient and generous? Do I have a strong relationship with Jehovah?’ (Eccl. 4:9, 12) The level of happiness a wife will experience in her marriage will depend to some extent on the decisions she makes before getting married. Millions of our Christian sisters set an excellent example in being submissive to their husband. They are to be commended! w21.02 8 ¶1-2




Wednesday, July 27

Step over into Macedonia and help us.​—Acts 16:9.



In recent years, many publishers have made it their goal to learn another language so that they can expand their ministry and serve in a congregation where there is a greater need for Kingdom publishers. This is a personal decision that these Christians make in order to advance Kingdom interests. Although it may take years for them to become fluent in the new language, they accomplish much good. Their fine qualities and experience strengthen and stabilize the congregation. We value these self-sacrificing brothers and sisters! A body of elders would not hold back from recommending a brother to serve as an elder or a ministerial servant simply because he is not yet fluent in the language of the congregation. The elders will evaluate a brother based on the Scriptural qualifications for elders and ministerial servants and not on how well he speaks the language of the local congregation.​—1 Tim. 3:1-10, 12, 13; Titus 1:5-9. w20.08 30 ¶15-16




Thursday, July 28

Consider it all joy, my brothers, when you meet with various trials.​—Jas. 1:2.



People may think that they can be happy only if they have good health, a lot of money, and peaceful family relationships. But the type of joy that James wrote about is a part of the fruitage of God’s spirit and is not dependent on a person’s circumstances. (Gal. 5:22) A Christian gains joy, or a deep sense of happiness, from knowing that he is pleasing Jehovah and following Jesus’ example. (Luke 6:22, 23; Col. 1:10, 11) Like a flame burning inside the protection of a lantern, this type of joy burns within a Christian’s heart. It does not flicker when health fails or money is scarce. And it is not snuffed out by ridicule or opposition from family members or others. Rather than being put out, the flame burns brighter each time opposers try to extinguish it. The trials we face because of our faith confirm that we are true disciples of Christ. (Matt. 10:22; 24:9; John 15:20) For good reason, James could write the words of today’s text. w21.02 28 ¶6




Friday, July 29

A good word cheers [a heart] up.​—Prov. 12:25.



As you come across Bible passages showing that strength comes from keeping calm and trusting in Jehovah, try to commit a few key verses to memory. You may find it helpful to read them aloud or to write them down and review them often. Joshua was commanded to read the book of the Law regularly in an undertone in order to act wisely. These reminders would also help him overcome the fear that he might otherwise have felt in his circumstances. (Josh. 1:8, 9) Many expressions found in God’s Word can give you peace of mind and heart in situations that would normally lead to feelings of anxiety or dread. (Ps. 27:1-3; Prov. 3:25, 26) At our meetings, we benefit from the instruction presented from the platform, the comments made by the audience, and the upbuilding conversations we have with our brothers and sisters. (Heb. 10:24, 25) We can also be greatly encouraged when we share our feelings with trusted friends in the congregation. w21.01 6 ¶15-16




Saturday, July 30

Become an example to the faithful ones.​—1 Tim. 4:12.



When you got baptized, you showed great faith and trust in Jehovah. And Jehovah happily entrusted you with the privilege of becoming a member of his family. The key now is to continue to rely on Jehovah. It may seem that it is easy to rely on Jehovah when you must make life-altering decisions, but what about at other times? How important it is that you trust in Jehovah when making decisions, including those regarding entertainment, secular work, and life goals! Do not rely on your own wisdom. Instead, look for Bible principles that apply to your circumstances, and then act in harmony with that direction. (Prov. 3:5, 6) If you do so, you will make Jehovah happy and you will earn the respect of those in your congregation. Of course, like all of us, you are imperfect, and at times you will make mistakes. However, this should not prevent you from doing all you can in Jehovah’s service. w21.03 6 ¶14-15




Sunday, July 31

I was rescued from the lion’s mouth.​—2 Tim. 4:17.



Are you dealing with opposition from members of your family? Or do you live in a country where the work of Jehovah’s people is severely restricted or even banned? If so, you might be encouraged by reading 2 Timothy 1:12-16 and 4:6-11, 17-22. The apostle Paul wrote this portion of Scripture while he was in prison. Before you read those passages, tell Jehovah about your problem and how it makes you feel. Be specific. Then ask Jehovah to help you discern principles in the accounts about Paul’s trials that will help you to know how you should respond to the challenge you are facing. Jehovah had warned Paul that he would have to endure persecution for being a Christian. (Acts 21:11-13) How did Jehovah help Paul? He answered Paul’s prayers and over time gave him power. Paul was assured that he would receive the reward that he had worked so hard to gain. Jehovah also moved Paul’s loyal friends to give him practical help. w21.03 17-18 ¶14-15, 19




