
June
Wednesday, June 1

We were determined to impart to you, not only the good news of God but also our very selves.​—1 Thess. 2:8.



Teachers must show genuine, personal interest in their students. View them as your future spiritual brothers or sisters. It is not easy for them to give up friends in the world and to make all the necessary changes to serve Jehovah. Effective Bible teachers introduce their students to others in the congregation who can have a good influence on them. The students can then enjoy associating with God’s people, who can give them spiritual and emotional support. We want each student to feel that he belongs in the congregation and is part of our spiritual family. We want him to be drawn to our warm and loving Christian brotherhood. Then it will be easier for him to stop having close association with people who do not help him to love Jehovah. (Prov. 13:20) If his former associates reject him, he will know that he can find true friends in Jehovah’s organization.​—Mark 10:29, 30; 1 Pet. 4:4. w20.10 17 ¶10-11




Thursday, June 2

All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth.​—Matt. 28:18.



We must be friends with Jesus if we are to have a good relationship with Jehovah. Why is that true? Consider just two reasons. First, Jesus told his disciples: “The Father himself has affection for you, because you have had affection for me.” (John 16:27) He also said: “No one comes to the Father except through me.” (John 14:6) Trying to be Jehovah’s friend without building a close bond with Jesus is like trying to enter a building without using the door. Jesus used a similar illustration when he described himself as “the door for the sheep.” (John 10:7) A second reason is that Jesus perfectly reflected his Father’s qualities. He said to his disciples: “Whoever has seen me has seen the Father also.” (John 14:9) So an important way that we come to know Jehovah is by studying the life of Jesus. As we learn about Jesus, our affection for him will grow. And as our friendship with Jesus grows, our love for his Father will deepen. w20.04 21-22 ¶5-6




Friday, June 3

I take pleasure in weaknesses, . . . for when I am weak, then I am powerful.​—2 Cor. 12:10.



Are you lying in a bed or sitting in a wheelchair? Do you have weak knees or poor eyesight? If so, can you run along with those who are young and healthy? You certainly can! Many older and infirm ones are running on the road to life. They cannot do this work in their own power. Instead, they draw on Jehovah’s strength by listening to Christian meetings over a telephone tie-line or watching meetings through video streaming. And they engage in the disciple-making work by witnessing to doctors, nurses, and relatives. Never let discouragement over your physical limitations convince you that you are too weak to run on the road to life. Jehovah loves you for your faith in him and your record of endurance. You need his help now more than ever, and he will not abandon you. (Ps. 9:10) Instead, he will draw even closer to you. w20.04 29 ¶16-17




Saturday, June 4

I do all things for the sake of the good news, in order to share it with others.​—1 Cor. 9:23.



What subjects might you discuss with a religious person? Try to find common ground. He may worship only one God, he may recognize Jesus as the Savior of humankind, or he may believe that we are living in a time of wickedness that will soon end. Based on beliefs you have in common, present the Bible’s message in a way that is appealing to that person. Keep in mind that people may not believe everything that their religion teaches. So even after you discern a person’s religion, try to find out what he personally believes. A missionary brother notes that some people say that they believe in the Trinity, but they may not actually believe that the Father, the Son, and the holy spirit are one God. “Knowing that makes it much easier to find common ground with the person,” he says. So try to find out what people really believe. Then, like the apostle Paul, you can “become all things to people of all sorts.”​—1 Cor. 9:19-22. w20.04 10 ¶9-10




Sunday, June 5

During that time your people will escape, everyone who is found written down in the book.​—Dan. 12:1.



We can face the future with confidence because both Daniel and John confirm that those who serve Jehovah and Jesus will survive this unparalleled time of distress. Daniel says that the survivors will have their names “written down in the book.” How do we get our names in that book? We must give clear evidence that we have faith in Jesus, the Lamb of God. (John 1:29) We need to get baptized in symbol of our dedication to God. (1 Pet. 3:21) And we must show our support for God’s Kingdom by doing what we can to help others learn about Jehovah. Now is the time to build trust in Jehovah and his organization of loyal servants. Now is the time to support God’s Kingdom. If we do, we will be saved when the king of the north and the king of the south are destroyed by God’s Kingdom. w20.05 16 ¶18-19




Monday, June 6

O Jehovah, your name endures forever.​—Ps. 135:13.



Adam and Eve knew Jehovah’s name, as well as vital truths about the One bearing that name. They knew him as the Creator, the One who gave them life, their lovely Paradise home, and a perfect mate. (Gen. 1:26-28; 2:18) However, would they continue to use their perfect minds to meditate on all that Jehovah had done for them? Would they keep building up their love and appreciation for the Person represented by that name? The answers became clear when God’s enemy tested them. Using a serpent as his mouthpiece, Satan asked Eve a question: “Did God really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden?” (Gen. 2:16, 17; 3:1) That question contained a subtle lie that was like hidden poison. What God had actually said was that they could eat from every tree, with one exception. (Gen. 2:9) Satan made it seem as if God were not generous. Eve may have wondered, ‘Is God withholding something good?’ w20.06 3-4 ¶8-9




Tuesday, June 7

Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely.​—Col. 3:13.



Some of Jehovah’s servants have felt hurt by a fellow believer. The apostle Paul recognized that at times we might have a valid “cause for complaint against” a brother or a sister. We may even have been treated unjustly. If we are not careful, we could become resentful. Bitterness may eventually cause a person to drift away from Jehovah’s people. Pablo, a brother in South America, was falsely accused of wrongdoing and, as a result, lost a privilege of service in the congregation. How did he react? “I got angry,” says Pablo, “and I gradually drifted away from the congregation.” Or a guilty conscience may torment a person who has broken God’s law in the past, making him feel unworthy of God’s love. Even if he was repentant and was shown mercy, he might feel that he is no longer good enough to be one of God’s people. How do you feel about brothers and sisters who face situations like those just discussed? w20.06 19 ¶6-7




Wednesday, June 8

The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself.​—Prov. 22:3.



We must learn to recognize situations that could harm us and then act to avoid the danger. (Heb. 5:14) For instance, we need to choose our recreation and entertainment wisely. Television shows and movies often portray immoral conduct. Such conduct offends God and will inevitably bring about harm. Accordingly, we avoid entertainment that could gradually undermine our love for God. (Eph. 5:5, 6) We must also discern the danger of false information spread by apostates, as they try to raise doubts about our brothers and Jehovah’s organization. (1 Tim. 4:1, 7; 2 Tim. 2:16) Such misinformation could undermine our faith. We must avoid being fooled by this propaganda. Why? Because these types of stories are spread “by men who are corrupted in mind and deprived of the truth.” Their goal is to start “arguments and debates.” (1 Tim. 6:4, 5) They want us to believe their slander and develop wicked suspicions about our brothers. w20.09 29 ¶13, 15




Thursday, June 9

[Seek], not [your] own advantage, but that of the other person.​—1 Cor. 10:24.



A husband and a wife should treat each other with love and respect. (Eph. 5:33) The Bible teaches us to focus on giving rather than on receiving. (Acts 20:35) What quality will help a married couple to show love and respect? The answer is humility. Humility has helped many Christian couples find greater happiness in their marriage. For example, a husband named Steven says: “If you are a team, you will work together, especially when there are problems. Instead of thinking ‘what is best for me?’ you will think ‘what is best for us?’” His wife, Stephanie, feels similarly. “Nobody wants to live with an opponent,” she says. “When a conflict arises, we identify the problem. We then pray, do research, and talk it out. We attack the problem, not each other.” Husbands and wives truly benefit when they do not think more of themselves than is necessary. w20.07 3-4 ¶5-6




Friday, June 10

I was making greater progress in Judaism than many of my own age in my nation.​—Gal. 1:14.



Do not rely on your own strength or abilities when serving Jehovah. The apostle Paul was well-educated​—he was taught by one of the most respected Jewish leaders of his day, a man named Gamaliel. (Acts 5:34; 22:3) And at one point, Paul had some influence in the Jewish community. (Acts 26:4) But Paul did not rely on himself. Paul gladly gave up the things that made him powerful by the world’s standards. (Phil. 3:8; ftn.) Paul paid a price for becoming a follower of Christ. He was hated by his own nation. (Acts 23:12-14) And he was beaten and imprisoned by his fellow citizens, the Romans. (Acts 16:19-24, 37) In addition, Paul became painfully aware of his own limitations. (Rom. 7:21-25) But rather than allow his opponents or his own shortcomings to cripple him, he took “pleasure in weaknesses.” Why? Because it was when he was weak that he saw God’s power at work in his life.​—2 Cor. 4:7; 12:10. w20.07 16 ¶7-8




Saturday, June 11

Whoever exercises faith in me . . . will do works greater than these.​—John 14:12.



The work of Kingdom preaching deserves our careful attention today. Jesus foretold that this work would expand in scope and continue long after his death. Following his resurrection, Jesus gave some of his disciples a miraculous catch of fish. He used that occasion to confirm that their assignment to be fishers of men was more important than any other endeavor. (John 21:15-17) Just before Jesus ascended to heaven, he informed his disciples that the witnessing work he had started would expand far beyond the borders of Israel. (Acts 1:6-8) Years later, Jesus gave a vision to the apostle John to show him what would take place “in the Lord’s day.” In it John saw this awe-inspiring event: Under angelic direction, “everlasting good news” was being preached to “every nation and tribe and tongue and people.” (Rev. 1:10; 14:6) Clearly, Jehovah’s will for us today is to share in this grand witnessing work until it is finished. w20.09 9 ¶5




Sunday, June 12

By faith Abraham, when he was tested, as good as offered up Isaac.​—Heb. 11:17.



Abraham’s family life was difficult. His beloved wife, Sarah, could not have children. For decades they had to deal with that bitter disappointment. Eventually, Sarah gave her servant girl, Hagar, to Abraham so that she could bear children for Abraham and Sarah. But when Hagar became pregnant with Ishmael, she began to despise Sarah. The situation became so difficult that Sarah chased Hagar away from home. (Gen. 16:1-6) Sarah finally became pregnant and gave Abraham a son whom he named Isaac. Abraham loved both of his sons, Ishmael and Isaac. But because of the bad way that Ishmael treated Isaac, Abraham was forced to send Ishmael and Hagar away. (Gen. 21:9-14) Later, Jehovah asked Abraham to offer Isaac as a sacrifice. (Gen. 22:1, 2; Heb. 11:17-19) In both cases, Abraham had to trust that Jehovah would eventually make things turn out well for his sons. w20.08 4 ¶9-10




Monday, June 13

Put on the new personality that was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.​—Eph. 4:24.



Imagine the joy that those who are resurrected will feel as they strip off their old personality and live according to God’s righteous standards. Those who make these changes will experience a resurrection of life. On the other hand, those who rebel against God will not be allowed to disrupt the peace of Paradise. (Isa. 65:20; John 5:28, 29) Under Kingdom rule, all of God’s people will experience the truthfulness of what Proverbs 10:22 says: “It is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich, and He adds no pain with it.” With Jehovah’s spirit at work on them, God’s people will become spiritually rich, that is, they will become more and more like Christ and will grow toward perfection. (John 13:15-17; Eph. 4:23) Each day they will become stronger, better people. What a joy life will be then!​—Job 33:25. w20.08 17 ¶11-12




Tuesday, June 14

Make it your aim . . . to mind your own business.​—1 Thess. 4:11.



We do well to keep in mind that some single Christians have made it a personal goal to remain unmarried. Other single Christians would like to marry, but they simply have not found the right person. Still others may have lost their mate in death. In any case, should those in the congregation feel the need to ask single Christians why they are not married or to offer to help them find a mate? If help is not requested, how might such offers make our single brothers and sisters feel? (1 Tim. 5:13) Our single brothers and sisters will be grateful if we value them based on their fine qualities and not on their marital status. Instead of feeling sorry for them, we do well to appreciate their faithfulness. As a result, our single brothers and sisters will never feel that we are saying to them: “I do not need you.” (1 Cor. 12:21) Instead, they will know that we respect them and value their place in the congregation. w20.08 29 ¶10, 14




Wednesday, June 15

[Christ] appeared to more than 500 brothers at one time.​—1 Cor. 15:6.



Later, Jesus appeared to the apostle Paul himself. (1 Cor. 15:8) Paul (Saul) was on his way to Damascus when he heard the voice of the resurrected Jesus and saw a vision of him in heavenly glory. (Acts 9:3-5) Paul’s experience added to the evidence that Jesus’ resurrection was not a myth. (Acts 26:12-15) Paul’s testimony would be especially noteworthy to some because he at one time persecuted Christians. Once he became convinced that Jesus had been raised up, Paul labored to convince others of this truth. He endured beatings, imprisonment, and shipwreck as he spread the truth that Jesus had died but was alive again. (1 Cor. 15:9-11; 2 Cor. 11:23-27) Paul was so sure that Jesus had been raised from the dead that he was willing to die defending his belief. Does this early testimony not convince you that Jesus was raised from the dead? And does it not strengthen your belief in the resurrection? w20.12 3 ¶8-10




Thursday, June 16

If you search for [Jehovah], he will let himself be found by you.​—2 Chron. 15:2.



We might ask ourselves, ‘Do I regularly attend congregation meetings?’ When we attend the meetings provided by Jehovah’s organization, we receive true spiritual refreshment along with upbuilding association. (Matt. 11:28) We might also ask ourselves, ‘Do I have good personal study habits?’ If you live with your family, do you set aside time every week for family worship? Or if you live alone, do you still set aside time just as if you were part of a family? Also, do you share as fully as possible in the preaching and disciple-making work? Why should we ask those questions? The Bible tells us that Jehovah examines our thoughts and what is in our hearts, so we should do the same. (1 Chron. 28:9) If we see that we need to make some changes in our goals, attitude, or thinking, we should ask Jehovah to help us make those changes. Now is the time to prepare ourselves for the tests that lie ahead. w20.09 19 ¶19-20




Friday, June 17

Not one of you who does not say good-bye to all his belongings can be my disciple.​—Luke 14:33.



Jesus illustrated the cost of becoming his disciple. He spoke about someone wanting to build a tower and about a king wanting to march into war. Jesus said that the builder must “first sit down and calculate the expense” to complete the tower and that the king must “first sit down and take counsel” to see whether his troops can accomplish what they intend to do. (Luke 14:27-32) Likewise, Jesus knew that a person who wants to become his disciple should analyze very carefully what it means to follow him. For that reason, we need to encourage prospective disciples to study with us every week. As the teacher, you need to prepare well for each Bible study session. With your student in mind, meditate in advance on how to present the information simply and clearly so that your student can easily understand and apply it.​—Neh. 8:8; Prov. 15:28a. w20.10 7 ¶5; 8 ¶7




Saturday, June 18

Go, therefore, and make disciples . . . , teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.



Jesus’ instructions are clear. We must teach people the things that he commanded. However, we should not overlook an important detail. Jesus did not say: ‘Teach them all the things I have commanded you.’ Instead, he said: Teach them “to observe all the things I have commanded you.” To apply that specific instruction when teaching a Bible student, we need to be not only teachers but also guides. (Acts 8:31) To “observe” a command means to obey it. When we study the Bible with others, we teach them what God requires of us. But we must do more. We must teach our Bible students to apply in their daily life what they learn. (John 14:15; 1 John 2:3) By example, we can show our students how they can apply basic Scriptural principles at school, at work, or during recreation. In the presence of our students, we can pray to Jehovah that the holy spirit guide them.​—John 16:13. w20.11 2-3 ¶3-5




Sunday, June 19

“Not by a military force, nor by power, but by my spirit,” says Jehovah of armies.​—Zech. 4:6.



Jesus’ disciples faced challenges. For example, copies of the Scriptures were few. There were no study aids such as we have today. And the disciples had to preach to people who spoke many different languages. In spite of all those challenges, those zealous disciples did the seemingly impossible​—within just a few decades, they had preached the good news “in all creation under heaven.” (Col. 1:6, 23) In modern times, Jehovah continues to direct and empower his people. The direction, of course, comes largely through God’s spirit-inspired Word. There we find a record of Jesus’ ministry and his command that his followers continue the work he started. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Jehovah is impartial; he foretold that the good news would be declared “to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.” (Rev. 14:6, 7) He wants the Kingdom message to be available to all. w20.10 21 ¶6-8




Monday, June 20

You save those who are humble, but your eyes are against the haughty.​—2 Sam. 22:28.



King David was a man who loved “the law of Jehovah.” (Ps. 1:1-3) David knew that Jehovah saves those who are humble but opposes the haughty. So David allowed God’s law to adjust his thinking. He wrote: “I will praise Jehovah, who has given me advice. Even during the night, my innermost thoughts correct me.” (Ps. 16:7) If we are humble, we will allow God’s Word to correct our wrong thinking before we act on those thoughts. God’s Word will be like a voice that tells us: “This is the way. Walk in it.” It will warn us when we are straying from the path​—to the left or to the right. (Isa. 30:21) By listening to Jehovah, we will benefit ourselves in a number of ways. (Isa. 48:17) For instance, we will avoid the embarrassment of having to be corrected by someone else. And we will draw closer to Jehovah because we recognize that he is treating us like a beloved child.​—Heb. 12:7. w20.11 20 ¶6-7




Tuesday, June 21

When they heard of a resurrection of the dead, some began to scoff.​—Acts 17:32.



Such thinking may have affected some in Corinth. (1 Cor. 15:12) Also, others may have thought of the resurrection in a figurative sense, meaning that a person was once “dead” in sin but had become “alive” as a Christian. Whatever their reason, denying the resurrection meant that their faith was in vain. If God did not resurrect Jesus, no ransom was paid and all remained in sin. So those who rejected the resurrection had no valid hope. (1 Cor. 15:13-19; Heb. 9:12, 14) The apostle Paul had firsthand knowledge that “Christ [had] been raised from the dead.” That resurrection was superior to the resurrection of those who had earlier been brought back to life on earth​—only to die again. Paul said that Jesus was “the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep in death.” He was the first person to be raised to life as a spirit being and the first one from mankind to ascend to heaven.​—1 Cor. 15:20; Acts 26:23; 1 Pet. 3:18, 22. w20.12 5 ¶11-12




Wednesday, June 22

They would deliver to them for observance the decrees that had been decided on by the apostles and the elders.​—Acts 16:4.



In the first century, the governing body in Jerusalem worked unitedly to maintain order and peace among God’s people. (Acts 2:42) For example, when the issue of circumcision came to a head about 49 C.E., the governing body, under the direction of holy spirit, considered the matter. If the congregation had remained divided over this issue, the preaching work would have been hindered. Even though they were Jewish, the apostles and older men were not influenced by Jewish tradition or by those strongly promoting it. Rather, they looked to God’s Word and spirit for guidance. (Acts 15:1, 2, 5-20, 28) The result? Jehovah blessed their decision, peace and unity prevailed, and the preaching work moved ahead. (Acts 15:30, 31; 16:5) In modern times, Jehovah’s organization has also worked to maintain order and peace among Jehovah’s people. w20.10 22-23 ¶11-12




Thursday, June 23

My son Solomon [is] the one whom God has chosen.​—1 Chron. 29:1.



Because of the limitations of age, health, or other factors, we may not be eligible to receive a certain theocratic assignment. In that connection, we can learn from the example of King David. When told that he had not been chosen to build God’s temple​—something that David had dearly hoped to do—​he gave full support to the one whom God had selected for the assignment. David even contributed generously toward the project. What an outstanding example to follow! (2 Sam. 7:12, 13; 1 Chron. 29:3-5) Because of health problems, Hugues, a brother in France, stopped serving as an elder, and he could not even care for simple tasks around the home. He writes: “At first, I felt worthless and deeply discouraged. But in time, I saw the importance of accepting my limitations, and I found joy in serving Jehovah within those limits. Like Gideon and his three hundred men​—all of whom were tired—​I will keep up the fight!”​—Judg. 8:4. w20.12 25 ¶14-15




Friday, June 24

Continue loving one another.​—1 John 4:7.



In his account of Jesus’ life, the apostle John uses the words “love” and “loved” more often than the other three Gospel writers combined. His inspired writings reveal that love must influence everything a Christian does. (1 John 4:10, 11) However, it took time for John to learn that lesson. When John was a young man, he did not always show love. For example, on one occasion, Jesus and his disciples were traveling to Jerusalem through Samaria. A certain Samaritan village refused to show them hospitality. John proposed calling down fire from heaven and destroying all the inhabitants of the village! (Luke 9:52-56) On another occasion, John and his brother James apparently coaxed their mother into asking Jesus to give them prominent positions alongside him in the Kingdom. When the other apostles found out what James and John had done, they were furious! (Matt. 20:20, 21, 24) Nevertheless, despite all of John’s flaws, Jesus loved him.​—John 21:7. w21.01 8-9 ¶3-4




Saturday, June 25

The Christ did not please himself.​—Rom. 15:3.



Jehovah makes decisions that are in the best interests of others. For example, he decided to create life, not to benefit himself, but to share with us the joy of living. No one could have forced him to give his Son to cover our sins. He willingly decided to make that sacrifice for our benefit. Jesus too made decisions that primarily benefited others. For example, he decided to forgo his own need for rest in order to teach a crowd of people. (Mark 6:31-34) A good family head knows that one of the most difficult things he must do is make wise decisions for his family, and he takes that responsibility seriously. He tries to avoid making decisions that are arbitrary or that are based purely on emotion. Instead, he allows Jehovah to train him. (Prov. 2:6, 7) That way, he will think of benefiting others, not himself. (Phil. 2:4) If a husband strives to follow the example set by Jehovah and Jesus, he will be a good family head. w21.02 7 ¶19-21




Sunday, June 26

Asa did what was good and right in the eyes of Jehovah his God.​—2 Chron. 14:2.



As a young man, King Asa was humble and courageous. For example, when he succeeded his father, Abijah, he launched a campaign against idolatry. He also “told Judah to search for Jehovah the God of their forefathers and to observe the Law and the commandment.” (2 Chron. 14:1-7) And when Zerah the Ethiopian invaded Judah with 1,000,000 soldiers, Asa wisely turned to Jehovah for help, saying: “O Jehovah, it does not matter to you whether those you help are many or have no power. Help us, O Jehovah our God, for we are relying on you.” This beautiful expression shows how much confidence Asa had in Jehovah’s ability to save him and his people. Asa trusted in his heavenly Father, and “Jehovah defeated the Ethiopians.” (2 Chron. 14:8-12) You would no doubt agree that facing an army of 1,000,000 soldiers was a huge challenge, and it was one that Asa met successfully. w21.03 5 ¶12-13




Monday, June 27

Have tender affection for one another.​—Rom. 12:10.



The Bible contains accounts of imperfect humans who showed tender affection. Consider the example of Jonathan and David. The Bible says: “Jonathan and David became bound together in close friendship, and Jonathan began to love him as himself.” (1 Sam. 18:1) David was anointed to succeed Saul as king. After that, Saul became resentful of David and tried to kill him. But Saul’s son Jonathan did not join his father in this murderous campaign against David. Jonathan and David promised to remain friends and always to support each other. (1 Sam. 20:42) The tender affection between Jonathan and David is all the more remarkable when we consider some factors that could have prevented them from becoming friends. For example, Jonathan was some 30 years older than David. Jonathan could have concluded that he had nothing in common with this much younger and less experienced man. Yet, Jonathan did not view or treat David as an inferior. w21.01 21-22 ¶6-7




Tuesday, June 28

Consider it all joy, my brothers, when you meet with various trials.​—Jas. 1:2.



Jesus promised his followers that they would be genuinely happy. He also warned those who love him that they would face trials. (Matt. 10:22, 23; Luke 6:20-23) We find joy in being disciples of Christ. But how do we feel about the possibility of being opposed by our family, persecuted by the government, or pressured to do what is wrong by our workmates or schoolmates? Understandably, such possibilities can make us feel anxious. People do not normally view persecution as a reason to feel joyful. Yet, that is exactly what God’s Word tells us to do. For example, the disciple James wrote that instead of feeling overwhelmed, we should consider it a joy when we go through trials. (Jas. 1:2, 12) And Jesus said that we should be happy even when we are persecuted. (Matt. 5:11) Jehovah inspired James to write to Christians to give them practical advice that would help them remain joyful even when facing trials. w21.02 26 ¶1-2; 27 ¶5




Wednesday, June 29

[Turn] away from the empty speeches that violate what is holy.​—1 Tim. 6:20.



Some of Timothy’s contemporaries failed to appreciate their privilege of being fellow workers with God. These included Demas, Phygelus, Hermogenes, Hymenaeus, Alexander, and Philetus. (1 Tim. 1:19, 20; 2 Tim. 1:15; 2:16-18; 4:10) Apparently, all these people were once spiritually strong, but they lost their sense of what was truly valuable. How does Satan try to make us give up the treasures that Jehovah has entrusted us with? Note some of Satan’s tactics. He uses entertainment and the media to promote values, thinking, and behavior that he hopes will cause us to loosen our grip on the truth. He attempts to intimidate us through peer pressure or persecution so that we will stop preaching. And he tries to entice us to listen to “the falsely called ‘knowledge’” of apostates so that we will abandon the truth. If we are not careful, we could gradually lose our grip on the truth.​—1 Tim. 6:21. w20.09 27 ¶6-8




Thursday, June 30

Jehovah will hear my request for favor; Jehovah will accept my prayer.​—Ps. 6:9.



Has a friend or a family member betrayed your trust? If so, you would benefit by reviewing the account of King David’s son Absalom. (2 Sam. 15:5-14, 31; 18:6-14) With the account in mind, tell Jehovah how you are feeling about the way you have been mistreated. (Ps. 6:6-8) Next, imagine how David must have felt as all of this was happening to him. He loved Absalom and trusted Ahithophel. Yet, both of these close companions betrayed him. They hurt him deeply and even tried to kill him. David could have lost faith in his other friends, suspecting that they too had joined Absalom. He might have thought only of himself and have wanted to flee the country alone. Or he could just have given up in despair. Instead, he prayed to Jehovah for help. He also asked his friends to help him. And he acted quickly to implement the decisions he made. He continued to trust in Jehovah and to trust his friends. w21.03 15 ¶7-8; 17 ¶10-11




