
November
Tuesday, November 1

When anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts, it is foolish and humiliating.​—Prov. 18:13.



From our limited viewpoint, we could judge Jonah as unreliable, even disloyal. He received a direct command from Jehovah to proclaim judgment in Nineveh. But instead of obeying, Jonah boarded a ship traveling in the opposite direction, “away from Jehovah.” (Jonah 1:1-3) Would you have given Jonah another chance to handle the assignment? Possibly not. Yet, Jehovah saw reasons to do so. (Jonah 3:1, 2) Jonah revealed the type of person he really was in his prayer. (Jonah 2:1, 2, 9) That prayer​—doubtless one of many Jonah offered—​helps us to see him as far more than a man who ran away from an assignment. His words show that he was humble, thankful, and determined to obey Jehovah. No wonder Jehovah looked beyond Jonah’s actions, responded to his prayer, and continued to use him as a prophet! How important it is that each elder “hears the facts” before giving counsel! w20.04 15 ¶4-6




Wednesday, November 2

[Paul] reasoned with them from the Scriptures, explaining and proving by references.​—Acts 17:2, 3.



The first-century disciples accepted Christian teachings and relied on the holy spirit to help them understand God’s Word. They proved to themselves that these teachings were based on the Scriptures. (Acts 17:11, 12; Heb. 5:14) They did not build their faith on feelings and emotions alone, and they did not serve Jehovah simply because they felt good when they associated with fellow believers. Instead, their faith was built on “the accurate knowledge of God.” (Col. 1:9, 10) The truths of God’s Word remain constant. (Ps. 119:160) For example, they do not change if a fellow believer offends us or commits a serious sin. And they do not change when we face adversity. So we need to be thoroughly familiar with Bible teachings and convinced that they are truthful. Our firm faith built on Bible truths will steady us in times of test, just as an anchor can steady a boat during a turbulent storm. w20.07 9 ¶6-7




Thursday, November 3

He ordered us to preach to the people and to give a thorough witness.​—Acts 10:42.



Jesus views what we do for his anointed brothers as if we were doing it for him. (Matt. 25:34-40) The primary way that we support the anointed is by sharing fully in the disciple-making work that Jesus directed his followers to carry out. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Only with the help of the “other sheep” can Christ’s brothers accomplish the great worldwide preaching campaign now taking place. (John 10:16) If you are of the other sheep, each time you share in this work, you show your loving attachment not only to the anointed but also to Jesus. We also make friends with Jehovah and Jesus by using our financial resources to support the work that they are directing. (Luke 16:9) For example, we can contribute toward the worldwide work, which includes providing material relief for those who have suffered loss. We can also support our own congregation financially and help those whom we personally know to be in need.​—Prov. 19:17. w20.04 24 ¶12-13




Friday, November 4

He will show no regard for the God of his fathers. . . . But instead he will give glory to the god of fortresses.​—Dan. 11:37, 38.



In fulfillment of that prophecy, the king of the north did not show any “regard for the God of his fathers.” How so? The Soviet Union, with the goal of eliminating religion, tried to break the power of the traditional religious organizations. To achieve that goal, the Soviet government had already back in 1918 issued an order that laid the foundation for atheism to be taught in schools. How did this king of the north “give glory to the god of fortresses”? The Soviet Union spent an enormous amount of money building its army and producing thousands of nuclear weapons to fortify its realm. Both the king of the north and the king of the south eventually gathered enough firepower to kill billions of people! The king of the north has supported the king of the south in one key endeavor; they “put in place the disgusting thing that causes desolation”​—the United Nations.​—Dan. 11:31. w20.05 6-7 ¶16-17




Saturday, November 5

Your brother . . . was lost and has been found.​—Luke 15:32.



Who can share in the search for inactive ones? All of us​—elders, pioneers, family members, and congregation publishers—​can help in locating them. Do you have a friend or a relative who has become inactive? Have you met an inactive one in your house-to-house ministry or while sharing in public witnessing? Explain to the person that if he would appreciate a visit, you would be happy to provide his contact information to the local elders. An elder named Thomas says: “First, I ask various brothers and sisters if they know where inactive individuals now live. Or I ask the publishers if they remember any who no longer attend meetings. Later, when I visit inactive brothers or sisters, I ask about their children and other relatives. Some inactive ones used to bring their children to the meetings, and these children may have been publishers at one time. They too can be helped to return to Jehovah.” w20.06 24 ¶1; 25 ¶6-7




Sunday, November 6

I will remember the works of Jah; I will remember your marvelous deeds of long ago.​—Ps. 77:11.



Among all the creatures on earth, only humans have the ability to learn moral lessons by remembering and analyzing past events. As a result, we can adopt better values and change our way of thinking and living. (1 Cor. 6:9-11; Col. 3:9, 10) In fact, we can train our conscience to recognize the difference between right and wrong. (Heb. 5:14) We can learn to show love, compassion, and mercy. And we can develop a healthy sense of justice. One way we prove that we appreciate the gift of memory is by choosing to remember all the times that Jehovah has helped and comforted us in the past. This will build our confidence that he will also help us in the future. (Ps. 77:12; 78:4, 7) Another way is by remembering the good things that other people do for us and being grateful for what they do. Researchers have found that people who are grateful are more likely to be happy. w20.05 23 ¶12-13




Monday, November 7

Fear this glorious and awe-inspiring name, that of Jehovah your God.​—Deut. 28:58.



Think of how Moses felt when he was huddled in a rocky crevice and he saw a vision of Jehovah’s glory passing by. Insight on the Scriptures notes that it “was probably the most awe-inspiring experience of any man prior to the coming of Jesus Christ.” Moses heard the following words, evidently spoken by an angel: “Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth, showing loyal love to thousands, pardoning error and transgression and sin.” (Ex. 33:17-23; 34:5-7) Memory of that event possibly came back to Moses when he used the name Jehovah in speaking the words of today’s text. When we think about the name Jehovah, we do well to meditate on the one who bears that name. We should remember his qualities, such as his power, his wisdom, his justice, and his love. Reflecting on those qualities and others can fill us with awe for him.​—Ps. 77:11-15. w20.06 8-9 ¶3-4




Tuesday, November 8

Continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe.​—2 Tim. 3:14.



Jesus said that his disciples would be identified by their love for one another. (John 13:34, 35) But more is needed if we are to have strong faith. Our faith has to be based on more than just the Christlike love of God’s people. Why? Suppose a fellow believer​—even an elder or a pioneer—​commits a serious sin. Or what if a brother or a sister hurts you in some way? Or perhaps someone becomes an apostate, asserting that we do not have the truth. If such things happen, will you be stumbled and stop serving Jehovah? The lesson is this: If you were to build your faith in God purely on the way that other people act instead of on your relationship with Jehovah himself, your faith would not be solid. In your house of faith, you should use not only such soft materials as feelings and emotions but also hard facts and solid logic. You need to prove to yourself that the Bible contains the truth about Jehovah.​—Rom. 12:2. w20.07 8 ¶2-3




Wednesday, November 9

Assist those who are weak.​—Acts 20:35.



Many experiences indicate that the angels are working alongside us to help us find inactive ones who yearn to return to Jehovah. (Rev. 14:6) For example, Silvio, from Ecuador, earnestly prayed for help to return to the congregation. While he was still praying, his doorbell rang. Two elders were at his door. During that visit, they were happy to begin providing him with the help he needed. We will find much joy in helping the spiritually weak return to Jehovah. Note what Salvador, a pioneer who pays special attention to inactive ones, says: “At times, I find it hard to hold back tears of happiness. It pleases me so much to think that Jehovah has rescued one of his dear sheep from Satan’s world and that I’ve had the privilege of cooperating with Him in this work.” If you have stopped associating with Jehovah’s people, you can be sure that he still loves you. Jehovah is on the lookout for your return, and he will gladly welcome you home. w20.06 29 ¶16-18




Thursday, November 10

You will see your Grand Instructor.​—Isa. 30:20.



As our “Grand Instructor,” Jehovah provides examples in his Word in order to teach us. (Isa. 30:21) We learn as we meditate on Bible accounts about those who showed godly qualities. We also learn as we examine what happened to those who failed to show such fine qualities. (Ps. 37:37; 1 Cor. 10:11) Reflect on what happened to King Saul. He started out as a modest young man. He was aware of his limitations and even hesitated to take on more responsibility. (1 Sam. 9:21; 10:20-22) Yet, in time Saul became presumptuous. He revealed this bad trait soon after he became king. On one occasion, he lost patience while waiting for the prophet Samuel and offered up a burnt sacrifice even though he was not authorized to do so. As a result, Saul lost Jehovah’s favor and eventually the kingship. (1 Sam. 13:8-14) We are wise if we learn from this warning example and avoid acting presumptuously. w20.08 10 ¶10-11




Friday, November 11

Show respect for those who are . . . presiding over you in the Lord.​—1 Thess. 5:12.



It is true that through Christ, Jehovah has given “gifts in men” to His congregation. (Eph. 4:8) These “gifts in men” include Governing Body members, appointed helpers to the Governing Body, Branch Committee members, circuit overseers, field instructors, congregation elders, and ministerial servants. All these brothers are appointed by holy spirit to care for Jehovah’s precious sheep and serve the interests of the congregation. (1 Pet. 5:2, 3) Brothers are appointed by holy spirit to carry out various responsibilities. Just as various parts of the body, such as the hands and the feet, work to benefit the entire body, brothers who are appointed by holy spirit work hard to benefit the entire congregation. They do not seek personal glory. Instead, they strive to build up and strengthen their brothers and sisters. (1 Thess. 2:6-8) We thank Jehovah for such unselfish, spiritually qualified men! w20.08 21 ¶5-6




Saturday, November 12

Go . . . and make disciples.​—Matt. 28:19.



One reason why we are motivated to preach is because people are “skinned and thrown about” and are in dire need of learning the truth about the Kingdom. (Matt. 9:36) Jehovah wants all sorts of people to come to an accurate knowledge of the truth and be saved. (1 Tim. 2:4) We will be moved to take up this lifesaving work when we think about the effect our preaching can have. We save people’s lives. (Rom. 10:13-15; 1 Tim. 4:16) We also need to be properly equipped for our work. And we need to know how to use that equipment. Jesus gave clear instructions to his disciples. He told them what to carry, where to preach, and what to say. (Matt. 10:5-7; Luke 10:1-11) Today, Jehovah’s organization provides a Teaching Toolbox that contains tools that have proved to be effective. And we are taught how to use those tools. That training helps us to gain the confidence and skill we need to be effective in our work.​—2 Tim. 2:15. w20.09 4 ¶6-7, 10




Sunday, November 13

No greater joy do I have than this: that I should hear that my children go on walking in the truth.​—3 John 4.



Can you imagine how happy the apostle John felt when he heard that those whom he had helped to learn the truth were continuing to serve Jehovah faithfully? They faced many problems, and John was working hard to strengthen the faith of these loyal Christians whom he viewed as his spiritual children. Similarly, we feel happy when our children, whether natural or spiritual, dedicate themselves to Jehovah and persevere in serving him. (3 John 3) About 98 C.E., Jehovah’s holy spirit moved John to write three letters. The purpose of those letters was to motivate loyal Christians to maintain their faith in Jesus and to keep on walking in the truth. John was concerned about the effect that false teachers were having on the congregations. (1 John 2:18, 19, 26) Those apostates claimed to know God, but they did not obey Jehovah’s commands. w20.07 20 ¶1-3




Monday, November 14

Exercise faith in God; exercise faith also in me.​—John 14:1.



We have faith in the message we preach, so we are eager to share it with as many people as possible. We trust the promises found in God’s Word. (Ps. 119:42; Isa. 40:8) We have seen Bible prophecies fulfilled in our day. We have witnessed how people change their lives for the better when they start to apply the Bible’s counsel. This evidence bolsters our confidence that the good news of the Kingdom is a message everyone needs to hear. We also have faith in Jehovah, the Source of the message we preach, and in the one whom he has enthroned as King of the Kingdom, Jesus. No matter what circumstances we face, Jehovah will always be our refuge and strength. (Ps. 46:1-3) In addition, we are confident that Jesus is directing the preaching work from heaven, using the power and authority Jehovah has given him. (Matt. 28:18-20) Faith builds our confidence that Jehovah will bless our efforts. w20.09 12 ¶15-17




Tuesday, November 15

She did a fine deed toward me. . . . She did what she could.​—Mark 14:6, 8.



At times, sisters may need someone to speak up for them when they face a specific challenge. (Isa. 1:17) For example, a widow or a divorced sister may need someone to help her care for some tasks that her husband used to do. An elderly sister may need help to speak to medical professionals. Or a pioneer sister who works on other theocratic projects may need someone to speak up for her if she is criticized for not being in the ministry as often as other pioneers are. Consider Jesus’ example. Jesus was quick to speak up for his spiritual sisters when they were misunderstood. For instance, he defended Mary when Martha criticized her. (Luke 10:38-42) And he defended Mary a second time when others berated her for making what they thought was a bad decision. (Mark 14:3-9) Jesus understood Mary’s motive and commended her. He even prophesied that her kind act would be recounted “wherever the good news is preached in all the world.” w20.09 24 ¶15-16




Wednesday, November 16

Shepherd the flock of God under your care, serving as overseers, not under compulsion, but willingly before God.​—1 Pet. 5:2.



A good shepherd understood that sheep may get lost. And if a sheep did wander away from the flock, the shepherd did not treat it harshly. Consider the example that God set when helping some of his servants who, for a while, strayed from Jehovah. The prophet Jonah ran away from his assignment. Even so, Jehovah did not quickly give up on Jonah. Like a good shepherd, Jehovah rescued him and helped him gain the strength he needed to fulfill his assignment. (Jonah 2:7; 3:1, 2) Later, God used a bottle-gourd plant to help Jonah understand the value of each human life. (Jonah 4:10, 11) The lesson? Elders must not quickly give up on those who become inactive. Instead, the elders try to understand what caused a sheep to stray from the flock. And when that sheep comes back to Jehovah, the elders continue to show loving interest in him. w20.06 20-21 ¶10-12




Thursday, November 17

They will be given a little help.​—Dan. 11:34.



After the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, God’s people in that vast region enjoyed “a little help”​—a period of freedom. As a result, they were able to preach freely, and before long the number of publishers in the former Communist bloc rose to hundreds of thousands. Gradually, Russia and its allies emerged as the king of the north. For a government to fill the role of the king of the north or the king of the south, it must do three things: (1) interact directly with God’s people, (2) show by its actions that it is an enemy of Jehovah and his people, and (3) compete with the rival king. Russia and its allies have had a direct impact on God’s people, banning the preaching work and persecuting hundreds of thousands of our brothers and sisters. Those actions show that they hate Jehovah and his people. And they have been competing with the king of the south, the Anglo-American World Power. w20.05 12-13 ¶3-4




Friday, November 18

Pay constant attention to . . . your teaching.​—1 Tim. 4:16.



Since teaching is linked to disciple-making, we want our teaching to be the best. We are regularly teaching millions of people the truths found in the Bible. We love what we teach from God’s Word. So we may be tempted to talk at length about what we love. However, whether conducting the Watchtower Study, the Congregation Bible Study, or a home Bible study, the conductor should not do too much talking. In order to let the Bible do the teaching, the teacher has to exercise self-control and not try to explain everything he knows about a certain Bible passage or subject. (John 16:12) Compare the Bible knowledge that you had at the time of your baptism with what you have now. Likely back then, you understood just the primary doctrines. (Heb. 6:1) It has taken you years to learn what you know today, so do not try to teach a new student everything all at once. w20.10 14-15 ¶2-4




Saturday, November 19

This is the carpenter, the son of Mary.​—Mark 6:3.



Jehovah chose excellent parents for Jesus. (Matt. 1:18-23; Luke 1:26-38) Mary’s heartfelt expressions recorded in the Bible reveal her deep love for Jehovah and his Word. (Luke 1:46-55) And the way that Joseph reacted to Jehovah’s direction shows that he feared God and wanted to please him. (Matt. 1:24) Note that Jehovah did not choose wealthy parents for Jesus. The sacrifice Joseph and Mary offered after Jesus’ birth shows that they were poor. (Luke 2:24) Their way of living must have been simple, especially as the family grew in size to include at least seven children. (Matt. 13:55, 56) Jehovah protected Jesus from certain dangers, but He did not shield His Son from all challenges. (Matt. 2:13-15) For example, Jesus had to deal with unbelieving relatives who did not initially accept him as the Messiah. (Mark 3:21; John 7:5) Likely, Jesus also had to cope with the death of his adoptive father, Joseph. w20.10 26-27 ¶4-6




Sunday, November 20

I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.​—Heb. 13:5.



Have you ever felt that you were all alone, that you had no one to help you deal with a challenge you faced? Many have felt that way, including faithful servants of Jehovah. (1 Ki. 19:14) If that ever happens to you, remember Jehovah’s promise: “I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.” So we can say with confidence: “Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid.” (Heb. 13:5, 6) The apostle Paul wrote those words to fellow believers in Judea about 61 C.E. His words remind us of the sentiments expressed at Psalm 118:5-7. Like the psalmist, Paul knew from personal experience that Jehovah was his Helper. For instance, over two years before he wrote his letter to the Hebrews, Paul made a dangerous journey through a storm-tossed sea. (Acts 27:4, 15, 20) Throughout that journey and during the time leading up to it, Jehovah proved to be Paul’s Helper in various ways. w20.11 12 ¶1-2




Monday, November 21

Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?”​—Eccl. 7:10.



Why is it unwise to keep thinking that our life was better in the past? Nostalgia can cause us to remember only good things from our past. Consider, for example, the ancient Israelites. After leaving Egypt, they quickly forgot how hard their life had been there. Instead, they focused on the good food they had enjoyed. They said: “How fondly we remember the fish that we used to eat without cost in Egypt, also the cucumbers, the watermelons, the leeks, the onions, and the garlic!” (Num. 11:5) But was it really “without cost” that they ate that food? No. The Israelites paid a heavy price; at the time, they were being severely oppressed as slaves in Egypt. (Ex. 1:13, 14; 3:6-9) Yet, they later forgot about those hardships and longed for the past. They chose to focus on “the good old days” instead of focusing on the positive things that Jehovah had just done for them. Jehovah was not pleased with their attitude.​—Num. 11:10. w20.11 25 ¶5-6




Tuesday, November 22

Jehovah is close to the brokenhearted; he saves those who are discouraged.​—Ps. 34:18, ftn.



At times, we might think about the fact that life is short and our days are “filled with trouble.” (Job 14:1) So it is understandable that we occasionally feel discouraged. A number of Jehovah’s servants in ancient times felt that way. Some even wanted to die. (1 Ki. 19:2-4; Job 3:1-3, 11; 7:15, 16) But time and again, Jehovah​—the God in whom they trusted—​reassured and strengthened them. Their accounts were recorded to comfort and instruct us. (Rom. 15:4) Consider Jacob’s son Joseph. In short order, Joseph went from being a cherished son of his father to being a lowly slave of a pagan court official in Egypt. (Gen. 37:3, 4, 21-28; 39:1) Then Potiphar’s wife falsely accused Joseph of trying to rape her. Without investigating the charges, Potiphar had Joseph thrown into prison, and he was bound in irons. (Gen. 39:14-20; Ps. 105:17, 18) Surely Joseph had reason to feel discouraged! w20.12 16-17 ¶1-4




Wednesday, November 23

Let your name be sanctified.​—Matt. 6:9.



That is what Jesus stated as a priority in prayer. But what do Jesus’ words mean? To sanctify something means to make it holy, clean, or pure. Some might wonder, though, ‘Is not Jehovah’s name already holy, clean, and pure?’ To answer, we need to think about what a name involves. A name is more than a collection of letters written on a page or spoken aloud. Notice what the Bible says: “A good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth.” (Prov. 22:1; Eccl. 7:1) Why does a name have such value? Because it involves a reputation, what others think of the one bearing that name. So the way a name appears on a page​—or even the way it is pronounced—​is not what matters most; what truly matters is whom and what that name stands for in the minds and hearts of others. When people tell lies about Jehovah, they are attacking his reputation. When they attack his reputation, they are trying to damage his name. w20.06 3 ¶5-7




Thursday, November 24

I am greatly disturbed, and I ask you, O Jehovah​—how long will it be?​—Ps. 6:3.



We might respond to intense pressures by becoming consumed with anxiety. For instance, we may worry that we will not earn enough money to care for our needs or that we will get sick and miss work or even lose our job. We may also be concerned that we will be unfaithful when tempted to break God’s law. Soon Satan will cause those whom he controls to attack God’s people, so we may worry about how we will react to that attack. We may wonder, ‘Is it wrong for me to feel some concern about such issues?’ We know that Jesus told his followers: “Stop being anxious.” (Matt. 6:25) Does this mean that he expects us to feel no anxiety whatsoever? Certainly not! After all, in the past some of Jehovah’s loyal servants struggled with anxiety, but they did not lose Jehovah’s approval. (1 Ki. 19:4) Jesus was actually reassuring us. He did not want us to become so anxious about the cares of this life that our service to God would be negatively affected. w21.01 3 ¶4-5




Friday, November 25

The head of a woman is the man.​—1 Cor. 11:3.



A husband is accountable to both Jehovah and Jesus for the way he treats his family. (1 Pet. 3:7) As Head of his universal family, Jehovah has the authority to make rules about how his children should behave, and he is able to enforce those rules. (Isa. 33:22) Jesus, as head of the Christian congregation, also has the right to make and enforce rules. (Gal. 6:2; Col. 1:18-20) Following the pattern set by Jehovah and Jesus, the head of a Christian family has the authority to make decisions for his family. (Rom. 7:2; Eph. 6:4) However, his authority has limits. For example, his rules should be based on principles found in God’s Word. (Prov. 3:5, 6) And a family head does not have the authority to make rules for those who are not part of his family. (Rom. 14:4) Also, when his sons and daughters grow up and leave home, they continue to respect him, but they are no longer under his headship.​—Matt. 19:5. w21.02 2-3 ¶3-5




Saturday, November 26

Provide for those who are [your] own.​—1 Tim. 5:8.



One important way that a family head proves that he loves his family is by providing for their material needs. He must remember, however, that material things cannot satisfy his family’s spiritual needs. (Matt. 5:3) While Jesus was dying on a torture stake, he wanted to make sure that Mary was cared for. Despite being in severe agony, Jesus arranged for the apostle John to care for Mary. (John 19:26, 27) A brother who is a family head may have a number of weighty responsibilities. He must be diligent in his secular work so that his conduct reflects well on Jehovah. (Eph. 6:5, 6; Titus 2:9, 10) And he may have responsibilities in the congregation, such as shepherding and taking the lead in the preaching work. At the same time, it is important that he regularly study the Bible with his wife and children. They will deeply appreciate his efforts to keep them physically, emotionally, and spiritually healthy.​—Eph. 5:28, 29; 6:4. w21.01 12 ¶15, 17




Sunday, November 27

[A capable wife] watches over the activity of her household.​—Prov. 31:27.



Describing the role of a capable wife, God’s Word says that she can oversee a household, buy and manage property, and negotiate financial transactions. (Prov. 31:15, 16, 18) She is not a slave who has no right to voice her opinion. Rather, her husband trusts her and listens to her ideas. (Prov. 31:11, 26) When a man treats his wife with that kind of respect, she will find pleasure in being subject to him. Despite his accomplishments, Jesus does not feel that it is demeaning to subject himself to Jehovah’s headship. (1 Cor. 15:28; Phil. 2:5, 6) Likewise, a capable woman who follows Jesus’ example will not feel diminished by submitting to her husband. She will support her husband not only because she loves him but primarily because she loves and respects Jehovah. A submissive Christian wife, however, will not support her husband if he asks her to violate Bible laws or principles. w21.02 11 ¶14-15; 12 ¶19




Monday, November 28

Tribulation produces endurance.​—Rom. 5:3.



Love for God has always helped Jehovah’s servants to endure persecution. For instance, when the apostles were commanded by the powerful Jewish supreme court to stop preaching, love for God moved them to “obey God as ruler rather than men.” (Acts 5:29; 1 John 5:3) Such unbreakable love also strengthens our brothers today, many of whom are standing firm against cruel and powerful governments. Instead of being discouraged, we count it a privilege to endure the world’s hatred. (Acts 5:41; Rom. 5:4, 5) Perhaps one of our biggest tests comes from members of our own family. When we begin to show interest in the truth, some family members may think that we have been misled. Others may think that we have lost our mind. (Compare Mark 3:21.) They may even violently oppose us. This negative reaction should not surprise us. Jesus said: “A man’s enemies will be those of his own household.”​—Matt. 10:36. w21.03 21 ¶6-7




Tuesday, November 29

Everyone must be quick to listen, slow to speak.​—Jas. 1:19.



When you accompany a publisher on his Bible study, listen attentively while the teacher and the student are talking. Only then will you be ready to assist if fitting. Of course, you must use good judgment. For instance, you would not want to talk too much, interrupt the teacher’s line of reasoning, or introduce a different topic. But with a brief comment, illustration, or question, you could help clarify the point being taught. At times, you may feel that you cannot add much to the study. But if you commend the student and show personal interest in him, you will do much to help him to progress. If it is appropriate, you could briefly tell the student how you learned the truth, how you overcame a challenge, or how you have seen Jehovah’s helping hand in your life. (Ps. 78:4, 7) Your experience could be just what the student needs to hear. It may strengthen his faith or encourage him to continue progressing to baptism. w21.03 10 ¶9-10




Wednesday, November 30

Make disciples of people of all the nations.​—Matt. 28:19.



Who really is responsible for any success we have in the ministry? Paul answered that question when he wrote these words about the Corinthian congregation: “I planted, Apollos watered, but God kept making it grow, so that neither is the one who plants anything nor is the one who waters, but God who makes it grow.” (1 Cor. 3:6, 7) Like Paul, we should always give credit to Jehovah for any success enjoyed in the ministry. How can we show our appreciation for the privilege of “working together” with God, Christ, and the angels? (2 Cor. 6:1) We can do so by zealously seeking opportunities to share the good news with others. We must not only plant seeds of truth but also water them. When an individual shows interest, we want to do our best to follow up on it with a view to starting a Bible study. As the study progresses, we rejoice when we see how Jehovah works on the heart and mind of a potential disciple. w20.05 30 ¶14, 16-18




