
September
Thursday, September 1

After that I will pour out my spirit on every sort of flesh.​—Joel 2:28.



Peter used slightly different wording when quoting Joel’s prophecy. (Acts 2:16, 17) Instead of beginning the quotation with the words “after that,” Peter said: “And in the last days”​—in this context, the last days of the Jewish system of things—​God’s spirit would be poured out “on every sort of flesh.” This indicates that considerable time had passed before Joel’s prophecy was fulfilled. It was after that remarkable outpouring of God’s spirit in the first century that the preaching work began to go forward to the greatest extent. By the time the apostle Paul wrote his letter to the Colossians, about 61 C.E., he could describe the good news as being preached “in all creation under heaven.” (Col. 1:23) In Paul’s day, “all creation” meant the world as it was then known. With the help of Jehovah’s powerful holy spirit, the preaching work has expanded much more in our day​—“to the ends of the earth”!​—Acts 13:47. w20.04 6-7 ¶15-16




Friday, September 2

I myself will search for my sheep, and I will care for them.​—Ezek. 34:11.



Jehovah loves each one of us, including any sheep who have strayed from his flock. (Matt. 18:12-14) God promised that he would search for his lost sheep and help them to regain their spiritual health. And he outlined specific steps that he would take​—steps that a typical Israelite shepherd would take if a sheep went missing. (Ezek. 34:12-16) First, the shepherd would search for the sheep, which could require much time and effort. Then, once he located the stray, the shepherd would bring it back to the flock. Further, if the sheep was injured or starving, the shepherd would lovingly support the weak animal, binding its wounds, carrying it, and feeding it. Elders, the shepherds of “the flock of God,” need to take these same steps to help any who have strayed from the congregation. (1 Pet. 5:2, 3) The elders search for them, help them to return to the flock, and show them love by providing the necessary spiritual support. w20.06 20 ¶10




Saturday, September 3

The fields . . . are white for harvesting.​—John 4:35.



Did Jesus view the fields as being ripe for harvesting because he expected that most people would follow him? Not at all. The Scriptures had foretold that relatively few would put faith in him. (John 12:37, 38) And Jesus had the miraculous ability to read hearts. (Matt. 9:4) Still, he focused on those few who would believe, and he zealously preached to everyone. How much more so should we, who cannot read hearts, resist the tendency to judge a territory or an individual! Instead, see people’s potential. Remember what Jesus said to his disciples. The fields are white, that is, they are ready to be harvested. People can change and become disciples of Christ. Jehovah views these potential disciples as “precious things.” (Hag. 2:7) If we see people as Jehovah and Jesus do, we will learn about their backgrounds and interests. We will view them, not as strangers, but as potential brothers and sisters. w20.04 13 ¶18-19




Sunday, September 4

I have called you friends, because I have made known to you all the things I have heard from my Father.​—John 15:15.



God’s Word clearly teaches that we must have and maintain love for Jesus in order to please Jehovah. One thing we can do to become a friend of Jesus is to get to know him. We can do this by reading the Bible books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. As we meditate on the Bible accounts of Jesus’ life, we come to love and respect Jesus because of the kind way he dealt with people. For instance, even though he was their Master, he did not treat his disciples as slaves. Instead, he revealed his inner thoughts and feelings to them. Jesus shared their pain and cried with them. (John 11:32-36) Even his opposers acknowledged that he was a friend of those who responded to his message. (Matt. 11:19) When we imitate Jesus in the way that he dealt with his disciples, our relationships with others improve, we feel more content and happy, and our appreciation for Christ grows. w20.04 22 ¶9-10




Monday, September 5

The king of the south will prepare himself for the war with an exceedingly large and mighty army.​—Dan. 11:25.



By 1870, Britain had become the largest empire on earth, and it had the most powerful military force. That empire was pictured as a small horn that vanquished three other horns​—France, Spain, and the Netherlands. (Dan. 7:7, 8) And it filled the role of the king of the south well into World War I. During this same time, the United States of America had become the dominant economic power and was forming a close partnership with Britain. During World War I, the United States and Britain were welded into a powerful military alliance. At that time, Britain and its former colony became the Anglo-American World Power. As Daniel foretold, this king had amassed “an exceedingly large and mighty army.” Throughout the last days, the Anglo-American alliance has been the king of the south. w20.05 4 ¶7-8




Tuesday, September 6

To the place from which the streams flow, there they return.​—Eccl. 1:7.



Water in liquid form exists on earth because our planet is located at the perfect distance from the sun. If it were just a little closer, all the water would boil off, leaving a hot, lifeless rock. If the earth were just a little farther from the sun, all the water would freeze, turning the earth into a giant ball of ice. Because Jehovah placed the earth at this ideal location, the earth’s water cycle can sustain life. The sun heats water in the oceans and on the earth’s surface and evaporates the water to form clouds. Each year, the sun evaporates nearly 120,000 cubic miles (500,000 cu km) of water. This water stays in the atmosphere for about ten days before falling as rain or snow. The water eventually makes its way back to the oceans or other bodies of water, and the cycle is repeated. This efficient, sustainable cycle proves that Jehovah is both wise and powerful.​—Job 36:27, 28. w20.05 22 ¶6




Wednesday, September 7

You will receive power when the holy spirit comes upon you.​—Acts 1:8.



Jesus urged us to keep praying for holy spirit. (Luke 11:9, 13) By means of his spirit, Jehovah gives us power​—even “power beyond what is normal.” (2 Cor. 4:7) With the help of God’s spirit, we can endure any trial we may be facing. Holy spirit can also help us handle our assignments in God’s service and can enhance our talents and abilities. We can honestly attribute the good results of our efforts, not to ourselves, but to the help of God’s spirit. We can show that we value God’s holy spirit by praying that it will help us detect any wrong thoughts or desires in our heart. (Ps. 139:23, 24) If we make such a request, Jehovah, through his spirit, can make us aware of wrong thinking or inclinations. Then we should pray for God’s spirit to give us the strength to resist such a thought or desire. Thus we will show that we are determined to avoid doing anything that would cause Jehovah to stop helping us with his holy spirit.​—Eph. 4:30. w20.05 28-29 ¶10-12




Thursday, September 8

I have made your name known to them.​—John 17:26.



When we defend Jehovah’s name, we follow the example of Jesus Christ. Jesus made his Father’s name known not only by using that name but also by defending Jehovah’s reputation. For example, he contradicted the Pharisees, who in various ways painted Jehovah as harsh, demanding, distant, and merciless. Jesus helped people to see his Father as being reasonable, patient, loving, and forgiving. He also helped people to see Jehovah by the way he perfectly imitated his Father’s qualities in his daily life. (John 14:9) Like Jesus, we can share what we know about Jehovah, teaching people what a loving and kind God He is. As we do so, we overturn lies and slander about Jehovah. We sanctify Jehovah’s name, making it holy in the minds and hearts of people. With our words and actions, we show people what Jehovah is truly like. We vindicate that name by helping to free people from the misconceptions they may have about it. w20.06 6 ¶17-18




Friday, September 9

Let us not become egotistical, stirring up competition with one another, envying one another.​—Gal. 5:26.



Social media can be used for a good purpose​—for example, to keep in touch with family and friends. Have you observed, though, that some of the material that people post on social media is designed to promote the people themselves? “Look at me” seems to be the message they want to convey. Some even post rude and obscene comments on their own photos or about the photos that others post. This too is contrary to the humility and fellow feeling that Christians are encouraged to cultivate. (1 Pet. 3:8) If you use social media, ask yourself: ‘Might the comments, photos, or videos that I post give others the impression that I am bragging? Could I make others feel jealous?’ Christians do not feel the need for promoting themselves. They follow the Bible’s admonition found in today’s text. Humility will help us avoid getting caught up in the world’s spirit of self-promotion.​—1 John 2:16. w20.07 6 ¶14-15




Saturday, September 10

Formerly I was a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man. Nevertheless, I was shown mercy because I acted in ignorance.​—1 Tim. 1:13.



Before the apostle Paul became a disciple of Christ, he was an insolent young man who persecuted Jesus’ followers. (Acts 7:58) Jesus himself stopped Paul, then known as Saul, from terrorizing the Christian congregation. Jesus spoke to Paul from heaven and struck him blind. To recover his sight, Paul was forced to seek help from the very people he had been persecuting. He humbly accepted assistance from a disciple named Ananias who restored Paul’s sight. (Acts 9:3-9, 17, 18) Paul later became a prominent member of the Christian congregation, but he never forgot the lesson Jesus taught him on the road to Damascus. Paul remained humble, and he willingly accepted the help of his brothers and sisters. He acknowledged that they were “a strengthening aid” to him.​—Col. 4:10, 11, ftn. w20.07 18-19 ¶16-17




Sunday, September 11

Your Father has approved of giving you the Kingdom.​—Luke 12:32.



Even though Jehovah is almighty, he delegates authority to others. For instance, he appointed Jesus to be King of the Kingdom, and He will give a measure of authority to the 144,000 humans who become corulers with Jesus. Of course, Jehovah trained Jesus to be King and High Priest. (Heb. 5:8, 9) He also trains Jesus’ corulers, but he does not give them this assignment and then step in to manage every detail of the work. Instead, he trusts that they will do his will. (Rev. 5:10) If our heavenly Father​—who does not need help from anyone—​delegates authority to others, how much more so should we do the same! For instance, are you a family head or an elder in the congregation? Follow Jehovah’s example by delegating tasks to others and then resisting the urge to micromanage them. When you imitate Jehovah, not only will you get the work done but you will also train others and boost their confidence.​—Isa. 41:10. w20.08 9 ¶5-6




Monday, September 12

The Son of man came to seek and to save what was lost.​—Luke 19:10.



How does Jehovah want us to feel about his lost sheep? Jesus provides the pattern for us. He knew that all of Jehovah’s sheep are precious in God’s eyes, so Jesus did all he could to help “the lost sheep of the house of Israel” return to Jehovah. (Matt. 15:24) As the fine shepherd, Jesus also did his utmost to avoid losing any of Jehovah’s sheep. (John 6:39) The apostle Paul urged the elders of the congregation in Ephesus to imitate Jesus’ example. “You must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the Lord Jesus, when he himself said: ‘There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.’” (Acts 20:17, 35) Clearly, elders today have a special responsibility in this regard. “When I think of how much Jehovah cares for his lost sheep, I feel motivated to do all I can to help them,” explains Salvador, an elder in Spain. “I am convinced that Jehovah wants me to care for them.” w20.06 23 ¶15-16




Tuesday, September 13

The former things have passed away.​—Rev. 21:4.



Jehovah will patiently wait until the end of the thousand years before he expects us to be perfect. Until that time, Jehovah is willing to overlook our sins. Surely, then, we have reason to look for the good in others and to be patient with them. Jesus and the angels were joyful when the earth was first created. But imagine how happy they will be to see the earth full of perfect people, who love and serve Jehovah. Imagine the joy that those who were brought from the earth to heaven to rule with Christ will feel as they see mankind benefiting from their work. (Rev. 4:4, 9-11; 5:9, 10) And imagine living when tears of joy replace tears of pain, when sickness, sorrow, and death are gone forever. Until then, be determined to imitate your loving, wise, and patient Father. If you do, you will maintain your joy, no matter what trials you face. (Jas. 1:2-4) How thankful we can be for Jehovah’s promise that “there is going to be a resurrection”!​—Acts 24:15. w20.08 19 ¶18-19




Wednesday, September 14

This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth.​—Matt. 24:14.



The Bible is a loving gift from God. Our heavenly Father inspired men to write it because he cares greatly for his earthly children. By means of the Bible, Jehovah answers the most important questions we could ask, such as: Where did we come from? What is the purpose of life? And what does the future hold? Jehovah wants all his children to learn the answers to those questions, so throughout the centuries he has moved men to translate the Bible into many languages. Today, the whole Bible or portions of it are available in over 3,000 languages! The Bible is the most widely translated and distributed book in history. We can prove that we appreciate the Bible by reading it each day, meditating on what it teaches, and doing our best to apply what we learn. In addition, we show our gratitude to God by doing all we can to share its message with as many people as possible.​—Ps. 1:1-3; Matt. 28:19, 20. w20.05 24-25 ¶15-16




Thursday, September 15

The word of Jehovah has been the cause of insults and jeering all day long.​—Jer. 20:8.



The prophet Jeremiah was assigned a territory that was extremely difficult. He became so discouraged at one point that he felt like giving up. But he did not. Why not? “The word of Jehovah” was like a fire inside Jeremiah, and he could not hold it in! (Jer. 20:9) The same is true of us when we fill our mind and heart with God’s Word. That is an added reason for us to study the Bible daily and meditate on it. As a result, our joy can continue to increase, and our ministry may become more productive. (Jer. 15:16) So when you feel discouraged, supplicate Jehovah for his support. He will help you to deal with your imperfections, weaknesses, or illness. He will help you to keep a balanced view of assignments of service. And he will help you to have a positive view of your ministry. Moreover, pour out your concerns to your heavenly Father. With his help, you can win the fight against discouragement. w20.12 27 ¶20-21




Friday, September 16

Appeal to . . . older women as mothers, to younger women as sisters, with all chasteness.​—1 Tim. 5:1, 2.



For some sisters, the meetings are their main opportunity to be with fellow worshippers. So we want to use those occasions to welcome them, speak with them, and let them see our concern for them. Like Jesus, we can make time to socialize with sisters. (Luke 10:38-42) Perhaps we can invite them over for a simple meal or for some recreation. When we do, we want to keep the conversation upbuilding. (Rom. 1:11, 12) Elders do well to keep Jesus’ attitude in mind. He knew that singleness could be challenging for some, but he made it clear that neither getting married nor having children is the key to lasting happiness. (Luke 11:27, 28) Rather, permanent happiness comes from putting Jehovah’s service first. (Matt. 19:12) Elders especially need to treat Christian women as their spiritual sisters and mothers. Elders do well to make time before or after meetings to talk with the sisters. w20.09 21-22 ¶7-9




Saturday, September 17

The farmer keeps waiting for the precious fruit . . . You too exercise patience.​—Jas. 5:7, 8.



In Israel, the farmer planted his seeds after the early rain in the fall and reaped the grain after the late rain in the spring. (Mark 4:28) May we wisely imitate the farmer’s patience. However, this may not be easy. Imperfect humans tend to want immediate results from their efforts. Yet, if we want our garden to produce, we must give it constant attention​—digging, planting, weeding, and watering. The disciple-making work also requires continuous effort. It takes time for us to root out weeds of prejudice and indifference in those whom we teach. Our patience will help us to avoid becoming discouraged when we encounter difficulties. When we do receive some positive response, we must still be patient. We cannot force a Bible student to grow in faith. At times, even Jesus’ disciples were slow to grasp the meaning of what he taught. (John 14:9) Let us remember that we may plant and water, but God makes it grow.​—1 Cor. 3:6. w20.09 11 ¶10-11




Sunday, September 18

I will praise Jehovah with all my heart in the assembled group of upright ones and in the congregation.​—Ps. 111:1.



All of us want our students to progress to baptism. One important way we can help them is by encouraging them to attend congregation meetings. Often students who attend meetings right away make the fastest progress. Some teachers explain to their students that they will receive half of their Bible education from the study and the other half from the meetings. Read Hebrews 10:24, 25 with your student, and explain to him the benefits that he will receive if he comes to the meetings. Enthusiastically share something you learned at a recent meeting. That is more motivating than just inviting the student to attend. What your student experiences at his first meeting will far exceed anything he ever experienced at any other type of religious gathering. (1 Cor. 14:24, 25) He will meet others whose good example he can imitate and who will help him progress to baptism. w20.10 10-11 ¶14-15




Monday, September 19

What instructor is like [God]?​—Job 36:22.



God’s spirit will help you to make practical application of what you read and study in God’s Word. Pray as did the psalmist: “Instruct me, O Jehovah, about your way. I will walk in your truth. Unify my heart to fear your name.” (Ps. 86:11) So continue to take in the spiritual food that Jehovah provides through his Word and his organization. Of course, your goal is not just to gain knowledge. You want to impress the truth on your heart and apply it in your life. Jehovah’s spirit can help you to do that. You also want to encourage your brothers and sisters. (Heb. 10:24, 25) Why? Because they are your spiritual family. Pray for God’s spirit to help you to give heartfelt comments at Christian meetings and to do your very best when you have a part on the program. In these ways you show Jehovah and his Son that you love their precious “sheep.” (John 21:15-17) So listen to your Grand Instructor by taking full advantage of the spiritual banquet he provides. w20.10 24-25 ¶15-17




Tuesday, September 20

They all abandoned him and fled.​—Mark 14:50.



How did Jesus treat his apostles when they were temporarily in a weakened condition? Shortly after his resurrection, Jesus told some of his followers: “Have no fear! Go, report to my brothers [that I was raised].” (Matt. 28:10a) Jesus did not give up on his apostles. Even though they had abandoned him, he still called them “my brothers.” Like Jehovah, Jesus was merciful and forgiving. (2 Ki. 13:23) Likewise, we have deep concern for those who have stopped sharing in the ministry. They are our brothers and sisters, and we love them! We still remember the labors of love that those fellow believers performed in the past​—some perhaps for decades. (Heb. 6:10) We truly miss them! (Luke 15:4-7) So encourage inactive ones to attend the congregation meetings. And when an inactive one arrives at the Kingdom Hall, we should take the initiative by warmly welcoming him. w20.11 6 ¶14-17




Wednesday, September 21

Do not go beyond the things that are written.​—1 Cor. 4:6.



James and John along with their mother approached Jesus and asked for a privilege that was beyond Jesus’ authority to give. Without hesitating, Jesus stated that only his heavenly Father could decide who would sit at Jesus’ right hand and at his left in the Kingdom. (Matt. 20:20-23) Jesus showed that he respected his limitations. He was modest. He never went beyond what Jehovah commanded him to do. (John 12:49) How can we imitate Jesus’ fine example? We imitate Jesus’ example of modesty by applying the Bible’s counsel found in today’s text. So when asked for advice, we never want to promote our own opinion or simply say the first thing that comes to our mind. Rather, we should direct attention to the counsel found in the Bible and in our Bible-based publications. In this way, we acknowledge our limitations. With modesty, we give credit to the “righteous decrees” of the Almighty.​—Rev. 15:3, 4. w20.08 11-12 ¶14-15




Thursday, September 22

Do not be overly righteous, nor show yourself excessively wise. Why should you bring ruin to yourself?​—Eccl. 7:16.



If you ever feel that you need to give counsel to a friend, what points should you keep in mind? Before you approach your friend, ask yourself, ‘Am I being “overly righteous”?’ An overly righteous person judges others, not by Jehovah’s standards, but by his own, and he is probably not very merciful. If after examining yourself you still see the need to speak to your friend, clearly identify the problem and use viewpoint questions to help your friend to recognize his mistake. Make sure that what you say is based on the Scriptures, remembering that your friend is accountable, not to you, but to Jehovah. (Rom. 14:10) Rely on the wisdom found in God’s Word, and when counseling someone, imitate Jesus’ compassion. (Prov. 3:5; Matt. 12:20) Why? Because Jehovah will deal with us in the same way that we deal with others.​—Jas. 2:13. w20.11 21 ¶13




Friday, September 23

Stop judging by the outward appearance, but judge with righteous judgment.​—John 7:24.



Would you like people to judge you based on the color of your skin, the shape of your face, or the size of your body? Likely, you would not. How comforting it is to know, then, that Jehovah does not judge us by what human eyes can see! For example, when Samuel looked at the sons of Jesse, he did not see what Jehovah saw. Jehovah had told Samuel that one of Jesse’s sons would become king of Israel. But which one? When Samuel saw Jesse’s oldest son, Eliab, he said: “Surely here before Jehovah stands his anointed one.” Eliab looked like a king. “But Jehovah said to Samuel: ‘Do not pay attention to his appearance and how tall he is, for I have rejected him.’” The lesson? Jehovah continued: “Man sees what appears to the eyes, but Jehovah sees into the heart.” (1 Sam. 16:1, 6, 7) We do well to imitate Jehovah when dealing with our brothers and sisters. w20.04 14 ¶1; 15 ¶3




Saturday, September 24

Lift up your eyes and view the fields, that they are white for harvesting.​—John 4:35.



Jesus had been traveling through fields, likely of young green barley. (John 4:3-6) This crop would be ready to be harvested in about four months’ time. Jesus said something that must have sounded unusual: “Lift up your eyes and view the fields, that they are white for harvesting.” (John 4:35, 36) What did he mean? Jesus was apparently referring to a figurative harvest of people. Consider what had just happened. Although Jews usually had no dealings with Samaritans, Jesus had preached to a Samaritan woman​—and she had listened! In fact, while Jesus was speaking about fields that were “white for harvesting,” a crowd of Samaritans who had heard about Jesus from the woman were on their way to learn more from him. (John 4:9, 39-42) One Bible commentary says about this account: “The eagerness of the people . . . showed that they were like grain ready for harvesting.” w20.04 8 ¶1-2




Sunday, September 25

Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works.​—Heb. 10:24.



Our meetings help us improve our battle skills, so to speak, by equipping us for the ministry. For example, we learn to use the tools in our Teaching Toolbox effectively. So prepare well for congregation meetings. During the meeting, listen carefully. After the meeting, apply the training you received. By doing such things, you will become “a fine soldier of Christ Jesus.” (2 Tim. 2:3) We also have the support of myriads of powerful angels. Think of what just one angel can do! (Isa. 37:36) Now consider what a mighty army of angels would be able to accomplish. No man or demon is equal to Jehovah’s powerful fighting force. It has been said that one faithful Witness plus Jehovah equals the majority. (Judg. 6:16) How true that is! Keep those thoughts in mind when you feel intimidated by something a workmate, a schoolmate, or an unbelieving relative says or does. Remember, you are not alone in this fight. You are following Jehovah’s direction. w21.03 29 ¶13-14




Monday, September 26

If the dead are not to be raised up, “let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we are to die.”​—1 Cor. 15:32.



The apostle Paul may have been quoting Isaiah 22:13, which refers to the attitude of the Israelites. Instead of drawing close to God, they pursued a life of pleasure. Basically, the attitude of those Israelites was “here today, gone tomorrow,” a view common even today. Clearly, the fact that Jehovah can resurrect the dead should affect our choice of associates. The brothers in Corinth needed to guard against associating with those who denied the resurrection. There is a lesson for us today: No good can come from choosing as regular associates those who have a live-for-the-moment outlook. Being with such ones can ruin a true Christian’s viewpoint and habits. In fact, it might lead him to have a lifestyle that includes what God hates​—sin. Thus, Paul strongly urged: “Come to your senses in a righteous way and do not practice sin.”​—1 Cor. 15:33, 34. w20.12 9 ¶3, 5-6




Tuesday, September 27

The head of every man is the Christ; in turn, the head of a woman is the man; in turn, the head of the Christ is God.​—1 Cor. 11:3.



This verse describes the way in which Jehovah has organized his universal family. Headship involves two key elements​—authority and accountability. Jehovah is “the head,” or the ultimate authority, and all his children, both angelic and human, are accountable to him. (Rom. 14:10; Eph. 3:14, 15) Jehovah has given Jesus authority over the congregation, but Jesus is accountable to Jehovah for the way he treats us. (1 Cor. 15:27) Jehovah has also given a husband authority over his wife and children. How can he learn to be a good family head? He must first understand what Jehovah requires of him. He also needs to know why Jehovah established headship and, specifically, how he can imitate the example set by Jehovah and Jesus. Why is this so important? Because Jehovah has given family heads a measure of authority, and he expects them to use it well.​—Luke 12:48b. w21.02 2 ¶1-3




Wednesday, September 28

I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself.​—Isa. 48:17.



We do well to imitate Jehovah regarding the things he chooses to forget. For example, Jehovah has a perfect memory, but if we are repentant, he chooses to forgive and forget the mistakes we make. (Ps. 25:7; 130:3, 4) And he wants us to do the same for others when they are sorry for mistakes they make that hurt us. (Matt. 6:14; Luke 17:3, 4) We can show appreciation for the marvelous gift of our brain by using it to honor the One who gave it to us. Some choose to use their brain for selfish purposes​—to set their own standards of right and wrong. But because Jehovah created us, it is only reasonable to expect that his standards are better than any standards we could set for ourselves. (Rom. 12:1, 2) When we live by his standards, our life is peaceful. (Isa. 48:18) And we gain a clear purpose for living​—to bring honor to our Creator and Father and make him proud of us.​—Prov. 27:11. w20.05 23-24 ¶13-14




Thursday, September 29

Have tender affection for one another.​—Rom. 12:10.



How can we cultivate tender affection for our brothers and sisters today? When we get to know fellow believers better, we may find it easier to understand them and to develop tender affection for them. Age and background need not be a barrier. Remember, Jonathan was about 30 years older than David; yet he developed a close friendship with him. Could you take an interest in someone who is older​—or younger—​than you? By doing so, you can show that you “have love for the whole association of brothers.” (1 Pet. 2:17) Does having tender affection for fellow believers mean that we will feel equally close to everyone in the congregation? No, that would not be realistic. It is not necessarily wrong to be drawn more to some than to others because of having similar interests. Jesus referred to all his apostles as “friends,” but he had a special affection for John. (John 13:23; 15:15; 20:2) However, Jesus did not show favoritism to John.​—Mark 10:35-40. w21.01 23 ¶12-13




Friday, September 30

You seem to be more given to the fear of the deities than others are.​—Acts 17:22.



The apostle Paul did not present his message to the Gentiles in Athens in the same way that he presented it to the Jews in the synagogue. He carefully observed his surroundings and took note of people’s religious customs. (Acts 17:23) Next, Paul searched for common ground between their form of worship and the truth in the Scriptures. So Paul was willing to adapt his approach. He told the Athenians that his message came from the “Unknown God,” whom they had been trying to worship. Although the Gentiles were not familiar with the Scriptures, Paul did not give up on them. Instead, he viewed them as being like grain that is ripe for harvesting, and he adjusted his presentation of the good news. Like Paul, be observant. Look for signs that indicate what beliefs people in your territory have. How has the householder decorated his home or vehicle? Does his name, dress, grooming, or even his vocabulary indicate what his religion is? w20.04 9-10 ¶7-8




