
DRAW CLOSE TO GOD
Does Jehovah Really Care About You?




“Feelings of worthlessness are probably the biggest roadblock that I am trying to overcome.” So said one woman who found it hard to believe that Jehovah could ever find a reason to care about her. Can you identify with her feelings? If so, you may wonder, ‘Does Jehovah really care about his worshippers as individuals?’ The answer is yes! We find proof of Jehovah’s personal care in the words of Jesus.—Read John 6:44.
What did Jesus, who knows the personality and will of Jehovah better than anyone else, say? (Luke 10:22) Jesus explained: “No man can come to me unless the Father, who sent me, draws him.” So, we cannot become a follower of Christ—and a worshipper of our heavenly Father, Jehovah—unless Jehovah personally draws us. (2 Thessalonians 2:13) If we understand what Jesus meant, then we will see in his words powerful evidence of God’s personal care.
What does it mean that Jehovah draws us? The Greek verb rendered “draws” is also used in reference to hauling in a net of fishes. (John 21:6, 11) Does Jehovah drag us against our will, forcing us to serve him? No. Jehovah gave us free will, so he does not force our heart open. (Deuteronomy 30:19, 20) One scholar puts it this way: “There is no handle on the outside of the door of the human heart. It must be opened from within.” Jehovah searches through the billions of hearts in this world, looking for individuals who are inclined toward him. (1 Chronicles 28:9) When he finds such a person, he responds in a touching way. How so?
Jehovah gently attracts, or tugs at, the heart of an individual who is “rightly disposed.” (Acts 13:48) Jehovah does so in two ways—through the Bible’s message of good news, which reaches us as individuals, and through his holy spirit. When Jehovah sees a heart that is responsive to Bible truth, he uses his spirit to help the individual to grasp and apply that truth in his life. (1 Corinthians 2:11, 12) Without divine help, we could never become genuine followers of Jesus and devoted worshippers of Jehovah.
“There is no handle on the outside of the door of the human heart. It must be opened from within”

What, then, do Jesus’ words recorded at John 6:44 teach us about Jehovah God? Jehovah draws people because he sees something good in their heart and cares about them as individuals. Understanding this reassuring truth brought comfort to the woman mentioned at the outset. She says: “Being a servant of Jehovah is the highest privilege anyone could have. And if Jehovah chose me to be a servant of his, then I must be precious to him.” What about you? Does knowing that Jehovah cares about his worshippers as individuals move you to want to open the door of your heart?



Suggested Bible reading for May
Luke 22-24–John 1-16



