Hopes and Fears of Today’s Youth
“IF ONLY we knew what is ahead,” sighed an 18-year-old French girl, Valérie. Whether they share Valérie’s doubts or not, youths think about their future. They often try to imagine what work and family life will be like and what kind of world they will live in. People in the past have often fantasized about the future.
For example, would you have enjoyed a ride with Captain Nemo in his submarine, the Nautilus? Or what about orbiting the moon in a rocket? Such exciting prospects were already visualized toward the end of the last century. All you had to do was give free rein to your imagination and take a seat alongside the heroes of Jules Verne’s famous science-fiction novels. If you had lived then, you might well have wondered: ‘Will such things really be possible one day? Will I live to see them?’
These two dreams, born of that 19th-century French writer’s fertile imagination, have come true. Submarines now occupy an important place in the arsenals of the great powers. And our generation has seen men walk on the moon. However, even if those particular fantasies did become fact, the same cannot be said of many human forecasts.
Unfulfilled Expectations
A cure for cancer was expected for the 1960’s. In the 1950’s, the president of a large American automotive manufacturing company prophesied that by 1975 automobiles would be equipped with a long-distance teleguidance system. It was also predicted that deserts could be transformed by breeding microscopic algae “whose rapid reproduction . . . and exceptionally rich protein content (75%) would easily support increasing populations.”
There have been so many of such unfulfilled expectations that people today no longer blindly follow scientists’ predictions. André Fontaine, editor of the Paris daily Le Monde, recently pointed out: “Man’s faith in progress through science, already shaken by the end of the 1960’s, has continued to decline.”
The absence of the promised improved relations between nations and individuals has also been a letdown. At its close, World War I was termed “the war to end all wars.” It was believed that men, after all they had lived through, would never again engage in such slaughter. However, the relative postwar calm lasted only a few years; then all illusions were shattered by new conflicts, including, of course, the horrors of World War II.
What About the Future?
Do hopes today stand a better chance of fulfillment? How do youths the earth over view their future? Will the year 2000 dawn bright or dismal?
Branch offices of the Watch Tower Society around the world conducted interviews with youths. As you consider the comments of these youths, see if you do not have similar hopes and fears.
Nice Families and Good Jobs
Thomas, a young German, wants “a long life and good health.” “I want to get married and have a happy family,” says Mikiko, a teenage girl in Japan. These are examples of youths who would like life to be somewhat similar to that of their parents. Others would like to change a few things. Maristela, a Brazilian girl, says she would ‘carry on love in a different way from her parents,’ since she believes that marriage is not “what the church and society make it out to be.”
Job prospects occupy an important place in young minds. A Japanese youth named Kenji is 13 and would like “to work with cars somehow​—either in a car company or even in racing.” Seventeen-year-old Helmut from Germany has dreams of becoming a professional soccer player one day, whereas Kunle, a student from Lagos, is “aiming to be a successful computer technologist.”
Thierry, Bruno, and Mimoun, three teenagers from northern France, are worried about unemployment and want to get an advanced education in order to secure a steady job. An opinion poll taken in April 1985, and quoted by the French daily Le Figaro, revealed that fear of unemployment is almost universal. The newspaper reported: “Unemployment comes far ahead of other [short-term] preoccupations in all major countries, except Japan and, to a lesser degree, the United States.”
Technology​—Blessing or Curse?
Young people also try to imagine a world transformed by technology. “I think the world will then be a better place to live in,” states a young Nigerian. “Even in Third World countries like ours, most things will be computerized, and through computers and other electronic gadgets, the world will become a better place.”
A journalist working for the French magazine Le Nouvel Observateur has roughly the same vision of the near future: “Machines will run on their own. Magnetic cards will replace money. After making a choice from goods displayed on a television screen, shopping will be done by telephone. People will work at home on terminals connected up with data banks.”
Other youths, however, are not so sure that a world taken over by technology would be so marvelous. Gaby, a German girl of 13, is afraid that by the year 2000, there will be “houses everywhere, with no trees or flowers.” Susanne, from the same country, imagines people living under a glass dome to escape pollution.
For still others, such as Selcuk, a young German of Turkish origin, “a completely electronic world” will cause greater unemployment. “There are not many jobs around now,” he says, “but in the year 2000 . . . it won’t be people behind the counter but robots.” Sixteen-year-old Selma from Brazil even goes so far as to say: “Computers will take the place of God.”
Their Big Fears
Emmanuel, a young Nigerian, is alarmed at the rising insecurity, explaining: “In the past, whenever thieves wanted to break into a house, they would wait until the owner was away. Now it does not matter if the whole family is at home. The thieves knock on the door and demand that you give them your property. If such a thing has started occurring now, what will it be like in the future?” Emmanuel is not alone in his fears. A Canadian youth stated: “I think the world will have . . . more crime and vandalism, more people will have nervous breakdowns, kids will be less disciplined.”
However, one of the main concerns of youths today is the fear of war. This dread is reflected in a comment made by Folasade, a Nigerian girl: “Anything could happen at any time​—even a global war by the year 2000.” The situation is similar in the United States, according to the International Herald Tribune heading: “Many in College Expect Nuclear War.” In Canada literature critic Yolande Villemaire reports that youngsters “are sure they will die in a nuclear holocaust.”
Japanese youths, like 15-year-old Daisuke, express similar feelings: “By the time I’m 30 the Third World War, which will be a nuclear war, will have destroyed this planet. I have no goals in life and no worries!”
David, a French lad, came straight to the point: “Considering all the present conflicts, I don’t think it’s even worth talking about the year 2000.” Many in France share his view, for a recent opinion poll revealed that 74 percent of French youths consider that from now to the year 2000 the major threat to mankind is a third world war.
Any Hope for the Future?
With such dark perspectives, it is understandable that young people express uncertainty as to the future. Yet, there is a sure hope for the future. Would you like to learn about that hope? This is the subject of the following article.
[Pictures on page 4, 5]
Among the few of man’s forecasts that came true are those of Jules Verne. Depicted here is his moonship
[Credit Line]
NASA photo

