Young People Ask . . .
How Can I Have a Good Time?
“BEING young is probably the most stressful time of your life.” So said the authors of Teenage Stress. Naturally, then, youths do not want to be working or studying all the time. They need an occasional outlet, a good time. Even Jesus Christ acknowledged the need to “rest up a bit” occasionally.​—Mark 6:31.
Unfortunately, young people do not always use good judgment when it comes to recreation. Far too often what starts out as a good time ends up in heartbreak. For example, one young girl tells of a teen gathering she attended: “The music on the stereo was terrific, great dancing, neat refreshments and plenty of laughs. Someone brought pot. Then came the booze. That’s when everything started to go haywire.” Sexual immorality resulted. Confessed the girl: “I have been miserable and depressed ever since.”
More typical, though, are the teenagers whose ideas of “fun” amount to a colossal waste of time. In the United States, for example, shopping malls have become virtual convention sites where idle youths spend hours doing nothing but ‘hanging out.’
The Need for Caution
‘Partying’ or ‘hanging out’ may have a certain appeal. But the fact that something is enjoyable does not mean it is wholesome; nor does it mean that it will help you develop a balanced, Christian personality. The apostle Paul warned Christians: “Beware, brothers, . . . for fear any one of you should become hardened by the deceptive power of sin.” (Hebrews 3:12, 13) Enjoyable things can often be deceptive in that they rob us of time and moral values.
Do you remember, for example, the Bible account of 24,000 Israelites who met with destruction? Beautiful Moabite and Midianite women invited them to a feast. Perhaps the Israelites reasoned: ‘Surely we are entitled to some relaxation after all these years in the wilderness. Just sharing a little food and wine won’t hurt.’ But it did hurt, bringing death to 24,000 who got involved in immoral sexual relations and idolatry!​—Numbers 25:1-9.
Would it not be equally dangerous​—not to mention time consuming—​to ‘party’ or ‘hang out’ with schoolmates who are not Christians? (Galatians 5:21; 1 Corinthians 7:29) Remember, what is immoral to Christians is often a way of life to others! The same would hold true of associating with wicked people by means of immoral music, suggestive dances, or books and movies that feature violence and sexual immorality.​—1 Corinthians 15:33.
All by Yourself
Following the Bible does limit what you can do for recreation. But this does not mean that life has to become a drab, all-work existence. Mary, for example, is a young Christian. She does not associate with youths who would attempt to lure her into wrongdoing. How does she have a good time? “I play the piano and the violin, and I spend some time practicing them.” Another teenage girl, named Melissa, similarly says: “I sometimes spend time writing stories or poetry for my own enjoyment.”
No, you don’t have to be at a party or even surrounded by companions in order to have fun. You can learn to use time productively by developing skills such as reading, carpentry, or playing a musical instrument.
Doing Things as a Family
Granted, you don’t want to be alone all the time. But finding company does not always mean seeking out peers. A survey of American youths revealed that teenagers “enjoy occasional family outings and activities.” Doing things together as a family not only is fun but can enhance family unity.
This means more than simply watching TV together. Says Dr. Anthony Pietropinto: “The problem with television-viewing is that, while it may be done in the company of others, it is basically a solitary activity. . . . Yet, pastimes such as indoor games, backyard sports, cooking treats, crafts projects, and reading aloud certainly offer greater opportunities for communication, cooperation, and intellectual stimulation than does the modern family’s passive preoccupation with television.”
John, a father of seven, recalls: “We always did things and went places as an entire family. Occasionally we went on weekend camping trips or went bowling. We visited local parks and museums. But we also enjoyed recreation at home, playing various games, such as volleyball and badminton. Even cleaning the yard or painting the house could be fun when it was done as a family.”
If your family is not already doing such things together, take the initiative and suggest it to your parents. Try coming up with some interesting and exciting ideas for family outings or projects.
Christian Gatherings
From time to time, though, it is also enjoyable to get together with friends. Why not ask your parents to help you plan such a gathering? You can arrange for a variety of activities, such as board games and group singing. If some of your friends have musical talents, perhaps they can be coaxed into performing a bit. Good food also adds to an occasion, but it does not have to be fancy or expensive. Sometimes guests can bring different food items.
Is there a park or an outdoor area nearby that allows for activities such as swimming and ball games? Why not have an occasional picnic? Again, families can share in bringing food so that no one is burdened financially.
Moderation is the key. Music does not need to be at ear-splitting levels to be enjoyed; nor does dancing have to be vulgar or sensual to be fun. Then there is the problem of games getting too competitive. Reports one Christian parent: “Some youths at times argue, almost to the point of fighting.” Follow the Bible’s advice to avoid ‘competing with one another.’​—Galatians 5:26.
Whom should you invite? The Bible says, “Have love for the whole association of brothers.” (1 Peter 2:17) Why, then, limit your gatherings to peers? “Widen out” in your associations. (2 Corinthians 6:13) One parent observed: “The elderly, though often not able to participate in some of the activities, enjoy coming and watching the goings-on.” The presence of adults often helps prevent things from getting out of hand. It is not possible, though, to invite “the whole association” to any one gathering. And problems can develop when gatherings are large and uncontrollable. Keep your gatherings small and avoid difficulties.
Christian gatherings also present the opportunity to build one another up spiritually. True, some youths feel that adding spirituality to a gathering takes the fun out of it. “When we have a gathering,” bemoaned one Christian boy, “it’s, ‘Sit down, get your Bible out, and play Bible games.’” However, the psalmist said: “Happy is the man . . . [whose] delight is in the law of Jehovah.” (Psalm 1:1, 2) Therefore, discussions​—or even games—​that center around the Bible can add to the enjoyment of the occasion.a
Another idea is to have several relate how they became Christians. Or add a dose of warmth and laughter by inviting some to tell humorous anecdotes. Often these teach valuable lessons.
The Best Times
But while gatherings and outings have their place, your best times will be in connection with Jehovah’s worship. Centuries ago, God arranged for the Israelites to go up to Jerusalem for the annual Festival of Booths. God commanded: “You must rejoice before Jehovah your God.” (Leviticus 23:40) Jehovah’s Witnesses today likewise hold conventions. For many Christian youths, such events are the most enjoyable times of the whole year!
But as an article in ’Teen magazine put it: “Life can’t always be jam-packed full of action and excitement​—and you’d probably be exhausted if it were!” Besides, there is “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Corinthians 15:58; Matthew 24:14) But when you from time to time feel the need for some recreation, enjoy it in a balanced, wholesome way.
[Footnotes]
See Awake! of January 22, 1979, pages 10-12, for information about some of these games.
[Picture on page 11]
Christian gatherings can be truly enjoyable when various activities are planned and different age-groups are represented

