Acting on Wise Sayings for Our Day
“JEHOVAH himself gives wisdom; out of his mouth there are knowledge and discernment.” Let worldly-wise men scoff at those words; the Christian witnesses of Jehovah have proved for themselves that acting upon God’s Word is indeed the course of wisdom for our day. By means of their preaching activity the scripture is being fulfilled: “True wisdom itself keeps crying aloud in the very street. In the public squares it keeps giving forth its voice. At the upper end of the noisy streets it calls out.”—Prov. 2:6; 1:20, 21.a
Why should we heed the call of wisdom? Because it tells us how to get life, everlasting life in fact, and without life we cannot enjoy anything. As we read: “Happy is the man that has found wisdom, . . . It is a tree of life to those taking hold of it, and those keeping fast hold of it are to be called happy.” And wanting to gain life, everlasting life, is not selfish, for God intended man to live forever in the first place and planted in man a strong love of life. Not to want to live forever would be showing a lack of appreciation, would be spurning God’s greatest gift.—Prov. 3:13, 18.
While the entire Word of God is a veritable library of divine wisdom, particularly does the book of Proverbs contain wise sayings for our day that we do well to act upon: “The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge” and “of wisdom.” “The name of Jehovah is a strong tower.” “More than all else that is to be guarded, safeguard your heart.” “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding.” “The generous soul will itself be made fat, and the one freely watering [others] will himself also be freely watered.” “A true witness is delivering souls.”—Prov. 1:7; 9:10; 18:10; 4:23; 3:5; 11:25; 14:25.
We do well, therefore, to take heed to this divine wisdom, giving our hearts, our whole attention, to the Divine Instructor, even as he counsels us to do: “My son, do give your heart to me and may those eyes of yours take pleasure in my own ways.” That means, first of all, taking in knowledge by studying God’s Word. And then acquiring wisdom by using that knowledge in a right way, with good results to ourselves. And finally, we must also acquire understanding, for: “Wisdom is the prime thing. Acquire wisdom, and with all that you acquire, acquire understanding.” To have understanding means to be able to see something in its connected parts, know how and why they belong together, and to see all this in relation to God. With all Solomon’s wisdom he still lost out because he failed to keep in mind his relationship with Jehovah. He neglected understanding.—Prov. 23:26; 4:7.
Acting on these wise sayings that God has given us for our day means that we will let the fear of Jehovah deter us from a wicked or foolish course; it means that we will put full confidence in Jehovah, taking his name upon us and making it known to others. It also means that we will be careful of our hearts, that our affections are on the right things and that our motive is pure. Also that we will show ourselves generous, especially as regards spiritual things, eager to share with others the good things we have learned from God’s Word, thereby proving to be true witnesses delivering souls. Thus acting on these wise sayings for our day, we ‘will certainly find life and get good will from Jehovah.’—Prov. 8:35.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, November 1, 1957.

