Announcements
ACTING ON WISE SAYINGS FOR OUR DAY—Prov. 1:20, 21.
Wisdom expressed in wise sayings is valuable only if it is acted upon. A person is not wise who has knowledge and knows what to do but does not do it. One who has knowledge to act wisely but does not use it lacks wisdom. So to be wise one must put knowledge to use. Jehovah’s witnesses have gained precious life-giving knowledge of Jehovah God’s purposes for mankind through study of the Bible. Acting with true wisdom, they delight to use this knowledge as a blessing to others. Throughout April they will do this by telling others pertinent things they have learned. In going from house to house, meeting friends and relatives, etc., they will encourage all desirous of gaining life-giving knowledge to subscribe for the foremost Bible-study aid journal on earth, The Watchtower. A year’s subscription is only $1 and to each new subscriber three booklets will be given. Also this month special effort will be put forth to place as many copies as possible of the April 15 Watchtower, which carries a most outstanding and important article. New persons are invited and encouraged to share in service this month so they too will be acting on wise sayings for our day.
READING FOR PROFIT
Millions of hours are spent every day in reading. How much of it is upbuilding? How much stimulates the mind? How much is even remembered? The most popular book, by circulation figures, is one that is unrivaled in inspirational value. That is the Bible. Yet relatively few persons, in spite of its extensive distribution, ever consult its pages. But those who do are richly rewarded. Here is reading that builds the mind for better things. It molds our thinking into the pattern designed by our Creator. It fashions our lives for a permanent place in God’s favor. Time spent reading God’s Word is never lost. It returns to us daily in many ways, and the more regularly we consider its wisdom the greater the benefits. The New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures is unsurpassed in its rendering of the “New Testament” books. Send only $1 for your copy today, or $3 for the beautiful deluxe edition.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
May 11: Avoid Rebellious Tendencies, ¶1-22. Page 209.
May 18: Avoid Rebellious Tendencies, ¶23-35, and Desirable Tendencies—Christian Servitude. Page 215.

