Desirable Tendencies—Christian Servitude
“Be obedient . . . doing the will of God whole-souled.”—Eph. 6:5, 6.
 1. How is complete servitude shown by the example set by Jesus?
WHEN we are reviewing the tragic results of man’s own self-determination in life, another pattern should be selected that has lasting benefits. Instead of acting upon one’s own impulses, why not consider the unselfish suggestion recommended in Jesus’ words relative to the two great commandments? He said: “‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.’ This is the greatest and first commandment. The second, like it, is this: ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’” These words, rather than giving freedom of choice, extremely limit the course of action that could be pleasing to Jehovah. This commandment removes self-choice entirely. In fact, these words crowd out of one’s life any desire other than that of complete obedience and servitude to Jehovah.—Matt. 22:37, 38.
 2, 3. (a) What does dedication mean? (b) From what slavery has a Christian been liberated? (c) What slavery is desirable?
2 This was the blueprint of life for Jesus and his followers. By choice, when a Christian dedicates his life to Jehovah God, he vows that he will follow the footsteps established by the Master Servant; in fact, it means the individual will be a slave to his Master. But, then, upon analyzing the matter we will find that an individual will be the servant or slave of one master or another, as Paul tells us at Romans 6:16: “Do you not know that if you keep presenting yourselves to anyone as slaves to obey him, you are slaves of him because you obey him, either of sin with death in view or of obedience with righteousness in view?” Then Paul exclaims: “But thanks to God that you were slaves of sin but you became obedient from the heart to that form of teaching to which you were handed over. Yes, since you were set free from sin, you became slaves to righteousness. . . . so now present your members as slaves to righteousness with holiness in view.” (Ro 6 Vss. 17-19) These words leave no alternative to the true Christian but to mold his life as a slave to his Master’s wishes. Of course, such a righteous course shows Jehovah is the Master to whom one selects to render obedience and faithful service. The position of slavery is aptly mentioned by Paul at Ephesians 6:5, 6: “You slaves, be obedient to those who are your masters . . . as Christ’s slaves, doing the will of God whole-souled. Be slaves with good inclinations, as to Jehovah, and not to men.” The reward for such course is described for us at Colossians 3:24 in these words: “For you know that it is from Jehovah you will receive the due reward of the inheritance. You are slaves to the Master Christ.”
3 When one considers that he has had opportunity to escape from slavery to the “god of this world” and from slavery to self, much happiness is the lot of those that will respond to the invitation to be ‘slaves of Christ,’ and render “sacred service” to Jehovah.—Rev. 22:3.
TRUSTWORTHY SLAVES
 4, 5. How may a master test the loyalty of his slaves, and what reward is given to the worker? To the sluggard?
4 Slaves are frequently tried by the master to determine competency and loyalty. This is well illustrated to us when a man was about to travel abroad. He summoned his slaves before him and gave them varied numbers of talents; one five, another two, and still another only one. After considerable time had passed the master returned and asked for an accounting of what the respective slaves had done with the talents he had given them. The one that received five talents had gained five and was rewarded by receiving even more responsibility, because of faithful service. The same was true also of the one who had been given two talents; he likewise responded favorably and profitably. Then to this one who had received two talents the master said, after having been shown that two additional talents had been gained: “Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.”
5 But what about the slave who had received only one talent? Rather than putting the talent to use in service to his master, he hid the talent. When the master returned, the slave returned the one talent to his master, but he had nothing more to show his master. The reply in this instance was: “Wicked and sluggish slave, you knew, did you, that I reaped where I did not sow and collected where I did not winnow? Well, then, you ought to have deposited my silver monies with the bankers, and on my arrival I would be receiving what is mine with interest. Therefore take away the talent from him and give it to him that has the ten talents. For to everyone that has, more will be given and he will have abundance; but as for him that does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him. And throw the good-for-nothing slave out into the darkness outside.” With this picture in mind, no difficulty in making the proper decision should be experienced by a true slave. He will subject himself completely and irrevocably to the service of his Master. Blessed and happy will be the lot of those slaves of Christ Jesus, because the Father’s blessings will include the inheriting of the kingdom that was provided for such faithful slaves. Slavery with this righteous Master can be a happy and desirable position, even for his “other sheep.”—Matt. 25:14-30; Luke 12:32; Matt. 25:34.
 6. How may a slave share happiness?
6 That is why Jehovah’s witnesses are happy people at this time. They recognize that they are in covenant relationship with Jehovah and have vowed to be in servitude to his every command. Rather than seeing how the limiting bounds given them as slaves may be stretched to suit their own personal desires, they say: ‘How can I conform my course of action to be absolutely certain that I am within the restrictions set by the Master?’
 7. What immediate reward is given to those who respond favorably to the Master’s words? To those who refuse?
7 Those who hear the words of liberation from Satan’s servitude will respond anxiously so they may render to Jehovah faithful, loyal service and will do this constantly. There will be an immediate reward to such, as Jehovah gives promise, saying concerning his “other sheep”: “They will hunger no more nor thirst any more, neither will the sun beat down upon them nor any scorching heat, because the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne will shepherd them, and will guide them to fountains of waters of life.” God’s promise is to wipe out every tear from their eyes. Just reflect, then, on this position of slavery in contrast with the miserable position of the great rebel Satan and his wicked invisible demons, his wicked earthly elements and those who are duped by all this. Through a knowledge of God’s Word we ascertain that which is the good and acceptable and complete will of God, and then we follow out the instructions as obedient slaves to our Master. In fact, if we do not do this, it will be a manifestation of rebellion on our part and we shall pass away with this rebellious, doomed world, because it as well as its desires is passing away; but he that does the will of God remains forever. The righteous course, free from rebellious tendencies, means life forever to the faithful, willing slaves.—Rev. 7:15-17; 1 John 2:17.

