Questions From Readers
● What can individuals do to stem the rising tide of immorality and godlessness?
Some persons feel that the way to do this is by joining a church, by doing social work or by entering politics. But impressive church membership figures—the so-called religious revival—have not stemmed the rising tide of godlessness, nor has the doing of social work. After entering politics, men of integrity soon find that they must either abandon politics or be corrupted to some degree themselves. Remembering that Satan is the cause of the increased godlessness, we see the futility of social and political efforts to remedy the situation. God’s Word points out the right course for individuals to take.
“Be training yourself with godly devotion as your aim.” That is the Bible’s counsel. So the honest-hearted individual does something toward stemming the tide of godlessness by starting with himself. He trains himself with godly devotion, putting on what the Bible calls a “new personality.” “Strip off the old personality with its practices, and clothe yourselves with the new personality which through accurate knowledge is being renewed according to the image of the one who created it.”—1 Tim. 4:7; Col. 3:9, 10.
To put on the “new personality,” take in accurate knowledge by studying God’s Word. Mentally absorb its righteous principles and apply those principles to your life. Yes, make your mind over: “Quit being fashioned after this system of things, but be transformed by making your mind over, that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and complete will of God.”—Rom. 12:2.
By making your mind over and putting on the “new personality,” you safeguard yourself from the rising tide of godlessness. Do more. The Scriptural rule is: “Bad associations spoil useful habits.” So associate with those who will not spoil your good habits but who will encourage you in them. Associate with the New World society of Jehovah’s witnesses; let these Christian witnesses encourage you in godly devotion.—1 Cor. 15:33.
Having protected yourself against the rising tide of godlessness, extend protection to others. How? By preaching to them both by word and by example.

