





The Delightful Course of Hospitality​—So Needed!

“Be hospitable to one another without grumbling.”​—1 PETER 4:9.
SONGS: 100, 87
HOW WOULD YOU ANSWER?
Why is it important to be hospitable to our brothers and sisters?

What opportunities do we have to be hospitable?

What can prevent us from being hospitable, and how can we improve?







 1. What difficulties did Christians have in the first century?
SOMETIME between the years 62 and 64, the apostle Peter wrote to “the temporary residents scattered about in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia.” (1 Peter 1:1) These brothers and sisters had come from many different places. They were facing “fiery trials,” or persecution, and needed encouragement and guidance. They also lived during a very dangerous time. Peter wrote: “The end of all things has drawn close.” In less than ten years, Jerusalem would be destroyed. What would help Christians everywhere to get through those stressful times?​—1 Peter 4:4, 7, 12.
2, 3. Why did Peter urge his brothers to be hospitable? (See opening picture.)
2 One thing Peter urged his brothers to do was to “be hospitable to one another.” (1 Peter 4:9) The Greek word for “hospitality” literally means “fondness for, or kindness to, strangers.” But Peter was urging his brothers and sisters to be hospitable “to one another,” even though they already knew one another and were doing things together. How would being hospitable help them?
3 It would draw them closer together. What about you? Do you remember the pleasant time you had when someone invited you to his home? And when you invited someone to your home, this brought you closer together. A good way to get to know our brothers and sisters is by being hospitable to them. Christians who lived in Peter’s time needed to draw closer to one another as problems became worse. In these “last days,” we need to do the same.​—2 Timothy 3:1.
 4. What questions will we discuss in this article?
4 In what ways can we be hospitable “to one another”? What can prevent us from being hospitable, and how can we improve? What can help us to be good guests?



OPPORTUNITIES TO BE HOSPITABLE

 5. How can we be hospitable at our Christian meetings?
5 At meetings: Jehovah and his organization invite us to the meetings. We want everyone who attends our meetings to feel welcome, especially new ones. (Romans 15:7) They are also Jehovah’s guests, so we need to make them feel comfortable, no matter what they look like or how they are dressed. (James 2:1-4) If you notice that a visitor is alone, could you invite him to sit with you? He may be grateful if you help him to understand what will be happening during the program or to find the scriptures that are being read. This would be an excellent way to “follow the course of hospitality.”​—Romans 12:13.
 6. To whom should we be the most hospitable?
6 For snacks or a meal: People in Bible times often showed hospitality by inviting others to their home for a meal, showing that they wanted to be friends and have peace. (Genesis 18:1-8; Judges 13:15; Luke 24:28-30) To whom should we be the most hospitable? It should be to the brothers and sisters in our congregation. As this system gets worse, we will need to depend on our brothers and sisters and be their loyal friends. In 2011, the Governing Body changed the time of the Watchtower Study for the United States Bethel family from 6:45 p.m. to 6:15 p.m. Why? The announcement said that it would probably be easier for Bethelites to accept and show hospitality to one another if the meeting ended earlier. Other branches have done the same. This has been a great opportunity for those in the Bethel family to get to know one another.
Could you invite new ones to have a snack or a meal or to go somewhere together?

7, 8. How can we be hospitable to visiting speakers?
7 Sometimes brothers from other congregations, circuit overseers, or representatives from Bethel give a talk to our congregation. Can we use these occasions to be hospitable to these brothers? (Read 3 John 5-8.) One way we can do this is to invite them to our home for a snack or a meal.
8 A sister in the United States remembers: “Over the years, my husband and I have had the opportunity to provide hospitality in our home for many speakers and their wives.” She feels that every experience strengthened their faith and at the same time was fun. She says: “We have never regretted it.”
9, 10. (a) Who may need to stay with us for a longer period of time? (b) Can those who have smaller homes help? Give an example.
9 Guests who stay longer: In Bible times, it was common to give some visitors a place to stay. (Job 31:32; Philemon 22) Today, we may need to do the same. Circuit overseers often need a place to stay when they visit congregations. This may also be the case with students of theocratic schools and with construction volunteers. And what about those who have become homeless after a natural disaster? They may need somewhere to live until their home is rebuilt. We should not assume that only those who have big homes can help. They may have already done so many times before. Can you offer someone a place to stay, even if your home is small?
10 A brother in South Korea remembers when students attending theocratic schools stayed with him. He writes: “I hesitated initially because we were newly married and living in a small house. But having students stay with us was truly a joyous experience. As newlyweds, we were able to see how happy a couple can be when they serve Jehovah and pursue spiritual goals together.”
11. Why may those who are new to your congregation need hospitality?
11 New brothers and sisters in the congregation: Some brothers and sisters or families may move to your area from other congregations. They may have come because your congregation needed help. Or they may be pioneers who were assigned to your congregation. This is a big change for them. They will have to adjust to a new area, a new congregation, and maybe even a new language or culture. Could you invite them to have a snack or a meal or to go somewhere together? This will help them to make new friends and adjust to their changed circumstances.
12. What experience shows that you do not need to prepare many things to be hospitable?
12 You do not need to prepare many things to be hospitable. (Read Luke 10:41, 42.) One brother remembers something that happened when he and his wife first became missionaries. He says: “We were young, inexperienced, and homesick. One evening my wife was particularly homesick, and my efforts to help were not working. Then, about 7:30 p.m., we heard a knock on the door. There stood a Bible student who brought us three oranges. She had come to welcome the new missionaries. We invited her in and gave her a glass of water. Then we made tea and hot chocolate. We didn’t know Swahili yet, and she didn’t know English.” The brother said that this experience helped them to start making friends with the local brothers and to be happier.



LET NOTHING STOP YOU FROM BEING HOSPITABLE

13. How does being hospitable help you?
13 Have you ever hesitated to be hospitable? If so, you may have missed an opportunity to have an enjoyable time and to make friends that you will have forever. Being hospitable is one of the best ways to stop feeling lonely. So why would anyone hesitate to be hospitable? There are a few reasons.
14. What can we do if we do not have enough time and energy to show or accept hospitality?
14 Time and energy: Jehovah’s people are very busy and have many responsibilities. Some may feel that they do not have enough time or energy to be hospitable. If you feel that way, you may need to change your schedule to be able to show and accept hospitality. This is important because the Bible urges us to be hospitable. (Hebrews 13:2) So being hospitable is the right thing to do. But to show hospitality, you may need to spend less time doing things that are less important.
15. Why may some feel that they cannot be hospitable?
15 How you feel about yourself: Have you ever wanted to be hospitable but felt that you could not do it? Perhaps you are shy and worry that your guests will get bored. Or perhaps you do not have much money and you worry that you cannot offer your guests what other brothers and sisters can. But remember that a home does not need to be fancy. Your guests will be happy if your home is clean and tidy and if you are friendly.
16, 17. What can you do if you feel anxious about having guests?
16 If you feel anxious about having guests, you are not alone. An elder in Britain admits: “There can be a measure of nervousness in preparing for guests. But as with anything in relation to serving Jehovah, the benefits and satisfaction that result far outweigh any anxiety. I have enjoyed simply sitting down with guests over coffee and talking.” It is always good to show personal interest in your guests. (Philippians 2:4) Most people enjoy talking about their experiences in life. We may hear their experiences only when we get together with them. Another elder writes: “Having friends from the congregation to my home helps me to understand them better and gives me time to get to know them, especially how they came into the truth.” If you show personal interest in your guests, you can be sure that all will enjoy themselves.
17 A pioneer sister who often had students from different theocratic schools stay with her admitted: “Initially I was concerned because my accommodations are very modest, and I have secondhand furniture. The wife of one of the instructors really put me at ease. She said that when she and her husband are serving in the traveling work, their best weeks are those spent staying with a spiritual person who may not have much materially but who has the same focus as they have​—serving Jehovah and keeping life simple. This reminded me of what my mum used to say to us as children: ‘Better a dish of vegetables where there’s love.’” (Proverbs 15:17) There is no need to worry, because what really matters is that we show love to our guests.
18, 19. How can being hospitable help us to overcome our negative feelings about others?
18 How you feel about others: Is there someone in your congregation who irritates you? If you do not try to overcome these negative feelings, your feelings will not change. You may not want to invite someone to your home if you do not like his personality. Or perhaps there is someone who hurt you in the past, and it is hard for you to forget.
19 The Bible says that you can improve your relationship with others, even with your enemies, if you are hospitable. (Read Proverbs 25:21, 22.) If you invite someone to your home, you may be able to overcome negative feelings and to develop a more peaceful relationship with him. You may begin to see the same good qualities in him that Jehovah saw when He drew him to the truth. (John 6:44) When love motivates you to invite someone who does not expect it, this could be the start of a good friendship. How can you make sure that love is really your motive? One way is to apply the counsel at Philippians 2:3: “With humility consider others superior to you.” We should think of ways that our brothers and sisters are superior to us. Maybe we can learn from their faith, endurance, or some other Christian quality. Thinking about their good qualities will deepen our love for them and make it easier to be hospitable.



BE A GOOD GUEST






Hosts usually prepare well for their guests (See paragraph 20)




20. Why and how should we be reliable when we have accepted an invitation?
20 The psalmist David asked: “O Jehovah, who may be a guest in your tent?” (Psalm 15:1) After that, David discussed qualities that Jehovah wants his guests to have. One of these is being reliable: “He does not go back on his promise, even when it is bad for him.” (Psalm 15:4) If we accept an invitation, we should not cancel unless it is absolutely necessary. The host may have already prepared for our visit, and if we cancel, all his effort will have been wasted. (Matthew 5:37) Some people cancel one invitation so that they can accept one they feel is better. Is that loving and respectful? We should be grateful for whatever our host offers us. (Luke 10:7) If we must cancel, then it would be loving and thoughtful to let our host know as soon as possible.
21. How can respecting local customs help us to be good guests?
21 It is also important to respect local customs. In some cultures, unexpected guests are welcome. In others, it is better to make arrangements before we visit. In some places, the host offers his guests the best food he has, and his family comes second. In others, everyone is treated the same. In some areas, guests normally bring something to contribute to the meal. In others, hosts prefer that their guests not bring anything. In some cultures, guests politely refuse the first or second invitation. But in others, it is rude not to accept the first invitation. We should always do our best to make sure that our host will be happy that he invited us.
22. Why is it so important to “be hospitable to one another”?
22 Peter said: “The end of all things has drawn close.” (1 Peter 4:7) Today, we face the greatest tribulation the world will ever experience. As this system gets worse, we will need to have deep love for our brothers and sisters. Peter’s counsel applies now more than ever: “Be hospitable to one another.” (1 Peter 4:9) Yes, hospitality is enjoyable and necessary now and forever.



