Service Meetings for February
Week Starting February 3
Song 27
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Theocratic News.
15 min: “Share In the Work That Will Never Be Repeated.” Questions and answers. As time permits, include points from “Keeping on the Watch​—How?” on pages 714-15 of the Proclaimers book.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News With a Sense of Urgency.” (Paragraphs 1-5) After brief comments on paragraph 1, chairman discusses paragraphs 2-5 with two or three publishers. They review highlights of the suggested presentations and comment on why these or similar presentations may be effective in the local territory. Publishers take turns practicing the presentations. Chairman gives commendation, suggests ways to make them more effective, and offers reminders on the need to mention the donation arrangement. He then asks audience about ways the goal of starting studies can be reached. Gives specific ideas of how eventually to get a study started in the Knowledge book.
Song 34 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 10
Song 29
 5 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
10 min: “Presenting the Good News With a Sense of Urgency.” (Paragraphs 6-8) Demonstrate presentations in paragraphs 6-7. Emphasize the need to make a return visit where interest is shown.
30 min: “Wanted​—100,000 Auxiliary Pioneers.” Question-and-answer coverage by the service overseer. Highlight the box on page 3. Review the sample schedules on page 6. Each baptized publisher ought to consider personally and prayerfully whether he is able to enroll for one or more months. Unbaptized publishers can expand their share in the ministry by setting their own goal of hours each month.
Song 43 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 17
Song 30
10 min: Local announcements. Mention interesting talking points in the current magazines that can be used in service this week.
13 min: “The Memorial​—An Event of Great Importance!” Questions and answers. Offer encouragement to make the entire month of March special by auxiliary pioneering. Highlight use of Memorial invitations.
22 min: Starting Home Bible Studies. In recent months, hundreds of thousands of bound books have been placed. This provides a basis for starting many more home Bible studies. Review what was accomplished locally in placing books and other literature. Encourage publishers to follow up on all interest. Have several publishers relate specifically the effort required on their part to start new home Bible studies. Emphasize that an integral part of our commission is to make disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) This can be done effectively if we endeavor to apply suggestions set out in the June 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry insert.
Song 47 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting February 24
Song 32
18 min: Local announcements. Announce the names of all who are auxiliary pioneering in March. Explain that it is not too late to submit an application. Encourage all to have a full share in field service on Saturday, March 1. Outline the additional arrangements that are being made locally for meetings for service during the month. Carefully review the Question Box.
12 min: “What About Your Relatives?” Husband and wife discuss the article together and decide on how to approach unbelieving relatives with the good news.​—See February 15, 1990, Watchtower, pages 25-7.
15 min: Review Literature Offer for March​—The Secret of Family Happiness. Briefly discuss the reasons behind family breakdown in modern society. (See October 15, 1992, Watchtower, pages 4-7.) Review the book’s contents, on page 3. Invite audience to pick out chapters that could provide the basis for a presentation. Point out the helpful teaching box that appears at the end of each chapter. Have a capable publisher demonstrate how to present the book. Remind all to pick up copies for use this weekend and to mention the donation arrangement when placing them.
Song 48 and concluding prayer.

