Share In the Work That Will Never Be Repeated
1 At various times throughout mankind’s history, it was necessary for Jehovah to execute judgment upon his enemies. However, because of his mercy, he provided righthearted ones with an opportunity for salvation. (Ps. 103:13) Their response determined their destiny.
2 For example, prior to the Flood, in 2370 B.C.E., Noah was “a preacher of righteousness.” The ones who perished were those who ignored the divine warning. (2 Pet. 2:5; Heb. 11:7) Before the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 C.E., Jesus clearly outlined the action that would be needed for anyone to escape the devastation that was to befall the city. All who rejected his warning message suffered dire consequences. (Luke 21:20-24) Such divine warnings and judgments were repeated many times throughout history.
3 A Modern-Day Warning Work: Jehovah long ago declared that his anger would be unleashed against today’s wicked system and that only the meek ones would survive. (Zeph. 2:2, 3; 3:8) The time for preaching this warning message is fast running out! The “great tribulation” is just ahead, and meek ones are now being gathered. Indeed, the “fields” are “white for harvesting.” Hence, no other work can compare with this as to importance and urgency.​—Matt. 24:14, 21, 22; John 4:35.
4 We must share in sounding the modern-day warning to others, “whether they will hear or will refrain.” This is a God-given assignment, which we dare not ignore. (Ezek. 2:4, 5; 3:17, 18) Our having a full share in this work provides a convincing demonstration of our deep love for God, our genuine concern for our neighbors, and our unshakable faith in our Savior, Jesus Christ.
5 Now Is the Time to Act: After past judgments by Jehovah, wickedness always sprang up anew because Satan and his demons were still active. However, this time it will be different. Satanic influence will be eliminated. A global warning about an impending “great tribulation” will never again be needed. (Rev. 7:14; Rom. 16:20) We have the special privilege of being part of a never-to-be-repeated work. Now is the time for us to make the most of this opportunity.
6 About his preaching activity, the apostle Paul, with great conviction, stated: “I am clean from the blood of all men.” (Acts 20:26) He did not feel bloodguilty through any failure to sound the warning. Why not? Because he could say of his ministry: “To this end I am indeed working hard, exerting myself.” (Col. 1:29) Let us enjoy the same satisfaction of sharing to the fullest extent possible in the work that will never be repeated!​—2 Tim. 2:15.

