Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● Does the fact that Christians are not to love the world mean that they do not love their neighbors?
No; the Bible specifically commands them to love their neighbor as themselves, and they show this love by rendering both spiritual and material assistance as they are able. However, they do not cast in their lot with the wicked system of things nor do they copy its ways.—Pp. 519, 520.a
● Why do the religions of Christendom present the greatest pitfall to mankind?
While claiming to be Christian, they advocate lawlessness by rejecting the commandments set out in the Word of God.—P. 529.
● In how many languages is the Bible now translated?
1,165. The complete Bible is in 221 languages.—P. 532.
● What quality will help one to avoid stumbling others and being stumbled by others?
Love, both for God and his law and for one’s neighbor.—Pp. 541, 543.
● How did early Christians view the eating of blood?
As a violation of God’s law; as a denial of Christian faith. They abstained even when it put their lives in danger at the hands of their persecutors.—P. 556.
● Since Jehovah’s witnesses refuse blood transfusions, is there anything that can be done on their behalf in the event of severe blood loss?
Yes. Where fluid loss is excessive, plasma volume expanders, such as dextran and saline solution, can be used. The body itself is marvelously equipped to replace blood loss from its own reserves. Even from a medical standpoint the most desirable way to treat bloodloss anemia is not by blood transfusion but by iron therapy.—P. 565.
● Is medical treatment that violates God’s law truly lifesaving?
No. It jeopardizes one’s opportunity for eternal life in God’s new world.—P. 565.
● What should Christian youths do to keep from being sucked into the delinquency of the old world?
Avoid unnecessary association with those who do not love Jehovah; pay attention to the counsel of their parents; study the Bible; keep busy in Christian work and in association with others who are serving God.—P. 571.
● Do the inspired books of the Bible teach that the prayers of the living in some way benefit the dead?
No; however, this idea is found in the Apocrypha and among such non-Christians as Hindus and Buddhists.—Pp. 581, 582.
● What does it mean to have a unified heart?
It means that one’s heart is free of the fear of men; it is not divided in its affections; it is dominated by the wholesome fear of Jehovah.—Pp. 587, 588.
● Among Christians today, who share in prophesying, and how?
Every member of the Christian congregation; all upon whom God has put his spirit. This they do by speaking about the prophecies that God has had recorded in his own Word, many of which are being fulfilled in our day.—Pp. 592-595.
● What was the former occupation of the apostle Matthew, and how is this reflected in his Gospel account?
He was a tax collector. His references to money values, his care in the use of numbers, his record of the genealogy of Jesus, all reflect this background.—P. 605.
● When are all nations due to unite under God’s kingdom?
Already Jehovah’s witnesses from all parts of the globe, from 181 (now 185) lands, have united under God’s heavenly kingdom, and only those persons who do thus unite under the kingdom of God will survive into God’s united new world.—Pp. 621, 625.
● Since when have all the many features of the sign of Christ’s second presence been in evidence?
A.D. 1914.—P. 632.
● What name do true Christians have called upon them that differentiates them from the nominal Christians of Christendom?
The name of their God, Jehovah.—P. 654.
● From what apostle did Mark apparently get much of the material that he included in his Gospel?
Peter.—P. 664.
● What position do Christians take toward weekly sabbath observance?
It is not a Christian requirement. It was given to the Jews and foreshadowed the thousand-year reign of Christ.—P. 680.
● What obligation do all Christians have as regards the “word of life”?
They are under obligation to publish it, to bring it to others, in imitation of Jesus Christ.—P. 687.
● How is Luke’s background as a physician reflected in his writing of the Gospel of Luke?
He uses more than three hundred medical terms or words to which he gives a medical meaning; he also shows warmhearted concern for women and children and for those who were poor or oppressed.—Pp. 696, 697.
● Does God answer all prayers?
No, only those offered in faith and according to his will.—P. 710.
● How has the locust plague foretold by the prophet Joel been fulfilled?
The persistent preaching by the first-century Christians following Pentecost about God’s kingdom and about destruction to come on that “crooked generation” made the unrepentant Jews feel that Jerusalem had been overrun by these Christian witnesses, as if by a locust plague. In modern times the preaching of Jehovah’s judgment messages by his anointed witnesses, particularly since 1926, has been as tormenting as a locust plague to Christendom.—Pp. 715, 717, 722.
● What is pictured by the “low plain of the decision” spoken of in Joel 3:14?
Armageddon, at which Jehovah will execute his judgment on the nations.—Pp. 724, 725.
● Is sexual sterilization of a man or woman Scripturally proper?
No.—P. 734.
● What is required if one is to have unfailing courage in these days?
He must know and have confidence in Jehovah God and he must have a knowledge and appreciation of the counsel and promises in His Word the Bible.—P. 742.
● Like King David, what is the “one thing” that Christians ask of Jehovah, and how do they prove the sincerity of their request?
They ask that they may dwell in Jehovah’s house all the days of their life, and they show the sincerity of their request by availing themselves of every opportunity to associate with Jehovah’s congregation in their worship both in meetings and in preaching from house to house.—P. 750.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1961.

