The Blessing of Freedom of Assembly in Greece!
HEADLINES on the front pages of daily papers in Athens heralded the news: Jehovah’s Witnesses are holding a large public assembly in Greece!
Often accompanied by photographs of the gathering, headlines such as the following declared: “20,000 ATTENDING INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS,” “A CROWDED GATHERING OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES!” “A PEACEFUL GATHERING!”
But what was so unusual about that? Jehovah’s witnesses are known throughout the world for their large conventions. Hundreds of these have been held in major cities all over the world for decades. The largest baseball stadiums, soccer fields, racetracks, auditoriums and various other places that can accommodate large crowds have been the scenes of many public assemblies by Jehovah’s witnesses.
Why, then, did this event make headline news in Athens this past July?
WHY FRONT-PAGE NEWS?
This gathering was front-page news because it represented a remarkable reversal! This was the first time that authorities had ever permitted Jehovah’s witnesses to have a large assembly in Greece! Previous governments had forbidden these Christians to have such gatherings, gatherings that in other countries are welcomed as normal events each year.
But for Greece, the organizing and successful convening of the assembly this year was an event of extraordinary importance. It meant a big change in attitude on the part of the government. And because this four-day assembly represented a milestone in Greece, it was given wide publicity by the press.
Why were such assemblies not possible before? Because the dominant Greek Orthodox Church had successfully pressured previous governments so that these assemblies were forbidden. Indeed, religious intolerance and persecution by the clergy was such that even the marriages of Jehovah’s witnesses were refused legal recognition. And the offspring of such marriages were regarded as illegitimate.
EVENTS LEADING TO ASSEMBLY
Months before the event, Jehovah’s witnesses in Greece decided to try to hold an assembly in or near Athens about mid-July. But since no such convention had been allowed by previous governments, there were doubts as to whether permission would be granted.
However, certain events provided some hope that this peaceful gathering of sincere Christians might be possible. First, in 1974 a new government came into power in Greece, followed by the adoption of a new democratic-type constitution. This constitution became operative on and after June 11, 1975.
The new constitution safeguarded, among other things, the right of peaceful assembly. Also, it guaranteed freedom of religious conscience, and the performance of religious services of any known religion without hindrance. These basic rights were to be protected by law.
Another significant event was that, on July 8, 1975, the Athens newspapers published the judgment of the Council of State, No. 2106/1975. This judgment declared that the religion of Jehovah’s witnesses is a known and recognized one, and that any solemnized marriage unions between Jehovah’s witnesses were to be recognized by law. Any children coming from these marriages were to be regarded as legitimate.
These new developments created a favorable atmosphere. They raised hopes that at last a trouble-free assembly could be convened. That would truly be a milestone in the fight for freedom of worship in Greece. For, although once labeled as the “cradle of democracy,” Greece had lost many fundamental democratic rights because of clergy interference and dictatorial-type rule. Yes, for a long time that “cradle” proved to be empty!
Application had been made to the proper authorities for a four-day assembly. The application was considered by the authorities​—and approved!
The site of this “Divine Sovereignty” Assembly was the Apollo Stadium located at Rhizupolis, near Athens. The program would be similar to that of the many other assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses being held this year in scores of different cities throughout the world.
ASSEMBLY PREPARATIONS
Before the assembly began, many of Jehovah’s witnesses with various skills came to work, free of charge, to prepare the stadium. With enthusiasm they undertook the task, very appreciative of the privilege to be a part of this important history-making occasion.
For one thing, a stage had to be constructed for the various program parts. Loudspeaking units had to be set up in many places around the stadium. In addition, toilet facilities for men and women had to be constructed, since the stadium lacked these. Parking areas nearby were arranged. Much other work was done so that those who attended would be comfortable and have their needs cared for, physical as well as spiritual needs.
When the time came for the assembly to begin, on Thursday, July 10, throngs of conventioners peacefully entered the stadium and occupied their seats. It was a marvelous, thrilling spectacle, in view of the past history of clergy opposition and intolerance. Tears flowed freely from many eyes.
In other lands where Jehovah’s witnesses regularly convene, assemblies are well advertised, through the press, radio and television, as well as by means of printed invitations left at the homes of people living in the area. But here, in an attempt to avoid any possible problem, all such preassembly publicity was avoided.
VAST PUBLICITY
But vast publicity was given the occasion anyhow! The Greek Orthodox Church and related organizations began a full-scale publicity campaign of vilification and insult.
Metropolitan Augustine of Florina, Macedonia, said, as reported by the daily Athens newspaper Hellinikos Vorras on July 6: “It is imperative to convene the whole hierarchy extraordinarily in order to face social and religious facts of enormous importance. The Church will betray itself if it continues inactive. We very strongly protest against [the assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses], and wish to hope that it will be cancelled at the last moment; otherwise, by order of the Synod, all priests of Athens should get up to the steeples and mournfully ring the churches’ bells, all during this satanic congress. For, without exaggeration, something is dying in Greece, and what is dying is its soul, which soul is the orthodox faith.”
Church organizations followed the lead of the clergy. For instance, hundreds of thousands of handbills containing false accusations against Jehovah’s witnesses were distributed to homes and shops in the Athens-Piraeus areas. One handbill, sponsored by six religious magazines, contained statements such as these about Jehovah’s witnesses: “Agents of International Zionism are on the move with dollars of the American Jews.” “They . . . disown Christ.” “They preach . . . domination of Israel over the whole world.” The handbill concluded: “GREEK PEOPLE! Will you allow the gathering of such people?”
Yet, persons with even an elementary knowledge of the beliefs of Jehovah’s witnesses know that such charges are totally false. It is absurd to claim that American Jewish dollars are financing Jehovah’s witnesses when the Witnesses today declare that Jewish Zionism will fail.a Also, anyone who examines the publications of Jehovah’s witnesses can see that the highest respect is given to Jesus Christ because of his relationship to the Creator, Jehovah God, and because of the part that Christ plays in God’s purposes.
As for the attitude of Jehovah’s witnesses toward governmental authorities, it is well known that they are law-abiding and peaceful. They obey Jesus Christ’s command ‘to give to Caesar what is Caesar’s and to give to God what is God’s.’ (Matt. 22:21) All of Jehovah’s witnesses are taught to respect civil authority, since Romans 13:1 says: “Let every soul be in subjection to the superior authorities,” that is, the civil governments. Hence, Jehovah’s witnesses obey all the laws of the land that do not conflict with the laws of God.
In addition to distributing slanderous handbills, representatives of the Holy Synod took steps to try to pressure government authorities to cancel the assembly. To this end, clergymen and clergy-inspired persons dispatched thousands of telegrams to the Ministry of Religions and to the Premier’s Bureau.
WHAT WOULD THE GOVERNMENT DO?
The question now was: What would the Greek government do? Would it yield to the clergy’s pressure? Would it forbid a peaceful Christian gathering held in full accord with the laws of the land? Would the newly voted Greek constitution, safeguarding the freedom of assembly, prove effective?
Newspapers widely noted the protests against the assembly from church leaders and their related groups. Also, it was noted that Archbishop Seraphim personally pressured the Ministers of Interior and of Public Order to try to cancel the assembly. As the daily Vradyni observed, these objections were “being considered on the part of the Government.”
But to the credit of the Greek government, it did not give in to this religious pressure! Neither the religious groups, nor the metropolitans, nor Archbishop Seraphim could prevail! The Greek government proved that it respected and applied the recently approved Greek constitution. It was determined to protect the rights of all its people, not just some of them. Hence, as one observer commented, it could be said that in this matter “democracy has finally returned to its cradle” after a long absence.
A TREMENDOUS WITNESS
The peaceful, four-day-long assembly was thoroughly enjoyed by those who attended. And the orderliness and exemplary conduct of the delegates were observed favorably by many who were not Jehovah’s witnesses. As a result, a tremendous witness was given throughout Greece.
On the second day of the assembly, newspapers published fine panoramic pictures of the assembled multitudes in the stadium. The comments of the newspapers were objective. Also, television teams came and recorded scenes of different program parts, such as the Bible dramas that were enacted to illustrate various Bible principles. These scenes, along with others of the packed stadium, were shown on national television, something that could not even be imagined as recently as one year ago!
The peaceful assembly, the fine program with its upbuilding information about God and his purposes, and the orderliness of the Witnesses, were contrasted in the minds of many people with the ungodly conduct of the clergy and their religious organizations. Fanatical religionists distributed their slanderous handbills right along the roads leading to the stadium, trying to instigate people to hostile action against the Witnesses.
Other fanatics took out icons, such as the “crucifix” and the “six-winged cherubs” from a nearby church, and, under the leadership of a priest, arranged themselves opposite the stadium. They chanted, and made menacing gestures to the passing Witnesses. And all during these noisy demonstrations the bells of the neighboring churches rang mournfully.
However, no serious incident occurred. Jehovah’s witnesses had been instructed to continue their usual calm and unprovocative behavior in all situations. They paid no attention to the troublemakers and avoided any discussion that could irritate anyone and possibly lead to a disturbance.
On the next-to-the-last day of the assembly, over 400 priests gathered at St. Irene Church. The Athens daily Akropolis reported: ‘400 PRIESTS CONDEMN ASSEMBLY​—PREPARED FOR ANY COST AND FIGHT IF REPEATED.’ The newspaper printed a resolution passed by the priests. It said, in part: “We the Greek Orthodox priests, convened in an extraordinary pan-clerical gathering today . . . express our vivid uneasiness . . . The granting of a permit [for the assembly] in spite of the steps taken by the Holy Synod of Monsignor Seraphim, Archbishop of Athens and of all Greece, and of the Right Reverend Metropolitans, constitutes a hostile action against the Church, since [Jehovah’s witnesses] are not merely of another creed, but they are avowed enemies and persecutors of the Church . . . We forewarn the Government, the country’s Parliament and all governmental administrations, that we the curates, leaders, assistants and friends of our honor-conscious, gentle and pious Greek people, are ready for any fight and cost on all similar future actions of the Government.”
But, of course, unprejudiced observers could easily see that it was not Jehovah’s witnesses who showed disrespect for the government, nor did they persecute the Church in any way. Instead, the Greek Orthodox clergy clearly demonstrated their hostility against the government and its constitution, engaging in unchristian political meddling. It was the clergy that engaged in persecution, trying to prevent the assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses, by their slanderous accusations, and by trying to incite the people against these peaceful Christians.
The police acted in a very commendable way. They saw to it that the rights of the people were upheld. Commendation was properly expressed for this fine attitude of the Greek police. When a few disturbers caused some damage to the parked automobiles of several of Jehovah’s witnesses, the police suggested taking action against the perpetrators. But seeking to avoid any difficulty on this occasion, the Witnesses felt that it would be better not to take action against these lawless elements. Happily, one of Jehovah’s witnesses who owns an automobile service station offered to repair the damaged cars at his own expense.
During the four days of the assembly, and in the days after, the subject of this gathering was in the forefront of the newspaper reports. Discussions were held everywhere about the event. Many honesthearted people expressed their disgust at the ugly demonstrations and improper protests of the religious organizations.
A well-known parliament deputy of Athens, and commentator of a leading Athenian daily newspaper, wrote: “I could not understand the unrestrained wrath of the [church] organizations, who want the heads of Jehovah’s witnesses upon a platter.” (Daily To Vima, July 16, 1975) Another Athenian paper published a fine picture of the assembly. And when some of its readers protested this newspaper’s coverage of the assembly, the paper answered: ‘So many thousands of people gathering somewhere for any purpose whatever makes up news. How can this be ignored by a newspaper, dear readers, whatever you are as respects this manifestation​—whether enemies, friends or indifferent?’​—Athens daily Kathimerini, July 12, 1975.
One newsman asked a Witness who was in charge of public relations: “The church bells that are ringing mournfully​—what do you have to say about them?” The Witness answered: “For us, this gathering is a time of joy and gladness. But for those people it is a time of lamenting, so they ring their bells mournfully.”
The spirit of the two peoples was indeed sharply contrasted, calling to mind that God’s Word says that where the spirit of God is there are also to be found “love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith, mildness, self-control.” (Gal. 5:22, 23) Also called to mind was what God, through the prophet Isaiah, said long ago: “Look! My own servants will cry out joyfully because of the good condition of the heart, but you [opposers] yourselves will make outcries because of the pain of heart and you will howl because of sheer breakdown of spirit.”​—Isa. 65:14.
OBSERVERS COMMENT FAVORABLY
The order and cleanliness that prevailed throughout the assembly impressed observers favorably, even those who previously held opinions that were unfavorable.
The officers and men of the police in charge of traffic and law enforcement around the stadium expressed great satisfaction with the prompt obedience of Jehovah’s witnesses when given instructions by the police. An officer said: “If all gatherings held were so orderly, we policemen would not be needed for anything.”
The men of the stadium’s management expressed their appreciation for the peace, order and cleanliness of the Christians who filled their stadium. They declared that the facilities “will always be at the Witnesses’ disposal.”
A visitor who came to the assembly commented: “Not a small bit of paper is in this stadium. What a clean people Jehovah’s witnesses are!” A journalist wrote: “The stadium was packed, but . . . no smoke was there.” He was impressed by the fact that no one was smoking tobacco. An engineer of a nearby electric factory, after attending some of the sessions, declared: “Now I will be regularly attending your meetings.”
Truly this assembly was a momentous, never-to-be-forgotten occasion. It was certainly a milestone in the activity of Jehovah’s Christian witnesses in Greece. The freedom to enjoy peaceful assembly in this way for the first time was greatly appreciated.
The crowd of 19,211 who listened to the concluding comments on Sunday evening expressed their profound thanks to the Sovereign Lord Jehovah and to his Son Jesus Christ for this marvelous occasion. With prolonged applause they also expressed their thanks to all those who made this fine assembly possible.
AN ENJOYABLE ASSEMBLY IN THESSALONICA TOO!
Three weeks after the successful assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in Athens, a similar four-day assembly was held in the historical city of Thessalonica, Macedonia. On the final day of this assembly, August 3, an enthusiastic throng of 10,124 heard the encouraging information that God’s righteous new order will soon be a reality.
The reaction of the Greek Orthodox clergy and their religious organizations was similar to what took place during the Athens assembly. However, the responsible officer in charge of the gendarmerie in Central Macedonia told the assembly organization: “The Constitution, and the laws of the State, protect you and we are here to grant you protection during your assembly and wherever it will be necessary.” And the Police Director of Thessalonica added: “Our men will be at your disposal to protect you. I personally know that you are law-abiding people and you do not need policemen around you. But our men will be there.” So in Thessalonica, as previously in Athens, the authorities demonstrated their respect for the new Greek constitution.
All who attended greatly enjoyed this blessing of freedom of assembly to hear God’s Word, just as their brothers had three weeks before in Athens.
[Footnotes]
See Man’s Salvation Out of World Distress at Hand!, published in 1975 by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. Note particularly chapter 13 entitled “When Christendom and Judaism Are No More!”
[Picture on page 549]
The “Divine Sovereignty” Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses at the Apollo Stadium, near Athens, Greece, July 10-13, 1975

