





COVER SUBJECT | WHY BE HONEST?
How Dishonesty Affects You

“There are always difficult situations that can be solved with a little dishonesty.”—Samantha, South Africa.





Do you agree with that statement? Like Samantha, all of us have faced difficult situations at one time or another. How we react to situations that tempt us to be dishonest can reveal what values we hold dear. For example, if saving face is paramount to us, we would likely view being dishonest as just another tool used to accomplish the task. When the truth comes to light, however, dishonesty often brings negative consequences. Consider the following.



DISHONESTY DESTROYS TRUST

Relationships are built on trust. When two people trust each other, they feel safe and secure. But trust does not happen overnight. People build trust when they spend time together, engaging in honest communication and acting unselfishly. Trust can be shattered, however, by just one act of dishonesty. And when trust has been broken, it can be very difficult to rebuild.
Have you ever been deceived by someone you thought was a good friend? If so, how did you feel? Likely you felt hurt, even betrayed. That certainly is understandable. There is little doubt that dishonesty can destroy the fabric of precious relationships.



DISHONESTY BREEDS DISHONESTY

A study by Robert Innes, a professor of economics at the University of California, found that “dishonesty is indeed contagious.” Thus, dishonesty could be likened to a virus—the more contact you have with a person who is deceitful, the greater your risk of being “infected” with dishonesty yourself.
How can you avoid falling into the trap of dishonesty? The Bible can help you. Please consider a few Bible principles.



Forms of Dishonesty
Lying





WHAT IS IT? Saying something false to someone who is entitled to know the truth. Lying can include misrepresenting or distorting facts in order to mislead a person, omitting key information to deceive someone, and exaggerating the truth in order to give a false impression.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Jehovah detests a devious person, but His close friendship is with the upright.” (Proverbs 3:32) “Now that you have put away deceit, each one of you speak truth with his neighbor.”—Ephesians 4:25.
Slander





WHAT IS IT? Uttering false and malicious statements that injure a person’s reputation.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “A troublemaker causes dissension, and a slanderer separates close friends.” (Proverbs 16:28) “Where there is no wood, the fire goes out, and where there is no slanderer, quarreling ceases.”—Proverbs 26:20.
Fraud





WHAT IS IT? Inducing someone to part with money or property on false pretenses.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “You must not defraud a hired worker who is in need and poor.” (Deuteronomy 24:14, 15) “The one who defrauds the lowly one insults his Maker, but whoever shows compassion to the poor glorifies Him.”—Proverbs 14:31.
Stealing





WHAT IS IT? Taking property from a person without permission.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: “Let the one who steals steal no more; rather, let him do hard work, doing good work with his hands, so that he may have something to share with someone in need.” (Ephesians 4:28) “Do not be misled. . . . Thieves, greedy people, drunkards, revilers, and extortioners will not inherit God’s Kingdom.”—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.


