From Our Readers
Single-Parent Families  I just can’t express enough how much I appreciated reading the cover series “Single-Parent Families Can Succeed.” (October 8, 2002) I can’t stop reading it! I am a single parent of two children. Every time I read these articles, I reassure myself that I can succeed and that I’m not alone. Thank you so much!
C. B., United States
I am divorced. Life was very demanding when I was left alone with two children. I thank Jehovah that he hears our cries and responds with such loving articles. In this way he assures us that he is thinking of us and that he loves us.
L. T., Czech Republic
Thank you so much for printing these articles. I had just begun to feel overwhelmed by my present circumstances of being a single parent and returning to the work force after having been a stay-at-home mom for years. However, the articles gave me the hope and encouragement I needed to go on. I plan to apply the suggestions, such as being well organized and having a regular family Bible study. I will keep this magazine nearby and will read it every time I begin to feel overwhelmed again.
B. A., United States
I became a single parent to my son and daughter 14 years ago. I thank you for the effort you make in your publications, yet I was disappointed in parts of this series. For example, the word “successful” was used over and over. I feel that I’ve implemented the suggestions on page 11, but I have not had the same level of success as the parent pictured on that page. Surely success is not just a matter of your child becoming a full-time evangelizer or a missionary.
M. S., Japan
“Awake!” responds: We realize that success can be measured in different ways. Our intent was to offer practical suggestions to help single parents cope with life’s daunting challenges and to provide reassurance that their efforts are not futile. Examples of youths in full-time service were used to show that single parents have succeeded in raising God-fearing children. Our hope is that all parents—single or married—will continue to care for the spiritual, emotional, and physical needs of their children.
Irish Famine  Thank you for the informative article “The Great Irish Famine—An Epic of Death and Emigration.” (October 8, 2002) During the period of this famine, many Irish immigrants came to Canada by ship. Many died because of cholera, typhus, and other diseases. Many children were orphaned, and some were adopted by French-speaking families and given French surnames. Hence, in time, the Irish background of many people was lost.
K. S., Canada
Young People Ask  I want to comment on your article “Young People Ask . . . Why Doesn’t My Parent Love Me?” (September 22, 2002) After my parents divorced, I started going through a serious depression. At times, it seemed that no one could help me. I have the greatest mother and brother anyone could ask for, but sometimes I feel like a piece of my heart is missing—the piece my dad has taken. I prayed to Jehovah for something to come along and build me up. That is just what this article did. It helped me to feel better about myself, and I learned how to cope. What really touched me was Psalm 27:10. It helped me to realize that Jehovah loves me even when it seems no one else does.
D. B., United States

