VOL. XXIX. DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6037 



CONTENTS 

Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society's Report 
for 1908 371 

The Watch Tower Subscription List 372 

Our Correspondence Department 372 

Evangelizing Through Newspapers 372 

The Society's Colportage 373 

The Tract and Volunteer Work 373 

The Pilgrim Service 374 

Summary of the Year's Work 374 

The Temple of God is Holy 374 

The Greater Than Solomon's 379 

A Review Lesson— December 27 381 

Resolved, by God's Assisting Grace 381 

Fourteen Elders and Others 382 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 



they send a Postal Card each MAY stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



"THE WONDERFUL STORY OF GOD'S LOVE" 



Just issued— a poem of 59 verses by Sister M. R. Land. 
It is a beautiful little booklet, appropriately illustrated, and 
suggested for use as a Christmas token. Price, 15c or $1.50 
per dozen, postpaid. 

DANO-NORWEGIAN AND SWEDISH LITERATURE 



Tabernacle Shadows and Spiritism booklets in the Dano-Norwegian 
language, 10c each. Also excellent Norwegian 
Volunteer matter. 

The Hell Booklets in cloth at 10c and in board covers 
at 15c, in Swedish; also Spiritism and Tabernacle Shadows 
treatises in TOWER form, in Swedish, at 5c per copy. Tabernacle 
Shadows in booklet form at 10c each. Plenty of good 
Swedish Volunteer matter. 

Volume 1 in Hollandish is now in stock at 25c per copy. 

MOTTOES, POSTCARDS and BOOKLETS for CHRISTMAS 



We have a choice line at very low prices, as set forth in 
our issue of November 1st. Also "Sermonette" Postcards, 15c 
per dozen, postpaid. 

Glacier Window Mottoes, like those exhibited at the Convention, 
30c per dozen, postpaid. 

OLD THEOLOGY QUARTERLY 



We are about to discontinue these Tracts. Order at once all 
you can use, so we need not move the stock to our new quarters. 



R4293 : page 371 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY'S REPORT 

-DECEMBER 1, 1907, TO DECEMBER 1, 1908.- 

FOR many years the work of the Society has shown 

phenomenal progress, our last report being the 

best of all— an astonishment even to the most 

hopeful. Of course, in the face of the financial depression, 

we had not the courage to hope that the present 

year would even nearly come up to last year's remarkable 

showing. We are confident, therefore, dear brethren, 

that you will be overwhelmed with surprise to learn that, 

notwithstanding the adverse conditions to which the 

panic led, the present year not only shows as favorably 

as last year, but shows a great improvement. We may 

well rejoice with one another and give to our Lord all 

the praise. Surely without him we could do nothing, 

in the face of the opposition which we continually meet 

from the world, from the flesh, and, above all, from our 

great Adversary, who works in and through the blinded 

children of disobedience. Ah! more and more do we 

realize the meaning of the Apostle's words, when he declares, 

"We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with 

wicked spirits in high positions."— Eph. 6:12. 

The contest is so unequal that if we did not have 
the supervision and protection of our Lord through his 
various agencies, we would surely be deceived and 
thwarted in every direction. As it is, in the light of 
our Lamp, the Word of God, we know what to expect; 
that for the harvest testing, which begins with the 
house of God and extends to the nominal systems and 
the world, there will be a relaxing of the Divine restraints 
upon the evil spirits, permitting their greater 
activity and correspondingly more and more severe 
tests upon all mankind. We remember our Lord's words, 
to the effect that the deceptions would ultimately prove 
so severe that they would "deceive, if it were possible, the 
very elect." It will not be possible, because for this 
class the Lord will provide special protection, special 
warnings, special assistances. We note the Apostle's 
remark that if it began first with us, what will the end 
be upon those who obey not the Gospel? "If the 
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly 
and the sinner appear?"— I Pet. 4:18. 

While the report shows progress in the work accomplished 
in extending the Truth to others, our chief 
cause for rejoicing lies in the fact that a deep work of 
grace seems to be in progress in many places; we believe 



very generally throughout all the Harvest work, considered 

as a whole. We are able to form, we think, 

fairly good estimates along these lines from the phraseology 

of the letters we receive and also from the reports 

made to us by the "Pilgrims." The spirit of brotherhood, 

the spirit of love, seems to be on the increase, 

even as the reverse spirit is increasing and manifest in 

the world— a spirit of strife and envy, evil-speaking and 

hatred. 

We have been pleased to note the remarkable progress 
made by some dear friends who have come into 
the light of Present Truth recently. The rapidity with 
which they grasp the outline of the Plan in many details, 
and the zeal with which they undertake to "let their 
light shine," and to bring their thoughts and words and 
doings into line therewith, are evidences of the power 
of the spirit of the Truth working in them, and are 
gratifying indeed. But alas! a faithful "View" from the 
Watch Tower reminds us of the fact that the harvest 
time is not alone for gathering the wheat from the fields, 
but a time also for threshing and winnowing it, for the 
separation of the chaff from the wheat, that the latter 
may be ready for the garner. We should, perhaps, expect 
that the remaining years of the harvest will be 
conspicuously marked in this manner. While we expect 
a large ingathering of ripened grain, we must also 
expect that the flail of trial and testing will fall heavily, 
swiftly and repeatedly upon the wheat, that it may be 
thoroughly threshed, that every grain may be thoroughly 
separated from the hull or chaff. Results may sometimes 
be very disappointing as we find ourselves mistaken 
in our estimates; as we find some fall whom we 
had no doubt would stand firmly with us to the end of 
the journey and enter the garner of the Kingdom. 
However, the work is the Lord's, and not ours. It is for 
us to do with our might what our hands find to do, and 
to leave all results in the Divine care, knowing that our 
Lord is too wise to err, and that his love for all of his 
dear people is far more intense than ours, and that 
nothing in their interest, for their correction in 
righteousness, etc., will be left undone. 

It is ours, therefore, to do our part and leave the 
remainder with him. We cannot share the sentiments 
of our opponents that the Lord has allowed the harvest 
work to progress thirty-four years along wrong lines, 
and now wishes three or four self-appointed brethren to 

R4293 : page 372 

take direction of affairs and say what should and what 
should not appear in the columns of this Journal, etc. 
This very same thought, as some of our readers know, 
has twice in the past led to conspiracies on the part of 
misguided brethren to turn the channel of the Stream 
of Truth more to their pleasement. As those efforts 
failed, so, we believe, other efforts, of a slightly modified 



form, will fail. These endeavors cause us sorrow 
of heart indeed, but in no sense or degree shake our 
confidence in the Lord and his perfect mastery of the 
situation and the carrying out of the harvest work. Our 
sorrow is for the deluded brethren whom the Adversary 
thus sifts out. It is not for us to question the methods 
of Divine Wisdom, but rather to remember that "The 
Lord knoweth them that are his." We may esteem 
brethren too highly or insufficiently, but the Lord 
knows the heart and makes no mistake. Then, too, 
each of the called ones has a will of his own. It is not 
our flesh that is being tested, but our wills; hence the 
necessity for watching our hearts and keeping very 
humble; otherwise pride or ambition may enter and in 
a few months, or even a few days, or hours or moments 
might work havoc to all our character development, 
from the Lord's viewpoint. 

Ah! how carefully we should heed the words, "Keep 
thy heart with all diligence (thy will, thy affections), 
for out of it are the issues of life"— life eternal or death 
eternal.— Prov. 4:23. 

We have some very important and very interesting 
things to present to you respecting the grand outlook 
for the work in 1909, but that properly belongs to the 
"View" of our next issue, and we must not trench 
upon it here. Suffice to say that it contains wonderful 
hopes and prospects, under the Lord's continued 
guidance, and your continued cooperation. 

R4294 : page 372 

THE WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION LIST 

With the New Year we expect to drop the word 
"Zion's" in the title of our Journal, because many of 
the friends inform us that the word is objectionable, 
having been so much used by Mr. Dowie and his followers. 
They report that our Journal is frequently 
cast aside under the supposition that it is published 
under Dowie's auspices, or in some manner affiliated 
with Zion City, which he founded. The new name, THE 
WATCH TOWER, is the one by which the Journal is 
usually mentioned. It appears, further, that African 
churches and papers use the word Zion extensively, 
which has led to the inquiry whether or not our Journal 
is published and generally read by colored people. 

We consider the subscription list of our Journal the 
surest and safest criterion, as respects the numbers of 
our deeply interested ones. Our present enrolment is 
25,000. This is only half the list we think we should 
have. It is the only discouraging feature connected 
with this report. It shows no increase over last year. 
For our encouragement, however, we must remember 
that during this year the Postoffice Department put into 
effect with all publications a rule intended to cut off the 
lists the names of all who do not actually subscribe and 



pay the money for their subscriptions, or have it paid 

for them by others. This meant the cutting off of 

large numbers of names from our list. Otherwise the 

list would probably show at least 5,000 stronger. As 

it was, our Society advanced to the TOWER account 

moneys representing the subscriptions of those who requested 

the Journal as the Lord's poor, and also advanced 

arrearage for those requesting the TOWER continued 

to them on credit. The Society is pleased to do 

this, as the work is one in any event, and any surplus 

which might accrue from the WATCH TOWER would belong 

to the Society. We state these matters in explanation 

and wish all our dear readers to know that we are 

as glad to have their names on the list, if they are poor 

and unable to pay for themselves, as if they were rich. 

We are continually reminded of the Scriptural declaration 

that amongst the Lord's consecrated flock there 

are not many rich nor great, but chiefly the poor of 

this world, rich in faith. 

We offer no premiums to obtain subscriptions. We 
rely upon your loving interest in this Journal and in 
the Truth it presents and in the brethren whom we believe 
will be blest and profited by the reading of it. 
On these high grounds we appeal to all the consecrated 
in sympathy with this Journal and its mission, to see 
to it that the names of all the interested promptly get 
on our lists, whether as paying subscribers, or on 
credit, or as the Lord's poor. 

What can and will you do in this direction for the 
coming year? Those who are on the list of the "Lord's 
poor" will please remember that their requests for renewal 
need not be sent to us now, but next May. We 
thus arrange so as to save our office force, for whom 
the present is the very busy season. 

OUR CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

We esteem this department very highly, because it 
permits us to keep closely in touch with the dear friends 
of the Truth, and to know of their joys and sorrows, 
and to give them advice along various lines of their 
special requests. We want you to know how much your 
letters are appreciated; how pleased we are to have 
them, and we want you to understand why only an 
occasional letter receives a response, and that, sometimes, 
a very brief one (perhaps on a postal-card). It 
is because we trust that you accept the DAWN-STUDIES 
and TOWERS and Tracts as answers. Whenever a letter 
contains a direct question, we endeavor to give it 
a direct answer, and very frequently can do this best 
by citing the volume and page of the DAWN or TOWER 
in which it is treated much more fully than a private 
letter would permit. We offer the suggestion that in 
writing to us you endeavor to keep the business part 
of your letter separate from the more social portion, 
and, if you ask questions, please make them pointed as 



possible. Say as much as possible in few words, and 
your letter will receive more, rather than less care and 
attention. Let us assure you that the Lord has greatly 
blessed many of your kind letters to our refreshment of 
heart, during various trying experiences, which he has 
wisely and lovingly permitted, and against which we 
do not murmur nor repine. 

Your assurances of your prayers and love and progress 
in the Truth and its service have been specially 
helpful. Continue, dear friends, to remember us and 
all the dear colaborers in your prayers. We feel sure 
that this is true in the case of all those who have informed 
us that they have taken the Vow. 

EVANGELIZING THROUGH NEWSPAPERS 

The newspaper has become the great factor in the 
daily life of the civilized world. The Lord seemed to 
point us to this way also of forwarding the interests of 
the Truth, and opened a wide door for us in connection 
with the publication of the debates. We have sought 
wisdom and grace to use this opportunity to the Lord's 
praise and to the finding of his people, and their liberation 
from the chains of error. The Lord has greatly 
blessed the effort so that at the present time the editor's 

R4294 : page 373 

weekly sermons are published in eleven newspapers 
regularly, representing a combined circulation of 402,000. 
This is equivalent to a circulation of 400,000 tracts 
per week, or 21,000,000 per year, with the advantage 
that it reaches people in a manner which some prefer; 
for quite a good many dislike to be seen receiving or 
reading a tract. Surely this is an excellent field, well 
worthy of cultivation as one of the best means of reaching 
the reading public. 

Brethren familiar with newspaper methods advise 
us that Allegheny is practically unknown, that Pittsburgh 
is noted more for its smoke and dirt, steel and 
iron, Homestead riot and millionaires, than for anything 
along the lines of science, literature or religion. 
They assure us that if the weekly sermons emanated 
from a more favorable quarter it would possibly result 
in the publication of the sermons all over the United 
States; that within a year there might be hundreds of 
papers publishing them regularly. Investigation and 
reflection seemed to teach that Chicago and St. Louis, 
although central in a large degree, have a stock-yard 
and big reputation, rather than a religious one; and 
Boston, although cultured and scientific, has a reputation 
for unorthodox fads along religious lines. Altogether 
we concluded, after seeking Divine guidance, 
that Brooklyn, N. Y., with a large population of the middle 
class, and known as "The City of Churches," would, 
for these reasons, be our most suitable center for the 



harvest work during the few remaining years. Besides, 

the brethren of the office force, always zealous to use 

their time, energy and opportunities in holding meetings, 

will find in Brooklyn and surrounding cities a vast field, 

only partially cultivated at the present time. Within 

the radius of a few miles reside seven and one-half 

millions of civilized people of every nation— the two-hundredth 

part of the population of the whole earth— 

the one-fiftieth of civilization. There are more Jews in 

New York City than in all Palestine, and more Irishmen 

than in Dublin, the capital of Ireland. We trust that 

our proposed move will commend itself to all of our 

dear friends. In our next issue we will briefly explain 

to you some of the Lord's remarkable leadings in connection 

with the selection of the new Bible House, which 

is undergoing extensive repairs to adapt it to the needs 

of the work. 

THE SOCIETY'S COLPORTAGE 

When a year ago we looked at our reports, a month 
after the panic began, we concluded that the Colporteur 
work had reached its climax, and that whatever success 
might attend other parts of the work, it would be impossible 
for the dear Colporteurs to make ends meet, 
in the face of a money stringency; that they would be 
obliged to retire, and hence that the sales would drop 
off greatly. Your surprise can be no greater than ours 
to find that, notwithstanding these various difficulties, 
the year 1908 stands head and shoulders above its predecessor 
and every other. True, the shutting down of 
works spoiled some of the territory entirely, but even 
this worked a blessing and led the Colporteurs to try 
the small villages and rural routes, with surprisingly 
good results, carrying the Truth to hungry hearts, who 
might otherwise not have been brought in contact with 
it. The total output of DAWN-STUDIES for the year 
shows an average of more than 2,000 volumes for each 
working day of the year. And the best of all— the last 
two months have been the best two of this, the best 
year. 

We note a great work of grace amongst the dear 
Colporteurs themselves— a deepening, mellowing, enriching 
of the Lord's holy Spirit of love and zeal. Not 
content with colporteuring merely, they seek, in harmony 
with our suggestions, to water the seed which seems 
to have fallen into good ground. By the time the Colporteur 
is ready to leave the city or town, he generally 
finds a number of interested ones ready to form a 
Berean Class for further study of the Word, by the aid 
of the Society's "Helps," which, we believe, the Lord 
has specially provided for this harvest time and this 
"hour of temptation." 

Let us all continue to remember these dear, loyal, 
faithful servants of the Truth in our petitions to the 
Throne of Grace. We scarcely dare hope that the year 



1909 will show a further increase upon the present one 
in this department; for we constantly say to ourselves, 
"Will wonders never cease?" No such sale in subscription 
books was ever known. Undoubtedly the Lord is 
using this method, not only to reach many of his ripe 
and Truth-hungry saints, but also to put the Truth 
into the homes of others, where it will be sought and 
devoured, and give strength during the "time of trouble," 
especially to the Great Company class. 

R4295 : page 373 

THE TRACT AND VOLUNTEER WORK 

Tons of literature have gone forth this year. The 
present report does not include the German and Scandinavian 
Tract distribution, which will be set forth 
later. However, the totals in the English are astounding. 
When it is remembered that these Tracts are nested 
four in one, and separate, it gives us a total of over 
thirty millions. You would be much interested in the 
details of this distribution— to know that not only 
Pilgrims and Colporteurs, but also doctors, merchants, 
housewives, etc., carefully plan to redeem their time 
from secular pursuits that they may give the more time 
and energy to this branch of the work. God is blessing 
it, too. In various ways we can note that those who 
are "not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ," but are 
zealous to serve it, are blessed of the Lord in their 
hearts and heads, and granted increasing privileges of 
service in various ways. It is certainly true that a great 
blessing goes out from this work to every one that participates 
in it, and that it would be well worth while to 
continue it for their sakes, if not one of these seeds of 
Truth fell into good and honest hearts and brought 
forth fruitage; but, on the contrary, the reports we receive 
show that gradually the Truth is making headway 
against opposition and finding the "Israelites indeed, 
in whom is no guile." 

The Postoffice Department has not yet restored to 
us second-class privileges in connection with the Old 
Theology quarterly, hence we think of discontinuing it. 
Order all you can use of the old stock that we need not 
"move" it. The present form of the Old Theology 
Quarterly has become widely known, and may have 
gained some enemies, as well as friends. Look out for 
the new quarterly, "PEOPLE'S PULPIT." We propose 
transferring the subscriptions of the Old Theology 
Quarterly to "PEOPLE'S PULPIT," confident that this 
change will be satisfactory to all of the subscribers. 
But the Postoffice Department may demand to see our 
authorization of such substitution. We request, therefore, 
that you address our Society by Postcard, saying 
in so many words that you will be pleased to receive 
"PEOPLE'S PULPIT" for the remainder of the time that 
Old Theology Quarterly would be coming to you on 



your subscription already paid. 
R4295 : page 374 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE 

During the forepart of the year, when financial matters 
looked unfavorable, we made no special attempt to 
increase the number of the Pilgrims, but, as the year 
advanced, and we found that instead of the Tract Fund 
donations decreasing, they were increasing, we began 
to put on more force, and today have several new Pilgrims 
and some others ready to start early in the New 
Year. This branch of the service is greatly blessed of 
the Lord, especially in connection with the interested. 
A special effort seems to be necessary to successfully 
reach the public. For the new year we plan to have 
several Pilgrims do a special evangelistic work with the 
public in cities and towns where we have, and where 
we have not, interested readers and classes. 

Our thought is to have these services in good localities 
and well advertised. We are selecting the brethren 
whose talents, we believe, will best qualify them for 
this department, leaving to the others the special work 
of more particularly ministering to the household of 
faith, as heretofore. We appreciate very much the helpfulness 
of all the dear friends along this line of service 
and trust and believe that the Lord has fully rewarded 
their self-sacrificing labors, in connection with the arranging 
and advertising. Only beyond the veil will we 
fully know what are the results. Now we see by faith, 
but are sure that the Lord's Word will not return to 
him void, but will prosper in the thing whereunto it 
was sent, and that our endeavors, on behalf of others, 
will bring refreshment to ourselves. 

In the financial department, it will be noticed that 
the expenses of the Pilgrims run up into larger figures 
than ever before. This does not signify extravagance 
on the part of any of the dear brethren, but is owing to 
the following: Many of the dear friends go to considerable 
expense in hiring halls and advertising the one-day 
conventions (and sometimes the Pilgrim visits), 
and these outlays in the service of the Truth we have 
asked them to report to us, so that this money also can 
appear in our reports as so much money contributed to 
the Society and paid out by the Society for said meetings, 
etc., even though our treasury never actually received 
the money, nor paid it out. The money was 
spent for the propaganda, and had it not been so spent, 
quite probably it would have been sent to the Tract 
Fund. Have this in mind, therefore, when noting the 
summary of cash received and cash paid out, against 
Pilgrim expenses. 

TRACT FUND RECEIPTS 



Confident that it would not be the Lord's will that 
we should go in debt, we are very careful not to undertake 
larger contracts than we feel reasonably sure we 
can meet financially. But as the year passed and the 
funds accumulated, we concluded that the Lord had in 
view a widening of the Work, and was preparing us for 
it. It is our thought that the increase of financial 
power put into our hands should not lead to less economical 
methods, but to an enlargement of the Work. 
We remember the Lord's statement, "He that is faithful 
in that which is least would be faithful in that which 
is greater." We go to our new quarters, therefore, 
financially well equipped for the opening of the work 
on a larger scale. 

Our reasons for believing that a large number of 
the Lord's people are to be brought into the light of 
Present Truth during the year just beginning we will 
set forth in our January 1st "outlook." We believe that 
you will all agree with us on this subject, after reading 
the evidences. 

SUMMARY OF THE YEAR'S WORK 

Letters received 75,569 

Letters sent out 61,573 



DAWN-STUDIES sent out-all volumes, all languages... 728,474 
Average per working day 2,372 



TRACTS circulated free 7,686,500 

TOWERS circulated free 445,000 

SERMONS in newspapers, about 11,500,000 

Foregoing in tract pages as usually stated 308,000,000 



Pilgrims in service 47 

Miles traveled 235,750 

Public meetings held 2,527 

Parlor meetings held 6,077 



FINANCIAL SHOWING. 

Balance from 1907 report $ 9,260.42 

"Good Hopes," 1908 93,994.26 



$103,254.68 
Expended in Foreign Missions: 

Great Britain $ 2,789.32 

Australasia 2,945.89 



Germany 9,826.41 

Scandinavia 3,583.67 

Jamaica 1,794.73 

Switzerland, France and Italy 232.95 

Africa 1,704.84 

China 232.85 



Total $23,110.66 

Expended for Tracts, Postage, etc 34,468.72 

Expended for Pilgrim Service, 

Conventions, etc 20,074.96 

Brooklyn Realty 17,500.00 

$ 95,154.34 



Balance for 1909 $ 8,100.34 



The above account of DAWN-STUDIES put into circulation 
includes the foreign work; but the other items 
do not. The reports of foreign branches we hope to present 
in our next issue. 

We congratulate you, dear friends, on the Lord's 
blessing upon our mutual efforts. The realization of 
our own insufficiency for the great work which seems to 
be opening up before us for 1909, properly makes us 
feel very humble and dependent upon the great Chief 
Reaper. "Greater is he who is on our part, than all 
that be against us." Let us look carefully for his leadings 
and abide in his love by keeping his commandment, 
"A new commandment I give unto you, that ye 
love one another, as I have loved you." 



R4296 : page 374 

THE TEMPLE OF GOD IS HOLY 

--I KINGS 8.--DECEMBER 13.- 

Golden Text:— "I was glad when they said unto me, 
Let us go into the house of the Lord."— Psa. 122:1. 

NEARLY twenty years elapsed between the incidents 

of our last lesson and those of the 

present one— the dedication of the temple of 

God, built by Solomon chiefly of materials accumulated 

by King David, his father. There were no methods of 

rapid construction in those days such as we have now. 

Solomon, with all his wisdom, had not invented steam-saws 

for cutting stone and wood and iron, nor steam-hoists 

for elevating materials into place, nor traveling 

cranes, nor hundreds of other useful conveniences 

R4296 : page 375 



which help to make our day so wonderful, in contrast 
with every other time. We are not for this to plume 
ourselves on a greater brain capacity or wisdom, but 
rather to accept the Scriptural interpretation that God 
specially lifted the curtain and disclosed to us these 
blessings, as part of his preparation for the Millennium, 
incidental also in bringing in the great time of trouble, 
with which the Scriptures declare this age will end. 
Nevertheless, Solomon's temple was one of the grandest 
buildings in the world in its day, although we consider 
the following comment by Edersheim rather exaggerated. 
He says:— 

"Alone and isolated in its grandeur stood the temple 
mount. Terrace upon terrace its courts rose till, high 
above the city, within the enclosures of marble cloisters, 
the temple itself stood out, a mass of snowy marble and 
of glorious glittering in the sunlight, against the half-encircling 
green back-ground of Olivet.... Nor has 
there been in ancient or modern times a sacred building 
equal to the temple, whether for situation or 
magnificence." 

THE GREAT COST OF THE TEMPLE 

Estimates of the cost of the temple are made, which 
we consider very unlikely— estimates running up into 
the hundreds of millions, and even as high as thousands 
of millions of dollars. On this fact was based an argument 
that Christian people today are well justified in 
building grand and costly edifices for divine worship, 
chiefly used one day in seven. It is not for us to find 
fault with others of a different view who choose thus to 
invest their energies. It is their own concern and 
they are right in following the dictates of their own 
consciences. We remember, however, that the temple 
at Jerusalem was the house of prayer for all the people 
of that nation, numbering millions, and that it is also 
styled, "A house of prayer for all nations." 

We remember that at the beginning and at the middle 
of their year were festivals, which God's people from 
all parts of the land of Israel and the whole world were 
expected to attend personally or by representative. 
Thus viewed the temple, even from the standpoint of the 
natural man, was a very different structure from a local 
church meeting-house. The Jews had meeting places 
styled synagogues, and they were generally quite humble 
and simple. Fault is sometimes found with us that 
we take a different course in this matter. Instead of 
erecting grand edifices in which to worship, we are poor 
and cannot attempt so to do except by solicitation of aid 
from the world, which is contrary to our judgment of the 
Lord's will, contrary to our conscience. Instead, our 
benevolences go towards the propagation of the Gospel 
by word or printed page. We have very economical arrangements 
for our little assemblies and also for our 



Convention spiritual feasts. We, of course, consider 
that our view of the matter is the correct one. 

IN THE DIVINE LIGHT 

There might be room for dispute amongst the Lord's 
people on the subject of costly church edifices, until we 
get to see the subject in the Divine light of God's Word. 
Thereafter there should be no room for discussion. 
That Divine light shows us the temple at Jerusalem as 
more than a house of worship for its time, as a type of 
a greater Temple to be built by a greater than Solomon. 
That greater Temple, the New Testament assures us, 
is the Church, the Body of Christ, of which he is the 
Head. This is the Temple of which St. Peter declares 
that himself and all of the Lord's thoroughly consecrated 
followers are antitypical, the living stones or 
members. This is the Temple of which our Lord declares, 
"Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the 
Temple of my God." This is the Temple of which our 
Lord again said, "Destroy this Temple and in three 
days I will rear it up"; he spake of the Temple of his 
Body, not of his own flesh, for that was but a tabernacle 
and was not reared up by our Lord. The Father raised 
him from the dead, but in a new body, a spiritual one. 

Of the Temple, the Body of Christ, the Church, he 
declares, "I will raise him up at the last day." The last 
day, the seventh day, the Great Millennium, is the third 
day referred to by our Lord. He was living in the fifth 
thousand-year day, there following the sixth, and the 
seventh has just begun, and with it, we believe, the 
raising up, the "change" to glory of the "Church, which 
is his Body." 

Of this Temple St. Paul writes, "The Temple of 
God is holy, which Temple ye are." (I Cor. 3:17.) He 
here referred to the Church in its present condition, on 
probation, as though it were a finished Temple, because 
by faith may be realized the Lord's presence and protecting 
care amongst these members in their temporary 
organization as the Church of Christ. But the same 
Apostle shows that this Temple is not quite complete, 
saying, "Ye are built upon the foundation of the 
apostles, Jesus, Christ himself being the chief cornerstone; 
in whom all the building fitly framed together 
groweth unto an holy Temple in the Lord." (Eph. 2:20,21.) 
In a word, as St. Peter suggests, the Lord's consecrated 
ones, as living stones for the glorious spiritual 
Temple of the future beyond the veil, are now being 
shaped, chiseled, polished, fitted for their places. 

THE ANTITYPICAL TEMPLE 

That glorious Temple, The Christ, in the power of 
the First Resurrection will share in the glory, honor 
and immortality of the divine nature; and through it 
during the Millennium, the heavenly Father will communicate 



his blessings to the world of mankind for their 
uplifting out of sin and death. Thus, as the High Priest 
in his robes of glory and beauty represented The Christ, 
the Messiah, Jesus the Head and the Church his Body, 
so the temple in which he served likewise symbolizes 
the same Redeemer and the same Church. The one 
illustration discloses one relationship or communication 
between God and men. The other represents 
another feature of the same ministry of reconciliation, 
as it will ultimately reach the world of mankind. 

From this standpoint we can readily see that God's 
temple, built by Solomon, represented so glorious a 
class and such rich blessings of God to men that it was 
very appropriate that the type of these riches of grace 
should be costly, ornate, beautiful in the highest degree. 

But now in the strict sense of the word these living 
stones are undergoing the process of chiseling and 
polishing, and the stone-yard and surroundings are not 
gorgeous and beautiful. Rather, as the Apostle declares, 
the Church in its present condition is a body of 
humiliation, or, as improperly translated, "Our vile 
body." The Church in the present life, like her Lord, 
is disesteemed in the world, despised, persecuted, 
"counted as fools all the day long," and "the filth and 
offscouring of the earth." It is in full harmony with 
these actual conditions pointed out in the Scriptures 
and known to us by experience that we see it to be the 
will of God that our present religious conditions should 
be very humble ones, unostentatious, inexpensive, to 
the intent that our energies may be the more efficaciously 
used in the forwarding of the work at the 
present time, rather than in attempting to make further 

R4296 : page 376 

types of the "glory that is to follow" our Resurrection 
"change." 

This is further shown in the type. God's association 
with his people now is represented in the tabernacle 
and its court and its tent, all of which were 
temporary. Thus the Apostle speaks of us who are in 
this tabernacle as groaning, waiting for our house from 
heaven, waiting for our "change" to the Temple condition 
through the power of the First Resurrection. 

"THE GLORY OF THE LORD FILLED THE TEMPLE" 

The record tells us that the stones and timbers of 
the temple were brought to the spot all prepared, shaped 
and marked for their several positions, so that the actual 
construction was a quiet one. We read that, "The parts 
came together without the sound of an hammer." The 
antitype of this is that the chiseling and polishing and 
preparing of God's saints in the present life and the 
marking of them for their several places, by which God 
sets the various members in the Body as it hath pleased 



him, will leave the work of the First Resurrection a 
very quiet one, so quiet that the world is not aware that 
it is now in progress. Thank God it is not yet finished, 
and there is yet hope and opportunity for some of the 
consecrated now living to "make our calling and election 
sure," and by the final "change from glory to glory" to 
be placed in the great spiritual Temple, in the particular 
niche or position for which under Divine providence we 
shall have been prepared. This resurrection "change" 
will make us all glorious and like unto our Lord and 
Redeemer, who is the express image of the Father's 
person. 

Our Lord described the assembling of the representatives 
of all the tribes of Israel for the grand occasion. 
The festival apparently lasted more than two 

R4297 : page 376 

weeks, certain prominent features marking each day of 

the time. The priests bore the ark from Zion, the city 

to which it had been brought by King David, as described 

in a previous lesson on, "The Homing of the 

Ark." Mount Zion was one division of the City of Jerusalem, 

while the temple was built in another division 

called Mount Moriah. At one time they were separated 

by considerable of a valley, but the topography has 

greatly changed in the intervening period and the bottom 

of the valley is filled in some places twenty feet 

and more. The city wall surrounded both of these 

mountains, or, as we would say, hills, for Jerusalem 

is built on a mountain. 

There were great demonstrations of joy in connection 
with this dedication of the temple. It meant much 
to the holy people as they realized that the great Creator 
had deigned to approve the erection of a dwelling-house 
with them. As the ark came forward the Levites 
sang and chanted, probably some of David's psalms, 
which apparently by inspiration were written for the 
occasion. (Psa. 47, 98, 99, 107, 118, 136.) The theme 
of the occasion seems to have been, "For his mercy endureth 
forever." Ah! how that oft-repeated expression 
of the Psalmist will be understood, appreciated by mankind 
shortly. When the priests with the ark shall have 
entered in, and when the Levites of the future, the 
Ancient Worthies and others, shall chant the praises of 
Jehovah throughout all the earth, making known to the 
people "That his mercy endureth forever" and that 
during the Millennial Age, in and through the Anointed, 
The Christ, they will have the privilege of returning to 
God and to all that was lost, how joyful indeed will 
be the occasion! How world-wide the blessing! Then 
every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to the 
glory of the Father! 

THE DEDICATION SERVICES DESCRIBED 



Prof. W. J. Beecher, after studying the account, 
offers the following suggestions respecting the order of 
ceremonies observed. We think it not unreasonable 
and quote as follows:— 

(1) "Then spake Solomon, the Lord said that he 
would dwell in thick darkness"; the declaration of 

1 Kings 8:12,13; 2 Chron. 6:1,2. 

(2) King Solomon then turned and blessed the 
standing congregation.— I Kings 8:1; 2 Chron. 6:3. 

(3) King Solomon then delivered an address to the 
standing multitude.— I Kings 15:21; 2 Chron. 6:4-11. 

(4) King Solomon then offered a dedicatory prayer, 
the multitude kneeling.— I Kings 8:23-53; 

2 Chron. 6:14-40,54; 6:3. 

(5) Psalm 132 was then chanted: "Arise, O God"! 
Then fire from the cloudy pillar descended upon the 
Mercy Seat, the Shekinah, and the glory of the Lord 
filled the house and the multitude outside prostrated 
themselves.— 2 Chron. 6:41; 7:1-3. 

(6) The Congregation then said, "For his mercy 
endureth forever."— 2 Chron. 7:3. 

(7) King Solomon closed the ceremony with an 
address and benediction, the multitude standing.— 
I Kings 8:54-61. 

"HE SHALL PRESENT YOU FAULTLESS" 

As living stones of the Spiritual Temple requiring 
much chiseling and polishing to prepare us for places 
in the heavenly temple, let us appreciate these. Instead 
of seeking to avoid them, let us rather thankfully welcome 
whatever experiences of this kind the Heavenly 
One shall see fit to permit us to have. We are his workmanship, 
created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Our 
present disciplines are intended to develop in us the 
character necessary to the great service for which our 
Creator intends us. 

The good works, the great works of God to some 
extent, are most abundantly manifested in this "New 
Creation," the Church, and some of our good works are 
as colaborers with God and Christ in shaping and up-building 
one another in the most holy faith. The great 
good work of God to which he has called us is that 
mentioned in the oath-bound Covenant to Abraham, "In 
thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
-Gal. 3:29. 

While we longingly look forward to our glorious 
station of the future, when the glory of the Lord shall 
fill the Temple, "When we shall know as we are known," 
let us not forget that unless we are submissive to the 
molding and fashioning influences of the School of 
Christ, we shall be set aside. Our names will be blotted 
out of that special role and our crowns apportioned to 
others. It is in full view of the possibilities of so great 
a loss of so great a prize that the Apostle wrote, "Let 
us fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his 



rest, any of us should seem to come short." 

The cultivation of pride along any line, the development 
of an unsanctified ambition, are amongst the 
greatest dangers to these living stones now in preparation. 
Such flaws developed would render us unfit for 
this special service. And if they should develop in us 
headiness or high-mindedness, they would probably 
also develop envy, malice, hatred, strife, evil-speaking, 
evil-surmisings, all of which are contrary to the Spirit 
of Christ and would soon render such "none of his." 



R4284 : page 377 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1909 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 



to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 
judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 
the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Scripture Studies in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 

or, 24 Eversholt St., London, N.W., England; or, Equitable Building, 
Collins St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 



CUT HERE AND SEND OUTER-HALF TO THE SOCIETY'S ADDRESS, 
FILLING OUT THE BLANKS, IF YOU CHOOSE. 



R4284 : page 378 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 



ON "GOOD HOPES" ACCOUNT 



The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the WATCH TOWER to friends who are not yet interested enough 
to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested friends 
who are too poor to subscribe and backward about accepting 
our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give us such addresses 
below— the expense to be deducted from their donations. 
Give full addresses, and write very plainly, please, 
mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



page 378 

Watch Tower Subscription Renewals 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we shall be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of the WATCH TOWER continued. 
The Lord's Poor friends have been requested to send 
their applications in June. When names are dropped and 
afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. When 
desiring to know date of expiration, look on your TOWER wrapper. 
Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

Hymns of Dawn with Music 



Our readers have for years inquired for this book. We 
now have it for you in handsome cloth binding and at cost 
price. It is the best and the cheapest hymn book in the world, 
at 35 cents per copy, postpaid, and contains 333 of the choicest 
hymns of all ages. By express, collect, 25c each, in any 
quantity. 

Watch Tower Binders 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and 
can hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 

Christian Home Embellishments 



For several years we have been supplying our readers with 
handsome text and motto-cards for the walls of their homes. 



Their influence is excellent; for they continually and cheerfully 
catch the eye and remind the heart of our great favors 
present and to come, based upon the "exceeding great and 
precious promises" of our Father's Word. We commend these 
as helps in the "narrow way"— helps in character-building. 
(These we import from London subject to custom duty, hence 
our London office can do still better for our British friends.) 

We have a very choice assortment of these this year. For 
your convenience and ours we put these up in packets of 
choice assortments, as follows: At $1.00 each, postpaid. So 
doing we are enabled to give you twice as many mottoes for 
your money as you could purchase elsewhere. Besides, we 
select the styles and mottoes with great care. The following 
packets represent our assortment. Order by number: 

No. Ma— Contains only small mottoes of assorted texts 
and styles, 22 in number; all beautiful. 

No. Mb— Contains medium and small mottoes assorted, 
11; all choice. 

No. Mc— Contains medium mottoes, 10; all handsome. 

No. Md— Contains medium and large mottoes, 5; all 
elegant. 

No. Me— Contains large mottoes only, 4; all desirable. 

No. Mal/2— Is a 50-cent packet of small mottoes. 

Daily Heavenly Manna 



Those who use this book as we recommend are surely being 
blessed. It should be on your breakfast table regularly. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by all. 
Then the Manna comment should be read. Introduce it to 
your friends as a help toward godly living. See prices in our 
November 1st issue. 

1909-Motto Card and Calendar- 1909 



These are elegant, 7-3/4 x 12 inches, an ornament to any 
parlor, a work of art. Besides a Calendar it contains "the 
Vow," which can be torn out by those who do not prefer it. 
These, postpaid, would not be dear at 50c each, but getting 
them in quantities we can supply them at 15c (7d.) each 
postpaid. 

New and Old Tracts 



Tracts for distribution among friends, house to house, for 
enclosure in letters, and in general for use in such ways as 
seem judicious, are supplied free. The expense entailed by 
the great demand for these is borne by the Tract Fund of 
voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as you feel able 
to use them, even if not so well able to contribute toward 



the expense; some who are able, and do contribute, do not 
have opportunities personally to use all that their contributions 
pay for, so that the matter is equalized and all may 
have a part in this service of disseminating the truth. The 
January issue of each year is prepared in special quantities 
for general use, the other issues for special uses. 

Tracts in foreign languages free. Say how many you 
can use. 

A Privilege and a Service 



We are convinced that the WATCH TOWER lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content 
that the name of any should be missing. We believe that 
all such will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow 
way" by its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding 
them afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh 
and the devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring the WATCH 
TOWER on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make 
personal application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in Present 
Truth, and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may 
necessitate. Any getting it on credit may at any future time 
request that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. 
We desire that as nearly as possible the WATCH TOWER 
lists shall represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the co-operation 
of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
25,000; but it should be at least 30,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 



R4297 : page 379 

THE GREATER THAN SOLOMON'S 

-I KINGS 11:4-13; LUKE 8:20. -DECEMBER 20.- 

Golden Text:— "For unto you is born this 
day in the city of David a Saviour, which is 
Christ the Lord."— Luke 2:11. 

THE object of this lesson is to show the downfall of 
the kingdom of Solomon the wise, the rich, the 
great, and the necessity for the greater Kingdom 
than his, which divine wisdom and love have designed, 



and which Divine power is to inaugurate in due time. 
In Solomon's experiences we have a most remarkable 
lesson of a most remarkable man; illustrating the 
tendencies of wisdom and riches to lead the imperfect 
children of men away from God, the Source of wisdom 
and riches, and away from all the highest ideals. 

The accounts of Solomon's prosperity are set forth 
in the books of Kings and Chronicles, and indicate that, 
under his wise administration, numerous public works 
were carried on, royal palaces built, great roads engineered, 
and water works and store-houses and armories 
constructed, etc. The nation of Israel, under 
Solomon's regime reached its highest position of power 
and influence in the world and dominated its largest 
amount of territory. But as Solomon prospered, he 
grew less pious. He became what the world would call 
broader-minded. The royal families of surrounding 
nations were pleased to have their daughters become 
Solomon's wives, and he generously accepted them 
from every quarter. The effect, however, was injurious 
to the King and to his entire people, because each of 
these prominent wives felt that she must represent the 
dignity of her own home land at the Jewish capital, and 
specially must represent its religious sentiment. Thus 
the heathen religionists all felt a great jealousy for the 
great temple of Jehovah and its elaborate services; and 
these wives, as representatives of the religions of their 
fathers, urged upon King Solomon, insistently, that 
they must have the opportunity of serving their gods, 
and that proper breadth of mind on his part would lead 
him to accede to their demands and to erect altars to 
their heathen divinities. 

The King, rolling in wealth, yielded to these importunities 
of his wives and established for them and their 
foreign ambassadors and visitors shrines, altars, holy 
places, dedicated to the various false gods of surrounding 
nations— not that the King believed in these or worshiped 
them himself, but, through a mistaken view of 
broad-mindedness and a mistaken form of generosity 
to his wives and their sentiments, he violated his 
highest sense of responsibility to his own Lord, Jehovah. 
Gradually that devotion which had been his at first, and 
which the Lord had blessed by two special manifestations, 
yielded, and the King became less and less a man 
after God's own heart; possessed of less and less of his 
father David's loyalty of heart and zeal for the Divine 
will and worship. 

SOLOMON'S DISLOYALTY REBUKED 

Our lesson tells how the Lord rebuked Solomon for 
his course; doubtless through the Prophet Ahijah. (Vs. 29-37.) 
The Lord assured Solomon that, because of his 
unfaithfulness, the major part of the kingdom would be 
rent or torn with violence from his son and come under 
the rule of one of his servants— Jeroboam. This man 



had been a trusted officer in the raising of taxes and the 
levying of workmen for the King's business. The same 
Prophet anointed Jeroboam, in the name of the Lord, 
to be king over the ten tribes; but, instead of waiting 
for the Lord's time, as David had done, Jeroboam instituted 
a rebellion against the King, in which he was 
unsuccessful and obliged to flee from the King's forces 
into Egypt. Afterward, in God's due time, he became 
the King of the ten tribes. Incidentally we note here 
a lesson for all of God's people; that we should wait 
upon the Lord for his times and seasons, in respect to 
all of life's affairs, great and small. It is for us to be 
faithful and alert and on the lookout for the Lord's 
providence; but not to anticipate them, not to make a 

R4298 : page 379 

move in advance in any event of the Lord's own time. 
"His purposes will ripen fast, 
Unfolding every hour; 
The bud may have a bitter taste; 
But sweet will be the flower." 

THE ANTITYPICAL KINGDOM 

It is only when we remember that the Kingdom of 
God under Solomon was a foreshadowing of the Kingdom 
of Christ that we get the proper view of the situation. 
It was God's typical kingdom and Solomon sat 
upon its throne as God's representative. So a greater 
than Solomon is eventually to sit upon the throne of 
earth and extend the Kingdom to the uttermost bounds 
and bring to the Kingdom riches, honor, wisdom and 
power greater than we can now properly appreciate and 
but feebly foreshadowed in Solomon's experiences. 
Solomon's blemishes are not to be considered as typical 
blemishes in the Kingdom of Christ, however. They 
teach another lesson, namely, that all power and wisdom 
in the present time are hindered by the unfavorable 
conditions surrounding, so that they become traps 
and snares, even to the wisest and best intentioned of 
men. Meantime the Lord's promise through Moses and 
the prophets was for a greater than Solomon, and wiser 
than he, and richer and more powerful than Solomon; 
able and willing to execute the Divine will amongst 
men, and to bring in a Kingdom of everlasting 
righteousness. That Kingdom has not yet appeared 
amongst men, and hence we still pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come; thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven." 

When we remember that this Kingdom is hinted at 
in our Lord's declaration, that "The Seed of the woman 
should bruise the serpent's head," and that it was later 
more particularly referred to in the promise made to 
Abraham, "In thee and in thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed," we readily see that, from the 
human standpoint, this hope is long deferred. Israel 



hoped to constitute that Kingdom and waited for Messiah, 
its head and Lord, to rule their nation, to use it, 
his elect people, to bless all the nations of earth. But 
when Messiah came into the world and to his people, 
that consecrated nation, he found them not worthy of 
the Kingdom blessings; nay, not even 144,000 worthy 
to constitute his Church, his Bride, members of his 
Body class, to be joint-heirs with him in his Kingdom. 
This was what God had foreseen and foretold, saying, 
"Though Israel be as the sand of the sea, only a remnant 
shall be saved." (Rom. 9:27.) This does not signify 
that the mass of that nation is lost in an irretrievable 
sense, but rather that only the remnant was saved 
in harmony with their expectations, saved as respects 
their relationship to the Kingdom class. This worthy 
remnant probably constituted in all not above 20,000, 
who were gathered out during the period of our Lord's 
ministry and the ensuing thirty-seven years of the 
Jewish harvest time and begetting of the holy Spirit. 

R4298 : page 380 

These became the nucleus of Spiritual Israel, and since 
then, in harmony with prophetic declaration, the Lord 
has been using various agencies for gathering out a 
similar class from all nations, peoples, kingdoms and 
tongues. Soon, we believe, the total number of 144,000 
will have been tested, proven, and accepted beyond the 
veil— "changed in the twinkling of an eye," from human 
conditions to heavenly conditions— to the divine nature. 

The long-promised Kingdom waits for the development 
of this "little flock" of Kings and Priests, who 
shall reign with Christ in the earth, as members of the 
Messiah company, of which he is the Head and Lord, 
as well as the Redeemer. With the glorification of the 
last member of this elect class comes the due time for 
the setting up of the Kingdom of God's dear Son in 
power and great glory. Then will be fulfilled the 
promise, "In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed," because the elect Church is a part of the 
seed of Abraham; therefore the promise of which they 
are heirs with Christ cannot be fulfilled until their 
selection and glorification shall be completed. Toward 
that glorious consummation of human redemption all 
the promises and arrangements of the Divine Word and 
Plan are bent: 

A SAVIOUR, WHICH IS CHRIST 

This brings us to the second part of the appointed 
lesson, which stands more particularly related to the 
Christmas season. It matters not particularly that 
December 25 is not the anniversary of our Lord's birth, 
according to the Scriptural account; that really he was 
born about September 25, nine months later. One day, 
as well as another, will serve us to commemorate our 



Saviour's birth in the flesh, as a gift of God's love to a 

condemned and dying world. Indeed, in some respects 

December 25, which corresponds to the date of our 

Lord's annunciation or begetting by the holy Spirit in 

the womb of Mary, may be considered even more appropriate 

for celebration than the day of his death. Was 

it not there that the Father began the sending of his 

Son, began to give us the gift of the man Christ Jesus? 

Indeed, at his birth he was not yet the man, and he 

could not save us as the babe. His begetting and birth 

were important, but incidental to the man at thirty years 

offering the sacrifice and saying, "Lo, I come, as in the 

volume of the book it is written of me, to do thy will, O 

God." (Heb. 10:7.) There the great Sacrifice for sin 

was offered to the Father and was accepted, and the 

acceptance was indicated by the bestowing of the holy 

Spirit, which begat our Lord again to a spiritual nature 

on the divine plane. 

For the three and a half years of his ministry his 
sacrificed flesh, laid upon the altar, was being consumed, 
while the New Creature was growing, being 
tested and approved, and finally, in his resurrection, 
he was justified in spirit or perfected as a New Creature. 
Our Golden Text is in full accord with this. The day 
of our Lord's birth the Saviour was born, the One who 
was to save his people, not only from their sins, but 
from the penalty of those sins, the death penalty— save 
them from the tomb. He did not really become the 
Saviour until he was thirty years of age. Indeed, in 
a larger sense of the word, he has not yet become the 
Saviour, the Deliverer. 

What he did during his earthly ministry and sacrifice 
of himself was merely to lay the foundation for the 
world's salvation by his own sacrifice— dying, "the Just 
for the unjust." After finishing this part of his work 
he at Pentecost began a work of saving the "little flock," 
"the elect," those who accept his favor by faith. Yet 
even with these the salvation is not yet completed; as 
the Apostle declares, "We are saved by hope." 

By faith and by hope we may accept the Lord's 
promises of a resurrection from the dead in due time. 
And these promises may operate in us so fully, so 
thoroughly, as to permit us even now to speak and 
think of ourselves from the Scriptural standpoint, as 
no longer dead with the world, but reckonedly risen 
with Christ, in newness of life, which brings us blessings 
of a spiritual kind today, but which costs us sacrifices 
and sufferings until death. The salvation we are 
looking for and which the Lord promises we shall ultimately 
have is, as the Apostle tells us, "At the appearing 
of our Lord Jesus Christ."— I Tim. 6:14. 

SALVATION BY HOPE AND ACTUALLY 

Whoever fails to see the difference between the 
hope salvation of the present time and the actual salvation 



of the resurrection morning has not the key necessary 
to enter into and enjoy, in a deep sense, the Divine 
Word and Plan. However precious the hope of the 
present time, it would be of small value alone, without 
the reality which it foreshadows. The salvation which 
Christ came to bring to mankind is not merely a hope 
such as we may enjoy, but a bona-fide reality such as 
he has promised us shall be realized in his Millennial 
Kingdom. The whole work of the Millennial Kingdom 
will be a resurrection work. Not merely will all mankind 
come forth from the grave, as Jesus has promised 
(John 5:28), but they will come forth for the purpose 
of being resurrected out of present sin and death conditions 
to the glorious perfection of perfect human beings 
—which Adam lost by disobedience— to the image 
of God, plus invaluable lessons gained during the reign 
of sin and death. 

THE EMBRYO KINGDOM OF CHRIST 

Messiah's Kingdom is to be a world empire, in 
which every knee shall bow and every tongue confess 
to the glory of God; when "the knowledge of the Lord 
shall cover the whole earth," and none shall need say 
to his neighbor, "Know thou the Lord; for they all shall 
know me, from the least to the greatest." That Kingdom 
we still pray for and have not yet received, but the 
"little flock," the "elect," who hear the call and obey it 
—these are spoken of as the Lord's Kingdom in embryo, 
for two reasons: (1) They voluntarily submit their 
hearts to him and seek to have his will done in them, 
in thought and word and deed, and increasingly as the 
days go by; and (2) because they are to be members of 
the royal family, which shall reign during the Millennium, 
under the Headship of Jesus, the great Prophet, 
Priest and King. These shall be his joint-heirs, whose 
office or service shall also combine Kingship and 
Priesthood. 

GOD'S GIFTS NOW 

Let us, then, rejoice at this joyful season of the 
year and have our hearts filled with appreciation of the 
Divine love and generosity, which gave us the great 
gift of Messiah, and thus indirectly a knowledge of the 
Kingdom yet to come and of our share in that Kingdom, 
which shall bless the world. As we have freely received, 
let us freely give, and thus copy our Lord and 
the heavenly Father. Some may have the opportunity 
of giving many gifts of many kinds. All will have the 
privilege of offering to their fellows, directly or indirectly, 
gifts of God's love, by making known to them 
the riches of his grace, as presented in the "Divine Plan 
of the Ages." 

R4299 : page 381 



The message of God's love is the most precious 
thing we have ever received, and let us have this in 
mind when offering gifts to others that, whatever else 
we may or may not be able to give our dear friends and 
neighbors and loved ones, we may offer them this; and 
our manner and general deportment should show how 
we value it above rubies, and thus we may best commend 
the gift of God to others and help them to appreciate 
it. In such presentations kind words, kind 
looks, will proceed from the loving heart, which has 
itself been saved by the power of the Truth from the 
domination of the Adversary and sin and selfishness. 
Let us learn to scatter these gifts of grace and Truth 
and happifying influences to all about us, not merely 
once a year, but every day and every hour, and not 
merely upon our friends, but, God-like, upon our enemies 
also, for "He is kind to the unthankful, and causes 
his sun to shine upon the evil and upon the good." 



R4299 : page 381 

A REVIEW LESSON-DECEMBER 27 

Golden Text:— "Keep thy heart with all diligence, 
for out of it are the issues of Life."— Prov. 4:23. 

A REVIEW of the lessons of the past six months 
will, no doubt, prove profitable to us all. But 
we suggest that as we are at the closing of the 
year, we each individually take a review of our lives to 
see what the year has brought us in the way of lessons 
and experiences and trials and testings, and how we 
have received these, and to what extent we have profited 
by them. We should remember that through life's 
trials and difficulties the Lord is teaching us lessons 
and showing us features of our own characters which 
we may improve. Without these experiences we might 
not know of certain defects nor appreciate the necessity 
for overcoming them. Therefore, to the faithful of 
the Lord's people every trial and every difficulty of life 
is a special blessing. We are to remember the Apostle's 
words, "If ye be without chastisements, ye are bastards 
and not sons," for "Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, 
and scourgeth every son," that such may be fitted and 
prepared for service hereafter. 

Our Golden Text furnishes us a very valuable seed-thought 
for the closing of the old year and the opening 
of the new. If we keep our hearts, our words, in the 
love of God; if we do this diligently, carefully, watching 
thereunto day by day, we shall be following the wise 
course. To whatever extent we have done this through 
the year closing, we have surely been blessed and 
profited. Whether we have succeeded well or poorly, 



whether, therefore, we can congratulate ourselves or 
not, the duty of the hour is to resolve that by the Lord's 
grace we will follow this course diligently during the 
year 1909. 

Many write us of the great blessing they have received 
from the Vow, and of the assistance it has 
rendered them in exercising diligence in the keeping of 
their hearts in the love of God, and in fellowship and 
communion with those who are actively engaged in the 
harvest work. Let us continue in those things which 
have blessed us in the past, and let us remember that 
part of the value of the Vow is in connection with its 
statement that its various features will be remembered 
daily at the Throne of Grace to the Father. Surely 
those who are in harmony with that Vow are seeking, 
if possible, more diligently than ever, to scrutinize 
every word and thought and deed, and to bring all of 
these into closest harmony with the Lord's Word and 
Spirit. These cannot fail to have a blessing every day. 
Let us continue in love and humility and in fervency of 
spirit, serving the Lord with all our hearts, and keeping 
our hearts with all diligence, that from them shall 
be excluded everything that would be defiling or dishonorable 
or disloyal to the Lord and to his brethren. 

"Out of the heart are the issues of life." Ah, yes! 
This is true in two senses. The issues of life as respects 
the words and deeds of life are all guided and 
influenced by the heart. If our deeds and words would 
be pure and holy and helpful, they must be backed by 
a loyalty of heart. Again, "Out of the heart are the 
issues of life" in the sense that the ultimate results that 
we shall obtain are not according to any formula of the 
Vow which we make, nor of any creed to which we 
might assent, nor of any course of study which we 
might undertake; but those issues would be dependent 
upon and determined by the real attitude of our hearts, 
because all the lessons of life, if they extend only to 
the outward man, and not the inward springs, will 
never bring us to the life eternal, which the Lord has 
promised to those that love him with all their hearts, 
to those who are fully consecrated in heart to him and 
his service. Let us close the old year with the right 
sentiments and proper self-examination, and begin the 
New Year with the proper diligence and proper resolutions 
out of good and honest hearts. 



R4299 : page 381 

RESOLVED, BY GOD'S ASSISTING GRACE 

ONE dear Brother writes that he feels fearful of the 
word Vow, but that he would have much pleasure 
in taking the Vow, if it were termed merely a Resolution. 
We mention this fact because there may be others 



similarly confused as to the meaning of the word Vow. A 
Vow, as defined by the dictionary and set forth by the WATCH 
TOWER, is merely a Solemn Resolution of the heart expressed 
to the Lord,— nothing more, nothing less. "Lord, I Vow," 
merely signifies, "Lord, by thine assisting grace I have resolved, 
and do resolve, that I will do and be," etc. 

By all means let those who have any mental conscientious 
scruples against the little word Vow make it in the form 
of a Solemn Resolution, as above outlined. Encouraging reports, 
from every direction, are constantly coming in, many 
of them from classes. 

We again urge the dear friends who have taken the Vow 
that they do not speak or think unkindly of any who have 
not taken it, but that they remember that "To his own Master 
each must stand or fall." Let us think kindly, lovingly, of 
those who follow not with us in this particular. Let no unkind 
word or criticism be uttered. Similarly we urge those 
who have not taken the Vow that they will do wisely not to 
oppose the brethren who have taken it— not to "smite" them 
with their tongues or otherwise. 

If this Vow is of the Lord all of his faithful ones by and 
by will recognize it. Let us remember that one of the chief 
tests of this harvest time is love for the brethren, and that 
another is humility. Let us each see to it that these fruits 
of the Spirit, love and humility, are very prominent in our 
own words, thoughts and acts. And let us mark those who 

R4299 : page 382 

cause divisions amongst you by a lack of these, by harsh and 
unkind words and by bombastic claims of superior wisdom, 
etc. "Do men gather grapes of thorn-bushes?" "By their 
fruits ye shall know them."— Rom. 16:17; Phil. 3:17. 

Remember the words "reasonably possible" in the Vow 
and give them full weight. They cover practically every 
exigency that could arise. If, for instance, one is in the house 
of another, it is not reasonably possible nor proper that he 
should attempt to regulate the doors, but merely have a 
preference, in harmony with the Vow. Even in his own 
house the temperature of the weather, or other considerations, 
might make it unreasonable or improper to have the door 
open. One who opposed the Vow objected that if he took it 
and should happen to be alone with one of the opposite sex 
in a railroad car, he would be obliged to get out. But this 
is an absurd application, contrary to both the letter and the 
spirit of the Vow, which makes no mention of elevators, etc. 

The natural man will find the Vow very close and 
stringent. The New Creature will find a sufficiency of elasticity 
in the words "reasonably possible," and, "As he would 
do in the presence of a congregation of the Lord's people." 
For instance, a physician and patient would properly prefer 
that necessary treatment be less public than before a 
congregation, yet they would prefer a third party to be present 
and, in any event, would desire and endeavor that the 
entire procedure be as modestly performed as though an 
entire congregation were onlookers. This is both the letter 



and the spirit of the Vow. 

We again remind you that through love for the brethren 
and fear of stumbling some who take a peculiar view of this 
matter, we have decided not to publish the names of those 
who have taken the Vow, or made this Resolution. We have 
no desire to make it a test of fellowship; still, it is our confidence, 
that under the Lord's leading, all of his consecrated 
people will shortly see "eye to eye" on this subject. We remark, 
however, that the number of those who have taken a 
stand in opposition to the Vow is comparatively small— about 
a score. But they seem to make up in bitterness of spirit 

R4300 : page 382 

what they lack in numbers. Let us hope and pray that the 
Lord will recover them from this snare, so that brotherly 
love and humility may again be controlling influences in 
their hearts, and also control their tongues and pens. 

Meantime let us make sure that no roots of bitterness 
are planted by us who have taken the Vow. One of its 
special provisions is "A closer scrutiny, if possible, than ever, 
of our words and thoughts and deeds," to have all in harmony 
with the Lord. Let us not forget that the benefits we 
derive from the Vow are not from the taking of it merely, but 
from the keeping of it, from permitting it to draw us nearer 
to the Lord— "Under the shadow of the Almighty." 



R4300 : page 382 

FOURTEEN ELDERS AND OTHERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Last night being the first Sunday night in the 
month was our regular monthly testimony meeting in 
the Chicago Class. It was such a good meeting that I 
thought I would write to you about it. 

The testimonies were all along the line of the "Vow." 
The time at our disposal was too short for all to tell of 
the good they had received since making the Vow their 
own. Some of the testimonies were to the effect that 
now the Scriptures seemed so much clearer; others 
testified that now they felt so much more closely drawn 
to the Lord and the brethren. Others stated how the 
sermons at the Convention and discourses in general 
appealed to them so much more than in the past and 
that they could understand them better; that since 
taking the Vow a damper, so to speak, had been opened 
in their heads, which allowed the Truth to get in. 

In this connection I might state how this meeting 
came to be along the line of the Vow. Some three or 
four weeks prior, the Chicago Elders, as a body (14 in 
all), took up the question of the Vow at one of our 
Elders' meetings, and decided unanimously that it 
would be a good thing to send in our names to the 



TOWER office as having taken the Vow, and to invite 
any in the congregation that wished to send in their 
names with ours. Accordingly three copies of the Vow 
were prepared and opportunity given at the various 
Sunday meetings since for any who wished to sign their 
names to these lists along with the Elders. The list of 
names has been growing each week, and after sufficient 
time has been given, so that all may have had an opportunity 
to sign, our Secretary will send in the list. 

When the Vow first came out many thought it was 
all right for others to take it and send in their names, but 
that it was not necessary for themselves. Noting, however, 
cases where much sorrow and trouble would 
have been prevented had the Vow been taken in times 
past, and noting on the other hand the good that came 
to those who have taken it, the Elders therefore decided 
that we wanted to lend our names and influence along 
with others in holding up this Standard to the Lord's 
people. 

With Christian love and greetings from all to all, I 
remain, yours in his service. 

L. W. JONES, (M.D.),-Chicago. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I presume that you long have noticed the following 
facts and indications, namely: 

While attending Conventions during the past two 
years, particularly the one at Put-in-Bay, I was impressed 
by the great number who have been in the 
Truth for a comparatively short time. A large number 
informed me that Put-in-Bay Convention was their first. 
Of course in such a large number there were many whose 
faces were familiar by reason of meeting them at former 
conventions. No doubt many whom I have met at other 
conventions were detained at home by various causes, 
but still this fact was so marked that I spoke of it to 
others. 

Does this mean that some are losing their crowns? 
And these later comers into the truth are received in 
their place? When the boats were leaving the wharfs 
at Put-in-Bay, on the last day of the convention, the 
one going to Toledo and the other to Cleveland, the 
great numbers of people who crowded the decks sang 
as the boats began to separate, inspiringly sang "God 
be with you till we meet again"; but my heart was sad 
with the thought that so many singing so joyously, 
would not be met again, because they would not be 
faithful and some one else would receive the crown now 
awaiting the determination of their faithfulness. 

What a great blessing the "Vow" has been to me, I 
will not take your time to describe. I cannot see how 
it can be other than a blessing to each one who takes it 
"to the Lord." I pray the Lord, daily, that he will continue 
to bless you as his wisdom sees you need, that 



you may continue to minister his Truth to the household 
as he sees they need. And that he will help us to 
trust more and more in his precious promises and grow 
in the knowledge of the Word, that we will be able to 
overcome in all trials and testings through which we 
must pass to become copies of his dear Son, our 
Redeemer. 
Your fellow-servant in the harvest work, 

C. C. SEABROOK, (M.D.),-Kan. 



We must remember that the number of interested 
is multiplying. This, thank God, accounts for the increased 
size of our conventions. It is a fact, nevertheless, 
that the "wheat" as gathered must be flailed, 
threshed, and winnowed before it is ready for the 
garner. We must not "think it strange," therefore, if 
some whom we loved dearly and hoped great things for, 
should under divine inspection be found to have less of 
the spirit of love than we had surmised.— Psa. 91:1-9; 
2Thess. 2: 11-17. -EDITOR. 


