Announcements
● Literature offer for April and May: Watchtower subscription for one year for a contribution of $4.00. Six-month subscriptions are $2.00. Where subscriptions are not obtained, two magazines and a brochure can be offered for 70¢. June: Any combination of five 32-page booklets on a contribution of 25¢. With a view to starting home Bible studies, one of the following booklets should be included in the combination: A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It, Is There a God Who Cares?, There Is Much More to Life!, or another booklet appropriate to the territory. Try to place all older stock.
● District convention badge cards for 1987 in English and Spanish will be consigned and included with April literature shipments. It will not be necessary to order these. Based on the size of each congregation, consignments in lots of 25 will be made, and the literature account will be billed at the rate of two cents per card.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—With References (Rbi8)—​Spanish
Aid to Bible Understanding, Volume 7 (Pau-Sin)​—German
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Large size)​—Armenian
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Armenian, Cibemba, Ewe, Ga, Twi
School and Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Arabic
The Time for True Submission to God​—Arabic
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Genesis (set of four; congregation and public: $6.00; pioneers: $5.00)​—Danish
Exodus (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—Danish
The First of Samuel (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—French
The Second of Samuel (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—French
Numbers (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—Italian
Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—Japanese
● The following publications are now available in grade-two English Braille:
Reasoning From the Scriptures (four volumes) in vinyl binders for purchase only: $32.00.
Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace” (four volumes) may be requested on loan or purchased for $5.00.
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide (one volume) may be requested on loan or purchased for $1.00. (Also available in grade-one Spanish and French Braille.)
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (one volume) may be requested on loan or purchased for $1.00. (Also available in grade-one Spanish and French Braille.)
As a reminder, The Watchtower is available in grade-two English Braille. One year semimonthly subscription is $6.00.
To obtain Braille publications, please send in a separate order. Include the remittance, if purchased, and the name and address of the person that will use them. Mark your order: ATTENTION: BRAILLE DESK.

