Feature The Watchtower During April
1 When The Watchtower first appeared in July 1879, only 6,000 copies were printed once a month in just one language. Now, 107 years later, over 12 million copies of each issue are printed, most of them semimonthly, in 103 languages. Such growth gives evidence of Jehovah’s approval of this instrument that he is using for making known the truth regarding his Kingdom.
2 Whether you have been reading The Watchtower for a relatively short time or you have read it for many years, we are confident that you appreciate the spiritual benefits received. The Watchtower has brought you a Scriptural hope. It has strengthened your trust in the Kingdom of God as the only means by which lasting peace will come to our earth. It has alerted you to the dangers of these critical times that mark “the last days.” (2 Tim. 3:1-5) Its pages have helped you to receive “comfort from the Scriptures” and reliable guidance based on God’s Word, the Bible. (Rom. 15:4; Ps. 119:105) While reflecting on these and other benefits, are you not moved to tell others about the value of The Watchtower? During April, a one-year subscription will be offered for a contribution of just $4.00.
BE POSITIVE IN YOUR OUTLOOK
3 God’s wisdom and not human reasoning is stressed in The Watchtower. Such wisdom is desperately needed by everyone today. It can improve lives and help develop right motives. This is necessary in order to “keep living.” (Prov. 9:1-6) Being thus convinced, we will offer the subscription with a positive attitude, recognizing that we have what others need. Carefully go over each issue to find statements that you believe may be helpful to householders. Such advance preparation will aid you in reflecting a positive spirit when presenting these magazines in the ministry.
4 The cost of The Watchtower is minimal when compared with the value in benefits to the reader. So confidently present the subscription at every opportunity. Some publishers may wish to offer Awake! subscriptions along with The Watchtower. A one-year subscription to both magazines is $8.00, a small cost compared with that of many worldly publications.
THE WATCHTOWER HELPS MAKE DISCIPLES
5 Be determined to follow up all placements and endeavor to develop the interest shown. Some brothers work up magazine routes with those who take single issues of the magazines. If a person reads a copy of The Watchtower or Awake!, he may become interested. So call back and present the next issues, highlighting a specific article that you feel would interest him. After reading a few issues, he may wish to subscribe. Subscribers also can benefit from your calling back to help them search out valuable points in the magazines.
6 Featuring The Watchtower during April should bring us joyful satisfaction. Having benefited from the magazine ourselves, we can confidently present it to others. By encouraging them to subscribe and read these valuable magazines, we can help them to take their stand on Jehovah’s side.

