Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 29
Song 49
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to support field service arrangements on first Sunday in April. There is still time to submit an application for auxiliary pioneer service during April. Encourage distribution of Kingdom News No. 33, Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? (Note km 1/87 pp. 7-8.) Briefly review how to fill out subscription forms. (Note 9/85 letter “How to Handle Subscriptions Properly” [S-11].)
15 min: “Feature The Watchtower During April.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Encourage all to have positive attitude in offering subscriptions.
15 min: New Topic for Conversation. Discussion and demonstration. Review presentation and illustrate how articles “God​—Is He a Real Person?” and “God’s Wisdom​—Can You See It?” from the April 1 and 15 issues can be tied in with theme. Assign qualified pioneer or publisher to give presentation, offering Watchtower subscription. For additional field points, refer congregation to section on “God” in Reasoning book, pages 145-51.
 5 min: Talk. Encourage publishers to make list of relatives and interested persons they will yet personally invite to the Memorial. May use information under “Memorial” on pages 266-9 of the Reasoning book when inviting others. Announce what arrangements have been made for the Watchtower Study during week of Memorial.
Song 112 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 5
Song 16
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to support magazine day on Saturday, April 11, as well as special arrangements for field service on Sunday. Review one or two articles in current issue of Awake! that could be featured. Suggest all bring new Index to Service Meeting next week.
20 min: “Participating in the Ministry Each Week Brings Increased Joy.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Emphasize value of personal schedule and use of calendar provided by Society.
15 min: Service overseer interviews several auxiliary pioneers. What motivated them to auxiliary pioneer during April? How have they organized their personal and household affairs in order to devote 60 hours to the ministry? How have other family members cooperated? What benefits have they received? Highlight joy that comes from pioneer ministry. Encourage all in congregation to support pioneers in the field during month. Mention that May has five full weekends and would be a good month to auxiliary pioneer.
Song 19 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 12
Song 46
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Accounts report. Mention Society’s acknowledgment of any contribution appearing on monthly statement.
15 min: Make Good Use of Watch Tower Publications. Talk. Highlight practical references provided on subjects such as “Ministry” or “Medical Treatment” in Watch Tower Publications Index. Emphasize how new Index is valuable in finding answers to questions, doing research, preparing talks, and so forth. Highlight points on pages 5 and 6. Where new Index is not available, explain and demonstrate use of available indexes and/​or table of contents and scripture and subject indexes in individual publications. Encourage all to make good use of Society’s publications in finding answers to Bible questions. Do personal research; seek direction from elders when necessary. Only as last resort write Society. (Note km 5/83 p. 8.)
20 min: “Prepare Students to Share in the Ministry.” Question-and-answer consideration of article handled by secretary. Highlight need for publisher conducting Bible study to determine when student is ready to participate in field ministry.
Song 121 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 19
Song 204
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Encourage all to participate in magazine work on Saturday, April 25. Follow through in assisting interested persons who recently attended Memorial to support congregation meetings regularly.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In an Effective and Orderly Manner.” Questions and answers. When considering paragraph 4, have brief demonstration of brother showing new publisher how to keep house-to-house record and explaining need to take good care of territory map card so that it does not become misplaced or damaged.
15 min: Personally Benefiting From Reading The Watchtower. Qualified brother interviews two or three publishers who have been subscribers for many years and who are good examples in congregation. How many years have they personally read The Watchtower? How has this publication aided them spiritually? What features do they especially enjoy? How do they feel about offering The Watchtower on a subscription basis?
Song 92 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 26
Song 43
15 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to offer subscription on first Sunday and all during May. Review talking points from May 1 and 15 issues on subjects “Do All Prophecies Come From God?” and “What Has God Done for You?” Review information in Question Box.
15 min: “Teaching With Illustrations.” Talk by school overseer based on March 15, 1987, Watchtower, page 8. Include points from School Guidebook, study 34, pages 168-71 as time allows.
15 min: Local needs or review highlights from most recent visit of circuit overseer, emphasizing one or two points congregation is to work on.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.

