Participating in the Ministry Each Week Brings Increased Joy
1 “We cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.” (Acts 4:20) This expression of the apostles Peter and John revealed that the preaching of the good news was an essential part of their lives. Concerning all the apostles, the Bible account tells us that “every day in the temple and from house to house they continued without letup teaching and declaring the good news about the Christ, Jesus.”​—Acts 5:42.
2 This constancy in sharing the good news was also characteristic of the apostle Paul, who “would give a talk in the synagogue every sabbath and would persuade Jews and Greeks.” (Acts 18:4) Even as a prisoner confined to his own house under guard, he would regularly preach and teach the good news of the Kingdom.​—Acts 28:30, 31.
3 Regularly sharing the good news brought many blessings and joys to our brothers in the first century. Some who were considered unlettered and ordinary acquired boldness and skill as they imitated Jesus in their speaking. (Acts 4:13) What a joy it must have been to know that their teaching brought salvation to many honesthearted ones!
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF WEEKLY SERVICE ARRANGEMENTS
4 A schedule for witnessing regularly each week can help you to enjoy such blessings. Our calendar specifies the first Sunday of each month as well as the second and fourth Saturdays as special days for the field ministry. Do you follow this schedule? By doing so and adding one more weekend, you would enjoy weekly participation in the field service. Many have arranged their affairs to share in service at least every weekend. Congregations arrange meetings for field service every Saturday and Sunday. Many of them have midweek arrangements as well.
5 If you are not sharing regularly in the ministry on the first Sunday and the second and fourth Saturdays of the month, why not set this as a goal to strive for as you endeavor to have a share in the ministry each week? Your book study conductor will be happy to provide the help you need to develop a practical schedule that conforms to your personal circumstances. Remember, the good news “has to be preached” in all the nations. (Mark 13:10) So why not prayerfully consider the suggestions here given in order that you, too, may have a share each week in this important work?
BLESSINGS YOU CAN ENJOY
6 It may be that you are not able to share the good news to the extent that pioneers do. However, if you do so regularly each week, your ministry will be more effective and your enjoyment will increase proportionately. When the 70 were sent out by Jesus, they “returned with joy,” telling of their experiences. (Luke 10:17) Even under difficult circumstances, frequent participation in the preaching work will increase your joy.
7 All are encouraged to schedule time to share the good news with others each week. As you do so, your skills as a teacher will improve and your joy will increase, all to the glory and honor of Jehovah.

