Presenting the Good News​—In an Effective and Orderly Manner
1 Jesus instructed his disciples: “Into whatever city or village you enter, search out who in it is deserving.” (Matt. 10:11) Today, we follow a similar procedure, expending much effort and millions of hours in searching out those who desire to listen. How is it possible for us to present the Kingdom message worldwide in an orderly manner?
2 Congregations receive assignments of territory, whether in city or in rural areas, from the branch office. (1 Cor. 14:40) This is consistent with the pattern that existed in the first-century Christian congregation. (2 Cor. 10:13; Gal. 2:9) Having well-defined territory assignments is essential if the Kingdom work is to be cared for in an effective and orderly manner.
BALANCED COVERAGE
3 The overall arrangement for working congregation territory comes under the supervision of the service overseer. However, a ministerial servant may do the actual assigning of the territory. He should review the records periodically and note territories that have not been worked for some time. He will let those requesting a territory know which ones need to be covered and will keep a meaningful record of the work that is being done. Our goal is to work all territories at least once each year. Every time a territory is covered, the brother who cares for the territory records should be notified by the one holding the territory.
4 What else is involved in thoroughly working the congregation’s territory in an effective and orderly manner? We want to reach as many people as possible. Can you present the good news to someone in each house in the territory that you work? Good house-to-house records need to be kept so that further attempts can be made to talk with those who were either not at home or busy on the initial call. It may be that some in your territory will have to be reached by letter, telephone, or other means, such as street witnessing. (See km 9/76 p. 8; km 11/85 pp. 5-6; km 3/84 p. 5; km 4/84 p. 3.) The service overseer and Congregation Book Study conductors will offer suggestions in accord with local conditions and individual circumstances.
5 Because we are sincerely interested in helping all those living in our territory to hear the Kingdom message, we should be determined to call repeatedly, using a variety of approaches along with designated literature and magazine offers. As we find interest, we want to follow through in developing it.
6 Genuine love for Jehovah and for our fellowman should motivate us to work closely with the service overseer and Congregation Book Study conductors so as to care well for the part of the field that has been entrusted to our care. Jehovah will bless our sincere effort to present the good news in an effective and orderly manner.

