Question Box
● When can a new Bible study be reported, and with whom may studies be counted?
A new home Bible study may be reported as such when it has been conducted two times after the call on which the study arrangement was demonstrated and there is reason to believe that the study will continue. A Study Report form should be made out and turned in each month.
A return visit and the time spent are counted each time a home Bible study is conducted. If circumstances require that another publisher accompany the one who conducts the study, and if both share in the study in a meaningful way, both may count the time. However, only the conductor of the study will report the return visit and the Bible study. Ordinarily it should not be necessary for more than two publishers to be involved in teaching at a home Bible study.
Home Bible studies should be continued with new persons until they have completed studying the two books that will establish them in the truth, such as You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth and United in Worship of the Only True God. The study, return visits, and service time may be reported until completion of these two publications even if the person gets baptized before finishing both books.
At times an elder on the Congregation Service Committee may request a publisher to conduct a home Bible study with someone who is already baptized but who has become inactive. This is in keeping with the Society’s arrangement to build up such ones who desire help. In such a case, the study may be reported along with the related return visits and field service time.​—Note om pp. 103-4.
Parents are responsible before Jehovah to instruct and train their own children in right worship. (Deut. 4:9; Eph. 6:4) A regularly conducted family Bible study is most beneficial in this regard. A family head or parent may report a regularly conducted family Bible study if nonbaptized members are included. Up to one hour of service time and a return visit may also be counted each week that the study is conducted.​—See km 6/83 p. 4.

