‘The Things He Did Have Gone Right With Him’
THEODORE JARACZ, a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, finished his earthly course on Wednesday morning, June 9, 2010. He was 84 years of age and is survived by Melita, his wife of 53 years. Other survivors include one sister as well as one nephew and two nieces.
Born on September 28, 1925, in Pike County, Kentucky, U.S.A., Brother Jaracz symbolized his dedication to Jehovah at the age of 15, on August 10, 1941. Two years later, at the age of 17, he entered the regular pioneer work, thus beginning a long career of nearly 67 years in full-time service.
In 1946, at the age of 20, Brother Jaracz attended the seventh class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. After graduation, Brother Jaracz was assigned to serve as a traveling overseer in the Cleveland, Ohio, area of the United States. In 1951, he was given an assignment to the Australia branch, where he served as the branch servant. The 1983 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses reported that Brother Jaracz “greatly encouraged the brothers throughout the country by his zeal for theocratic orderliness and a fine lead in the field.”
After returning to the United States, Brother Jaracz married Melita Lasko on December 10, 1956. They began their married life in the traveling work, diligently serving circuits and districts covering a large part of the United States. In late 1974, Brother Jaracz was invited to become a member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Brother Jaracz will long be remembered as a dedicated and loyal servant of Jehovah, wholeheartedly focused on theocratic activities. He was a loving and caring husband as well as a spiritual man who put the interests of others ahead of his own. (1 Cor. 13:4, 5) This sincere interest in others was shown by his deep concern that all be treated fairly and mercifully. Additionally, his tireless love and concern for people were reflected in his zeal for the field ministry.
Although deeply saddened by the loss of a hardworking, beloved member of the Bethel family and the worldwide brotherhood, we rejoice in Brother Jaracz’ loyal service to Jehovah over many decades. We are confident that he has ‘proved himself faithful even to death and has received the crown of life.’ (Rev. 2:10) We are also certain that ‘the things he did have gone right with him.’—Rev. 14:13.

