Announcements
LOYALTY TO THEOCRATIC ORGANIZATION
Jehovah, the Almighty Sovereign, does not tolerate disloyalty in his great organization. He requires full allegiance to the righteous principles his organization represents at all times. (Josh. 23:8, Mo) Love for God impels his faithful servants to intense loyalty. This they demonstrate not by words only, but also by consistent and continuous activity in behalf of what is just, true and righteous. Their loyalty moves them to clean and right living, and to widespread preaching of the good news of Jehovah’s kingdom, so that all persons may see the benefits that come from loyalty to God’s organization. That is why, during the month of November, Jehovah’s witnesses will go forth from house to house and offer the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures and a bound book, on a contribution of $2. (Or, the Hebrew Scriptures, Vol. I, if persons have the Greek Scriptures) These will help persons of good will to appreciate the need for their loyalty to God.
BASIS FOR BELIEF IN A NEW WORLD
A new world of righteousness, peace and eternal prosperity may appear to you to be beyond reach. Your heart is heavy under the weight of woe now upon this old world, with its uncertainty and fear. You would like a completely new world, yes, but you feel that you will never live to see any such world. Do you know that there is a sound basis for belief in a new world? Do you know that all evidence points to the early realization of a complete change in earth’s affairs—a change from corruption, distress and perplexity to a new system of things under the direct administration of Almighty God and his Son Jesus Christ? If your mind is open to consider the facts, the 64-page booklet Basis for Belief in a New World will provide absorbing reading for you. At the conclusion you will have a comforting basis for belief in a righteous new world. The booklet may be obtained for 5 cents a copy, or seven copies for 25 cents.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 6: The Living Word.
Week of December 13: Power for Life and Service.

