Mankind United​—What It Could Mean
“WHETHER Hindu or Catholic, Jew or Lutheran, Quaker or Moslem, Buddhist, Amish or Mormon, if we put as much devotion and zeal into making a heaven right here on Earth as we do in striving to qualify for the hereafter, just think what a brilliantly clean, uncontaminated and beautiful world we would live in.”
With those words American journalist Mel Ellis expressed the desire of many people today. They want a beautiful world to live in. Yet, they continue to keep their religious, political, economic and social divisions​—the very things that have led to so much hatred, strife and bloodshed throughout history.
Still, the earth could be greatly transformed if people were only united in purpose. One immediate result would be that wars would cease. Then phrases such as “armaments races” and “nuclear weapons stockpiles” would be things of the past. There would never again be the maiming of human bodies and the injuring of minds in warfare. Families would not again experience the heartbreak of losing loved ones in armed conflict.
The money spent on arms and military preparation now amounts to about 800 billion dollars (U.S.) a year. If all of that were devoted to peaceful pursuits, what a transformation could take place even amid present imperfect conditions! Think of the necessary homes, hospitals, schools, basic sanitary needs, clean water and other things that could be provided. And all of that could easily result in full employment for those constructing things for the benefit of mankind. If the entire human family, too, worked together for the common good, there would be plenty of food for all. French newspaper editor André Fontaine stated: “There is enough wealth for everyone if only we would use it for the benefit of mankind.”
So think about what a united human family could mean. It could mean loving cooperation instead of heartless competition; fellow feeling instead of blind hatred; upbuilding peace instead of senseless violence; unifying mutual respect instead of divisive nationalism.
But how could such changes ever be accomplished? Surely, they must begin in the minds of people. And to change the mind there has to be a complete change of moral and spiritual education to rid humans of all influences that divide. But where could you get that kind of unifying education? From the political, economic, religious or educational systems of this world?
The Bible gives us its clear answer in these words of the prophet Jeremiah: “I well know, O Jehovah, that to earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.”​—Jeremiah 10:23.
That conclusion is supported by the words of Mark Thee, director of the International Peace Research Institute in Norway. He stated: “Today’s international situation is characterized by a profound crisis pervading almost all spheres of human activity: economic and social, political and military, spiritual and moral. Conflict situations are accumulating, violence is on the increase and the use of force as an instrument of policy and diplomacy has become widespread. . . . The balance between peace and war is becoming ever more precarious.”
Is it not evident, then, that humans, on their own, do not have the answers because they lack the wisdom to direct their own step toward global unity? True, some may feel that this is an exaggeration and that humans on their own could someday bring about unity. However, what does the record show? Does it give us any basis for hope that one or more of this world’s elements could be a force for world unity? If not, what would?
[Picture on page 4]
Think what could be done even now if all the money spent on arms were used to build a peaceful world!

