Young People Ask . . .
Should I Follow the Latest Fad?
REGARDING a recent fad known as break-dancing, several young persons commented: “They do it in school​—in the gym and in the hallways.” “I’ve seen them do it on tables and benches in school.” New-wave clothing and haircuts, including punk, are likewise popular fads. Running shoes worn with business suits and video games have had their time in the spotlight as popular trends. Yes, ours is an age of fads. But why? Where do fads come from?
A fad is defined as a pursuit or interest that usually is followed with exaggerated zeal by some but is short-lived. Consider, for example, the short career of the toy known as the Hula Hoop. Newsweek of December 12, 1983, noted: “No toy has quite created the mass mania inspired by the Hula Hoop. The $2 plastic ring rolled onto the scene in 1958 and 30 million Americans quickly took it to their hearts and hips. But just as fast they tired of the three-foot hoop and by the end of the year the fad had died.”
How do fads become so popular in the first place? In some cases, word of mouth spreads them. Often, though, fads are promoted by musicians, stage and screen actors, athletes, manufacturers, racial groups, and others. Slick advertisements or TV commercials are especially designed to capture the attention of young people. But why do advertisers often aim for youths?
Why Do Youths Follow Fads?
It’s only normal to want to be accepted by others, and particularly do youths feel such a need. Well aware of this, some advertisers capitalize on it as a means of furthering a fad. Advertisements often portray young people as popular, successful, and happy because they wear, use, or listen to this or that product. As a man interviewed by U.S.News & World Report put it: “Fads, no matter where they occur, create a certain kind of status. . . . Fads also appeal to people’s desire to be part of something that is new.”
Eighteen-year-old Neil agrees. “Everyone wants to be accepted,” he says, explaining why so many young people go after fads. Gerald, who is also 18, likewise observes that youths may wear brand-name clothing to “get the respect of their friends.” The power of such peer pressure was well summed up by 13-year-old Pam when she said: “Because you see your friends wearing them you want to have them also.”
You may know some young people who follow a trend not because it is especially appealing to them personally but because it is considered the in thing to do. Have you ever felt that way? Nevertheless, perhaps you have wondered . . .
Are All Fads Bad?
Not necessarily. For example, one activity that has become increasingly popular in recent years is running. Some who have followed this trend in moderation say that it has helped to improve their health.
But fads are not always so health inducing. Consider break-dancing. It has been described as “an energetic mix of acrobatics and robot-like moves,” “a combination of such acceptable elements as acrobatics, pantomime and music.” Of course, dancing can be clean and healthy fun.
But it should be noted that some forms of break-dancing are reportedly dangerous. It has been said that they can cause lower back pain and difficulty in bending, symptoms of what the American Family Physician calls the break-dance back syndrome. Especially dangerous is head-spinning. According to Asiaweek, one youth in Malaysia broke his neck and died while break-dancing. No wonder that in Djakarta, Indonesia, the government banned head-spinning, though permitting other less dangerous forms of the dancing. Is it wise to pursue an activity that could jeopardize your health or even your life?​—Compare 1 Chronicles 11:17-19.
Should I Follow That Fad?
Some allow others to decide for them what is in and what is out. In effect, they become little more than a slave. As Romans 6:16 says: “Do you not know that if you keep presenting yourselves to anyone as slaves to obey him, you are slaves of him because you obey him?” Interestingly, McCall’s magazine noted: “Almost everything has become subject to fashion: food, hobbies, books, slang, furniture, pets, people, places.” But is it wise to become a “slave” to others, letting them decide what you should eat, read, or buy, or where you should go?
A Bible proverb says: “Anyone inexperienced puts faith in every word, but the shrewd one considers his steps.” (Proverbs 14:15) In line with that wise advice, be cautious about letting others tell you what is in and what is out. Don’t be too hasty to let others dictate what will become part of your life-style, diet, or wardrobe.
Another thing to consider before following a fad would be the life-style of those who promote and practice it. Often these individuals lead immoral lives that are reflected in the trends they establish. Some express protest and rebellion by the fad they initiate. A Christian seeking to conform his or her life to Bible standards would want to consider how a particular fad measures up against what the Bible says at Philippians 4:8: “Whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well spoken of, whatever virtue there is and whatever praiseworthy thing there is, continue considering these things.” If a fad does not measure up to that list, would it be wise to follow it?
Other matters to consider would be: (1) How do your parents view it? Before considering your parents to be old-fashioned or ‘not with it,’ remember the Bible’s counsel at Proverbs 23:22: “Listen to your father who caused your birth, and do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.”
(2) How will it affect the view others have of you and what you represent? Does it really matter what others think? The apostle Paul saw the need to reason with some first-century Christians regarding their responsibility to consider the viewpoint of fellow Christians. He went to the point of saying: “Therefore, if food makes my brother stumble, I will never again eat flesh at all, that I may not make my brother stumble.”​—1 Corinthians 8:13.
(3) How will it affect you physically and spiritually? Before following a particular fad, ask yourself: Would following it reflect “soundness of mind”? (2 Timothy 1:7) Would it endanger my health, perhaps even my life? How much better to spend your time in pursuit of things that will not be damaging physically or undermine your spiritual progress.
So, while many youths rush to follow the latest fads and fashions, you can be different. You can learn to think for yourself and make wise decisions. “The scene of this world is changing,” says the Bible. (1 Corinthians 7:31) You do not have to be caught up in the continual current of change that causes many to be anxious about what they should do, say, or wear. (Compare Matthew 6:31, 32.) Make the focus in your life the winning of God’s approval. Developing the qualities that please God will also help you to gain genuine friends​—friends who accept you not because you follow the latest fad but for what you are as a person.
[Blurb on page 14]
Advertisements often portray young people as popular, successful, and happy because they follow a certain trend
[Pictures on page 15]
Do you remember the Hula Hoop?
What do you think about break-dancing?

