Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● In what way did Jesus make God’s name “known” or “manifest” to his followers?​—John 17:6, 26.
Not only did Jesus pronounce God’s name correctly, but by what he was, said and did, Jesus revealed the attributes, law, will and purposes of his Father, thereby making known the person represented by the name.​—P. 259.a
● How, as stated at 2 Corinthians 1:20, have God’s promises ‘become Yes by means of Jesus Christ’?
It is by means of Jesus Christ​—by what he was as a person and by what he did—​that all of God’s promises are fulfilled. In laying down his life as a ransom for mankind, Jesus provided a legal basis for Jehovah God to carry out those promises.​—Pp. 261, 262.
● When and in what sense does Jesus as High Priest die toward the survivors of the “great tribulation” who are in the antitypical city of refuge?
This takes place at the end of Jesus’ thousand-year reign when such “tribulation” survivors have attained human perfection. Jesus dies to them in the sense that his priestly service of cleansing them with the blood of his sacrifice will no longer be needed.​—P. 311.
● Why do Jehovah’s witnesses not accept for baptism persons who are addicted to tobacco?
Tobacco befouls the body and is harmful to health; hence, its use reflects disrespect for the Giver of life, Jehovah God. The use of tobacco does not harmonize with the Biblical admonition for Christians to ‘cleanse themselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit.’ Then, too, tobacco contains an addictive drug, nicotine. Therefore tobacco can be classed with the addictive drugs like those that provided the source for the Greek term phar·ma· kiʹa, “druggery.” The Bible specifically states that “druggers,” whether those who personally make a practice of using such drugs or those who urge others to indulge in such a practice, will not gain divine approval. (Gal. 5:20; Rev. 9:21; 2 Cor. 7:1)​—Pp. 338, 339.
● How can we keep “close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah”?​—2 Pet. 3:12.
This we do by daily living as if Jehovah’s day for judgment were to come very soon. We would not view it as being far off, allowing us ample time to engage in selfish pursuits and then still have time to turn around and escape the destructive fury of Jehovah’s day.​—P. 362.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1973.

