Where Racial Divisions Do Not Exist
TODAY racial and national feelings often run high. Time and again these feelings have contributed to injustice, ill will and even acts of violence. Many sincere people would like to see an end to such things. They are yearning to find people who have genuine love for fellow humans. But are there people today who manifest true love for fellowmen regardless of race, nationality or station in life? You, like others, may find the answer to this question by going to a Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
✔ A woman from the state of Virginia resisted her brother’s efforts to tell her about the Bible truths he was learning from Jehovah’s witnesses. Later, this woman and her husband moved to a new location, and were called on by Witnesses there. She relates: “I usually took their magazines, but I always threw them away. So I was very surprised to find that my husband had taken some publications and was actually reading them. I felt that he must be losing his mind and teased him about it a lot. Finally we sat down to talk about what he had read. When he brought up the facts that point to an intelligent Creator, I couldn’t argue against this. I promised to attend a meeting with him, and at that meeting my viewpoint was changed. The people in this integrated congregation were genuinely friendly to me and were interested in me and my family.”
This was quite different from what she had experienced in the past. As she put it: “We had had a colored woman in our church when I was young. But she always sat in a separate section.”
When one of the Witnesses offered to study with her and her husband, they agreed. “Even though I wasn’t convinced then that we had found the truth,” she observes, “it was so wonderful just to be with such loving people.”
✔ A young Jewish man from the state of Massachusetts relates:
“My experience began while I was attending college. A fellow student, a girl [who was studying the Bible with Jehovah’s witnesses], began asking me questions that I hadn’t considered before, like, ‘If God created this planet, why doesn’t he do something to improve its condition?’
“Having been an Orthodox Jew and having seen the hypocrisy in so many religions, I wasn’t interested in becoming involved with any religious organization, but I couldn’t ignore her questions. She told me that these and many more questions could be answered for me by Jehovah’s witnesses and, if I would go to one of their meetings, I would see something very unusual. So I attended one of them, and found out just what she meant.
“Having attended school in a ghetto area, I had seen much racial hatred. But here, right in the middle of the ghetto, was a group of people who knew there was only one race, the human race. They were considerate, kind and loving to one another and to me, despite my appearance [long hair and sideburns, mustache, blue jeans and sandals]. Soon a friend and I began studying with Jehovah’s witnesses.”
This friend then adds his own comments: “One day I was talking with a good friend of mine [the young Jew] about the Woodstock rock festival that I had attended. I told him how impressed I was that over 300,000 people were gathered there and yet there was so much love among the people. After I had finished telling him about it, he said, ‘If you want to find out what love really is, come to a meeting of Jehovah’s witnesses.’ So I went, skeptical of how they were going to react to my unkempt appearance.
“I did not understand what was taking place on the platform, but I did observe the people. They were warm and sincere, and showed genuine love for one another regardless of color or age difference. I was overwhelmed by this. I couldn’t even put into words what I felt.”
Today both of these young men are baptized witnesses of Jehovah. Regarding them an elder in their congregation notes: “Both make a fine Christian and gentlemanly appearance. Indeed, the change in these two men shows the truth’s transforming power, and the whole congregation enjoys their association very much.”
If you are interested in associating with people who are not divided by racial barriers but who strive to cultivate love as commanded in the Bible, we encourage you to study the Holy Scriptures with Jehovah’s witnesses. We are confident that what you learn will be a real source of spiritual uplift to you.

