Have You Ever Wondered—
Can Young Folks Find Security Today?
WE LIVE in an unstable, dangerous world. Many people feel frustrated and depressed. For example, a young man of 16 in Britain, on leaving school, tried hard to find a job, but failed. He committed suicide. An exceptional case? So many young folks feel unhappy and insecure that, for example, in Alberta, Canada, it ranks second as a cause of death of youths 15 to 19 years old. Why? How can this feeling be overcome?
WHAT CAUSES THE FEELING OF INSECURITY?
There are many factors involved, such as unhappy homes and bad conditions at school. In many places good jobs are hard to find. So are loyal friends. Marriage seems risky. And the general future looks gloomy.
Parents may be so occupied that they spend little time with their young folks and consider them a burden. If family togetherness is lacking, parents and children become strangers. In some cases parents become strangers to each other. And the family breaks up.
“Student reading skills are declining,” says a report from Canada. In many countries standards of teaching are dropping. Cheating is on the increase. Diplomas are becoming meaningless. Vandalism and violence are driving teachers away. Schools are becoming centers for drugs, drink and illicit sex.
If you are a young person, have you found that, when the “crunch” comes, some of your “friends” prove ungrateful and disloyal? Have you noticed the increasing divorce rate and feel that marriage is not for you?
You young folks today face many problems. You have inherited a world that seems to be going mad. Capping all of this is the stark insanity of a buildup for another global conflict. The very thought of it is frightening. The Bible puts it this way: “Men become faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth.”​—Luke 21:26.
Then how or where can you find security and real happiness?
DOES “HAVING FUN” HELP?
Yes, it does. Good clean fun can relax us and help us to face life’s worries better. As the Bible says, there is “a time to laugh . . . and a time to skip about.” (Eccl. 3:4) But just “having fun” is not the real answer. One can go out for an evening and forget everything. But the next day the problems are still there.
Moreover, certain types of “fun” have ugly kickbacks. You can “drown” your worries in alcohol or go on a “trip” with drugs. But they only increase your problems. And you pay heavily​—not only in cash but also in health and peace of mind. Do you know of anyone who is not the worse off for taking drugs or for drinking too much?
No, pleasures and trying to escape are not the answer. Then . . .
WHAT IS THE ANSWER?
What a difference it would make if you had a bright hope for the future! What is life without hope? And how much happier you would be if you had lots of true friends​—people you could always turn to for encouragement and help in solving your problems. Life is cold and empty without friends.
You may say: “That sounds fine. But what hope is there for the future? Things are getting worse instead of better.”
True. But, interestingly, the Bible actually foresaw that this would happen. It foretold for this time world wars, “food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another . . . increasing of lawlessness.” Then it adds: “And then the end will come.” (Matt. 24:7, 12, 14) Not the end of this beautiful earth. But the end of this corrupt, violent system of things.
Yes, the Bible shows we are fast heading for this climax in human history. A global cleanup! The present world setup will disappear and God himself will bring in a new order of peace and happiness under his own government.​—Dan. 2:44; Ps. 37:10, 11.
What a thrilling hope!
You may say: “But, if true, that is still future. I want my problems solved now.” So let’s consider . . .
HOW CAN YOUR PROBLEMS BE SOLVED?
The famous Hindu leader Mahatma Gandhi once said to the British viceroy of India: “When your country and mine shall get together on the teachings laid down by Christ . . . we shall have solved the problems not only of our countries but those of the whole world.”
But problems are increasing. Why? Because people have ignored Christ’s teachings​—especially this one: “You must love your neighbor as yourself.” True, Christendom has had the Bible for centuries. But she has not followed its teachings.
The Bible is “beneficial . . . for setting things straight.” (2 Tim. 3:16) For example, note its counsel on a few different matters: “An answer, when mild, turns away rage.” “All things . . . that you want men to do to you, you also must likewise do to them.” What a lot of problems would be solved by following advice such as this!​—Prov. 15:1; Matt. 7:12.
You may say: “But are there any people who really do what the Bible says?” You may realize, as many do, that religious organizations are full of people who preach but do not practice.
WHERE CAN YOU FIND TRUE FRIENDS?
You can find them among a people who keep out of political squabbles and violence, who form a loving, united, world family​—Jehovah’s Witnesses. They will gladly assist you in understanding fascinating Bible prophecies that will give you a superb hope for the future. (Rev. 21:3, 4) In time, you will find that wherever you go you will have loyal friends. (Prov. 17:17) And they can help you to learn the Bible’s realistic solutions to your problems now.

