They Appreciated Our Hospitality
A report on a five-alarm fire, as submitted by an overseer of the Bethel Home of the Watchtower Society in Brooklyn, New York
IT HAD been very interesting for us in recent months to watch a gradual transformation taking place. One of our neighbors had been doing a great deal of remodeling right across the street from our home. It involved the Hotel Margaret, which was located on our street.
The Watchtower Bible and Tract Society has had its living quarters, or Bethel home, here in Brooklyn Heights ever since 1909. In those days the Hotel Margaret had already been operating for some 20 years as a first-class luxury hotel. Lately, though, it had been unoccupied as it had been undergoing a reported $7,000,000 renovation project that was nearly completed.
Many of us living here at Bethel were awakened on the morning of February 1, 1980, a little before 4:00 a.m. by the sound of fire engines. We were amazed to look out of our windows and see a blaze raging in the upper floors of the 12-story Margaret.
One of our buildings, at 107 Columbia Heights, is directly across the street from this hotel. Due to the intense heat and, especially since there were strong winds blowing in the direction of our building, it was felt wise to evacuate it.
Although there are around 500 members of our Bethel family who live in this building, it was emptied in a matter of minutes. Most left the building in their nightclothes, some even were barefoot with the temperature at 13° F (−11° C). Many went to the main lobby of our Bethel home to await developments. Others were invited to the rooms of their friends elsewhere in the complex. Firemen soon came asking us to evacuate the “107” building, but were surprised to find that it had already been done.
The firemen were faced with an enormous task. You see, the interior structure was entirely wood with a brick exterior. As the fire spread, the wooden floors and supporting beams would collapse onto the floors below so that it was impossible to fight the fire from within the building. We marveled at the teamwork and efficiency displayed by the 150 firemen as they went about their duties. At the height of the fire, one of the upper walls fell into the street damaging two fire trucks and several cars parked below.
Many in the neighborhood kindly opened their homes to families who were displaced.
As the fire burned down from floor to floor, concern was expressed that the exterior brick walls might collapse. Building engineers and city officials were called in for consultation.
By Friday afternoon the decision was made to close down the nearby Brooklyn-Queens Expressway temporarily because of existing danger to passing cars. A crane was called in to take part of the wall down. Until this was accomplished on Monday, none from our family were able to return to their rooms in the “107” building. So, most of these 500 Bethel family members made arrangements to stay for the weekend with their friends elsewhere in the headquarters complex.
The active stage of the fire lasted around three days, and it continued to smolder for several days more. During this time the many policemen, firemen, city officials and demolition workers used the Bethel lobby as a center for their activity. This provided an opportunity for us to get to know these men and their work firsthand.
Warm Display of Hospitality
The firemen were very impressed by the hospitality that was shown them by those in the neighborhood. For example, the hundreds of men that were in and out of the Bethel lobby were supplied continuously with hot coffee, sandwiches and other items. On several mornings they were served a full-course breakfast.
One fireman said, “In all my 15 years on the force, I was never shown such hospitality as this.” Another said, “Who is in charge here so we can write him a letter thanking him for the hospitality that was shown to us?”
Many of these men had never really had an opportunity to get to know Jehovah’s Witnesses. They remarked about such things as the friendliness and willing spirit shown and the cleanness of the facilities. There were also opportunities for many Bible discussions.
One policeman said: “I have been working in this area for seven years and I cannot recall ever having a problem with the people living here. If everyone in the area were like them, we would not have to be here.” They enjoyed our hospitality, and we certainly appreciated their efficient and fearless performance of a dangerous job.
In the weeks following the fire, letters were received from several companies who had fought the blaze. Facsimiles of three of these letters appear on opposite page.
It was indeed sad that this recently remodeled historical landmark was destroyed. However, we are thankful that due to the skillful efforts of the firemen and other officials no one was killed or critically injured.
Many of us reflected on the temporary nature of material things as we saw firsthand how quickly they can go up in smoke. And we were very happy to be able to share our ‘living hope’ of God’s incoming new system with those with whom we were brought into contact on this occasion.
[Box on page 27]
The City of New York
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Engine Company 224
274 Hicks Street
Brooklyn, New York 11201
February 10, 1980
Mr. George Couch
World Wide Headquarters
Jehovah’s Witnesses Administrative Offices
124 Columbia Heights
Brooklyn, New York 11201
Dear Sir:
  I would like to take this opportunity on behalf of the officers and firefighters of Engine Company 224 to thank you, and the many members of the Jehovah’s Witnesses family, for the sincere kindness and generosity which you extended to us during the night of the Margaret Hotel fire and since that time.
  It is a wonderful feeling to know there are good neighborly people who care about their firefighters right here on the Heights.
Yours truly,
Richard J. Sullivan
Captain, Eng. Co. 224
The City of New York
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Engine Company 205
74 Middagh Street
Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201
February 12,
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society
124 Columbia Heights
Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201
Dear Friends:
  How does one begin to thank all of you for the many hours of hospitality that you so kindly extended to me and my brother Firefighters. In todays society there is a tendency to look the other way when someone is in need, but you chose not to ignore the need for shelter, hot coffee and food.
  This act of kindness will be long remembered by the hundreds of men of the New York Fire Department that operated at the fifth alarm fire at the Hotel Margaret on February 1, 1980 and the seven days that followed. It is also my belief that the men were also touched spiritually because your efforts were posible because of your love of God.
My humble thanks,
Joseph R. Doyle
Lieutenant, Engine Co. 205
The City of New York
FIRE DEPARTMENT
HEADQUARTERS 10th DIVISION
February 18, 1980
George Couch
Director of Operations
Dear Mr. Couch,
  Just a few lines to express my sincere appreciation for the warmth and the care displayed by your staff at the scene of the 5th Alarm at the Hotel Margaret.
  I thank you, on behalf of myself and each member of the N.Y.C.F.D. who operated at this difficult fire in subfreezing temperatures.
  Your concern as manifested by providing a place of warmth and nourishment, will never be forgotten.
  God Bless You!
Joseph A. Ippolito
Deputy Chief, Division 10

