Can We Help More to Attend?
1 Last year on Sunday, April 19, there were 1,463,070 present for the Memorial celebration in the United States. No doubt, the fact that it fell on Sunday, when most people are off from work, helped toward the fine attendance. This year it may not be so convenient for some, but can we aid more to attend? If we put forth a concerted and organized effort we can expect Jehovah’s blessing. The following is suggested:
2 Week of March 8-14: Start inviting those with whom you are conducting home Bible studies. Following the study it would be a fine thing to use ten to fifteen minutes to explain why all should be present on April 8. Information about the Memorial celebration, who should partake of the emblems and who should not, along with other fine points could be drawn from the articles “‘Born Again’—Man’s Part and God’s Part” and “What Prevents Me from Getting Baptized?” in the February 1 and 15 issues of The Watchtower. Other points from the articles could be considered in succeeding weeks.
3 Week of March 15-21: Invite relatives to attend the Memorial with you. There are many of our relatives who have never attended a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Explain to them that Jesus encouraged his relatives to hear what he had to say and some of his immediate family became believers such as Mary and his brothers Jude and James.—Acts 1:14; Gal. 1:19; Jude 1.
4 Week of March 22-28: Invite Watchtower and Awake! subscribers and those on our magazine routes. Have you obtained subscriptions to The Watchtower or Awake! during the past year? If so, no doubt you know where you obtained those subscriptions. Do you have those who take magazines from you regularly on a magazine route? These people as well as subscribers have had the opportunity to feed regularly on the spiritual food provided through these journals. Theirs is often more than a casual interest in spiritual matters. Let us make a special effort to reach such ones and invite them to the special talk on Sunday, March 28, and the Memorial on April 8.
5 Week of March 29–April 4: Call on inactive ones and finalize transportation and other necessary arrangements with those who will attend. The secretary can provide names and addresses of any who were active in the past but no longer are. Those who have been assigned by the elders to study with inactive ones can follow the suggestions given for the week of March 8-14. It is not good to assume that interested persons will be able to get to the meeting. It is better to inquire and offer assistance. Then the interested ones are sure that we are sincere in wanting them to attend.
6 The special invitation provided by the Society may be used on all the occasions outlined above. Additionally, it is good to leave an invitation with interested persons we call back on in the territory. It provides a message that will serve as an incentive to attend, giving the time and address of the meeting. If we follow the above suggestions week by week, we may expect that more will be encouraged to attend.

