The Only Cure for Sick Mankind
1 This is the striking title of the special public talk to be given in all congregations throughout the United States on Sunday, March 28. What an appropriate subject to hear discussed just prior to the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal! Yes, the blessings of Kingdom rule all hinge directly on what was accomplished that Friday afternoon, Nisan 14, 33 C.E. God’s name was sanctified and a ransom was provided for all mankind who wish to take advantage of it. On the basis of this loving arrangement God has provided a cure for sick mankind.
2 Do you not agree that such a provision merits the attention of all? “However, how will they call on him in whom they have not put faith? How, in turn, will they put faith in him of whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?” Those pointed questions directed to the Christians at Rome should reach our hearts as well and move us to preach. (Rom. 10:14) And as we preach during the month of March let us use every opportunity to inform people about the special public talk on March 28, followed by the Memorial of Christ’s death on April 8.
3 Special handbills have been provided for both of these events. You may want to use the one advertising the public talk in your house-to-house ministry both in magazine work and when presenting the regular offer. But when calling on relatives, making return visits, inviting those with whom you study or extending an invitation to others showing special interest, it would be good to present the two handbills together.
4 The printed invitations can give the necessary information interested ones need but should be presented along with a warm, personal and sincere request that they attend. So imitate the spirit shown by Lydia when she extended an invitation. Acts 16:15 says she spoke “with entreaty!” To entreat means “to make an earnest request; to persuade.” Did Lydia’s persuading get results? Those who responded said: “She just made us come.” As we display a similar spirit during March and April, encouraging honest-hearted persons to assemble with us, just think of the prospect! No doubt thousands will not only hear but will put faith in Him of whom they have heard and will come in line for the only cure for sick mankind.

