The Most Important Day in 1982
1 How much do you value the life of Jesus Christ? Judas valued it as worth no more than the price of a slave. On the other hand, Jehovah viewed his only begotten Son as the most precious of all his creation! His human life was so valuable it could be used to purchase all humankind. (1 John 2:2) This was accomplished by his death, one of the most significant events in the history of mankind.
2 Appropriately, Christians are commanded to remember that event in the manner prescribed by Jesus himself. (1 Cor. 11:23-26) The correct date for this observance has not been lost but is accurately recorded and preserved. This year the Memorial falls on Thursday, April 8, making this the most important day in 1982. What can you do to make it the most important day of the year to you? The importance each of us places on the Memorial of Christ’s death will, to a great extent, indicate the value we place on the redemptive sacrifice he made in our behalf.—1 John 5:13.
DEEPEN APPRECIATION FOR THAT DAY
3 In recent years the Society has been suggesting a Bible reading schedule for the week leading up to the Memorial date. The full schedule will appear in the April issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. Why not do more than just read the accounts this year? Some like to pick a time of day when there will be no distractions so they can truly concentrate and meditate on the events that took place in Jesus’ life just prior to his death. Others have found that they can visualize the happenings by closing their eyes while playing those portions of the Society’s Bible tapes covering the suggested verses. (Ps. 63:6) In this way the action comes to life in our mind’s eye and can make a powerful impression, deepening our appreciation. Also, the Society has prepared a new outline that will be used by most Memorial speakers this year. This will provide the same general spiritual refreshment and reminders for the brothers everywhere.
4 It is surely an appropriate time also to take stock of our own life course. Has your evaluation of Christ’s sacrifice for you moved you to make the necessary changes in your life to gain his approval? The apostle Peter said of Jesus: “He himself bore our sins in his own body upon the stake, in order that we might be done with sins and live to righteousness.” (1 Pet. 2:24) As we reflect on our life course we may note certain adjustments for the good that need to be made.
5 What about the day we celebrate the Memorial? Some have found they can devote the entire day to theocratic pursuits. They start the day with a family consideration of the day’s text, or do it alone if circumstances so dictate. Heartfelt prayer will surely help us to approach the actual evening celebration in the right frame of mind and with deep appreciation. (Eph. 6:18) Some may be able to take a half day off from secular work, or even the whole day, and share in sacred service along with many others of God’s people who make this a special day of worship.
6 April is usually a month when tens of thousands share in full-time service. Last April in the United States there were 41,887 auxiliary pioneers and in April of 1980 there were 43,083! This is more than double the average number who auxiliary pioneer other months. With the Memorial again falling in April this year, would it not be a fine way to show our sincere appreciation for the loving provision of Christ’s ransom sacrifice by sharing in full-time service during April? Now is the time to apply.
7 As the world around us continues to sink into greater depths of ungodliness, let us show that we are the sort of persons we ought to be “in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion.” (2 Pet. 3:11) Let us plan now to make the Memorial season a time to show special appreciation for what Jehovah accomplished through the death of his Son.

