Will You Be an Auxiliary Pioneer in April?
1 It is fitting for us to render our “sacrifice of praise” to Jehovah God at every opportunity. (Heb. 13:15; Ps. 44:8) This is especially true during the season when we observe the Memorial of our Lord’s death. (2 Cor. 5:15; 6:1, 2) Can you increase your praise to Jehovah by serving as an auxiliary pioneer in April?
2 Annually, many brothers and sisters seize the opportunity to auxiliary pioneer in April. This is one way to show special appreciation for what Jehovah God has done for us and what Jesus Christ did and is doing for us. (Ps. 145:1, 11, 21) April is a fine month for spending additional time in field service. Also, in April many of us have time off from secular work and school because of the world’s holidays. In April of 1979, an all-time peak of 51,008, almost ten percent of the Kingdom proclaimers in the United States branch, shared in the auxiliary pioneer work. What a grand witness to Jehovah God we would give this year if at least ten percent, over 55,000 of us, are auxiliary pioneers in April!
WHO CAN BE AUXILIARY PIONEERS?
3 Ask yourself, “Can I be an auxiliary pioneer?” Surely you have thought about it before. Have you ever shared in this work? No doubt many brothers and sisters in circumstances similar to yours have served as auxiliary pioneers. With Jehovah’s help, perhaps you can do it too.—Phil. 4:13.
4 The enrollment requirements are not difficult. To qualify, you must be baptized, have good morals and a reputation as an exemplary Christian. You should also have made plans that will enable you to devote 60 or more hours in the field ministry during the month. If you qualify, why not request an application, fill it out and return it to the service committee in your congregation? April is an especially fine time to auxiliary pioneer. Youthful publishers who are still attending school can take advantage of the world’s Easter holiday period to engage in the field ministry. Try it. We are confident that you will find the experience enjoyable and spiritually stimulating.
EXPERIENCES OF AUXILIARY PIONEERS
5 Can you be an auxiliary pioneer? Will you be one? These are questions for you to answer. However, the experiences of hundreds of thousands who have been auxiliary pioneers strongly indicate that many others could auxiliary pioneer sometime during the year.
6 A sister in Florida wrote: “I just wanted to express my appreciation for the auxiliary pioneer arrangement. Although working full-time, I was able to enjoy a fine spiritual boost serving as an auxiliary pioneer. I found witnessing from 5-7 p.m. to be very rewarding as I found many people home and I was able to talk with them, even if only briefly at times. Also, I was thrilled to start a Bible study! The brothers were very supportive and I enjoyed working with many different ones during the month. I hope to benefit from this fine provision again.”
7 In a number of congregations entire bodies of elders take the lead as auxiliary pioneers at certain times. In California where one body of elders did this, their wives joined them. So did most of the ministerial servants and their wives. When this was announced to the congregation, 26 other publishers also enrolled as auxiliary pioneers for the same month. Can you imagine the joy these 53 brothers and sisters had in the field service and the good results in the territory from this special effort? Their example heightened the congregation’s spirituality, and good effects were felt for many months thereafter.
8 Will you be an auxiliary pioneer in April? Prayerfully consider your circumstances. In this connection, heed Paul’s exhortation: “My beloved brothers, become steadfast, unmovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.”—1 Cor. 15:58.

