Keeping Abreast with Jehovah’s Organization
JESUS CHRIST foretold that in our day this good news of the Kingdom would be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all nations. The fulfillment of that prophecy takes many, many proclaimers, and for them to work orderly and efficiently organization is required. And so we find it. Jehovah God has a visible earthly organization accomplishing his purpose.—Matt. 24:14.
That organization has ever been a moving, progressive organization. Progress naturally means instruction, changes and corrections. As a result there have been increased and improved understanding of Jehovah’s will and purposes and a widening out of activity; as in the days of the apostles so in our day. For example, in 1938 God’s people saw the need of being not democratic but fully theocratic in organization.—Isa. 60:17.
Since then God’s people have obtained a better understanding of many teachings, such as regarding the resurrection. They also understand better many Bible principles and requirements, such as the need to keep wholly separate from the military and religious parts of Satan’s organization even in employment.
Jehovah’s organization being a moving, progressive one, those who would keep abreast with it must also make progress. They want the ‘God of peace to equip them with every good thing.’ (Heb. 13:20, 21)a This was the prayer of the apostle Paul regarding the Hebrew Christians. He had good reason for so praying, for they were coming short, not progressing to maturity, not keeping abreast with Jehovah’s organization, even as can be seen from the contents of the book of Hebrews.
How can we who are Jehovah’s witnesses today keep abreast with God’s rapidly advancing earthly organization? A basic factor toward our doing so is obedience. It means that we must keep close to Jehovah, remembering that we are dedicated to him and not merely to a work or an organization. Of Jesus Christ while on earth it was stated that he learned obedience from the things he suffered. We too, then, must learn obedience.—Heb. 5:8; 13:17.
There are four things that we must do to perfect our obedience. First of all, we must study God’s Word, together with the helps he has provided for our understanding it. Never should we be so occupied with the cares of this life that we cannot find some time each day for the consideration of a portion of God’s Word. We must ever be conscious of our spiritual need. As soon as you receive the Watchtower magazine, read it through for the very enjoyment of it, apart from any thought of study.
Secondly, we must put forth zealous efforts to apply in our daily lives what we learn. We need to strive continually to bring our lives in line with Jehovah’s righteous requirements. This also means being alert to every opportunity to witness to Jehovah’s name and kingdom and it includes accepting assignments given to us and making the best use of them, be they large or small.—Luke 16:10.
However, all this cannot be accomplished in our own strength, and so, thirdly, we must keep praying for Jehovah’s spirit to help us. This spirit Jehovah God most willingly gives, but not without effort and cooperation on our part.—Luke 11:13.
And fourthly, to perfect our obedience so that we can keep abreast with Jehovah’s progressive organization we need the help of our mature Christian brothers. So attend all the meetings of the Christian congregation; listen, associate and participate.—Eph. 4:11-16.
We should keep asking ourselves: Have we been making progress, and, if so, in what respect—secularly or theocratically? Is the quality of our ministry improving? Are we happier, progressing toward maturity, bringing forth more of the fruits of the spirit? Are we devoting more time to the Christian ministry than we did a year ago?
We cannot blame others if we are failing to make progress. And while we want to be ready to accept greater responsibilities whenever they are offered to us, if at all able to do so, we should not think of progress only in regard to service positions in the organization. Surely women in Jehovah’s organization make progress and keep abreast with it even though they are not eligible for such service positions. Right?
Get to know your Christian brothers better. It will make for a friendly atmosphere in your Kingdom Hall and result in a positive attitude on your part. Help your brothers to move ahead, to keep abreast with Jehovah’s organization. That is the best way for you to do so yourself!
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, June 1, 1967.

