Living amid Turmoil in Ireland
IN THE winter of 1968-1969 the troubles that have persistently afflicted Ireland once again erupted into open conflict. Since then there have been dreadful bloodshed and massive destruction of property. Over a thousand persons have died in bombings, shootings and assassinations. Thousands of others have been mutilated, disfigured and injured. Why?
Basically, it is due to religious/​political differences​—between Protestants and Roman Catholics. On one side are Protestants associated with British rule, and on the other side are Roman Catholics linked with the struggle for Irish independence. Sadly, even after all the lessons of history, many feel that violence is the way to settle differences.
PROTESTANT BACKGROUND
I was born in Belfast in northern Ireland in 1917. One of the major influences in my life was the Orange Order, a society devoted to the cause of Protestantism. It takes its name from the famous victory by King William of Orange over King James II of England at the Battle of the Boyne in 1690.
The highlight of each year for Orangemen is the massive parade on July 12 to commemorate that victory. Passions are stirred by the multitude of flute and drum bands that give color and excitement to the march. I remember well walking along with my father, who was a leading drummer in one of the bands. It is a real demonstration of Protestant strength and ascendancy in the north of Ireland and, of course, it serves to heighten bitterness between the communities.
CHANGE TO CHRISTIAN NEUTRALITY
The turning point of my attitude came in the mid-1950’s. My mother, once a staunch Protestant, had for many years been loosely associated with Jehovah’s witnesses. However, none of us youngsters, imbued as we were with a spirit of nationalism and Protestant superiority, would pay much attention to what she would tell us.
I became a regular member of the Church of Ireland, the largest Protestant Church in the country. However, Jehovah’s witnesses were very persistent, though kindly. In time they started a Bible study with my wife. Soon afterward my interest was stirred to the point that I began attending their meetings. On account of the fine instruction received, I quickly came to a knowledge of the Bible, and both my wife and I were baptized by Jehovah’s witnesses in 1956. Now, instead of my having the bigoted and hateful attitude that had marked my early years, the truth of the Bible has developed in me an appreciation of true Christian qualities.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.
Jehovah’s witnesses are strictly neutral as regards the factional strife that festers all around them; they refuse to participate in any way in the religious/​political conflicts that rage. So gone are the days when, for instance, I threatened to bury my hammer in the head of a Roman Catholic fellow worker if he opened his mouth again on the subject of religion.
But you may wonder, how can a person who remains neutral cope with the pressures that are inevitably brought to bear on him? How can he maintain Christian neutrality in the face of fanatical religious/​political controversy? How does it affect his life and the life of his family?
A look at some of the experiences that have happened to my family and friends will answer these questions.
MAINTAINING A RIGHT OUTLOOK
I work in one of Belfast’s main hospitals, where I witness firsthand many of the sad victims of dreadful bombings. Such tragedies occur almost daily, particularly in cities like Belfast and Londonderry.
Seeing legless and armless and otherwise mutilated persons regularly carried into the hospital can be a shocking experience. It often produces a terrible bitterness in people, and it is only by keeping firmly fixed in mind God’s promise of a righteous new order that one can maintain a right outlook.​—2 Pet. 3:13.
The threat to life and property is ever present. For example, one of my Christian associates was caretaker of a large block of offices that had become the target of terrorist bombers. He and his family just managed to get clear of the building before a two-hundred-pound bomb exploded, wrecking the building and destroying all their possessions.
But a person cannot permit such things to disturb him. After a bullet had shattered her bedroom window, a friend in our Christian congregation said that her reaction was: “I’m putting my bed in the other room. I’m losing no sleep tonight!” On one occasion my brother found himself in the middle of a gun battle between the security forces and the terrorists. At another time they stole his car.
One day a fifty-pound bomb went off in the building directly opposite our home, not more than twenty-five feet away. It caused great damage to many homes in the area.
At the time, we were preparing to leave for one of our Christian assemblies. But we refused to allow this incident to interfere. After making temporary repairs, we went off to the assembly, leaving our troubles behind. The strength and hope that our Creator, Jehovah God, gives help us to ride out these storms.
ATTENDING CONGREGATION MEETINGS
Part of our worship is to attend Christian meetings regularly. But simply traveling to them can be a nerve-racking experience. There is an ever-present danger of car bombs. Vehicles are packed with explosives and then parked, ready to explode, at some point designed to cause havoc. Once a car blew up without warning less than fifty feet from our car. It is terrifying to see the flash of the exploding bomb, with people being flung to the ground among the flying debris!
Sometimes we make long detours around danger areas and known trouble spots. We have to be prepared for long delays as traffic is rerouted away from a suspect vehicle. Also, security forces sometimes check vehicles thoroughly in their search for explosives. We have to anticipate these things and leave for meetings early enough to make sure of getting there on time.
Travelers are often wise to lock themselves inside their cars to prevent the doors from being forced open by would-be hijackers. One family, on their way to a congregation meeting, were stopped in a line of cars at a traffic light. They were horrified to see terrorists moving speedily from one car to the next trying to commandeer vehicles. One of the locks on their vehicle was broken! Fortunately, as the terrorists approached, the traffic light changed and they moved on. Needless to say, the door lock was speedily repaired.
Such conditions have caused much inconvenience, but all our congregation meetings in the Belfast area have gone on as usual. No one has suffered injury while in attendance.
VIGILANTES
One development that has caused us considerable difficulty in sticking to a course of neutrality is the emergence of vigilante movements, particularly in Belfast and Londonderry. These groups are formed where Roman Catholic and Protestant communities are closely adjacent. These are flash points of potential trouble. The residents in such areas organize themselves for protection from incursions by extremists bent on murder and destruction of property.
Great pressure is often brought on Jehovah’s witnesses by well-meaning neighbors to participate in protecting the area. For instance, one of my Christian brothers had recently moved to a street when the neighbors decided to organize themselves into a vigilante group. All the residents were called to a special meeting. Needless to say, the family of Witnesses, the only ones in the street not participating in the meeting, felt somewhat apprehensive. Already a number of Roman Catholic families on the street had been forced to leave when their homes were stoned.
After the special meeting broke up, there came a knock on the front door. Two women were collecting food and other supplies for the vigilantes. The family explained their position of neutrality as Jehovah’s witnesses, and the women left without any trouble.​—John 17:15, 16.
However, the vigilante fervor spread and requests for material assistance multiplied. Money was requested for warm clothing for those standing guard during cold winter nights. Also, there was a collection of money for a fund to get the wives and children out of the area if trouble escalated. Each time that requests were made, the Christian position of Jehovah’s witnesses was explained.
As tensions grew, and destruction of homes and other property knew no bounds, pressure to conform and take sides also grew. One has to see the staggering amount of devastation that has wrecked large areas of Belfast to appreciate fully the criticalness of the situation, and the desperation of the population to protect themselves. The Witness on this street explains:
“The vigilantes became more and more impatient with our position of neutrality. Everyone, they explained, was playing a part in the protection of the area while I slept soundly in my warm bed, sheltered under their safekeeping.
“All I would have to do, I was told, was to walk around the block for a few hours each night and report anything suspicious. They tried to make out that I could not be Christian, because the local minister was taking his turn. Although feelings against my position were running very high, I explained again why my conscience would not permit me to share in such activity.
“As I referred to the Bible principles involved, they began to leave one at a time. However, they warned that if my house was burning as a result of terrorist activity, they would not help me.
“I was able to explain to the one remaining vigilante that the early Christians took no part in the conflict at the time of the destruction of Jerusalem in the first century. They fought for neither the imperial Roman armies nor the nationalistic Jewish forces, but stayed absolutely neutral, even though it brought upon them condemnation from their neighbors. I pointed out that it was not that first-century Christians did not care for their fellow countrymen​—Jesus wept at the prospect of what would happen to Jerusalem—​but their allegiance was to God’s kingdom, and they refused to be drawn into the world’s political struggles.
“After a discussion of these and other points, the one who remained said that he now understood our position. We have not been disturbed since.”​—John 18:36.
This highlights the strong pressures that must be resisted if a true Christian is to avoid letting this system squeeze him into its mold.
BARRICADES
From time to time local people take the law into their own hands and seal off the areas where they live. Barricades are erected for protection, and passage is denied to persons who are considered undesirables.
On one occasion there had been a lot of shootings and killings in the area where my son-in-law and his family live. Feelings of hatred prevailed, and virulent anger and rage mounted. Up went the barricades.
One of these barricades completely blocked the side entrance of my son-in-law’s home. Moving it a few feet would have saved him a great deal of inconvenience. So he decided to try to get the barricade builders to move it. However, they were in no mood for reasonable discussion. One of them angrily pointed out that my son-in-law had no right to complain since he was not sharing in the defense of the area.
In the face of their hostility, he decided it was not worth arguing over the matter. He put up with the inconvenience.
FAMILY DISCUSSIONS
One thing that has helped our family to maintain proper Christian conduct and avoid unnecessary trouble is regular family discussions. We talk about what action we should properly take to meet the various circumstances that arise during the present turbulent conditions. Having clear in mind beforehand what would be a wise and Scripturally approved course of action has certainly been a help.
Repetition of these matters is vital, since doing the right thing can be lifesaving. For example, some of the things we review from time to time include: Be sure to get away from any trouble spot immediately when violence flares, and do not wait around to see what happens. Also, during trouble stay indoors and away from windows. Ricocheting bullets and flying glass are no respecters of persons!
HOUSE-TO-HOUSE PREACHING
Featured prominently, too, in our discussions has been how best to carry on our activity of calling from house to house to help persons to come to an accurate knowledge of God’s purposes. Great tact and discretion are needed in doing this preaching work in the midst of the present turmoil.
People are naturally very suspicious and fearful of strangers. There have been many occasions when a knock at the door in Belfast has heralded a murder gang. Persons have been shot dead on their own doorsteps!
It is a fact to consider that in some areas of Belfast not even the security forces have free or safe access. In some instances undercover agents have posed as door-to-door callers; hence, there is suspicion of anyone who is not well known in a neighborhood.
In some instances Jehovah’s witnesses have been forced by threats from extremists to leave certain areas, including both Roman Catholic and Protestant neighborhoods. We have not stopped to argue, but have quickly left rather than waiting for violence to erupt. At times we have avoided certain localities altogether, but later we begin to call on people in these areas once again. However, we must exercise great caution while doing so.
It is important that we use practical wisdom. Thus, while troubles were at their height, we drastically reduced much of our evening preaching activity. Also, we have found it good to carry some means of positive identification. Not only is this useful when security forces check us, but it also helps to allay the fears of some householders.
There is difficulty here among many people in appreciating the fact that a person can be a Christian, a believer in the Bible, without being either Roman Catholic or Protestant. But many more people are beginning to realize that Jehovah’s witnesses are different, that we are neutral, and are really separate from anything political, Roman Catholic or Protestant.
EFFECTS OF BIBLE TRUTH
I particularly enjoy working in the public preaching work among my Roman Catholic neighbors. At present I am sharing in a regular home Bible discussion with a young Roman Catholic couple who are appreciating the marvelous truths of the Bible and its promise of genuine peace and security. After a year of happy association it is exciting to see how Bible truth can break down the barriers that have held people apart for centuries and caused so much turmoil.
Now I am looking forward to our next Christian assembly when the first member of this formerly Catholic family plans to symbolize by water baptism his dedication to do Jehovah’s will. One of my associates remarked on how grand it is to see the close friendship we have between us, one formerly a fervent Roman Catholic and the other formerly a bigoted Protestant.
While the worst of the troubles periodically subside, the turmoil is still here. There is a very tense situation, simmering like a volcano, and it can produce great mental and emotional pressures. I thank God that, although my family and I are living amid the turmoil here in Northern Ireland, we are no part of it.​—Contributed.
[Blurb on page 518]
‘With proper instruction from the Bible the bigoted attitude of my early years gave way to an appreciation of true Christian qualities.’
[Blurb on page 519]
‘Great pressure to support the vigilantes is often brought on Jehovah’s witnesses by well-meaning neighbors.’
[Blurb on page 520]
‘The allegiance of early Christians was to God’s kingdom, and they refused to be drawn into the world’s political struggles.’
[Blurb on page 521]
‘People are beginning to realize that Jehovah’s witnesses are different, that we are really separate from anything political, Roman Catholic or Protestant.’

