The Better Choice​—Life in a Paradise Earth
This present life may be a poor choice in view of our troublous times. Yet many cling to it. As troubled as it is, it is better than nothing, better than oblivion. However, people may now choose a trouble-free paradise on earth.
WONDERFUL WORK
If you would like to care for the earth, transform it into fields yielding food or into parks yielding beauty, make the deserts blossom, see thorns and thistles give way to meadows and forests, safeguard some areas of jungles and mountains as habitats for wildlife and as silent praisers of the Creator​—if you would like to share in this work of beautification, then you would like to live in that paradise earth. Seeing good from such work “is the gift of God.”​—Eccl. 3:13.
PEACE WITH ANIMALS
If you would be pleased to exercise dominion over animals, not with guns or whips or bars, but through love and mutual trust; if you long for the time when the bear and the calf will lie down together, the leopard and the kid will feed together, when the lion will eat straw like the ox, and if you would like to see the day when all these animals will docilely follow the leading of a little child, then you would like the paradise earth. “They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain,” is the promise of Jehovah.​—Isa. 11:9.
HEALTH AND LIFE
If it is your heartfelt hope to see the day when the lame will leap like a hart, to hear the tongue of the speechless sing, to watch the eyes of the blind open, to observe the ears of the deaf unstopped, to witness sighing and crying give way to smiles and tears and mourning give way to laughter and pain and death give way to health and eternal life, then you will let nothing block your way of attaining the blessed paradise earth wherein such conditions will exist forever. This, too, is the promise of God: “He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”​—Rev. 21:4.
NO MORE WAR
If your heart aches for the time when swords will be beaten into plowshares and spears into pruning shears, when there will be no military schools, no learning of war, no making of bombs, no fomenters of war, then you will thank God for his new system of things wherein all this will occur. Jehovah gives assurance of this: “He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.”​—Ps. 46:9.
END OF OPPRESSION
If you wish for the time when oppressive political rule will vanish and commercial greed will be no more, when men will build houses and inhabit them and dwell in peace, when the earth will be filled with joyous laughter and vibrate to the stirring songs of birds, and when cleansed air will be filled with the fragrance of flowers, then you will thrill to life in the paradise earth. The promise to God’s people is: “The work of their own hands my chosen ones will use to the full.”​—Isa. 65:22.
NOT TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE
Is the reaction of any reader one of skepticism, or outright scoffing? Too good to be true, this paradise earth? Is that what he is thinking? That is understandable, since all we have ever experienced is this present troubled existence. “The wages sin pays is death,” and mankind has been sinning and collecting the wages for it. (Rom. 6:23) However, God’s Word promises “the world is passing away,” but “he that does the will of God remains forever.”​—1 John 2:17.
RELIABLE PROMISES
These promises of a paradise earth come from Jehovah God, “who cannot lie.” (Titus 1:2) The nation of Israel was reminded of this: “Not one word out of all the good words that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed.” (Josh. 23:14) Even an opposer of God was compelled to say: “God is not a man that he should tell lies. . . . Has he himself said it and will he not do it?”​—Num. 23:19.
Everlasting life in a paradise earth​—God’s original purpose for this earth and man upon it. It is this life the reader may now choose. Jehovah God does not think it too good to be true, so no reader should think so. Jehovah thinks this present system is too bad to continue, and you surely agree with this. Even now he is having people choose either life eternal in paradise or death everlasting with this old world.
How are persons now making their choice known? How may you make yours known? Consider the following article.

