From Our Readers
Family Defies Nazis  I am 90 years old and am studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses. I read the article “Oh, Jehovah, Keep My Young Girl Faithful!” (September 22, 1993) It told of Witness parents and their daughter who, although put under the severe oppression of Hitler, fought a heroic struggle to uphold Jehovah’s teachings. I broke down in tears as I read it. I am determined to learn the teachings of Jehovah with an even more serious attitude.
S. T., Japan
This experience touched me deeply. Simone Arnold Liebster was a mere girl, without her parents and confined in a reformatory because of her obedience to Jehovah. What a wonderful example of faith!
M. C. L. S., Brazil
The reliance on Jehovah and the love, dignity, and strength that both she and her parents lived made me reassess my own relationship with Jehovah. I felt humbled, and it helped me appreciate the spiritual assets of endurance and faith.
V. B., Australia
Loneliness  I read the articles on loneliness (September 22, 1993) three or four times. You suggest that one should dance around, sing, and act happy. But you didn’t mention how a chemical imbalance can cause one to have suicidal feelings.
P. C., United States
The articles were not directed to those suffering from severe depression or suicidal tendencies, which generally require special care. Rather, they were addressed to those suffering temporary bouts of loneliness because of grievous circumstances, such as the death of loved ones. Material on depression was published in our October 22, 1987, issue and also in the feature “Young People Ask . . .” in this issue.​—ED.
Northern Lights  I enjoyed your article “Mysterious Riders of the Celestial Winds” (September 22, 1993) about the aurora borealis. But you failed to point out that the lights can also be seen from northern and eastern parts of Scotland. There’s even a song about ‘the northern lights of old Aberdeen’!
G. S., Scotland
Thanks for the additional information.​—ED.
Protecting Wildlife  I am president of a local environmental foundation. It’s good to see a series of accurate articles about the environment. (“Who Will Protect Our Wildlife?,” November 8, 1993) It has been my contention for years that were it not for God, we would already have perished.
M. S., United States
God has certainly made the earth resilient, which is no doubt why it has withstood man’s efforts to ruin it. Ultimately, though, His solution is to “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.” (Revelation 11:18)​—ED.
AIDS  I enjoyed very much the articles on AIDS in the “Young People Ask . . .” series. (August 22, 1993, September 8, 1993) I’m 20 years old and used to be embarrassed by the fact that I am a virgin. But after reading those articles, I’ve come to realize that my virginity is a gift from Jehovah.
L. K., United States
To imply that heterosexual contact is in the same risk category as homosexual contact is wrong. All research indicates that homosexuals have the highest risk of contracting HIV.
J. S., United States
Research shows that homosexuals are indeed at greater risk of HIV infection. Even so, experts say that infection by heterosexual contact is growing at an alarming rate. And according to one spokesperson for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, women “are the most rapidly growing segment of the HIV-​infected population in this country.” Not that the women are always at fault; many are infected by profligate husbands.​—ED.

