From Our Readers
Shakespeare Controversy  The article “The Enigma of William Shakespeare” (August 8, 1998) inspired me to investigate further. The book The Real Shakespeare: Retrieving the Early Years, by Eric Sams, brought out several points that may be of interest. For one thing, many questions could be explained by understanding that Shakespeare may have been a Catholic in Protestant England. His fleeing of religious persecution could thus explain his so-called missing years. Also, Shakespeare’s claimed works have many earmarks of his early life. The names of several characters are names taken from among his family and friends, including the name Hamlet—the name of his son. His plays have numerous details that could have been drawn from his personal experience with such things as butchering.
J. A., United States
The controversy over the bard is not likely to be resolved anytime soon. Nevertheless, we appreciate these comments.—ED.
Bird Lovers  Thank you for your gentle description of a marvelous creation of Jehovah in the article “The Cock-of-the-Rock—An Amazonian Jungle Beauty.” (September 22, 1998) Your article momentarily transported me to the Amazon forest.
E. L. V., Brazil
This article somehow caught my attention in a new way. It was presented in such a positive light, and it emphasized that Jehovah made all these creatures for our enjoyment!
L. H., Barbados
I enjoyed very much the article “Bird-Watching—A Fascinating Hobby for Everyone?” (July 8, 1998) But the hummingbird, which you refer to as a bird from “North/Central America,” can also be seen in South America.
J. P., Argentina
Our caption was incomplete, and we appreciate the clarification.—ED.
Mental Focus  I used to have difficulty concentrating while the teacher was speaking. But your article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Keep My Mind on Things?” (September 22, 1998) has helped me to change my habits in the classroom. Since reading your article, I have overcome this problem, and I am now more disciplined.
M. A. M., Brazil
I have problems concentrating. I didn’t realize that all it took to concentrate was a little motivation and self-discipline. This is going to be some work, but I think I can do it!
D. R. A., United States
Awake! contains a lot of information that is very interesting for youngsters like me. I benefited from this article because not concentrating is a problem I have. Heartfelt thanks.
M. N., Italy
Trains  I thoroughly enjoyed reading the article “The Iron Way—Here to Stay?” (October 8, 1998) I have been interested in trains since I was a small boy. Your information on the history of rail technology from the early 1800’s to now was very accurate. Thank you for this enjoyable article.
L. M., United States
I work in one of the most advanced train factories in the world, and I congratulate you on writing such an excellent article. Your information was factual and well documented. I would just like to observe that some high-speed trains use materials like aluminum instead of stainless steel. As was shown by a recent train accident in Germany, it may be that high speed comes at the cost of safety.
I. D. C., Portugal

