Millions Will Be Going—Will You?
WELL over eight million people worldwide attend the annual district conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses every year. This summer, 201 three-day “God’s Prophetic Word” District Conventions are scheduled in the United States. Likely, one will be held near where you live. We encourage you to be present when the program begins with music at 9:30 a.m. on Friday.
The morning program will include a welcoming talk as well as the keynote address “Pay Attention to God’s Prophetic Word.” In the afternoon the symposium “Take Delight in Reading God’s Word” will provide practical suggestions on how to make Bible reading both profitable and pleasurable. The concluding discourse of the day, “Fighters Against God Will Not Prevail,” will review the fight waged in modern times against proclaimers of God’s Kingdom.
The Saturday morning program features a discussion of baptism, and an opportunity to be baptized will be provided for those who qualify. In the afternoon encouraging reports will be presented regarding the marvelous response of people to Bible truth in certain countries in Latin America, Africa, and Eastern Europe, as well as in the huge Asian country of Kazakhstan. The part is entitled “‘Desirable Things’ Are Filling Jehovah’s House.” The Saturday program will conclude with two discourses, “Prophetic Scriptures Alert Us to Watchfulness” and “The Prophetic Word in the Time of the End.” The last one will focus on the Bible book of Daniel and provide reasons for paying attention to its prophecy.
On Sunday morning a three-part, one-hour symposium entitled “Prophetic Words for the Appointed Time” will discuss the prophecy of Habakkuk. You will see what an encouragement this short Bible book can be to Christians today. Afterward a full-costume drama, featuring the Bible account of Jacob and Esau, will highlight the theme “Appreciating Our Spiritual Heritage.” The morning program on Sunday will conclude with the motivating talk “What Does Our Precious Heritage Mean to You?” Then, in the afternoon, you will enjoy the public talk “Making All Things New—As Foretold.”
Make plans now to attend. To find the location nearest your home, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses or write to the publishers of this magazine. Our companion magazine, The Watchtower, listed all convention locations in the United States, Canada, Britain, and Ireland in its issue of February 15, 1999.

