‘How Does Your Work Benefit the Community?’
THIS was the question that Chandrakant Patel, an Indian journalist, asked a staff member at the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses, in Brooklyn, New York. Mr. Patel had come for a tour of the facilities and was so impressed by what he saw and heard that upon returning to India, he wrote an article for a Gujarati-language newspaper.
Contrasting some of the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses with those of church organizations in India, Mr. Patel wrote that Jehovah’s Witnesses believe in the almighty God, Jehovah, as opposed to the doctrine of the Trinity commonly taught in the churches and that they do not use images in their worship. He observed that Jehovah’s Witnesses have high principles because they hold firmly to Christian values set out in the Bible regarding adultery, abortion, and the hatred or killing of one’s fellowman. He described the Witnesses as peaceable, loving, long-suffering, and service-minded as well as fearless and zealous in spreading the message of the Bible to others.
What reply did the journalist from India get to his question, ‘How does your work benefit the community?’ He wrote: ‘The answer was that Bible education is beneficial in all areas of life.’ Mr. Patel had specifically wanted to know about the fields of health care and employment. Citing parts of the explanation that was given him, he reported: ‘If a person follows the Scriptural advice to shun harmful substances like tobacco and drugs and leads a clean life, he can avoid various diseases. And hardworking, clean-living, honest individuals are more likely to get employment. Moreover, settling problems in a kind and loving way makes for peaceful relations with others. So teaching people what the Bible says works for the benefit of the community.’
This journalist saw Bible teachings in action at the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses. His article praised the cleanliness and cheerfulness of devoted volunteer workers at that hub of spiritual activity. You too can benefit from Bible teachings. Jehovah’s Witnesses will be glad to show you how.
[Picture Credit Line on page 31]
Newspaper background: Courtesy Naya Padkar, Gujarati Daily published from Anand, India

