What Should Be Done?
1 What should be done when an elder or a ministerial servant moves to another congregation and the body of elders there wants to use him as an elder or a in ministerial servant? The governing body has asked that the entire body of elders in the congregation to which he moves make inquiry of the entire body of elders where he was appointed and had served. In other words, it is not merely a matter of the current committee making the recommendation, but the entire body of elders should make the recommendation. The recommendation can be sent in by the committee, but the full body of elders is to be consulted and should register its approval of the brother being recommended as an elder or a ministerial servant in their congregation. They should await a letter from the governing body making the appointment before any announcement is made.
2 If someone serving as an elder or a ministerial servant commits serious wrong and is put under restrictions by the judicial committee he is no longer irreprehensible or free from accusation and thus he loses his privileges and his status as an elder. (1 Tim. 3:2, 10; Titus 1:6, 7) This, of course, is announced to the congregation, and the notification of this should be sent to the branch office so that the records there can be adjusted accordingly. (Pages 157, 158, 170, Organization book.)
3 However, what should be done when there is a question regarding the brother’s qualifications and the body of elders decides to recommend one’s removal as an elder or a ministerial servant? The body of elders should discuss matters thoroughly with the one whose qualifications are in question, decide what they are going to recommend to the governing body, and furnish briefly the reasons for their recommendation and the facts on which their decision was based. They should, however, await notification from the governing body as to whether this brother is being retained or deleted before making any announcement.
4 In every case where an appointed elder or a ministerial servant moves or is disqualified for some reason, the governing body should be notified. If you know to where he has moved please advise the Society, as this information is very helpful. If the brother was serving on the committee, then let the Society’s once know who will be caring for the position on the committee.

