Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JUNE 10
 7 min: Song 100. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “Readily Sharing Our Hope.” Questions and answers. Briefly discuss and/​or demonstrate various ways in which new folder listing Bibles available from Society may be used.
20 min: Displaying Genuine Love for One Another at Christian Assemblies.
Chairman: Brief introduction to material should include some comments on displaying genuine love and Christian hospitality toward one another at assemblies this summer. What we do, how we act, can be a powerful influence for good or can cause disappointment, even stumbling some. After very brief introductory comments proceed to ask the following questions, letting brothers look up scriptures, commenting on them and applying them to our conduct at Christian assemblies. (1) What do Christian assemblies provide for us in these momentous days? (Rom. 1:11, 12; Heb. 10:24, 25) (2) What quality primarily should we display if we are to be identified as Christ’s disciples? Why do you so answer? (John 13:34, 35)’ (3) How do Bible principles show that we should conduct ourselves with respect to waiting in line for food or for releases at a literature counter? (1 Cor. 10:24; John 15:12, 13) (4) When it comes to seat saving, what Bible principles should guide our outlook and decisions? (Heb. 13:1, 2; Phil. 2:4; 1 Cor. 13:4, 5; Col. 3:13) (5) What would we do if newly interested ones came to our house to learn about the Bible and the entire family was seated, occupying all the chairs at the table? Would we just tell them that they would have to stand, or would some of us help them to be seated? (Rom. 12:10; 1 Pet. 4:9) (6). How can we aid elderly people to enjoy assemblies? How can children make the assembly more enjoyable for their parents? (Lev. 19:32; Ex. 20:12) (7) Why is setting a good example at assemblies of great value to fellow believers, new ones and worldly observers? (1 Pet. 2:12; 2 Cor. 6:3, 4)
 3 min: Accounts report.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include field service report. Song 94.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 17
10 min: Song 109. Family discussion of text and Branch Letter.
10 min: Talk by field overseer. “Challenging, Yet Rewarding, Territory.” Outline definite arrangements made to cover thoroughly any business territory locally. Adapt information and timing to congregation’s circumstances.
10 min: “Are We Missing Any Opportunities?” Question-and-answer coverage by Bible study overseer encouraging brothers to be alert to start studies at every opportunity.
20 min: “Serving Jehovah Whole-souled.” Talk based on material in “Organization” book, page 132, paragraph 3, to page 134, paragraph 3, inclusive, and question-and-answer coverage on material under subheading “Serving Where the Need is Greater.” Highlight scriptures and commend congregation for progress made. Proportion material according to local circumstances.
10 min: Concluding comments. Cover main points in “What Should Be Done?” Song 63.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 24
10 min: Song 57. Introduction, text and comments. Consider Theocratic News.
15 min: Upbuilding talk by a pioneer, if possible, or one who has served as a pioneer on “Organization” book material, page 135, paragraph 4, to page 141, paragraph 4, inclusive.
10 min: “Question Box.” Consider by questions and answers.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With the Right Approach.” Discussion, also demonstration of appropriate points in paragraphs 2 to 4. Have comments made on benefits of proper approach. Appropriate introductions can be suggested for use with the bound book offer for July.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include suggestions on presenting July offer and starting studies. Discuss any plans for July 4 service activity. Song 117.
WEEK STARTING JULY 1
(Provide meeting of own choice or, if necessary, cancel this or any other meeting due to assemblies. Presiding overseer should determine what adjustments need to be made in program during June or July.)
WEEK STARTING JULY 8
 7 min: Song 64. Introduction, text and comments.
40 min: Stimulating review of “Divine Victory” assembly program. The brothers handling this part should be assigned well in advance of the assembly. One brother may serve as chairman, getting reports from various ones on how the program helped us to appreciate and improve our relationship with Jehovah, new thoughts gleaned from principal one-hour discourses, counsel concerning the way we are using our lives, the effect of what we learned as to our field ministry, any outstanding experiences, etc.
 3 min: Concluding comments. Talk on June 15, 1973, “Watchtower” article “Motivated by a Godly Conscience.” Song 91.

