Do You Value Our Literature?
1 Diamonds and other gemstones are valuable not only because of their beauty but also because of the high cost of finding them and mining them. The knowledge of Jehovah and Jesus Christ is of even more excelling value, and our publications are the only ones in the world that explain these spiritual riches in depth and with godly wisdom. (Rom. 11:33; Phil. 3:8) How can we demonstrate true appreciation for our literature?
2 A number of individuals and family groups regularly set aside a contribution to be taken to the Kingdom Hall and placed in one of the boxes labeled “Contributions for the Society’s Worldwide Work​—Matthew 24:14.” Individuals make additional contributions to the worldwide work when they pick up supplies of literature or magazines and when they deposit contributions received in the field ministry.
3 Another way to demonstrate appreciation is to be selective in offering literature to people we meet in field service. We would not think of giving an expensive diamond to an infant, who could not comprehend its value. Neither do we give valuable literature to individuals who have no appreciation for spiritual things. (Compare Hebrews 12:16.) Our generous giving of ourselves and our literature should be regulated by a discerning attitude. Is the householder willing to converse? Does he pay attention when we speak, respond to questions we ask, and follow along as we read from the Bible? If such interest is manifest, we are glad to leave an appropriate publication. When we conduct studies in our publications, people are helped to learn what the Bible teaches and the way is opened for them to build a relationship with Jehovah. The true benefit to be derived from our literature is determined by how it is used.
4 Literature left on a shelf at the Kingdom Hall or in our home is not accomplishing its purpose, and its value is not being realized. Even older issues of the magazines, brochures, bound books, and tracts should be put to good use. When was the last time we took an inventory of the supply of literature we already have on hand? We may be surprised to discover how much has accumulated. Is the literature we have still in good condition​—not yellowed with age, torn, or soiled? If so, we should make every effort to distribute this in the field ministry. Damaged literature can be retained for personal use or appropriately discarded. Even while concentrating primarily on the current offer, we may decide at times to use a different publication.
5 Always give careful thought to how much literature you actually need for distribution purposes. Good judgment is necessary. While an adequate quantity is essential, especially if you are pioneering, there is no need to maintain a large personal supply of literature, since more can be obtained at the Kingdom Hall before and after meetings. Equip yourself with sufficient literature to get the month started and get more as your supply is used up.
6 Our publications are most valuable when placed in the hands of people who appreciate God’s Word of truth. May all of us be wise and discreet in the use of what has been provided, thus showing how highly we value our literature.

