How to Cultivate Interest
1 From one dictionary we learn that “cultivate” means to prepare for or foster growth. But this word can also mean to improve by labor, care, or study. Making disciples is an important objective of our ministry. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Therefore, we need to put forth effort to cultivate the interest we find in the field ministry.
2 Repeated visits are usually required to foster the spiritual growth of honesthearted individuals. Productive return visits should lead to a regular Bible study.
3 Do you call back only on those who show great interest? You do not need to place literature in order to return. One pioneer who does not usually leave much literature on the initial visit calls back on everyone who is friendly. A good discussion in which you share a Scriptural thought provides a fine basis for a return visit.
4 Use Tracts to Start Bible Studies on Return Visits: The various subjects of our tracts are relevant for our day. They emphasize the need for taking in Bible knowledge and applying it.
You could say:
▪ “Last time we talked about some reasons for putting trust in the Bible. What kind of future does the Bible talk about?” Begin reading from the second paragraph on page 3 of the tract Life in a Peaceful New World. Look up the scriptures. Ask the householder for his reaction to what you are reading. Conclude by considering the material under the subheading “How It Is Possible for You” on page 5.
5 In a similar manner, you could use the tract What Hope for Dead Loved Ones?
You might say:
▪ “As we considered briefly before, many people lack confidence in God. For example, they ask, ‘If God is so powerful, why does he allow people to die?’ This tract can help answer that question.” Call attention to the section beginning with the fourth paragraph on page 2. Ask a relevant question after each paragraph, and consider cited scriptures that are not quoted. If your congregation now has a supply of the new brochure Does God Really Care About Us?, it could be used in a similar way.
6 Continuing the Study: By following the methods suggested here, you are starting a home Bible study. In order to further the discussion on a regular basis, ask the householder at the conclusion of your visit: “Did you notice that we answered important questions in just a few minutes? Next week we could spend a little more time talking about the resurrection hope or another subject that interests you.” You could use just one of the questions mentioned in these articles each time you visit. At an appropriate time, you can switch to a brochure or start a study in the Live Forever book.
7 How satisfying it is to conduct a Bible study with a genuine truth-​seeker! May we be blessed with a productive ministry by applying the suggestions given on how to cultivate the interest we find.

