Lay the Groundwork on Your Initial Call
1 Making effective return visits becomes easier when we lay the proper groundwork on the initial call. The Reasoning book can help us do that.
2 The following presentation is based on the second introduction on page 10 of the Reasoning book, under the heading “Bible/​God.”
After a friendly greeting, say:
▪ “We find that more and more people today feel uncertain as to where they can find practical answers to mounting everyday problems. Have you found that to be true? [Allow for response.] It used to be that people looked to the Bible for help. But now many say they have doubts. How do you feel about the Bible?” If the householder expresses skepticism about its authenticity, take out the tract Why You Can Trust the Bible and read the second and third paragraphs on page 2. If the householder agrees that the Bible is God’s Word, look up and read the scriptures cited in the second paragraph on page 2 of the tract, and briefly discuss these with him.
3 If there are many in your territory who express disbelief, try adapting the fifth introduction on page 10 of the Reasoning book to arouse their interest.
You could say:
▪ “In view of all the conflicts in the world today, many sincere people find it difficult to believe in God. Or if they do believe in him, they do not believe he can solve the problems we face. How do you feel? [Allow for response.] Notice what this tract has to say about men, science, and the Bible.” Then begin reading the fifth paragraph on page 3 of the tract Why You Can Trust the Bible.
4 Raise Questions From the Tract to Set Up Your Next Visit: Plan for your initial call to be only the beginning of a series of fruitful visits. Do not feel that you need to go into much detail; neither should you be so abrupt that the householder feels you are not genuinely interested in him. After reading two or three paragraphs from the tract, raise a question that can be discussed on a future visit.
5 For example, you could direct attention to the third paragraph on page 4 and ask: “Do you think the Bible provides enough evidence to trust what it says about the future?” This will establish a reference point for the return visit, when you might consider chapters 9 and 10 in The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s?
6 If the householder is genuinely interested and seems to appreciate the information presented, you may wish to offer the God’s Word book on the initial call. Or if the situation warrants, you may offer the New World Translation. Where appropriate, briefly explain that our work is supported by voluntary donations and that you would be pleased to accept a small contribution for that purpose.
7 If we view each householder as a potential disciple, we will endeavor to use our concluding remarks to lay the groundwork for a return visit.

