Service Meetings for November
Week Starting November 2
Song 49
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Call attention to information in box about branch addresses. Commend publishers for the part they are having in Kingdom-preaching work. Suggest talking points in current magazines for use in local territory.
15 min: “The Power of God’s Word.” Questions and answers. Encourage all to read the tract Why You Can Trust the Bible, taking note of lines of reasoning and simple, potent argumentation for use in field service.
20 min: “Lay the Groundwork on Your Initial Call.” Brother handling this part introduces four demonstrations illustrating one of the two introductions mentioned in paragraphs 2 and 3 and demonstrating each of the points in paragraphs 4, 5, and 6. The last demonstration should show how both the Bible and the God’s Word book can be presented when genuine interest is manifested on initial call.
Song 52 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 9
Song 141
 5 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News.
15 min: “Do You Follow Instructions?” Talk by presiding overseer based on article in October 1, 1990, Watchtower, pages 30-1. Local application should be made to specific needs: reporting field service time, Kingdom Hall cleaning, being on time for meetings for field service, controlling children in Kingdom Hall, and so forth. Commend where appropriate, and help all discern how entire congregation benefits and the work of appointed servants is made easier when everyone follows instructions.
10 min: “Be an Auxiliary Pioneer in December.” Warmly and enthusiastically cover material by means of questions and answers. Announce local arrangements for field service and special arrangements to be made for larger groups during December.
15 min: “Do You Value Our Literature?” Encouraging talk.
Song 27 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 16
Song 179
15 min: Local announcements, including accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Warmly commend congregation for financial support of local congregation as well as Society’s Kingdom Hall Fund and Society’s worldwide work. Outline special field service arrangements for holiday period, where appropriate. Parents should especially prepare schoolchildren for issues that may arise during the holiday season, using pages 17-21 of the School brochure.
20 min: “How to Cultivate Interest.” Talk and demonstrations, to be handled by service overseer. Demonstrate techniques outlined in paragraphs 5 and 6. Keep demonstrations simple and easy to follow.
10 min: “Choose Appropriate Talking Points.” Discussion between husband and wife preparing for field service.
Song 198 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 23
Song 54
10 min: Local announcements. Present a demonstration of how a talking point from a current magazine can be used this weekend. Use suggestions given at last week’s Service Meeting.
20 min: “Looking to Jehovah in All We Undertake”​—Part 1. Discussion of paragraphs 1 to 13 of insert by two brothers, preferably those working with Regional Building Committee in area. Local experiences may be included. Warmly encourage all who qualify to volunteer.
15 min: Why We Do Not Celebrate Birthdays. Discussion between elder and preteenage fatherless boy who is a good example. Boy approaches elder to ask for his help in dealing with pressure from his peers to attend a birthday party. He understands it is wrong but would like to be able to explain it clearly to others. Elder kindly and in simple language reviews with boy information on pages 30-1 in September 1, 1992, Watchtower and pages 68-70 of the Reasoning book.
Song 24 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 30
Song 104
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Using the Greatest Man Book to Let Our Light Shine in December. Talk with demonstration. Encourage all to have field service points well in mind. Suggest talking points based on chapters considered in Congregation Book Study earlier in month.
20 min: “Looking to Jehovah in All We Undertake”​—Part 2. Question-and-answer consideration of paragraphs 14 to 25 of insert. Emphasize share each publisher can have in (1) volunteering if qualified and circumstances allow, (2) contributing financially to Society’s Kingdom Hall Fund, and (3) supporting congregation activities when others are away on a construction assignment.
Song 4 and concluding prayer.

