Announcements
ASSEMBLY TIME IS HERE!
That is right, time flies, and it is just a few days more now until Jehovah’s witnesses will begin their 1954 assemblies! The first three district assemblies will be held in Boston, Cincinnati and Richmond, June 24-27. For those attending, this will be 1954’s most important event. For the rest of Jehovah’s witnesses in the United States and Canada, that most important matter will come in July or August. Yes, for all, the time is at hand!
Have you completed arrangements? Do you realize the importance of these strengthening spiritual feasts? You would if you knew the program that has been prepared! Each of the twenty-one assemblies will have the same spiritual food. At each your love for Jehovah and for your brothers will be strengthened, your Christian welfare improved, and your ability to serve the people of good will increased. Who would turn his back on such feasts?
District Assemblies, June 24-27: Boston, Mass., Fenway Park. Cincinnati, Ohio, Cincinnati Gardens, 2250 Seymour Ave. Richmond, Va., Mooers Field, 1700 Roseneath Rd.
CONTINUING OUR COURSE IN JEHOVAH’S NAME
The greatest name in all the universe is that of Jehovah God. To “walk” in it means to follow the course that Jehovah God marks out for us to take. (Mic. 4:5) Those who walk in his name honor it and are glad to confess it before others. They proclaim Jehovah’s name and fame, his words and his works, as did Jesus the faithful and true witness. (Rev. 3:14) Jehovah’s witnesses delight to walk in Jehovah’s name, rejoicing at all times to tell others about his glorious kingdom. During July they will present to all people whom they contact three excellent books, Bible study aids, in hard binding, together with three booklets on outstanding Bible themes, on a contribution of $1.50.
FOR THOSE WHO ARE AWAKE!
Alerted to the significance of things happening throughout the world today, persons of discretion try to keep up with occurring events. Not having time to consider lengthy articles of the daily press and monthly periodicals, but yet desiring to be informed as to what is happening in scientific, governmental, commercial and educational fields, they seek to keep posted with a minimum of time and effort. This can be done by regularly receiving Awake! magazine. A year’s subscription, 24 issues, is only $1.00.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
The Society’s offices, factory and Bethel home in Brooklyn, New York, will be closed from July 31 to August 15, inclusive. Orders and correspondence sent in during that period will not be handled until some time after the reopening of the offices. Please anticipate your needs well in advance and place your orders in time for attention before the vacation period.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 11: The Revelation of Jesus Christ.
Week of July 18: Maintaining the Way of Favor.

