Praise the King of Eternity!
“Jehovah is King to time indefinite, even forever.”—PSALM 10:16.
 1. What questions arise with regard to eternity?
ETERNITY—what would you say it is? Do you think time could really go on forever? Well, there is no question that time stretches forever into the past. So why not forever into the future? Indeed, the New World Translation of the Bible refers to God as being praised “from time indefinite even to time indefinite.” (Psalm 41:13) What does this expression mean? We may be helped to understand it if we refer to a related subject—space.
2, 3. (a) What questions involve space, helping us to appreciate eternity? (b) Why should we want to worship the King of eternity?
2 How extensive is space? Is there any limit to it? Up until 400 years ago, our earth was thought to be the center of the universe. Then Galileo developed the telescope, providing for a greatly enlarged view of the heavens. Now Galileo could see many more stars and was able to show that the earth and other planets revolve around the sun. The Milky Way no longer looked milky. It proved to be a galaxy of stars, about a hundred billion in number. We could never count that many actual stars, even in a lifetime. Later, astronomers went on to locate billions of galaxies. These stretch out endlessly into space, as far as the most powerful telescopes can probe. It seems that there are no limits to space. The same is true with eternity—it has no limits.
3 The idea of eternity seems to be beyond the understanding of our limited human brains. However, there is Someone who fully understands it. He can count, yes, and even name the boundless quadrillions of stars in their billions of galaxies! This One says: “Raise your eyes high up and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who is bringing forth the army of them even by number, all of whom he calls even by name. Due to the abundance of dynamic energy, he also being vigorous in power, not one of them is missing. Have you not come to know or have you not heard? Jehovah, the Creator of the extremities of the earth, is a God to time indefinite. He does not tire out or grow weary. There is no searching out of his understanding.” (Isaiah 40:26, 28) What a marvelous God! Surely, he is the God we should want to worship!
“King to Time Indefinite”
 4. (a) How did David express appreciation for the King of eternity? (b) What did one of history’s greatest scientists conclude as to the origin of the universe?
4 At Psalm 10:16, David says of the Creator, God: “Jehovah is King to time indefinite, even forever.” And at Psalm 29:10, he repeats: “Jehovah sits as king to time indefinite.” Yes, Jehovah is the King of eternity! Further, David testifies that this exalted King is Designer and Maker of all that we behold in space, saying at Psalm 19:1: “The heavens are declaring the glory of God; and of the work of his hands the expanse is telling.” Some 2,700 years later, the famous scientist Sir Isaac Newton expressed agreement with David, writing: “This most elegant system of suns, planets and comets could only arise from the purpose and sovereignty of an enlightened and mighty being.”
 5. What did Isaiah and Paul write about the Source of wisdom?
5 How it should humble us to know that the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, whom even the spacious “heavens, yes, the heaven of the heavens, . . . cannot contain,” lives eternally! (1 Kings 8:27) Jehovah, described at Isaiah 45:18 as “the Creator of the heavens, . . . the Former of the earth and the Maker of it,” is the Source of wisdom far more extensive than mortal human brains can fathom. Jehovah said, as highlighted at 1 Corinthians 1:19: “I will make the wisdom of the wise men perish, and the intelligence of the intellectual men I will shove aside.” To this the apostle Paul added in 1Co 1 verse 20: “Where is the wise man? Where the scribe? Where the debater of this system of things? Did not God make the wisdom of the world foolish?” Yes, as Paul went on to say, at 1Co chapter 3, verse 19, “the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.”
 6. What does Ecclesiastes 3:11 indicate as to “time indefinite”?
6 The heavenly bodies are part of the creation that King Solomon referred to: “Everything [God] has made pretty in its time. Even time indefinite he has put in their heart, that mankind may never find out the work that the true God has made from the start to the finish.” (Ecclesiastes 3:11) Truly, it is implanted in the heart of man to try to find out the meaning of “time indefinite,” that is, eternity. But can he ever attain such knowledge?
A Marvelous Life Prospect
7, 8. (a) What marvelous life prospect lies ahead for mankind, and how may it be attained? (b) Why should we rejoice that divine education will continue for all eternity?
7 Jesus Christ said in prayer to Jehovah: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) How can we gain such knowledge? We need to study God’s Word, the Holy Bible. Thereby we can gain accurate knowledge of God’s grand purposes, including the provision made through his Son for everlasting life on a paradise earth. That will be “the real life” referred to at 1 Timothy 6:19. It will be in accord with what Ephesians 3:11 describes as “the eternal purpose that [God] formed in connection with the Christ, Jesus our Lord.”
8 Yes, we sinful humans may attain to everlasting life through divine education and faith in Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. How long will this education continue? It will go on for all eternity as mankind is progressively instructed in the wisdom of our Creator. The wisdom of Jehovah has no limits. Recognizing this, the apostle Paul exclaimed: “O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge! How unsearchable his judgments are and past tracing out his ways are!” (Romans 11:33) Appropriate it is, indeed, that 1 Timothy 1:17 calls Jehovah “the King of eternity”!
Jehovah’s Creative Wisdom
9, 10. (a) What grand works did Jehovah accomplish in preparing the earth as his gift to mankind? (b) How is the excelling wisdom of Jehovah displayed in his creations? (See box.)
9 Consider the splendid heritage the King of eternity has provided for us humans. Psalm 115:16 tells us: “As regards the heavens, to Jehovah the heavens belong, but the earth he has given to the sons of men.” Do you not think that is a wonderful trust? Surely! And how we appreciate our Creator’s outstanding foresight in preparing earth as our home!—Psalm 107:8.
10 Wonderful developments took place on earth during the six creative “days” of Genesis chapter 1, each day covering thousands of years. These creations of God would ultimately cover the entire earth with a verdant grassy carpet, stately forests, and colorful flowers. It would be teeming with multitudes of exotic sea creatures, flocks of lovely winged birds, and a vast array of domestic and untamed animals, each reproducing “according to its kind.” Following the description of the creation of man and woman, Genesis 1:31 relates: “God saw everything he had made and, look! it was very good.” What a delightful environment surrounded those first humans! Do we not perceive in all of these creations the wisdom, foresight, and care of a loving Creator?—Isaiah 45:11, 12, 18.
11. How did Solomon magnify Jehovah’s creative wisdom?
11 One who marveled at the wisdom of the King of eternity was Solomon. He repeatedly called attention to the Creator’s wisdom. (Proverbs 1:1, 2; 2:1, 6; 3:13-18) Solomon assures us that “the earth is standing even to time indefinite.” He appreciated the many wonders of creation, including the part that rain clouds play in refreshing our earth. Thus, he wrote: “All the winter torrents are going forth to the sea, yet the sea itself is not full. To the place where the winter torrents are going forth, there they are returning so as to go forth.” (Ecclesiastes 1:4, 7) So it is that after the rains and the rivers have refreshed the earth, their waters are recycled from the oceans back into the clouds. What would this earth be like, and where would we be without this purifying and recycling of water?
12, 13. How may we show appreciation for God’s creation?
12 Our appreciation for the balance in creation should be backed up by action, as King Solomon noted in the closing words of Ecclesiastes: “The conclusion of the matter, everything having been heard, is: Fear the true God and keep his commandments. For this is the whole obligation of man. For the true God himself will bring every sort of work into the judgment in relation to every hidden thing, as to whether it is good or bad.” (Ecclesiastes 12:13, 14) We should fear to do anything displeasing to God. Rather, we should seek to obey him with reverential awe.
13 Surely, we should want to praise the King of eternity for his glorious works of creation! Psalm 104:24 declares: “How many your works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made. The earth is full of your productions.” Joyfully, let us subscribe to the last verse of this psalm Ps 104:35 by saying to ourselves and to others: “Bless Jehovah, O my soul. Praise Jah, you people!”
The Crowning Earthly Creation
14. In what ways is God’s human creation far superior to the animals?
14 All of Jehovah’s creation is masterly. But the most remarkable earthly creation is us—humankind. Adam and then Eve were brought forth as the climax of Jehovah’s sixth creative day—a creation far superior to the fish, birds, and animals! Whereas many of these are instinctively wise, mankind is endowed with the power of reason, a conscience that can distinguish between right and wrong, the ability to plan for the future, and an innate desire to worship. How did all of this come about? Rather than evolving from brute beasts, man was created in God’s image. Accordingly, man alone can reflect the qualities of our Creator, who identified himself as “Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abundant in loving-kindness and truth.”—Exodus 34:6.
15. Why should we humbly laud Jehovah?
15 Let us praise and thank Jehovah for the extraordinary design of our bodies. Our bloodstream, essential to life, cycles through the body every 60 seconds. As Deuteronomy 12:23 states, “the blood is the soul”—our life—precious in God’s sight. Sturdy bones, flexible muscles, and a responsive nervous system are topped by a brain far superior to any animal brain and with capacities that a computer the size of a skyscraper could not begin to contain. Does this not make you feel humble? It should. (Proverbs 22:4) And consider this also: Our lungs, larynx, tongue, teeth, and mouth interact to provide human speech in any of thousands of languages. David made appropriate melody to Jehovah, saying: “I shall laud you because in a fear-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, as my soul is very well aware.” (Psalm 139:14) Let us join David in thankfully praising Jehovah, our marvelous Designer and God!
16. What melody did a famous musician make in praise to Jehovah, and to what compelling invitation may we respond?
16 The libretto of an 18th-century oratorio by Joseph Haydn states in praise of Jehovah: “Give Him thanks, all ye His works so wondrous! Sing His honor, sing His glory, bless and magnify His Name! Jehovah’s praise endures forevermore, Amen, Amen!” Even more beautiful are the oft repeated inspired expressions in the Psalms, such as the invitation extended four times in the 107th Psalm 107:8, 15, 21, 31: “O let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loving-kindness and for his wonderful works to the sons of men.” Do you join in that praise? You should, for everything that is truly lovely has as its source Jehovah, the King of eternity.
Still Mightier Works
17. How does ‘the song of Moses and of the Lamb’ extol Jehovah?
17 During the past six thousand years, the King of eternity has set in motion still mightier works. In the final book of the Bible, at Revelation 15:3, 4, we read of those in heaven who have triumphed over demonic enemies: “They are singing the song of Moses the slave of God and the song of the Lamb, saying: ‘Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your ways, King of eternity. Who will not really fear you, Jehovah, and glorify your name, because you alone are loyal? For all the nations will come and worship before you, because your righteous decrees have been made manifest.’” Why is this called ‘the song of Moses and of the Lamb’? Let us see.
18. What mighty work is memorialized in song in Exodus chapter 15?
18 Some 3,500 years ago, when Pharaoh’s mighty army perished in the Red Sea, the Israelites thankfully praised Jehovah in song. We read at Exodus 15:1, 18: “At that time Moses and the sons of Israel proceeded to sing this song to Jehovah and to say the following: ‘Let me sing to Jehovah, for he has become highly exalted. The horse and its rider he has pitched into the sea. Jehovah will rule as king to time indefinite, even forever.’” Righteous decrees of this King of eternity were manifest in his judging and executing of enemies that defied his sovereignty.
19, 20. (a) Why did Jehovah form the nation of Israel? (b) How have the Lamb and others answered Satan’s challenge?
19 Why had this become necessary? It was in the garden of Eden that the wily Serpent led our first parents into sin. This resulted in sinful imperfection being passed on to all mankind. However, the King of eternity immediately took steps in harmony with his original purpose, which would lead to the ousting of all his enemies from earth’s domain and to the restoring of paradisaic conditions. The King of eternity formed the nation of Israel and provided his Law to foreshadow how he would accomplish this.—Galatians 3:24.
20 In time, though, Israel itself sank into unfaithfulness, and this sad state climaxed when its leaders gave God’s only-begotten Son over to the Romans to be viciously tortured and killed. (Acts 10:39; Philippians 2:8) However, Jesus’ integrity to the death, as the sacrificial “Lamb of God,” refuted outstandingly the challenge made by God’s ancient Adversary, Satan—that no man on earth could keep faithful to God under a severe test. (John 1:29, 36; Job 1:9-12; 27:5) Though inheriting imperfection from Adam, millions of other God-fearing humans have followed in Jesus’ footsteps by keeping integrity in the face of satanic attacks.—1 Peter 1:18, 19; 2:19, 21.
21. In line with Acts 17:29-31, what will be discussed next?
21 Now the day has arrived for Jehovah to reward those faithful ones and to judge all enemies of truth and righteousness. (Acts 17:29-31) How will this come about? Our next article will tell.
Review Box
□ Why is Jehovah rightly called “the King of eternity”?
□ How is Jehovah’s wisdom displayed in his creations?
□ In what ways is humankind a masterpiece of creation?
□ What works call for ‘the song of Moses and of the Lamb’?
[Box on page 12]
Jehovah’s Excelling Wisdom
  The wisdom of the King of eternity is reflected in so many ways in his productions on earth. Note the words of Agur: “Every saying of God is refined. He is a shield to those taking refuge in him.” (Proverbs 30:5) Then Agur refers to many of the living creations of God, the large and the small. For example, in verses 24 to 28, he describes “four things that are the smallest of the earth, but they are instinctively wise.” These are the ant, the rock badger, the locust, and the gecko.
  “Instinctively wise”—yes, the animals are made that way. They do not think things out as humans do but rely on implanted wisdom. Have you ever marveled at this? What an orderly creation they are! For instance, ants are organized into colonies, which include the queen, workers, and males. In some species, the worker ants even herd aphids into farm enclosures that they have built. There they milk the aphids while the soldier ants drive away any invading enemies. The admonition is given at Proverbs 6:6: “Go to the ant, you lazy one; see its ways and become wise.” Should not such examples prompt us humans to have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord”?—1 Corinthians 15:58.
  Man has built huge airplanes. But how much more versatile are the birds, including the hummingbird, which weighs less than an ounce [30 gm]! A Boeing 747 must carry 47,000 gallons [180,000 L.] of fuel, be operated by a trained crew, and employ complex navigation systems to make a transoceanic crossing. Yet, a tiny hummingbird relies on one thirtieth of an ounce [1 gm] of fatty fuel to carry it all the way from North America, across the Gulf of Mexico, and into South America. No heavy load of fuel, no training in navigation, no complicated charts or computers! Did this ability result from a chance process of evolution? Hardly! This tiny bird is instinctively wise, being programmed thus by its Creator, Jehovah God.
[Picture on page 10]
The diversified creations of “the King of eternity” extol his glory
[Picture on page 15]
As Moses and all Israel celebrated Jehovah’s victory at the Red Sea, there will be great rejoicing after Armageddon

