Benefiting From Revised Public Talks
1 The modern history of Jehovah’s Witnesses is accurately described in the words of Proverbs 4:18: “The path of the righteous ones is like the bright light that is getting lighter and lighter until the day is firmly established.”
2 In line with this, the Christian congregation continues to receive timely clarification of and updated information on Bible teachings. (Matt. 24:45-47) Likely you can relate examples of this that you have noted since you began to associate with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Congregation meetings, including public talks, help us to keep abreast of the increasing light of truth.
3 Revised Outlines: Recently, the Society has updated a number of public talk outlines. Fresh material has been incorporated into them, and important points have been clarified. If the congregation is to receive the full benefit of this updated information, brothers who give public talks should use only the very latest outlines.
4 With a view to getting the most out of public talks, give some thought to the titles of the talks to be given. Before you attend the Public Meeting, try to recall the latest information from theocratic sources on the subject. Then, while listening, anticipate the development of this information. Take note of any fresh ways of presenting these truths for future use. This ensures that you will derive the greatest benefit from the revised public talks.
5 Public Talks Should Inform and Also Motivate Listeners: When Jesus spoke, he reached the hearts of his listeners. At the conclusion of Jesus’ Sermon on the Mount, the most famous public talk ever given, as Matthew 7:28 reports: “The effect was that the crowds were astounded at his way of teaching.”
6 Having Jesus’ example in mind, bodies of elders should use discretion in approving new public speakers, assigning only those brothers who are fine teachers, who will adhere closely to the Society’s outlines, and who are able to hold the attention of the audience. Brothers who are assigned the privilege of giving public talks should continually strive to improve their speaking ability, accepting any counsel and suggestions received from the elders.
7 As foretold at Isaiah 65:13, 14, the spiritual prosperity of God’s people continues to become more evident. The arrangement for public talks is one of the many ways that we are “taught by Jehovah.”​—Isa. 54:13.

