Part 2​—Show Consideration for Others
1 As far as reasonably possible, we want to maintain a good relationship with people who live in our community. This requires that we show consideration and respect for their rights and feelings.
2 Jehovah’s Witnesses are known for good manners. Our standards of decorum in the neighborhood, at school, and in the workplace, as well as at our assemblies, have been the subject of many favorable comments.​—See the June 15, 1989, Watchtower, page 20.
3 Fine conduct, of course, includes many things, such as honesty, diligence, and good morals. It also includes being respectful of residents who live in the area around our Kingdom Hall. Our godly conduct in other respects may be ignored if we fail to be considerate of our neighbors. Paul urged us to “behave in a manner worthy of the good news.”​—Phil. 1:27.
4 From time to time, complaints have been made by residents living near certain Kingdom Halls because of what they feel is a lack of consideration shown by those attending the meetings. Brothers and sisters should avoid congregating on the sidewalk in front of the Kingdom Hall and carrying on animated conversations that can be heard in nearby homes. Children should not be allowed to run in and out of the Kingdom Hall. Thoughtlessly slamming car doors or blowing horns can disturb the neighborhood. Conduct of this type reflects unfavorably on the congregation. Also, it is important that we observe all traffic regulations when driving in the area.​—Rom. 13:1, 2, 5.
5 Cars should not be parked on private property or in places where they obstruct traffic or block driveways. Parking lots maintained by nearby business establishments for their customers should not be used unless permission is given. Where three or four congregations use the same Kingdom Hall, meetings are scheduled virtually every day of the week, and this requires close cooperation between bodies of elders.​—See The Watchtower, October 1, 1988, page 17, paragraph 13.
6 The Bible urges us to “do all things for God’s glory,” and that includes showing consideration for outsiders. (1 Cor. 10:31-33) If we ‘keep an eye on the personal interests of others,’ we will not thoughtlessly intrude on their property. (Phil. 2:4) We will also avoid interfering with business activities of local merchants.
7 Showing consideration for others​—both inside and outside the congregation—​is an outward expression of what we feel in our hearts. What we do and say should demonstrate that we ‘love our neighbors as ourselves.’​—Matt. 7:12; 22:39.

