Preaching​—An Honored Privilege
1 The ministry of the good news is an honored privilege that Jehovah has extended to us. (Rom. 15:16; 1 Tim. 1:12) Is that the way you view it? Neither the passage of time nor the ridicule of others should be allowed to diminish its importance in our eyes. Bearing God’s name is an honor given only to a few. How can we make our appreciation for this privilege grow?
2 Preaching the Kingdom message does not bring us the world’s favor. Many view our work with apathy or indifference. Others ridicule and oppose it. Such opposition can come from workmates, neighbors, or even family members. In their eyes we may appear to be misguided and foolish. (John 15:19; 1 Cor. 1:18, 21; 2 Tim. 3:12) Their discouraging comments are designed to dampen our zeal and cause us to slow down or to relinquish our honored privilege. Negative views are promoted by Satan, who “has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, that the illumination of the glorious good news . . . might not shine through.” (2 Cor. 4:4) How do you react?
3 It is important to keep in mind that our preaching about the Kingdom is the most important work any of us could be doing today. We have a lifesaving message that is available through no other means. (Rom. 10:13-15) Having God’s approval, not that of man, is what counts. The world’s negative view of our preaching activity does not deter us from boldly declaring the good news.​—Acts 4:29.
4 Jesus highly esteemed his privilege to do his Father’s will. (John 4:34) He devoted himself exclusively to the ministry and did not allow either distractions or opposers to slow him down. Preaching the Kingdom message always took first place in his life. (Luke 4:43) We are commanded to imitate his example. (1 Pet. 2:21) In doing so, we serve as “God’s fellow workers.” (1 Cor. 3:9) Are we taking full advantage of this privilege? Do we seek occasions to share the good news with others both formally and informally? As Witnesses of Jehovah, we should always be ready to “make public declaration to his name.”​—Heb. 13:15.
5 Our share in the ministry is largely determined by our attitude. Do we deeply appreciate all that Jehovah has done for us? Have we developed in our hearts a love for Jehovah that motivates us to do all we can in his service? Meditating on the blessings we now enjoy as well as what Jehovah has promised for the future helps us to abound in love for our Creator. Such love motivates us to action​—persistence and regularity in the Kingdom-preaching work to the extent our circumstances allow. Our zeal will give evidence of our love for Jehovah and our neighbor.​—Mark 12:30, 31.
6 We show how highly we value something by what we do with it and say about it. Do we truly value our privilege to preach about the Kingdom? Do we glorify our ministry? Are we determined to persevere in this vital work in spite of opposition? If we highly esteem this wonderful privilege, we will surely be zealous and wholehearted.​—2 Cor. 4:1, 7.

