The Word of the Kingdom​—Getting the Sense of It
1 In his illustration of the sower, Jesus said that the seed falling on “the fine soil” pictured “the one hearing the word and getting the sense of it.” (Matt. 13:23) After hearing about the Kingdom, have we got “the sense of it”? How much does it influence our lives? Have we put Kingdom interests in first place, thus revealing that we did get the sense of the message?
2 A correct understanding of the Kingdom message requires personal study. We need to take time to meditate on the spiritual food provided. Hasty reading of The Watchtower is like gulping down a tasty and nutritious meal. Do you take time to give the spiritual food thorough consideration? To gain the most benefit, there must be an incentive and a healthy spiritual appetite. If these are lacking, other activities can minimize the benefits of personal study or consume the time we need for it. Sticking to a good study schedule is not easy. While it takes a careful balancing of priorities, the spiritual riches to be gained are priceless.​—Prov. 3:13-18; Col. 1:27.
3 Examining the Scriptures helps us each day to entertain positive, upbuilding thoughts about the Kingdom. Those who are “conscious of their spiritual need” plan to take a few minutes every day to read the text and comments. (Matt. 5:3) Many texts explain various facets of the Kingdom. For example, on November 22, 1994, the text featured was Matthew 13:4. The comment considered the Kingdom hope and reminded us of the dangers of unwholesome association with relatives and neighbors. The fact that at Bethel homes around the world, there is a 15-minute discussion of the daily text each workday morning emphasizes the benefits and the seriousness of considering the day’s text together. Does your family include a similar consideration in your daily routine?
4 As you grow in appreciation for the Kingdom, there will be a greater incentive to share the Kingdom message with others. The Watchtower and Awake! provide what might be likened to mental fuel that feeds our minds with fresh, up-to-date information. They help us to maintain a keen awareness of how much the world needs God’s Kingdom. They help us to be spiritual persons, who “have the mind of Christ.” (1 Cor. 2:15, 16) All of this can strengthen our hope and increase our zeal to share the Kingdom hope with others.​—1 Pet. 3:15.
5 It is vital that we personally get the sense of the Kingdom message. The Kingdom is the means that God will use to uphold his sovereignty, end wickedness, and bring a new world​—a paradise. Jesus commanded us to put it first in our lives. We must be sheeplike subjects to live under its rule. (Matt. 6:10, 33) Make the most of your opportunity to enjoy its blessings.

