From Our Readers
Brotherhood of Man
Sometimes your writers give the facts only superficial coverage. For example, in the article “The Brotherhood of Man​—Just a Dream?” Napoleon is blamed for having shattered the dream of brotherhood. That is shallow thinking. Brotherhood was destroyed long before Napoleon. I dare to claim that if Jehovah’s Witnesses had the sole say in a country, they would have to become politically active. They would even trigger a revolution, and what it would bring about would be anything but Christian, because in political situations you cannot always preserve a patient, sheeplike attitude among the people. They would all become ravenous wolves, some more so, some less so, according to character. You cannot simply close your eyes and say this could never happen. That is certainly a bit presumptuous.
E. A., Germany
We did not blame Napoleon for shattering the dream of brotherhood. Napoleon was only brought into the article to show how the great hopes of the French Revolution of 1789 to attain “Freedom, Equality and Brotherhood” were not lasting. And this was proved by what Napoleon’s conquests did. We do not believe that men, even the very best of men, are able to bring about true freedom, equality and brotherhood. Men will always be limited by their own imperfections and sinful tendencies. But we do believe that God’s kingdom by Christ Jesus will do so. That such a true brotherhood is possible is clearly demonstrated now in the worldwide brotherhood of Jehovah’s Witnesses, as can be seen in the article “The Real Brotherhood of Man Today.”​—ED.
We Keep Our Homes Clean
We’d like to add our experience. We rented a small house, but it was “gray-weary.” Within weeks we’d raked, marked off a lawn area, planted flowers, washed windows, removed trash and litter, and so on. The owners commended us and loaned us tools. Later they only accepted half a month’s rent so we could buy paint for the inside. The results? I was given three different domestic jobs; one based strictly on what could be seen from the road​—the employer asking for no references and mailing me my pay two days in advance of the job being done! While we’ve always enjoyed being neat and clean, your article has been a pleasant reminder and probably played a part in the employment that resulted.
M. D., New Jersey
Young People Ask
I very much appreciate your series “Young People Ask . . . .” As a youth today, I can definitely agree that pressures and temptations are hard to resist. Your articles couldn’t have come at a better time.
D. S., Michigan
I want to thank you for your article under “Young People Ask . . . ” entitled “Love or Infatuation​—How Do I Know?” I am one who trusted in my own heart and understanding. And now I am unhappy to say the least. So I hope others will take heed. Marriage is forever. Don’t “marry in haste to repent at leisure” as I did.
D. W., New York

