From Our Readers
Paramedics
Your article “A Paramedic Tells His Story” (January 22, 1983) was fairly accurate in day-to-day events, but any paramedic worth his salt would not dream of using his position to influence ex-patients with his religious beliefs. You insult my profession with your article. A true professional paramedic asks for and expects no thanks.
J. W., Ambulance Officer, Australia
We do not think that Larry Marshburn uses his position to influence his patients with his religious beliefs, but, rather, in his personal life he continues to show a kindly interest in his fellowman beyond the call of his profession, telling them of the hope for life when there will be no more sorrow, suffering, sickness or death.​—ED.
I have recently completed a CPR course and was told that the correct position for administering CPR is kneeling next to the victim. Your cover shows the paramedic standing.
A. V., Michigan
The picture was based on an actual photograph in a paramedic magazine. We understand that CPR can be administered from a kneeling or a standing position, but that the kneeling position is the more recommended and most often used.​—ED.
Handling a Job Interview
The night before I was going on a job interview I read your article “How Do I Handle a Job Interview?” (February 8, 1983) I noted the suggestions given as to what to do before going on the interview, while on the interview and after leaving the interview. One thing the article stated that really gave me confidence was that while others are going out for the same job, you can be the one to get the job. I followed your suggestions and I was the one who got the job. Please keep on with these articles. We young people need such articles, so that we can cope with the problems we face.
M. F., Pennsylvania
Your article on handling a job interview is a very important answer in times of high unemployment. I thought, however, that you might be interested in an article printed by the Seattle Post Intelligencer regarding the recent murder of a young Seattle woman. Apparently people’s thoughts are changing regarding the accompaniment by another person to a job interview, due to the extreme dangerousness of our times.
J. R., Washington
Our article quoted a consultant who conducts job seminars as stating, “always go alone.” The newspaper article tells of a young woman who was murdered when she answered a “receptionist wanted” ad for a nonexistent firm. She had called the Seattle office of the Better Business Bureau, trying to find out if the ad was placed by a reputable business, but no information was available. The spokesman for the Better Business Bureau stated: “She did the right thing​—trying to check out the ad before answering it—​but she also should have taken someone with her when she went for the interview. Our advice to any female job hunter is: Never go alone to an interview if it’s not during daylight hours and it’s not at the offices of an established business.” We are pleased to pass this information on to our readers.​—ED.

