Earth-Wide Security​—How?
IMAGINE living on an earth free from danger and want. That is what earth-wide security means. Is it just a dream?
No. Consider the days of ancient King Solomon. Respecting his wise rule, the Bible states: “Judah and Israel continued to dwell in security, everyone under his own vine and under his own fig tree . . . all the days of Solomon.”​—1 Kings 4:25.
A Lesson From Solomon’s Reign
Unusual Bible accounts, like the above, are passed off by skeptics as exaggeration. Thus, someone may ask: ‘How can I be sure that Solomon’s rule is not just myth?’ Indirect archaeological evidence is presented following this article. Of course, the best evidence of the reality of Solomon’s rule is that it is reported on in the infallible Word of the living God, Jehovah.​—John 17:17; 1 Peter 1:24, 25.
The secret of the security enjoyed under Solomon’s reign lay in applying Jehovah’s righteous laws. Before the Israelites entered the Promised Land, God had said: ‘If you continue walking in my statutes and keeping my commandments, the land will indeed give its yield. And you will indeed dwell in security in your land. And I will put peace in the land, and you will indeed lie down, with no one making you tremble.’​—Leviticus 26:3-6.
Sadly, after Solomon’s death the Israelites stopped obeying Jehovah; they turned to idolatry and filthy sex worship. As a result, they lost their security, and the land was invaded by Pharaoh Shishak of Egypt. (1 Kings 14:21-26) “You, for your part, have left me, and I, too, for my part, have left you to the hand of Shishak,” Jehovah explained to an assembly of rulers in Jerusalem.​—2 Chronicles 12:5.
Someone Greater Than Solomon
Jesus Christ confirmed the historic truth about Solomon and “all his glory.” (Matthew 6:29) But with respect to himself, Jesus said: “Look! something more than Solomon is here.” (Matthew 12:42) What did he mean? The security enjoyed under Solomon’s reign was limited. That human king could not free his subjects from sickness, sin, and death. Jesus, however, taught sinful men how they could attain perfect life in everlasting security.​—John 10:10; 13:34, 35; 17:3.
The basis for attaining such total security was laid by Jesus’ death and resurrection. (John 3:16; 1 Corinthians 15:20) From God’s right hand in heaven, he will soon bring earth-wide security to all who submit to his rule. King David of old was inspired to write about this in the poetic 72nd Psalm 72. These words had a partial fulfillment during the reign of David’s son, hence its Ps 72 superscription, “Regarding Solomon.” Yet, the main fulfillment concerns the Kingdom rule of the Greater Solomon, Jesus Christ.
According to Psalm 72:7, 8, the security to be enjoyed under Christ’s rule will be both global and everlasting. “In his days the righteous one will sprout, and the abundance of peace until the moon is no more. And he will have subjects from sea to sea and from the River to the ends of the earth.”​—Compare Zechariah 9:9, 10.
Subjects of Christ’s rule will also enjoy freedom from want, for Psalm 72:16 assures us: “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” Naturally, there will also be freedom from discrimination, oppression, and violence. “For he will deliver the poor one crying for help, also the afflicted one and whoever has no helper. From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul, and their blood will be precious in his eyes.”​—Psalm 72:12, 14.
As in King Solomon’s time, the basis for such earth-wide security will be the wise application of Jehovah’s universal laws. This will be in answer to David’s prophetic request: “O God, give your own judicial decisions to the king . . . Let him judge the afflicted ones of the people, let him save the sons of the poor one, and let him crush the defrauder.”​—Psalm 72:1, 4.
What About Our Present Needs?
‘That’s all very nice,’ someone might say, ‘but I need physical security now.’ True, Christians are still subject to the insecure conditions plaguing mankind​—crime, disease, natural disasters, old age, and death. Experience around the globe has shown, however, that with Bible knowledge, they are better able to cope. (Proverbs 15:1; 22:3) Also, they have the satisfaction of a valid hope. A new Bible student from a crime-ridden suburb of Johannesburg, South Africa, explained one way in which the Scriptures helped him: “Now I know that crime is not permanent; it’s only temporary.”
Why, there is even hope for those who have died as victims of criminal violence. “I am the resurrection and the life,” Jesus promised, and then he added: “He that exercises faith in me, even though he dies, will come to life.”​—John 11:25.
To enjoy such a feeling of security, you need strong faith, which comes from studying Jehovah’s Word. By daily setting aside time to study the Bible, you can experience the fulfillment of this wonderful promise: “As for the one listening to me, he will reside in security and be undisturbed from dread of calamity.”​—Proverbs 1:33; 2:21, 22.
[Box on page 6]
“Under Solomon, Israelite material culture advanced more in three decades than it had during the preceding two hundred years. We find in Solomonic strata the remains of monumental constructions, great cities with massive walls, the mushrooming of residential quarters with well-built clusters of the dwellings of the well-to-do, a quantum jump in the technical proficiency of the potter and his manufacturing processes. We find, too, the remains of artefacts representing goods made in far-off places, signs of vigorous international commerce and trade.”​—The House of David, by Jerry M. Landay.
[Picture Credit Line on page 5]
NASA photo

