From Our Readers
African Toys  What a lovely article was “African Toys for Free”! (March 22, 1993) As an art teacher, I know how important it is to promote creativity in children in this age of television and computer games. When parents spend time making things with their children, they also create lasting memories!
D. B., Germany
I am seven years old. I liked the article, and I thought that it was neat that [African children] get to make their own toys! It sounds like fun, and I would like to try it.
M. S., United States
Rape  Your series of articles on “Rape​—A Woman’s Nightmare” was fantastic. (March 8, 1993) I’m 14 years old, and I’ve heard of girls younger than me who have been raped. But it wasn’t until I read your article that tears came to my eyes, and I realized that this is more serious than I had thought. Thanks a lot.
S. B., United States
During my freshman year in high school, I was raped by a “family friend.” For the past few years, I have thought I had committed fornication. Now I can see that Jehovah knows it was not my fault! I only regret not having got help sooner.
A. S., United States
Many programs deal with recovering from rape, but they do not tell how to avoid it. Surely it is more important to prevent than to cure! In this respect the article helped me immensely, and certainly it will help women everywhere who are potential victims.
J. A. M., Brazil
I was attacked by a would-be rapist outside my home. I fought as I’ve never fought before and screamed Jehovah’s name so loud so many times that the dogs began to bark. My attacker finally got tired of my screaming and ran away. I recommend that everyone follow your suggestions. Depending on the circumstances involved, our actions may make a big difference.
S. P., United States
Almost 20 years ago, I was raped by an acquaintance. I never reported it because I felt ashamed. I never even spoke about it until three years ago in therapy. Only then did I disclose it to my husband. He now understood my aversion to sexual relations. When I finished reading your articles, I cried out of joy​—not pain—​for the first time in 20 years, and thanked Jehovah.
T. P., United States
Space Exploration  I have finished reading the excellent articles on space exploration in the Awake! issue of September 8, 1992. In spite of my knowing very little about this subject, the clear explanation you have given has impressed me. I believe these articles will help us to appreciate more Jehovah’s purpose for an obedient human family.
W. D. F., Costa Rica
We are writing to thank you for the effort you put into compiling the articles on space exploration. After reading the last article, we joyfully thanked Jehovah, the omniscient God, who organized the universe in such a marvelous way. We are eagerly looking forward to the new system, when he will give obedient humans with a perfect brain the opportunity to better understand the universe.
I. N. O. and J. N. O., Nigeria

