





HOW YOUR DONATIONS ARE USED
Convention Programs That Are “Heard and Seen”

JULY 1, 2024


For more than 130 years, modern-day Witnesses of Jehovah have gathered together at annual conventions. These programs now feature over 40 different talks along with music, interviews, and videos. If the program is to benefit and motivate those who attend, it must be “heard and seen” clearly. (Luke 2:20) How are your donations being used to make sure that all can benefit from these conventions, regardless of where they live?
Audio/Video Systems Customized for Each Convention Venue
Many modern stadiums and arenas in Western countries already have audio/video systems. So when we rent such a venue for a convention, why do we often install our own equipment? David, who works with the World Headquarters Broadcasting Department, explains: “Few of the facilities that we rent are designed to have an audience listen closely for over six hours to what is primarily a spoken-word program. Sports venues, for example, use the public address system primarily to make short announcements and to play musical snippets. Their video screens display game scores, advertisements, and replays. In contrast, we want the audience to watch longer videos and to hear and understand clearly every word spoken from the platform.”
Each convention venue is unique, so each audio/video system must be customized. As soon as venues are selected, Broadcasting Departments at our branch offices determine where attendees will be seated based on the estimated attendance and the capacity of the facility. The brothers then determine mathematically where speakers and video screens need to be installed, map out how they will be connected, and then list all equipment that will be needed to ensure that everyone will be able to see and hear the program.




Brothers from the Local Broadcasting Department (LBD) follow a carefully designed plan



Audio/video systems become even more complex at conventions where the program will be presented in multiple languages. If the program will be interpreted into another language, audio and video must be fed to the interpreters and then the interpretation needs to be transmitted on a separate radio channel to those who understand that language. Thanks to special media players, video can be synchronized for all in attendance, even if the audio is transmitted in eight different languages. “These systems are very complex,” says David, “and the volunteers that operate them require a lot of training.”
Most branch offices have a supply of audio/video equipment that is used every year. Where that is the case, the brothers arrange for each piece of equipment to travel from one convention to the next. The United States branch alone spends over $200,000a each year just to ship convention equipment. Still, this reduces our need to buy and maintain additional equipment. Steven, who helped oversee audio/video at a convention in Canada, relates, “Our audio/video team did its best to make sure that every nut, bolt, cord, and part was accounted for, cared for, packed away safely, and ready for the next program.”
Obtaining and Maintaining the Equipment
Renting audio/video equipment is extremely costly, and the equipment is often of low quality or poorly maintained. For that reason, we generally purchase the equipment we need. Presently, an indoor LED video wall measuring five by three meters (16 by 10 ft) costs about $24,000, and even a single 15-meter (50-ft) microphone cable is about $20. Thus, Broadcasting works with the Purchasing Department to “calculate the expense” before purchasing any equipment. (Luke 14:28) For example, how many people will benefit from the equipment? Is purchasing new equipment the best way to fill the need? Do we have adequate storage for the equipment, and do we have the tools and the trained volunteers needed to maintain it?
To extend the life of the audio/video equipment and thus save dedicated funds, we regularly perform electronic and mechanical repairs. We also ship the equipment in heavy-duty cases to limit damage, and these cases too are repaired as needed.




Maintaining and repairing audio/video equipment extends its life



A Fine Witness and a Clear Program
Non-Witnesses have been impressed by the quality of audio/video at our conventions. At one convention, for example, an employee of one of the world’s leading broadcasters remarked on the quality of our content and production. “He was amazed when he found out that the members of our team were all volunteers and not professionals,” relates Jonathan, who helps set up and operate audio/video equipment at conventions. “He said it would take his company five days to install what we installed in only a day and a half.” At another convention, the facility manager stated, “Many music and video professionals have been here, yet I have never seen this level of professionalism and expertise!”




Brothers and sisters enjoying the program



How have you benefited from the audio/video systems at the convention? Perhaps you feel like David, who lives in England. He says: “I am 88 years old and have attended conventions all my life. Yet, now it is easier than ever to give my undivided attention to the material. Thanks to the beautiful videos, the whole program moves along more quickly and the message is conveyed more clearly and uniformly.” Micheal, who lives in Nigeria, observes, “Because our brothers no longer struggle to hear the speaker or see the videos, they are able to concentrate and they don’t lose interest during the program.”
As you attend this year’s “Declare the Good News!” Regional and Special Conventions, take a moment to consider what was involved in helping you to hear and see the program. We are grateful that your donations, including those made via donate.jw.org, have helped make that possible. Thank you.

a All dollar amounts in this article refer to U.S. dollars.

