





HOW YOUR DONATIONS ARE USED
Disaster Relief in 2022—Brotherly Love in Action

JANUARY 1, 2023


The Bible foretold that our days would be marked by wars, earthquakes, pestilences, and other “fearful sights.” (Luke 21:10, 11) Those prophetic words continued to be fulfilled during the 2022 service year.a For example, the conflict in Ukraine persisted unabated, touching the lives of millions. Much of the world was still recovering from the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, countless people were affected by natural disasters, such as earthquakes in Haiti and destructive storms in Central America, the Philippines, and southeastern Africa. How have Jehovah’s Witnesses helped those affected?
During the 2022 service year, our organization provided relief to victims of some 200 disasters! In total, we spent nearly 12 million dollars in providing relief.b Consider how donated funds were used to help victims of two disasters.
Earthquakes in Haiti
On August 14, 2021, a magnitude 7.2 earthquake struck southern Haiti. Sadly, three Witnesses died—two of our sisters and one brother. Those who survived have had to deal with the physical and emotional damage that the earthquake caused. A brother named Stephane says: “Throughout the city so many people died that there were several funerals every week for more than two months.” Another brother, Éliézer, says: “Many Witnesses had no shelter, no clothes, no shoes, and no other basic necessities. For months, many lived in fear because of the constant aftershocks.”
Our organization was quick to help. The Haiti branch supplied over 53 tons of food, as well as tents, tarpaulins, mattresses, and solar chargers for cell phones. Additionally, during the 2022 service year, over 100 homes were rebuilt or repaired. More than a million dollars went into relief efforts.




Delivering food, Haiti



Our brothers and sisters are extremely grateful. Lorette says: “The earthquake completely destroyed our house and our business. We had nothing to eat. But Jehovah’s organization stood by us, supplying us with everything we needed.” Micheline says: “The earthquake damaged the shelter where my two sons and I lived. I didn’t know what to do except pray for help, and Jehovah answered through his organization. We now have a sturdy house in which to live. I am determined to do all that I can to show my gratitude to Jehovah.”
Our relief efforts did not go unnoticed by the local authorities. The director of the city hall of L’Asile said: “I congratulate you for the fast way in which you came to help. I praise you because you show great respect for the authorities. I am happy to see that you are not interested in money. Instead, you want to help people. You act out of love.”
Tropical Storm Ana Strikes Malawi and Mozambique
On January 24, 2022, Tropical Storm Ana made landfall in Mozambique and then headed west into Malawi. The cyclone brought heavy rainfall and strong winds—up to 100 kilometers per hour (62 mph). It downed power lines, washed away bridges, and caused extensive flooding.
The storm affected more than 30,000 Witnesses in Malawi and Mozambique. Charles, a brother who assisted with the relief work, says: “When I saw the suffering of the brothers and how much they had lost, I felt heartbroken and helpless.” To make matters worse, their meager food supplies and crops were all swept away. Many lost their homes. Tragically, one brother lost his wife and two young daughters, who drowned when their rescue boat capsized.




Damaged house of a Witness couple, Mozambique







The rebuilt home



The storm was terrifying. At 1:00 a.m. in Nchalo, Malawi, the Sengeredo family heard the frightening sound of rushing water. Two rivers had flooded! Brother Sengeredo decided that they should vacate the house. It was a wise decision because the flood soon caused the house to collapse. Their belongings were either damaged or washed away. The family decided to go to the Kingdom Hall, which is normally a 30-minute walk from their home. This time, however, it took two hours. They arrived drenched and tired, but safe.
The Malawi and Mozambique branches quickly began relief efforts. They directed circuit overseers and elders to evaluate the needs of the affected brothers and to provide spiritual and emotional support. Several Disaster Relief Committees (DRC) were assigned to oversee the relief work, and these committees promptly began helping our brothers obtain food and other necessities. Over $33,000 was spent on humanitarian aid and over $300,000 on repairing and rebuilding homes.
The DRCs used funds wisely, which was especially important because of high inflation. For example, in the first seven months of the relief work, the price of maize flour—a staple in Malawi—increased about 70 percent. Fuel prices also rose. To save funds, the brothers purchased food and building materials locally and in bulk. They thus received discounts and avoided high transportation costs.
The relief work touched the hearts of Jehovah’s people. Felisberto, a brother in Mozambique, says: “I have never seen an organization that has given so much: building materials, transport, construction workers, food, and loving guidance. This relief was an outstanding example of the brotherly love that Jesus described at John 13:34, 35.” Ester, a widow in Malawi whose home was destroyed, says: “I was in despair because I had little means to build another house. So when the brothers came and built one for me, I felt that I was already in Paradise.”
As we approach the promised new world, we expect to see even more disasters. (Matthew 24:7, 8) Nevertheless, thanks to your generous donations, we are confident that Jehovah’s people will receive the needed relief. Ways to donate are explained at donate.jw.org. Thank you for your generosity.

a The 2022 service year began on September 1, 2021, and ended on August 31, 2022.
b All dollar amounts in this article refer to U.S. dollars.

