





HOW YOUR DONATIONS ARE USED
Green Initiatives That Benefit Our Brothers and the Planet

APRIL 1, 2025


As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we know that Jehovah God will soon step in to save our planet from the ruin that mankind has caused. (Revelation 11:18) However, we also do what we can to care for the planet. For example, we have implemented many green initiatives at our facilities.
Green initiatives, or green solutions, are projects that have the goal of reducing negative impacts on the environment. What green initiatives have we implemented? And how have these helped us to use donated funds wisely?
A Cool Solution for an Assembly Hall
Originally, the Matola Assembly Hall in Mozambique was built with open sides and a simple sheet metal roof. This roof transferred much of the sun’s heat into the auditorium, making it very hot. A local brother says: “The heat would make us sweat! At the end of the program, the brothers would rush outside for fresh air and to cool down.” How could we provide our brothers with a more comfortable learning environment?
We decided on a green solution: installing wind-driven fans, along with insulation. The insulation reduces how much heat from the sun is transferred into the building, and the fans provide a steady flow of fresh air. The fans do not require power but use wind and natural convection to extract the hot air that builds up in the auditorium. These fans cost about $50 each.a




Wind-driven fans at the Matola Assembly Hall



This solution has greatly improved the air quality at the Assembly Hall. Since there is no stagnant air, less moisture and mold accumulate in the building. There is also less build up of carbon dioxide and a greater flow of oxygen. As a result, the attendees are more alert and comfortable. The brother quoted earlier says: “Now, we don’t rush outside as soon as the program finishes. Instead, we stay in the auditorium during the lunch break, chatting with friends. Sitting under the new roof feels like sitting under a nice big tree!”




Our brothers now enjoy their assemblies and conventions even more



Accessing a Renewable Source of Energy
We have installed photovoltaic (PV) systems at many of our facilities around the world. These systems use solar panels to convert sunlight—a renewable energy source—into electricity. As a result, we are less dependent on electricity generated from fossil fuels. PV systems produce less pollution and help us to save donated funds.
In 2023, a PV system was installed at the Slovenia branch office. It provides 30 percent of the energy needs for the building. If at a given moment the system generates more electricity than is needed, the surplus energy can be fed into the power network of the local municipality. This PV system cost $360,000. However, since the branch now has lower electricity bills, the system will pay for itself in four years.




Slovenia branch



In 2024, we installed PV panels and a large battery at the Sri Lanka branch office. That project cost about $3 million, and the system covers 70 percent of the branch’s electricity needs. The savings will cover the costs of the panels within three years. That same year, we also installed a PV system at the Netherlands branch office. This system cost $1.1 million and provides 35 percent of the electricity for the branch. The PV system will pay for itself in nine years.




Netherlands branch



We have also installed PV systems at various remote translation offices (RTO) in Mexico. Consider one example: the Tarahumara (Central) RTO located in Chihuahua. In winter, temperatures can fall below 0 degrees Celsius (32°F), and in summer, they have reached over 40 degrees Celsius (104°F)! Yet, because of the high cost of electricity, the brothers avoided using heating and cooling systems. Jonathan, a brother who works at the RTO, says: “We used blankets and thick clothing in winter and opened the windows in the summer.”
In 2024, a PV system was installed at the RTO. This system cost $21,480, but the savings will cover the cost of the system within five years. Our brothers can now use the heating and cooling systems more often. Jonathan says: “We enjoy our assignment more, and we are more productive. At the same time, we feel good knowing that our organization’s resources are being used efficiently and in an environmentally friendly way.”




The Tarahumara (Central) translation team now works in a more comfortable environment



Harvesting Rainwater
In Africa, some Kingdom Halls do not have access to a reliable source of water. As a result, brothers may have to carry water several kilometers to their Kingdom Hall. At other halls, brothers purchase water that is delivered by truck, but this is expensive and not environmentally friendly.
To give our brothers access to water, we have installed roof gutters and large water tanks at many Kingdom Halls across Africa. Before installing the equipment, brothers study the local microclimate to design the most effective system for the hall. Adding the equipment to a Kingdom Hall costs between $600 and $3,000. However, this equipment often reduces the operating expenses of the Kingdom Halls, since the brothers no longer need to pay for water.




A water tank at a Kingdom Hall in Phuthaditjhaba, South Africa



These rainwater systems have benefited our brothers. Noemia, a sister from Mozambique, says: “Previously, we traveled very long distances to obtain water. We would arrive at the hall feeling very tired and worn out. And since water was scarce, it was difficult to maintain good hygiene. Now, everyone can wash his hands. We can go to the Kingdom Hall without being too tired to enjoy the meeting. Thank you very much!”




A sister and her son in South Africa, using harvested rainwater



How are the costs for these green initiatives covered? By donations to the worldwide work, many of which are made via the different methods found at donate.jw.org. Thank you for your generous contributions!

a All dollar amounts in this article refer to U.S. dollars.

