





HOW YOUR DONATIONS ARE USED
Songs That Draw Us Closer to God

NOVEMBER 1, 2021


Music is a beautiful gift from Jehovah. It can affect our thoughts, change our mood, and inspire us. This is certainly the case with our original songs. In fact, these songs can do even more: they can draw us closer to Jehovah.
Since 2014, over 70 original songs have been produced, and now at least one of those songs is available in more than 500 languages! But you may have wondered, ‘Who works on these songs, and how are they produced?’
A Glimpse Behind the Scenes
Original songs are produced by the music team in Audio/Video Services, which works under the oversight of the Teaching Committee of the Governing Body. The music team is made up of 13 brothers and sisters who help with composing, music engineering, scheduling, and production support. Additionally, the Teaching Committee has approved remote volunteers all over the world to assist with this work, including composers, musicians, and singers. These brothers and sisters humbly use their talents without seeking personal recognition.





How is an original song produced? First, the Teaching Committee decides the Scriptural basis for the song and the emotional feel the song is to have. The music team then makes assignments for the composing of the music and the writing of the lyrics. A sample recording is prepared. The Teaching Committee reviews the sample recording and provides further direction. Then, the music team adjusts the song and records the final version. These songs are recorded in a variety of locations, including branch facilities and home studios.





To compose and record original songs, our brothers use digital audio workstations, a music notation program, and audio libraries, among other things. The work also requires the use of such equipment as musical instruments, mixing consoles, amplifiers, speakers, and microphones. The microphones can each cost from $100 to more than $1,000 (U.S.). In 2020, we spent $116,000 (U.S.) on music-recording equipment.





What efforts are made to conserve funds? In place of having a large music team at Bethel, many remote volunteers are used. Additionally, instead of assembling and recording a large in-person orchestra, our brothers often compose and produce music digitally.
“A Spiritual Lifeline”
Brothers and sisters love listening to original songs. Tara, who lives in Germany, says: “The songs help me to relax when I am anxious. Listening to them in my mother tongue feels like a hug from Jehovah.” A brother in Kazakhstan named Dmitry says: “I like being able to listen to the songs without needing to worry about whether they are in harmony with Bible principles. Moreover, the songs help me to stay focused on spiritual things.”
Delia, in South Africa, describes how she feels about the original songs: “They have become a spiritual lifeline for me. When I am feeling down or facing a challenge, there is always a song that matches my situation perfectly. Often, just the tunes of the songs are enough to change the way I feel!”
Some original songs have become favorites. Lerato, also in South Africa, says: “The songs ‘Just Around the Corner’ and ‘The New World to Come’ fast-forward me to the time when I will welcome back my beloved mother. Every time I listen to those songs, I see her running toward me with open arms.”
One original song was especially helpful to a teenager in Sri Lanka. She says: “My science teacher scolded me harshly in front of the class for being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I became afraid, and I did not know what to say. When I came home, my mother encouraged me to listen to the song ‘Study Makes You Strong.’ The song helped me see the need to do research and prepare an answer. The next day, I spoke with my teacher. She listened to me and expressed her appreciation for the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I thank Jehovah’s organization for providing us with such encouraging songs.”
How are the costs of producing these songs covered? By donations to the worldwide work, many of which are made via the methods found on donate.jw.org. Thank you for your generous contributions.


