





HOW YOUR DONATIONS ARE USED
The Deaf Have Not Been Forgotten

JULY 1, 2022


Jehovah God wants all people, regardless of their circumstances, to learn about him and his heavenly Kingdom. (1 Timothy 2:3, 4) For that reason, Jehovah’s Witnesses produce Bibles and Bible study aids for as many people as possible, including the deaf. In fact, our organization has produced thousands of publications in the form of sign-language videos,a which are available in more than 100 sign languages! How do we produce and distribute these publications? And what improvements have we made over time?
How Are Sign-Language Videos Made?





Sign-language publications are produced by translation teams around the world. Members of each team carefully analyze the publication they need to translate. Next, they decide how best to convey the information in sign language. When that is done, they record the publication on video. Currently, 60 teams translate Bible study aids into sign language on a regular basis, and another 40 do so occasionally.
In the past, it was costly to produce sign-language videos. Video cameras and other equipment were more expensive than they are today. Also, videos were recorded in a studio, which we had to build ourselves, sometimes by renovating an existing building. In total, it would cost over $30,000b to have everything set up for a sign-language translation team.
In order to make the best use of donated funds, our organization has sought ways both to improve and to simplify the translation process. We have thus made use of modern equipment that is both functional and less expensive. Instead of using a studio, translation teams can set up a green background called a green screen and record videos in their office. When multiple signers are needed, brothers and sisters can record their portion of a publication from their office or home; they no longer have to go to a studio.





We have also produced software to help signers with their work. Such improvements have reduced by half the time that translation teams need in order to produce a sign-language publication. Our brothers appreciate these improvements. A brother named Alexander says: “Sign-language videos are released much more often than before. I’m very happy about that. I watch the videos every day.”
Nowadays, it costs less than $5,000 to equip a translation team. As a result, we are able to produce sign-language videos in many more languages.
How Are Sign-Language Videos Distributed?
Once a team finishes recording a sign-language publication, the videos must reach those who need them. In the past, we produced videocassettes and DVDs, but this was expensive, time-consuming, and labor-intensive. The recordings were sent to a vendor for duplication. Finally, the videocassettes and DVDs were shipped to congregations. In 2013 alone, we spent more than $2,000,000 on producing sign-language DVDs.





The deaf greatly appreciated those provisions. However, the videos were not always easy to use, especially as the number of cassettes or DVDs grew. In some cases, multiple DVDs were required to record a single Bible book. A brother in Brazil named Gilnei recalls: “Whenever we wanted to read a scripture, we had to find the right videocassette and then find the scripture. It was very difficult.” A sister named Rafayane, who used sign-language DVDs, says: “It was tiring to do personal study. We spent a lot of time just looking up scriptures or references.” And when our brothers and sisters were in the preaching work, they would often take along DVDs or videocassettes, which they could play on an interested person’s TV. Some brothers even took their own DVD players. Before long, however, portable DVD players with a screen became available, and many brothers used these. Bobby, who lives in the United States, says: “If after sharing one scripture you wanted to share another one, you often had to switch to a different DVD. This took time and limited our ability to use the Bible in conversations.”
In 2013, Jehovah’s organization released the JW Library Sign Language app, which allows brothers and sisters to download and play sign-language videos on their smartphones or tablets. The app was first released for American Sign Language. Then, in 2017, it was updated to support all sign languages. Brothers and sisters worldwide were overjoyed. Juscelino, a brother in Brazil, says: “I couldn’t believe it! I kept thinking about how the Governing Body shows love for us deaf people and how they want us to progress in the truth just like those who use a spoken language. I was very excited, and the app motivated me to study the Bible even more.”




Using the JW Library Sign Language app



Today we produce all sign-language videos digitally and distribute them on our website and on the JW Library Sign Language app. As a result, sign-language publications can be translated, recorded, and distributed in a matter of days, rather than months or years. In fact, in many sign languages, publications are released simultaneously with those in spoken languages.
Note the comments from some of our deaf brothers and sisters. A sister named Klízia says: “What organization cares so much about the deaf that they are willing to provide spiritual food in such an easily accessible way? Nothing in the world can compare with what Jehovah’s organization does for us.” Vladimir says: “The videos show me that Jehovah cares as much about deaf people as he does about hearing people.”
Our sign-language videos often state the following: “This publication is provided as part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.” We deeply appreciate your donations, many of which are made via donate.jw.org. These funds allow us to produce Bibles and Bible study aids for all people, including those who use sign language.

a Since sign languages communicate ideas visually using hands and facial expressions, sign-language publications are released in video format instead of on the printed page.
b Dollar amounts in this article are in U.S. dollars.

Milestones in Sign-Language Translation
1992: Release of our first sign-language videocassette
2002: Release of our first sign-language DVD
2013: Release of the JW Library Sign Language app
2017: JW Library Sign Language app is updated to support all sign languages
2020: Release of the world’s first complete sign-language Bible, the New World Translation in American Sign Language


