




For the feature Bible drama, over 27,500 kilograms (60,000 lb) of crushed stone was brought into the Mt. Ebo studio



HOW YOUR DONATIONS ARE USED
Video Production for 2020 “Always Rejoice”! Regional Convention Program

AUGUST 10, 2020


The videos at our regional conventions touch our hearts and enhance our understanding of Scriptural teachings. The 2020 “Always Rejoice”! Regional Convention features 114 videos, including the 43 talks delivered by members of the Governing Body and their helpers. Have you ever wondered how much effort and cost is involved in these video productions?
Nearly 900 of our brothers and sisters from around the world offered their time and skill to help produce the program. In total, they spent almost 100,000 hours over a two-year period on the project. This included the 70,000 hours needed to complete the 76-minute feature Bible drama Nehemiah: “The Joy of Jehovah Is Your Stronghold.”
As you might imagine, there were significant costs involved in providing the living necessities for these self-sacrificing volunteers, as well as the technical infrastructure, equipment, and facilities needed to complete the work.
“The Teaching Committee of the Governing Body is very interested in having a variety of cultures and locations featured in our videos. This approach helps to reflect accurately the global nature of our brotherhood,” relates Jared Gossman, who works with Audio/Video Services. “To accomplish this goal, 24 teams in 11 different countries worked together on this project. Such a worldwide effort takes a tremendous amount of resources, planning, and coordination.”
Many of our videos also call for specialized equipment and sets. For example, sets for Nehemiah: “The Joy of Jehovah Is Your Stronghold” were built inside the Mt. Ebo studio near Patterson, New York, U.S.A. To make the best use of dedicated funds while giving the film a historically accurate appearance, the brothers constructed lightweight set pieces designed to mimic the walls of ancient Jerusalem. Each structure consisted of a six-meter-tall (20 ft) wood frame covered in foam with a faux finish that looked like stone. These “walls” could be moved to fit different scenes, reducing the total number of sets needed. Even so, nearly $100,000 (U.S.) was required to construct sets for the drama alone.a

Knowing these details increases our appreciation for this year’s regional convention program. We are confident that the effort involved in producing this program will result in a global shout of praise to Jehovah. Thank you for your generous donations to the worldwide work through donate.jw.org and other means.

a The sets for Nehemiah: “The Joy of Jehovah Is Your Stronghold” were created before the COVID-19 pandemic. Physical distancing was not required at that time.

