Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
Jehovah’s witnesses not only understand and accept the Biblical teaching of the general priesthood, but they apply the principle, putting it into practice as they all share in preaching God’s Word to others. During February they will do this by offering a year’s subscription for the Watchtower magazine on a contribution of $1. Three Bible-study booklets will be given to each new subscriber.
“BABYLON” STUDY QUESTIONS
You will be glad to know that a 96-page booklet of study questions on the book “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules! is now ready for mailing. It may be had for 10c per copy. If you have a copy of the Babylon book, you will definitely want this booklet of study questions. It has been designed to direct your attention to the key thoughts in each paragraph. Whether used in personal study or when discussing the Babylon book with others, it will prove to be a most valuable study aid. If you have not yet obtained the book “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules!, do so now. It may be had for 75c; the book and the booklet of study questions together are 85c.
HOW WELL DO YOU KNOW THE BIBLE?
How often have you said: “I wish I knew more about the Bible”? Now you can know more! A fascinating new book of 352 pages has been prepared for just that purpose. It is not interpretive. It deals with the Bible as a book with emphasis on its value to us today. It is entitled “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial.” Send for your copy. It is $1.
MEMORIAL
The annual observance of the memorial of the Lord’s evening meal will occur this year on Saturday, March 28, sometime after 6 p.m., Standard Time. Each congregation should start making arrangements for this important occasion. A qualified speaker, one of the remnant if available and capable, should be assigned to give the discourse.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
March 29: Of Which God Are You a Witness? Page 104.
April 5: Of Which God Are You a Witness?, Part Two. Page 111.

