What Is the Bible’s View?
Coffee, Tea, and Christians
WHEN 10 a.m. comes in Poland, it is time for drugie śniadanie. In Germany the 4 p.m. kaffee-klatsch is almost a ritual. Who in England would think of skipping “teatime”? And in the United States the midmorning or afternoon “coffee break” is ingrained. Yes, throughout the world persons have the habit of pausing over a cup of coffee or tea.
But popular as such customs are, serious questions or objections sometimes come up about the wisdom of drinking tea or coffee. Such questions particularly arise with Christians who are striving to guide their life by the wise advice and principles of God’s Word. The objections that are raised center on two main points:
Some persons feel that it is unwise, even unchristian, to drink such beverages because they contain caffeine. They point out that caffeine is a drug, and they hold that it is addictive, much as are cocaine, heroin and nicotine (from tobacco). So, they reason, if a Christian rightly avoids addiction to these other drugs, should he not also shun the caffeine in coffee and tea?
The other main major objection to these beverages is the claim that they harm your health. Heart disease, ulcers and cancer of the bladder are some of the problems that have been linked with coffee and tea. Thus, it is reasoned, since a Christian has dedicated his life and body to God, he should avoid things that would harm him needlessly.​—Rom. 12:1.
Amidst the many claims made, how can you reach a balanced decision? The counsel of the Bible can aid you to do so.
A Drug
Caffeine is a drug, a stimulant, found in “food” such as coffee, tea and chocolate products. A cup of coffee contains between 100 and 150 milligrams of caffeine, a cup of tea 90 milligrams, a bottle of cola drink 40 to 72 milligrams, a cup of cocoa 50 milligrams and a bar (85 grams; 3 ounces) of bittersweet chocolate about 75 milligrams.
With most persons caffeine stimulates the heart and kidneys, quickens reaction time and promotes alertness. Caffeine, though, seems to aid some older persons to relax. Also, caffeine is sometimes used to treat headaches, because it affects the blood vessels of the brain. Yes, the drug caffeine produces effects on the human body.
However, does the Bible condemn eating or drinking things that contain natural substances that may stimulate or relax you?
We are helped to get a correct answer by examining what the Scriptures say about alcoholic beverages, for alcohol is also a drug, one that calms or acts as a depressant on the brain.
There is no question that God’s Word is opposed to drinking so much wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages that one becomes drunk. Christians are warned against “excesses with wine, revelries, drinking matches.” (1 Pet. 4:3; 1 Cor. 6:9, 10) And we read: “Wine is a ridiculer, intoxicating liquor is boisterous, and everyone going astray by it is not wise.”​—Prov. 20:1.
What about drinking such things in moderation? While the Bible does not specifically urge all persons to drink things containing the drug alcohol, it does not say that doing so in moderation is wrong just because a drug is involved. In Biblical times wine was a common beverage with meals. (Gen. 27:25; 1 Sam. 16:20) Everyone has to take in fluids. And there simply is no Biblical ban on sometimes making wine, beer or the like part of one’s normal fluid intake. Jesus did so.​—Luke 7:34.
The Bible does not ignore the fact that beverages containing the drug alcohol can affect a person’s body or mind. Psalm 104:15 lists as one of God’s provisions “wine that makes the heart of mortal man rejoice.” Accordingly, God’s Word often associates wine with joy and pleasure. (Eccl. 9:7; John 2:2-10) And alcohol’s ability to calm or depress the nervous system of a distressed person is also noted in the Bible without disapproval.​—Prov. 31:6, 7.
Do you see the significance of this? Since the Bible does not forbid a Christian’s including some alcoholic beverages in his fluid intake, how can it truthfully be said that because coffee and tea contain caffeine it is unscriptural to consume them, even to use these drinks because of their awakening or calming effect?
‘But,’ some may object, ‘don’t coffee and tea drinkers get addicted to caffeine?’ In Drugs, Society, and Human Behavior, Professor R. S. Oakley comments:
“Dependence on caffeine is real, and one withdrawal symptom that has been well substantiated is the headache, which generally develops in habitual users . . . after about 18 hours of abstinence. Some reports suggest that nausea and lethargy may precede the actual headache.”
On the other hand, in an article on coffee Science Digest (June 1975) quotes Dr. M. Seevers of the University of Michigan as saying: “No physical dependence occurs with any of the psychomotor stimulants,” such as coffee.
However, even if dependence or a mild form of “addiction” to the caffeine in coffee or tea is possible, from the strictly Biblical standpoint that does not mean that a Christian must avoid them. Nearly everyone knows that a person can get addicted to alcohol and experience severe withdrawal symptoms if deprived of it. Yet, the Bible does not forbid drinking alcoholic beverages in moderation.
Still, the fact that some tea and coffee drinkers seem to become “addicted” and “must” have their regular dose of caffeine should give a reasonable person food for thought. What if you found that when deprived of coffee or tea you became nervous, somewhat sick or even irritable to the point of not manifesting the “fruitage’ of the spirit”? (Gal. 5:22, 23) You might conclude that a serious review of your way of life and habits is in order.
Caffeine and Your Health
Many persons have reconsidered their drinking of coffee and tea after reading reports that these beverages can damage their health. But, to be fair, there have also been reports contesting these dangers, indicating that moderate use of tea or coffee poses no substantial risk for most persons. Dr. Jean Mayer, former professor of nutrition at Harvard University, reviewed both sides in a June 1976 article. Summarizing some of his comments:
Heart disease: A study by a drug surveillance program “found that persons who drink one to five cups [of coffee] a day have a 60% greater risk of a heart attack.” Yet another long-term and highly regarded study “found no statistical relationship between coffee and any form of heart disease.”
Cancer: “Two studies at the Harvard School of Public Health showed a statistical relationship between coffee and a higher incidence of cancer of the bladder and lower urinary tract.” However, ‘a Canadian study found no such relationship.’
Ulcers: Coffee stimulates secretion of gastric acids. “A study of college students revealed that men who drink one or two cups a day have a 150% greater risk of later developing ulcers. . . . In contrast to these findings, a large, long-term study done by [a medical-care program] could detect no association between drinking coffee and developing peptic ulcers.”
Various other health aspects related to use of caffeine might be considered, but note the conclusion of the Science Digest article cited earlier:
“Most medical experts today admit there is no firm proof that coffee by itself can precipitate fatal diseases.”
Not to be overlooked is this: Even if it is determined that there is a potential risk, might it not depend on how much and how regularly a person drinks coffee or tea? And might the “risk” be related to an individual’s condition of health?
What the Bible says about alcoholic beverages can be tied in here. Who does not know that overindulgence in them can damage your health? And is it not clear that some persons, because of their health or previous experience with alcoholic beverages, should not drink them at all? Nonetheless, the Creator, who has seen more of the effects of alcoholic drinks than any human, does not categorically condemn their moderate use. So, would this not be true also of coffee and tea?
As to another Bible example, consider honey. Some persons, believing that refined sugar is bad for one’s health, prefer to use honey as a sweetener. Still, the Bible points out: “Is it honey that you have found? Eat what is sufficient for you, that you may not take too much of it and have to vomit it up. The eating of too much honey is not good.” Prov. 25:16, 27.
Yes, you could damage your health by consuming too much honey, too much sugar, salt, fat, milk, alcohol or a caffeine-containing food or drink. And there undoubtedly are some persons who should abstain altogether from sugar, alcoholic drinks or the rest. But other persons may find that they can or want to eat or drink these things in moderation. And when it comes to consuming such things, we cannot ignore the fact that a person is doing something that is basically normal and necessary eating or drinking. It is not as if he was forcing upon his body an unnatural process that is unquestionably defiling and harmful, such as taking smoke into the lungs in order to satisfy an addiction to nicotine.
Nevertheless, even in eating and drinking it is reasonable to be aware of what might pose some health risk. Whether it is honey, salt, fat, milk, an alcoholic drink, or a caffeine-containing beverage, you can give thought to factors such as: The condition of your body and any tendencies toward certain diseases that you have; the amount and regularity of eating or drinking the “food”; your circumstances and what is available to eat or drink; and, finally, what you have learned about the effect of this “food” on the health of others who have consumed it over the years.
Conclusion
While “moderation” is an important word when it comes to coffee and tea, equally important is “understanding.” Whether you do or do not choose to drink either beverage, strive to show understanding toward those doing otherwise.
Since there is no Scriptural basis for categorically ruling out all drinking of coffee or tea, you should, without criticizing, allow others to make their own decision. And they should deal likewise with you. For from the Biblical standpoint, whether a Christian will drink coffee or tea in moderation is a personal matter.

