They Plan Their Use of Time
1 The apostle Paul urges us to “become imitators of God” by showing love for one another. (Eph. 5:1) We can also imitate our God by showing that we appreciate the value of doing things according to a schedule. Are you doing that? Repeatedly, the Bible tells us that Jehovah causes things to take place at an “appointed time.” (Ex. 9:5; Hab. 2:3; Mark 1:15) He set a definite period during which the good news was carried exclusively to the Jews. At the appointed time, it was extended to the Gentiles. Today, according to divine schedule, the preaching of the Kingdom message reaches around the globe.—Mark 13:4, 10.
2 As Jehovah’s Witnesses we know the importance of this evangelizing activity, and we all share in it. But those who do it according to a schedule find that they are able to accomplish much more than otherwise. What about yourself? Do you personally have definite times each week when you share in the field service? Or is your participation somewhat irregular, often getting crowded out by other pursuits? Would you enjoy more blessings by scheduling definite times for field service? You may be interested in how others arrange their schedule.
SOME PRACTICAL EXAMPLES
3 Here is what a mother of four and who must work part time says: ‘When my son leaves for school at about 7:20 a.m. I get the housework done and sometimes start supper; then on most days I am ready for secular work or for field service. I also try to get out on weekends so that I can witness with my children. It is best for me to have a definite schedule and be determined to go, barring emergencies, rather than to have a wait-and-see attitude.’
4 A sixteen-year-old publisher who attends school reports that he too has regular times for field service. How often? At least twice a week for about two hours he is out telling others the good news.
5 Of course, poor health limits what a person can do. That is true of a sixty-nine-year-old brother who serves as presiding overseer this year. But he manages to get out in the field service every Saturday. He often witnesses for fifteen minutes or so, then rests in the car for a few minutes before starting again. In this way he is able to stay out for up to two hours. He writes: “It keeps the mind alert, provides healthy exercise and, above all, stimulates the heart with gratitude for the opportunity to sanctify the glorious name of our Father, Jehovah.”
6 Each of us has circumstances peculiar to his own life. Some are able to participate more in actual field service than others. No one else can set a goal of field-service time for us, but it can be helpful to set a goal for ourselves, and we can learn from what others do. And those who really plan their use of time, giving a prominent place to the vital work of proclaiming the Kingdom message, find great pleasure in what they are able to accomplish.—Eph. 5:15-17.

