Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MAY 1
25 min: Song 31. “They Plan Their Use of Time.” Questions and answers; read scriptures as time permits. After discussing paragraphs 3-5, interview some local publishers as to their service schedule. When doing this, also bring in the fact that the Good News book is the offer for the month; ask what they find to be especially appealing to householders. Outline local arrangements for group witnessing. Then discuss last paragraph of article.
20 min: “Make the Good News Attractive to Your Neighbors.” Possibly have a husband and wife first read and then discuss this material together, a paragraph or two at a time. Emphasize what scriptures say. Let them discuss in practical terms how to apply the counsel in their own neighborhood (but not using names).
15 min: Enduring When Faced with Indifference. We have been entrusted with lifesaving good news, but Satan wants us to quit our telling others the truth. If not by outright persecution, then by influencing the minds of people so that they are indifferent, he seeks to cause us to get discouraged and slow down. (2 Cor. 4:4; Mark 4:14, 15) Are we going to let him win out over us? What kind of reaction did Ezekiel and Isaiah meet in their territory? Did they quit? (Ezek. 2:7; Isa. 6:8-10) The situation is similar today in Christendom, which is our territory. Yet some sincere ones do accept the truth, and how glad we are to help them! (Have good local experience related; or use yb77 p. 250 ¶4 to p. 252 ¶2.) Conclude with Hebrews 10:36. Encourage full share in field service this week. Song 8.
WEEK STARTING MAY 8
20 min: Song 6. Local announcements; accounts report; reminder to turn in field service reports this week, covering first half of month. Questions and answers on article “Can We Reach More People?” Outline any arrangements made locally for evening witnessing throughout the coming months.
20 min: Branch Letter; then discuss How to Start Bible Studies. Once we find persons who show some interest, we want to help them get the truth into their heart. Have realistic practice sessions with audience participation, showing how to start studies (1) in the house-to-house work and (2) when making return visits. Use local situations arising at doors. Have audience help publishers develop presentation in a way that will really appeal to persons locally. Take it step by step from introduction until consideration of paragraphs.
House-to-house demonstration may feature direct approach, such as: “If you have a moment I would like to show you how we learn about God’s good news as we study the Bible and see what you think of it.” After getting householder’s permission, proceed to discuss a Bible topic, using one of the Society’s publications (or just the Bible) as the basis. Keep it informal. Return-visit demonstration can be on person who, although busy, took literature during evening witnessing. Emphasize need to start studies quickly whenever possible to reach person’s heart.
20 min: Reaching Everyone in Our Congregation Territory. Talk on witnessing in business territory, perhaps reviewing the material in June 1973 Kingdom Ministry, page 3, highlighting need to reach businessmen with good news. Also highlight need of contacting store owners when covering regularly assigned territory before considering territory as completed. Ask: In harmony with Matthew 9:37, 38 and John 3:16, how should we feel about the need to reach everyone with Kingdom message? Comment on how often local territory is covered. Does that mean that we are actually reaching all the people? Why do we want to reach them? (2 Pet. 3:9) Are we taking time to make not-at-home calls? If not consistent about this, what could help us to improve?
If truly looking for people, then when interest is found we do not simply read a scripture, place literature and leave. We are looking for these very people! Anytime that is appropriate, anywhere people show interest we take the time to talk with them. Be alert to every sign of interest. In one area where little literature was placed, publishers made a practice to call back on those who were even a little friendly.
As shown by the congregation report, how many return visits were made last month? Are we individually endeavoring to reach people’s hearts? Would it be beneficial to plan to include at least one return visit each time we share in service? How could the telephone be used to make return visits? In what ways would this be effective?
Discuss with congregation what is being done to reach persons who live in apartments, trailer courts and other difficult-to-reach places. Here street work can be emphasized, not merely to report time, but to reach people who might otherwise be missed. Instead of simply walking down the street holding up magazines, actively approach people. You may be able to reach certain other persons by obtaining a special mailing permit from the Post Office for a $40 yearly fee, which would entitle you to mail printed material at the rate of two cents per envelope. If you have fewer than 600 persons to whom you would mail printed material and would mail only once a year, a permit would not represent a savings. If we are all alert to our opportunities, we may be able to reach everyone in our territory with the Kingdom message and thus fulfill our sacred trust. (Prov. 22:29) Song 25.
WEEK STARTING MAY 15
15 min: Song 48. The Importance of Assemblies in Our Lives. Talk, with audience participation.
Regularly we meet in congregation. In ancient Israel, Jehovah also provided for larger assemblies at various times. Today we enjoy a similar provision.
Draw comments from audience on following points: (1) How was your appreciation for Jehovah’s direction of his people furthered by your attending your first large assembly with Jehovah’s Witnesses? What impressed you? (2) How many of you were present for the following notable events? — Introduction of what has come to be known as the Theocratic School, at assemblies in 1942. Release of the first volume of the New World Translation, in New York, in 1950. Release of the Truth book, in 1968 (over a million persons have become Witnesses since then). Outlining of arrangements for congregation elders, in 1971. (3) We can look forward to further rich blessings at the forthcoming district assembly. Don’t miss it!
30 min: Discuss insert regarding district assemblies. Use varied presentation (some questions to audience; perhaps group discussion, or experienced publishers answering questions for newer ones). Emphasize assembly that local congregation will be attending.
15 min: Persevering in Efforts to Benefit from Spiritual Provisions. Talk. In the days of Jesus, those who traveled from Capernaum in Galilee went some 75 miles one way, many on foot, to assemblies in Jerusalem. At Pentecost of 33 C.E. persons were present from all the places listed at Acts 2:8-11; compare with map in back of Bible. Earnest efforts are likewise put forth by Jehovah’s servants in modern times. (Cite examples: yb76 p. 210; g75 10/22 p. 23; g73 11/8 p. 19.)
Announcements encouraging participation in field service (also ask, Did you turn in your field service report?) and stimulating anticipation for coming meetings. Song 29.
WEEK STARTING MAY 22
20 min: Song 21. Prayer and Hope Aid Us to Endure. After introductory comments to set the theme, invite audience to read scriptures and to make practical application.
Not only when at the Kingdom Hall, not merely when out in field service, but at all times we need to conduct ourselves in a way that honors Jehovah. (1 Cor. 10:31) If family members do not share our faith, this is a test. Even the imperfection and thoughtlessness of others in our household can be a trial. Away from home—at secular work, at school, when shopping or traveling—the selfish, often crude, spirit of the world puts our Christianity to the test. They may even ridicule us for trying to do what is right. How will we react?—Jas. 1:2-4; 1 Pet. 3:1, 2; Prov. 15:2.
What will aid us to do what is right, even when under pressure? Prayer, reliance on Jehovah. (Rom. 12:12; Col. 1:10, 11; Phil. 4:6, 7) Also, keeping clearly in focus the grand hope that Jehovah has set before us. (Heb. 12:1, 2; 1 Thess. 1:3) With the help that God provides, every one of us can attain to the approved condition that results from endurance.—Rom. 5:1-4; 8:37.
20 min: Learning to Converse About Our Hope.
(5 min.) Talk outlining some of the principles of good conversation. (See School Guidebook, p. 82 ¶16, p. 79 ¶4; g75 3/22 pp. 10-12.)
(15 min.) Discuss with audience how to converse in such a way that we tactfully give a witness.
Mention that Our Kingdom Service has suggested as a topic for conversation, the question, “Will there ever be an end to violence?” Ask audience: (1) Why would people who are not Jehovah’s Witnesses be interested in that subject? (2) What further tactful questions could you ask to stimulate conversation on the topic? (3) What scripture could we use that would have a direct bearing on the subject? And what comment might we offer on the text? (4) What other informative points could we mention that would contribute to conversation on this subject? (Perhaps include interesting items from “Watching the World,” “Insight on the News,” other news reports; also consider how to go ahead with a more extensive witness if interest is shown.)
Now ask the audience to suggest another subject that they feel would be a good topic for conversation with a view to giving a witness. Analyze it with the audience, using the same questions. Emphasize the importance of coming to grips with the first question above so that we view matters realistically; also the fourth question, so that we do not have to stop after a brief, formal presentation. Be prepared; but then speak spontaneously from the heart, helping others to see just how grand the truth really is.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—Have in Mind Starting Bible Studies.”
(5 min.) Ask publishers (notified in advance) to comment briefly on new Bible studies that they have started in recent months. Comment on what it is about the Bible’s message that has appealed to these people, also the joy of aiding them.
(10 min.) Publisher approaches Bible study overseer, would like to have a study, has not had success in starting one. Together they read and discuss material under the heading Presenting the Good News.
(5 min.) Encourage all to share in field service this week. Monday, May 30, a worldly holiday, may also be a good day for field service for many publishers. Suggest that those who handle service groups review at their meetings for field service this material from Presenting the Good News. Song 32.

