Young People Ask . . .
Should I Move to a More Prosperous Country?
TARA left her native Trinidad, Sheila left Jamaica, and Erick left Suriname. All three youths moved to a more prosperous nation. Why?
“We young people in Trinidad,” Tara explains, “are greatly influenced by what we see in magazines and on TV. Unfortunately, this gives us a romanticized view of the United States and other prosperous countries.”
Sheila’s story is similar: “I remember being told of great opportunities for jobs and free education.” She added, though: “I don’t know why, but those who had been to these countries never mentioned the rest of the story. Maybe they were ashamed to admit that things there are not so great.”
Still, people are on the move. A report in the Los Angeles Times showed that from 1980 to 1990, the number of people moving to other countries doubled and is expected to double again by the year 2000. Every year over 700,000 people move to the United States. Australia, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, and Saudi Arabia each receive well over 50,000 immigrants each year, many of them in search of a more prosperous life.
If you live in a poor or developing nation, you too may wonder if your future would be brighter in a wealthier land. This is a weighty decision. How can you choose wisely?
Do Not Rush Your Decision
Erick, from Suriname, believes that you should never act in haste but should first gather as much information as you can. “Even in Suriname,” he says, “most families have relatives in the big countries, and you should be able to get up-to-date information and learn the truth about world economic conditions.”
Before you decide, remember: “There is a frustrating of plans where there is no confidential talk, but in the multitude of counselors there is accomplishment.” (Proverbs 15:22) So discuss your options frankly with your parents, Christian elders, and others who are experienced and care about you.
Do Not Believe Everything You Hear
When you hear glowing reports about prosperous distant lands, a little healthy skepticism may be in order. “Anyone inexperienced puts faith in every word,” says a wise proverb, “but the shrewd one considers his steps.”​—Proverbs 14:15.
Sheila, who lived in Jamaica, said: “My English teacher insisted that moving to the United States would be the best thing I could ever do. Some adults told me that if I went to Canada, the United States, or England, I would better myself no matter what field I chose. In short, I would be stupid to turn down such an opportunity.”
Did her move to the United States really help her? “In most ways my life did improve, but my friends who stayed in Jamaica improved their lives too. Usually you trade one problem for another. Where you live will not automatically make much difference.”
Tara, who moved to the United States from Trinidad, agrees: “People held up the prosperous countries as lands of opportunity​—to study, work, make more money, and live under better conditions. But now many who moved away are realizing that conditions are getting worse everywhere. Some have returned home.”
Weigh the Pros and Cons
To make a balanced decision, consider more than the rosy reports of abundant wealth in other lands. Weigh the pros and cons that a move may involve​—economic, social, moral, and spiritual.
For example, the economy may be in bad shape where you live. But are there no job opportunities close to home? “Back home,” says Tara, “unemployment was high, especially for those without higher education.” So she moved; her brothers stayed behind. “My two younger brothers took a course in furniture making and upholstering. Now they work in factories and get lots of private jobs from people who like their work. They are probably doing better back home than I am here in the ‘land of opportunity.’”
If you do move, you will likely face some culture shock, perhaps even an all-out assault on the moral principles you hold dear. Is the move worth such a risk? Then, too, materialism runs rampant in prosperous nations. How might that affect you spiritually?
Learning from Esau’s Mistakes
When it came to weighing the pros and cons of decisions, Esau of Bible times had a serious problem. He repeatedly failed to take crucial factors into account​—his spirituality and his family. As a result, some of his biggest decisions turned out to be disasters.
The Bible warns against “anyone not appreciating sacred things, like Esau, who in exchange for one meal gave away his rights as firstborn.” (Hebrews 12:16) This birthright was sacred. God had created an opportunity for Esau’s family to be in the line of descent of the Messiah, the key to the salvation of all mankind. (Genesis 22:18) Yet “Esau despised the birthright.” He readily sold it for a meal of lentil stew! (Genesis 25:30-34) Your most sacred possession is your relationship with your Creator. Don’t trade it in, slight it, or put it at risk for any material advantage.​—Mark 12:30.
Later, when Esau moved from his boyhood home to another land, he married two Hittite women. These marriages may for some reason have seemed practical, but spiritually they brought only problems because the women did not worship the God of Esau’s parents, Isaac and Rebekah. Those wives were “a source of bitterness of spirit” to his parents.​—Genesis 26:34, 35.
It is not uncommon for young people to marry just to gain entry into a more prosperous nation. India reportedly has had 4,000 spouses a year move to the United States, with an estimated 10,000 still waiting to do so. Marriage, however, is a precious gift from God. It is not to be cheapened, used as a mere ticket to cross a border. Think, too, of how it would hurt Jehovah and your faithful family members if you were to become ‘unevenly yoked with an unbeliever.’​—2 Corinthians 6:14.
Make the Best of Your Decision
How well you follow up on your decision may be more important than the decision itself. Whether you remain where you are or decide to move, the main thing is to make the best of your decision.
If you remain: Do not criticize those who move. Their decision is their own responsibility. (Romans 14:4; Galatians 6:4, 5) Learn to appreciate the beauties and advantages that are unique to your home country. Develop more love for the people and empathy for their struggles and challenges.
If you move: Set your priorities wisely as you learn new customs and perhaps a new language. Don’t get caught up in working long hours just to acquire material goods you never needed before. Otherwise you may soon be too busy for spiritual things.
“It is very important in today’s world to have a job,” Sheila acknowledges. “However, family, friends, and spiritual matters are more important. When all else fails, they are what keep us going.” The Bible wisely advises us against “using [the world] to the full; for the scene of this world is changing.” (1 Corinthians 7:31) Those who truly succeed keep their concerns about job and money in the proper place​—well behind family needs and spiritual pursuits.
Choose new friends carefully. Erick says: “Maintain contact with friends who promote an upbuilding life-style.”
Remember Your Real Needs
The things we really need for happiness do not change. “No matter where we live,” observes Sheila, “Jehovah’s requirements for us remain the same.” What are they? Jesus put it succinctly: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.” “Never be anxious” about having enough food or clothing. Give first priority to “the kingdom and [God’s] righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.”​—Matthew 5:3; 6:31, 33.
Living by these principles can help you to find a better life in any land.
[Pictures on page 18]
Affluent lands can seem more appealing than they really are

