Take as a Pattern the Prophets—Joel
 1. How can we imitate Joel’s humility as we preach?
1 Who was the prophet Joel? He reveals only that he was “the son of Pethuel.” (Joel 1:1) This humble prophet emphasized Jehovah’s message, not his own role as the messenger. Likewise, in our ministry, rather than seeking personal praise or recognition, we direct attention to Jehovah and the Bible. (1 Cor. 9:16; 2 Cor. 3:5) In addition, we find strength in the message we declare. What aspects of Joel’s prophecy can infuse us with zeal and hope today?
 2. What should the nearness of Jehovah’s day motivate us to do?
2 “The Day of Jehovah Is Near.” (Joel 1:15): Although these words were written millenniums ago, we are living in the time of their final fulfillment. Deteriorating world conditions and the indifference and ridicule that we encounter in our territory are positive proofs that the last days of this wicked system of things have arrived. (2 Tim. 3:1-5; 2 Pet. 3:3, 4) When we contemplate the nearness of the end, we have every reason to give the ministry priority in our lives.—2 Pet. 3:11, 12.
 3. Why is the ministry especially important as we approach the great tribulation?
3 “Jehovah Will Be a Refuge for His People.” (Joel 3:16): The rocking described in this verse could apply only to Jehovah’s execution of judgment during the great tribulation. We take comfort in knowing that Jehovah will deliver his faithful servants during that time. (Rev. 7:9, 14) As we engage in the preaching work and experience how Jehovah sustains and strengthens us, we build faith and endurance that will help us during the coming great tribulation.
 4. Why can we be joyful and face the future with confidence?
4 Although Joel’s message has been described by some as one of gloom, it offers God’s people the glorious hope of deliverance. (Joel 2:32) Let us, then, face the future with confidence and zealously proclaim the good news of God’s Kingdom as we heed the words of Joel 2:23: “Be joyful and rejoice in Jehovah your God.”

