Young Brothers, Are You Reaching Out?
 1. When should a young brother begin to apply the direction found at 1 Timothy 3:1?
1 “If any man is reaching out . . . , he is desirous of a fine work.” (1 Tim. 3:1) Those inspired words encourage brothers to reach out to qualify for service privileges in the congregation. Must you be an adult to do so? Actually, it is best to begin reaching out when you are still a youth. In this way you can receive training and demonstrate your fitness to be appointed as a ministerial servant when you are older. (1 Tim. 3:10) If you are a young baptized brother, how can you reach out?
 2. How can the spirit of self-sacrifice be cultivated and demonstrated?
2 Self-Sacrifice: Remember that you are reaching out for a fine work, not a title. Therefore, cultivate a desire to help your brothers and sisters. One way to do this is by meditating on Jesus’ fine example. (Matt. 20:28; John 4:6, 7; 13:4, 5) Ask Jehovah to help you to be interested in others. (1 Cor. 10:24) Could you give practical assistance to those in the congregation who are elderly or infirm? Do you make yourself available to cut the grass, shovel the snow, or care for other aspects of maintaining the Kingdom Hall? Could you volunteer to give a substitute talk on the Theocratic Ministry School? You will find that giving of yourself in behalf of others will bring you joy.—Acts 20:35.
 3. How important is spirituality, and how can it be developed?
3 Spirituality: It is far more important for a servant in the congregation to have spirituality than to have special talents or natural abilities. A spiritual man tries to view things as Jehovah and Jesus do. (1 Cor. 2:15, 16) He displays “the fruitage of the spirit.” (Gal. 5:22, 23) He is a zealous evangelizer who puts Kingdom interests first. (Matt. 6:33) You can develop spiritual qualities by having a good routine of personal study. This would include reading the Bible every day, reading each issue of The Watchtower and Awake!, and preparing for and attending congregation meetings. (Ps. 1:1, 2; Heb. 10:24, 25) When encouraging young Timothy to make spiritual advancement, Paul wrote: “Pay constant attention to . . . your teaching.” (1 Tim. 4:15, 16) So work hard on your talk assignments in the Theocratic Ministry School. Prepare for the ministry, and share in it regularly. Set and work toward spiritual goals, such as pioneering, Bethel service, or attending the Bible School for Single Brothers. Spirituality will help you to “flee from the desires incidental to youth.”—2 Tim. 2:22.
 4. What is the value of reliability and faithfulness?
4 Reliability and Faithfulness: Because the brothers who were assigned to distribute food to needy Christians in the first century were “certified,” evidently known for being reliable and faithful, the apostles did not have to worry about whether the work would be done. This allowed them to focus on other important matters. (Acts 6:1-4) Therefore, when you are given an assignment in the congregation, carry it out to the best of your ability. Imitate Noah, who carefully followed the instructions he was given to build the ark. (Gen. 6:22) Faithfulness is valued by Jehovah and demonstrates spiritual maturity.—1 Cor. 4:2; see the box “The Benefits of Training.”
 5. Why should young brothers reach out?
5 As prophesied, Jehovah is speeding up the ingathering. (Isa. 60:22) On average, a quarter of a million people are getting baptized each year. With so many new ones coming into the truth, qualified spiritual men are needed to care for congregation responsibilities. Now more than ever, there is plenty of work to do in Jehovah’s service. (1 Cor. 15:58) Young brothers, are you reaching out? If so, you are desirous of a very fine work indeed!
[Blurb on page 2]
With so many new ones coming into the truth, qualified spiritual men are needed to care for congregation responsibilities
[Box on page 3]
The Benefits of Training
  Qualified young brothers benefit when elders give them assignments and train them. A circuit overseer was sitting on the platform giving encouragement to a publisher after the meeting. He noticed a young boy standing nearby, so he asked if he was waiting to speak to him. The young brother replied that he was assigned to vacuum the platform after every meeting. His parents were ready to leave, but he did not want to go before he fulfilled his assignment. The circuit overseer gladly moved. He commented: “The elders in that congregation were alert to train qualified young brothers by giving them congregation assignments. As a result, it was not unusual for them to recommend a young brother as a ministerial servant when I served the congregation.”

