Now Opening to Blacks
Church Doors
AFRICA. On March 18, 1978, the “Daily Mail” of Johannesburg, South Africa, published an article entitled “Green Light for Mixed Worship.” It began: “Churches in the urban areas can now open their doors to black people without permits for ‘bona fide’ church activities, the Minister of Plural Relations, Dr Connie Mulder, announced yesterday.” However, permits are still required for large gatherings or meetings lasting longer than a day.
In an effort to prevent misunderstanding, Dr. Mulder explained: “This decision does not mean churches or church councils are now compelled to open their doors to all people at all times. What it really means is that individual churches or church councils will, in the light of their particular circumstances and in the spirit of the country’s laws, in each instance decide for itself what its standpoint will be.”
The announcement met with mixed feelings. While some welcomed it, one clergyman complained that “the time was not yet right” for such a move. A church official declared: “It is not our custom to have mixed congregations and we will continue to hold separate services.” However, according to the “Daily Mail” report, spokesmen for some churches said that they had always had multiracial services and had never applied for permits. But regardless of how individuals may feel, permitting blacks to attend churches of South Africa that were formerly exclusively white is significant. What effect it will have on black-white relations only time will tell.
Church Government
AMERICA. Ever since the Mormon Church was established in the United States in the early 19th century, it has excluded blacks from the priesthood. In this regard, “Time” magazine noted that Mormon publications had considered dark skin “a sign of God’s disfavor” and had specified that blacks were “cursed as to the priesthood.”
However, this doctrine has long been a source of embarrassment to many Mormons. The problem has grown in recent times with the advancement of such movements as civil rights for blacks and human rights for all persons. Stated University of Utah historian Brigham Madsen: “Church young people were mortified. They would not put up with it any longer.”
So this past June, S. W. Kimball, 83, church president, announced that a new revelation had come from God that would allow blacks to become Mormon priests. Kimball stated that God “has heard our prayers, and by revelation has confirmed that the long-promised day has come when every faithful, worthy man in the Church may receive the holy priesthood . . . without regard for race or color.” He noted that “the Lord has now made known his will” in this regard.
Yet, nearly two thousand years ago the Lord had already revealed his will in this matter by having the following recorded in his own inspired Word: “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”​—Acts 10:34, 35.

