Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should remember the following points:
● What does it mean to know God?
Knowing God is to come to have a deep, intimate understanding of him and his fine qualities and to appreciate from the heart what a friend he is. This requires a person to exert himself in developing knowledge, love and appreciation.​—Pp. 265, 266.a
● What was the main issue Satan raised in the Garden of Eden?
It was over the deservedness, rightfulness and righteousness of Jehovah’s sovereignty. That is, Was God’s rule exercised in a way that was really for the benefit of his creatures?​—P. 267.
● Why is a person who is indifferent to his marriage responsibilities a liar?
In Christendom the majority have sworn in God’s name to love, honor and stick by their marriage mates. Among others the marriage is in effect a contract. Those who fail to live up to their vows are liars.​—Pp. 309, 310.
● What part should mercy play in our lives?
It should include not only forbearance toward those who offend us, but also active expressions of compassion to others who are in need. This includes the giving of spiritual aid to others, not to make a record for ourselves, but out of concern for them; encouraging persons who are ill or lonely, and giving material aid to worthy ones as we are able.​—Pp. 411-415.
● How might Christians become guilty of ‘murdering the righteous One,’ as stated at James 5:6?
By looking down on or refusing to help lowly Christian brothers, or by letting covetousness, envy or pride lead them into hating certain brothers. What is done to the brothers of Christ, “the righteous One,” is counted as done to him.​—Pp. 447, 448.
● What besides preaching is included in the ministry of true Christians?
It includes also the work done within the Christian congregation by overseers, as well as services to the sick, the poor and needy, work done in caring for Christian meeting places, service in Bethel homes, and the many other activities by which we demonstrate that we apply the counsel of God’s Word in our own lives and so properly represent true worship to others.​—Pp. 456-459.
● Why has God allowed the righteous to suffer?
Because of the issue raised in Eden involving the integrity of men to God. God has allowed to men the privilege of serving under test, enduring pressures from Satan and his world, to vindicate God’s name.​—P. 487.
● Since Adam and Eve were created perfect, how could they sin?
They were not made to perform like machines but were in God’s likeness and had free moral agency. They were perfect or complete according to God the Creator’s standards and purposes for them. Therefore, if they had not had the ability to choose good or bad, they would not have been perfect.​—P. 499.
● What will human perfection in God’s new order remove, but what will it not mean?
It will remove everything that does not measure up to God’s standards, but it will not make the person all-knowing or possessing all abilities. It will not eliminate the challenge of living. Problems will be encountered, but without the frustration, disappointment and futility we meet in a sinful world.​—P. 500.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1971.

