Insight on the News
Satanism Spreading
“A rise in Satanic rituals and fascination with heavy metal music bands . . . have pointed to a surge of devil worship by adolescents.” So says The Press Democrat of Santa Rosa, California. Among the things officials have tied in with Satan worship are grave robberies, animal mutilations and even a number of murders. Satanic messages and symbols, including the number 666, have become prominent on covers of phonograph record albums and in graffiti. What has exerted the greatest pull in enticing youths into Satanism? “The kids are getting all kinds of messages in the [heavy metal] music,” says detective Dave Gaerin of the juvenile division of the San Diego County Sheriff’s Department. “We had a concert down here where the band had 15,000 kids chanting ‘Natas’”​—that is Satan spelled backward.
The allure of independence is also an attraction. “I often think of Satan as a cool dude,” explained one high school student about his fascination with the Devil. “Since he controls one part of the supernatural, he tends to let you be on your own, to do what you want, whereas God has his own rules on how you’re supposed to live.”
It was this ploy​—the lure of independent action without restraint by the beneficial law of God—​that led our first parents into disobedience and plunged the human race into 6,000 years of untold suffering. (Genesis 3:4, 5, 13) This same deception is being fostered by Satan today, especially since he knows his time is short. (Revelation 12:12; 2 Corinthians 2:11) Those who resist his enticements can look forward to enjoying “the glorious freedom of the children of God.”​—Romans 8:21.
Avoiding Truth
When on trial before Roman Governor Pilate, Jesus told him: “For this I have come into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth. Everyone that is on the side of the truth listens to my voice.” Truth to Jesus was precious, not to be compromised.​—John 18:37.
How do people today react to the idea of religious truth? Writing in London’s The Times, Roman Catholic author Christopher Derrick observed: “Any mention of religious ‘truth’ implies some kind of claim to know; and however distantly, however tactfully, it hints at the possibility of other people being mistaken.” He added: “The horrid fact is that if you make a religious statement that actually means something, you imply that somebody else may possibly be wrong; and that would not do at all.”
Why not? Because the overriding call today is for ecumenism, described by Derrick as “an absolute value,” and religious leaders find it desirable to avoid all divisiveness. Each person is thus left free to believe in what is “right” for him. What then of truth? Jesus said: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” Those who listened to what he said were grateful that he did not water down the truth​—the essential to free them from the traditions and false teachings of their religious leaders that kept them from attaining life.​—John 8:32; Matthew 23:13, 15.
Space Search Continues
Is there intelligent life in space? The search that began 25 years ago is now being stepped up. “The awesome task, which involves scanning hundreds of billions of stars,” reports The New York Times, “has so far yielded no clear evidence that life exists beyond Earth.” However, two observatories work full time in the search, as new and vastly more sensitive detectors are being put in operation. Proceeding on the theories that “life originated on other worlds” and that “other civilizations might be trying to establish communication with one another,” a systematic search is being undertaken​—even though no firm evidence exists of inhabited planets orbiting any star other than our sun.
Such prodigious effort in the face of such scanty evidence highlights the deliberate inclination to ignore the fact that extraterrestrial life of the highest order does exist. God and his angelic creation exist in the spirit realm. Not only do the visible heavens testify to his existence and godship but so does the written guide for information and instruction that he has given mankind. Men need look no further than the Bible to learn of mankind’s origin, purpose in life and future.​—Psalm 14:1; 19:1; 2 Timothy 3:16, 17.

