Questions From Readers
▪ Do Jehovah’s Witnesses regard alcoholism as a disease?
Many people speak of addiction to alcohol as a disease, according to a broad definition of that word. Researchers, physicians and people assisting alcoholics are among these, for many of them use terms such as “disease,” “sickness” or “illness” in describing or defining alcoholism. For instance, Science Digest of May 1984 states:
“Alcoholism is still a disease in search of an explanation. Once considered a disorder of the mind alone, it is now thought to have genetic and biochemical components as well . . . Recent findings support earlier evidence from Sweden that alcohol abuse often ‘travels’ within families.’”​—Page 16.
There is, though, reason for caution about viewing alcoholism as a disease. Some alcoholics, and others, have been inclined to excuse their addiction to drinking or overdrinking, claiming that they really cannot help it, for it is a disease. Others seem to feel that if an alcoholic has a biological predisposition toward the problem, or his body has an impaired biochemical response to alcohol, then he cannot be viewed as morally reprehensible.
Christians, however, are concerned primarily with God’s view of matters. His view is righteous, balanced and permanent, in contrast to medical and psychological positions that may come into vogue for a time, only to be altered or abandoned later. Jehovah’s perfect Word forthrightly condemns drunkenness, listing it among the things that can keep someone out of God’s Kingdom. (Galatians 5:19-21) Romans 13:12, 13 advises: “The night is well along; the day has drawn near. Let us therefore put off the works belonging to darkness and let us put on the weapons of the light. As in the daytime let us walk decently, not in revelries and drunken bouts, not in illicit intercourse and loose conduct, not in strife and jealousy.” Even if there may be a biological predisposition in certain cases, leading some to view it as a medical problem or disease, Christians recognize the moral aspects of it.
The apostle Peter wrote to Christians: “For the time that has passed by is sufficient for you to have worked out the will of the nations when you proceeded in deeds of loose conduct, lusts, excesses with wine, revelries, drinking matches, and illegal idolatries. Because you do not continue running with them in this course to the same low sink of debauchery, they are puzzled and go on speaking abusively of you.” (1 Peter 4:3, 4) Peter was imperfect himself and understood the human condition. Yet he did not say that all Christians had turned from excesses with wine except those who had some genetic or biological predisposition to problems with alcohol. In fact, the apostle Paul said that some Christians formerly had been fornicators, thieves, drunkards and extortioners. But no matter what had led them to such moral problems, they could and did change. Paul said: ‘You have been washed clean, you have been declared righteous in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ and with the spirit of our God.’​—1 Corinthians 6:9-11.
So whether alcoholism is spoken of as a disease or not, we must hold to the high and good standard set in God’s Word. Anyone who has developed an addiction to alcohol​—whether through lack of self-control, ethnic or family influence, or even due to a biological quirk—​should work to put it behind him, perhaps availing himself of sympathetic help. (See Awake! of July 8, 1982, pages 4-12.) Thus “he may live the remainder of his time in the flesh, no more for the desires of men, but for God’s will.”​—1 Peter 4:2.

