Announcements
● Literature offer for October and November: Subscription for The Watchtower or Awake! for $3.50; both subscriptions may be offered for $7.00, six-month subscriptions are $2.00; December: New World Translation and either Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? or any other older 192-page book for a contribution of $3.75. The brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! may be offered with the Bible for a contribution of $3.25. January and February: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, for $2.50; otherwise any 192-page book may be used.
● New Publications Available:
My Book of Bible Stories—Marshallese, Sango, Tahitian, Yoruba
Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry—Japanese
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!—Baoule
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Exodus (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)—English
Album with complete Greek Scriptures (22 cassettes; congregation and public: $34.50; pioneers: $22.00)—Spanish
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
“Preach the Word”—English
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves With Music in Your Hearts” (deluxe and paper editions)—English
● Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry is now available in grade-two English Braille. This five-volume publication for the visually impaired is available to baptized publishers and those preparing for baptism. Such persons may obtain this Braille publication by giving their order, along with their name, address and remittance of $6.25, to the congregation secretary. He will then forward the order to the Society, ATTENTION: BRAILLE DESK. The publication is not available on a loan basis.
● Congregation Book Studies for the weeks of January 1 through February 5, 1984, will be conducted in the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century (1979 revised edition). Instructions for conducting these studies will be given in the December issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. Congregations may need to order a supply of the brochure so that everyone attending the Congregation Book Study will have a copy. Beginning with the week of February 12, 1984, the new book United in Worship of the Only True God will be used in the Congregation Book Studies.
● With this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, we are including the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1984. This will enable school overseers to become familiar with the instructions and make assignments well in advance.

