God’s Kingdom—A Reality
1 God’s Kingdom by Christ Jesus is a reality. It has permanence. For just as Jehovah is the “King of eternity,” his associate King, Jesus, now also has “the power of an indestructible life.” (Rev. 15:3; Heb. 7:1, 2, 15, 16) The reality of the Kingdom is shown today in the transforming effect it has on the lives of its supporters as they leave behind worldly ways and conform to the laws and principles of the Kingdom’s book of instruction, the Bible. Further clear-cut evidence that it is real is seen in the worldwide unity of those from all nations who have become subjects of the Kingdom.—Prov. 14:28; Acts 10:34, 35.
2 Recognizing the reality of the Kingdom and wanting to be obedient to the commands of its King Jesus Christ, Jehovah’s people earth wide regularly share in declaring “the good news of the kingdom of God.” (Luke 4:43) They want all to know what the Kingdom can do for people now and in the future. Too, they are most grateful that Jehovah God through his organization has equipped them with the instruments they need to proclaim his Kingdom to others.—Heb. 13:20, 21.
THE WATCHTOWER—ANNOUNCING JEHOVAH’S KINGDOM
3 One of the most helpful instruments put in their hands is The Watchtower. It has championed God’s Kingdom for more than a hundred years. Moreover, it has kept watch by calling attention to Scriptural warnings to “keep awake” spiritually. It has alerted its readers as to how present-day wars, famines, pestilences and other happenings serve as indicators that these are the “critical times” marking “the last days” of this system of things.—Matt. 24:14; Luke 21:10-17, 36; 2 Tim. 3:1-5.
4 Similarly, Awake!, while carrying articles on a variety of subjects, most importantly builds confidence in the Creator’s promise of a peaceful and secure New Order within our generation, under the rule of God’s Kingdom.
5 The effect that these outstanding magazines have had on subscribers is well illustrated by the comments of one couple who wrote: “We have always read and loved the Bible and realized it was God’s Word. However, like so many others, we did not properly understand it. Then when we received The Watchtower, the key to the Bible’s message came into our hands. It has meant so much to us.” Another person was moved to write: “The day The Watchtower first came into my home, I read it and immediately a window was opened toward a wonderful future. I had always been taught such things as immortality of the soul, fiery hell and Trinity. But after reading The Watchtower for an hour, I cried out, ‘I have found the truth,’ and have never left it.”
6 Our Kingdom Ministry also lends its support to Kingdom proclaimers. The April issue had an excellent insert on obtaining subscriptions. It urged us to have a positive attitude. Was it helpful? Judge for yourselves by the results of the subscription campaign in April and May of this year. A year ago during the spring subscription campaign we obtained 167,253 subscriptions. During the same period this year we obtained 269,536, or 102,283 more. You will find it helpful to review the April insert as we enter our new campaign.
7 How appropriate that during the months of October and November we will again offer a one-year subscription to The Watchtower and Awake! for $3.50 each or $7.00 for the two. By reading these magazines along with the Bible, many thousands of persons in all parts of the earth have come to accept the reality of God’s Kingdom and to give it their loyal support. Because God’s Kingdom is the only solution to the problems that distress mankind, we should be moved to have a full share in distributing these magazines, which proclaim the Kingdom. The lives of others are at stake. It is our united prayer that Jehovah will bless our efforts to help many more persons to submit themselves to his Kingdom by Christ Jesus, to their lasting joy and eternal welfare.

