Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 2
Song 57
10 min: Pertinent Announcements and local announcements. Encourage magazine activity on second Saturday of the month. If time allows, include talking points from latest magazines.
20 min: “God’s Kingdom—A Reality.” Question-and-answer discussion. Review some specific points from insert of April 1983 Kingdom Ministry “Subscriptions—‘Wisdom Calling Out’!” to show how subscriptions may be obtained. Let audience tell what points from this material have been helpful to them and how they will use points during the month of October.
15 min: “Some Adjustments in the Use of Various Forms.” Talk by elder, explaining adjustments to extent necessary for benefit of publishers. Remind brothers to bring School brochure with them to next week’s meeting.
Song 64 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 9
Song 73
 8 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
17 min: “Make Disciples of Your Children.” Discuss material with audience, stressing urgent need to apply suggestions now. Interview some parents as to how they will implement the suggestions in their own home. If available, interview parents who have successfully raised children, following thoughts similar to those expressed in the article.
20 min: Consider the School brochure, pages 5, 30 and 31, “Cooperation With the School System.” This should principally be a talk with some question-and-answer discussion regarding parents’ responsibility toward the children. They should not simply send their young ones off to school and let the secular authorities take care of their schooling. Parents have the major responsibility for the education of their children, even as the brochure notes. Discuss the practical ways that a parent can cooperate with the school system for the benefit of his child’s education. Emphasize the importance of meeting with the teacher and discussing matters. If available, have a Witness mother who has had experience in talking to her children’s teachers demonstrate how such a profitable meeting can be arranged and handled. Remind brothers to bring Our Ministry book next week.
Song 9 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 16
Song 66
 5 min: Local announcements.
20 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, pages 41-54. Talk by well-qualified elder, with questions and answers particularly on material under subheadings “Congregation Book Study Conductor” and “Benefiting Individually,” pages 43-6.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Street Witnessing and Magazine Routes.” Question-and-answer discussion. Briefly demonstrate how street witnessing should be done and how to start a magazine route.
 5 min: Encourage witnessing with magazines on fourth Saturday of the month. Suggest talking points in current magazines. Remind brothers to bring School brochure for Service Meeting next week. Song 25 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 23
Song 94
 5 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Improving Our Teaching Ability—By Demonstrating Personal Concern.” Question-and-answer discussion. Give practical illustrations of what can be done through personal attention to help Bible students draw close to Jehovah’s organization.
10 min: Consider School brochure on “Holidays and Celebrations.” Use introductory material of this section and the material on Halloween and All Saints’ Day; additional material from our publications may be introduced as well.
10 min: Experiences in obtaining subscriptions, placing magazines or using School brochure this month. Remind brothers to bring School brochure again next week.
Song 82 and concluding prayer.

