Presenting the Good News—By Street Witnessing and Magazine Routes
1 From the very beginning of the modern work of Jehovah’s Witnesses, magazines have been used to help “hungry” ones to learn the truth. At first this was done basically through subscriptions, but in January 1940 some new methods of placing magazines were proposed. It was suggested to the 67,000 publishers then associated in the United States that individual copies be offered on the streets and through magazine routes. What was the result? The 1941 Yearbook answers: “Individual magazines to the amount of nearly 3,000,000 were distributed in this manner.”
2 Last year with over 600,000 publishers in the field, over 80 million magazines were distributed in the United States. Many of these were placed in the regular door-to-door work. Perhaps this is how you shared in distributing them. Could you reach even more who are hungering for the truth by placing magazines on busy streets and on a magazine route? Have you tried these methods yet?
STREET WITNESSING
3 Many publishers and pioneers do street witnessing near transportation centers early in the morning when people are on their way to work. One sister approached a woman from a foreign country, and the woman was delighted to have the magazines. She asked if someone could study with her in her language, as she had been searching for Jehovah’s Witnesses. Now she is feeding regularly at Jehovah’s table.
4 Two sisters, while waiting for the rest of the group to finish door-to-door work on a Sunday, approached people on a busy street and placed over 20 magazines each in just a few minutes. One of the sisters placed a book with a college professor who commented that he was searching for the truth and even wanted more material, in addition to the magazines.
5 How did these publishers place so many magazines? They approached people walking along the street and those in parked cars. Smiling warmly, they directed attention to a particular article in the magazine that they thought might interest the person. They were, in fact, witnessing from person to person rather than simply standing or walking along holding up magazines.
MAGAZINE ROUTES
6 Publishers who are successful in establishing magazine routes say that the first essential is regularity in magazine activity. Upon placing magazines from door to door, they suggest to the person: “If you enjoy these issues, you may wish to have succeeding copies, and so I will stop by in two weeks to give you the opportunity to obtain the next issues.” Others refer to “In Our Next Issue” and point out the interesting articles that will appear. They may say, “I’m looking forward to reading this article when it comes out. Perhaps you would like to read it too.” Some refer to the articles that appear as regular features, such as “Young People Ask” or “God’s Word Is Alive.”
7 When making commitments to call again, it is important to be sure that you return. Your own consistency in returning on your magazine route can build up a warm, friendly relationship between you and the householder, and there will be a greater readiness to obtain the magazines. Some who have magazine routes find that a good time to call is in the early evening just after the householder has returned from secular work. Others make their route calls on Saturday.
8 Whether on the street or on magazine routes, let us take advantage of all opportunities to get the magazines into the hands of the people.—Ps. 107:9.

