Some Adjustments in the Use of Various Forms
1 As part of an effort toward simplification, the Governing Body has approved a number of adjustments regarding the use of handbills and Memorial invitations as well as programs and lapel cards for circuit assemblies. These adjustments are designed to save many man-hours of work for the Society and to cut down on some of the work load for local overseers. Additionally, considerable expense will be eliminated without diminishing the effectiveness of the Kingdom-preaching work or our ministering to the needs of the congregations.
2 Handbills for the special spring talk and those for circuit assembly public talks are being discontinued, but the handbills advertising weekly congregation meetings will still be available, and all congregations are encouraged to keep a good supply of these on hand for use in the field. Also beginning with 1984, it will not be necessary for congregations to order Memorial invitations.
3 A standard Memorial invitation for all congregations will be provided. The invitations will be distinctive each year. They will be consigned in sufficient quantities, based on the number of copies of Our Kingdom Ministry that are sent to each congregation. These invitations are not to be reordered. Congregations will be billed at the rate of $1.25 for each package of 450 invitations. The Memorial invitations for April 15, 1984, will be mailed separately, but starting in August of next year, they will be sent along with the regular shipment of forms and other congregation supplies. Since these standard Memorial invitations will simply show the date and give the time for the celebration as after sundown, they will be used in conjunction with the regular congregation meeting handbills. In offering the Memorial invitation to an interested person, the publisher can supply any additional information.
4 These adjustments will represent great savings in time, work and expense for all concerned. However, there will be further simplifications regarding circuit assemblies. In addition to discontinuing the use of handbills for circuit assembly public talks, we will use standard circuit assembly programs for the series beginning in February 1984. Circuit overseers are being informed about the procedure to follow in ordering such programs. Use of lapel cards at circuit assemblies is being discontinued. However, lapel cards will continue to be used at district conventions.
5 As the Kingdom work continues to expand and increase throughout the earth, it becomes more important for us to make the most efficient use of all of our resources and energies. We want to accomplish the most a good with the talents and assets that Jehovah has entrusted to our care. (Compare Ecclesiastes 10:10.) The fine support that all the brothers are giving to the preaching work today is greatly appreciated by the Society. It must bring joy to Jehovah’s heart. No doubt these new arrangements will have Jehovah’s blessing and prove to be advantageous in accomplishing the work ahead.

