VOL. XXXIII APRIL 15, 1912 No. 8 

REPORT 

on 
Foreign Mission Work 
by The 
Missions Investigation Committee 
APPOINTED BY THE 
INTERNATIONAL 
BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 

page 122 

Description and prices page 138 

Biblical Comments 
-of- 
Scripture-Studies, The Watch Tower, etc. 



GENESIS: 



1: lln the beginning.... Not of the universe, but of our planet F17 

God created Prepared for the work of the six creative days....F18 

And the earth Doubtless our earth is the most advanced of 

all the worlds yet created Z '07-12 

1: 2And the earth was... It already existed before the six days began F23 

And the spirit The power or energy E190, 175 

Moved upon Fecundated, rendered fruitful or prolific. E(190, 176 

This manifestation of God's spirit is easier to 
understand than its transforming power. ..E199, 183 

1: 3And there was light. Probably electrical, as Aurora Borealis F30 

1: 5And the evening The obscure beginning F31 



And the morning The perfect completion F31 

Were the first day.. The Azoic or lifeless age of 7000 years F3 1 

Certainly not a sun day, for the sun itself was 

not visible until the fourth creative day F19 

1: 6Be a firmament An expanse of atmosphere F31 

In the midst of Between the F31 

1: 8Were the second day. The Palaeozoic age, Silurian period, 7000 years. ..F31 
1: 9The dry land appear. The weight of the seas caused the earth to 
buckle as it cooled, gradually forcing portions 
of its crust above the water. Similar paroxysms 

of nature will, probably, occur soon F32 

l:12Grass and herb Carbonic and nitrogenous gases causes extraordinary 

plant growth during the third creative 
day, storing carbon for coal deposits and 

purifying the atmosphere for animal life F32 

Seed after his kind. Contrary to Evolution theories F32 

l:13Were the third day.. The Carboniferous era of 7000 years F32 

1: 16And God made Literally "Caused to shine." The word does 

not mean created F33 

The greater light... Said by papists to represent the pope B308 

To rule the day To indicate the time of day F34 

Said by papists to represent spiritual things. ...B308 

The lesser light... Said by papists to represent civil power B308 

To rule the night... Said by papists to represent temporal affairs. ...B308 

l:19Were the fourth day. The Devonian period of 7000 years F34 

l:20Waters bring forth.. By Divine power given for the purpose F35 

Abundantly The untenable trillions of shell-fish which absorbed 

the excess of hydrocarbons F36 

The moving creature. The creeping creature E348, 324 

That hath life Nephesh, soul, sentient being as of man.E348, 324 

l:21Living creature Nephesh, soul, sentient being, as of man 

E348, 357, 324, 334 

l:23Were the fifth day.. The Reptilian period of 7000 years F35 

l:24Let the earth, etc.. A comprehensive scientific expression F54 

Living creature Nephesh, soul, sentient being, as of man 

E348, 357, 324, 334 

Cattle Domestic animals as distinguished from others F36 

l:26Let us The plural form calls our attention to the fact 

that, "The Word was in the beginning with 
God" Z'94-12 

1 

REVELATION-BIBLICAL COMMENTS 481 

Worship God The source from which come all these blessings 

and all this light Z '96-305 

22:10Seal not the sayings. When the time comes for a full understanding 

of the book of Revelation, the Church is not 

to hide the matter Z '05-173 

22:llUnjust still The proclamation of the message of Present 

Truth is not expected or intended to convert 

the world Z '05-173 

Righteous still The message of Present Truth applies only to 

those who are righteously inclined Z '05-173 

22:12Reward is with me.... And will not be given until I come F665 



22: 13 And the end Of the direct creation of God Z '93-115 

22:14His commandment "This is his commandment, that we should 

love one another" Z '94-356 

Through the gates.... The Ancient Worthies, through whose instrumentality 

all may enter into the Kingdom Z '92-16 

Into the city The Kingdom of God A296, D25, H23 

22:15Without are dogs Idlers, breeders of spiritual contagion, 

self-seeking, 

biting and devouring, treacherously 

lying in wait to deceive Z '94-216 

The word used refers to the wild dogs which 
roam Palestine and which are pests; not the 
pet house dogs mentioned by our Lord in 
his remark to the Syro-Phoenician woman.Z '00-191 

And murderers Brother-haters H63 

22:161 am the root Origin, source of life, by virtue of my purchase 

of David's life-rights E150, 135 

No longer a branch out of the root of Jesse 

and David E150, 135 

And the offspring.... Through Nathan's line E150, 135 

22:17And the Bride The Bride does not say Come, until there is 

a Bride, following the marriage of the 

Lamb A98, E226, 208, F336 

And whosoever will... And whosoever will receive it D198 

During the Millennial Age A97 

The water of life will not be forced on any 
Z'05-217 

Now, "No man can come to me except the 

Father which sent me draw him" Z '05-171 

The water of life.... Restitution blessings: Truth, clear as crystal.. 

D655,E179, 165, H47 

Freely "Ho every one that thirsteth: come ye to the 

waters, and he that hath no money" Z '05-217 

22:201 come quickly The second advent of the Lord is thus shown 

to be beyond Pentecost and beyond the destruction 
of Jerusalem, for John wrote these 
words long after both of these events had 
transpired A90 



R5007 : page 123 

THE WORLD'S CONVERSION 



REPORT OF MISSIONS INVESTIGATING COMMITTEE, INTERNATIONAL BIBLE 
STUDENTS ASSOCIATION 

AT ITS CONVENTION held September 1-10, 

191 1, the International Bible Students Association 

appointed a Committee to tour the 

world and supply an unvarnished report of 

the true condition of affairs in Oriental 

lands amongst the peoples usually termed 



"heathens." 

The proposition of a certain Laymen's 
Missionary Movement to promptly collect 
$30,000,000 and immediately convert the 
world naturally aroused the query respecting the possibility 
of attaining such desirable results. No doubt 
existed that benevolent people would willingly expend 
thirty million dollars, and much more, if the results aimed 
at could be attained. On the other hand, many rumors 
had been reaching Europe and America respecting the inefficiency 
of the Missions and Missionaries already in the 
Oriental lands. These tales possibly had something to do 
with the falling off of contributions to Missionary Societies. 
It is the thought of many, however, that the secret of 
the curtailment of donations to various propaganda is the 
same as applies to the home work of all Christian denominations. 
The secret is that the masses of the people, 
as well as the wealthy, are rapidly losing faith in revealed 
religion— in the Bible. 

The Higher Critics in all of our Colleges and Seminaries, 
and in the chief pulpits of Christendom, have for 
fifty years been carrying on a subtle warfare against the 
Bible. Are we not now beginning to see the fruits of 

R5008 : page 123 

their labors in a general agnosticism? Many manifest 
their loss of faith merely by a non-attendance at religious 
services, and by failure to contribute as formerly to religious 
benevolences. Others are showing their agnosticism 
by joining Socialism, which many believe is gradually 
leading them to atheism and anarchy. 

Bible Students of the I.B.S.A. are very generally of 
the opinion that the Bible teaches that nothing short of 
Messiah's Kingdom in power and great glory can scatter 
the thick religious darkness in the world— that nothing 
short of that Kingdom, as the "Sun of Righteousness," 
can scatter the darkness that covers the earth and the 
gross darkness that benights the heathen. These Bible 
Students very generally hold that the Bible teaches that 
the Bride of Christ (the saintly few of this Gospel Age) 
must be completed, and must by the First Resurrection be 
glorified with the Redeemer and sit with Him in His 
throne, before the time will come when Jesus shall enlighten 
the world. 

In other words, "Jesus is the true Light which lighteth 
every man that cometh into the world." But, in Divine 
providence, the world separates itself into two distinct 
classes. The first and smaller class consists of those 
"Elect" who have the hearing ear, the understanding and 
appreciating heart, and the willing mind to be the footstep 
followers of Jesus, and thus to gain the great prize 
of joint-heirship with Him in His Kingdom. To these 
the light of Truth comes now. To others, the non-elect, 
it will come by and by, when, according to Divine 
promise, "All the blind eyes shall be opened, and all the 



deaf ears shall be unstopped." 

EVERY KNEE SHALL BOW 

These Bible Students are very generally agreed that the 
long-promised "Golden Age" of Messiah's Kingdom is 
near at hand. Very generally they quote and rejoice in 
such Scripture promises as, "When He shall appear, we 
shall also appear with Him in glory." (Colossians 3:4.) 
This appearing or revealing will be to the world, respecting 
whom Saint Paul writes, "The whole creation groaneth 
and travaileth together until now, "..."waiting 
for the manifestation of the sons of God." They quote 
and rejoice in the promise which declares, "If we suffer 
with Him we shall also reign with Him." Gladly, therefore, 
do they rejoice in tribulations and misrepresentations 
and whatever Divine Providence permits, knowing that 
all of these things are working out for them a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory— in the Kingdom. 

These Bible Students have come to very generally understand 
that the Scriptures teach that Messiah's Kingdom 
must first enlighten the world before, "Unto Him 
every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to the 
glory of God." Hence, while sympathetic with all good 
works, these Students are not expecting the world's conversion 
as the result of Missionary effort, and are not disappointed 
that the eighteen centuries of the preaching of 
the Gospel has not brought such a result. 

A MESSAGE TO ALL NATIONS 

The interest of these Bible Students in the present 
status of missionary work centers in the fact that they 
understand the Bible to teach that the preaching of the 



This journal $1.00 (4/-) per year in advance. Entered at 
Brooklyn, N.Y., Post Office as Second Class Mail Matter. 

R5008 : page 124 

Gospel in all the world has been eminently proper, not 

with the expectation of converting the world, but, as the 

Master said, to give a witness to all the world, and to 

gather an elect few from all nations, peoples, kindreds 

and tongues for membership in His Bride class— to sit 

with Him in His throne during the thousand years, cooperating 

in the work of uplifting the race as a whole. 

Indeed, we understand that one of the principal motives 
associated with the sending out of the Committee of 
Investigation was to ascertain whether or not there would 
appear to be saints in those distant lands, who, as yet, 
have no knowledge of "the Gospel of the Kingdom," and 
of the fact that we are now in the harvest time of this 
Age, and probably very close to the dawning of the New 



Dispensation of Messianic glory. It was with this in view 
that the Association privately authorized Pastor Russell, 
its President, to spend as much as seven thousand dollars 
in publishing the Gospel of the Kingdom in Oriental lands, 
provided in his judgment and in the judgment of the 
Committee there were saintly hearts and minds in those 
lands likely to appreciate the message and to be ripened 
thereby for the heavenly "garner." 

The Committee did not find the time at their disposal 
sufficient to permit them to visit Burmah, Africa and Australasia. 
It recommends that another Committee be appointed 
for that work, and that it have due consideration 
at the next General Convention of the I.B.S.A. This 
Convention is announced to be held at Pertle Springs, 
Chautauqua grounds near Warrensburg, Mo., June, 1-8, 
1912. 

The gentlemen who have served on this Committee are 
all earnest Bible Students. Their zeal in the matter of 
this investigation may be judged from the fact that they 
not only paid their own expenses, but additionally defrayed 
Pastor Russell's and all secretarial expenses. These 
gentlemen have long been deeply interested in the propagation 
of the Gospel, both at home and abroad. From 
the first we thought the Committee a remarkably fair one, 
and we believe the Report fully justifies that opinion. 
While it tells some plain truths, and lays bare some important 
facts, it is in no sense harsh or unkind, but on the 
contrary, sympathetic. 

So interesting is the Committee's Report and so instructive 
that we have practically devoted one entire number 
of THE WATCH TOWER to its presentation. We trust 
our readers will understand and appreciate our endeavors. 
We are printing a very large edition of this number, believing 
that it will be of interest to many outside our 
present list of subscribers. All such are cordially invited 
to become subscribers, and to join with us in the study of 
our Heavenly Father's Word in its own light— without 
the "spectacles" of any denominational creed. We 
can supply a large demand for extra copies of this issue, at 
5c. per copy, postpaid, to any part of the world. Tell 
your friends desiring these to address THE WATCH 
TOWER, Brooklyn, N.Y. The committee's report follows: 

THE HAWAIIAN ISLANDS VISITED 

Our first stop was at the Hawaiian Islands. Our investigations 
were practically confined to Honolulu, the 
principal city, but there we were in touch with the general 

R5008 : page 125 

situation throughout the group of thirteen islands. We 
were astonished to note the degree of civilization manifested 
by the entire population, composed of Hawaiians, 
Chinese, Japanese, Filipinos, Koreans, Portuguese and 
Americans. Of the two hundred thousand population, 



about seven thousand are Americans or of Caucasian 
mixture. 

Many of the natives live in very cramped quarters, in 
what is termed "slum districts." These, nevertheless, are 
not so much inferior to American slum districts as one 
might suppose. 

We visited a "Settlement," a philanthropic arrangement 
of very simple character in the midst of the poor 
and for their assistance. It has a playground for children, 
swimming baths, a gymnasium and entertainment room, a 
dispensary for simple remedies, a kindergarten room, and 
alongside an apartment for the convenience of consumptives, 
to whom advice is given respecting the care of their 
health and the avoidance of the spreading of the infection 
to their families. The gentleman in charge explained 
to us that the city of thirty thousand is divided into eight 
districts, and that eight ladies visit these districts regularly 
every ten days, and their compensation is from $90 to $100 
per month. The sugar planters and principal merchants 
consider it a good business enterprise to thus safeguard 
the city against cholera, yellow fever and bubonic 
plague, and care not 
that it is under 
Church control and 
so accredited. 

We visited the 
Kakemhame School, 
founded by Mrs. 
Bishop, a Hawaiian 
Princess, who became 
the wife of an 
American Banker. 
Her estate maintains 
the school at an expense 
of $70,000 per 
year. Only boys 
and girls with Hawaiian 
blood can enjoy 
the benefits. It 
is conducted on a 
luxurious scale, but 
appears to be of a 
very practical character 
and bound to 

exert a civilizing influence. 
The school 
has about 250 pupils, 
a neat little chapel 
and the necessary 

appointments for literary and manual training. The 
pupils look bright and healthy. 

We also visited the Mid-Pacific Institute. The boys' 
buildings are separate from those for the girls. The total 
number of pupils was approximately 220, and about evenly 
divided between the sexes. They have their board and 
lodging and schooling. A nominal charge of $1 a week 



is made, but nearly all are charity pupils, we were told. 
They seem healthy and happy. The classes were much 
smaller than in America. The grading is very similar 
to that of our public schools, with the addition of excellent 
homing influences and instruction for the girls in sewing, 
cooking, etc., calculated to turn them out useful and helpful 
wives. Our best wish for American and European 
children is that they could have as good a start in life as 
have the pupils in the schools we visited here. Nearly all 
the teachers, male and female, are American, bright and 
intelligent and above the American average. We did not 
learn their rate of pay. 

"NOW I LAY ME DOWN TO SLEEP" THE NEAREST APPROACH 
TO RELIGION 

We were rejoicing to think that such practical arrangements 
had been made along humanitarian lines, and 
it was with considerable surprise that we learned afterwards 
that nearly all this work is included in the reports 
of the American Missionary Association and the American 
Board of Christian Foreign Missions. Nothing connected 
with the schools gave any indication of their connection 
with religious or missionary institutions. The 
only statement of a religious service coming to our attention 
was that the smaller children knelt by their beds on 
retiring at night and sang, "Now I lay me down to sleep." 

R5009 : page 125 

Indeed, we inquired respecting Christian instruction and 
were informed that the attempt to give it would alienate 
the pupils and thus cause the disruption of the schools. 
We were informed that chapel services are held on Sunday, 
and also Sunday-school exercises, but that comparatively 
few of the children attend. The only hope seems to 
be that the civilizing and educating of these children 
would later on make them more amenable to Christian 
instruction. 

Departing we were invited to speak a few words of 
encouragement to the pupils of the girls' school. We 
sought to impress upon them the advantages of their 
pleasant and comfortable surroundings, and we connected 
these creature comforts with the Savior and the influence 
which doctrine exercises upon the hearts of mankind who 
properly receive it. We exhorted them to give Jesus a large 
place in their appreciation and affections. Whether it was 
imagination or not, it seemed to us that about half of the 
faces grew dark and scowly while we spoke, and we 
associated this impression with what the teachers had 
told us respecting the opposition to everything Christian. 
Nevertheless, they sang us their Hawaiian farewell song 

R5009 :page 126 

in the natural tongue, which surprised us by its rich and 



musical qualities. 

We visited the Y.M.C.A. in its new building. We 
learned that its cost, $140,000, was subscribed in six days. 
It is conveniently arranged for its purposes. In the basement 
are bowling alleys; on the ground floor, the main 
offices, a cafe, a reading room, comfortable lounging seats, 
a room for checkers, chess and dominos, and quite a 
large room for billiards. On the next floor above is the 
gymnasium, which is evidently one of the prominent features. 
Also on this floor is a large room for night school 
instruction. Above the gymnasium, on the third floor, 
we understand, there is an auditorium, and also a small 
room on the first floor for class purposes. The building is 
in charge of very pleasant gentlemen, who treated us 
cordially. 

It is our opinion that the work in Hawaii is a good 
one, viewed from the humanitarian standpoint, but an utter 
failure viewed from the standpoint of Christianization. 
So far as we could discern, faith in the Redeeming blood 
of Jesus, in His resurrection and in His coming Kingdom 
have never been taught. But alas! this is becoming 
too true in Europe and America and amongst Christian 
people of all denominations. Only comparatively few 
any longer sing understanding^, "In the Cross of Christ 
I glory." 

A gentleman who had resided in the city for forty-two 
years remarked that in his opinion the Hawaiians are 
retrograding, are less reliable, less temperate and less 
moral than they were twenty-five years ago. 

REPORT ON MISSIONARY WORK IN JAPAN 

We found the Japanese a very interesting people. We 
traveled nearly seven hundred miles through Japan, and 
visited various cities aggregating four and a half millions 
of population, which is about one-tenth of the entire population 
of Japan. We found the people industrious, peace-loving, 
polite and kind to each other, and towards foreigners. 
Although our visit was in the holiday season, when, 
according to their custom, over indulgence in liquor would 
be pardonable, nevertheless our entire party, scattered for 
the purpose of wide observation, noted only twelve intoxicated 
persons, and three of these were Europeans. Parental 
love and care were in evidence everywhere. We heard 
not a harsh expression from parent to child, nor to any 
one, and witnessed only one altercation, and it trivial. 
Everybody seemed industrious, minding his own business, 
and happy. Our united comment was, Would to God as 
favorable conditions prevailed in Europe and America! 
We noted nothing resembling profanity, and upon inquiry 
were told that they use no profanity, and that their strongest 
expression is "beka"— fool. 

We did not, however, conclude that the fretfulness, 
unhappiness, quarrelsomeness and rudeness and boisterousness 
frequently in evidence in Europe and America 
are attributable to Christianity. On the contrary, we surmised 



that Divine Providence had sent the message of 
the Gospel in the direction of the more rude or combative 
race, which received the letter and form of Christianity in 
a measure, without generally entering into its spirit of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly 
kindness and love. Our comment further was that if the 
Japanese should receive the letter of the Gospel and its 
spirit they would have less difficulty than the Europeans 
and Americans in the development of the fruits of the 
Spirit, because naturally more disposed toward gentleness, 
patience and brotherly kindness. 

WHAT OF THE MISSIONARY EFFORTS? 

These observations of the Japanese gave us the keener 
interest in our investigation as to how much, if anything, 
Christianity has to do with these conditions, to what 
extent Japan is Christianized, etc. Our findings in the 
matter at Tokio will serve to illustrate. Our Committee attended 

R5009 : page 127 

nine religious services, besides the two addressed 

by Pastor Russell. The average attendance at the nine 

meetings was 59, the smallest being 9, and the largest 

250, including the ministers. Two of these services were 

in the English language; the others were in Japanese and 

addressed by Japanese ministers. One of the sermons 

in the English tongue was along the line of Evolution. 

Although many Japanese understand English they rarely 

attend preaching in that tongue. We saw but one Japanese 

at the two English services and he, apparently, 

was a servant in waiting. We were very agreeably surprised 

to note the deeply reverential attitude of the majority 

of those attending the Japanese services, and that 

fully two-thirds were males. We congratulate the laborers 

in this missionary field on the devout appearance of the 

43 1 Japanese worshipers observed by us at the seven meetings 

referred to. Of course, it is impossible to tell 

accurately the attitude of the heart from the outward 

demeanor, but reverential attitude and attention should 

count for considerable. 

ENCOURAGEMENTS AND DISCOURAGEMENTS 

It was plainly evident that the Missionaries are feeling 
a considerable degree of discouragement, nor can 
we blame them. So 
far as we could learn 
their work made considerable 
progress until 
twenty years ago, 
since which time a 
wave of unbelief has 
swept over Japan, 
just as in Europe and 



America. Today the 

Japanese minds, like 

the minds of their 

European and American 

cousins, are full 

of interrogation 

points. In other 

words, the spirit of 

agnosticism is more 

and more prevalent. 

It is affecting the 

Missions and their 

work, and also affecting 

Buddhism and 

Shintoism. Although 

Buddhist temples, recently 

built, are gorgeous 

affairs, and 

although a million 

dollars has just been raised to build a new Buddhist 

temple near Yokohama, nevertheless, it is admitted that 

Buddhism is on the wane— that the number who attend 

the temples to pray and worship are fewer than formerly, 

and generally of the more ignorant classes. 

The present trend of the Japanese religious sentiment 
is toward infidelity, doubt and atheism. An inquiry 
as to the religious sentiment in three of the Japanese 
schools (University of Tokio) recently showed the following 
religious census: 

Christians, 4; Buddhists, Confucians and Shintos, 17; 
noncommittal, 46; atheists, 60; agnostics, 282; total, 409. 
This is a terrible picture, true also, we fear, of many colleges 
in America and Europe. 

Christianity in Japan is in much the same condition 
as in America and Europe, in two respects. (1) A certain 
number are true worshipers, devout believers, but 
they are few. (2) A larger number associate for the 
advantages they gain in one way or another— as, for instance, 
the privilege of night schools, Y.M.C.A. gymnasiums, 
etc., etc. There is considerable sympathy for 
Christianity amongst those who are at heart agnostics, 
and who class Jesus as a great teacher along with Confucius 
and Buddha, but who see nothing and know nothing 
respecting His redemptive work. These realize that 
Christianity has been helping on in the work of Japanese 
civilization, and would be sorry to know of anything 
calculated to hinder the work of the Missionaries. Christianity 
and all other religions in Japan are on the 
defensive. 

JAPANESE DEMAND PROOFS BEFORE ACCEPTING DOCTRINES 

The active minds of the Japanese know that 
Buddhism cannot answer their questions respecting God 
and the future, and they come to the Missionaries and 
native Christians with questions, for which they have as 



yet received no satisfactory reply. In consequence, they 
are holding aloof and saying, There is some good in all 
religions, perhaps, but apparently all of them have more 
or less of error and superstition. We will take advantage 
of the kindly interest of these foreigners in our welfare. 
We appreciate the fact that they have invested millions 
of dollars in churches and colleges in our land. We are 
confident they have done us good and helped to some extent 
to break from us the shackles of religious superstition. 
We will attend their schools and avail ourselves 
of their kindness, and endeavor to show a kindly disposition 
toward them; but we do not believe in Jesus as 
a Savior; we merely recognize Him as a great teacher. 
We think, therefore, that it is unnecessary that we should 
be baptized. We see not how this would have anything 
to do with our character. The fact of the matter is we 
believe we get as good moral teaching from Buddhism 
as from Christianity. We will stand aloof, doubting if 
there is any positive truth on these subjects. Thus it will 
be seen that the attitude of the Japanese toward Christianity 

R5010 :page 128 

is very much the same as the general attitude of 
the public throughout Christendom. 

We should note that considerable educational work 
is being carried on at Tokio by the Methodist brethren. 
Dr. Spencer informs us that they have an attendance of 
about 350 girls and 550 young men in their college. 
They seem to be well equipped. We could wish that the 
youths of the middle and lower classes in Europe and 
America were as well provided for. 

The Missionaries themselves appear to be an earnest 
band, but considerably discouraged. And no wonder! 
Outsiders report that they have considerable denominational 
conflict and jealous competition, but that steps are 
now being taken for a general religious Federation. The 
Missionaries freely admit that in their schools and other 
work it is necessary to lay stress chiefly upon moral 
conduct and to say little or nothing about Jesus' redemptive 
work and other doctrines— otherwise they would 
lose their hold upon the pupils, who evidently attend the 
schools chiefly for the educational advantages they offer. 
We repeat that the Missionaries of Japan have our congratulations 
upon the work done years ago and our sympathy 
in respect to the discouragement of the present, 
and the unfavorable outlook. What the Japanese need is 
"the Gospel of the Kingdom," announcing the second 
coming of Jesus as the Messiah of Glory, to rule, heal 
and instruct all the families of the earth. Pastor Russell's 
sermons gave them more food for thought than they had 
ever before enjoyed. 

THE CONDITIONS AND OUTLOOK IN CHINA 

At no place were we able to penetrate beyond 125 



miles inland in the great Empire of China, of 320,000,000 

people. But directly and indirectly we visited and inspected 

the conditions of life in about fifteen cities and 

villages, whose combined population was about 4,000,000. 

We saw many sad sights and heard many sad stories, 

but also both saw and heard other things 

which comforted and encouraged us. 

We were specially impressed with the 
business faculties of the Chinese, with 
their energy and general contentment, 
and, alas, also impressed with the filthiness 
and unsanitary conditions in which 
we found them in their large cities. Both 
young and old, male and female, work, 
and apparently willingly. 

China entire may be said to be revolutionized; 
few apparently have any 
sympathy with the Manchu Dynasty, 
which has just abdicated. The remarkable 
thing is that the revolutionists, 
hampered for lack of money, have been 
able to accomplish so much and to have 
preserved order so well. True, lawlessness 
has in several instances gained the 
upper hand; and, of course, it is still 
possible that the entire social fabric may 
be destroyed. There is a reason, however, 
why this seems improbable: For 

long centuries the various provinces of China have maintained 
a kind of local autonomy, not unlike that of Canada 
and Australia in respect to the British. These provinces 
or states have long had states rights, slightly after the 
fashion of the American Union. 

MISSIONARIES IN CHINA 

Without doubt missionaries have accomplished considerable 
in China. It is difficult, however, for the Chinese 
to differentiate between Christian missionaries and Christian 
tourists, Christian soldiers and sailors, Christian merchants 
and tradesmen and Christian clergymen who preach 
to such of these as attend Divine service. Gradually, however, 
we believe they are getting a proper focus upon the 
matter. We must sympathize with them in this; if we 
could put ourselves in their places, how strange it would 
all appear to us! The aloofness of the foreigners and the 
disdain with which they usually treat the natives is quite 
unfavorable also to true Christian progress here. Moreover, 
although the Chinese are aware that some good 
people are sending large sums of money in their interest, 
building colleges and hospitals and churches and schools 
and Y.M.C.A. buildings, with gymnasia, billiard rooms, 
bowling alleys, etc., they find it difficult to harmonize this 
benevolence with the fact that foreigners all conspire to 
keep wages at the lowest point— hindering as much as 
possible any advance in prices or such improvement in 



conditions as would raise prices. 

Under all these conditions it seems remarkable to us 
that Christian missionary effort has accomplished so much 
as we perceive. It seems the more amazing when we 
reflect on the Gospel message which Christendom has had 
to offer, namely, that only the saintly few have the 
slightest prospect of heaven, and that all the vast remainder 
of China's hundreds of millions and their forefathers 
are doomed to an eternity of torture. 

But with all this handicap we found some Chinese 
Christians who gave every evidence of deep sincerity. 
Some foreigners, however, told us that they were merely 
"rice Christians." This may be true of some, but we feel 
sure it is not true of all— nor even of a majority. Comparing 
the native congregations with Christian gatherings 
in Europe and America, we have every reason to believe 
that the comparison favored the Chinese. They listen 
more respectfully, reverentially and earnestly than do the 
majority of congregations in Christian lands. 

THE OUTLOOK 

The outlook is both favorable and unfavorable. It is 
unfavorable in that China is now coming under the influence 
of Higher Criticism, Evolution, etc.— not from the 
missionaries, however, who seem to be more loyal to the 
Bible than are the ministers of Christendom. This flood 
of infidelity is coming from Japan. 

The slowness of the Christian progress in China of 
late may be judged from the report of one Y.M.C.A. 

R5010 :page 129 

secretary from America. He said that in ten years the 
Association had succeeded in bringing only 25 persons 
into membership with the different Christian churches of 
all denominations. And the Y.M.C.A., be it remembered, 
is chiefly a moral club dominated by Christian influence 
—much the same as in Europe and America— and 
apparently the chief recruiting ground for the churches. 
So far as we were able to sense the situation from the 
missionary viewpoint it is this: The influence of Christianity 
has brought a measure of enlightenment to the 
Chinese which led up to the recent revolution. The revolution 
itself is dominated by the Christian 
Chinese, partly because they are the more 
intelligent. The solid front which Chinese 
religions have heretofore maintained is 
breaking. Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism 
still dominate the masses, but 
many are saying, We are non-sectarian; 
we take the best of all these religions 
and admit that there are good things also 
to be said respecting Christianity. The 
progressive Chinese of the revolutionist 
party proclaim that henceforth China 



shall be known as one of the Christian 

nations. By this they do not mean, however, 

that the Chinese will be converted 

to faith in Jesus as the Redeemer of the 

world and their personal Savior, but 

merely that China recognizes that the nations 

which call themselves Christian, are 

more wise, more intelligent, less superstitious, 

better educated and better warriors 

than the nations which recognize 

Buddhism, Brahminism, Taoism, Mohammedanism, etc. 

The statement, therefore, simply means that the Chinese 

propose to adopt Occidental manners and customs and, 

so far as possible, Occidental lines of thought. 

DIFFICULTIES SHOULD BE PROMPTLY REMOVED 

But while the psychological moment for the spread of 
Christianity would appear to have arrived, there is a difficulty. 
The Chinaman is perplexed by the 600 different 
denominations of Christians and the 600 different theories 
of salvation which they represent. Once awakened to 
thought he is more critical, if not more logical, than the 
masses of Christendom in respect to what he will accept 
instead of the doctrines he proposes to drop. He asks 
the missionaries all kinds of questions, the majority of 
which receive no satisfactory answer. One of the principal 
difficulties is on the subject of the Trinity— how there 
could be one God and He of three different persons, or 
how there could be three different Gods and yet these 
three be only one person; and how the one God could be 
dead for three days and raise Himself from the dead. The 
Chinese mind seems unable to grasp this mathematical 
problem. 

As between the Protestant Hell and the Catholic 
Purgatory, the Chinaman is also perplexed. He wants to 
know where Hell and Purgatory are located, and who 
knows and how he knows. He seems perplexed to understand 
how a just and loving God should bring so many 
people into existence for such a fate. While Christianity 
appeals to them in some ways, it repels them along these 
lines; the poor Chinese are really in a quandary. The 
trend amongst the more thoughtful ones seems to be to 
consider all religions as more or less superstitions, useful 
merely for the control of the more degraded and vicious. 

In view of these limitations, the missionaries now find 
it inexpedient to discuss doctrinal matters. Instead, the 
chief attention is given to schools, colleges, hospitals, Y.M.C.A. 
privileges, sports, etc. Their hope is that this 
beneficial influence may gradually attract more and more 
the Chinese, and that thus will spring up a preference for 
Christian methods and places of worship over and above 

R5011 :page 129 

those of other religions. 



WHICH IS THE RIGHT SHIP? 

One missionary likened the Christian church and its 
salvation to a large ship: The passengers board the 
vessel in confidence, trusting all to the officers, and do 
not study the maps, charts and compass nor inquire particularly 
respecting the machinery. So all desiring to be 
saved, he said, should get into the Church and live and 
rest there contented, without inquiring particularly into 
doctrines, trusting implicitly to the final outcome. 

But some of the hearers inquired, Which boat— which 
church? Are there not many Christian boats, Catholic 
and Protestant? Which one will surely be properly navigated 
and bring all of her passengers to the heavenly 
port? 

Such knotty questions are, of course, perplexing to 
the missionaries, unused to such close reasonings in their 
own lands. We sympathize with the missionaries, realizing 
that they are in a very difficult situation. In conversation 
many of them manifested great earnestness and real 
piety and deplored their inability to accomplish greater 
results along religious lines. Others, a minority, we hope, 
seem to have a narrow and hypocritical spirit. Sent to 
convert the heathen they would like to make such reports 
as would please and not discourage those who sent them 
forth, especially in view of the fact that the Home Secretaries 
write them that donations are falling off and 
that encouraging reports must be made. 

Much has been said respecting the fact that the missionaries 
live in palatial residences and hold themselves 
so aloof from the people whom they would interest that 
the latter discount all their professions of love and sympathy. 
Having heard such reports we sought to determine 
whether or not they were truthful, and, if so, the 
cause. We did find palatial residences of ministers in 
Hong Kong and Shanghai, but these were not, strictly 
speaking, missionaries who served the Chinese. These 
ministers serve and are chiefly supported by Americans, 
British, Germans, etc. (merchants, consuls, military officers, 
etc.). One of these serves the Union Church in 
Shanghai at $2,400 gold ($4,800 Chinese money) per 

R5011 :page 130 

year. Of course, out of this he can well afford to live 
quite luxuriously in China. It is true that the missionaries 
also live in compounds, near the college buildings, separate 
entirely from the natives. These substantial structures, 
of course, must appear to the natives as palatial, 
greatly in contrast with their own hovels. 

But we have not the heart to blame Western people for 
desiring to live according to their own standard when it is 
possible. No doubt some of them would serve with equal 
zeal if they had nowhere to lay their heads superior to the 
native house-boats on the river or the hovels on the shore. 



As one of them very frankly said, The constant din and 
hum of voices from earliest morning till latest night is 
very wearing upon the more delicate nervous systems of 
Caucasians and calculated to bring on nervous prostration, 
hence the better houses, purer air, better food, etc., 
may be considered almost in the light of necessities. Nor 
can we suppose that those who sent forth the missionaries 
and are paying their expenses desire them to live on the 
same level as the Chinese, even if their health would 
permit. On the whole, the average missionary seems to be 
doing in this respect about as faithfully as the majority 
of Christian people and Christian ministers in their home 
lands. So far as their clothing is concerned, we saw 
nothing that would be considered extravagant, even 
though much superior to the poor toggery of the majority 
of the natives. 

THE RED CROSS SOCIETY 

We have for years heard much of famines and consequent 
pestilences in China and these have usually been reported 
from practically the same district— the valley of 
the Yangtse River, which is navigable by large vessels 
for 900 miles. There is no doubt about the distress; many 
of the poor people are in a very pitiable condition. This 
is the third year in succession in which they have suffered 
famine. Even the seed sown was lost by reason of the 
great freshets. It is safe to say that two millions are on 
the verge of starvation— many have already starved to 
death. Money and rice from America have been poured 
into this district time and again, giving a moiety of relief, 
but the cause of the trouble remains— the river conditions. 

The American Red Cross Society, organized for the 
preservation of life, and having as its President the Honorable 
William H. Taft, sent engineers to look into the 
difficulties and to confer with the Chinese Government 
respecting a permanent remedy. It has required time to 
make surveys and for engineers to decide what is necessary. 
The matter had reached a satisfactory conclusion 
and work was about to be begun when the revolution interrupted. 
It is anticipated that the new government will 
take the matter up. The engineer in charge, Mr. Jameson, 
informed us that he hopes to put to work speedily 
on the necessary improvements 30,000 of the destitute, 
and thus help a little in stemming the famine difficulties. 
While the matter is not under missionary auspices, 
it nevertheless has, in the minds of the Chinese, a 
missionary association and a helpful influence. Indeed, 
it is only along the lines of higher civilization that any 
considerable work can be accomplished now in China. 
Nevertheless, the Chinese are awakening and, like the 
Japanese, are wanting a new religion, rational as well as 
reverential. Is it not the same in Europe and America? 

Pastor Russell addressed the natives on two occasions. 
Considerable interest was manifested and Chinese reports 
of both discourses were published, the publishers proposing 



to continue such publications weekly after the manner of 
the American and British newspapers. Something in his 
presentation seemed specially to strike interest and convince 
many of his hearers. In response to an offer of 
free reading matter in English, many addresses were 
handed in. 

THE MORALS OF CHINA 

The Chinese moral standard differs considerably from 
ours, but they apparently respect their own; there is no 
obtrusion of the nude and lewd. We saw no immodest 
dressing— nothing to suggest impurity or licentiousness. 
Mr. Lerrigo, Secretary of the Canton Y.M.C.A., informed 
us that the Chinese of the Association had recently 
purchased a moving-picture outfit, but that they immediately 
objected to the immodesty of some of the pictures, 
which would be thought all right in Europe and 
America. A censorship committee was appointed, and 
every picture in the slightest degree immodest is eliminated. 
In their Christian gatherings the sexes sit apart. 
When we sought for photographic views representing the 
Chinese, their customs and homes, we found them all 
modest, chaste. Vulgar, foolish and immodest pictures 
there were on sale, but they were of European manufacture, 
and apparently sold to Europeans and Americans. 
A missionary of thirty years' residence assured us that 
the moral status of the people in general is quite good, 
excepting that of the Buddhist priests. 

UNITED STATES MISSIONS 

Our visit to the Philippine Islands gave us a greatly 
increased respect for the American flag. The change 
wrought in the twelve years of American supervision of 
the Philippines is little short of a miracle. Little did we 

R5011 :page 131 

suppose that our Government had been carrying on so 

benevolent a work as we there beheld. True, it is not a 

missionary work in the proper sense of that term, in that 

it is not attempting to give the Filipinos religious instruction 

of any kind. Nevertheless, the work is very similar 

to that which all Foreign Missions are now attempting in 

Oriental countries— a work of education and moral and 

social uplift, etc. The officers and soldiers 

whom we met were a credit to the greatest 

nation in the world, including the 

Major General commanding the forces 

of the Philippines, the Civil Governor 

and those of the civil service officials 

with whom we became acquainted. 

When our Government took over the 
control of these Islands from Spain there 
were thousands of Jesuits and Friars in 



the Islands in control of vast estates, but 

the people were ignorant. These friars 

still own 95 per cent, of the property within 

the walled city of Manila, we were 

told. The Government rents from them 

considerable property, paying $4,000 gold 

rent per year for one building alone. 

Nothing has been done by the United 

States Government against Catholicism; 

no Protestant denomination has been 

favored in any manner. Instead a thousand 

American teachers were imported, 

of whom 800 still remain. These are now supplemented 

by 6,000 native teachers. The Filipino thirst for education 

is rapidly increasing. The Legislature has recently 

determined upon the erection of 400 new school houses 

and the addition of many teachers. Do you have compulsory 

education? we inquired. The answer was, It is 

unnecessary; we cannot equip the schools rapidly enough 

as it is; we 

are obliged 

to run two 

shifts in order 

to accommodate 

those 

who are anxious 

to learn. 

An up-to-date 
hospital 
has been 
erected; it is 
probably as 
complete as 
any hospital 
in the world, 
and its free 
dispensary 
has the 
distinction of 
being sixth 
in the world's 
record of 
cases treated 
in a year— 
80,000 cases 
last year. 

Steam 
railways, 
electric railways, 

etc., with modern buildings and a newly dredged 
harbor are rapidly increasing the business interests and 
lifting the people from serfdom and peonage to intelligence 
and good citizenship. 

R5012:page 131 



UNITED STATES TREATING FILIPINOS AS AN ELDER 
BROTHER 

To give an idea of the progress made, we note the 
fact that at a meeting addressed by Pastor Russell there 
were present about 1,000 Filipino young men, ages from 
18 to 30, who understand English, and who gave the very 
closest attention. Following the address some 300 applications 
for literature were voluntarily handed to Pastor 
Russell. This is in keeping with the general manifestation 
of this people for knowledge along every line. Another 
indication of their progress was manifested recently. A 
proposal was made that a Y.M.C.A. for Filipinos be 
established. The American Central Committee made an 
offer of $140,000, provided the Filipinos of Manila themselves 
would raise $80,000. The amount was more than 
subscribed— $100,000 was contributed. 

To our surprise, the Governor General and others assured 
us that all of these improvements are being made 
by the Filipinos themselves— at their own cost. The 
United States Government merely supervises the matter 
through its representatives. The judges, physicians, 
nurses, teachers, schools, are all paid for out of Filipino 
funds under our Government's wise and economical management 
of their affairs; as an elder brother doing for a 
younger. We felt proud indeed of the record. When 
we contrasted the results here manifested and the benevolent 
methods used with the selfish exploiting practices 
only too common, we thanked God that whatever the 
blemishes of our Government and whatever its shortcomings, 
it has a record for justice second to none ever made 
in this world's history, and that without hypocrisy. 

This fairness manifested by our Government is telling 
upon the Filipinos, who at first misunderstood. It is also 
influencing the large number of Chinese residing there. 
Indeed, the whole world is taking notice; but alas ! we 
fear that no colonizing nation is ready to follow the example. 
The peoples of the Orient are practical and nothing 
could much more commend to them the principles of 
Christianity than our Government's course. Quite to the 
contrary, the operations and exploitations of European 
governments have given the missionaries a very uphill 
work in what they have sought to do. The very fact that 
these exploiting governments have backed up and protected 

R5012:page 132 

the missionaries has had, we believe, an influence 
derogatory to missions. 

THE MALAY PENINSULA 

Your Committee visited Singapore and Penang and 
had interesting and profitable experiences. The greatest 
missionary effort in both places appeared to be under 
Methodist control. The work being done in these two 



Malayan centers reminded us very much of what we have 

already mentioned respecting the work in progress in the 

Philippine Islands. Like that, it seemed 

to be chiefly a work of secular education, 

and quite successful, although conducted 

along different lines. The Government 

subsidizes the schools liberally, besides 

which a tuition fee is charged. In these 

respects we believe the work less successful 

than that in the Philippines, where 

the education is free, and where the 

Government provides the schools and 

teachers and cannot supply them rapidly 

enough. 

These Methodist schools in Singapore 
and Penang, so far as we were able to 
learn, have 2,500 and 2,000 pupils respectively 
in attendance, and with Government 
subsidization, are self-supporting. 
These pupils are attracted from all parts of the 
Peninsula, and some from Siam and from Sumatra, across 
the Straits. Naturally the expenses attaching to these 
scholarships must reduce the number in attendance and 
confine it to the comparatively better-off classes. In the 
Philippines, on the contrary, the free schools and their 
teachers are scattered everywhere, and all people, rich 
and poor, have educational opportunities. While, therefore, 
we highly commend the work being done here, we 
still believe that the American plan is the superior one. 
It is astonishing to note how anxious the peoples of these 
parts seem to be to gain an education. 

Inquiry respecting Christianity amongst the students 
revealed the fact that a certain amount of religious matter 
is introduced daily, in that the sessions are opened with 
prayer, and some of the simpler Bible stories and parables 
are brought to the attention of the pupils. Of course, 
only a small proportion of the entire attendance at these 
schools ever take the full course of instruction, but we 
are informed that one-quarter of those who do graduate 
profess Christianity, as preferable to the religion of their 
birth, although they do not very generally join any of the 
Christian churches. We were glad to learn that here, as 
well as in China, prejudice against Christianity is 
rapidly breaking down, and that the Chinese who predominate 
here prefer American and English teachers 
rather than their own. Indeed, they are quite willing to 
pay good salaries for competent teachers, who are in 
demand. 

We did not have favorable opportunities for contact 
with the native Christians, who are of many nationalities. 
We learned with pleasure, however, that while they are 
few in number, they give evidence of sincerity. Other 
denominations were represented as active, but in a much 
smaller way, and much less successful than the work 
noted. 



CHRISTIAN INFLUENCE IN INDIA 

For centuries India has been a missionary field— particularly 
the southern portion, and the Island of Ceylon 
adjacent. Tradition has it that St. Thomas, one of the 
twelve Apostles, visited Ceylon and Madras. A cathedral 
to his memory stands in Madras, covering, it is claimed, 
his grave. The legend is quite specific. We were shown 
the cave where he was attacked by the Brahmins, but 
from which he escaped. About two miles from it is what 
is termed Mt. Saint Thomas. This is the place where, 
supposedly, he was speared to death by a Brahmin. Of 
course, these incidentals may have belonged to some other 
man by the name of Thomas, and centuries of time may 
have confounded him with the Apostle Thomas. But that 
some man by the name of Thomas, a Christian Missionary, 
visited those parts long ago could scarcely be questioned. 

Additional tradition shows that at a very early period 
Syrian Christians made a settlement on the southwest 
coast. They still maintain an organization, and a church 
history running back from twelve to fifteen hundred years, 
and they now number about a quarter of a million in the 
Province of Travancore, whose population is about three 
millions. 

The London Missionary Society, a Congregational institution, 
has carried on a work in Travancore since 1806. 
They have had some success, almost exclusively with the 
lower castes, some of whose forbears were slaves. They 
claim now a church membership of ten thousand. Although 
Travancore is one of the smallest of the India 
Provinces, we have given it prominence because Christian 
missionary effort here appears to have reached a 
better development than elsewhere, so far as we could 
discern. The natives are very poor, but industrious, and 
apparently honest-hearted. The higher castes, which adhere 
to Hinduism, seem not averse to Christianity, but reject 
it, because to them it seems less logical than their 
own beliefs. The natives from the lower castes, reached 
by the Gospel message, have certainly been blessed above 
their fellows still remaining under the grosser superstitions 
and idolatry of Hinduism. 

Northward from Travancore and Madras we found 
evidences of missionary activity, but they were newer and 
their successful work correspondingly less in evidence. 
We were pleased, however, to note that some amongst the 
natives in all parts give evidence of great sincerity and 
Christian devotion to the extent of their knowledge of 
the Lord and His Word. These, however, of course, are 
very isolated cases, just as this class of Christians is scarce 
in every part of the world. 

METHODS EMPLOYED TO INTEREST NATIVES 

Various are the methods used by the Missionaries to 
gain a hold upon the people of India, and to lift them 
from idolatry and superstition. The college appears to be 



the most attractive bait. There is a thirst for knowledge, 
even though it be less in India than could be wished for. 
In only one locality did we hear of children being hired 
to attend school by the payment of a trifling sum. We 
were told that for this inducement the parents would compel 

R5012:page 133 

the attendance of the children, but not without it. In 
various parts of India there are academies and colleges 
controlled by the Missionaries. These are attractive to the 
young men, because of the educational facilities. The 
students are not required to make any profession of Christianity 
in joining the schools, but rather are assured that 
no attempt will be made to indoctrinate them. These students, 
we are advised, come largely from the upper Brahmin 
caste, influence with which is much coveted by the 
Missionaries. 

Inquiry as to how Christian interest was sustained 
amongst these young men brought the answer that the 
majority, after graduating, scoff at Christianity, and 
claim a superiority for Hinduism. They seem to catch 
in the schools the spirit of "Higher Criticism." We cannot 
surely tell the mental attitude of these young men 
when they enter the schools, because we know that the 
influence of the schooling in the colleges in Christendom 
tends to similar unbelief in the Bible. Inquiry respecting 
the status of the Protestant Missionaries on the subject 
of faith in the Bible brought the report that many of them 
are Higher Critics and Evolutionists, who no longer believe 
in the Bible as the inspired Word of God. It seems 
to be conceded, however, that higher critical teachings 
are not conveyed to the scholars in a public manner, but 

R5013 :page 133 

rather, as in Christendom, covertly. 

We found evidence of very sincere Christian endeavor 
on the part of the Missionaries in the past, with some 
fruitage in consecrated natives. We found the Missionaries 
of the present time earnest and attentive to their 
work, but, like ministers of Christendom, they seem to 
have had their spirituality sapped, devitalized, and, probably, 
by the same influences— "Higher-Critical-Infidel-Evolutionary" 
theories. Only one missionary did we hear 
of preaching eternal torture, and he was a new arrival on 
the field. Contact with "heathendom" seems to fully settle 
in the minds of all reasoning people that God never intended 
the eternal torture of all except the comparatively 
few who put their trust in the redemptive work of Jesus, 
and subsequently seek to walk in His steps. 

SINCERITY OF MANY NATIVES EVIDENT 

On every hand may be seen evidences that the poor 
Hindus are as sincere at heart in their worship as any 



Christian could possibly be. There is not 
the slightest sign that the devotions of 
the majority are hypocritical— "to be seen 
of men." Although their devotions are 
performed publicly, fearlessly, they are 
reverential and seem to be addressed to 
some unseen god, even though crude idols 
are at times apparently used to represent 
him, according to a philosophy which we 
are unable to appreciate. However, when 
we remembered the terrible mental pictures 
of the Almighty drawn by some of 
our creeds, and contrasted these with the 
ugly idols worshipped by some of these 
poor peoples, we felt inclined to say that 
of the two the creed idol was the more 
repulsive. 

The Salvation Army has recently entered 
the missionary lists in India. Its 
sympathetic method of mingling with and 
aiding the lowest caste to better ideas of 
home-life and cleanliness is commendable. If only their 
fifes and drums called the people to hear of God's love, 
and the good tidings of His provision for all in Messiah's 
Kingdom, what good they might accomplish! They are 
making quite a show of success by attracting to their 
service young teachers, "catechists," from other missions, 
by more liberal allowances for their expenses. 

MORE THAN EDUCATION NEEDED TO LIFT NATIVES OUT 
OF SUPERSTITION 

At Benares we had a Christian native for a guide, and 
he informed us that many of the poor people who were 
bathing in the Ganges, and hoping thereby to wash away 
their sins, had been educated, some of them in Christian 
schools, so that quite a good many of them were conversant 
with the English language. This surely was a very 
discouraging discovery. It indicated that even more than 
education is necessary to lift these peoples out of their 
deep-seated superstitions. 

Missionaries and Christianity have frequently been 
blamed with doing injury to the people. Many say, "You 
can trust a native who has not professed Christianity, but 
beware lest you ever trust one who has been Christianized 
—they are not dependable." It may be that something 
connected with Missionary effort promotes dishonesty in 
those who receive its benefits, but in our opinion the Missionaries 
and their methods are less to be blamed than the 
Europeans residing in India and transient visitors. Apparently 
the more consecrated people of Christendom remain 
at home. There can be no doubt that the influence 
of the white man in a general way upon the people of 
India has to a considerable extent been demoralizing, and 
this demoralizing influence, exercised by representatives 
of Christendom, seems to more than counteract the helpful 



influences of the Bible and the Missionaries. The natives 
of lower castes look up to the whites, but find their 
disgraces easier to copy than their graces. 

In Madras we became acquainted with a native Christian 
worker who was conducting a temperance mission. 
We remarked that we had been greatly surprised to find 
the natives quite free from the influence of intoxicating 
liquors, and that we were surprised at his having 
a Temperance Mission. He corroborated our understanding 
of the matter that Hindus and Mohammedans, 
who constitute the bulk of the population, repudiate intoxicating 
liquors. He said that his labors were chiefly 
amongst the young natives who were influenced by Christianity, 
and who were rapidly becoming addicted to intoxicating 
liquors. We learned also that amongst the 
Mohammedans there is a class increasingly numerous 
which, following the example of the whites, are becoming 
skeptical of religion and correspondingly dissolute in their 

R5013 :page 134 

habits. As for the whites, nearly all seem to use liquors 
and tobacco. The irreligion and nominalism of the majority 
of the whites discount greatly all missionary efforts. 

A REVIEW OF THE COMMITTEE'S TOUR 

The Committee traveled in India about four thousand 
miles altogether— by railway, bullock-carts, automobiles, 
pony-carts, jinrickshas, carriages, etc. 

From the Straits of Malay our party came to the Island 
of Ceylon. We had some interesting experiences in its 
chief city, Colombo. A number of Bible students of that 
place met us on our arrival, and gave us hearty greetings 
of welcome. Our fellowship with them was sweet, 
and three of them subsequently accompanied us for a few 
days through the Travancore District of India. Here in 
Colombo a meeting had been arranged for in the Public 
Hall, to be addressed by Pastor Russell. Although the 
hour appointed was early, the house was crowded, about 
900 being present. Close attention was given, and at the 
conclusion of the meeting many addresses were handed 
in for literature on Biblical topics. 

Another interesting experience worth relating was a 
visit by the Committee to the Lepers' Hospital on an 
island adjoining the city. The hospital is presided over 
by an educated Indian of the Parsee faith, who with 
great cordiality arranged for Pastor Russell to give an 
address (through an interpreter) to the lepers. Many 
heard with interest, and amongst them some inquired for 
literature. 

TRAVANCORE PROVINCE-INDIA 

A full week was given to southwest India, and it was 
worthy of it. Our first stop was at Russell-Purim, the 



principal point at which Brother Davey for two years has 

let shine the "Gospel of the Kingdom." Pastor Russell 

preached there twice through interpreters to audiences 

variously estimated from two to five thousand. Nearly 

two miles from the meeting place we were met by a thousand 

of the natives who escorted us to a hastily improvised 

auditorium. A fife and drum corps preceded us, 

while behind us came bagpipes, tom-toms and various 

musical instruments unknown to us. Many of those who 

met us carried banners of welcome and marched ahead of 

our motor car, while on either side were 

lined up others who greeted us, singing 

native hymns of welcome. Our Committee 

was quite unprepared for such a 

reception, and in the general din could 

merely express our appreciation by bowing 

to the multitudes who walked and 

ran before, beside and behind us to the 

meeting place, constantly joined by other 

hundreds on the way, and finally by thousands 

who were waiting for us at the 

auditorium. 

When we stepped upon the platform 
each member of the Committee was 
presented with a garland of flowers, 
strung after the native style. These were 
hung about our necks. To each of us 
was presented also a bouquet of flowers 
handsomely arranged in a manner which, 
we were informed, to the natives signified 
peace, love and good will. Next came 
fans and a glass of cocoanut milk. It was following 
these experiences and refreshments that Pastor Russell 
gave his address. Following the first address we were 
introduced to some of the officials of the vicinity. 

NAGERCOIL -MISSION CENTER 

Our next stop was at Nagercoil, where the London 
Missionary Society has a college. We were kindly received 
by the Secretary in charge, and, as per arrangement 
made in advance, Pastor Russell delivered an address. 
The auditorium was crowded, as were the doors 
and windows, while hundreds were unable to get within 
hearing distance. Natives constituted the audience, except 
the white teachers. Amongst them, we were informed, 
were educated Hindus as well as Christians, and nearly all 
were men. 

TRIVANDUM-THE CAPITAL 

The next stop was at Trivandum, the capital of 
Travancore. Two meetings were held in Victoria City 
Hall, which on both occasions was crowded to overflowing. 
We cannot, of course, know to what extent the hearers 
received the message. It was quite manifest, however, 



from their conduct, that some of the Hindus had 
come to sneer at anything Christian. It was equally 
manifest that by the time of the close of the meeting 
most of this disposition had faded away; the faces were 
earnest— many of them markedly sincere. They heard 
the Bible defended and Christianity upheld with more of 
an appeal than ever before to the Bible, as well as to 
reason. Nearly 200 requested literature, expressing a desire 
to study further the matter which they had heard— 
some of them expressing deep concern. 

Five other less important places were visited and meetings 
held ere 

WE REACHED MADRAS 

In Madras we had very interesting experiences also. 
Three meetings were held in different localities, all of 
them crowded. Nearly three hundred applications for 
literature were handed in. It was while in this vicinity 
that we visited the Mount of Saint Thomas, where, according 
to tradition, the Apostle Thomas, as before referred to, 
suffered martyrdom by a spear-thrust at the hands of a 
Brahmin. 

THE VIZAGAPATAM MISSION 

We had an interesting visit to Vizagapatam, which 
has a mission now under the control of the Canadian Baptists, 
having been transferred to them by the London 
Missionary Society. A public meeting was held in the 
chapel and we attended. The missionary and his wife 
were present, and also two men and two women, native 

R5014:page 135 

teachers or workers. It was Quarterly Meeting Day, and 
about six boys and six girls repeated Scripture verses, 
committed to memory, in the presence of an audience of 
about forty adults. These missionaries and teachers- 
yea, and all missionaries— have the sympathy of the Committee, 
for we realized that they have a difficult proposition 
—an impossible one, so far as the conversion of 
the world is concerned. 

CALCUTTA-CITY OF PALACES 

Some of us journeyed from Madras to Calcutta, while 
another passed through the Mysore District to Bombay. 
All of our experiences were interesting. We were impressed 
with the fact that while the natives respect the 
whites as a superior race, they are perplexed with some 
of their religious teachings, and inclined to think that 
many professing Christianity are only partially sincere in 
professing such beliefs— for instance, Mohammedans 
cannot receive the "Doctrine of the Trinity." They accept 
our Old Testament Scriptures, but declare that these 



forbid the worship of any but the one God. They therefore 
oppose Christians in preaching that there are three 
gods, even as they oppose the Hindus for preaching that 
there are five thousand gods. 

All (Hindus and Mohammedans) are perplexed that 
these superior whites should insist on justice, kindness 
and love and yet teach that the Creator is devoid of these 
qualities— that He foreordained their forefathers to an 
eternity of torture, well knowing what He was doing, and 
that He has allowed ignorance to prevail in the earth 
over the masses of mankind, while demanding knowledge 
and faith as a basis for salvation. They say, What we 
already believe seems to us more reasonable than this. 
We have some bad gods of our own, but none of them are 
so vicious as the Christian God is represented to be. We 
also have kind and generous gods and merciful gods, and 
these teach us that we must be kind and generous toward 
each other and towards even the brute beasts. Why, they 
ask, should we leave our own faith, which is older than 
yours, to accept your views, which are less reasonable, just 
and loving than our own? 

RELIGION NOT GENERALLY TAUGHT 

Of course, missionaries find it very difficult to answer 
such propositions. One result is that little is said about 
the future punishment of unbelievers, etc. If much were 
said on these subjects, Hindu children would not be allowed 
to attend the schools. To maintain a hold upon 
the children, to be able to make interesting reports of the 
progress of their work, and to seemingly justify their continuance 
in the work, the pupils must be held on to. Religious 
instruction is generally avoided, except at times, 
when it is optional with the pupils to attend. 

Another matter connected with the schools should be 
mentioned: Of late years, the Government has been fostering 
education by giving liberal allowances to schools 
of a satisfactory curriculum. But the Government requires 
that such schools, aided out of the public treasury, 
shall be non-religious. The various mission schools of 
practically all denominations are now competing for such 
Government patronage— to compensate for the falling off 
of missionary donations. As a consequence these mission 
schools are non-religious— purely secular— with merely a 
Christian influence attaching, and, as already noted, this 
Christian influence is of late vitiated and neutralized by 
an unbelief in the Bible, the fruitage of "Higher-Criticism-Evolutionary" 
theories. 

The critics of the Christian religion are, of course, 
mainly from the upper castes. Those of the lower castes 
wonder much, understand little, and seem to be in expectation 
of harsh language and ill treatment, both from the 
whites and the higher castes of Indians. In all of our 
journeyings we were impressed with the gentleness of the 
people as a whole, and the evident affection of parents 
for their children. Only amongst those who have been 



closely associated with the whites did we find the quarreling 
and wrangling disposition. 

In Calcutta two meetings were held, addressed by Pastor 
Russell. Although the attendance was not large, the 
interest was considerable, as evidenced by the fact that 
170 handed in their names and addresses for literature. 

We were informed that the advertising implied that 
only the whites were invited, and if the natives had known 
that they would have been welcome, crowds would have 
been turned away. 

BENARES-'THE HOLY CITY" 

Benares was our next stopping point. It is the Mecca 
of India. As a city it is said to be sacred to more people 
of different religions than any other city on earth. No 
attempt was made to hold a meeting there. The people 
seem more ignorant and superstitious than at any other 
point visited. The principal interest here, aside from the 
temples, which we did not visit, were the bathing ghats 
along the shore of the Ganges river. To these pilgrimages 
are made from various parts of India. They go down the 
steps into the water, which to them is sacred; they bathe, 
pray the while, and finally, before leaving, many of them 
fill little vessels with the "sacred" water, which they carry 
home with them. It was particularly saddening and discouraging 
to be told by a native Christian that many who 
go thither to bathe have had contact with Christianity and 
modern education. It reminded us of the saying of a 
Missionary in Japan, namely, that one of the most discouraging 
features of his work was that some of the 
members of his congregation who had professed Christianity 
for years, nevertheless went annually to the Shinto 
temple to worship their ancestors. 

LUCKNOW--CAWNPORE--AGRA, ETC. 

These places were interesting, each in its way, but 
less so than places already described, with nothing specially 
worthy of noting. 

BOMBAY, THE BEAUTIFUL 

Our experiences at Bombay closed this most interesting 
tour through India. Here Pastor Russell addressed two 
very intelligent audiences, composed partially of whites, 
the remainder being of high caste natives. Some stood and 
many, desirous of hearing, were unable to gain admission. 
Here again many requests for literature were handed in. 

The next day on the pier, as we were departing for 
Egypt, an educated native of the Parsee caste, who had 
accepted Christianity, came to bid us good by, bringing 
with him a long garland of flowers of sweet odor, which 
he hung about Pastor Russell's shoulders, and presenting 
him at the same time with a very handsome bouquet in 
the form of a scepter. He declared himself under lasting 



obligations for the assistance in the understanding of 
God's Word afforded by the meeting of the night previous. 
He also handed in his address for literature. 

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS ON INDIA 

From the foregoing it will be noted that in the Committee's 
estimation the true Christianity has made more 
advancement in the Province of Travancore than in any 
other. We believe the readers of this report will feel a 
special interest in the people of that Province. We tried 
to think of some little souvenir of that Province, and 
found one which, we believe, will be generally interesting. 
It is the smallest coin used in Travancore, and probably 
one of the smallest in value in the world, about one-tenth 

R5014:page 136 

of a cent each. Yet in one sense of the word it is the basis 
of all monetary value, for it is called "cash." 

We have brought with us several thousand of these 
from the Travancore mint— new. They are for the International 
Bible Students Association classes. Each 
class desiring these souvenirs should, through its secretary, 
send to the Brooklyn office a list of names of its 
members desiring one coin each; thus each class may be 
served at one sending— saving trouble and expense. 
These souvenirs will be sent free, postpaid. 

With deep gratitude to God for the privileges and 
lessons connected with this world-tour of Mission Investigation, 
we conclude our Report with a Categorical Summary, 
which notes the questions given us for our guidance, 
and our answers thereto following each. 

THE CATEGORICAL SUMMARY 

I.— "Are Foreign Missions conducted along Christian 
business lines?" 

Ans.— As these terms are generally understood, Yes. 

II.— "To what extent are the methods used successful 
in reaching the heathen peoples, and in bringing them to 
Christianity?" 

Ans.— The success attained by Missionaries is small. 
We found Oriental Christians about as sincere, intelligent 
and earnest as the average of 
church attendants in America and Europe; 
and, as there, a very few who gave evidence 
of being consecrated to God and 
His service. 

But, viewing the question from the 
standpoint of the present and future, 
rather than the past, our Report is different. 
The present methods cannot be 
called successful, because Christianizing 
endeavors seem pretty generally to have 
ceased! Present missionary endeavors 



are almost exclusively along the lines of 
secular education. Although this is not 
Christianizing work, it is, of course, a 
good work, for the poor Orientals surely 
need education. 

R5015 :page 136 

In your Committee's opinion, however, 
there is less need for Academic and 
Collegiate education, such as the Missionaries 
forward, than for Common 

Schooling. The Oriental, after obtaining higher education, 
is spoiled for the common affairs of life about him, 
and aspires only to teaching, clerkship and office holding, 
which are over-supplied. Unable to get such employment, 
he is in trouble. He will not dig, and to beg he is ashamed. 
But the general Common School education, your Committee 
believes, could best be done by the Government, 
and along unsectarian lines, after the method followed 
by the United States of America in its supervision of the 
Philippine Islands. Christians, of course, would be the 
best for teachers. 

III.— "What are the teachings, and what are the inducements 
to accept Christianity, and how enduring are 
the results?" 

Answer.— There are evidences of positive teachings in 
the past, but there is very little religious teaching now being 
done, because the people would resent it, and keep 
their children from the schools. We heard of instances 
where a small coin per day was given to each child attending 
school; but, aside from the schooling, the inducements 
offered by the Missionaries are chiefly social and 
medical. 

Of late the natives are more and more averse to a 
public avowal of Christianity, because with increasing 
intelligence come doubts. The tendency of the times in 
the Orient, as in the Occident, is toward unbelief in any 
religion. If a Missionary falls from faith in the Bible 
into "Higher-Criticism-Infidelity," he may continue his 
office and profession. But the Orientals have no such inducements 
to outwardly profess what they no longer believe 
(except native teachers). Besides, these Orientals 
are very honest in respect to their religious professions, 
except where spoiled by contact with the hypocrisy of the 
whites. 

IV.— "What is the attitude of heathendom toward the 
Missionaries, and toward Christianity, and what is the 
prospect of Foreign Missions becoming self-supporting?" 

Answer.— The Orientals are remarkably tolerant of all 
religions, but are often perplexed at the Missionary competition 
and opposition of Christian denominations. The 
higher castes consider the medley of Christian doctrines 
presented to them less philosophical than their own. Their 
own, however, is not satisfactory, they confess. But before 
exchanging for another they want to know that the 



change will be for the better. The common conception, 

that all the peoples of India, China and Japan are heathen 

savages, is very erroneous. Their upper classes, or castes, 

include some splendid characters of truly noble manhood, 

the moral and intellectual peers of Europeans and Americans. 

Indeed, the masses of these people are less vicious, 

less rude, more kind and considerate than are the masses 

of Europe and America. Drunkenness and outward immodesty 

are almost entirely unknown amongst the 

Orientals. 

Many of the congregations of Christians in Japan, 
China and India are self-sustaining. And in such cases 
the Orientals prefer to take over the full control of all 
services, rather than to have the Missionaries take any 
part. The native ministers come closer to the people than 
it is possible for the whites to do. Habits and customs of 
life make it almost impossible for Missionaries to live in 
the very simple style of the Orientals, and it would not be 
reasonable to require it. 

V.— "What, if any, change should be made in the 
teachings and financial administration to make the Foreign 
Mission work more successful?" 

Answer.— The great change necessary to make Missionary 
work more successful is for the Missionaries to 
have and to impart to the people a more logical Gospel. 
To preach to the millions of the Orient that God foreordained 
them to ignorance of the true religion, and condemned 
all the generations of their forefathers, on account 

R5015 :page 137 

of that ignorance, to an eternity of torture is not 
logical, not loving, not just— not Gospel at all, when we 
remember that the word Gospel means "good-tidings of 
great joy which shall be to all people." The Missions 
would be much more successful in reaching the hearts of 
those they would serve if they presented the Gospel of 
God's loving provision of Messiah's coming Kingdom. 

Although the doctrine of the Trinity corresponds considerably 
with the teachings of the Hindu religion, it is, 
nevertheless, difficult for those of other religions to fully 
accept it. They cannot understand the matter of three 
Gods in one person, as some put it; or three persons in one 
God, as others put it. There is a simplicity and honesty 
about these people that is commendable, and which refuses 
to confess that which they do not understand. The 
message of Messiah's coming Kingdom, in which God's 
will shall be done on earth, even as it is done in heaven, 
would, we believe, appeal to large and increasing numbers 
of Orientals. 

VI.— "What hope is there for the conversion of the 
world during the present generation, through the Laymen's 
Foreign Missionary Movement, with their proposed 
thirty million dollars?" 

Answer.— No one who knows anything of Oriental 
conditions would have the least expectation of the world's 



conversion during this present generation through the use 
of the thirty million dollars proposed. Nor, indeed, if 
the sum were a thousand times that. We would not, however, 
discourage the giving of money for Missions. Those 
who give will be benefited by so doing, and undoubtedly 
every million spent benevolently in Oriental lands will 
help to bring in the more extravagant civilization of the 
West. It will increase the wants of the natives, and thus 
promote commerce. As for promoting vital Christianity, 
we all know that this is not a purchasable commodity. 

As to whether the Western civilization will really 
advantage the East is a question. The Orientals, economical 
and industrious, are also contented, which is more 
than can be said of their more favored brethren of the 
West. Nor can we claim that our Western civilization 
would make them more honest and more truthful. 

The very suggestion of the conversion of the world 
is ridiculous to the peoples of the East— including the 
Missionaries. One Methodist minister frankly said, "I 
had to come here and see for myself, before I dropped the 
idea of the world's conversion, and the twin idea that all 
the unconverted would suffer endless torture." 

VII.— "To what extent do the monies donated benefit 
the heathen, and could any improvement along this line 
be suggested?" 

Answer.— Our judgment is that that portion of money 
contributed to Foreign Missions, which reaches heathen 
lands, is wisely enough used for its intended purposes. 
Whatever waste there is would seem rather to be in the 
machinery of collections. One collector for such benevolent 
institutions told us that he was allowed, as his salary, 
one-half of all that he collected. We know not to what 
extent this principle obtains with other Societies. Each 
Society owes to itself to institute a very thorough investigation 
into its own affairs, and to ascertain what proportion 
of the funds received is ever forwarded to the 
Missionaries. 

Nothing in these remarks applies in any degree to the 
Association under whose auspices this Committee went 
forth. It is well known by us all that the International 
Bible Students Assn. is conducted along most economical 
lines, and that all services in the home office are gratuitous. 

We know nothing to suggest, except that the true 
Gospel of salvation be preached— the Gospel of the Kingdom 
of Messiah. Wherever Pastor Russell preached the 
soon coming of Messiah's Kingdom to "Bless all the families 
of the earth," all classes heard with keen interest. 
He quotes Scriptures relating to the coming "Golden 
Age," the lifting of the veil of ignorance and manifesting 
God's love to all men, including those now sleeping in 
death. It seemed good to Mohammedans, Hindus, Buddhists, 
Confucians— all. Many desired him to stay longer, 
but his time was limited; instead he promised them literature, 
for which they eagerly handed in their addresses. 

Your Committee found no time in which to visit Burmah, 
Africa and Australasia, and suggest that it might be 



wise to send another Committee to investigate those fields. 

In harmony with your suggestions, Pastor Russell arranged 
for the publication of free literature in the six 
principal languages of India, viz.: Hindustani, Guiarati, 
Malayami, Tulugu, Marotti and Tamil. This work is 
already under way, as is also a similar work of the Chinese 
and Japanese. The entire cost of producing three 
million copies, and circulating them through willing natives, 
will, he believes, be kept within the seven thousand 
dollars authorized by the Association. 

In conclusion, your Committee assure you that they 
have done their very best to accomplish the purpose of 
their appointment. They thank the Lord, and also the 
Association, for the great privileges enjoyed in connection 
with the service. 

C. T. RUSSELL, Pres. Adj.-Gen'l W. P. HALL 

F. H. ROBISON, Sec'y J. T. D. PYLES 

E. W. V. KUEHN R.B.MAXWELL 

DR. LESLIE W. JONES 



R5016 :page 137 

THE COMMITTEE HOMEWARD BOUND 

Leaving India the Committee journeyed via Suez, 
stopping two days at Cairo. A visit was made to the Great 
Pyramid, whose wonderful Passages tell by their construction 
so much of the Divine Plan that it has been called 
the Stone Bible. We need not here give space to an explanation 
of the meaning of the passages and their wonderful 
lessons, so in harmony with the prophecies of the Bible, 
because the majority of our readers already have this as 
one of the Chapters in the Third Volume of the STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES. We do, however, urge all to a fresh 
reading of this testimony, so helpful to faith. 

On the second day an excursion was made to the ruins 
of Memphis, the ancient Capital of Egypt in Joseph's time, 
when he was next to Pharaoh in authority. Many of 
the scenes brought freshly to mind the Scripture narrative 
respecting Joseph, and later on respecting the finding of 
Moses in the rushes of the Nile. The land of Goshen, 
where the Israelites spent two centuries, and from which 
they were miraculously delivered, the place of their possible 
crossing the Red Sea, the wells of Moses, and the 
bitter waters of Marah on the opposite shore, were noticed. 

ATHENS AND MARS HILL 

Next we visited Athens, made famous through the 
visit of St. Paul eighteen centuries ago. There we visited 
the Stadium, where Socrates and other orators of ancient 
Greece held large audiences by their eloquence. We 
thought, too, of the fickleness of public applause, as we 
viewed the ancient prison in which he died. Other items 



of interest at Athens were the wonderful Temple and the 
great Amphitheatre, with a seating capacity of forty thousand, 
recently remodeled after its original style, in marble. 

R5016 :page 138 

But the ruins of the greatness of ancient Greece, grand 
as they were, led our minds still more particularly to the 
great Apostle St. Paul. We considered that his monuments 
in the New Testament writings are more eloquent 
a thousand times than all the achievements of all the 
philosophers, poets and artists of the whole period of 
Greece's fame. We climbed to Mars Hill, traversing quite 
probably the same steps, cut in the natural rocks, by which 
the Apostle ascended and descended. We went to a platform 
in the rocks above, and near to the old market house 
mentioned in the Scriptures, and surmised that St. Paul 
spoke to the people from that very spot. Our little company 
while on Mars Hill engaged in a short service of 
praise and prayer, and Pastor Russell gave a little sermonette 
re the Gospel which St. Paul preached— Jesus 
and the Resurrection— Jesus, the Redeemer and Savior; 
the Resurrection, the method by which a Divine blessing 
will come through Jesus to all the families of the earth. 

We noted that as the doctrine of the Resurrection was 
scoffed at by the ancient Greeks, so the worldly-wise of 
today are still inclined to stumble over it and to mock and 
say, "We will hear thee again of this matter— enough for 
the present." 

Two public meetings were held in one of the principal 
auditoriums of Athens, addressed by Pastor Russell. On 
both occasions many were turned away, while others were 
obliged to stand. Many heard the Gospel of the Two 
Salvations for the first time:— 

(1) The present call and development of the "elect," 
the consummation of whose hope will be in the glorious 
change of the First Resurrection. 

(2) The Restitution blessing then to be brought to 

the world in general with full opportunity for all the willing 
and obedient to return to human perfection and a 
world-wide Eden and everlasting life— rejectors being destroyed 
in the Second Death. 

Our experiences at Corinth were interesting. We were 
shown the ruins of ancient Corinth, which have recently 
been uncovered. We walked about some of the very market 
places and fountains visited by St. Paul, and probably 
upon the very stones. St. Paul's Cathedral, a fine, modern 
structure, is the City's memorial to the great Apostle. The 
Cathedral is Greek Catholic— or rather Greek Christian, 
for so the natives prefer to speak of themselves. 

Here, at the request of the Mayor and the Ecclesiastics, 
Pastor Russell gave two addresses of about an hour and 
a half each. They were well received. The reasonableness 
of the presentations and deductions and the harmony 
of the same with the Bible seemed to be the general comment 
of the people, many of whom seemed hungry for a 



clearer knowledge of God's Word and a surer foundation 
for their faith. Here as well as at Athens many addresses 
were handed in with requests for reading matter. 
Brief stops were made at two places in France, 
where several semi-private conferences were held with 
Bible Students. The following Sunday brought us to 
London, where a most interesting and profitable week was 
spent. Pastor Russell delivered eight addresses in London 
and nearby— four of these were in the London Tabernacle. 



R5016 :page 138 

NEW YORK HIPPODROME MASS MEETING 
TO HEAR I.B.S.A. COMMITTEE'S REPORT ON MISSIONS 

Less than a week brought us safely across the Atlantic 
on the Cunarder "Mauretania." Here we received a most 
hearty welcome, which culminated on Sunday in a mass 
meeting of Christian people at the New York Hippodrome. 

The Hippodrome, with a seating capacity of fifty-two 
hundred, had been secured for the Committee's report on 
March 31,3 p.m. Crowds were at the entrances waiting 
for admission at 1:30 o'clock. Before 3 o'clock every seat 
was taken, and subsequently hundreds were turned away 
disappointed. No better evidence than this of the interest 
of the public and of Bible Students of all denominations 
could be asked. 

The crowds entering beheld with bated breath the entire 
platform, or stage, over a hundred feet wide, banked 
with beautiful floral evergreen plants, etc., etc. We 
learned afterwards that it required eighteen men to unwrap 
and place these floral tributes— from 4 a.m. until 
noon. The decoration was a master-work, both as respects 
the materials and their arrangement. It was declared 
the most beautiful floral display of the kind ever 
seen in the American Metropolis. The Chairman, referring 
to the flowers, remarked that they had come from 
Bible Students of twenty-one different States of the Union 
addressed to the Pastor and with greetings to himself 
and to the Committee. The central feature of the display 
was a large Cross of red carnations circled by a crown of 
yellow daffodils and surrounded by a circular wreath-work 
of dark green leaves in which were scattered beautiful 
white lilies. 

The Hon. J. F. Rutherford of the New York Bar 
served as Chairman. He introduced Prof. F. H. Robison, 
who read to the audience the categorical Summary which 
constitutes the conclusion of their Report, explaining that 
the full Report would be printed, as we here have it. 

Pastor Russell followed with a discourse from the text, 
"Ask of Me and I will give Thee the heathen for Thine 
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy 
possession." (Psa. 2:8.) It will be unnecessary for us 



to give a synopsis of this, as Bible Students in all parts 
of England and America have already had opportunity to 
read it in the more than one thousand newspapers which 
publish the Pastor's sermons every week. 



page 138 

ORDER COUPON 

For Pastor Russell's Studies in the Scriptures 

Advertised on Back Cover 

Bible and Tract Society, London W., or Brooklyn, N.Y. 

Sirs:— Please send me (all charges fully prepaid) for the 
enclosed $2.00 (or $2.65 with THE WATCH TOWER) the complete 
set of Pastor Russell's six volumes of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES. It is expressly agreed that if, after reading the 
first volume, I desire to return the set, charges prepaid, my 
money will be promptly refunded. 

Date 



Name St. and No.. 



P.O. State, Prov. or Country _ 



ORDER COUPON 

For International Bible Students Association Bible 

Illustrated inside Back Cover 

Bible and Tract Society, London W., or Brooklyn, N.Y. 
Sirs:— Please send me (all charges fully prepaid) for the enclosed 

$ , your International Bible Students Association 

Bible No. 1918 at $1.65, or No. 1919 at $1.75, or No. 1928 at 
$2.65, or No. 1939 at $1.95, or No. 1959 at $3.65. 

Name St. and No. 



P.O. State, Prov. or Shire_ 

Date Country 



page 139 



Inside back cover colored picture of our Lord and his disciples in wheat field. 

page 140 

Colored picture of six volumes (Three-fifths actual size) 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

THE DIVINE PLAN THE NEW CREATION 
THE TIME IS AT HAND THE ATONEMENT 
THY KINGDOM COME THE DAY OF VENGEANCE 



VERITABLE BIBLE KEYS 

ONE OF THE WORLD'S GREATEST OBSERVERS AND CRITICS ONCE SAID: 

There is one thing which constitutes an effectual barrier against all 
progress; which holds out a restraining 

hand against the onward march of all attainment; which damps the glow of study 
and research; which 

blocks the channel to an endless succession of happinesses; and that thing is— 
"CONDEMNATION WITHOUT INVESTIGATION" 



The full set of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES as above pictured (six volumes, over 

3000 pages), all packing and carriage charges prepaid to 

any part of the world, for the small sum of $2.00 (8 s.), the usual price of one 

such volume. Address, BIBLE AND TRACTS SOCIETY, 

LANCASTER GATE, LONDON, E., ENGLAND; 13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A.; or 

312 FLINDERS ST., MELBOURNE, VIC, AUSTRALIA. 

Or to secure above set of Studies and the religious journal which Pastor 
Russell edits, The Watch Tower, 16 pages 

twice a month for one year, send $2.65 (11 s.). See Order Slip bottom of 
preceding leaf. 



These valuable books may be ordered at the same prices in any of the following 
languages, viz: German, French, Swedish, 

Dano-Norwegian, Greek, Polish, Arabic, Hungarian, Hollandish, Spanish, Italian 
or Finnish. 



page 141 


