Acting With Insight During Our Spiritual Harvest
1 Under the direction of Jesus and in cooperation with his angelic reapers, a great spiritual harvest is now taking place in the earth. Just as in ancient Israel, Jehovah has outlined specific requirements governing both the work and the workers in this modern harvesttime. What a privilege we have to share wholeheartedly in this Kingdom ingathering! Appreciation for our blessed opportunities should move us to work with diligence and insight, intensely occupying ourselves with the witnessing work.​—Prov. 10:4, 5; Acts 18:4, 5.
“BE AGLOW WITH THE SPIRIT”
2 This great modern-day harvest requires energetic, spirited activity. (See Romans 12:11, Kingdom Interlinear.) We act with insight when we imitate faithful early Christians who had a regular, zealous share in the ministry. Like them, we recognize the importance of engaging faithfully in the holy work of preaching the good news, since this present-day activity is a chief reason for the very formation of the Christian congregation. (Matt. 24:14) Our love for Jehovah and heartfelt obedience to our preaching commission move us to put Kingdom interests first. We eagerly follow the inspired advice given to God’s ministers in Hezekiah’s time: “Do not give yourselves up to rest.”​—2 Chron. 29:11.
3 As we continue to discern the meaning of this harvesttime, we want to participate regularly in making known “the things having to do with peace.” (Luke 19:42, 44; Acts 5:42) Could you arrange to share regularly in all features of the ministry? Rich blessings from Jehovah await all whose circumstances allow them to do so. We are refreshed by personal experiences in the ministry, and our “acting with insight” becomes a wholesome influence on the spiritual health of the congregation as we set an example to be imitated by others.
PIONEER SPIRIT ON THE INCREASE
4 How heartwarming to observe that each year thousands of our brothers ‘perceive the will of Jehovah’ to include their accepting the opportunities and challenges of the full-time ministry! (Eph. 5:17) Last year during the month of August, a peak of 2,727 new regular pioneer applications were approved in this country. How we rejoiced then to have nearly 28,000 regular pioneers at the start of the new service year! Are you in position to reach out for such service privileges?
5 If you have finished high school this year, what is holding you back from pioneering? As a family group, could arrangements be made for one or more of your family members to pioneer? Some have found it possible to cut back on secular work in order to pioneer for at least a year. Have you seriously considered this possibility? Whatever your circumstances may be, pray to Jehovah about expanding your ministry as you seek to act with insight in demonstrating the pioneer spirit.
6 May we all continue “to have a heart for working,” keeping busy in Jehovah’s service. (Neh. 4:6; 1 Cor. 15:58) Our acting unitedly with insight will result in dewlike refreshment and great joy.

