Announcements
● Literature offer for August and September: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth or My Book of Bible Stories, for a contribution of $2.50. October: Subscription for either The Watchtower or Awake! for $4.00 each for a one-year subscription; six-month subscription, $2.00. November: Survival Into a New Earth, for a contribution of $1.00.
● Each congregation will receive three Literature Inventory forms, and an actual count should be taken of all campaign literature in stock and of all controlled stock items listed on the inventory form. Please fill out the forms completely and send the original to the Society no later than September 6. Keep a carbon copy for your files. The third form is to be used as a work sheet.
● During the week of September 3-8, 1984, the Society will be taking an inventory of all literature on hand in Brooklyn. Due to taking this inventory, no congregation literature orders will be processed for shipment or for pickup during that week.
● The secretary and service overseer should complete the Congregation Analysis Report form (S-10) and send this to the Society as soon as the congregation’s August report has been compiled. Double-check all information for accuracy, carefully following the instructions on the form. Keep a duplicate in the congregation file.
● Starting in September, circuit overseers will give the public talk “Restoration of Harmony to the Earth.” The public talk to be given by district overseers in connection with the new series of circuit assemblies beginning in September will be “War at Armageddon​—Is It Near? What Will It Mean?”
● 1985 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses: Publishers and pioneers, please order your calendars through your congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these calendars now. Then on September 1, 1984, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society, using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). Calendars in other languages should be listed under “Other Language Publications,” showing the quantity for each language separately as well as the year 1985. The calendars will be available in English, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish and Swedish.
Calendars are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at $1.00 each, which is the rate for publishers, pioneers and the public. Do not send the remittance with the order. (See the Cost List, pars. 22-4.) Until the calendars are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices.
The 1985 calendar features six full-color photographs depicting the preaching activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses in several different lands.
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The Good News According to John (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Czech, Slovak

