Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JULY 29
Song 10
 5 min: Announcements in Our Kingdom Ministry. Also local announcements.
22 min: “Do Not Let Your Hand Relax.” Question-and-answer discussion. Make local application of material so that those in attendance will appreciate potential in congregation for increased activity, which will result in more home Bible studies. Read paragraphs and selected scriptures.
18 min: Topic for Conversation. Discuss and demonstrate. Why is this question so appropriate now? Read and discuss each scripture, stressing each teaching point. Have two well-prepared and experienced publishers make model presentations, using suggested scriptures. One publisher to offer the Live Forever book, showing illustration on pages 12 and 13, then reading to householder paragraph 15 on page 14. Simplicity of starting a Bible study in the book can be commented on. Thereafter, the other publisher, using the same Scriptural presentation, will offer the Bible Stories book, directing the householder’s interest to story 115. Help all to appreciate simplicity of such presentations. As time permits, get comments from brothers about success they have had in using these books to start studies. Encourage all to learn Scriptural presentation and to share in house-to-house ministry first Sunday of month, August 5.
Song 23 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 5
Song 151
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly review articles in August 8 Awake! Direct attention to paragraph under “Feature Articles” on page 2. Have prepared publisher make the following model presentation, featuring August 8 Awake! After appropriate introduction, publisher asks householder: “What do you think of the Olympic Games? Are the high ideals of sportsmanship important, or are these on the way out?” Allow householder to reply. Publisher continues by saying: “Notice here on page 2 of Awake! what it says about the matter.” Publisher shows page 2 to householder and reads or discusses paragraph under heading “Feature Articles.” Publisher concludes by saying: “I am sure that you will find these articles very interesting. These issues of Awake! and The Watchtower are yours for a contribution of 30 cents.” Encourage brothers to make brief presentations of the magazines and to share in this service Saturday.
20 min: “Acting With Insight During Our Spiritual Harvest.” Question-and-answer coverage. Read paragraphs and look up scriptures as time permits.
15 min: “Keep Your Balance​—How?” (w84 5/15 pp. 8-11) Talk by elder.
Song 210 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 12
Song 106
 7 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
20 min: “Good Manners in Field Service Honor God.” Question-and-answer discussion. Have paragraphs 3-6 read. When considering paragraph 3, have brothers relate experiences about favorable impression left because of good manners displayed in field service.
18 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. Talk and discussion of material in chapter 13, pages 153-61. Also review Memorial report stressing need to continue helping new ones.
Song 213 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 19
Song 117
10 min: Local announcements. “Making Your Family Life Happy.” Talk and discussion of article highlighting current need and value of this information. Encourage all to give full support to Congregation Book Study arrangement and to invite interested ones to attend regularly.
20 min: “Are You Trustworthy?” (w84 4/1 pp. 26-9) Talk and discussion by elder.
15 min: Prepare locally according to needs. This time may be used to interview publishers in the congregation on how they got the truth. Have them especially comment on their appreciation for the Congregation Book Study, what they have learned, how it has helped them and their children.
Song 214 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 26
Song 183
10 min: Local announcements. “Circuit Assemblies​—Practical Counsel.” Enthusiastic talk.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In School.” Question-and-answer discussion. Warmly encourage youths to uphold the truth fearlessly and respectfully, and to share their hope with classmates and teachers. When paragraph 7 is considered, get comments from parents on how they have presented the School brochure to teachers, what the results have been, and so forth. With new term starting, many students will have new teachers, classmates and others who may know nothing about Jehovah’s Witnesses. This means additional opportunities to place the School brochure and provide a witness.
15 min: “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Make Kids Stop Picking on Me?” (g84 2/22 pp. 21-3) Talk and discussion based on article. May also include exemplary youth in discussion. Highlight how a faithful stand in defending the truth serves as a protection for one and gives a witness. Courageously living the truth brings blessings and support from Jehovah and the congregation. Encourage all to share in field service first Sunday of month.
Song 125 and concluding prayer.

