Presenting the Good News​—In School
1 As September approaches, millions of young people will be returning to school. There the students will spend much time each school day, gaining knowledge and skills that will help them later on as adults. However, these young people may also be subjected to unscriptural philosophies, empty theories and views condoning or promoting loose morals. They will be called upon to make important decisions about their future without being given any spiritual guidance. While this large territory is almost completely off limits to adults, there are many young publishers who also attend school and are able to share the good news with honesthearted ones.
WAYS TO WITNESS IN SCHOOL
2 While in school, some young Witnesses have found it effective to have the Live Forever book or the Bible Stories book with them. One young brother leaves one of these books right on top of his desk. When classmates ask about the book, it opens the way for a discussion. Thus, a good witness is given to students and teachers, and he has even started several Bible studies.
3 Another young Witness takes advantage of opportunities during the lunch hour to speak to different students about the Kingdom. She says she finds it very easy to open the conversation by talking about something currently being discussed in one of their classes. Then she directs attention to an article on a similar subject in one of the recent Awake! magazines. This young sister has also been able to make return visits and start Bible studies right at school.
4 Young Witnesses may also have opportunities to present the good news in connection with class reports or projects. In one classroom the students were assigned to present scientific information in proof of evolution. A young brother approached the teacher after class and asked if he could present scientific material supporting creation. The teacher agreed. The result was an outstanding oral report by the brother, which was applauded by his classmates. The teacher was so impressed that he arranged for the report to be presented to other classes.
5 In a number of cases arrangements have been made for qualified elders to speak to groups of students in school. They have explained more about our teachings and activities and have even shown a set of the Society’s slides. Not only students but teachers and school officials have benefited.
YOUR CONDUCT AS A WITNESS
6 Young ones also do well to reflect upon the effect their personal conduct has on the truth, either in recommending the good news or detracting from it. A number of teachers have come to a knowledge of the truth as a result of the good conduct of Witness children in school. Contrastingly, the attitude and behavior of worldly students is often disrespectful. They are lazy, careless about their work and disobedient in class. They often get into serious trouble. Onlookers usually do not point critically to their religion. But what happens when the student is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? Because of the high standards that we uphold and that the organization is known for, we must always be careful to maintain right conduct. May our conduct always be in harmony with Jehovah’s regulations and thus bring him honor.​—Ps. 119:9.
7 Parents can play an important part in getting the cooperation of teachers. One sister was reluctant to approach her daughter’s new teacher because of a report that the teacher was uncooperative and difficult to deal with. Finally the sister approached the teacher in a tactful and kind way and pointed out her desire to cooperate with him in his difficult job. The sister concluded by offering the teacher the brochure School and Jehovah’s Witnesses. The teacher accepted the brochure and later said that he read it from beginning to end. During that school year his attitude toward the Witness youth demonstrated that he appreciated what he had read in the brochure.
8 If you are a young Witness returning to school and it is your earnest desire to help your honesthearted classmates, speak up about the good news and be assured of Jehovah’s pleasure and blessing.​—Ps. 148:12, 13.

