VOL. XXVI. AUGUST 1, 1905. No. 15 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 227 

Union of Churches 227 

Seventeen Million Church Members to 
Federate 227 

The Newer Unrighteousness 228 

Luther's Suppressed Utterance 229 

The New Christianity 229 

Berean Bible Study for August (Brotherly Love).. ..230 

"Full of Mercy and Good Fruits" 230 

The Great Company in the Court 232 

"Lord, Choose My Cross for Me" (Poem) 235 

A Good Son of a Bad Father 235 

"Thy Word Was Found, I Ate It." 237 

Thanks Be to God for Deliverance 239 

page 226 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



NEW MOTTOES AND OLD FAVORITES 



We have just received a large line of new Mottoes, of designs 
never before shown, and also duplicates of some of the 
best patterns of former lots. 

The prices on these are gauged so as to cover cost, customs 
duty, packing and postage, and no more. We again have 
arranged them in assorted $ 1 .00 packages, marked: 

Am, for packages containing some old styles, which some 
may have had before. 

(Bm, for packages all strictly new and different, medium 
sizes. 

Cm, packages new mottoes, chiefly medium and large. 

Dm, packages of large new mottoes. 

Those who want $3.00 worth or $5.00 worth can thus select 
several packages. If no designation is made we send the Am 
assortment. 

We have some 25c and 50c packages also— all of the smaller 
sizes, so as to afford variety. They are all choice mottoes and 
beautiful. They should be on the walls of all Christian homes 
—if possible in every room. They exercise a quiet but powerful 
influence for good. 

The variety is too great to catalogue satisfactorily. The 
prices range from lc each up to 25c and are about one-half the 
usual retail rates. 

We can supply German mottoes also, though the delivery 
will be slower, as we order them sent direct from our German 
branch. 

Our British friends can order mottoes best from our London 
office— saving customs duty, freight, etc. Our mottoes 
all come from London. 



R3601 : page 227 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
UNION OF CHURCHES 



A MOVE toward the formation of a federation of 
the Protestant Churches of Cleveland, O., was 
taken yesterday morning at the Ministers' 
union meeting. 

A paper was read by Dr. Paul F. Sutphen of the 
Second Presbyterian Church, in which he presented an 
argument in behalf of unity among the churches on the 
basis of a federation similar to the relationship between 
the United States government and the States, the denominations 
to retain their names, but be members of a 



federation. Dr. Sutphen said that he thought the time 
was now ripe for the organization of such a federation. 

The paper was followed by a discussion. The views 
expressed by Dr. Sutphen met with approval and the 
ministers selected a committee of five, of which Dr. Sutphen 
is chairman, to look over the situation in Cleveland 
and ascertain whether or not an organization can 
be formed. 

The movement in Cleveland is similar to the movement 
which has been started to form an organization 
including all the Protestant denominations in the United 
States. At a meeting in New York next November delegates 
will meet to discuss the situation. It is expected 
that there will be 600 to 700 delegates at the 
meeting, over which President Roosevelt has been invited 
to preside.— Cleveland Plaindealer. 



This is precisely what we suggested as the probable 
outcome of the "Union" movement,— a federation on 
the plan of the union of the several States in the United 
States of America. Denominations of kindred creeds 
and spirit may indeed unite absolutely, but federation 
alone will bring opposing creeds into accord. This is 
really a revival of "The Evangelical Alliance," but it 
will include the Episcopal Church and thus get the "life" 
mentioned by the Revelator. (Rev. 13:15). The proposal 
to have the chief executive of the nation preside 
at the meeting for proposed federation is significant of 
the close political alliance which will result. 

SEVENTEEN MILLION CHURCH MEMBERS TO FEDERATE 



We clip the following from the North American:— 

Long strides have been taken towards the practical 
federation of the Protestant churches of the United 
States. Fourteen denominations have already agreed 
to participate in the great conference to be held in New 
York city during November of this year. It is understood 
that the synods of the Lutheran Church will vote 
to participate, and the Protestant Episcopal Church, 
through its Committee on Unity, will do likewise. 

If these two denominations' assent, seventeen millions 
of communicants will be represented. It will be 
the first time in the history of Christianity since the 
Reformation that such a unity has been realized. 

There will be no union along the lines of rules of 
faith or church organization, but there will be consolidation 
of effort in all the matters pertaining to the broad 
moral and national questions upon which all sects can 
meet on a common basis. 

It will be a great church "trust," in fact, if not in 
name. The leaders of the movement prefer to say they 



are adopting the national spirit; forming a union of denominations 
similar to the union of the States. But the 
spirit of consolidation of energy is predominant. 

One of them said yesterday: 

"In many of the general charities, and in scores of 
other ways, we are dividing our energies; we are accomplishing 
a minimum of good with a maximum of energy. 
It is clear that by such a federation as is proposed we 
can reverse the proposition." 

An eminent clergyman, who has done more, perhaps, 
than any other person to bring this church unity, for 
which all sects and denominations have so earnestly 
prayed, yesterday gave the following statement to The 
North American: 

About a year ago a number of gentlemen representing 
different churches, officially connected with 
movements for Christian union and co-operation, met 
in the City of New York and decided to undertake a 
movement whose purpose should be the bringing together 
of regularly appointed representatives of the 
American Christian and Protestant churches, with a 
view to considering their common interests in connection 

R3602 : page 228 

with the moral and religious welfare of the American 
nation. 

A committee was constituted, with the Rev. Dr. 
W. H. Roberts, of Philadelphia, as chairman and the 
Rev. Dr. E. P. Sanford as secretary. 

Dr. Sanford has been for years the secretary of a 
voluntary organization, with headquarters in New York 
city, known as the National Federation of Christian 
Workers, and Dr. Roberts is the stated clerk of the 
Presbyterian General Assembly and American secretary 
of the Pan-Presbyterian Alliance. 

THE NEWER UNRIGHTEOUSNESS 



"Our forced-draft pace relieves us of the super-abundance 
of energy that demands an explosive outlet. 
Spasms of violent feeling go with a sluggish habit of 
life, and are as out of place today as are the hard-drinking 
habits of our Saxon ancestors. We are too 
busy to give rein to spite. The stresses and lures of 
civilized life leave slender margin for the gratification 
of animosities. In quiet, side-tracked communities 
there is still much old-fashioned hatred, leading to personal 
clash; but elsewhere the cherishing of malice is 
felt to be an expensive luxury. Moreover, brutality, 
lust, and cruelty are on the wane. In this country, it 
is true, statistics show a widening torrent of bloody 
crime, but the cause is the weakening of law rather than 
an excess of bile. Other civilized peoples seem to be 



turning away from the sins of passion. 

"The man who picks pockets with a railway rebate, 
murders with an adulterant instead of a bludgeon, 
burglarizes with a 'rake-off instead of a jimmy, cheats 
with a company prospectus instead of a deck of cards, 
or scuttles his town instead of his ship, does not feel 
on his brow the brand of a malefactor. The shedder of 
blood, the oppressor of the widow and the fatherless, 
long ago became odious; but latter-day treacheries fly 
no skull-and-crossbones flag at the masthead.... 

"How decent are the pale slayings of the quack, 
the adulterator, and the purveyor of polluted water, 
compared with the red slayings of the vulgar bandit or 
assassin! Even if there is blood-letting, the long-range, 
tentacular nature of modern homicide eliminates 
all personal collision. What an abyss between the knife-play 
of brawlers and the law-defying neglect to fence 
dangerous machinery in a mill, or to furnish cars with 
safety couplers!... 

"The stealings and slayings that lurk in the complexities 
of our social relations are not deeds of the dive, 
the dark alley, the lonely road, and the midnight hour. 
They require no nocturnal prowling with muffled step 
and bated breath, no weapon or offer of violence. Unlike 
the old-time villain, the latter-day malefactor does 
not wear a slouch hat and a comforter, breathe forth 
curses and an odor of gin, go about his nefarious work 
with clenched teeth and an evil scowl. In the supreme 
moment his lineaments are not distorted with rage, or 
lust, or malevolence. One misses the traditional setting, 
the time-honored insignia of turpitude. Fagin and 
Bill Sykes and Simon Legree are vanishing types.... 
The modern high-power dealer of woe wears immaculate 
linen, carries a silk hat and a lighted cigar, sins with a 
calm countenance and a serene soul, leagues or months 
from the evil he causes. Upon his gentlemanly presence 
the eventual blood and tears do not obtrude themselves." 

"The same qualities that lull the conscience of the 
sinner blind the eyes of the onlookers. People are sentimental, 
and bastinado wrongdoing not according to 
its harmfulness, but according to the infamy that has 
come to attach to it. Undiscerning, they chastise with 
scorpions the old authentic sins, but spare the new. 
They do not see that boodling is treason, that blackmail 
is piracy, that embezzlement is theft, that speculation 
is gambling, that tax-dodging is larceny, that railroad 
discrimination is treachery, that the factory labor of 
children is slavery, that deleterious adulteration is 
murder. It has not come home to them that the fraudulent 
promoter 'devours widows' houses,' that the monopolist 
'grinds the faces of the poor,' that mercenary 
editors and spellbinders 'put bitter for sweet and sweet 
for bitter.' The cloven hoof hides in patent leather; 
and to-day, as in Hosea's time, the people 'are destroyed 
for lack of knowledge.' The mob lynches the redhanded 
slayer, when it ought to keep a gallows Haman-high for 



the venal mine inspector, the seller of infected milk, 
the maintainer of a fire-trap theater. The child-beater 
is forever blasted in reputation, but the exploiter of 
infant toil, or the concocter of a soothing syrup for the 
drugging of babies, stands a pillar of society. The petty 
shoplifter is more abhorred than the stealer of a franchise, 
and the wife-whipper is outcasted long before the 
man who sends his over-insured ship to founder with 
its crew."— Atlantic Monthly. 

LUTHER'S SUPPRESSED UTTERANCE. 



A Council of the Lateran, held A.D. 1513, under 
Pope Leo X., pronounced the immortality of the soul 
to be an orthodox article of Christian faith. The following 
is a translation of the rule which was adopted 
by this council, as given by Caranza, p. 412, 1681. 

"Whereas, some have dared to assert concerning 
the nature of the reasonable soul, that it is mortal; we, 
with the approbation of the Sacred Council, do condemn 
and reprobate all those who assert that the intellectual 
soul is mortal, seeing that the soul is not only truly and 
of itself and essentially the form of the human body, as 
is expressed in the canon of Pope Clement the Fifth, 
but likewise immortal; and we strictly inhibit all from dogmatizing 
otherwise, and we decree that all who adhere 
to the like erroneous assertions shall be shunned and 
punished as heretics." 

Martin Luther visited Rome during the reign of 
Leo X., and the profligacy, corruption and licentiousness 
that he witnessed at the Papal court destroyed forever 
his former reverence for the sacred authority of 
Popes and Councils. For the decree of the Lateran 
Council he seems to have entertained a special contempt. 
In his Defense, prop. 27, "Adversus Execrabilem Antichrist 
Bullam," (Luther's Works, Vol. 2, folio 107, 
Wittenberg 1562) published in 1520, he said: 

"I permit the Pope to make articles of faith for 
himself and his faithful— such as 'the soul is the substantial 
form of the human body,' 'that the soul is immortal,' 
with all those monstrous opinions to be found 
in the Roman dunghill of decretals." 

SPIRITISM'S ONWARD MARCH 



The day is near when the world will accept the belief 
that spirits importantly participate in terrestrial life and 
exercise influences on our minds and acts. I am giving the 

R3602 : page 239 

study of spirit possession or obsession of insane persons most 



profound attention.— Bishop Samuel Fallows. 

I often see the spirits who cause insanity in my patients 
and at times I even hear their voices. Persons who are spoken 
of as helplessly insane are frequently simply lost under the 
overwhelming control of a spirit or, at times, a crowd of 
spirits. We frequently find by post-mortem examinations 
that no physical disorder exists in the brain or nervous 
systems of such insane. A large percentage of the insane are 
persons who have attempted to become spiritualistic mediums 
and who, by laying themselves open to spirit influence, have 
found the wrong or an evil spirit taking advantage of their 
susceptibility for the purpose of giving vent to spiritual 
desires and ideas through an earthly medium.— Dr. Edgar 
M. Webster, member of the Mental Section of the American 
Medical Association. 

THE NEW CHRISTIANITY 



The Rev. Dr. Francis L. Patton, President Emeritus 
of Princeton University, addressing the students of 
Washington University Medical Department, said:— 

"Some of the symptoms of the new Christianity are 
found in the studied avoidance of doctrinal statement, in 
the disposition to deal very prominently with sociological 
topics and to treat even doctrinal subjects exclusively from 
their ethical side. 

"Underlying the movement is a new conception as to 
what Christianity is. 

"The old view of Christianity, of course, is that it is a 
piece of supernatural information respecting the way of 
salvation through a crucified Redeemer. 

"The new Christianity is the direct denial of this. According 
to one form of that denial, Christianity is simply a 
stage in the great progress of development. This form of 
denial has been, in a measure, superseded by another, which 
looks upon Christianity as the revelation of God in Christ 
and claims attention as being a return to the historic facts 
of the gospels. It is a return, however, which is distinctively 
associated with the repudiation of metaphysics in theology 
and an uncertain attitude with reference to the real deity 
of Jesus Christ. 

"The logical result of either form of the new Christianity 
is the elimination of doctrinal statement, and the 
placing of the emphasis altogether upon the ethical teachings 
of Jesus. It must, however, be constantly remembered 
that Christianity must be more than ethical in order to be 
even ethical. If we are to uphold the ethics of Jesus we must 
uphold the authority of Jesus, and to uphold the authority 
of Jesus, we must maintain the supernaturalism that enters 
into his life. 

"The tendency to reject the teachings of Paul is one that 

R3603 : page 229 



has its logical expression in the thoroughgoing subjectivism 

of Sabellius, and the way to escape from the blighting influences 

in morals and religion which result from this subjectivism 

is to rehabilitate the Pauline theology."— St. 

Louis Republican. 

POPE TOUCHES TRUST QUESTION 



The "trust" question is dealt with in an encyclical 
letter from the Pope. Among other things it says:— 

"There are to-day vast numbers, continually being 
recruited by fresh accessions, who are utterly ignorant of 
the truths of religion, or who at most possess only such knowledge 
of God and of the Christian faith as to lead the lives of 
idolators. In consequence of this ignorance they regard it as 
no crime to cherish hatred against their neighbor, to enter 
into the most unjust contracts, the most unjust speculation, 
endeavor to possess themselves of the property of others 
by enormous usury and to commit iniquities not less 
reprehensible." 

HUMANITY IS SAVAGE 



Count Tolstoy, in an interview, reiterates at length 
his views on the inefficiency of the proposed government 
reforms in Russia. He says:— 

"This striving for a renewal of the state is impossible until 
the people have within themselves the image of the living 
God. Civilization has become savage. When the war with 
Japan is finished there will be war with India for Thibet. 
Human happiness is only attainable when such individual 
will do his utmost, one in the workshop, another in the field 
and another to compose sonatas; it only matters that each 
fulfils his duty, creates something. Positive rest will come of 
itself. Reform is of little value when humanity is savage. 

HEBREW CHILDREN EXPELLED FROM MOSCOW 



The Russian authorities have ordered the expulsion from 
Moscow of all Jewish children living with their parents. 
The order is issued on the ground that while permission has 
been granted to a limited number of Jews to live in the city 
the privilege does not extend to their children. The order 
therefore has been issued that the children must leave the 
place.— Cleveland Plain Dealer. 

"BE READY TO RECEIVE THE TRUTH." 



Rev. John Robinson was the pastor of the Pilgrim 
Fathers. Below we note his memorable "parting charge" 
to the Pilgrims who came long ago to settle in America: 

"I charge you before God and His blessed angels, that 
ye follow me no further than ye have seen me follow the 
Lord Jesus Christ. The Lord has more truth yet to break 
forth out of His Holy Word. I cannot sufficiently bewail 
the condition of the Reformed Churches who are come to 
a period in religion, and will go at present no further than 
the instruments of their reformation. Luther and Calvin 
were great shining lights in their time, yet they penetrated 
not into the whole counsel of God. I beseech you remember 
it— 'tis an article of your Church covenant— that you 
be ready to receive whatever truth shall be made known to 
you from the written word of God." 

LIVING AT OUR BEST 



Do not try to do a great thing; you may waste all your 
life waiting for the opportunity which may never come. 
But since little things are always claiming your attention, 
do them as they come, from a great motive, for the glory of 
God, to win His smile of approval, and to do good to men. 
It is harder to plod on in obscurity, acting thus, than to stand 
on the high places of the field, within the view of all, and to 
do deeds of valor at which rival armies stand still to gaze. 
But no such act goes without the swift recognition and the 
ultimate recompense of Christ. 

To fulfil faithfully the duties of your station; to use to 
the uttermost the gifts of your ministry; to bear chafing annoyances 
and trivial irritations as martyrs bore the pillory 
and stake; to find the one noble trait in people who try to 
molest you; to put the kindest construction on unkind acts 
and words; to love with the love of God even the unthankful 
and evil; to be content to be a fountain in the midst of a 
wild valley of stones, nourishing a few lichens and wild flowers, 
or now and again a thirsty sheep; and to do this always, and 
not for the praise of man, but for the sake of God— this makes 
a great life.— F. B. Meyer. 



"It is blasphemy to assert that the infinitely good God 
should plan a redemptive system for His children, and that 
the Son of God should give His life for its advancement, and 
the Holy Ghost His continuous, unwordable efforts for its 
carrying forward, and then have it fail, and the only other 
alternative should be to have the Judge come and destroy 
the whole race and world."— Bishop H. W. Warren. 

True. Much better is the Bible teaching of coming 
"times of restitution."— Acts 3:19-21. 



R3603 : page 230 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR AUGUST. 
--(SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER BIBLES)- 
BROTHERLY KINDNESS (BROTHERLY LOVE) 

1. What is the "new commandment" given by Christ to 
his disciples? Jno. 13:34; 15:10,12,17; 1 Jno. 4:21; 
Z/00-183 (2nd col, par. 1,2); 1 Jno. 3:11,23; 

Jno. 15:12; Z/05-125 (2nd col. par. 2). 

2. What is brotherly love? Z. '02-197 (2nd col. par. 2,3); 
Z.'98-201 (1st col. par. 2; 2nd col., par. 1). 

3. Who are our "brethren"? Matt. 12:50; Z/97-31 1 
(1st col. par. 1,2,3); Z/00-180 (1st col, par. 5 and 
2nd col. par. 1); Z/03-207 (1st col. par. 4,5); E.120, 
par. 2. 

4. Why is the manifestation of brotherly kindness so 
necessary? Z. '04-292 (2nd col. par. 2,3). 

5. Is it important that we observe the spirit as well as 
the form of our Lord's command? 1 Pet. 1:22; 

Rom. 12:9; Z/99-216 (2nd col. par. 6,7), and 217 
(1st and 2nd cols.); Z/97-264 (1st col. par. 2); Z.'98-8 
(2nd col. par. 1); Z.'05-l 18 (2nd col. par. 4,5); 
Z/03-333, (2nd col., par. 4). 

6. Why do the Lord's "brethren" need no "outward 
passwords, grips or badges"? Jno. 13:35; Z. '05-139, 
1st col. par. 2,3); Z/05-164 (2nd col. par. 8). 

7. How is our love for God measured by our love for 
"the brethren"? 1 Jno. 4:8; Z/00-183 (2nd col. 

par. 3), 184 (1st col. par. 1); F.467, par. 3; F.600, par. 2). 

8. Can we fellowship all "the brethren" alike? Jude 21,22; 
Z/03-333 (2nd col. par. 1,2,3); Z/02-198 

(1st col. par. 1,2); Z/03-207 (2nd col., par. 1). 

9. Should we always expect to have our manifestations 
of brotherly kindness received in the same spirit? 
Z/05-106 (2nd col. par. 7) and 107, par. 1. 

10. How are the comfort and peace of the Church dependent 
upon the manifestation of this grace? 
Z.'04-296(lstcol. par. 2). 



R3603 : page 230 

"FULL OF MERCY AND GOOD FRUITS." 

ONE HALF of a year is gone, and we wonder to 
what extent the text selected as our year text 
for 1905 has been remembered by all the dear 
readers, and to what extent they have sought to secure 
the wisdom to which our text referred. 



"Wisdom is the Principal Thing: 
Therefore Get Wisdom."— Prov. 4:7 



"The Wisdom that is from Above 
is First Pure, 
Then Peaceable, Gentle, Easy of Entreatment, 
Full of Mercy and Good Fruits."— Jas. 3:17 



These heavenly counsels have been in the Lord's 
Word for centuries, they have been in our hands and 
before our eyes for years. We know them, we assent 
to them and yet how many— how few— seem to know 
how to apply them in the ordinary affairs of life. Surely 
as the Lord looks down upon us he must say, These 
people require line upon line, precept upon precept, instruction 
and repetition continually. Alas that it is so! 
We all might well be thoroughly discouraged were it not 
for the assurance we have that the Lord looks deeper 
than the outward conduct, that he is a discerner of the 
thoughts and intents of the heart, and that according to 
what he sees to be our desires and efforts is his judgment 
respecting us. The thoughts and intents of our hearts 
are sometimes short of the standard that we ourselves 
approve, and O how short of any standard we could approve 
would be much of our conduct if we could but 
see ourselves as others see us and especially as the Lord 
sees us! 

We are not writing with a view to discouraging any 
dear brother or sister who is painfully, laboriously, 
striving to climb up Zion's hill along the narrow way. 
On the contrary, we have nothing but sympathy for 
them, and are assured that the Lord regards both 
them and us compassionately— "he remembereth our 
frame, he knoweth that we are dust." The Lord recognizes 

R3604 : page 230 

that we are imperfect, fallen creatures, and he is not 
expecting perfection of us. He has made provision for 
the covering of such of our imperfections as we do not at 
heart assent to; he has also given us instruction respecting 
his will, and he is carefully scrutinizing us day by day to see 
to what extent our love for him and for the principles of 
righteousness, which he has enunciated and which we 
have acknowledged, are entering into and controlling the 
forces and conduct of our lives; for, after all, the words 
of our mouths are but the echoes of our hearts, and to whatever 
extent our hearts are clean our words will be pure, 
and to whatever extent our hearts are loving and gentle 
and kind our words and conduct will be in accord with 
these divinely approved qualities. 



FIRST PURE, THEN PEACEABLE. 

Let us examine ourselves afresh to know the condition 
of our hearts, remembering the word of the Lord, 
that if we judge ourselves we would not require that he 
should judge us, but that if we neglect to judge ourselves 
he will chasten us, because we put our cause in his hand, 
because we are his. The word pure has in it the thought 
of innocent, without deceit; it has in it the thought of 
virtue and chastity; it contains the thought of clean, 
true and truthful. We cannot hope that any, either 
in the Church or out of it, are actually pure in the absolute 
sense of this word, but we do rejoice that our dear 
Master gave the key to a proper understanding of the 
matter when he said, "Blessed are the pure in heart." 
So long as we are in this present, mortal, imperfect condition 
absolute purity is impossible; for us to be pure 
of heart is possible— purity of intention, purity of 
motive. 

When we begin a self-examination to see whether 
or not we are using our time and talents and influence 

R3604 : page 23 1 

wisely, this is the first point for scrutiny, Are we pure 
in heart, in our daily course of life? Are we sincere in 
the prayers that we utter to the Lord, in our endeavors 
to please him? In our relationship toward the Father 
are we candid and honest? Do we love him with a pure 
love, heartily, fervently, or do we not? Let each decide 
this point for himself before proceeding to the next. If 
upon examination we find that our hearts have not been 
pure in respect to our covenants and relationship to 
the Lord and his Word and to the Father, let us go no 
farther until we have asked divine forgiveness and resolve 
that by the Lord's assisting grace we will be 
nothing less than pure in heart, pure in endeavor. 

If we can assure ourselves that our motives and intentions 
have nothing of selfishness connected with them, 
that our purposes are pure in the sight of the Lord, then, 
indeed, our hearts may rejoice whatever may have been 
our weaknesses and imperfections of the flesh, in our 
relationship toward the Lord or the Father or our neighbors 
or the world. 

The next point is, Are we peaceable? Have we thus 
far in the year been seeking to cultivate peace, or, as the 
Scriptures put it, "Follow peace with all men and holiness, 
without which no man shall see the Lord"? Have 
we lived thus far in the year as peaceable, as pure of 
heart toward God and his Word and his brethren as is 
possible for us? If so we have cause for rejoicing afresh 
and being of good courage; if not, here is another lesson 
and opportunity for going to the throne of grace to acknowledge 
our fault, to pray for more of this wisdom 
from above, which is first pure and then so far as possible 
peaceable toward all— peace loving, peace disposed. 



"EASY OF ENTREATMENT." 

How has it been with us so far? Have we been 
hard-hearted, cold and repulsive, or have we been gentle, 
kind, sympathetic with those with whom we are in contact, 
easy to be entreated, willing, yes, anxious to do 
everything which in our judgments would seem to be in 
the interest and for the welfare of others— proper, reasonable 
and right to do? If so, happy are we, but let us not 
too hastily conclude, not too hastily congratulate ourselves 
along this line, until we have made close inspection 
of the pathway of the last six months. Have any appealed 
to us for forgiveness and been refused? If so ours 
is a very dangerous position. The Lord declares most 
positively that while that is our attitude we can expect 
no mercy from him. He insists upon this— "After this 
manner pray ye, Forgive us our trespasses as we also 
forgive those who trespass against us." 

Emphasizing the matter, we remember that the 
Master explained, "Unless ye forgive men their trespasses, 
neither will your heavenly Father forgive your 
trespasses." What a thought! Do we need mercy? Do 
we need to have our faults and weaknesses of the flesh 
covered? Do we rejoice in the privilege of approaching 
the throne of heavenly grace to obtain mercy? Then, as 
a condition to those privileges and blessings, we must be 
in the attitude of heart where we not only will forgive 
those who trespass against us, but forgive them gladly, 
freely, heartily. Our Lord specially warns us against 
a forgiving with the lips which does not include a forgiving 
from the heart, saying, "Except ye shall from 
your hearts forgive," etc.— Matt. 18:35. 

Let no one deceive himself— mercy is a prime essential 
to everyone who would be counted amongst the 
Lord's saints, and who would count himself as having 
any of the evidences of acceptance with the Lord to a 
participation in the glorious high calling. If we have 
been derelict in this matter in the past, let us be the 
more zealous now to correct matters, and the more on 
our guard as respects the future that we may not err 
farther in this same direction. 

"FULL OF MERCY AND GOOD FRUITS." 

Ah! Here we have the pith of the whole matter: 
Full of mercy does not signify that we are not wholly 
without mercy, merciless; nor does it signify that we should 
have a little tinge or coloring of mercy in connection with 
our thoughts, words and doings. On the contrary, it 
does mean that the Lord is very merciful, Love is his 
name, and that in proportion as we have received his 
spirit, in that proportion we are full of love and full of 
mercy. He that lacks mercy lacks the spirit of the Lord, 
as though when we read, "If any man have not the 
spirit of Christ he is none of his," we should substitute 



the word mercy and say, If any man have not mercy he 
is none of Christ's. O, Merciful Lord, help us, we pray 
thee, that we may have more and more of thy spirit of 
compassion and sympathy and love, that we may more 
and more become copies of thy dear Son and thus copies 
of our Father whose mercy endureth forever, and obedient 
followers of him who said that unto seventy times 
seven we should be ready to fully and freely forgive from 
the heart those who transgress against us and repent! 

Full of good fruits! Yes, mercy is one of the good 
fruits of the Lord's Spirit, but there are others, and it is 
a consolation that being filled with mercy does not mean 
that we shall be unable to contain the other graces, but 
rather that the fuller we are of mercy the more of the 
other graces of the Lord's spirit we may possess. Mercy 
is not one of the good fruits, although it is classed high. 
It is really a negative quality: it signifies merely that we 
do not resent the evils of others, that we are willing to 
forgive, to have compassion. Still more is necessary, 
we must also have the active traits of character that will 
reach out toward others, not to injure them, not to pull 
them down, not to slander them, not to backbite them, 
but to do them good. The fruits of the spirit of evil are 
anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife. Whoever finds any 
of these lurking anywhere in his heart should both labor 
and pray to have himself cleansed from the leaven of 
corruption that he might be completely filled with the 
fruits of the spirit, good fruits, meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long suffering, brotherly kindness, love, that 
these things might be in him and abound. 

If we have mercy towards a dear brother or sister 
who may have transgressed against us, we are not to feel 
boastful of the matter, but to realize that we also have 

R3604 : page 232 

been forgiven much and are objects of divine mercy, and 
we are to go on to cultivate in our hearts and to be filled 
with the other good fruits. We ought to learn to exercise 
patience toward a brother, to help him over his 
natural difficulties and weaknesses in a most kind, gentle, 
sympathetic manner, remembering ourselves also lest we 
should be tempted. We should be on the alert to exercise 
brotherly kindness, not merely toward those whose 
natural dispositions we admire because like or superior 
to our own; but rather our love for the Lord and love for 
the brethren should lead us to sacrifice our natural tastes 
and inclinations to some degree, that we might give aid 
and encouragement and assistance in the good way to 
those members of the body who are naturally less amiable 
or who have made less progress or whose weaknesses 
or shortcomings are more apparent. 

This will be brotherly kindness, and it will also be 
God-likeness, for thus the Almighty and our Lord Jesus, 
while having the common fellowship with the holy in 
heaven, condescended to us and continually bow down 



to hear us, to sympathize with us and to assist us. Let 
us be more and more God-like then in our relationship 
and dealings with and toward each other, and finally 
these various elements of love will form in us more and 
more completely until, by the grace of God, eventually we 
shall be filled with his spirit, the spirit of love— until we 
shall have that perfect law in full control of all our words 
and thoughts and doings, and thus attaining let us stand 
fast, waiting for the glorious conditions of the first resurrection, 
which the Lord has promised to all such overcomers 
of the world and its spirit of sin and bitterness 
and evil. 



R3605 : page 232 

THE GREAT COMPANY IN THE COURT. 

SOME matters connected with the Tabernacle 
Shadows of the Better Sacrifices and the typical 
services connected therewith seem still to be 
obscure to some of the dear friends who apparently 
are giving earnest heed to their study. To all such we 
recommend a fresh reading of the pamphlet published 
by our Society, devoted to this topic, and also a fresh 
reading of the references made to it in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. VI. pp. 126-132. Matters of this kind 
require deep and careful study to be understood by any, 
and, of course, were never meant by the Lord to be 
understood by everybody. The Apostle clearly indicates 
that only those begotten of the Spirit can ever properly 
and correctly appreciate and understand spiritual 
things. Others may hear or read and partly understand 
and appreciate, but can never be expected to grasp 
matters fully. Amongst WATCH TOWER readers, however, 
we have hope that there are many who are spirit 
begotten, and our endeavors in this article and always 
are on behalf of these. The Lord's time and way for 
reaching others are our time and way, and we wait 
patiently for the development of that feature of the 
divine plan in its "due time." 

THE ANTITYPICAL LEVITES 

We have already pointed out that only the members 
of one tribe of Israel, the tribe of Levi, were permitted 
within the sacred enclosure outside the Tabernacle tent, 
called the "court," and that of this tribe only the priests 
were permitted to enter the holy places. We have 
shown that those priests typified the Royal Priesthood, 
of which Jesus is the High Priest and his faithful ones the 
under priests, and that the Levites in general represented 
the household of faith— the justified. We recognize a 
difference between the priests of the present time and 
those of the future; for any now recognized as priests 



who do not perform the sacrifice will be cut off from that 
special privilege and honor, and will constitute what in 
Revelation is pictured as a "great company." Those 
who have taken the step of consecration and been 
accepted of God and been made partakers of the holy 
Spirit, cannot ignore their covenant, they cannot 
return to human conditions. They must go on to perfection 
on the spirit plane or be hopelessly lost in the 
Second Death. There is no middle ground, because the 
terms and conditions upon which the Lord will receive 
them on the spirit plane are as reasonable as any he 
could make for them on the human plane. 

When during the Millennial age the whole world of 
mankind will be granted an opportunity of coming into 
full accord with their Creator, it will be on condition 
of their absolute obedience to his law of love— not merely 
a perfunctory obedience either, but an obedience from 
the heart. Any who will not by the close of the Millennial 
age reach that proper condition will assuredly be 
amongst those who will die the Second Death, as pictured 
in Revelation 20:9 and Matthew 25:46. Nothing can 
be accepted of the Lord as righteous that is in any degree 
in sympathy with sin. And that same rule which will 
then apply to the world is during this Gospel age applicable 
to the great company. It will be required of 
them that when brought into straits they shall at least 
prove loyal to the principles of righteousness, that they 
shall not deny the Lord nor the principles of his government, 
whatever the cost— otherwise they will be unworthy 
of eternal life on any plane. The case with the 
little flock is recognized as being still different: the overcomers 
delight to do the Father's will to such an extent 
that they make haste at the sacrifice of earthly interests 
to lay down their lives in the service of the King and his 
brethren and all the principles of righteousness. 

ONCE CONSECRATED, ALWAYS CONSECRATED. 

The difficulty with some of the dear friends seems to 
be their unsuccessful attempt to identify this great 
company with the typical Levites. Let us, therefore, 
examine this point. They query, How can these, who 
have already made a sacrifice, be represented by the 
Levites who did not sacrifice? We reply that the great 
company do not sacrifice. Their covenant, their agreement, 

R3605 : page 233 

was to sacrifice even unto death, and had they 
faithfully carried out that agreement they would not be 
of the great company but of the little flock, the overcomers, 
the Royal Priests. From God's standpoint they 
never carried out their covenant, and hence cannot be 
recognized as priests, and therefore, although for a 
time recognized as priests in a tentative way, their 
failure to perform the sacrifice hinders them from being 



ultimately received as priests— it separates them from 
their brethren and constitutes them a different class, a 
class who have consecrated but who have not performed 
in harmony with that consecration. 

Nevertheless, this great company class will not consist 
of persons who have repudiated the Lord, who have 
sinned wilfully, who have despised the covenant: on 
the contrary, at heart they are still in sympathy with 
righteousness, loyal to the Lord, but they do not develop 
that consuming zeal for righteousness which would 
constitute them overcomers in the Scriptural sense. 
They love righteousness and hate sin, and yet they do 
not deal with these principles in that thoroughgoing 
manner which would constitute them copies of God's 
dear Son. So long as they hold on to the Lord, so long 
as they love him and love righteousness, they shall not 
be utterly condemned of him even though repudiated 
as respects a share in the Bride company, the little flock. 
Thank God, No! All who love righteousness and hate 
iniquity in any measure shall have fullest opportunity of 
demonstrating this, and shall be accounted worthy of 
life everlasting, and unquestionably this company is 
a "great company," as the Scriptures indicate— far more 
numerous even than the little flock, as the Levites in 
the type numbered thousands in proportion to the five 
chosen from amongst them to be priests. 

If, then, the Royal Priesthood were all originally of 
the household of faith (Levites in the type) before their 
covenant of sacrifice as priests was accepted of the Lord, 
what would they be if failing to sacrifice they were put 
out of the priesthood? We answer that they would still 
be Levites after they had lost their priestly privileges, 
after their names had been blotted out as respects membership 
in the body of Christ, after their crowns had been 
apportioned to others; as respects the Kingdom they 
would still be of the household of faith unless they had 
wilfully and deliberately repudiated the Lord and his 
grace. They would still, therefore, be represented in 
the tribe of Levi. 

IF JUSTIFICATION WERE LOST 

We have already pointed out that as our standing 
as members of the Royal Priesthood is at the present time 
tentative, subject to change if we do not sacrifice, so 
likewise our justification is in the present time tentative 
—dependent upon our continuance in a condition of 
faith and obedience. We see again that justification by 
faith, as it operates during this Gospel age, is merely 
with a view to bringing us into a relationship to God 
which will permit us to consecrate ourselves for the 
Royal Priesthood. Were it not the divine purpose to 
select the Royal Priesthood there would be no present 
call to justification by faith, but the whole world of mankind 
alike would share in the blessed arrangements of 
the divine plan for the future age, namely, an actual 



justification, an actual restitution, an actual making perfect, 
such as the world will experience during the Millennial 
age— a justification by works cooperating with faith. 
Thus it is written respecting the world's judgment in the 
Millennial age that they will be judged according to their 
works.— Rev. 20:12. 

On the contrary, we of this Gospel age are assured 
that our judgment will not be according to works impossible 
to us under present conditions, but according 
to faith, with which our works will cooperate to the extent 
of our ability. In a word faith is now the standard 
of test, and such works as we can present merely attest 
our faith: in the coming age works will be the standard 
and perfection will be demanded, while faith will cooperate 
and approve the works. 

If, then, it be granted that the only object of justification 
by faith now is to permit the believer to present 
his body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, his 
reasonable service, it follows that those believers who 
never reach the point of such a consecration receive the 
grace of God (justification) in vain. It does not accomplish 
for them the only purpose, the only object, for 
which it was intended. And it follows that such justification 
by faith lapses or becomes null and void within 
a reasonable time if it be not exercised, if the consecration 
which it was intended to make possible be not offered 
to the Lord. This being true, it would seem that those 
whose justification lapses because not used in consecration 
will at the time of the lapsing cease to be considered 
as typified by the Levites; they drop back from the 
Levites' position to that of Israel in general, representing 
the world, just as those who do make the consecration 
and for a time are recognized as priests drop back from 
the priestly position if they fail to go on and complete 
the sacrifice. 

Now, then, view the situation. See who ultimately 
will constitute the Royal Priesthood— that it will 
be only the little flock who have gladly and loyally laid 
down their lives in the service of the King and after the 
example of the High Priest, Jesus. Likewise note that 
the only ones who will ultimately constitute the antitypical 
Levites will be those who make consecration and 
fail to attain the priestly degree through their failure to 
make a proper sacrifice— "a great company." 

THE LORD'S GOAT AND THE SCAPE-GOAT 

We have already set forth in Tabernacle Shadows 
that the work of this Gospel age, this antitypical Day 
of Atonement, began with the sacrifice of the bullock, 
which represented our Lord Jesus. The blood of the 
bullock being taken within the Most Holy by the High 
Priest, appropriation of its merit was made on behalf 
of the members of the High Priest's body, the under 
priesthood, and on behalf of the entire household of 
faith, the antitypical Levites. Next in order came the 



R3606 : page 234 

two goats, both bound, consecrated at the door of the 
Tabernacle, representing all who consecrate themselves 
to the Lord, and how ultimately they would be divided 
into two classes— the little flock and the great company. 
The course of the little flock, the Royal Priesthood, was 
typified in what was done to the "Lord's goat." As 
that goat was sacrificed after the same manner as the 
bullock, its fat burned upon the altar, its hide, etc., 
burned without the camp, and its blood taken into the 
Most Holy and sprinkled, so with the entire company of 
the little flock: they pass through the experiences of the 
High Priest, they suffer with him, they are hated with 
him, they go to him without the camp bearing his reproach. 
But as a bullock has much fat and a goat is 
very lean, so our Lord had much love to offer upon the 
Lord's altar, while his followers altogether have very 
little, and that little is acceptable merely because the 
High Priest's previous sacrifice opened the way, covered 
its blemishes and made it acceptable. 

It has required this entire Gospel age to do this 
sacrificing of the Lord's goat, and its blood has not yet 
been presented before the Father by the glorified Christ, 
—Head and body. 

Next we have to consider the scape-goat. It represents 
a consecrated class, because it as well as the other 
goat was tethered at the door of the tent, devoted to 
sacrifice. It represents a class, however, that does not 
go to sacrifice, that does not go without the camp and 
bear the reproach with the bullock, a class whose fat 
does not go upon the altar, a class whose blood will never 
be sprinkled upon the Mercy Seat. It represents the 
great company of the consecrated who fail to make their 
calling and election sure, but whom the Lord's mercy 
rescues from the second death because they also trust in 
him, because they love righteousness and hate iniquity, 
even though they did not display the proper amount of 
zeal in connection with their love of righteousness to 
merit their being classed with the overcomers, the Royal 
Priesthood. 

THE SINS BORNE BY THE SCAPE-GOAT 

The Scriptures show the priest laying his hands upon 
this scape-goat and confessing over it the sins of the 
people, and that then it was taken into the wilderness 
and left there under that load. This we have interpreted 
as the delivering over of the unworthy members of the 
Church to the power and control of the Adversary, that 
their flesh might be destroyed, that their spirits or life 
might be ultimately saved. In other words, the life 
which was not sacrificed was destroyed, the sufferings 
which were not voluntarily taken up in harmony with 
the consecration are nevertheless inflicted; and if those 



sufferings are rightly received and if as a result loyalty 
to the Lord is ultimately demonstrated, that spirit shall 
be saved "so as by fire," coming through great tribulation 
—"a great multitude whose number no man knoweth" 
shall "come up out of great tribulation and wash 
their robes and make them white in the blood of the 
Lamb"— the Levites, a glorious company, but occupying 
a lower plane in the divine plan for the world's salvation, 
occupying a subordinate place to the Bride in the glorious 
work of uplifting the world of mankind during the Millennial 
age. 

Some who do not grasp the matter clearly, who have 
not learned how to apply types and antitypes, may say 
that the scape-goat never went into the Holy and therefore 
could not represent the great company class. We 
answer that neither did the goat go into the Holy nor 
did the bullock go into the Holy. The bullock represented 
our Lord as a human being, not as a spirit being; 
the goats represented the Lord's consecrated people as 
human beings, not as spirit beings. The point to be 
noticed is that the one goat followed the bullock to sacrifice 
and the other goat did not. The blood of the Lord's 
goat, therefore, was sprinkled by the High Priest upon the 
Mercy Seat, while the blood of the scape-goat was not 
so sprinkled. 

A TIME OF TROUBLE 

As to the signification of the confessing of the sins of 
the people upon the scape-goat: the sins thus confessed 
upon the head of the scape-goat are assuredly not the sins 
for which atonement is made by the blood of the bullock 
and of the Lord's goat. The atonement is made for 
original sin and all of its blemishes and imperfections as 
they affect the race of Adam. There are other sins than 
these for which atonement is not made, which are not to 
be forgiven, but on account of which divine wrath has 
been more or less manifest throughout the past six thousand 
years, and will be especially manifested in the great 
time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation 
nor ever shall be again, and which is now nearing. That 
trouble is spoken of as the pouring out of the vials of 
wrath upon the world because men have not lived up 
to their knowledge and opportunities and privileges. It 
will come as a natural effect from natural causes, and yet 
will be retributive punishment upon the world. In that, 
we understand, the great company will be given a special 
place, a special share. That will be the time in which 
every man's work shall be tried "so as by fire," this being 
applicable specially to the Church. 

True, some of this great company class have been 
turned "over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, 
that the spirit might be saved [that they might be saved 
as spirit beings] in the day of the Lord Jesus" all down 
through this Gospel age. But the proportionate number 
of these has probably been small as compared with the 



number who to-day, under the greater light and opportunity 
and privileges which we enjoy, have consecrated 
themselves, yet hold back from the completion of their 
sacrifice. The portion of this Day of Atonement picture 
which relates to this great company class is not different 
from that which relates to the other classes. For instance, 
the sacrifice of the Lord's goat is not represented 
as being accomplished until the very last member of the 
body of Christ shall have suffered with the Head, until 
the final work in that connection, the sprinkling of the 
blood of the Lord's goat upon the Mercy Seat shall have 
been accomplished, and until the last member shall not 
only have consecrated but shall have finished his 
sacrifice. 

R3606 : page 235 

LORD, CHOOSE MY CROSS FOR ME. 

"It was a time of sadness, and my heart, 
Although it knew and loved the better part, 
Felt weary with the conflict and the strife, 
And all the needful discipline of life. 

"And while I thought on these— as given to me, 
My trial test of faith and love to be- 
lt seemed as if I never could be sure 
That, faithful to the end, I should endure. 

"And thus, no longer trusting to his might 
Who says, 'We walk by faith and not by sight'— 
Doubting, and almost yielding to despair, 
The thought arose: My cross I cannot bear. 

"Far heavier its weight must surely be, 
Than those of others which I daily see: 
Oh, if I might another burden choose, 
Methinks, I should not fear my crown to lose. 

"A solemn silence reigned on all around, 
E'en Nature's voices uttered not a sound; 
The evening shadows seemed of peace to tell, 
And peace upon my weary spirit fell. 

"A moment's pause, and then a heavenly light 
Beamed full upon my wondering, raptured sight; 
Angels on silvery wings seemed everywhere, 
And angels' music thrilled the balmy air. 

"Then one more fair than all the rest to see- 
One to whom all others bowed the knee- 
Came gently to me, as I trembling lay, 
And 'Follow me,' He said— I am the Way.' 

"Then speaking thus, He led me far above; 
And there, beneath a canopy of love, 



Crosses of diverse size and shape were seen, 
Larger and smaller than mine own had been. 

"And one there was more beauteous to behold, 
A little one, with jewels set in gold; 
Ah, this, methought, I can with comfort wear, 
For it will be an easy one to bear. 

"And so the little cross I quickly took, 
But all at once my frame beneath it shook; 
The sparkling jewels— fair were they to see, 
But far too heavy was their weight for me. 

'"This may not be,' I cried, and looked again, 
To see if there were any here could ease my pain, 
But one by one I passed them slowly by, 
Till on a lovely one I cast my eye. 

"Fair flowers 'round its sculptured form entwined, 
And grace and beauty seemed in it combined; 
Wondering, I gazed, and still I wondered more, 
To think so many should have passed it o'er. 

R3607 : page 235 

"But O! that form so beautiful to see, 
Soon made its hidden sorrows known to me: 
Thorns lay beneath those flowers and colors fair, 
Sorrowing, I said, 'this cross I may not bear.' 

"And so it was, with each and all around, 
Not one to suit my need could there be found. 
Weeping, I laid each heavy burden down, 
As my guide gently said, 'No cross— no crown.' 

"At length to him I raised my saddened heart, 
He knew its sorrow, bade its doubts depart. 
'Be not afraid,' he said, 'but trust in me, 
My perfect love shall now be shown to thee.' 

"And then with lightened eyes and willing feet, 
Again I turned my earthly cross to meet; 
With forward footsteps, turning not aside, 
For fear some hidden evil might betide. 

"And then, in the prepared, appointed way, 

Listening to hear and ready to obey. 

A cross I found of plainest form, 

With only words of love inscribed thereon. 

"With thankfulness I raised it from the rest, 
And joyfully acknowledged it the best; 
The only one of all the many there, 
That I could feel was good for me to bear. 

"And while I thus my chosen one confessed, 



I saw a heavenly brightness on it rest, 
And as I bent, my burden to sustain, 
I recognized my own old cross again. 

"But O, how different did it seem to be, 
Now I had learned its preciousness to see, 
Yes, now no longer will I say, 
'Perhaps another is a better way.' 

"Ah! henceforth my one desire shall be, 

That he who knows me best shall choose for me, 

And so whate'er His love seems good to send, 

I'll trust it's best— because he knows the end."— Unknown 



R3607 : page 235 

A GOOD SON OF A BAD FATHER. 

-2 CHRONICLES 34: 1-13. -AUGUST 6.- 

Golden Text:— "Remember now thy Creator 
in the days of thy youth."— Eccl. 12:1. 

WE CANNOT treat this lesson from the standpoint 

evidently intended by those who selected it. 

We cannot base upon it and plead for "good 

citizenship" amongst the Lord's consecrated people 

of spiritual Israel. We cannot make it the groundwork 

of an exhortation to social, political and moral public 

reforms, because while commending the course followed 

by Josiah we cannot concede that it is a proper illustration 

for the Lord's people of spiritual Israel to-day. 

A failure to recognize the times and seasons in the 

divine plan, and the different features of the work apportioned 

to those different times and seasons, have 

greatly beclouded the judgment of many good people in 

their endeavors to expound the Word of the Lord and 

to draw lessons therefrom. 

Coming to the throne at eight years of age it is remarkable 
that, instead of having his head and heart 
turned to foolishness and vanity, Josiah at the age of 
sixteen began to seek earnestly to know and do the will 
of God in respect to the kingdom which he governed as 
an absolute ruler. By the time he was twenty years of 
age his convictions were crystallized and he began a 
thorough reformation of the kingdom of Judah, extending 
the same beyond the lines of his own particular 
dominion into the territories of Manasseh, Ephraim, 
Simeon and Naphtali. He was in earnest, and not only 

R3607 : page 236 

gave the commands for the destruction of the images 
and various paraphernalia associated with the idolatry 



established in the land, but he gave the matter his personal 
supervision,— he went with the officers whom he 
commissioned and saw to it personally that the destruction 
was thoroughly accomplished. This work of reform 
had been prophesied for him years before, even to the 
declaration that he would burn the bones of the priests 
of Baal upon the Baal altar at Bethel.— 1 Kings 13:1-3; 
2 Kings 23:15-17. 

The course of Josiah and that of other reformers of 
the Jewish epoch— as, for instance, Elijah, who caused 
thousands of the priests of Baal to be slain— are a source 
of confusion in the minds of many earnest Christians, as 
apparently sanctioning acts of violence public or private, 
totally out of accord with the spirit of this Gospel dispensation. 
In order to have a right conception of the matter 
it is necessary that we remember that the Jewish nation 
by divine arrangement represented God's judgments in 
the world, and that under the Law there was a certain 
responsibility resting upon every king of Israel, and also 
in some respects upon the individuals of that nation, to 
oppose idolatry with violence, because the kingdom 
typically represented God and his reign of righteousness. 
With the end of the Jewish era, when fleshly Israel was 
cast off from divine favor as a nation, all the laws and 
regulations given to that people governing such matters 
ended, were abrogated, made null and void. As our Lord 
declared unto them, "Your house is left unto you desolate." 
-Matt. 23:38. 

With the establishment of Spiritual Israel at Pentecost 
a new covenant, a new relationship and new regulations 
have accordingly gone into effect. The spiritual 
Israelites are not to war with carnal weapons. Their 
warfare is to be each within his own heart, fighting the 
good fight of faith against the desires of the flesh, the 
wiles of the Adversary and the spirit of the world. Each 
heart has its own dominion to conquer, to clear of 
idols; each heart is expected to establish in all the realm of 
the natural body which it controls the worship and reverence 
and service of the Lord our God. As for worldly 
affairs we are distinctly told that we have nothing 
whatever to do with them— "Ye are not of the world 
even as I am not of the world." The world at present 
is under the control of the Gentiles and that by divine 
permission. The New Creatures, spiritual Israel, are to 
keep themselves separate from the world, and, so far as 
their consciences will permit, to be subject to the powers 
that be because these powers are permitted of God. This 
does not signify that they endorse all the doings of the 
powers that be in their hearts— they may be seriously 
grieved thereby; but whatever they may experience of 
grief or opposition or suffering or trials of patience and 
of faith are to be esteemed as so much of the Lord's 
fitting and polishing process, making them ready for 
the kingdom conditions of the future, making them the 
more humble and patient and loyal to himself and to 
righteousness, and the better qualified for the great 



work they will be engaged in in the future of blessing, 
ruling, judging, uplifting and encouraging the world 
in the right ways of the Lord. 

THE MOTHER'S INFLUENCE 

In a previous lesson we saw something of how a good 
father might have a bad son, and how in a general way 
at least it implied dereliction, unfaithfulness to his 
duties as a father, no matter how zealous and faithful 
he might have been in other respects and whatever 
excuses might be possible as respects his own lack of 
parental talent. Our lesson to-day reverses the matter, 
showing us the good son of a bad father, and we think 
it entirely reasonable to suppose that this implied a good 
mother. For a bad father and a bad mother to have 
reared a good son would appear almost impossible. 
Hence we feel safe in assuming that Josiah's mother 
was a godly woman. 

The divine arrangement by which the mothers of 
the human family are considerably separated from the 
selfishness and strife of business and politics, so that if 
the mother will she can expend her energies in the training 
of her children according to the highest ideals before 
her mind, has undoubtedly been a great blessing to the 
race in various ways. Undoubtedly it has prevented a 
more rapid decline into extreme selfishness and sin, and 
wherever this arrangement of nature is interfered with 
more or less of disadvantage to the children is almost 
certain. 

O, that the mothers of the world could appreciate 
the great power for good which the Lord has placed in 
their hands! O, that they could realize that the hand 
that rocks the cradle is the hand that rules the world! 
To realize this and to use the opportunity thus providentially 
placed in their hands would be a proper response 
to the divine arrangement, and would entirely 
remove from such the ambition to have a share in politics, 
business, etc. The trouble is that the counsel of the 
Lord's Word and the arrangements of divine providence 

R3608 : page 236 

on this as on other subjects pass measurably unheeded. 
The poor world is doing perhaps as well as it knows, 
some better and some worse proportionately as the instincts 
of nature are acknowledged and followed with a 
lofty sentiment. 

Christian mothers, especially those whose eyes of 
understanding are opening to a larger appreciation of 
the divine character and plan, should be swift to avail 
themselves of their privileges in the training of their 
children— their responsibilities. Let none think that 
the work is small and insignificant and without its influence. 
Every son and every daughter properly trained 
to reverence and obedience to God and his Word and to 



their parents, and to the Golden Rule in respect to their 
dealings with playmates and neighbors, and to order 
and regularity and punctuality and system and truthfulness, 
is not only prepared for his and her own blessing in life, 
but prepared also to be a blessing and example to other 
boys and girls and men and women. Thus every mother's 
influence extends and multiplies as days and years go by. 
Even if there were no such desirable influences to 

R3608 : page 237 

be exercised outside the family circle, the proper training 

of the children means so much to the home— so much 

to the general peace and comfort and love constituting 

a home. While the father should not shirk his responsibilities 

as the head of the family, the mother as his 

efficient co-worker and helpmate earnestly cooperates, 

and to her must fall the major part of the responsibility 

for the training of the children, the breadwinner of the 

family being necessarily less in contact with them. And 

when the mother only is a child of grace, the whole 

responsibility, so far as her husband will permit, falls 

upon her shoulders, with only the assistance and guidance 

which the Lord provides. Alas, that so many homes 

are anarchous, lawless, therefore not really homes at all. 

Many parents, with false conceptions of kindness and 

indulgence, allow the children to grow up devoid of 

the proper respect for God, for parents and for the rights 

and interests of others. This is the secret of much of 

the lawlessness and growing spirit of anarchy everywhere 

manifest in the world. The wonder indeed is 

that, with homes devoid of law and order and love and 

kindness, the world is not in a worse state than we find 

it. 

"IN THE DAYS OF THY YOUTH" 

The Golden Text of our lesson should be made 
prominent in every family. The child who learns to 
remember and reverence his Creator, who learns also 
of his own imperfections and how they were incurred, 
and that the death penalty is the curse resting upon 
himself and all the world, blighting every earthly prospect, 
will be in a fair way to receive the message of salvation 
from the curse— to learn of how God in his love has 
provided Jesus as the great Redeemer, and that the 
deliverance secured through his death will soon extend 
to every member of the human family. Reverence to 
parents follows naturally as a result of reverence to 
God. 

The Editor of this journal had the good fortune to 
be born of Christian parents and to be reared under 
Christian influences, and thus in God's providence, 
quite early in life, was led to see the privilege as well as 
the blessing of consecration to the Lord. Looking back 
he can see with increasing clearness the many pitfalls 



and snares and sad experiences which were thus averted 
and the great blessings which were thus secured. His 
sympathies go out toward all who by the grace of God 
flee from sin and lay hold upon the great Life-giver and 
seek to walk in his steps, holding fast his hand. He rejoices 
with all such, but he feels specially interested in 
those who seek the Lord early in life, before the evil 
days draw nigh, before passing into the sowing of wild 
oats and the reaping of the crop of bitter experiences 
which this implies. He feels a deep interest, therefore, 
in all the younger readers of this journal, especially of 
those who have felt the love of God constraining their 
hearts and who have responded to that drawing influence 
and have made a full consecration of themselves 
to walk in the steps of the Captain of our Salvation- 
steps of self-denial, self-sacrifice, steps which lead from 
glory to glory. To all such he extends earnest greetings 
and salutations in the Lord— congratulation on the steps 
already trod and best wishes for those which are to 
come. 



R3608 : page 237 

"THY WORD WAS FOUND, I ATE IT." 

-2 CHRONICLES 34:14-28.-AUGUST 13- 

Golden Text:— "I will not forget thy Word."— Psa. 1 19:16. 

KING AHAZ, in his wicked rebellion against God's 

authority, had caused the manuscripts of the 

Law to be burned— presumably all of them. 

However, in God's providence, perhaps with the cooperation 

of some of the faithful priests, one copy of the Law 

was buried under a pile of stone and rubbish in one of the 

little rooms surrounding the court of the Temple. 

There it was found by the priest Hilkiah in the process 

of the cleaning up and restoring of the Temple services 

commanded by King Josiah in connection with 

the reforms he instituted, considered in our last lesson. 

Shaphan was the name of the king's scribe, his position 
corresponding somewhat to secretary of state at the 
present time. He, as the king's representative, had 
general charge of the Temple repairs, the collection of 
moneys donated by the people for the repairs of the Temple, 
and the re-institution of its services. Not to the 
king, therefore, but to Shaphan his representative, Hilkiah 
the high priest delivered the sacred manuscripts, 
and he in turn reported them to the king. Whether they 
included all the books of the Law, the five books of Moses 
and possibly the book of Judges, we cannot surely know, 
but evidently from the context they included the book 
of Deuteronomy. 



"SANCTIFY THEM THROUGH THY TRUTH." 

The Lord predicates two things respecting his Word 
of truth: First, it is intended only for those of an honest 
heart and who are seeking the truth; and, secondly, it is 
intended to still further enlighten and thereby to still 
further sanctify this class for whom it is intended. It 
was so with Josiah. Devoted to righteousness and seeking 
to serve the Lord, the message of the Law tended to 
deepen his every conviction and stimulate him to still 
further endeavors in the Lord's service. The reading of 
the Law alarmed the king greatly, for he was in a condition 
of heart to believe every word of it. He realized that the 
nation of Israel had committed the very sins recorded in 
Deuteronomy, the twenty-eighth chapter (See 2 Kings 22:19), 
and that, therefore, they were subject to the very 
penalties therein specified. He rent his clothes— the 
tearing of the loose outer garment in olden times being 
a symbol of distress, perplexity or fear. 

R3608 : page 238 

At once the king sent commissioners, saying, "Go, 
inquire of the Lord for me and for them that are left in 
Israel and Judah concerning the words of the book that 
is found, for great is the wrath of the Lord poured out 
upon us because our fathers have not kept the commandment 
of the Lord to do all that is written in this book." 
The commissioners inquired of the Prophetess Huldah, 
and brought to the king the answer that all the evils, 
"curses," declared in the book as the punishment for 
such sin would surely come upon the people because they 
had forsaken the Law. The punishments must be inflicted, 
but the king, who had shown such a loyalty to the Lord 
(and presumably others who manifested a similar spirit), 
would be preserved from the trouble. That is to say, it 
would not come at such a time and in such a manner as to 
involve them. 

LOYALTY TO GOD, SYMPATHY FOR MAN. 

The king was doubtless comforted in a measure by 
the assurance of his own escape from the fiery troubles 
predicted, but the right condition of his heart was evidenced 
by the fact that he was not content merely with 
this, but sought as far as possible to bring the priests, 
the nobles and all the chief people of Israel, and incidentally, 
of course, all who were under their influence, 
back into harmony and fellowship with the Lord. The 
work of destroying idols throughout the land, which was 
accomplished in a considerable degree six years before, 
was renewed and thoroughly accomplished; the Temple 
services were established also in good form. 

In this connection the king ordered the observance 
of the Passover as directed by the Lord, and the record 
seems to be that there had never been a more notable 



one in the history of Israel: the reformation seems not 
only to have been an outward one but one that reached the 
heart, and the desire to please and serve the Lord seems 
to have extended to all classes. Nevertheless we may 
be sure that then, as at all other times, there were both 
deep and shallow natures, and that the majority of the 
Israelites were swayed by the example of the king and 
nobles, without having any clear moral and religious 
sentiments of their own on the subject. It is always so 
in every nation; only the comparatively few seem to 
really hear and appreciate the Word of God. Thus our 
Lord said to those whom he addressed, "Blessed are your 
eyes for they see, and your ears for they hear." The 
majority neither saw nor heard nor appreciated with 
their hearts, although the multitudes said, "Never man 
spake like this man," and great crowds appeared to 
listen. 

R3609 : page 238 

I WILL NOT FORGET THY WORD. 

The golden Text is the key to all proper living. It 
was because David did not forget the Word of the Lord 
that he was the good king, the prototype of the great 
Messiah. David's prophetic words, however, relate 
more particularly to the Christ than to himself. Many 
of his prophecies were written from this standpoint— as 
speaking for Messiah. We are reminded of our Redeemer's 
sentiments as expressed in another Psalm, "I 
delight to do thy will, O my God: thy law is written in 
my heart." (Psa. 40:8.) The Apostle applies these 
words directly to our Lord.— Heb. 10:7. 

What was true of our Lord, the Head of the Church, 
must be true of every member of his body. Not a member 
can be indifferent even to the Word, the testimony, 
the will of God. And the attitude of each must not 
merely be a willingness to do the Lord's will under restraint, 
but it must be of a willing heart, "I delight to do 
thy will." To this end the Word of God must not only 
be appreciated as so much of literature and history and 
divine direction, but it must be so thoroughly appreciated 
as to be received into the heart, or, as the Apostle 
states it, it must be written in our hearts. This reminds 
us of the fact that Adam in his perfection was an image 
of God— that God's law was written in his heart. Indeed 
in his nature, being, he was created in harmony with God, 
in his image, his likeness, as was also our Redeemer by 
his immaculate birth. The followers of Jesus, however, 
born in sin and shapen in iniquity, are far from having 
the divine law written in their hearts— with all of them 
it has become more or less obliterated through the fall. 
A part of the Christian's daily business is to engrave in 
his character, in his heart, more and more deeply, the 
laws of the Lord; and the more earnestly he gives attention 
to this discipline and schooling, necessary to all the 



disciples of Christ, the more he prepares himself for the 
Kingdom condition and join t-heirship with the Lord, 
promised to all those who love and obey and follow him. 

"MAKING WISE THE SIMPLE." 

"The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the 
soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the 
simple. The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing 
the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening 
the eyes." (Psa. 19:7-9.) How true are 
these prophetic declarations may be comprehended only 
by those who have learned to appreciate the Word of 
God. It deters from sin, it encourages toward righteousness, 
it gives consolation in trouble, it gives strength and 
courage in a time of general fear and quaking, it gives 
wisdom in times of perplexity, and the result is that the 
people of the Lord have much advantage everyway 
through it as respects the present life, besides the hope, 
the encouragement and the preparation which it gives 
for the life which is to come. 

The Prophet, representing the Lord's people of a 
future day, cries, "Thy words were found and I did eat 
them," and this represents a double thought: first it 
implies that the Word of the Lord would be lost and 
would need to be searched for; secondly it implies that 
when found it will avail us nothing unless it be appropriated 
to our needs, unless its testimony be received into 
good and honest hearts and be put into practice. The 
Word of the Lord was lost in a most important sense 
during the dark ages. Forms and ceremonies and the 
decrees of councils took the place of the testimony which 
the Lord declares to be sure. The result was increasing 
confusion and deterioration of spiritual vitality amongst 
those professing the name of Christ. Not only was the 
Word of the Lord lost in the sense of not being followed, 

R3609 : page 239 

but in a very important sense it was also lost by not 
being studied. The writing of the Scriptures was generally 
discontinued and the old manuscripts were lost 
sight of. 

The finding of the Word of God seemed to begin 
afresh with the introduction of the art of printing, at 
a time when certain of the Lord's people were aroused to 
inquire more particularly for the "old paths." (Jer. 6:16.) 
In Luther's day, when printing was considerably 
advanced, history tells us that although he had been in 
a religious college for years, and was a professor and 
teacher, he never saw a copy of the Word of God until 
he was twenty years of age. Thank God, conditions are 
so changed now that his Word is found in the sense of 
being easily accessible to the whole people, and in the 
sense, too, that, under his providential care, in this time 
of the end knowledge has been increased so as to be 



universal in Christian lands. (Dan. 12:4.) Thank God 
that to-day his Word is abundantly distributed in all 
civilized lands and is obtainable in all heathen lands 
and in all languages. 

BURIED UNDER TRADITIONS. 

Nevertheless the Word of the Lord is in one sense 
still hidden. It is covered with a thick coating of false 
teaching and human tradition, so that in the homes 
where the book is to be found there is often so much 
blindness upon the eyes of the understanding that the 
truth of God cannot be appreciated. It is still necessary 
for us to pray with the Apostle, for ourselves 
and for others, that, the eyes of our understanding 
being enlightened, we might be able to comprehend 
with all saints the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of the love of God, which passeth 
understanding. It is only as our eyes of understanding 
open that we really see the wonderful things of God's 
book, and that we really get the wonderful blessings 
which he intended only for those who seek in truth and 
in sincerity, only for the saints. 

The prophet speaks of a famine in the land, not for 
bread nor for water, but for the hearing of the Word of 
the Lord. There was such a famine in the dark ages, 
and to a large extent the reformation movement was a 
supply of the heavenly food and drink, spiritual nourishment. 
But, as we have just seen, there is still a famine 
though of another kind. Although there are churches 
in every direction, Bibles in every home, many are 
beginning to find that they are starving— that with the 
Word of God in their hands they are famishing, because 
they have been feeding upon the husks of human traditions, 
creeds and theories of men, which will not stand 
the tests of present-day enlightenment. Some are feeling 
lank and hungry spiritually. We wish there were 
more of these, for the Lord to-day, as ever, is as good as 
his word, assuring us that they that hunger and thirst 
after righteousness [truth] shall be filled. To all who now 
come into the right relationship to the Lord and to his 
Word there is refreshment never before known by his 
people. His Word, always precious, is a hundred-fold 
more precious now than ever before; its beauty, its true 
meaning, its reasonableness are more and more manifest 
to those who have the hearing ear and the eyes of their 
understanding opened, to those who are freed from the 
bondage of human traditions and are seeking the Bread 
from heaven, the testimony of the Lord that maketh wise 
the simple, the humble. 

Now is the time for those who have tasted that the 
Lord is gracious and who have found his Word to be 
meat indeed, who realize that the Lord is present and 
has girded himself, and is serving the household of 
faith with meat in due season— now is the time for these 
to seek for and to assist those who are coming to an 



appreciation of their lankness and their hunger and 
thirst. May the Lord more and more give us wisdom 
and grace in presenting his Truth, that we may testify 
not only with our lips, but with all the conduct of life, 
the power and grace of the Word of Life. 



R3609 : page 239 

THE LONDON, ENG., CONVENTION. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have much pleasure in giving you a short report of 
the third London Convention. The three days of last 
weekend the 10th, 11th and 12th of June, were, to the 
brethren who gathered in London, as a holy convocation 
unto the Lord. We had indeed a time of rejoicing with 
each other for all his goodness, and a time of solemn waiting 
upon him, that we might offer our praise and gain 
further strength. The result is according to his gracious 
promise: the windows of heaven were opened and his 
love was poured out upon us. It has been a memorable 
time for all, and with one consent there were expressions 
of gratitude for the privilege of attending and for the encouragement 
and stimulus gained. It was specially good 
to hear from some who are learning the value of the 
Truth that the Convention has been as a seal to their 
faith, and that full assurance had come. 

All the meetings were well attended and all were 
larger than last year. On the Sunday night there were 
about 600 present, while the average of the other meetings 
was about 350. We had with us Brother Luttichau 
from Copenhagen and Brother Lundborg from Stockholm, 
and it gave pleasure to hear of the growth of the Truth in 
their countries. Then there were, as usual, brethren from 
Scotland and Ireland. 

The addresses were helpful, but a large proportion of 
the value of the Convention was plainly in the assembly 
of the brethren and encouragement through the mutual 
faith. The testimonies were good, indicating a fervent 
desire to be found pleasing to God, and to be faithful 
stewards of the treasure committed to us. On Monday 32 
brothers and sisters symbolized their consecration to the 
Lord by immersion. 

At the close of a Colporteur meeting for testimony, 
etc., on the suggestion of a brother, a message of love 
was sent to you and I have very much pleasure, dear 
brother, in conveying this to you. In support of this all 
the people rose to signify their feelings. We look forward 
to the time when we may have you with us again and when 
the love may be spoken to you and shown in the face. 
We were also desired to express the gratitude which the 
friends have for the meetings held under the auspices of 
the Society. 

We pray for you, dear brother, that you may ever be 



found faithful to the great things committed into your 
hands, that your joy of the Lord may ever increase and 
that you may walk worthy of the Lord to all pleasing, 
being spared to do all his will may have for you. 
With much love in him, I am your brother, 
J. HEMERY. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 