From Our Readers
Emperor Worship  In your article “Funeral for a Former God” (December 22, 1989), you misplaced the blame for the conflict between Japan and the West. This was the result of the attempts of the West to dominate Asia. The rise of Japan as a world power stopped this. No, Emperor Hirohito was not a god, but maybe the Lord used him as a way to lead the oppressed people of Asia to freedom.
T. M., United States
It is not reasonable to conclude that God endorsed the terrible carnage wrought by that conflict. (Habakkuk 1:13) The tragic reign of Emperor Hirohito was used to illustrate that human rulership works to man’s injury and that man sorely needs God’s rulership. (Ecclesiastes 8:9)​—ED.
Were the articles good and proper for a Christian to read? By reading the details about Emperor Showa, are not ‘our minds on the works that are wicked’?​—Colossians 1:21.
Y. F., Japan
Understandably, the articles may have evoked painful memories, especially among readers who lived through the events described therein. Nevertheless, the articles were written to expose the folly of worshiping any human and to turn readers to “the living God.” (Acts 14:15)​—ED.
Choosing Careers  Thank you for your counsel to young people on the value of a university education. (May 8, 1989) For the past 22 years, I have been a professor at a large state university, and I can assure your young readers that aside from the serious spiritual considerations, much of what is taught at universities these days has little practical value. Academic standards have dropped, and often graduates have few marketable skills.
Also, in the past, some had concluded that a young Christian was to be condemned for enrolling in university courses under any circumstances. I therefore appreciated the balanced view expressed in your article.
F. S., United States
Parents must decide how much schooling is appropriate for their children. And while a career in the ministry is recommended for Christian youths, some job training beyond what is offered in secondary school is not objectionable in itself. In some lands, it may be practical or even necessary to receive such training. Parents must weigh the benefits against the effects it might have upon the spirituality of their children. In any event, a Christian’s priority must be the advancement of Kingdom interests, not financial advantage. (Matthew 6:33)​—ED.
My parents used to tell me to learn a trade in school, but I would just forget about it. Since reading your article, I’m taking courses that will help me to get a job I like when I get out of school. But whatever trade I learn, I plan to make the ministry my career.
V. L., United States
Understanding Asthma  My heartfelt thanks for your article. (March 22, 1990) The day before we received it, our doctor diagnosed our daughter as an asthma sufferer. So the article was like an arm of comfort. I shall be using many of its suggestions.
V. H., England
Crossword Puzzles  I am a regular reader of Awake! and especially enjoy the crossword puzzles. They help me memorize scriptures. Will any more be published?
J. W., England
Yes, they will continue to be published from time to time.​—ED.

