Philippines
Coconut palms, lush tropical greenery, white-sand beaches, beautiful seas​—all of these make up much of what is the Philippines. This archipelago of some 7,100 islands has been called the Pearl of the Orient Seas. Adding to its attractiveness is a lighthearted people of deep emotion who love dance and song. Should you visit this island country, you will likely never forget the exceptional hospitality shown by the friendly and beautiful people who live there.
For many, however, the Philippines is a place that brings to mind an entirely different picture​—that of disaster. You may recall the eruption of Mount Pinatubo, with its lahar flows that wiped out complete towns; or possibly you remember the world’s worst peacetime disaster at sea, in which thousands of people died when the ferry Doña Paz collided with an oil tanker. In fact, Belgium’s Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters listed the Philippines as the most disaster-prone country in the world. Typhoons, floods, earthquakes, and volcanoes are common. Add to that the relatively poor economic condition of many inhabitants, and you have a portrait of a beautiful country that has its difficulties.
Throughout the Philippines, Jehovah’s Witnesses are busy making known Bible truth to the 78,000,000 people living there. This is not an easy task. Apart from the threat of natural disasters, there are the challenges of reaching people on the many small islands and in remote areas of the mountains and jungle. Nevertheless, the work is being done. Jehovah’s people have displayed outstanding resilience despite the varied circumstances they encounter. Consequently, they have experienced Jehovah’s blessing on the disciple-making work.
In some ways, the Witnesses in the Philippines are like the ancient Israelites who desired to restore true worship in Jerusalem. They were encouraged by Nehemiah’s words: “The joy of Jehovah is your stronghold.” (Neh. 8:10) Despite the challenges they faced, the Israelites joyfully moved ahead in the work of promoting Jehovah’s worship. Like the Israelites in Nehemiah’s time, Jehovah’s Witnesses throughout the Philippines are being instructed in God’s Word. They too are making the joy of Jehovah their stronghold.
Light of Truth First Shines
The Philippines is unique in that it is the only predominantly Roman Catholic country in Asia. Filipinos originally had their indigenous religions, but over 300 years of rule by Spain impressed Catholicism on the people. Though administration for half a century by the United States exposed people to other forms of religion, the prevailing belief remains Catholic. Some 80 percent of the people profess that faith.
In 1912, Charles T. Russell, a leading Bible Student​—as Jehovah’s Witnesses were formerly known—​stopped in Manila on a lecture tour around the world. On January 14, he gave a talk at the Manila Grand Opera House on the subject “Where Are the Dead?” Literature was distributed to those in attendance.
More seeds of Bible truth were sown in the early 1920’s when Brother William Tinney from Canada came as the next representative of the Bible Students. He organized a Bible study class. Because of ill health, he had to return to Canada, but interested Filipinos continued the Bible study class. Literature sent by mail helped to keep the truth alive in people’s hearts. This was the situation until the early 1930’s. By 1933 the message of truth was being broadcast in the Philippines on radio station KZRM.
In the same year, Joseph dos Santos set out from Hawaii on a worldwide preaching tour. His first stop was the Philippines, but he never made it any farther. Brother dos Santos was given the responsibility to take the lead in the Kingdom-preaching work there and to establish a branch office. The office began operation on June 1, 1934. Brother dos Santos, along with the few local people wanting to serve Jehovah, got busy in preaching and distributing literature. Though there was opposition, by 1938 there were 121 publishers in the country, and 47 of them were serving as pioneers.
Although English was being taught by the Americans, the brothers recognized that people learn the Bible best in their native tongue. This posed a challenge because throughout the Philippines, close to 90 languages and dialects were spoken. However, efforts were made to translate literature into some of the major languages. By 1939 the branch office reported: “We are now making the Tagalog records [of Bible talks], and with these we expect to use the sound machines and phonograph more to the glory of the Lord.” They also reported work on translating the book Riches into Tagalog. Two years later, the translation of booklets into four other key Philippine languages was completed, thus opening up the way for the Kingdom message to be understood by most people in the country.
Among those who responded to the message of truth during those years was Florentino Quintos, a schoolteacher. He first learned something about the work of Jehovah’s people when he talked to a man who had personally attended Brother Russell’s lecture in Manila in 1912. In 1936, Florentino obtained from one of Jehovah’s Witnesses 16 brightly colored books that discussed the Bible. However, Florentino was busy working as a teacher, so for a while, the rainbow-colored books were displayed but not read. Then war struck, the Japanese invaded, and many normal activities came to a halt. Now Florentino had time to read, which he did. In a short time, he finished the books Riches, Enemies, and Salvation. His reading was interrupted by the need to flee from the Japanese, but the seeds of truth had been planted in his heart.
Rapid Growth Despite World War
World War II brought new challenges to Jehovah’s servants throughout the archipelago. At the beginning of the war, there were 373 publishers in the Philippines. Nevertheless, though they were few, they displayed outstanding zeal and flexibility in their efforts to promote pure worship.
Some brothers from Manila moved to smaller towns outside the city and continued their preaching work there. The war made it impossible to import Bible literature, but the brothers were able to place literature that had been stored in private homes before the war. When that supply was exhausted, they resorted to lending books to people.
Salvador Liwag, a schoolteacher who gave up his profession to become a full-time proclaimer of the good news, was in Mindanao when the war broke out. He and some other brothers evacuated to the jungles and mountains. There they continued their theocratic activities. Extreme caution had to be exercised in moving about, to avoid conscription by the Japanese for work in their garrisons. At the same time, anti-Japanese guerrillas often suspected the brothers of being Japanese spies.
Amazingly, there were opportunities to hold small assemblies during the Japanese occupation. A circuit assembly was held in Manila; many attended. Another was held in Lingayen. The inhabitants were surprised to see strangers coming in trucks; but no one interfered, and the assembly was held successfully.
Jehovah blessed all this activity, and the number of Witnesses multiplied. The 373 praisers of Jehovah at the beginning of the war became more than 2,000 just four years later.
Recall that Brother dos Santos had been assigned to take the lead in organizing the Kingdom-preaching activity in the Philippines. In January 1942 he was interned in a Japanese prison camp in Manila. Nevertheless, he too maintained a spirit of zeal. “I told the good news to as many as I could in the camp,” he said. Life in the camp was hard, and many starved to death. When Brother dos Santos was imprisoned, he weighed 135 pounds [61 kg], but when released, he weighed only 80 pounds [36 kg].
The Americans freed the prisoners in 1945 and offered to repatriate Brother dos Santos to Hawaii, but he refused. Why? His joy was in the Kingdom work, and he wanted to do what he could to see that it moved forward in the Philippines. Moreover, his replacement had not yet arrived. Said Brother dos Santos: “Until he came, I was going to stay!” Regarding Joseph dos Santos, Hilarion Amores stated: “He was really hardworking and interested in the spiritual needs of the brothers.”
Missionaries Arrive
The Filipino brothers did the best they could before and during the war, though they had had no special training. Shortly after the war, however, help arrived. Gilead graduates Earl Stewart, Victor White, and Lorenzo Alpiche arrived on June 14, 1947. At last, Brother dos Santos would have a replacement. In 1949 he returned to Hawaii with his wife and children.
Brother Stewart was appointed as branch servant. Most of the other missionaries who came in those early years were assigned to the field. As to the effect of having Gilead-trained missionaries, Victor Amores, who was sent from the Philippines to Gilead, relates: “For organizing the work, it was a big help. The brothers learned from these Gilead graduates. Progress resulted. Before 1975, we reached almost 77,000 publishers, whereas in 1946 we were only 2,600.” After the first three brothers, quite a few other missionaries followed, including the Browns and the Willetts, who served in Cebu, and the Andersons, who worked in Davao. There were also the Steeles, the Smiths, and Brothers Hachtel and Bruun. Neal Callaway arrived in 1951. He later married a local sister, Nenita, and they served in virtually all parts of the Philippines until his death in 1985. Denton Hopkinson and Raymond Leach from Britain arrived in 1954, and they continue to contribute to the work in the Philippines after more than 48 years.
Foreign Gilead graduates were not the only ones to contribute to the organization and expansion of the Kingdom-preaching work in the Philippines. By the 1950’s, Filipino brothers were also invited to Gilead School, and almost all of them returned to serve in their home country. The first three were Salvador Liwag, Adolfo Dionisio, and Macario Baswel. Victor Amores, mentioned earlier, used his training in the traveling work and at Bethel. He later raised a family but returned to the full-time service. He served as a traveling overseer and then as a special pioneer in Laguna Province, along with his wife, Lolita, until he was in his late 70’s.
Onward Through the 1970’s
As the work moved ahead rapidly, the number of publishers continued to increase, surpassing 77,000 by 1975. Overall, Jehovah’s servants maintained their spirituality and kept on serving God loyally. However, there were many who stopped serving Jehovah when the present system of things did not end in 1975. By 1979, the number of publishers had fallen below 59,000. Cornelio Cañete, who was serving as a circuit overseer in the mid-1970’s, said: “Some got baptized because of 1975 and stayed for a few years. After 1975, they left the truth.”
The vast majority, though, just needed encouragement to continue having the proper view of Christian service. So the branch office took steps to organize special talks. As a result, not only were the active ones encouraged but some of the inactive ones were helped to be active praisers of Jehovah again. The brothers came to understand that they served God, not with a date in mind, but forever. Since that time of temporary decrease, the number of Kingdom publishers has increased dramatically. Those who did not let disappointment cause them to forget all of Jehovah’s goodness have truly been blessed!
Opening Up Remote Areas​—In the Mountains
The thousands of islands that make up the Philippines are scattered over about 1,150 miles [1,850 km] of open sea from north to south and 700 miles [1,100 km] from east to west. Some islands are not inhabited, and many have rugged mountain areas. Reaching people in such remote places is a challenge.
One such area is Kalinga-Apayao. In the rugged Cordillera Central mountains of northern Luzon, people are divided up into tribes and villages, each with its own dialect and customs. Although head-hunting was abandoned in the 20th century, enmity between the villages has been common, resulting in feuds and killings. Geronimo Lastima said: “In former years, it was difficult to send special pioneers into those territories. The local people would go after the brothers with the intention to kill.”
The solution was to send sisters. Geronimo explained: “They didn’t go after women. Tradition dictates that women should not be harmed.” The sisters were effective in teaching the truth to the local people. Then, in turn, the locals were baptized and became pioneers. They understood the culture of their own people and knew how to witness effectively. As a result, “hunters” have spread all throughout these mountains​—hunters of those who want the truth. In the 1970’s, there were only a few Witnesses in all of Kalinga-Apayao; now there are two circuits.
Similarly, in the neighboring mountainous province of Ifugao, there was not even a single Witness in the early 1950’s. Three regular pioneers were assigned to preach to the people living among the centuries-old rice terraces. In time, local people began to accept the truth. Today there are 18 congregations with 315 publishers in that area.
In the far northern mountains of Abra, the problem is how to reach villages where there are not yet any Witnesses. A circuit overseer with a keen desire to take the good news to the remotest areas invited 34 others to join him in preaching in the area near Tineg. (Acts 1:8) Since there is no public transportation, the group trekked seven days through the mountains to reach ten villages with about 250 homes.
The circuit overseer relates: “It was quite a challenge to walk along the mountain ridges while carrying all our supplies. Of the six nights, we spent four sleeping in the open mountain air or beside a river.” It had been many years since some of the villages had received a witness. In one place, they met a man who said: “Twenty-seven years ago, Jehovah’s Witnesses preached to my father. He told us that Jehovah’s Witnesses have the truth.” Altogether, the group placed 60 books, 186 magazines, 50 brochures, and 287 tracts and demonstrated many Bible studies.
Preaching in Other Remote Areas
Palawan is a large island of the Philippines. Long and narrow, it extends for 270 miles [434 km]. Located far from the hustle and bustle of the more populated islands, Palawan is the forest home of various tribes and many isolated settlements, including those of migrants. Ready to take on any assignment, missionary Raymond Leach was sent there as circuit overseer. There were few Witnesses and long distances to cover. He recalls: “I was assigned there from 1955 to 1958, and there were only 14 publishers in all of Palawan. It took me five weeks to visit them.”
Since then, there has been much progress, though it remains a place of challenges. Febe Lota, now in her early 40’s, started as a special pioneer in Palawan in 1984. She relates what happened while serving in Dumaran: “We came to what we thought was the last house. We couldn’t imagine that there was another, but there was!” Living back amid the palms was a married couple whose work was to take care of a coconut grove. And what is more, they were interested in the Bible!
Febe says: “If it weren’t for serving Jehovah, I would never have gone back to that place.” To reach there, Febe and her partner would spend a day walking through coconut groves along a stretch of sandy and rocky beach. At high tide, they walked through water up to the knees. Because of the distance, they decided to go there once a month and spend several days. That meant lugging food, books, magazines, and extra clothing. “It was a real sacrifice for us to be exposed to the heat of the sun and to stinging, biting insects. We would arrive dripping with sweat.” However, their efforts were rewarded as they saw the interested couple progress very rapidly in their Bible study.
The couple was forced to leave their work at the coconut grove when the manager, a Baptist, found out that they were studying with the Witnesses. Febe was pleasantly surprised when she later saw the wife of the couple again. Not only was she already baptized but, as Febe says, “she was sitting with us at the meeting for pioneers held at the district convention.” What a joy to see the fine fruit of one’s labors!
On the large island of Mindanao in the southern Philippines, there are many areas that are hard to reach. Nathan Ceballos has served there as a traveling overseer, accompanied by his wife. During the weeks that they were not visiting congregations, they made efforts to preach in isolated territories. They invited other brothers and sisters to come along. Once the group used 19 motorcycles to reach many villages. Roads are rough and muddy, and the Witnesses had to cross rivers and streams, most of which have no bridges. Although people in those areas have little money, they donated soft, handmade brooms in appreciation for the literature brought by the brothers. Imagine the sight as the brothers headed back home, their motorcycles loaded with brooms! Nathan says: “All went home weary and untidy but full of joy, knowing that what we had done was Jehovah’s will.”
Using Every Means to Preach the Good News
In recent years, Jehovah’s organization has encouraged Kingdom preachers to take advantage of every opportunity to give a witness. This has been especially appropriate in the more populated areas of the country. The larger cities, such as Davao, Cebu, and Metro Manila, are much like other cities throughout the world, with their multitude of businesses, offices, condominiums, and subdivisions. What has been done to reach people in these places?
Makati is part of the circuit that, until recently, was served by Marlon Navarro. Marlon, a young graduate of the Ministerial Training School, worked hard to organize preaching in the financial district of Makati, an area assigned to three congregations. Brothers and sisters, many of them pioneers, were selected and trained to work this area effectively. Bible studies are being conducted in the malls and parks in this part of the city; some of these Bible students are attending meetings.
Cory Santos and her son, Jeffrey, are both pioneers. Often they engage in street witnessing in the morning, sometimes as early as 6:00 a.m. At that time of day, they meet people coming home from the night shift on their factory jobs. They have even started Bible studies while doing this street work. Some who were initially contacted in this way have progressed to baptism.
Outside the cities also, publishers have been alert to find opportunities to witness to others. Norma Balmaceda, who has been special pioneering for more than 28 years, spoke to a woman who was waiting for a ride. Norma asked the woman: “Where are you going?”
The woman answered: “Quirino Province.”
“Are you from that place?”
“No, but my husband is intent on moving there because life here in Ifugao is so hard.”
That provided the opening for Norma to share the good news about the Kingdom government, which will solve man’s problems. They parted ways. Years later, at a circuit assembly, a woman approached Norma and introduced herself as the person that Norma had spoken to. She was now baptized, and her two daughters and husband were enjoying a Bible study.
At the branch office in Quezon City, the brothers are alert to use every opportunity to witness. Felix Salango, for example, is well-known for his zeal in preaching to others. He has often auxiliary pioneered while serving at Bethel. During the year 2000, while construction on an additional residence building was progressing, Felix took note of the workers who had been hired to erect the outer shell of the building. He approached the chief engineer and asked permission to talk to the workers. Felix says: “After their lunch, I went to the site, where the engineer had gathered the more than 100 workers. I described the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses and explained that knowledge is needed in order to survive the great tribulation. I had with me one box of brochures and one box of Knowledge books. I explained that if the workers were interested in studying God’s Word, they could have one of the publications.” Felix also explained how the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses is supported worldwide and put the publications and an envelope near a coconut tree. Many of the workers took a book or brochure, and a large number also put a donation in the envelope.
Some were interested in studying, including the chief engineer. Every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday during the lunch break, Felix arranged to study with him in the brochure What Does God Require of Us? The engineer told Felix: “What I am learning here, I explain to my wife and to my friends.” Two other engineers working there wanted to study too as well as a security guard and a couple of the secretaries. Yes, witnessing at every opportunity brings Jehovah’s blessing.
Missionaries Come In
Over the years, 69 trained foreign missionaries have gone to the Philippines to assist in the Kingdom-preaching work. They have done this in a variety of ways. Denton Hopkinson and Raymond Leach, mentioned earlier, were originally assigned to the field, first as missionaries and then as traveling overseers. Later, they were given assignments at the branch office.
A number of Gilead graduates arrived during the 1970’s to help with the newly established printing operations. Among them were Robert Pevy and his wife, Patricia, who had previously served in England and Ireland. Robert was helpful in setting up a writing desk at the Philippines branch office. Everyone was sad to see them leave in 1981 to take up service at world headquarters in Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.
Dean and Karen Jacek arrived from the United States in 1980, and after a brief period of Tagalog language study in Laguna, they were assigned to the branch. After some additional training in 1983, they helped the brothers​—locally and in nearby island nations—​to learn the use of the computer system developed by Jehovah’s Witnesses that has proved essential in supporting the publishing of Bible literature in local languages.
Hubertus (Bert) and Jeanine Hoefnagels from the Netherlands arrived in 1988. The branch was just about to start a major construction project. Since the couple had previous experience in branch construction and Bert was familiar with heavy-equipment operation, they were assigned to help with the project. Bert operated the equipment and also trained others. He says: “From the beginning, I was training the local brothers to drive trucks, a backhoe, a bulldozer, a loader, and a crane. Eventually, we had a group of some 20 to 25 people who were working with heavy equipment.”
Later, they were joined by four other Gilead graduates​—Peter and Beate Vehlen from Germany and Gary and Teresa Jeane Melton from the United States. The Vehlens also had experience in branch construction, and the Meltons had five years of experience serving at the United States Bethel. All were able to make a contribution to the branch construction work.
Years earlier, in 1963, the last missionary home had been closed down, since the work in the field could be cared for by qualified Filipino pioneers. Nevertheless, in 1991 the Governing Body arranged to send six missionaries into the field. Although experienced in branch work, these missionaries also had experience that could be used to good benefit in the field. For example, Jeanine Hoefnagels started special pioneering at the age of 18. She could now use her experience and vivacious personality to encourage the brothers and new ones. Her husband, Bert, commented on other benefits. He said: “Having missionaries in the field here helps people to understand the international scope of our work.” Meanwhile, some missionaries have continued caring for administrative and other duties at the branch.
The Philippines not only has had missionaries come in but also has had missionaries go out.
Missionaries Go Out
While missionaries were still coming in, the Philippines started sending Filipino pioneers to other countries to share in missionary work there. Although local pioneers may not have had the same organizational training as Gilead graduates, excellent local pioneers were abundant. Since World War II, the disciple-making work had expanded much more rapidly in the Philippines than in nearby countries. Thus, starting in 1964, qualified Filipino pioneers have been invited to take up missionary service throughout Asia and the islands of the Pacific. Some who were sent out have been married couples, but most have been single pioneers who already had a decade or more of experience in the full-time ministry. By mid-2002, 149 had been sent to 19 different lands. Of these, 74 continue in their assignments. While waiting for paperwork to be processed, prospective missionaries spend time at the branch and receive training and experience that will help them in their assignments. What contribution to the preaching work have these missionaries made over the years, and what challenges and joys have they experienced?
Rose Cagungao (now Engler) and Clara dela Cruz (now Elauria) were the first to go out. Their assignment was Thailand. About a year later, Angelita Gavino joined them in that assignment. Of course, as with other missionaries, learning the language was a big challenge. Angelita tells about learning Thai: “For the first few weeks, I felt frustrated because everything written in the book looked like ‘worms’ to me, and at the meetings we could hardly talk to anybody because of the language barrier.” But learn they did, and they continue using this acquired language to help others.
After those first few, a steady stream of willing pioneers was sent to a variety of countries. Porferio and Evangeline Jumuad were asked to go to Korea in 1972. They learned the language well, and after two and a half years in the missionary field, the Jumuads were invited into the circuit work.
In 1970, Salvacion Regala (now Aye) was one of nine Filipino sisters who arrived in Hong Kong to begin missionary work. Learning Cantonese was her first challenge. The Cantonese language has nine tones. Change the tone, and the word changes meaning. Salvacion remembers struggling with those tones, once telling her Bible student that they had moved out of their lodging place “because of a ghost” when she really meant “because of the high rent.” Eventually, she learned the language. Salvacion has helped more than 20 people learn the Bible’s message of truth. Now she meets many Indonesians who work as domestic helpers in Hong Kong, so she is trying to learn Indonesian.
Rodolfo Asong, a determined but friendly brother, had completely different conditions to face when he was assigned to Papua New Guinea in 1979. He threw himself into learning the language and did so well that after just a short time in the country, he was sent out as a traveling overseer. However, visiting congregations in Papua New Guinea was very different from doing so in the Philippines. He says: “I learned how to paddle a small, single, wooden canoe while standing, like the natives do.”
Regarding assemblies, Rodolfo relates: “Because of distances and lack of affordable transportation, we arranged many small assemblies. The one held in the village of Larimea was the smallest I have ever attended. The total attendance was ten.” On another occasion, he was appointed as convention overseer for the gathering held in the village of Agi. He says: “I was also appointed to serve as convention chairman, to care for the Sound and Food Service departments, to direct the drama, and to play the role of King David.” He truly exerted himself in that assignment and later enjoyed missionary service in the Solomon Islands.
In 1982, Arturo Villasin, an adaptable brother from Luzon, was sent to the Solomon Islands. He served there as a circuit overseer and found conditions to be quite different from the Philippines. Many islands could be best reached by small plane. He related: “One time our plane crashed, but we all survived. Another time we barely missed hitting the side of a mountain on account of poor visibility.” As to visiting some congregations, he said: “We trek through the rain forest, climbing muddy, steep hills to visit congregations located among bush people who worship their ancestors.” Arturo died unexpectedly of health complications in 2001, but he will long be remembered as a faithful missionary.
Experiences like these from the Filipino brothers and sisters sent to missionary fields in Asia and the Pacific are plentiful. Despite the challenges, these willing and self-sacrificing servants of Jehovah have made a significant contribution to the preaching work in these lands.
Joy in Helping Others Make Jehovah Their Stronghold
Joy is found in Jehovah’s blessing. (Prov. 10:22) Adelieda Caletena, who was sent to Taiwan in 1974, says: “I am indeed very happy and thankful to Jehovah that he is blessing our work here and has given me the opportunity to be a part of it.”
Paul and Marina Tabunigao, now serving in the Marshall Islands, say: “We have helped 72 persons to serve Jehovah. It makes our hearts rejoice that many of them are now serving as elders, ministerial servants, special pioneers, regular pioneers, and active congregation publishers.”
Lydia Pamplona, who has served in Papua New Guinea since 1980, has helped 84 persons to the point of dedication and baptism. She recently reported that she conducts home Bible studies with 16 people, most of whom now attend meetings. Her personal comments no doubt sum up the feelings of many of the missionaries: “I thank Jehovah for the ministry he has entrusted to me. May he continue to bless our ministry, to his glory.”
The branches where Filipino missionaries were sent have appreciated having them in the local territory. The Thailand branch wrote: “The missionaries from the Philippines are doing good work. They are examples of faithfulness over the many years they have been in Thailand. They stick to the work despite advancing age. They love Thailand and the Thai people; they consider this to be their home. Thank you very much for sending us these fine missionaries.”
Kingdom Ministry School Helps Equip Elders
Around the same time that pioneers were first being sent out from the Philippines to serve in other lands, Jehovah’s organization provided training for the increasing number of qualified brothers shouldering responsibilities in the congregations at home. The Kingdom Ministry School was one of the primary means to accomplish this training.
The first classes started in 1961 as a one-month course. Jack Redford, who had been a Gilead instructor and would later serve as a missionary in Vietnam, was assigned to teach this course in the Philippines. The early school was held at the branch and conducted in English.
Although English is fine for some, consideration always needs to be given to the other common languages and dialects in the Philippines. Many elders would get more from the course held in their own tongue. Thus, from the mid-1960’s, the course was conducted in several languages. Cornelio Cañete remembers being assigned to teach throughout the Visayan Islands and Mindanao. He chuckles when he says: “I was teaching the course in three languages: Cebuano, Hiligaynon, and Samar-Leyte.”
Over the years, the course has been altered, including the way it is scheduled. Recently, the course was held over a weekend​—one and a half days for elders and one day for ministerial servants. However, there is still the challenge of teaching the school in about eight languages. Elders knowing these languages go out from the branch and conduct a training school for traveling overseers. These, in turn, conduct the actual schools for the congregation elders and ministerial servants. At the last one held, 13,000 elders and 8,000 ministerial servants benefited from this training.
Help for the Pioneers
Later the pioneers also began to receive additional training. In 1978 the first classes of the Pioneer Service School were held. All serving as pioneers at that time were enrolled in the classes, including special pioneers. Since then, except for the years 1979 and 1981, classes have been held every year.
The pioneers have benefited greatly from the school, but they have had to face challenges in order to attend. Some have made financial sacrifices to get there. Others have put up with difficulties in transportation.
Those attending the school held in the city of Santiago had to deal with an unexpected situation. Rodolfo de Vera, the circuit overseer, related: “On October 19, 1989, Santiago, Isabela, was struck without warning by a supertyphoon with maximum winds of 127 miles per hour [205 km/hr]. When we started our classes that morning in the Kingdom Hall, there were just some showers and a slight wind, so we proceeded with the pioneer school. However, the winds got stronger, and the building began to shake. Soon, the roof was blown off. We wanted to leave, but we saw that it was more dangerous outside because of the many flying objects.” Although the building began to break apart, all survived unharmed. They attribute their survival not only to Jehovah but also to a suggestion in the Awake! magazine to seek protection under a table or a desk during such situations. Brother de Vera said: “We took shelter under the tables. After the typhoon passed, we were covered with fallen branches and metal roofing sheets, but all who had stayed in the building under the tables were unhurt.”
Each year, schools are conducted in seven languages. Up to the 2002 service year, 2,787 classes have been held with a total of 46,650 pioneers completing the course. What a fine provision this has been to help pioneers enhance their skills and put full trust in Jehovah as they continue “shining as illuminators in the world”!​—Phil. 2:15.
Early Efforts in Offset Printing
All the work in the field and in the congregations would be much more difficult without the excellent Bible literature that is available. For many years, printing for the Philippine field was done in Brooklyn. In the early 1970’s, however, a factory was built right on the branch’s premises in Quezon City. Letterpress equipment, similar to what Brooklyn had, was installed. This enabled the branch to print all magazines right on site.
Within that decade, it became clear that letterpress printing, with its hot-metal method, was being phased out by the printing industry, in favor of offset printing. Direction given by world headquarters indicated that we would gradually make this change too.
In 1980 the branch purchased commercial phototypesetting equipment. The South Africa branch had obtained the same type of equipment and shared their experience with the Philippines. This computerized typesetting system went hand in hand with a small sheetfed offset press that was purchased about the same time.
On a small scale, this equipment allowed the brothers to learn the techniques used in offset printing. David Namoca, who already had extensive experience in Linotype operation for letterpress printing, learned how to use the phototypesetting equipment. Other brothers learned how to make offset printing plates and how to do the printing on the newly purchased press. Thus, by the end of 1980, the branch was already using the offset method to turn out some issues of Our Kingdom Ministry and magazines in languages requiring fewer printed copies.
The upcoming changeover to offset printing also introduced the use of computers to help the brothers involved in translation and prepress work. Little by little, the brothers gained experience and confidence. In due time they were able to improve both the quality and the quantity of printing using these methods. In fact, in 1982 the brothers were so eager to make progress that they printed Kingdom News No. 31, a four-color publication, using the one-color offset press. The paper was run through the press six times​—four for the full-color side and two for the other. It was a big job, and the quality may have left a little to be desired; but everyone was delighted to see a four-color Kingdom News produced on our own equipment.
That arrangement served to get things started, but how would the full transition to computerized phototypesetting and offset printing be accomplished? Jehovah’s organization had something in mind, and the Philippines branch would soon benefit from it.
Jehovah’s Organization Provides MEPS
The Governing Body authorized the production of a computerized phototypesetting system that would meet the unique needs of publishing the good news in scores of languages. The Multilanguage Electronic Phototypesetting System (MEPS) was developed at Brooklyn. Although the commercial equipment used for a while by the branch had introduced the use of computers and offset printing on a limited scale, MEPS would allow the Philippines branch to move ahead in this area, along with other branches throughout the world.
Two couples were invited from the Philippines to Wallkill, New York. The brothers received training in MEPS computer maintenance and the application of MEPS programs to prepress work. Another couple, Florizel Nuico and his wife, spent their time at Brooklyn, where Brother Nuico learned how to operate M.A.N. offset printing presses. This was just what the Philippines branch needed to move fully into computerized prepress work and offset printing.
In 1983 an M.A.N. offset press arrived in the Philippines. It was erected with the help of Lionel Dingle from the Australia branch. Brother Nuico began training local brothers in what he had learned at Brooklyn. By the end of 1983, the first magazines were rolling off this press. However, the system was not yet fully in place, so for a while, magazines were produced by combining the hot-metal method with offset printing.
Completion of the system was not far off though. The first MEPS computer arrived at the end of 1983, and the two brothers who had been trained at Wallkill set to work teaching others how to operate and maintain MEPS equipment. Within a short time, production was under way. Dozens of Bethelites were thoroughly trained in how to use the system for translation, text entry, composition, and phototypesetting as well as in how to repair computers. In the Philippines, the training process is complicated by the number of languages involved. The Watchtower itself is prepared in seven languages, not including English. MEPS was well suited to the task.
There was noticeable improvement in the quality of the publications being produced. Concerning those doing the printing, Cesar Castellano, a factory worker, says: “Most of our brothers are farmers. Some did not have any technical skills. It is impressive to see how Jehovah through his spirit moves the brothers to be able to do a lot of things, including the printing work.” The brothers learned, and the publishers in the field received publications that were increasingly appealing. But there was a more important benefit​—a spiritual one—​that was made possible by these technological advancements in printing methods.
Spiritual Food at the Same Time
When the magazines for the Philippines were printed in Brooklyn, it took six months or more for what had appeared in the English magazines to be published in the Philippine languages. Although the magazines were translated locally, sending manuscripts and proofs back and forth and finally shipping the printed magazines took quite a bit of time. When magazine printing was moved to the Philippines in the 1970’s, time was saved, but the contents of the magazines were still six months behind the English issues. Many of the Filipino brothers thought, ‘Wouldn’t it be wonderful to have the vernacular at the same time as the English?’ For years, that was just a dream.
However, with the advent of MEPS and the adjusted production procedures, what previously had been a dream became reality. The Governing Body realized that studying the same material at the same time would have a powerful unifying effect on all of Jehovah’s people. This goal was pursued, and by January 1986, The Watchtower was available simultaneously with English in four local languages: Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Iloko, and Tagalog. Other languages soon followed. Then, what a surprise it was at the 1988 conventions to receive the book Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand! in three vernacular languages at the same time as the English edition! The brothers were joyful​—not only to have higher quality literature to offer to interested ones but to be able to benefit from the same spiritual feeding program at the same time as the majority of their brothers throughout the world.
These improvements in our printed publications came at a time of turbulent conditions in some parts of the country. The publications would emphasize the constant need for all to make Jehovah their stronghold.
Military/Rebel Encounters
Activities of rebel groups intensified in many areas of the country during the 1980’s. Some were connected with the Communist movement. Encounters between government troops and subversive forces became more common. These conflicts often tested the brothers’ trust in Jehovah.
In one area where there was a congregation of 62 publishers, the brothers woke up one morning to find that the rebels and the military were lining up for battle. The brothers’ homes were right in the middle. One elder went to the rebel forces, and another went to the government troops. They asked them not to fight there on account of the number of civilians that would be affected. Their request was ignored. Unable to flee, the brothers gathered at the Kingdom Hall. An elder led them all in a prayer that was quite long and loud enough to be heard by government troops outside. When the brothers opened their eyes, they found that the two sides had gone off somewhere else; there was no battle. These brothers were convinced that Jehovah had protected them.
Dionisio Carpentero has been a traveling overseer for over 16 years, accompanied by his wife. He still recalls what happened during his first year in circuit work, in the province of Negros Oriental, south-central Philippines. He relates: “We visited Linantuyan Congregation. We were happy because on Wednesday, 40 publishers joined us in field service. But we were unaware that the rebel forces were watching our every move. Their hideout was near the Kingdom Hall. Four of them went to our accommodations at 4:00 p.m. to inquire about us. An elder there explained that I am a circuit overseer and visit their congregation every six months.”
Apparently, the men did not believe the explanation. Instead, they suspected Dionisio of being a military man and demanded that the elder bring him out so that they could kill him. The elder replied that they would have to kill him first. They left.
Dionisio continues: “The dogs barked through the night, indicating the presence of the rebels. We prayed four times that night, asking Jehovah to guide us. Then, although it was the dry season, it rained hard. The men who were waiting to kill us left.”
After the meeting on Sunday, Dionisio informed the elders that he and his wife would leave for the next congregation. However, to do so, they had to pass by the rebel hideout. “One of the men was looking out the window,” says Dionisio. “We even told him that we were leaving. Nevertheless, at 8:00 p.m., rebels went to the Kingdom Hall asking for us. The elder told them that we had already left and had even passed by their hideout. Surprisingly, they had not seen us. This experience taught us to trust in Jehovah and to be courageous in facing difficulties.” With his wife, Dionisio joyfully continues his service.
Such conflicts at times make witnessing difficult. To be in such places at the wrong time could mean being caught in the cross fire. In some cases, however, one faction or the other has informed the brothers of impending conflicts. When that happens, the brothers choose a more peaceful place to witness until the fighting is over. Nevertheless, the Kingdom witness work goes on, and the brothers have learned to rely on Jehovah.
Tests of Neutrality
Jesus said regarding his followers: “They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.” (John 17:14) As in other nations, Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Philippines have stayed out of the world’s politics and military conflicts. They have not ‘taken up the sword’; rather, they have laid down their weapons and pursued the ways of peace as taught by Jehovah. (Matt. 26:52; Isa. 2:4) This neutral stand is well-known throughout the Philippines, and people on all sides recognize that Jehovah’s Witnesses are no danger to them. However, there have been times when Jehovah’s servants have had to show clearly where they stand on matters. This has served as a protection to them.
As a traveling overseer, Wilfredo Arellano has extensive experience serving in a variety of territories, some peaceful and others not so peaceful. In 1988 he visited a congregation in south-central Philippines. There the brothers had been pressured by subversives to join with them in rebellion against the government. The brothers firmly refused.
Wilfredo relates what happened: “During my visit, government troops were active in the congregation’s territory. They wanted to form the residents into a militia group to combat the subversives. At a meeting with government representatives, the brothers were given an opportunity to explain why they would not join the subversives or a government militia group. While some local residents were against our stand, the government spokesmen respected us.”
Wilfredo tells what happened next: “One brother, on returning to his farm after the meeting, encountered a group of heavily armed men with two blindfolded prisoners. He was questioned whether he had attended the government meeting, and he answered truthfully that he had. The armed men wanted to know if he had joined the militia, which he had not, and he explained his neutral stand. Thus, he was allowed to continue on his way home. A few minutes later, he heard two shots and realized that the blindfolded prisoners had been executed.”
In the 1970’s and early 1980’s, Philippine law made it compulsory for all citizens to vote. Violators were imprisoned. This gave Jehovah’s people the opportunity to demonstrate their loyalty to God. Like their Christian brothers around the world, Jehovah’s servants in the Philippines have maintained their position of neutrality in politics, remaining “no part of the world.”​—John 17:16.
After a change in government in 1986, the country’s constitution was revised, removing the requirement to vote. This has made it easier for the brothers. However, there were other tests faced by many, particularly those of school age.
‘Learning War No More’
Irene Garcia grew up in the central Luzon province of Pampanga. She faced a problem that is still a test for many youths. In high school, army training is required. Students who are Jehovah’s Witnesses, though, have personally decided that they cannot share in a program that teaches the ways of war. First, Irene prayed to Jehovah for his help. Then, keeping in mind the three faithful Hebrew youths of the prophet Daniel’s time, she personally went to the army training commander and requested that she be exempted from the training. (Dan., chap. 3) Though he did not fully understand her position, he did express his appreciation for her explanation. However, he warned her that a low grade would be the result of her nonparticipation. Irene answered: “That’s OK. I will just try to do my best in my other subjects.” She was given other work to do instead of army training. She said: “It resulted in other children of Witnesses not having any problem asking for exemption, and I still graduated in the top ten.”
Not all army training commanders have allowed exemptions. Some commanders have made it difficult for students to graduate. Even so, sticking to Jehovah’s principles has taught thousands of youths an important lesson: Taking a firm stand on the side of Jehovah’s Kingdom and maintaining neutrality in this world’s affairs bring Jehovah’s protection and blessing.​—Prov. 29:25.
Number of Conventions Increases
Now let us take a look at spiritual gatherings of Jehovah’s people. These are always joyful occasions. Since Witnesses were few in the country before World War II, there were no large gatherings until after the war. Nevertheless, efforts were made to build up the brothers in this way. In fact, the 1941 Yearbook reported on a convention held in Manila in March 1940.
You will recall that Joseph dos Santos was imprisoned by the Japanese. He was finally released by the American forces early in 1945. He was keenly interested in the spiritual welfare of the brothers, many of whom were new in the organization. Arrangements were made to help them learn how to teach Scriptural truths effectively to others by means of home Bible studies. The national assembly held in Lingayen, Pangasinan, toward the end of 1945 was one way to do this. About 4,000 attended, indicating the great amount of interest at that time. What a joyful occasion that was, now that the war had ended!
From that point on, convention attendances grew steadily as the number of publishers increased. Some 17 years later, that 4,000 became 39,652. Then the conventions were held, not in just one location, but in seven. In another 15 years (1977), the district convention attendance surpassed 100,000. By then, 20 conventions were held throughout the country. Eight years later, attendance was over 200,000, and by 1997, those attending district conventions numbered more than 300,000. For the year 2002, it was possible to plan 63 conventions, the largest number ever. Travel throughout the islands can be challenging and sometimes expensive. Having conventions in multiple locations brings them closer to the brothers, making it easier to attend. As a result, more are benefiting from these spiritual feasts.
Jehovah Blesses Efforts to Attend
It has not been easy to attend assemblies and conventions. In 1947, in the northern part of the country, brothers floated down the Abra River on two rafts to attend a circuit assembly in Vigan, on the coast. At the mouth of the river, they broke up the rafts and sold the lumber in order to buy tickets for the bus that would take them back home to the mountains after the assembly. They brought with them big bags of rice, bundles of wood, sleeping mats, many children, and warm smiles that grew bigger as the assembly progressed. With rice, firewood, an old-fashioned burner, and a sleeping mat, they cared for all their material needs.
In 1983 a group from the Caburan Congregation in the southern Philippine province of Davao del Sur walked for three days across mountainous terrain to reach a motorboat terminal. Then they traveled by motorboat for another day to the convention city. They felt that the joyful association with others at the “Kingdom Unity” District Convention was well worth the effort and expense.
In 1989 one family with two children, ages two and four, walked about 40 miles [70 km] from the town of El Nido in Palawan to attend a circuit assembly. It took them two days to walk through jungle where there are few marked trails. As they walked, they had to pluck leeches from their bodies. To make matters worse, it rained continuously for the two days. There were many creeks and rivers that had to be crossed, but there were no bridges. Despite these difficulties, the family arrived safely. How they enjoyed their association with the brothers there!
In other areas, limited financial resources make it hard for families to get enough money to attend conventions. Ramon Rodriguez faced that problem in 1984. He lives with his family on Polillo Island, off the east coast of Luzon. Ramon is a fisherman. It was just one week until the convention, but his family of seven had enough money for only one to attend. They prayed to Jehovah about this, after which Ramon and his 12-year-old son went out to fish. They rowed out to sea and dropped their nets but had no success. After some time, the son insisted that they go back closer to home and try. There they tried one more time. Ramon says: “We were not expecting it, but when we pulled up the nets full of fish, there were so many that they filled the boat.” They had caught over 1,100 pounds [500 kg] of fish! By selling the fish, they had more than enough money for the entire Rodriguez family to attend the convention.
The next night, other brothers wanting to attend the convention dropped their nets in the same location and caught another 200 pounds [100 kg] of fish. Ramon adds: “Non-Witness fishermen who went out and dropped their nets at the same time were surprised because they did not catch even one fish. They commented: ‘Their God blessed them because they’re going to attend the convention.’” Time and again, Filipino Witness families have learned that putting spiritual things first in life and acting in harmony with one’s prayers bring joy and Jehovah’s blessing.
Outstanding Conventions
Jehovah’s people throughout the world fondly remember past conventions. The brothers in the Philippines are no exception. Although all convention programs are appreciated, some take on special meaning and leave a deeper impression on heart and mind. Sometimes these are international gatherings or, perhaps, conventions where missionaries return to their country of origin and share their experiences with those gathered.
As was noted earlier, there are quite a few Filipino brothers and sisters serving as missionaries in other Asian nations and islands of the sea. On several occasions, Witnesses around the world have contributed funds to help the missionaries return to their native countries and attend conventions there. Filipino missionaries also benefited from this loving arrangement. In 1983, 1988, 1993, and 1998, dozens were helped to come back to the Philippines to enjoy the conventions with their families and friends. Reports from 1988 show that 54 missionaries serving in 12 countries were back for conventions in the Philippines. At that time, these 54 had an average of 24 years in full-time service. Everyone thoroughly enjoyed their expressions and experiences related on the program.
Others remember conventions because of associated events and the determination of the brothers to carry on despite inconveniences. For example, just before the 1986 “Divine Peace” District Convention in Surigao, on Mindanao, a typhoon hit the city with 100-mile-per-hour [150 km/hr] winds. The stadium roof was severely damaged. All electric power to the city was cut off and was not restored until after the convention. Water had to be fetched from four miles [6 km] away. That did not stop the Witnesses from gathering together. Brothers salvaged what was left of the platform and set it up in a gymnasium next to the stadium. They rented a generator to power several lights, the sound system, and a refrigerator for the cafeteria. Although 5,000 were expected to attend, a peak of 9,932 enjoyed the convention! These were certainly not fair-weather Christians.
International conventions have been especially memorable. The Governing Body arranged for international conventions to be held in Manila in both 1991 and 1993. The delegates left a big impression on the city. What a wonderful interchange of encouragement this was for the Filipino brothers and sisters, most of whom do not have the means to travel and visit other countries! (Rom. 1:12) The foreign delegates were impressed by the warm and friendly hospitality shown to them by their Filipino brothers. One couple from the United States wrote: “Our special thanks for your warm reception. You received all of us with open arms that wrapped around us so lovingly!”
In 1993, stadiums at three locations in Manila were used, and whenever a member of the Governing Body gave a talk, the three places were linked by telephone hookup. How thrilled the delegates were when the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures in Tagalog was released! One young sister said: “I was filled with joy. I had hoped for the time when we would have the New World Translation in Tagalog. What a surprise to receive it!”
In 1998 the tables were turned. For the first time since 1958, the Philippines was invited to send delegates to other countries. Thus, 107 went to the West Coast of the United States for a convention there. In September, 35 others had the privilege of attending an international convention in Korea. Such conventions have truly played an important part in educating and unifying Jehovah’s people and in helping all to make Jehovah their stronghold.
Now let us turn our attention to the work in the field. How has this been accomplished in a land with so many languages?
Presenting the Good News in Many Languages
As mentioned earlier, it is generally easier for people to learn the truth in their native language. This presents a challenge in the Philippines because of the many languages spoken. Nevertheless, Jehovah’s Witnesses have endeavored to meet the needs of the people by witnessing to them in their own tongue and preparing Bible literature in a variety of languages.
Usually, a witness can be given to a certain language group by those who already speak that language. In some cases where few Witnesses know the language, zealous publishers and pioneers have tried to learn it. In this way, they have imitated the apostle Paul, who became “all things to people of all sorts.”​—1 Cor. 9:22.
Although the Philippines is the fourth most populous country in the world that has English as an official language, that is not the native language of most of its people. Not all read English well, so there is a need for publications in several Philippine languages. Over the years, Jehovah’s Witnesses have translated Bible publications into at least 17 of these languages. Some have just a brochure or two​—such as Tausug, a language of the Islamic peoples in the south, or Ibanag, spoken by a small ethnic group close to the northernmost part of the country. For the most part, people understand and are comfortable with one of the seven major languages. The Watchtower is translated and printed in these. Thus, spiritual programs at Kingdom Halls or at assemblies and conventions are primarily presented in these languages.
In recent years, the government has encouraged the use of the Pilipino language, which is essentially the same as Tagalog. Over a generation, the effects of this have been noticeable. There has been a profound increase in the use of Pilipino in speech and in print, whereas there has been either no change or a decrease in the use of other languages. This is reflected in the printing figures for The Watchtower. In 1980, total circulation of the Tagalog edition per issue was 29,667. By the year 2000, this figure had quadrupled, reaching 125,100 per issue. During the same time, there was minimal change in English and only a modest increase in the other Philippine languages.
Bethel Family Supports Work in Field
Some 380 full-time ministers serve at the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Quezon City, part of a conglomerate city called Metro Manila. A staff of 69 works on translating and proofreading publications in the vernacular. Part of this staff recently completed the translating of the Hebrew Scriptures of the New World Translation into three languages: Cebuano, Iloko, and Tagalog. Ever since the Greek Scriptures of this Bible were released in 1993, the brothers had been looking forward to having the complete New World Translation. How thrilled they were to receive the Tagalog edition as a district convention release at the end of 2000! Cebuano and Iloko editions soon followed. Hundreds of thousands of people in the field can now benefit from this clear, accurate, and consistent translation of the Holy Scriptures.
Members of the Philippines Bethel family come from various backgrounds and speak 28 different languages and dialects. Thus, many are well qualified to translate Bible-based publications. However, translating is only part of the work done at Bethel.
Bethel volunteers perform a variety of tasks that give support to the all-important preaching work in the field. Some brothers print magazines and other literature. Volunteers also deliver it to various points on Luzon. Many perform support duties in the Bethel Home itself, such as maintaining equipment, cooking, and cleaning. Others are assigned to the Service Department, where they receive and send correspondence in many languages to help the congregations, traveling overseers, and full-time servants in the field. You can imagine how much correspondence is handled for some 3,500 congregations throughout the archipelago!
From the time that the branch office was first established in 1934 until the mid-1970’s, the activities at the branch were under the oversight of a branch servant, or overseer. After Joseph dos Santos returned to Hawaii, Earl Stewart, a missionary from Canada, had that responsibility for some 13 years. Two other brothers served for short periods of time after that. Then in 1966, Denton Hopkinson, who had arrived in 1954, was appointed branch overseer. He served well as such for about ten years until Jehovah’s organization saw fit to implement a new arrangement for the oversight of branches worldwide.
In harmony with direction to branches all over the world, in February 1976 oversight was transferred from just one man to a Branch Committee. This group of qualified men working under the direction of the Governing Body would be responsible for decisions affecting the work in the field and at the branch office. Originally, the Branch Committee in the Philippines was composed of five members. Later, since most of the original committee members were foreign missionaries, it was deemed wise to increase the number of Filipino brothers. So for a time the committee grew to seven.
The advantages of this Branch Committee arrangement were quickly seen. Denton Hopkinson, now serving as the Branch Committee coordinator, observes: “Looking back, you can see how that was a wise and timely move. With the amount of work and the size of the organization, one person could not keep his finger on all things. The weight of responsibility is more evenly distributed now.”
Proverbs 15:22 says: “In the multitude of counselors there is accomplishment.” Consulting with others results in a valuable pool of wisdom. The Philippines Branch Committee applies that principle. Since Brother Hopkinson was appointed branch overseer, the size of the Bethel staff has grown tenfold, and so has the work. The Branch Committee presently consists of five longtime servants of Jehovah. They have spent, on an average, more than 50 years in full-time service. Their combined experience has certainly been helpful as the work throughout all of the islands has moved forward vigorously under Jehovah’s guiding hand. The Branch Committee and all in the Bethel family count it a grand privilege to support this work.
Bringing the Truth to “All Sorts of Men”
Accomplishing the work of preaching is truly in harmony with God’s will that “all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) What “sorts” of people have been helped by zealous preachers throughout the Philippines?
Marlon was the sort of person who was always getting into trouble. He was known in his village as a man with many vices: smoking, getting drunk, using drugs, and carrying on with bad associates. When the Witnesses came, Marlon’s mother took an interest in the Kingdom message. Pioneers walked dusty and muddy roads to conduct a study with her. At first Marlon showed no interest in joining the study but just walked by occasionally. However, the brothers who conducted the study with his mother showed an interest in him. In time, he not only started studying but cut off his waist-length hair to attend his first meeting at the Kingdom Hall. He made rapid progress, and people were surprised at the big changes he had made in his life-style. Marlon now serves as a full-time pioneer minister, bringing the truth to others. What motivated him to accept the truth? He indicated that it was the perseverance of the pioneers in coming to study with his mother that convinced him that they had the truth.
Some may not seem to be the sort of people who would be inclined to accept the truth. Nevertheless, proclaimers of the good news do not prejudge people but give them the opportunity to hear. On the small island of Marinduque, a special pioneer gave a witness at one house. When finished, she asked if anyone else lived there. The householder replied that someone lived upstairs but added: “Don’t bother going; he’s violent and flares up easily.” However, the pioneer felt that the man should be given the opportunity to hear the Kingdom message. Upon going up to the door, the pioneer found that it was as if the man had been waiting for her. With a smile, she offered a free home Bible study. She was surprised that the man, Carlos, seemed happy with the offer. A Bible study was started with him and his wife.
During the pioneer’s second visit, Carlos revealed that he and his wife had serious problems and had even attempted suicide. When the pioneer had first called downstairs, Carlos had put his ear to the floor to listen, and he had heard the householder discouraging the pioneer from going upstairs. When he heard that, he prayed that the pioneer would ignore the advice and come up anyway because maybe this was the answer to their request for peace of mind. Their study of the Bible did bring them peace of mind. The two were baptized together, and Carlos’ wife is now a regular pioneer minister.
Another man, named Victor, had been exposed to both Buddhist and Catholic teachings. He began to wonder why there are so many religions in the world. He personally started to search for the truth. After examining Islam, Hinduism, Shintoism, Confucianism, the theory of evolution, and other philosophies, he found that none of these satisfied him. In his search, he found that only the Bible contained accurate prophecy. Thus, he centered his search on the Bible. Through an examination of the Scriptures, he and his girlfriend, Maribel, concluded on their own that the Trinity, hellfire, and purgatory are false teachings. Still, something seemed to be missing.
Sometime after he and Maribel were married, Victor talked to a Witness and learned that it is necessary to use God’s name. After checking this in his Bible, Victor immediately began to use Jehovah’s name in his prayers. Soon he was attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall and making rapid spiritual progress. Both he and Maribel were baptized in May 1989, and Victor now serves as a traveling overseer, building up congregations.
Pioneers have helped people in all sorts of situations. Primitiva Lacasandile, a special pioneer in the southern part of Luzon, started a Bible study with a couple in a village. They had two children. Economically, they were poor. Once when Primitiva arrived for the Bible study, she was shocked to find the oldest child hung up in a sack in the house, crying. Primitiva says: “The mother was wielding a knife and was about to kill the child. I stopped her and asked why she was going to do that. The mother explained that it was because of their financial distress.” Primitiva gave them Bible counsel on their problem, which resulted in saving the life of the child. They continued their Bible study and started attending meetings, even though they had to walk five miles [8 km] to reach the meeting place. The couple progressed and were baptized, and now the husband is an elder in the congregation. Primitiva says: “The child that was almost killed is now a regular pioneer. Truly, the work Jehovah gave his servants saves lives now and in the future.”
Serving Where the Need Is Greater
There are yet many areas having few Kingdom proclaimers. Pioneers and publishers have volunteered to go to these places. Pascual and Maria Tatoy were serving as regular pioneers. They volunteered to go with Angelito Balboa, a special pioneer, to help work the territory on Coron Island, on the western side of the Philippines. To support themselves, Pascual went fishing with another brother and Maria made treats of sticky rice to sell.
When the circuit overseer visited, he pointed out the need on another island, Culion. The place had a leper colony, and there were only four publishers. He invited the Tatoys to go there. Pascual and Maria accepted, and Jehovah has blessed their efforts. The four publishers on Culion have now become two congregations.
In the mid-1970’s, large numbers of boat people fled Vietnam. Many of them ended up in the Philippines. For about 20 years, refugee camps were in operation. A large camp was located on Palawan Island. Some Filipino brothers volunteered to take the truth to these people. One Vietnamese-speaking brother came from the United States to help. Some accepted the truth in the camp. Others became familiar with Jehovah’s name and his Witnesses before moving elsewhere.
Special pioneers are serving in many of the remote areas of the Philippines. They often take other publishers and pioneers with them when working distant places. Norma Balmaceda tells about working the mountainous province of Ifugao. She says: “We usually go on Monday, taking our preaching bags full of literature, our clothes, and food​—enough to last us until Saturday morning. In the afternoon, we return for our congregational meetings.”
Some congregations arrange preaching expeditions, especially when there is fair weather. They may spend several days or a week going to territories in the hinterland. Nicanor Evangelista, now serving at Bethel, remembers doing such work. He says: “In the rural areas, it is Filipino custom that if people are interested, they will say: ‘You may sleep here with us. You can cook here.’ Sometimes the pioneers would study the Bible with the interested ones late into the night because the pioneers slept right there.”
Aeta Learn the Truth
In their effort to witness to all sorts of people, Jehovah’s servants have made some contact with the Aeta, or Negritos, as they are otherwise called. The Aeta are considered the original inhabitants of the Philippines. They are relatively few in number, and making contact with them is not always easy. This is because many of them live as nomads in the mountain forests, catching game or looking for wild fruit and vegetables. They have some similarities to the Pygmies of Africa, being less than five feet [150 cm] tall and having a dark complexion and curly hair. Some have been assimilated into general society, and others have set up more permanent homes near populated areas. Many used to live in the mountains around Mount Pinatubo but were displaced at the time of the huge eruption there.
Another group of Aeta lives on Panay Island, in central Philippines. Lodibico Eno and his family are Aeta from that area. Applying Bible principles brought many changes for Lodibico. He relates: “Before, I had many vices: chewing betel nut, smoking, drinking, gambling. I was also very violent. We had an unhappy family life. If I had not quit those vices, I might have already lost my life. Now my body has become clean. My teeth, which used to be reddish, have become white. I am an elder in the congregation. All these blessings I have received from Jehovah God.” Just like this Aeta family, even people from small tribes have experienced the freedom that comes from following Jehovah’s way.​—John 8:32.
Bringing Freedom to Those Not Free
Another sort of people who have been helped are those in prison. Since the 1950’s, Jehovah’s Witnesses have put forth a special effort to visit those behind bars. A significant number have been helped to accept the way of the truth.
As a young person, Sofronio Haincadto was involved in rebellion against the government. He was arrested and sentenced to six years in prison. While at the New Bilibid Prison on Luzon, he noticed a prisoner who did not attend the religious services allowed for prisoners. He learned that the man had become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. That led to almost daily discussions about the Bible. Sofronio says: “I became convinced that what I had previously been fighting for could not really change society and make it better.” He learned that only God’s Kingdom can bring the desired changes. With the help of brothers from a nearby congregation, Sofronio made spiritual progress and was baptized in a prison well used for watering plants.
After serving his sentence, Sofronio went on to become a regular pioneer and, later, a special pioneer. During his full-time service, he was able to help about 15 people accept the way of the truth. After marrying, he had six children. Three of them now enjoy full-time service, one of them as a circuit overseer. In 1995, two of his sons attended Ministerial Training School. The truth brought real freedom to Sofronio, to his family, and to others he helped.
Special pioneers have been preaching to prisoners at the Iwahig penal colony in Palawan, and in fact, they were permitted to build a small Kingdom Hall right on the premises. An inmate who had been convicted of arson, larceny, and several murders began to study. When he was helped to apply what he learned from the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, what a change it made in his life!
After more than 23 years of incarceration, this man was given notice of his impending release. He expressed a desire to be with his family members again after such a long time. However, his family was so ashamed and afraid of him that they sent word: “Please don’t come back.” They were not aware of the tremendous changes that God’s Word had brought to his life. What a surprise they got when this calm, peaceable Christian returned to his hometown!
The largest national women’s prison is located in Mandaluyong, Metro Manila. For many years, Jehovah’s Witnesses were given only limited access to this facility. However, this changed when a woman who had already been studying the Bible was transferred to this prison. The authorities said that she should join one of the other religious groups there, but she insisted that she could not, explaining that she wanted to worship only with Jehovah’s Witnesses. The authorities agreed and allowed the Witnesses to visit this facility weekly. Several women there have been baptized since then, and a nearby congregation regularly conducts the Watchtower Study and some other meetings for the benefit of interested female prisoners.
The message of truth has brought unique freedom to some of those behind bars. They too are precious to Jehovah, and his people are delighted to have a share in assisting such ones.
Longtime Servants Carry On
A Bible proverb says: “Gray-headedness is a crown of beauty when it is found in the way of righteousness.” (Prov. 16:31) Yes, how beautiful it is to see those who have made the joy of Jehovah their stronghold over many years!
Before World War II, the theocratic organization in the Philippines was small. There are very few who can trace their service back that far. Thus, it is quite encouraging to meet Leodegario Barlaan. He has been in the full-time service since 1938. During the war he and his companions were mistreated by the Japanese, but they kept on preaching. After the war he continued in full-time service with his wife, Natividad, and they were eventually invited into the traveling work. Later they served as infirm special pioneers in the province of Pangasinan. Natividad died in 2000, but Leodegario continues in that assignment. Everyone is encouraged by his determination to do what he has always done​—the preaching work.
The witnessing activity grew rapidly after World War II. Many who learned the truth then continue to serve even now. For example, during the war Pacifico Pantas read Bible publications that belonged to his neighbors who were Witnesses. He says: “I began attending meetings. Next I applied for general [now, regular] pioneer service, but I hadn’t been baptized yet. They asked me to get baptized, so I did.” That was in 1946. Pacifico’s pioneering took him to several parts of the country. He enjoyed other privileges too. He says: “I was invited to the 16th class of Gilead and was able to attend the 1950 international assembly in New York City. After graduation I served as a circuit overseer in the states of Minnesota and North Dakota, U.S.A., and then returned to the Philippines to serve as a district overseer for the country south of the Pasig River, from Manila all the way to Mindanao.”
In the following years, Brother Pantas enjoyed a variety of assignments at Bethel and as a traveling overseer. Then in 1963, Pacifico got married. He and his wife had children, so it became necessary for them to settle down to raise their family. They kept on serving Jehovah as a family, and all three children have grown up as praisers of Jehovah. These three presently serve as elders, and one has graduated from Ministerial Training School. Another is serving at Bethel. Even in his older years, Brother Pantas remains a positive force in the congregation.
Presentable Halls for Worshiping Jehovah
It is only recently that Jehovah’s people in the Philippines have had Kingdom Halls as their places of worship. For many years the vast majority met in the brothers’ homes. Of course, even in the first century, Christians used houses for meetings. (Rom. 16:5) However, as congregations in modern times grew, it became desirable to have places that could comfortably accommodate more people.
David Ledbetter said: “It was very difficult for many because of the lack of financial resources. Even in Metro Manila, a big city, we had only one Kingdom Hall built on land owned by the congregation. In every other place where there was a Kingdom Hall, the congregation had the building but they didn’t own the land.” The brothers’ wages were so low that the congregations could not afford land.
So the brothers made do in any way that they could. What they had, they willingly shared. For example, Denton Hopkinson remembers Santos Capistrano, a brother in Manila who made the second floor of his house available to be used as a Kingdom Hall for some 40 years. Brother Hopkinson says: “After Brother Capistrano’s wife died, his children lived downstairs. The Kingdom Hall was upstairs, and he had just a small area for his room, with a kitchen at one side. The Kingdom Hall took most of the second floor. You would think it was inconvenient for him, but he was happy to have it that way. That was the spirit of the brothers.”
Eventually, it became possible to build Kingdom Halls on land owned by the congregations. The value of the peso picked up, and by the 1980’s, there was modest improvement in wages, thus making it feasible to borrow money. As a result, a few congregations were able to get loans.
Then, a loving arrangement initiated by the Governing Body made a big difference. Announcements about a Kingdom Hall Fund were made in the United States and Canada, and not long after that, the Philippines benefited from money that had been contributed for the specific purpose of building Kingdom Halls. This arrangement follows the principle that “an equalizing might take place,” making it possible to arrange for loans. (2 Cor. 8:14, 15) Things started gradually, but hearing how the arrangement was working elsewhere encouraged more and more brothers to try to have a Kingdom Hall too.
What a difference this arrangement has made! Regarding Kingdom Hall loans, the branch office reports: “Overall, there have been more than 1,200 Kingdom Hall projects. It certainly has made an impact throughout the country.” Although at first a large part of the funds came from other countries, eventually the Filipino brothers could support their own program. Concerning this, the branch office states: “For several years now, all financing of Kingdom Hall projects has come from loan repayments and contributions from the brothers within the Philippines. This shows that even in economically depressed areas, much good can result when the money is pooled.”
A large number of congregations now have Kingdom Halls. There are about 3,500 congregations in the country, and there are those still needing their own meeting place. However, about 500 of these congregations have fewer than 15 publishers and cannot afford Kingdom Hall loans. So the merging of congregations has recently been encouraged to make it more practical to have Kingdom Halls.
Adjustments in Viewpoints on Meeting Schedules
Some congregations, whether having their own Kingdom Hall or not, are located in remote areas. Brothers have to walk two, four, or even more hours over rough terrain to get to the meeting place. As a result, there are areas where it is impractical to come together more than once a week to a central place for meetings. Consequently, many of these congregations had all their meetings on one day except for the Congregation Book Study. Brothers came prepared to share in four meetings. They brought food for lunch. In this way, the long distance to the meeting place needed to be traversed only once a week, with other activity, such as the field ministry, being carried on in the local area on other days.
During the 1980’s, this practice began to spread to not-so-remote congregations, even those in city areas. Perhaps economic hardship caused some to think of ways to save money. Fewer days with meetings meant less travel and less expense. Other brothers became overly concerned with convenience, perhaps using time on other days for personal pursuits, such as education or secular work.
More and more congregations began to have four of their meetings on one day, and some congregations, even all five meetings! However, this meant that congregations in the Philippines were drifting further and further from the way things are done by most of Jehovah’s people throughout the world, who have meetings on three different days during the week. The brothers had become somewhat out of balance in this regard. During the visit of the zone overseer in 1991, this matter was called to his attention. In turn, the Governing Body was consulted. They responded by saying: “We do not believe this is a good practice unless there are extreme extenuating circumstances.” This information was conveyed to the brothers, first in the cities and then in the rural areas.
It was pointed out that besides conforming to the established worldwide arrangement for meetings, the congregations would spiritually benefit more from having separate meetings than from trying to cram all the material into three and a half to four hours. Young children and newly interested ones had found such a schedule difficult. Elders could prepare higher quality talks when preparing for one or two meetings rather than for many.
What was the response of the congregations to this counsel? The vast majority responded positively, quickly making adjustments to have midweek meetings. Now, with the exception of the very remote congregations, most congregations enjoy a more balanced spiritual program each week.
Assembly Halls
For many years, circuits used school grandstands, gymnasiums, racetracks, or other public facilities to hold assemblies. Despite any inconvenience, the brothers appreciated these opportunities for joyful association.
As with Kingdom Halls, obtaining Assembly Halls was not easy. Economic constraints came into the picture here too. Nevertheless, many circuits were keen on having their own meeting places. As a result, quite a few modest Assembly Halls have been put up. These usually serve only one or two circuits, not a group of circuits as in many other countries. In many cases, land was donated or purchased at a reasonable cost, particularly in rural areas. Brothers then pooled their contributions and built a simple structure​—usually an open-sided hall with just a roof to shade the audience, a concrete floor, a raised stage, and some seating.
In the Metro Manila area, even that was not possible primarily because of exorbitant land prices as well as the cost of putting up an appropriate structure in the city. Congregations in the area contributed to a fund for that purpose, but the amount received was far below what was needed just to purchase land. Through the 1970’s, the 1980’s, and most of the 1990’s, assemblies in Metro Manila continued to be held in schools, grandstands, and similar places.
In the meantime, the number of congregations and circuits in the Metro Manila area continued to grow, making the need for an Assembly Hall acute. A search for suitable land began. Letters went out to the congregations informing them of the privilege of supporting the project financially. In 1992 about 15 acres [6 ha] of land was found, near the Lagro district on the northern end of Metro Manila.
Metro Manila congregations supported the project by sending contributions and volunteer workers. International servants came in from several countries to help with the work. One of them, Ross Pratt from New Zealand, relates: “In March 1997 we got the approval from Brooklyn to begin. It was a big earthwork job, and 38,000 cubic yards [29,000 cu m] of soil was moved to get the site prepared for the buildings. There were 50 to 60 permanent workers. The Assembly Hall was finished in November 1998.” It was then dedicated. Since the hall was designed to hold up to 12,000 people, district conventions can also be held there. The open sides on this Assembly Hall allow the tropical breezes to move through as the audience listens to the program inside. Sixteen circuits in and around Metro Manila now regularly enjoy spiritual programs at this hall.
Additional Branch Property
As the number of congregations and circuits in the field multiplied, the work load at the branch increased. In 1980 there were about 60,000 publishers in the field. Before a decade passed, the Philippines would join the ranks of countries having over 100,000 publishers. In the same period, the Bethel family grew from 102 to 150. However, even in the early 1980’s, space at the branch was getting tight. There was a need for more accommodations.
The Governing Body gave instructions to look for more property. Felix Fajardo tells what happened: “We went from house to house to find out if there was any property for sale near Bethel. The Filipino and Chinese owners said that they were not selling their property. One property owner adamantly said: ‘Chinese do not sell. We buy. We never sell.’” So, at that time, it seemed that nothing was available close to the original branch.
A search was made for property in other places. If necessary, the branch office would move out of the city. Several sites were found in nearby provinces. The Governing Body took particular interest in a large parcel of land near San Pedro, Laguna, being offered by a brother for a reasonable price. Approval was given to purchase this. Planning went ahead for building offices, a Bethel Home, and a factory on that land. However, as time passed, it seemed that moving things there was not Jehovah’s will. There was no telephone service, the road was poor, and there was a security problem in that area. It became evident that this property was not the best place for a branch. So it was made into a farm to help supply the Bethel family’s needs. Yet, that did not solve the problem of needing more space for the branch office.
An unexpected turn of events seemed to indicate Jehovah’s direction. Felix continues: “Out of the blue, our nearest neighbor said: ‘We are selling our property​—1,200 square yards [1,000 sq m]. We would like to sell it to you.’ So the Governing Body told us to buy it. We thought that it was sufficient, but when we submitted our building plans to world headquarters, we were told: ‘Maybe you can look for more property. You need a little bit more.’
“Right after that, a doctor and an attorney came and said: ‘We would like to sell our property to you.’ It was also 1,200 square yards [1,000 sq m]. Next, a woman who had about 2.5 acres [1 ha] next door wanted to sell. She sold it at a very reasonable price. We thought we had a pretty good size now. But headquarters said: ‘Find some more.’”
Then came some unexpected help. The doctor and the attorney who had sold us their property went around to the other neighbors and convinced them to sell their land. One by one they offered their property to the branch. After almost all nearby properties were purchased, another proposal was sent to headquarters. Again the answer came back: “You need some more.” The brothers were thinking: ‘Where are we going to go now? We have exhausted all possibilities nearby.’
About this time, a telephone call was received about the property owned by the businessman who had previously said, “Chinese do not sell.” It was now for sale! Felix explains: “Brother Leach and I found out that no one else was interested in it. So we got it very cheap. It seems that Jehovah’s hand was in the matter.” Another 2.5 acres [1 ha] of land was added, and finally, headquarters said: “You have enough to start planning to build.”
As time passed and conditions changed, it became evident that the farm in San Pedro was no longer needed. Much of the food for the Bethel family could be purchased in bulk at rates lower than the cost of producing it at the farm. So the decision was made to sell the farm. By 1991 it was in the hands of a new owner. Proceeds from the sale were used to help defray the costs of the new buildings at the branch.
Building the New Branch Facilities
The land now owned by the branch was more than triple the size of the original 2.5-acre [1 ha] lot purchased in 1947. With the help of the Regional Engineering Office at the Japan branch of Jehovah’s Witnesses, plans were drawn up, and the work of preparing the site began in mid-1988. Some of the old wooden buildings were to be torn down. The new buildings would include an 11-story residence building and a large 2-story factory. A Kingdom Hall was to be erected on the site.
Besides the Gilead graduates who were assigned to help, almost 300 brothers and sisters from about five countries came as long-term international servants and short-term international volunteers to help on the project. Nearby residents were amazed when they saw that people from other countries came to help. They were even more taken aback when they learned that the majority of these had come at their own expense! Local brothers and sisters added to the atmosphere of international unity.
As with the acquisition of the land, Jehovah’s direction was seen as construction progressed. For example, only one company in the Philippines handled the type of roof sheeting needed for the buildings. However, the branch’s order for material was 301st on the company’s waiting list! The brothers made an appointment to speak directly with the vice president of the company, and they explained the volunteer nature of our work. The company’s board of directors met, approved the brothers’ request, and moved their order to number one on the production list. Soon after the materials were delivered, workers at that company went on strike.
A fine spirit was manifested by the multitude of brothers involved in the branch construction project. About 600 volunteers each week came from nearby congregations to help. In fact, some 30 percent of the work was done by these volunteers.
High construction standards were maintained. Since the islands of the Philippines are located in an active earthquake zone, brothers engineering the project made sure that the 11-story building could withstand strong tremors. How different these high-quality buildings were compared with the previous structures, one of which had been built in the 1920’s! The oldest were torn down to make way for the new ones.
Finally, on April 13, 1991, the branch dedication program took place. John Barr of the Governing Body gave the dedication talk to an audience of 1,718. Brothers and sisters who had been serving Jehovah for more than 40 years were invited to the program and enjoyed it along with guests from ten countries. On the following day, 78,501 benefited from a spiritually upbuilding program that was carried by telephone line to six locations throughout the archipelago.
Filipinos Go Out as International Servants
During the branch construction, international servants from other countries shared their skills with Filipino brothers. Hubertus Hoefnagels, who trained others, comments: “Many of the local brothers are very zealous, and they were able to apply what they had learned.” As a result, when the Philippines project was finished, some of these trained brothers were able to go out as international servants to help on branch projects in other countries, particularly in Southeast Asia.
Joel Moral, from Quezon Province, was one of them. He first came to the branch construction project in Manila with the thought of volunteering to work for one week. However, his help was needed, and he was asked to stay on. Although he had no extensive experience in construction, working on the branch project enabled him to gain skills quickly by learning from foreign international servants.
Even before the project in the Philippines was finished, a need arose for help on a new branch in Thailand. Joel says: “I wasn’t expecting it, but I was invited to go to Thailand. My experience on construction in the Philippines was a big help to prepare for international work.” He stayed more than one year helping on the construction in Thailand.
Joshua and Sara Espiritu got acquainted with each other while they were both working on the Philippines branch construction. They were married shortly after the dedication of the branch and made it their goal to serve together as international servants. After a few months, they were invited to share in construction work in other countries. Since then, they have served in five countries: three in Asia and two in Africa. Joshua says of his experience while still in the Philippines: “While we were working with the brothers from other countries, we learned skills. We now had knowledge that we could share with others.” When they were sent to other countries, they told the local brothers: “We will not always be here. In the future you will continue the work.” Regarding his goal when going to other countries, he explains: “We do not go there just to work, but we really try to teach the brothers.”
Of course, going to different countries requires flexibility. Jerry Ayura was sent to several places, including Thailand, Western Samoa, and Zimbabwe. He explains: “I learned that Jehovah uses people of all kinds of backgrounds. We love them because Jehovah loves them.” How happy these Filipino brothers are that they can contribute to Jehovah’s work on an international scale!
Unrest Does Not Stop the Work
Making the joy of Jehovah one’s stronghold includes continued loyalty to him, even in difficult times. There have been numerous opportunities for Jehovah’s servants in the Philippines to demonstrate this.
Though martial law ended on January 17, 1981, unrest continued through the 1980’s. In February 1986 the government was replaced. However, the change of power was relatively peaceful, and even congregations located where the “People’s Power” revolution took place continued their meetings and preaching without interruption. While passing by “People’s Power” crowds, publishers noticed priests and nuns mingling among the people and egging them on to action.
The new government quickly implemented certain changes. However, unrest did not end. In the first three years after the new government came to power, there were a number of coup attempts, some of them bloody. On one occasion during the branch construction, foreign and local construction workers alike were surprised to look out across the city and see renegade soldiers bombing their own military camp. These encounters were relatively brief, but they made it necessary to encourage some congregations to meet at Kingdom Halls in safer locations.
For many years, unrest between government troops and opposing forces has continued in some areas of Mindanao. While carrying on their ministry, brothers there have had to act discreetly and trust in Jehovah. Renato Dungog, a graduate of Ministerial Training School and now a circuit overseer, served in an area where there has been much strife throughout. On one occasion, while Renato was waiting for a boat, a soldier asked him: “Where are you going?”
Renato explained: “I’m a traveling minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I visit the brothers twice a year to strengthen them and to go preaching with them.”
The soldier responded: “God must be with you, or else you would have been killed.” So despite turmoil, the brothers carry on their work, trusting in Jehovah, and they are well respected for it.
Back Into the Courts With the Flag-Salute Issue
Youths have had their loyalty to God tested. On June 11, 1955, President Ramon Magsaysay signed into law Republic Act No. 1265 requiring all children in public and private schools to salute the Philippine flag. Children of Jehovah’s Witnesses reacted conscientiously, as do Witness youths throughout the world. (Ex. 20:4, 5) Although they respect the nation’s emblem, they cannot conscientiously engage in what they consider to be religious acts of devotion to any object. When children of the Gerona family in Masbate were expelled from school for not saluting the flag, it resulted in a case that was taken to the Philippines Supreme Court in 1959. The court, however, did not respect the religious stand of Jehovah’s Witnesses. It contended that the flag “is not an image” and that “the flag is utterly devoid of any religious significance.” Thus the court took it upon itself to legislate what is or is not religious.
Of course, this did not change the Witnesses’ religious beliefs. The brothers stood firm for Scriptural principles. The court’s decision did result in some difficulties, though not as severe as might have been expected.
Flag salute was not an issue again until the court’s decision was incorporated into the Administrative Code of 1987. After that, in 1990 a number of children of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Cebu area were expelled from school. A superintendent of schools was adamant in enforcing the rule. The expulsions spread.
The media covered the expulsions. Then a committee on human rights took an interest in these children, who were being denied an education. It seemed that the mood had changed from that of 1959. Was it now Jehovah’s time to bring the matter out into the open again? Ernesto Morales, an elder at that time in Cebu, observed: “Editors, newspapermen, educators, and others all urged us to take the case to court.” The Legal Departments at the branch and at world headquarters were consulted. The decision was made to file a case.
However, the Regional Trial Court, followed by the Court of Appeals, rendered unfavorable decisions. They were unwilling to go against the Supreme Court’s decision in the 1959 Gerona case. The only way to resolve the matter would be to take the issue back to the Supreme Court. Would they be willing to hear the case? Yes was the answer from the Supreme Court! Felino Ganal, a Witness lawyer, took the lead in filing the case before the highest court. Within days, the Supreme Court issued an injunction requiring that all the expelled children be readmitted to the schools, pending a decision on the case.
Arguments were filed by both sides. After careful consideration, the Supreme Court reversed the 1959 decision and upheld the right of children of Jehovah’s Witnesses to refrain from saluting the flag, reciting the pledge of allegiance, and singing the national anthem. The court explained the landmark decision: “The idea that one may be compelled to salute the flag, . . . on pain of . . . being expelled from school, is alien to the conscience of the present generation of Filipinos who cut their teeth on the Bill of Rights which guarantees their rights to free speech and the free exercise of religious profession and worship.” The court also ruled that expulsion of Jehovah’s Witnesses from schools would “violate their right . . . , under the 1987 Constitution, to receive free education.” The Manila Chronicle declared: “The Supreme Court corrects a 35-year injustice on the Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
A motion for reconsideration was filed by the opposing parties, but on December 29, 1995, the Supreme Court denied the motion. Thus, the decision stands. What a victory for Jehovah’s people!
Work Continues Despite Disasters
As noted at the beginning of this report, the Philippines is frequently afflicted by disasters. Let’s take a look at some disasters that have affected the brothers.
Earthquakes: Since the islands are located at the junction of two major tectonic plates, the country is prone to earthquakes. One authority says that at least five earthquakes take place each day, with many more temblors that are not felt by humans. Most cause no disturbance to life, but occasionally, severe earthquakes wreak havoc.
At 4:26 p.m. on July 16, 1990, one such severe quake with strong aftershocks struck near Cabanatuan, a city in central Luzon. Benguet Province was also heavily affected. A number of schools and hotels collapsed, resulting in loss of life.
At that time Julio Tabios, who was serving as district overseer there, was traveling with his wife on the way to a circuit assembly in a mountainous area of Benguet. A brother who was carrying vegetables to sell in Baguio gave them a ride in his truck. After winding through the mountains, they came to a narrow portion of the road where they had to allow an oncoming vehicle to pass. Just then, rocks started falling down the mountain. They realized that it was a strong earthquake. Julio says: “The brother managed to back up his truck to a wider space, after which a big rock thudded onto the spot we had just left. We were thankful to be safe. Moments later, a second tremor hit, and we watched a huge rock next to us tremble as if it were dancing.” Whole sides of mountains slid down.
Landslides had blocked the road. The only way to reach the assembly site, or anyplace else for that matter, was by trekking through the mountains on foot. At nightfall, they were put up at the house of a kind person. The next day, they climbed a high mountain to get to their destination. Along the way, they made contact with a number of brothers who were helping one another to cope with the effects of the earthquake. Finally, after hiking along dangerous mountain trails, they reached Naguey, where the assembly was to be held. Julio relates: “What tears of joy among the brothers, since they were no longer anticipating that we would arrive! Though we were very tired, we were refreshed when we saw the happy brothers and sisters welcome us.” Despite the earthquake, many had made the effort to be there, demonstrating their great appreciation for spiritual things.
You may recall that the new buildings at the branch were under construction at the time. Although the residence building was not yet finished, the 1990 earthquake was the first structural test for this building. The swaying back and forth made some Bethelites queasy, but the building did just what it was engineered to do and came through the strong temblor undamaged.
Floods: Because of the humid tropical climate, most parts of the country receive generous amounts of rain. Certain areas are quite susceptible to flooding. Leonardo Gameng, who has engaged in full-time service for over 46 years, recalls: “We had to hike two miles [3 km] in mud up to the knees.” Juliana Angelo has served as a special pioneer in territories in the province of Pampanga that are prone to flooding. “To reach interested ones with the Kingdom message,” she says, “we rode in little paddleboats. The brother paddling needs sharp vision to avoid trees where snakes lurk, apt to drop into the boat.” Corazon Gallardo, a special pioneer since 1960, spent many years in territories in Pampanga. At times, there was no boat to ride in, and she recalls that she had to walk in floodwaters almost up to the shoulder. Despite such difficulties, she maintains a fine attitude. She has learned to be adaptable and to rely on Jehovah, knowing he will never forsake his loyal ones.
Ever since the lahar from Mount Pinatubo filled up many low-lying areas, floods in Pampanga have become worse because the water now spills over into other areas. Generoso Canlas, a circuit overseer there, says that because of the water, they have often had to wear boots or even go barefoot in the field service. However, the brothers keep on going despite the inconveniences.
Where flooding is particularly severe and whole communities are affected, Jehovah’s Witnesses help one another and also non-Witnesses. When this happened in Davao del Norte, in southern Philippines, the town officials so greatly appreciated the help that they passed a resolution saying so.
Volcanoes: There are many volcanoes in the Philippines, but the one that caught the world’s attention was Mount Pinatubo. In June 1991 the volcano erupted with a spectacular mushroom cloud. Day virtually turned into night. Some thought it was the beginning of Armageddon. Ash fell as far west as Cambodia. In a short time, Mount Pinatubo disgorged 235 billion cubic feet [6.65 billion cu m] of pyroclastic material. The heavy ash caused roofs and even whole buildings to cave in. Much of the ejected material became lahars, huge flowing slurries that wiped out some houses and buried others. Both ash and lahars severely damaged and destroyed Kingdom Halls and homes of the brothers. Julius Aguilar, a regular pioneer in Tarlac at the time, says: “Our whole house was buried under ash.” The family was forced to move.
Pedro Oandasan was serving as a circuit overseer in the area. He relates: “The brothers never forsook their worship and service to Jehovah. Attendances were always more than 100 percent. Further, the lahar did not lessen the love of the brothers for the preaching work. We kept on preaching to the evacuees and even in the devastated areas.”
Such disasters offer opportunities to put Christian love into action. During and after Mount Pinatubo’s eruption, brothers assisted one another in evacuating. The branch office quickly sent a truck loaded with rice, and after it was unloaded, the truck was used to evacuate brothers from affected towns. When the brothers in Manila learned of the need, they immediately responded by sending funds and clothes. In Betis, Pampanga Province, young brothers organized a brigade to help victims. Among those they helped was an interested woman whose husband had been opposed to the truth. When these young brothers helped to rebuild this couple’s house, the husband was so impressed that he is now a Witness!
Typhoons: Of all the weather disturbances in the country, typhoons, or tropical cyclones, cause the most destruction. On the average, about 20 typhoons hit the archipelago each year. Such storms are of varying intensity, but they are characterized by strong winds and heavy rains. Often these are of sufficient strength to destroy buildings. In addition, typhoons destroy crops, affecting the livelihood of farmers.
Again and again, Witnesses’ homes and crops have been damaged. Amazingly, the brothers usually just pick themselves up and keep on going. In some parts of the country, typhoons are so frequent that they are almost a normal occurrence. Commendably, the brothers have learned to cope, and they deal with life’s problems one day at a time. (Matt. 6:34) Of course, when brothers in nearby areas hear of those in need, they voluntarily send food or money to help them. Occasionally, after exceptionally severe storms, traveling overseers contact the branch office, which is happy to organize relief.
Delivering Bible Literature
Because the Philippines is a nation of many islands, it has always been a challenge to get literature to congregations on time and in good condition. For many years, the postal system was used. Often, however, issues of The Watchtower and Our Kingdom Ministry did not arrive before it was time to study them at the meetings.
Jehu Amolo, who works in the branch’s Shipping Department, remembers what prompted a change. He explains: “Apart from the problem of delayed deliveries, in 1997 the postal rates went way up.” Considering that about 360,000 magazines were being shipped every two weeks, a large amount of money was involved.
The suggestion was presented to the Governing Body that the brothers from the branch deliver our literature. After careful study, this was approved. On Luzon, trucks go out directly from the branch. However, since other areas are separated by water, the branch uses a reliable package service to send magazines and literature by boat to selected points throughout the archipelago. From these depots, drivers truck the shipments to drop-off locations. When the drivers are far from their points of origin, the brothers happily accommodate them in their homes so that the drivers can get a good rest before continuing on their way.
Aside from the monetary advantage, the brothers are thrilled to have the publications they need on time and in excellent condition. A side benefit is that they feel closer to the organization because of regular contact with brothers from the branch. Many are encouraged just by seeing the truck pass by displaying the name Watch Tower.
This arrangement in some ways has given an additional witness. For example, on one occasion there was flooding in Bicol, southern Luzon, when a delivery was being made. Vehicles were stopped by high water on the highway. It so happened that a literature truck stopped in front of a brother’s house. When the family saw it, they told the drivers: “Come on in and eat and stay here until the flood subsides.”
Non-Witness drivers did not know where they would eat or sleep. When they saw what was happening, they asked the Bethel drivers: “How are you connected with these people?”
The brothers answered: “They’re our spiritual brothers.”
The other drivers responded: “So that’s how Witnesses are! Even though you just met, you trust one another.”
Beyond the Borders
Now let’s take a brief look outside the country and consider the many Filipinos residing abroad. In the heyday of the British Empire, people said that “the sun never set” on its realm. Now some say: “The sun never sets on the Filipinos.” Although the Philippines is a small nation, Filipinos are scattered all over the globe. Because of work or for other reasons, hundreds of thousands of Filipinos have gone to other lands. How has this resulted in some learning the Bible’s truth? Of those who were already Witnesses, how have they helped others?
Ricardo Malicsi worked as an airport consultant. As his job took him to many countries, he and his wife used this circumstance to spread the good news in countries where there were very few publishers. In fact, in some of these countries, there were restrictions on the preaching work. While they were in such places as Bangladesh, Iran, Tanzania, and Uganda, they were happy to help several to know Jehovah. In some cases, they were instrumental in establishing congregations. Among the other countries where they worked and preached are Laos, Myanmar, and Somalia. This they did for 28 years, until Ricardo retired. How happy they are to have made such a fine contribution to spreading the good news in far-flung fields!
Others were not Witnesses when they left the Philippines to work elsewhere, but it was there that they found the truth. Rowena, a Catholic, first went to work in the Middle East. While there, she started reading the Bible. Later, she got work in Hong Kong, where thousands of Filipinos work as domestic helpers. She says: “I prayed to God every night to please send me the right people who will guide me to God’s Kingdom.” That prayer was answered when two missionaries, John and Carlina Porter, contacted Rowena and helped her to study the Bible. Rowena wrote to the Philippines branch to tell her experience and also to ask that someone visit her husband, still in the Philippines, to explain the Bible’s message to him.
Filipinos who have emigrated now make up large communities in a number of other countries. In the early 1900’s, there was a shortage of plantation workers in Hawaii. Many Filipinos filled that need. Some of the first ones to come into the truth in Hawaii were Filipino immigrants. Today, there are ten Iloko congregations and one Tagalog congregation in Hawaii.
Thousands of Filipinos live in the United States. There are many Witnesses among them. The first Filipino congregation there was formed in Stockton, California, in 1976. The United States branch reports: “The Filipino field progressed very well, and on September 3, 1996, the first Filipino circuit was established.” As of the 2002 service year, there were 37 Filipino congregations comprising about 2,500 publishers working under the supervision of the United States branch. There are also Tagalog congregations or groups in Alaska, Australia, Austria, Canada, Germany, Guam, Italy, and Saipan.
Although these Filipinos are in other countries, their receiving spiritual food still requires the involvement of brothers in the Philippines, since all translation of publications for Philippine languages is done at the branch in Manila. Additionally, some lands, including Guam, Hawaii, and the United States, have either Iloko or Tagalog convention programs. All translated materials for these conventions, including taped dramas, come from the Philippines.
Reaching Out to Other Language Groups
Throughout the islands, peoples speaking the vernacular have, for the most part, received a good witness. In recent years, however, an effort has been made to reach those who were previously not given a thorough witness.​—Rom. 15:20, 21.
For many years there were few English congregations in the Philippines. Although most Filipinos know some English, it is not spoken fluently by the majority. Yet, there was a need for English meetings in some locations. In the late 1960’s, the brothers observed this problem near Clark Air Base in Pampanga. Sisters married to U.S. military personnel stationed there did not speak a local language. The brothers helped organize English meetings, and these were of great benefit for many years to those in that area.
A similar problem arose in Metro Manila. An American sister lived there during the late 1970’s and early 1980’s. Pacifico Pantas, an elder in the Tagalog congregation where she associated, says: “I felt sorry for her because she attended regularly but would not get much out of the meetings.” Soon, other Americans also came to that congregation. The suggestion was made to have the public talk and Watchtower Study in English. This was arranged with Brother Pantas taking the lead. Eventually, more meetings were added, and others were invited to help. David and Josie Ledbetter, who were serving at the branch, accepted the invitation. Things have grown nicely over the years, and that one little group has expanded into two English congregations.
Having English congregations has benefited many people. Monica, from California, is one of them. She started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses there. Her parents​—staunch Catholics—​were vehemently opposed. They decided to send Monica to a Catholic environment in the Philippines. Her mother accompanied Monica to Manila and left her there at her Catholic grandmother’s home, without her passport. Even if Monica could find a congregation, she could not continue her study, since she knew no Tagalog, having grown up in the United States. However, the sister who studied with her in California called Josie Ledbetter to make sure that someone contacted Monica. Josie said that there was now an English congregation. That was just what Monica needed! Josie states: “During the six months that Monica was ‘exiled’ in the Philippines, she was baptized. Two weeks after Monica got baptized, her mother said: ‘Here’s your passport. Come back.’ Monica was already a Witness.” How thankful she was for the English congregation!
There has been another benefit. The brothers have reached some areas that had never been worked. There are subdivisions in Metro Manila where wealthy people live, and many of these people speak English. Thus, English has helped to open the door to these territories.
Efforts have also been made to open up the Chinese territory. In the mid-1970’s, a Chinese book study group was formed. The book study was held in a shoe store operated by Cristina Go. However, the group was very small and needed help.
Elizabeth Leach, who came to the Philippines when she married missionary Raymond Leach, had served in Hong Kong for 16 years. Elizabeth’s experience with Cantonese and in helping Chinese people to learn the truth was put to use. Around that time, Esther Atanacio (now, Esther So) was one of two special pioneers assigned to that territory. Esther recalls: “When we started working in that area, people did not know who Jehovah’s Witnesses were.” Nevertheless, the Chinese community in Manila was gradually introduced to Jehovah’s name and people.
Although the pioneers knew Cantonese, they had to learn another dialect, since the main Chinese dialect used in Manila is Fujian. Ching Cheung Chua, a young man who was new in the truth, began to associate with the group. Because he knew the Fujian dialect, he served as an interpreter at early meetings.
The group gradually progressed. A small congregation was formed in August 1984. Many challenges remain, but those who are helping consider it a joy to preach in this territory that had not previously received a thorough witness.
Even Those Who Cannot Hear “Hear”
As time went by, it appeared to be Jehovah’s will that attention be given to yet another language and territory​—that of the deaf. Even into the early 1990’s, there were practically no arrangements in the Philippines to help the deaf learn about Jehovah. While very few deaf associated with congregations, there were some unusual exceptions. For example, Manuel Runio, whose mother was a Witness, was helped to learn Bible truth by a sister who studied with him by tediously writing on paper. He was baptized in 1976. On the island of Cebu, Lorna and Luz, twins who were both deaf, were taught the Bible’s message by their blind uncle. How could a blind pioneer teach deaf people? With the help of an assistant, he used illustrations. Also, his cousin interpreted what he said into signs that the twins could understand, since they had never formally studied sign language. Both were baptized in 1985. However, such efforts were few and far between.
Several events led to opening up this territory. When missionaries Dean and Karen Jacek were at Brooklyn Bethel for some training in mid-1993, brothers working in Translation Services asked what was being done to help the deaf in the Philippines. A young sister in the Philippines had enrolled in a sign-language class, with the intent of learning to communicate with a deaf friend from a Witness family. Also, Liza Presnillo and her pioneer companions in Navotas, Metro Manila, met deaf ones in their territory but could not communicate with them. The pioneers were thinking about studying sign language so that they could reach the deaf with the Kingdom message.
The branch learned that Ana Liza Acebedo, a regular pioneer in Manila, worked at a school for the deaf and was one of the few Witnesses in the Philippines who had an extensive knowledge of sign language. She was asked: “Would you be willing to teach sign language to some Bethelites?”
Her answer was yes! She had often wondered how all the deaf people would be witnessed to. A class was started that included Bethelites and local regular pioneers. The sisters in Navotas had already enrolled in a sign-language course, and they continued with that.
Things then moved very quickly. Within six months, sign-language interpreting was being used in three congregations in Metro Manila. During 1994, interpreting was arranged for the first time at assemblies and conventions. One of the first goals was to help deaf children of Witness parents. A number were among the first to be baptized. Manuel Runio, who had faithfully attended meetings for years without sign-language interpreting, was happy to benefit from these new arrangements.
Soon, other places in the country were asking for assistance. Liza Presnillo was sent with a pioneer partner to Olongapo to work as a temporary special pioneer in the deaf territory. Many were helped. By mid-2002, sign-language groups had been formed in 20 municipalities outside of Manila. A milestone of progress was the forming of the Metro Manila Sign Language Congregation in April 1999, the first in the country. Joel Acebes, one of the Bethelites in the first sign-language class and now an elder in that congregation, says: “We are happy that we have been used by Jehovah in this work that is so important.” Yes, even the deaf are “hearing” the Kingdom message. Seeing the progress in this previously unworked territory is truly a cause for rejoicing.
Larger Facilities Needed
With new territories being worked during the 1990’s and old ones being worked even more thoroughly, there has been steady growth in the number of publishers and new ones associating with the congregations. More magazines have been needed, and more books and brochures have been translated into Philippine languages than ever before. The result has been a significant increase in the staff at the branch​—to do printing, translating, and proofreading and to perform other needed services for the brothers and congregations. Not long after the new residence building was finished in 1991, it was full. It had been designed for 250 people. By 1999, the Bethel family numbered 350.
There was still room on the branch property for building, so the Governing Body approved the construction of another residence, very similar to the one finished in 1991. Work got started in 1999 and was completed by the end of 2001. The building almost doubles the on-site housing capacity. There is additional office space, which was badly needed to meet the needs of the expanding work in the field. Other facilities provided include a larger laundry, a classroom for the Ministerial Training School, and improved library facilities. Skilled local workers and international servants temporarily joined the Bethel family to get this work done. After completing the new building, these volunteers stayed on to do renovation work on the 1991 building. A lot of work is involved in such construction projects, but it is with one goal in mind​—to provide facilities that will support the dissemination of life-giving Bible truths.
Ministerial Training School Helps Fill a Need
When the Ministerial Training School was established in the United States in 1987, many brothers in the Philippines began thinking, ‘Will it ever be possible for us to benefit from that training?’ The answer came in 1993. It was announced that the school would begin operation in the Philippines the following year. The school would provide additional training for qualified brothers who have some organizational experience as elders or ministerial servants. Hundreds of brothers applied.
Two traveling overseers and one missionary were trained as instructors. The first class got under way in January 1994. Those who have received this training have become more qualified to serve their brothers in the congregations. One congregation wrote this about a school graduate who associates with them: “Compared to before he attended the school, there is a big difference in the way he handles meeting parts now.”
Many students made material sacrifices in order to benefit from this spiritual training. Ronald Moleño had training as a chemical engineer. He received an invitation to the school, but about the same time, a company offered him a job that would bring a high salary, housing, insurance, and other benefits. Ronald meditated on the two opportunities and chose the spiritual one. He graduated from the 18th class and continued to enjoy his service as a pioneer. Ronald was recently invited to take up missionary service in Papua New Guinea.
Wilson Tepait had a decision to make after attending the first class. He had a good secular job as a teacher, but he was now being invited to take up special pioneer service where the need was greater. He says: “I enjoyed my teaching job, but I also knew that Kingdom interests must be the first thing in my life.” He accepted the privilege of special pioneer service and saw that Jehovah blessed his service in that field. Wilson now serves as a district overseer in the southern Philippines.
Most students in the school are from the Philippines. However, the Governing Body made arrangements for students to come from other Asian nations. Lands that have sent students include: Cambodia, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Thailand. Some of the students come from countries where the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses is restricted. The mutual training has been a very upbuilding experience for the students. Instructor Anibal Zamora says: “Students that come from countries where there are restrictions relate how they have trusted in Jehovah in all situations. This strengthens the students from the Philippines.” In turn, students from other countries learn how Filipino brothers of humble backgrounds have served Jehovah under adverse circumstances.
Nidhu David, a student from Sri Lanka, said: “Those are memories that I will always treasure. It was two months of training from Jehovah God. Just fantastic!”
The school facilities are located right at the branch. Not only do the students benefit from the prepared curriculum but they also learn from seeing firsthand how the work is organized at the branch. Their exposure to spiritually-minded brothers and sisters at Bethel gives them fine examples of faith to imitate. Also, brothers from countries with fewer publishers or restricted conditions are able to see the organization on a large scale.
To date, 922 have graduated from 35 classes. Of the Filipino graduates, 75 now serve as traveling overseers and many more as substitute circuit overseers in the 193 circuits throughout the islands. Six are assigned to Bethel, and ten are serving in missionary assignments in Papua New Guinea and Micronesia. Hundreds are serving as regular pioneers in their home territory or where the need is greater. In just eight years since the school opened, over 65,000 have been baptized in the country. There is a fine pioneer spirit and, generally, positive growth in the congregations. One cannot help but think that these brothers have applied what they learned in the school, contributing to the fine forward movement.
Forward Movement
Marvelous things are being accomplished throughout these islands. Zealous brothers associated with almost 3,500 congregations are busy proclaiming the good news of the best government imaginable, God’s Kingdom.
Recent reports are very encouraging. For the last seven months of the 2002 service year, a new peak in publishers was reached every month. By the month of August, there were 142,124 bringing the message of the Kingdom to others. Jehovah’s name and purpose are being introduced to people on scores of islands. Jehovah’s servants there are doing something similar to what is foretold at Isaiah 24:15: ‘They glorify the name of Jehovah in the islands of the sea.’
Among these zealous preachers are thousands of regular pioneers. In 1950, there were only 307 pioneers, but by the end of April 2002, there were 21,793. Add to this the 386 special pioneers and 15,458 auxiliary pioneers in that month, and the total was 37,637, or 27 percent of all publishers. Many more have shown that they want to join the ranks of the full-time servants of God. During the 2002 service year, 5,638 regular pioneer applications were approved.
All of this is bearing fine fruitage. Thousands of people continue to respond. The Memorial attendance in March 2002 was 430,010. Close to 100,000 Bible studies are being conducted each month. During the 2002 service year, 6,892 new disciples were baptized. In 1948, there was only 1 Witness to every 5,359 people in the country. Today there is 1 to every 549. While Jehovah yet leaves the opportunity open, prospects are bright that thousands more may join praisers of Jehovah in these islands of the sea.
Determined to Continue
When C. T. Russell visited in 1912, a few seeds of truth were cast onto Philippine soil. Slowly but surely, the seeds did germinate and grow. They bore good fruit as some took a stand for the truth ‘in favorable season and in troublesome season.’ (2 Tim. 4:2) Particularly since World War II, the speed of growth picked up until today, when tens of thousands are active praisers of Jehovah. As such, they work joyfully honoring God’s name along with some six million making up the worldwide congregation of Jehovah’s people.
As this account has shown, the work has not always been easy. Despite the beauty of this land, reaching the inhabitants of multitudes of islands has tested the mettle of Kingdom proclaimers. Some brave the stormy seas to reach isolated spots of land. Many trek through the thick vegetation of mountain heights to find sheeplike ones. Even though the islands of the Philippines have had a disproportionate share of calamities​—earthquakes, floods, typhoons, and volcanoes—​this has not stopped the work of Jehovah’s loyal Witnesses.
They are similar to the Israelites who were in a restored land to revive true worship. The odds were against them, but the joy of Jehovah was their stronghold. Today, too, Jehovah’s Witnesses have clearly demonstrated resilience and trust in God. They know that Jehovah is with them, and they believe what Psalm 121:7 says: “Jehovah himself will guard you against all calamity. He will guard your soul.” With Jehovah’s backing, they look forward to helping as many as possible before this system ends. Afterward, they anticipate teaching millions of resurrected ones throughout the earth, including these 7,100 islands. Then the paradisaic beauty of this land will radiate, to the praise of the Creator.
In the meantime, Jehovah’s Witnesses are determined to move ahead with full trust in Jehovah to bless their work. They endeavor to harmonize their lives with the words of God’s prophet: “Let them attribute to Jehovah glory, and in the islands let them tell forth even his praise.”​—Isa. 42:12.
[Blurb on page 232]
“God must be with you, or else you would have been killed”
[Box on page 153]
Early Seeds of Truth Sown
Charles T. Russell and his group visited the Philippines in 1912. Although they were the first official representatives from headquarters in Brooklyn to visit there, records indicate that two other Bible Students were already in the Philippines and were helping others to learn Bible truth. Louise Bell, from the United States, wrote:
  “My husband and I went to the Philippines in 1908 and worked as teachers. We were the only Americans in the town of Sibalom. We ordered hundreds of pounds of Bible tracts from Brooklyn. They were shipped from New York to San Francisco, then across the Pacific to Manila, and from there by interisland boats to Sibalom.
  “We distributed those tracts and talked to the local people as we had time and opportunity. We kept no record of hours or placements. Although the people were Catholics, many listened to us gladly. We were teachers with medical training, yet we were primarily messengers of the good news.
  “We traveled on foot or horseback over bad roads. Sometimes we slept on woven bamboo floors and ate fish and rice from a common bowl.
  “When Pastor Russell visited Manila in 1912, we sent him a telegram.”
Sister Bell attended Brother Russell’s lecture at the Manila Grand Opera House on the subject “Where Are the Dead?”
[Box on page 156]
An Overview of the Philippines
The land: About 7,100 islands cover a land area of approximately 120,000 square miles [300,000 sq km]. The islands span about 1,150 miles [1,850 km] from north to south and some 700 miles [1,125 km] from east to west. They vary widely in size​—the largest is a little larger than Portugal while the smallest is so small that it disappears at high tide.
The people: Predominantly of Malay descent, though some have Chinese, Spanish, or American backgrounds.
The language: Of the scores of languages in the Philippines, the Bicol, Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Iloko, Pangasinan, Samar-Leyte, and Tagalog languages are among the more widely spoken. English and Pilipino are considered to be the official languages. Pilipino is derived primarily from Tagalog.
The livelihood: Great variety exists in the cities, but in the country areas, many are farmers or fishermen. Food crops, including rice, sugarcane, bananas, coconuts, and pineapples, are widely grown.
The food: Rice is normally served at every meal. Fish and other seafoods are very common, along with vegetables and fruits that grow in the tropics.
The climate: The country has a tropical climate, with fairly consistent temperatures throughout the islands. The country in general gets plenty of rain.
[Box/Picture on page 161, 162]
An Interview With Hilarion Amores
Born: 1920
Baptized: 1943
Profile: Learned the truth during the Japanese occupation of World War II. Witnesses in the country were few at that time.
  I was baptized during the war when it was still possible for the brothers to preach from house to house. However, we had to be cautious because people were suspicious of what we were doing. Eventually, we had to flee to the countryside, but in 1945 we returned to Manila.
  At that time, I had the privilege of translating The Watchtower into Tagalog. This required working to as late as two o’clock in the morning. The translated material was mimeographed and sent to groups of Witnesses. Self-sacrifice was needed, but we were very happy because the brothers were cared for spiritually.
  Throughout my years in the truth, I have seen that Jehovah is merciful. He truly cares for his people, both spiritually and materially. I remember the postwar relief sent to the Philippines. My, how many were helped with trousers, shoes, and other clothing! Many pioneers who benefited were so appreciative that they put forth even greater effort in their full-time service. Jehovah really cares for his people, providing whatever is needed.
[Box/Picture on page 173, 174]
A Beloved Missionary
Neal Callaway
Born: 1926
Baptized: 1941
Profile: Born into a Witness family, he started his full-time ministry upon graduating from high school. Invited to the 12th class of Gilead School; assigned to the Philippines, where he served as a traveling overseer.
Neal Callaway was a zealous missionary, dearly loved by the brothers. Serious about the Kingdom work and at the same time displaying a jolly disposition, he served in all parts of the country. He tells about his assignment in the traveling work.
  “Sometimes we would walk over the hills for two hours to reach the territory, singing Kingdom songs as we went. With 15 to 20 in a group, all walking single file over the trails and singing, it really made my heart glad that I had accepted my foreign assignment.
  “To take God’s Word to the small homes in the rural sections, to see these humble people sitting on the floor listening to every word being spoken, and later to see them at the Kingdom Hall on my next visit​—this made me want to work all the harder to tell others about God’s Kingdom.”
Neal married Nenita, a sister from Mindoro, and they faithfully served together until his death in 1985. Filipino brothers still speak fondly of him. One said: “Brother Callaway was a good man who got along well with the brothers. He knew how to adjust, whatever the situation.”a
[Footnote]
Brother Callaway’s life story appeared in “The Watchtower” of August 1, 1971.
[Box/Picture on page 177]
An Interview With Inelda Salvador
Born: 1931
Baptized: 1949
Profile: Sent as a missionary to Thailand in March 1967.
  I had mixed emotions when I heard that I would be sent as a missionary to Thailand. I was happy, worried a bit, and had a lot of questions in my mind.
  It was March 30, 1967, when I arrived here. To me, the language was strange. It is a tonal language with low, high, deep, rising, and acute tones. It was hard to learn the language, but I was lovingly helped by both local and foreign brothers.
  From 1967 to 1987, I was in Sukhumwit. Then I was asked to move to a new congregation assignment. That seemed hard because I had to leave brothers and sisters with whom I had worked for 20 years. That’s how I felt when I moved to Thon Buri. Well, it’s all in the mind. After 12 years in Thon Buri, I moved back to Sukhumwit in 1999. Other missionaries said that it was as if I was going back home. But as for me, any congregation to which I am assigned can be my home.
[Box/Picture on page 178]
Recollections of Learning a Language
Benito and Elizabeth Gundayao
Profile: Benito, accompanied by his wife, Elizabeth, served in circuit work in the Philippines. In 1980 they were sent as missionaries to Hong Kong. There they have helped 53 persons to learn the truth.
  Learning Cantonese was a great test for those of us who did not have any background in the Chinese language. Earnest effort and perseverance as well as humility are truly needed.
  One time, I was trying to say, “I’m going to the market.” In Cantonese, it turned out to be, “I’m going to the chicken’s manure.” In field service my wife excitedly said, “Oh, I know her,” in referring to a sister with whom the householder was acquainted. But my wife’s words meant, “Oh, I eat her.” What a shock to the householder! We treasure very much our experiences in the Chinese-speaking field.
[Box/Picture on page 181, 182]
An Interview With Lydia Pamplona
Born: 1944
Baptized: 1954
Profile: After gaining experience as a special pioneer in the Philippines, invited to serve in Papua New Guinea in 1980. Has helped more than 84 persons to learn the truth.
  I was thrilled to receive my assignment because it had long been my desire to serve where the need is greater. I was also apprehensive because it would be the first time for me to leave my family. I did not know much about Papua New Guinea, and the little I knew from stories I had heard made me nervous. Mother encouraged me, saying: “Jehovah God will take care of us wherever we are doing his will.” I wrote my letter of acceptance.
  When I arrived, the brothers were very kind, and the people were friendly. I placed many books and magazines every month, more than I had ever placed in the Philippines. But the language and customs were very different from mine. I thought: ‘Well, I’ll just serve here for a few years and then go back home and pioneer with Mother again.’
  Well, after learning two of the main languages and adopting some of the local customs, I came to know the people better. Throughout the more than 20 years that I have been here, I have had the privilege of teaching the truth to quite a few, and some I have taught to read and write so that they can study properly and make the truth their own. All of this and other blessings make me feel that Papua New Guinea is my home now. If Jehovah wills, I am happy to be used in his service until he says the work is done or until the end of my days here.
[Box/Picture on page 191, 192]
An Interview With Filemon Damaso
Born: 1932
Baptized: 1951
Profile: Started full-time ministry in 1953. Later married and entered circuit work. After raising children, continued full-time service as a special pioneer with his wife. Has had various assignments in the Visayan Islands and Mindanao until now.
  Severe hardships made full-time service difficult in the 1960’s. Food was scarce because of the rat plagues that destroyed the maize and rice crops. We could no longer go preaching in the towns because our clothes and shoes were worn out.
  So we went to the fields, mountains, and far-flung barrios​—usually without shoes. I almost didn’t get to give a part at a circuit assembly because I didn’t have proper clothing. However, our district overseer, Brother Bernardino, kindly lent me his shirt, and I gave my talk. Of course, many people were worse off materially than we were. Because of our determination to persevere, Jehovah blessed us.
  In 1982, tests came our way because of neutrality. In Mindanao, rebellion against the government was rampant. Because I was conducting Bible studies with so-called rebel officials, government soldiers branded me as a “lecturer” for the leftists. However, a government official explained that what we teach comes wholly from the Bible and is not political in nature.
  At the same time, I was viewed negatively by the rebels because when I went preaching, I first witnessed to the barrio captain and to the commander of the military detachment. But they didn’t touch us because a rebel official with whom I was studying stood up for us.
  For decades, Jehovah helped us survive hardships and tests. Thanks be to Jehovah for his mercy and protection!​—Prov. 18:10; 29:25.
[Box/Picture on page 217, 218]
An Interview With Pacifico Pantas
Born: 1926
Baptized: 1946
Profile: Graduated from the 16th class of Gilead in 1951. Currently serves as an elder in Quezon City.
  During the second world war, we had Jehovah’s Witnesses for neighbors in the province of Laguna. They invited me to help myself to their library. The books were good: Creation, Vindication, Reconciliation, Religion, Enemies, Children, and lots more. When the Japanese burned our town, we became separated from the Witnesses, but I found them again over a year later in Manila. I began attending meetings, and after I was baptized, I joined a group of pioneers. Our assignment was the whole province of Tayabas, later named Quezon. We worked from town to town and slept in empty buses, homes of interested people, and the like.
  When we reached Mauban, a group of guerrilla fighters raided the town. We were asleep on the second floor of the town hall. The commotion woke us up. It seemed that the policemen below us had been trapped. We could hear them dropping their guns on the floor.
  The fighters stormed upstairs. One of them shone a flashlight on us and said: “Who are you?” We pretended to be asleep. He asked again and added: “Aren’t you spies from the Philippine constabulary?”
  “No, sir,” we answered.
  He said: “But you are wearing khaki.”
  We explained that the clothes had been donated and that our shoes were what our brothers in America had shipped in a relief package.
  The commander said: “OK, I’ll take the shoes.” So I took off my shoes. He also wanted my pants. Soon all of us were in our underpants. It was good that we had some clothes stored nearby. Actually, we were glad they took what they did. Otherwise, the whole town would have thought that we were spies for the fighters!
  We bought some wooden shoes, went back to Manila, and then went on to the Visayan Islands to continue preaching.
Brother Pantas shared in the full-time ministry and served as a servant to the brethren (now called a circuit overseer) before attending Gilead School. Upon returning to the Philippines, he served as a district overseer and at the branch office before raising a family.
[Chart/Graph on page 168, 169]
THE PHILIPPINES​—A TIME LINE
1908: Two Bible Students from the United States begin witnessing in the town of Sibalom.
1910
1912: Charles T. Russell gives talk at the Manila Grand Opera House.
1934: Branch office is established. Booklet Escape to the Kingdom is published in Tagalog.
1940
1947: First Gilead graduates arrive.
1961: Classes of the Kingdom Ministry School begin.
1964: Filipino pioneers are first invited to take up missionary service in neighboring countries.
1970
1978: Classes of the Pioneer Service School begin.
1991: New branch buildings are completed and dedicated. Mount Pinatubo erupts.
1993: New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures is released in Tagalog.
2000
2000: Complete New World Translation is released in Tagalog.
2002: 142,124 publishers are active in the Philippines.
[Graph]
(See publication)
Total Publishers
Total Pioneers
                                                     150,000
                                                     100,000
                                                      50,000
             1940          1970          2000
[Chart on page 199]
(See publication)
Chart of Growth in Convention Attendance (1948-99)
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
 50,000
      0
        1948 1954 1960 1966 1972 1978 1984 1990 1996 1999
[Maps on page 157]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
PHILIPPINES
  LUZON
    Vigan
    Baguio
    Lingayen
    Cabanatuan
    Mt. Pinatubo
    Olongapo
    Quezon City
    MANILA
  MINDORO
  VISAYAN ISLANDS
    Masbate
    CEBU
  MINDANAO
    Surigao
    Davao
  PALAWAN
    El Nido
[Full-page picture on page 150]
[Picture on page 154]
Charles T. Russell and William Hall during their 1912 visit to the Philippines
[Picture on page 159]
Joseph dos Santos, shown here with his wife, Rosario, in 1948, remained a zealous Kingdom proclaimer despite three years of cruel imprisonment during World War II
[Picture on page 163]
The first brothers sent from the Philippines to Gilead School: Adolfo Dionisio, Salvador Liwag, and Macario Baswel
[Picture on page 164]
Walking through the mountains to preach
[Picture on page 183]
Thousands of pioneers have benefited from the Pioneer Service School
[Picture on page 186]
Computerized phototypesetting began in 1980
[Picture on page 189]
The good news is made available in many Philippine languages
[Picture on page 199]
“Divine Teaching” International Convention, 1993
[Picture on page 199]
Baptism at the “Joyful Praisers” District Convention, 1995
[Picture on page 200]
Filipino missionaries who came back to visit at convention time
[Picture on page 202]
The “New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures” in Tagalog was released at conventions in 1993
[Picture on page 204]
Translating the Bible with the aid of computers
[Picture on page 205]
A happy pioneer receives the complete “New World Translation” in his own language
[Picture on page 207]
Branch Committee, from left to right: (seated) Denton Hopkinson, Felix Salango; (standing) Felix Fajardo, David Ledbetter, and Raymond Leach
[Picture on page 211]
Many Vietnamese refugees learned the truth while in the Philippines
[Picture on page 215]
Natividad and Leodegario Barlaan each spent more than 60 years in full-time service
[Pictures on page 222, 223]
Kingdom Halls built in recent years
[Pictures on page 224]
Metro Manila Assembly Hall (above) and other Assembly Halls, outside of Manila
[Picture on page 228]
Left: John Barr delivers talk at 1991 branch dedication program
[Picture on page 228]
Below: The branch buildings in 1991
[Picture on page 235]
Victory for Jehovah’s Witnesses acknowledged in the newspapers
[Pictures on page 236]
Earthquakes, volcanoes, and floods cause problems, but zealous publishers keep on preaching
[Picture on page 246]
Zealous pioneers have learned sign language to help deaf ones benefit from spiritual programs
[Picture on page 246]
Students with instructors at the first sign-language Pioneer Service School class in the country, early 2002
[Picture on page 251]
The 27th class of Ministerial Training School in the Philippines

