VOL. XXXIV FEBRUARY 1 No. 3 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

The Cost of Discipleship 35 

Fidelity to the Truth a Cause of 
Persecution 36 

The Golden Rule a Test 36 

The Burning Outside the Camp 37 

Reports from Foreign Branches for 1912 37 

Abraham's Age on Entering Canaan 42 

The Oath-Bound Covenant 42 

Abraham's Three Wives Typical 43 

Abraham's All Given to Isaac 43 

As the Stars and as the Sand 43 

God's Oath to Abraham 43 

Hope for the Sodomites 44 

The Wickedness of Sodom Great 44 

The First Resurrection 45 

Abraham's Faith Tested 45 

"If We Suffer With Him" 46 

The Ram in the Thicket 46 

Some Interesting Letters 47 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 47 

page 34 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5173 : page 34 

1913-MEMORIAL SUPPER- 19 13 

The proper date for the celebration of the Memorial 
Supper this year will be Thursday evening, March 20, after 
6 p.m. This is the beginning of the 14th of Nisan of the 
Jewish Calendar. The 15th of Nisan marks the full of the 
moon following the Spring Equinoxes. The moon symbolized 
the favor granted to Israel. It was at its full the day Jesus 
died— thereafter it began to wane, symbolical of the Jewish 
favor having ended at that time. 

We commend to all of the Lord's people the celebration 
of our Savior's death, in harmony with His request, "As oft 
as ye shall do this, do it in remembrance of Me." We understand 
this to be an injunction to an annual celebration, and 
that the appropriate time is the anniversary of the first 
celebration. We give notice thus early because subscribers 
to this Journal as far away as Alaska, Japan, Australia, China 
and India are interested with us in this precious memorial 
of our Master's sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. 
It is to us a remembrance also of our covenant to share with 
Him in His sufferings and of His promise that the faithful 
shall also be partakers of His coming glory in the Kingdom. 



page 34 

"IN THE GARDEN OF THE LORD" 

This is the title of a very beautiful little poem from the 
pen of Sister G. W. Seibert. It has been published in booklet 
form with sixteen illustrations, twenty-four pages, paper. It 
was our hope that we should have had these in time for the 
use of the friends, as holiday souvenirs, but they arrived just 
too late for announcement. They are useful at all times, however. 
We suggest that the various Classes of Bible Students 
desiring these order them together. The convenience of making 
larger shipments will permit us to make a proportionately 
lower price— 6c. each, 65c. per dozen, postpaid by us. 



MID-WINTER SOUTHERN CONVENTIONS 

Further particulars respecting these Conventions may be expected in 
our next issue. We merely now announce that Brother Russell may be 
expected to meet with the friends at Jacksonville, Sunday, February 16 
and Monday, the 17th; at Kingston and vicinity, February 24-26; at 
Tampa, March 5; at Pensacola, March 6; returning to Washington 



Temple, March 9. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MARCH 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
March follow: (1) 7; (2) 102; (3) 47; (4) 208; (5) 191; 
(6) 87; (7) 160; (8) 43; (9) 299; (10) 105; (11) 116; (12) 255; 
(13) 22; (14) 72; (15) 307; (16) 259; (17) 243; (18) 114; 
(19) Vow; (20) 106; (21) 39; (22) 273; (23) 332; (24) 240; 
(25) 203; (26) 101; (27) 235; (28) 331; (29) 8; (30) 305; 
(31)303. 



R5172:page35 

THE COST OF DISCIPLESHIP 

"Being reviled, we bless; being 
persecuted, we suffer it."— 1 Cor. 4:12. 

SINCE GOD HIMSELF is Love, the very 

highest ideal of perfection which He has 

given to His people is the standard of Love. 

We cannot imagine a higher standard 

than this, nor one more difficult to attain. 

It is the special characteristic without 

which none will get the prize of the high 

calling of God in Christ Jesus. This mark 

of perfection was stamped on our Lord. 

He delighted to do the Father's will in all 

respects, even to the extent of laying down His life for 

those who, on account of Adam's sin, were under the 

sentence of death. 

Our Lord did not, however, need to run toward this 
mark of perfect love; for He was always perfect— "holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." (Heb. 7:26.) 
The Church, on the contrary, are naturally imperfect and 
fallen by heredity; but we have been washed from all 
stain of guilt in the blood of the Lamb. The mark of 
perfect love we attain gradually. We first reach perfection 
of heart intention, and then we pass through experiences 
which crystallize our characters in righteousness. 
In all of these trials and difficulties, we must demonstrate 
that, if our physical organism were perfect, we would 
always do God's holy will. 

As we see this quality of love in our Lord Jesus, we 
appreciate it, even though we realize that we are not up 
to the standard which God requires. Nevertheless, our 
great desire is that we have perfect love for everything 
in harmony with the will of God. After we have reached 
perfection of heart intention, the test is no longer upon 



us of attaining the mark, but of pressing down upon that 
mark until our character has been crystallized. As the 
Apostle Paul says, "Having done all, stand." (Eph. 6:13.) 
We do not progress beyond perfect love; for no 
one can do more than to have a full desire that God's will 
be done in him. He could do no more, whether he lived five 
years longer or fifty years. Perfect love is the mark toward 
which he pressed, and he can attain no higher standard. 
While one stands at the mark of Love, the tests grow 
stronger. We pass through experiences— often trivial 
enough— which tempt us to malice, envy, anger and strife. 
If we are overcome by these tests, and fall away from 
the condition of perfect love, we shall lose the prize for 
which we are running. (Phil. 3:14.) One who thus falls 
away may get into the Great Company for development; 
but if he were to lose all love, he would go into the Second 
Death. In either of these cases, the person has 
moved away from the mark of perfect Love, the only 
standard for those who desire to be in the Kingdom and 
to participate in the glorious things which God has in 
store for those who love Him supremely. 

GENEROSITY AND BENEVOLENCE CHARACTERISTIC OF 
GOD'S PEOPLE 

Our Lord desires to see in His followers the disposition 
to overcome the weaknesses and tendencies of the 
fallen condition and to follow in His footsteps. Of Him 
it is written, "Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an 
example, that ye should follow in His steps;. ..who, 
when He was reviled, reviled not again; when He suffered, 
He threatened not." (I Peter 2:21-23.) To be 
reviled is to be made to appear vile, to be evil spoken of, 
slandered. The natural tendency of all is to resent injustice, 
to render evil for evil, to give as good as we get— 
and a little more if possible. This is the natural inclination 
because we are in the fallen condition, unbalanced in 
our minds. 

Our Lord's teaching is all the opposite of the spirit 
of reviling. No matter how much we are reviled, we 
are not to revile in return; no matter how much we are 
persecuted, we are not to persecute in return. This is 
the Law of the New Creation. Instead of reviling again, 
we are to bless. This does not mean that when one has 
said a slanderous thing of us, we are to say, "God bless 
you"; but that if the person is in difficulty and needs help, 
we are to overlook altogether what he has done to us, 
and be just as ready to help him as any other person. 

This spirit of generosity and benevolence should be 
the spirit of the Lord's people. We are to bless those who 
revile and persecute us by doing them good and by explaining 
to them, if possible, the situation, which evidently 
they have misunderstood. We are to bless them by helping 
them, if opportunity offers, out of darkness into light. 

Our faith is greatly strengthened by considering the 
course of our Lord and noting the similarity between His 



experiences and ours. Both He and His Apostles were 
persecuted by the Jewish household of faith. The whole 
Jewish nation professed to be God's people; and our 
Lord recognized them as His own, as it is written. (John 1:11.) 
Yet when "He came unto His own," they received 
Him not, but persecuted Him and even crucified Him. 
Later, they persecuted His Apostles and their followers. 
Apparently the household of faith has had a monopoly 
of persecutions. All down the Gospel Age, those who 
have professed to be God's people have persecuted others. 

R5172:page36 

Both Catholics and Protestants have persecuted each 
other and the Jews, God's chosen people. The majority 
of persecutions have been by those who professed to be the 
people of God, many of whom really thought they were. 

The persecutions of today are of the same kind. They 
come from those who profess to be the Lord's people. In 
harmony with this fact is the Scripture which says, "Your 
brethren that hated you, that cast you out for My Name's 
sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified: but He shall appear 
to your joy, and they shall be ashamed." (Isa. 66:5.) 
This statement applies also to the members of our own 
families, who are not in sympathy with the Truth; that 
is to say, any persecutions coming from the members of 
our families are usually from those who profess to be 
Christians. As a rule, their opposition is not for personal 
reasons, but on account of some doctrinal point, which 
they do not see in the same light as do those whom they 
persecute. 

It behooves the Lord's people to look with great sympathy 
upon those who may be their persecutors. We recall 
instances where persecution has been carried on with 
the thought that the persecutors were doing the will of 
God. Those who persecuted the Lord Jesus were to some 
degree ignorant of who He was. In Acts 3:17, St. Peter 
says, "And now, brethren, I wot that through ignorance 
ye did it, as did also your rulers." St. Paul says, "Had 
they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of 
glory." (I Cor. 2:8.) When Saul of Tarsus persecuted 
St. Stephen and others of the early Church, he verily 
thought that he did God service, as he himself afterwards 
tells us. --Acts 26:9-11. 

FIDELITY TO THE TRUTH A CAUSE OF PERSECUTION 

All down through the Gospel Age, those who have 
been faithful to the Truth of God have been put "out of 
the synagogue." The creeds of men have been barriers 
to keep out those who understood the Word of God. 
There was a time when many were excommunicated as 
heretics because of conscience. One of these was Michael 
Servetus, a brother Christian, whose horrible death at 
the stake was brought about by John Calvin. This course 
of conduct literally fulfilled the Scripture which says, 



"They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time 
cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he 
doeth God service."— John 16:2. 

Those who had charge of the synagogues were not 
always bad people, but they were mistaken, as was Saul 
of Tarsus when he haled men and women to prison. 
(Acts 8:3.) The same conditions exist today. The darkness 
hateth the light. When any become enlightened in 
the Word of God, they are told, "If you stay with us, 
you must not present these matters." Those who are 
loyal to God are in this way forced out of the synagogues. 

Our day has a peculiarity, however, that other days 
have not had. The Divine Plan is so beautiful that by its 
light we see that others are in darkness. The voice of 
God, the voice of conscience, of enlightenment, calls the 

R5173 : page 36 

people of God out of Babylon, which is misrepresenting 
God's character, Plan and Word. Instead of feeling like 
bringing vengeance upon our enemies, we should feel 
sympathy for them— not with them, but for them. We 
should realize that with them it is very much as it was 
with the Jews of our Lord's day, who, had they known 
what they were doing, would have been very much 
ashamed of their course. 

The persecutions of today are different from those of 
any other period of history. Many faithful followers of 
the Lord are reproved and slandered for their loyalty to 
the Word of God. Our Lord's words, however, warrant 
us in expecting that those who are faithful to Him will 
be evil spoken of, even as He was. With His words before 
our minds, we should not be surprised at false 
charges and false insinuations made against His true 
followers in proportion to their prominence as His 
servants. 

Our Lord's warning that men "shall say all manner of 
evil against you falsely for My sake" (Matt. 5:11), does 
not imply that those who malign the true Christian will 
say, "We do this to you for Christ's sake, because you 
are one of His followers." We have never heard of any 
one who was thus persecuted, and therefore such a course 
cannot be what our Lord meant. Evidently His meaning 
was that His followers, honorable, moderate, truthful, 
honest, virtuous, possessing the spirit of a sound mind, 
like Himself, would be highly esteemed amongst the nominally 
religious, were it not for their loyalty to the Word 
of God. Because of faithfully pointing out popular 
errors, because of fidelity to the Truth, they are hated by 
those prominent in Churchianity. 

THE GOLDEN RULE A TEST TO CHRISTIANS 

These conditions are testing the adherents of Churchianity 
along the lines of the Golden Rule; and when they 
speak evil through malice, hatred, strife and opposition, 



they are condemning themselves under that rale; for well 
do they know that they do not wish others to speak evil 
of them— either through hearsay or through concocted 
lies or through malice. 

These conditions are also a test to the Lord's people, 
to prove whether they are willing to endure these persecutions 
and oppositions cheerfully, as a part of the cost 
of being disciples of Christ. If under the pressure they 
revile in return and slander and backbite, they are thus 
demonstrating their unfitness to have a place in the Kingdom. 
If, on the other hand, they receive these lessons 
with patience and long-suffering, they will develop more 
of the character-likeness of their Redeemer and thus become 
more worthy of a share with Him in the future glory. 

Our Lord's declaration, "Ye are the salt of the earth," 
may very properly be applied to those of the followers of 
the Lord who give heed to His teachings and who cultivate 
His character-likeness. As salt is useful in arresting 
decomposition, so the influence of these faithful ones 
is preservative. At the time of the First Advent, the world 
was in a condition in which it would probably have hastened 
to degeneracy and decay, but for the introduction of 
the preservative influence extending from the members of 
the Body of Christ. That influence is still manifest in 
so-called Christendom. 

Even today, although the truly consecrated believers 
in the great Redeemer are confessedly few in number, yet 
the saltness from the teachings of the Savior has a wide 
influence upon the world. Without it, doubtless, corruption 
and a complete collapse would have come long ago. 
In spite of it, we see very corrupting and corrupt influences 
at work everywhere; and the wider our horizon, 
the more general our information, the more we realize 
the truth of this statement. When the last member of 
the Body of Christ shall have passed beyond the veil, the 
salt will be gone. Then corruption will take hold swiftly, 
and the result will be the great time of trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation.— Matt. 24:21; Dan. 12:1. 

The Scriptures point out the fact that the Lord's consecrated 
people belong so completely to Him that in all 
their afflictions He is afflicted. (Isa. 63:9.) When Saul 
of Tarsus was persecuting the early Church, our Lord 
called out to him on the way to Damascus, and said, 
"Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou ME? And he said, 

R5173 : page 37 

Who are Thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus, 

whom thou persecutest." (Acts 9:4,5.) Saul was not 

persecuting the glorified Savior directly, but he was persecuting 

the followers of Jesus— not the New Creatures, 

but the flesh. Since, then, our Lord adopts the flesh of His 

followers as His, the Church is said to be filling up that 

which is behind of the afflictions of Christ.— Col. 1:24. 

Throughout the Gospel Age, the world has been blind 
to the fact that it has persecuted the Church of Christ— 



those whom God has chosen to be joint-heirs with our 
Lord Jesus Christ. (Rom. 8:17.) When later the eyes 
of mankind shall have been opened, they will realize 
what they have done, and will be very much ashamed of 
their conduct. After Saul of Tarsus saw that he had been 
fighting against God, his whole course of life was changed. 

THE ANTITYPICAL BURNING OUTSIDE THE CAMP 

As our Lord suffered in the flesh, so will also those 
who are members of the Church, which is His Body. 
(Eph. 1:22,23.) St. Peter admonishes us to expect this, 
saying, "Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us 
in the flesh, arm yourselves with the same mind." (I Peter 4:1.) 
It is the flesh, not the New Creature, that 
suffers. While we are suffering in the flesh, we are also 
being developed in the spirit. 

In Psalm 44:22, we read, "For Thy sake we are killed 
all the Day long; we are counted as sheep for the slaughter." 
St. Paul shows that this statement is a prophecy 
applicable to the entire membership of Christ, of whom 
our Lord Jesus is the Head. (Rom. 8:36.) The day to 
which reference is made is the Gospel Age (2 Cor. 6:2), 
the antitypical Day of Atonement. As on the typical 
Atonement Day the typical sacrifices were offered, so all 
down the Gospel Age the antitypical "better sacrifices" 
have been made. (Heb. 9:23; 13:11-13.) These "better 
sacrifices" began with our Lord and continue with His 
Body, which is the Church. 

The antitypical sacrificing began at the time of our 
Lord's consecration, which was His full surrender of His 
life to God, to be used in any way that the Father saw fit 
and that His providences might direct. The Church follows 
in His steps. Our consecration is our death to the 
world, to earthly hopes, aims and ambitions. In our 
Lord's case, we see that His sacrificial death not only 
meant the giving away of His physical strength in healing, 
teaching, etc., but included also the suffering resulting 
from the opposition of those about Him. Even from 
members of His own family He experienced ostracism. 
So Jesus died daily. 

In proportion as we are faithful to our Heavenly Father 
and to the terms of our consecration, we shall have 
similar experiences. Faithfulness to our covenant of 
sacrifice will bring upon us opposition from the world, 
the flesh and the Devil. Particularly will our persecution 
come from those Christians who are not developed sufficiently 
to appreciate matters from the proper standpoint. 

St. Paul, in speaking of his own case, says that he 
was dying daily. (I Cor. 15:31.) This statement applies 
to all who are laying down their lives in the Lord's service. 
Sometimes it is by the expenditure of physical 
strength; sometimes it is by a stab from some one who 
has hurt us, wounded us, injured us with his tongue. In 
the type, this kind of experience is represented by the 
burning of the flesh outside the camp, a place which typifies 



the outcast condition. 

The faithful servants of the Lord will be ostracised 
by the world, as our Lord foretold. (Matt. 24:9; John 16:1-3.) 
Their attitude of full consecration to do the 
Father's will is not appreciated; for to the world it seems 
to be foolish. It is a reproof. As our Lord said, "For 
every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh 
to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved."— John 3:20. 

To be faithful unto death is a part of the covenant of 
sacrifice. In some instances, death may come early; in 
others, it may come late. St. Stephen was faithful unto 
death, which came early in his Christian experience; St. 
Peter was also faithful, but met his death after a long 
lifetime. The promise to the overcomer is, "Be thou 
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of 
life." (Rev. 2:10.) "If we suffer, we shall also reign with 
Him."— 2 Tim. 2:12. 



R5174:page37 

REPORTS FROM FOREIGN BRANCHES FOR 1912 
BRITISH BRANCH REPORT FOR 1912 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The figures giving the British Branch Report for the 
year ending October 3 1 have been sent to the Office. We 
trust they duly reached you. 

It has been a year of progress in all directions. The 
chief factor is the devotion of the Colporteurs. In nearly 
all cases they have considerably increased their sales; and 
the numbers of the Colporteurs have also increased, 
through the encouragement they are now getting. We believe 
there is more work possible in this part of the 
field than ever. Record sales are being effected. And it 
is still the case that in places colporteured once or twice 
the books are as salable as ever. The Volunteer literature 
has gone out at a rather lower rate than last year, but 
the Class Extension work has absorbed a good deal of 
Volunteering energy. 

The Class Extension work is proving a great blessing 
to the brethren as well as to those who have ears to hear. 
In London both the Tabernacle Congregation and the Forest 
Gate Church have met with much encouragement. The 
Class Extension Committee of the Tabernacle report 18 
new week-night classes formed during the year through 
this work, and two existing classes greatly augmented, 
out of twenty-one series of meetings held— results which 
are gratifying. These results, we believe, are largely due 
to a careful following out of the suggestions given in the 
pamphlet. Other classes also report progress, some good, 
some not so good, but it is noticeable that the best results 
follow when the suggestions given are accepted and adhered 
to. After three Chart Talks and three lectures, 



with the same brother as chairman through all the meetings, 
the people are generally found willing to form a 
class for further study. 

The Pilgrim service has been greater this year than 
any previous year. The visits of the Pilgrims are much 
appreciated by the classes, who, everywhere, show a desire 
to use the occasion for a public witness. These meetings, 
with the Class Extension work, have of necessity proved 
a considerable tax upon the finances of the brethren, yet 
the donations to the Tract Fund show an increase. The 
book-loaning, which has been tried by some classes, has 
not made much advance during the year. It has been a 
blessing to those who have engaged in it, and has been 
used of the Lord in some instances to bring some into the 
light of the Truth. Especially is this the case in Forest 
Gate, London. Altogether the outlook is good. People, 
aroused by the "present distress," felt both in the Churches 

R5174:page38 

and in domestic life and politics, are paying more heed 
to the message of the Truth; they are more ready to 
listen and to read. The general spreading of our literature 
and the publication of the sermons are having an 
effect upon the country, and the evidences are that there 
are many "open doors" for service awaiting us all. We 
believe there are splendid opportunities for Colporteur 
work and Class Extension work awaiting those who have 
liberty and grace to work while it is yet day. The spiritual 
health of the classes is good, though, we regret, some of 
the dear brethren are allowing themselves to be tried by 
dissensions sowed by the enemy. 

We are rejoicing in the privilege of service, and daily 
we pray for the Lord's continued blessing upon all the 
work, both here and abroad, and also upon your own. 

Yours in His grace and service, 

BRITISH BRANCH, 
Executive Committee. 

OUTPUT OF STUDIES, BOOKS AND BOOKLETS 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in cloth 96,922 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in Karatol, leather, 

India, and foreign tongues 3,955 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. I in magazine 
form 5,220 

Total 106,097 

Books (Manna, Poems, Manual and Hymnal) 3,224 

Booklets 13,592 

Grand Total 122,913 

This shows an increase over the output of last year 
in STUDIES of 32,338 volumes; in books, of 1,286; 
whereas there is a loss in the numbers of booklets 



and Volume I in magazine form. 

Circulation of PEOPLES PULPIT and EVERYBODY'S 

PAPER 7,356,869 

Tracts 316,000 

WATCH TOWERS on Hell 53,115 

Total 7,725,984 

This represents, figured in the usual tract pages, 
117,709,904, 1,912,000, and 3,399,360, a total of 123,021,264. 
Practically a million more copies of PEOPLES 
PULPIT and EVERYBODY'S PAPER were distributed this 
year than last. 

SUMMARY OF CORRESPONDENCE 

Letters and cards received 19,639 

Letters and cards sent out 19,501 



REPORT OF AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH FOR 1912 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We are glad to think that the Report which we have 
now the pleasure of sending along for the year past will 
be pleasing to you. We continually realize that what is 
done is "not by power nor by might, but by My Spirit, 
saith the Lord," and that what has been accomplished is 
through the Lord's Spirit in His people, energizing them 
to more and more earnest zeal in His service, and with 
desire that every grain shall be garnered in this part of 
the Harvest field. 

While we are rejoicing that many have been brought 
to a knowledge of the Truth during the year, there is still 
the more pleasing feature, if that is possible, that those 
who have been longer associated with the Harvest Message 
have certainly increased their joy in the Lord, their 
love for the Truth and their appreciation of the means 
which the Lord has particularly used for bringing these 
matters to the household of faith. A corresponding increase 
of zeal is manifest all along the line, and you will 
notice that the donations to the Tract Fund by way of 
Good Hopes, etc., have greatly increased, as though the 
friends had made up their minds to try to meet the expense 
of the work in this field if possible. 

When one thinks of the 724,000 PEOPLES PULPIT and 
EVERYBODY'S PAPER that have been sent out, mostly by 
mail, it represents a beautiful amount of patient, steady 
plodding by those who have been able to do it. Some 
have written the wrappers by the thousands and sent them 
to us; while others have been able to wrap the papers for 
the post; and so the work has gone on. We cannot but 
think that the Lord will be pleased with the diligent 
efforts, specially of some, in this matter. 



The Colporteurs have had a good year, and there is an 
increase in the output of volumes over last year of about 
33-1/3 per cent.; and although the ground had all been 
previously gone over, the prospects are still good, and we 
are glad that some others are endeavoring to so arrange 
matters as to be able to enter the work even at the eleventh 
hour. Some of the workers have had specially interesting 
times and wonderful evidences of the Lord's favor and 
guidance and blessing. 

We think that it is just possible that some may not 
be realizing opportunities in this service. Though unable 
to give all their time, they may be able to spend a few 
hours a week. There must still be some that need the 
sealing in their foreheads, for the winds are surely to be 
let loose when this work is finished. And it always seems 
to me that it is a wonderful joy to take the Water of 
Truth to the thirsty soul, to search out the Nathanaels, 
and get them to "come and see" and realize the presence 
of Messiah. 

Brother Nelson will report on his travels; he seems 
specially to have been a means of assistance and blessing 
to the Sydney Class, who undertook to pay his expenses 
and also co-labored with him in the Extension Work. 
Their hard work in circulating the numbers of EVERYBODY'S 
PAPER has been rewarded, not only by blessing on 
themselves, but by a nice addition of new members to their 
class. 

We believe that the Convention that was held there 
last Easter was the beginning of better conditions for the 
Church in Sydney. The Convention at Melbourne takes 
place at Christmas, and we are looking forward for the 
best one yet. We hope to be able to report it so. Certainly 
it was a good one on the last occasion. 

There are evidences that the prosperity of this country, 
which has been so pronounced for the past year or two, 
has reached its zenith. Among the thoughtful, whether 
religious or not, there is a general impression that some 
sort of crisis is being approached and that things cannot 
continue as they are very long. 

We are still hoping that you may come over and help 
us. The friends have had so much disappointment twice 
in regard to yourself, and then also in respect to Brother 
Hollister. We hope that when you do come it will not be 
for too short a time. We are sure that much good would 
result, not only in stimulating the friends, but also in 
appealing to the Christian community generally. While 
still hoping along this line, we desire that you will join 
with us and all the dear friends in these parts that the 
spirit of love and zeal may dwell richly with us all, that 
the work may go forward to the glory of God. 

With Christian love, yours in the service of Christ, 
R. E. B. NICHOLSON. 

PUBLICATIONS CIRCULATED 

Copies of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 12,388 



in magazine 

form 666 

Copies of booklets 1,800 

Total 14,854 

R5175 : page 39 

FREE LITERATURE 

PEOPLES PULPIT and EVERYBODY'S PAPER 724,323 

Sample WATCH TOWERS, debates, etc 14,369 

Low estimate of sermons in newspapers 3,532,233 



Total 4,270,925 

These, represented in the usual tract pages, would 
be about 17,386,176; 1,162,776; 12,144,700 and 30,693,652 
respectively. 

CORRESPONDENCE 

Letters and cards received 3,096 

Letters and cards dispatched 4,486 



REPORT OF WORK IN GERMANY FOR 1912 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Enclosed please find the Report for the last quarter of 
our fiscal year and the trial balance sheet for the year. 
I had the pleasure to be at the Hamburg Convention and 
took part most of the time— Sister Koetitz accompanying 
me. The friends enjoyed themselves very much and confessed 
to having received a great blessing. About seventy 
took part, half of which number was from a distance. 
We had a nice hall and sent invitations to the addresses 
we had received through Colporteurs. There was also a 
notice in the paper. The result was that on the first and 
last days of the Convention (being Sunday and a holiday, 
respectively), more than a hundred strangers attended, 
and quite a number of these showed considerable interest. 

At the first Hamburg meeting after the Convention, 
eighteen new friends attended. The Convention remembered 
you kindly and passed a resolution to send you heartfelt 
greetings and best wishes in the Lord. These Conventions 
are certainly a great blessing. 

Having heard of the resolution on Hell passed by the 
Washington Convention, the Hamburg Convention wished 
to go on record, and unanimously adopted it in German 
translation, voting that it might be sent to the German 
newspapers and clergy of the Continent. The Hamburger 
Fremdenblatt reported the matter on the second day following. 
And other newspapers later. 

Now let me give a brief report of the work during 



the past year. I would mention first the circulation of 
literature, as follows: 

Volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 1 1,056 

Volume I in TOWER form 1 1,230 

Various booklets 35,555 

Regular issue of the German WATCH TOWER 

(12 numbers) 43,200 

Sample copies of German WATCH TOWER 

(12 numbers) 24,000 

"Hell" TOWERS 8,842 

PEOPLES PULPIT, EVERYBODY'S PAPER, Yiddish 

papers and Old Theology tracts 2,919,050 

The last item, of free literature, together with the 
above-mentioned sample TOWERS and TOWERS on Hell, 
represent in tract pages 83,817,600. 

These figures include the circulation of nine hundred 
volumes in the Hollandish, Polish and Hungarian 
languages, some Polish and Hungarian P. P., and 500,000 
Hollandish P. P., sent to Holland, South Africa and 
America. 

Comparing these figures with those of last year, you 
will find a considerable increase in the number of volumes 
and booklets circulated. We received 5,886 letters and 
cards, answering 3,977. About 200 friends were immersed 
during the year. 

As for the general spirit of the friends in the Truth, 
I consider that it is very good, although it seems that we 
do not come up to the standard of freedom (from earthly 
cares), liveliness and success set us by our American 
brethren in the Harvest Work. However, the Lord knows 
our hearts and makes allowance for different conditions 
and circumstances in this country. I feel that the friends 
may be credited with having done about all that they 
could, and I am surprised that the net results are so large. 
And I rejoice, praising the Lord for His blessings which 
have crowned the efforts of the dear German friends— of 
Germany, Switzerland, and part of Austria and Russia— 
with such success. I should mention also with appreciation 
the encouragement given and the assistance rendered 
by the German friends in America who have written to 
us and obtained literature from here. 

Your visits in this country were a great inspiration to 
all who had an opportunity to see and hear you, and we 
look forward to seeing you soon again if the Lord will. 
We have entered the new year of our labors, with political 
and social disturbances upon us and ahead of us, as you 
are aware from the newspapers. We must gird up the 
loins of our minds, as the Lord and the Apostles suggest, 
and be sober and hope to the end, daily, for the favor to 
be brought unto us finally. 

With these brief remarks let me close my this year's 
Report, with the happiest greetings to yourself and the 
Brooklyn Bethel Family, and to all who are in Christ 
Jesus and one with us in the same hope, from the German 



Bible House Family, and from your humble brother and 
fellow-servant in Christ, O. A. KOETITZ. 

SUISSE-GERMAN DEPT. REPORT FOR 1912 
(Included in the Foregoing) 

DISTRIBUTION OF LITERATURE 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and MANNAS 1,602 

" ' Vol. I, in magazine 

form 1,391 

Booklets 2,303 

Copies of WATCH TOWER 6,000 

EVERYBODY'S PAPER and Tracts 94,000 



REPORT OF WORK IN SWEDEN-- 19 12 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

By the Lord's grace we have passed another year in 
His blessed service, and are now so much the nearer to 
the end of this Harvest period; and by His favor it is my 
privilege to send you the Report of the Swedish work for 
the last fiscal year. 

As the following figures will show, the work has been 
richly blessed of the Lord, and a considerable general increase 
also is shown this year, although not in every 
branch, as we would have wished to have it. We have 
also the very best reasons for our still greater expectations 
for the year before us. The friends over here realize 
more and more the importance of the present privileges 
opened up for us by the present Chief Reaper, and a large 
part of the "common people" seem to be hungering and 
thirsting for the Truth as never before. Indeed, we can 
see how "the field [still] is ripe unto the Harvest"— and 
more so now than ever. 

Our hearts rejoice, while we at the same time feel 
greatly humbled when we realize some of the mercies 
shown us in connection with this wonderful time of 
preparation for the setting up of the Kingdom; and we 
are most earnestly decided, by the Lord's help, to be faithful 
to Him and to His special channel, until the end, using 
every remaining opportunity in the best way possible. 

One of the most remarkable increases is shown in the 
number of books sold, which is not very far from twice 
as large as the corresponding figure the preceding year, 

R5175 : page 40 

depending, we believe, to a large extent upon the publishing 
of the new-styled, revised Swedish versions of all the 
different volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, which 
also has been done here during the year. The large editions 
(of 30,000 copies altogether) of the first three 
volumes published in June this year, have during these 



few months melted down to such a degree that we have 
found it wise to already begin the printing of new editions 
in the same quantities. More than thirty dear brethren 
and sisters have labored as Colporteurs during the year. 
A few of these have just recently received the Truth, and 
have joined in the work with great zeal. 

The free distribution of tracts has also increased, as 
you will see. A large part of the issue of "Eko fran 
talarstolen"— PEOPLES PULPIT— of which we now regularly 
print about 150,000 copies every month— has been used in 
connection with the advertising of public meetings in 
various parts of the country. 

The regular Pilgrim service has been richly blessed and 
used of the Lord. We have had two General Conventions 
(the first in Orebro with not less than 500 Truth 
friends present, and the second in Stockholm— when we 
had the joy of having you— yourself— in our midst, and 
had the privilege of listening to your helpful and loving 
words to us), and a large number of well attended and 
profitable local Conventions in nearly all parts of the 
land. Besides this, 81 extra public meetings— of which 
many were in places where we have never before had any 
meeting— have been held by myself all over the land during 
the year. 

These extra meetings have had a total attendance of 
31,150 adults, which as a rule have given the very closest 
attention to our presentation of the good Message for 
fully two hours and more each time. At the close of 
these meetings, we have sold between two and three thousand 
volumes of the STUDIES, etc., and we have also in 
connection with them distributed nearly one-half million 
"Eko fran talarstolen." 417,500 of that number have been 
put in the homes of the people before the meetings, advertising 
the same, by brethren who voluntarily have given 

R5176 : page 40 

their time in this way to serve the Cause we all love so 
dearly. 

The number of subscribers to the Swedish WATCH 
TOWER has increased by only 142, but we hope it will increase 
more during the year before us. The voluntary 
donations to the Tract Fund show again a considerable 
increase, which is specially remarkable when one considers 
the limited financial conditions in which most of 
the friends here live, as well as the fact that a large part 
of their savings has been used in connection with the 
hundreds of meetings held all over the country, and of 
which the expenses have not been reported to us. 

We daily commend you, our beloved Pastor, and all 
your faithful co-laborers everywhere, to the Lord's grace, 
and are glad to know that we also are remembered by you. 

With much Christian love from ourself, and on behalf 
of the Swedish Brethren, 

Yours in the service of our Redeemer, 

AUGUST LUNDBORG. 



SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Copies STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES circulated 27,780 

Vol. 1 in Magazine edition, sold at cost 12,650 



Total 40,430 

Various other books and booklets, MANNA, 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS, etc 25,557 



Total 65,987 

Eko fran talarstolen (PEOPLES PULPIT), 

issued free 753,000 

Other free tracts and sample TOWERS 126,036 

Total 879,036 

Expressed in usual form of tract pages 14,124,128 

Number of subscribers to the Swedish 

WATCH TOWER 1,881 

Old sets Swedish TOWER, cloth-bound and 

unbound 700 

Bibles sold 109 

Number of meetings held under the auspices 

of the Society 1,395 

Number of miles traveled in preaching 

tours 73,571 

Letters and cards sent out 5,320 

Letters and cards received 4,118 

Total number of various sendings, by mail 

and by railroad 27,567 



REPORT FROM THE NORWEGIAN BRANCH FOR 1912 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Number of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and 

MANNAS sold 2,179 

Number of booklets sold 2,069 

Total 4,248 

Tracts and Norwegian PEOPLES PULPIT 

distributed 123,625 

These estimated as tract pages 1,978,000 

Subscriptions to the Norweg. PEOPLES PULPIT 1,066 

Subscriptions to the Dano. -Norweg. WATCH 

TOWER 265 

Letters and cards received 1,502 

Letters and cards sent out 1,214 

Parcels sent out 11,598 

Number of public meetings 42 

Number of parlor meetings 148 



Number of attendants, approximately 14,500 



ANNUAL REPORT OF DANISH BRANCH FOR 1912 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I hereby submit the Report of the work done in this 
country, in our endeavor to spread the good tidings of the 
Kingdom so near at hand. Although the figures are small, 
yet in one or two branches the work has widened somewhat. 
More tracts have been distributed than formerly, 
and although no regular Pilgrim service has been taken 
up, more work has been done in that line than previously, 
and both public and private meetings have been held in 
different parts of the country. Lately we have taken up 
a work on Sundays, in different towns and places, from 
which we have been able to get back to Copenhagen the 
same day. Early on Sunday mornings, some twenty of 
the friends of the Class here have started out for some 
such place, and throughout the morning and forenoon they 
have distributed tracts announcing a public meeting held 
in the afternoon. These meetings have also been announced 
in the local papers, and have been well attended. 
A number of the books have been sold at the close of the 
meetings, to those who had become interested through the 
tracts or the meeting. In various places we see indications 
of spiritual growth amongst the friends, and great joy in 
the Lord, and in His wonderful Message. We trust that 
through the Lord's grace we shall be able to do more in all 
branches during the next year, and we are very grateful 
for our privileges in connection with the work. 

With Christian love, and best wishes, 
Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

CARL LUTTICHAU. --Copenhagen. 

R5176 : page 41 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Output of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 2,938 

Output of various booklets 1,927 



Total 4,865 

Tracts free 234,400 

Letters and cards received 1,125 

Letters, cards and parcels sent out 1,125 

Copies of Danish WATCH TOWER sent out 
monthly 876 



REPORT OF JAMAICA BRANCH FOR 1912 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



It is our privilege and pleasure to report to you the 
work as it progresses in this part of the Harvest Field, 
and our many blessings while sharing in its labors, which 
are of much value to us in our Christian development and 
also highly appreciated. 

Nearly all our efforts during the past twelve months 
have met with success, and we believe the dear Lord has 
signally directed all our services, the dear friends in the 
main being of one heart and one mind throughout the 
Island. And in our experiences with the various ecclesias 
we find them loyal to the Truth and to its source. 

There are many becoming interested at this time, and 
as a whole the Truth is being well established in the 
Island, although we are putting out more literature in 
other parts (other islands) at present. Owing to a drouth 
which has continued in Jamaica for several months, causing 
a financial strain, and also owing to the fact that the 
Island has been thoroughly canvassed in the past two 
years, there is less literature being circulated here; but 
other points seem to have some virgin soil and additional 
opportunities for the blessed Truth to spread. 

The Colporteurs labor under many difficulties in the 
West Indies, Colon, etc., and some find it very difficult to 
meet expenses; however, they are doing good work. As 
you will observe by the Annual Report, there has been a 
large number of volumes placed in the hands of readers 
within the past year, which will undoubtedly serve their 
purpose in due time. 

With much Christian love, I am, 
Your brother and fellow-servant in Christ, 
ROBT. R. PRICE. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

Total number STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES sold 6,944 

" " " " " " magazine 

form 525 

Total number other books sold 1,250 

" " booklets sold 1,012 

" " PEOPLES PULPIT and EVERYBODY'S 

PAPER 315,000 

Estimated in tract pages 5,040,000 

Public lectures 27 

Estimated total attendance 9,449 

Average attendance 350 

Semi-public talks and Class Lessons 159 

Total attendance 5,467 

Average attendance 35 

Letters and cards received 887 

Letters and cards sent 1,805 



THE GOSPEL IN SOUTH INDIA 
MY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



I have been anxiously waiting to hear from you. We 
praise the Lord for the blessed privilege of laying down 
our lives for the Lord's cause. The work is spreading 
rapidly and there are wider scopes for extending the work 
in different places. In all we have about fifty-odd congregations 
or Bible Study Classes now, and we must have 
some teachers in each of these places. Then only will 
the message of the hour reach those of the surrounding 
places. 

If we may spend monthly at an average of five Rupees 
on each class, the work will have greater effect. No matter 
how deeply the poor friends are interested in a place, 
without our frequent visits all the wolves and foxes gather 
and howl and tear them to pieces. Really, it is a hard 
thing to keep them away, without some one on the spot. 
When we start a class in a place, immediately the sectarian 
people go there and say all manner of evil things about 
you, and all the workers, falsely, and try their best to 
discourage the poor people. It seems we have to take a 
paternal care over these poor friends until they are well 
grounded in the Truth and strengthened in spirit and in 

R5177 : page 41 

faith. "They were grieved that the people were taught." 
--Acts 4:2. 

Brother Carmichael is the one who spends his entire 
time distributing tracts now. Other friends also do it, 
but they give only part of their time. Brother Joseph is 
in North Travancore starting classes. He also finds much 
opposition in those parts. 

Here in almost all the vernacular missionary papers 
there is some slanderous report about me and the work- 
almost every issue. They call me Anti-Christ, dog, devil, 
and I know not what all. I don't have time to look or 
listen, as the pressure of the Lord's work is heavy and 
the time is so short. 

The latest development is that some of the literature 
of the enemies of the Truth in America has found its way 
to Travancore, and some sectarians are glorying over it 
and are translating and publishing it in the vernacular 
languages. 

At the instigation of so-called "Christians," we are 
drawn into Court, not for committing any crime, but for 
putting up sheds and teaching the people the Gospel Truth. 
The reason is that there is a law here that no shrine or 
temple shall be built by anybody without the permission 
of the Government. These people know well that it is not 
at all our purpose to put up shrines and temples, and yet 
they want to scare the poor people and put us to unnecessary 
trouble and expense. 

There is a case pending at Quilon in which I am one 
of twelve accused. The accusation against us is that we 
have violated the law of the State in building a Christian 
church. This is the place where Brother Pyles and Dr. 
Jones went for the night meeting, when you and Brother 



Hall and myself went to the English school at Nellykakuzy, 
where Dr. William lives. We all, the twelve accused, 
went to Quilon for the case, and some of the witnesses 
did not appear; hence it is posted for next Friday. 
Of course it will not amount to anything, yet there is 
trouble and unnecessary expense in connection with it, and 
loss of time. These are the things our enemies delight in. 
Such is the spirit of the missionaries, who have come to 
the heathen to preach about Christ. 

The tract, "Problem of the Ages," is translated and 
printed in Malayalam and Tamil, in small quantities of 
25,000. As the funds are not sufficient, I am waiting for 
your instructions in the matter. 

Friends in Royapuram want me to go and spend some 
time with them, and there are many places that could be 
worked for the glory of the Lord. The Federated Malay 
States constitute a very good field, as there are many 
educated Indians there who already show some interest 
through the tracts I have been sending through the mail. 

If I could travel for two months visiting some of these 
places, I am quite sure there would be much interest 
aroused in those parts. I only make this suggestion. I 
think about 500 or 600 Rupees would be enough for the 
entire trip. 

R5177 : page 42 

I could go from here to Madras, and after spending 
a few days there, go to Burmah, and then to Penang, and 
to the Malay States. There are many Tamil and 
Malayalam people in those places. I think until I come 
back Brothers Theophilus and James may be able to go on 
with the work here. 

Herewith I enclose the monthly statements and the 
receipts of the 53 catechists and teachers, for the help 
they have received. 

Dear Brother, I know it is hard for you to spare even 
a few moments for me, yet I beg of you to drop a few 
lines to encourage and cheer me up and direct me with 
your counsel, at least once a month. 

I die daily, not only for the cause of the Master, but 
also for the servant of the Lord. You know that whatever 
arrow is shot at you by enemies, first pierces me 
through my heart. May the Lord give you, dear brother, 
more strength, more courage, more wisdom and love, every 
passing day. 

With love and prayers, your brother and fellow-sufferer 
for the cause of the Lord. 

S. P. DAVEY. 

REPORT OF WORK IN SOUTH AFRICA FOR 1912 

Volumes STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

circulated 1,409 

Other books 185 

Booklets 1,818 



English PEOPLES PULPITS 28,808 

English EVERYBODY'S PAPER 30,000 

Dutch PEOPLES PULPITS 3,000 

(These last three items figured in tract pages are 
equivalent, respectively, to 460,928, 480,000 and 
48,000.) 

Mail dispatched 1,716 

Meetings held 309 



WORK FOR THE BLIND 

During the year 1912 the efforts of the Gould Free Library 
for the Blind show as follows:— 

Books loaned out, postage free 876 

Tracts sent out, free 2,698 

Representing in tract pages 37,044 

Letters received 652 

Letters dispatched 483 

Your Brother in Christ, 

F. B. GOULD. 



R5177 : page 42 

ABRAHAM'S AGE ON ENTERING CANAAN 

WE ARE in receipt of a number of letters, calling 
attention to what seems to the writers 
an error in the Chronology given in STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II, relative to the 
date of Abraham's birth, his entrance into 
Canaan, etc. For the sake of these, as well 
as others who may have the same difficulty, 
we here enlarge upon what is stated in Vol. 
II, pages 44-47. 

Gen. 1 1:32 says that at his death Terah's 
age was two hundred and five years. Acts 7:4 says that 
then Abraham removed into Canaan. And Gen. 12:4 
states that Abraham was seventy-five years old when he 
departed out of Haran. Hence Terah's age at Abraham's 
birth must have been one hundred and thirty years. 

But is not this out of harmony with Gen. 1 1:26, which 
says, "And Terah lived seventy years and begat Abram, 
Nahor and Haran"? We answer, No. The point of 
confusion is in the fact that Haran, the eldest, is mentioned 
last, while Abram, the youngest, is mentioned first 
—possibly because of his greater prominence in the narrative, 
or possibly, as a little stumbling-block to hinder us 
from seeing the facts except as guided by the Lord, in 
His due time. 

That Haran was the eldest of the sons of Terah is 
quite evident from the recorded facts. His son Lot was 



old enough to be the companion of his uncle Abraham. 
Lot and Abraham were probably nearly of the same age, 
as each had his own flocks and herds and herdsmen. 
When Sodom was destroyed Lot had two daughters of 
marriageable age and others already married. This was 
before Isaac was born, Abraham being then ninety-nine 
years old.-Gen. 17:24; 18:1,16; 19:8,14. 

Again, notice the likelihood of Haran's being much the 
oldest of Terah's sons, and Nahor the second, thus: Nahor 
married one of his brother Haran's daughters, Milcah 
(see Gen. 24:15), whose grand-daughter, Rebecca, became 
the wife of Abraham's son, Isaac— Gen. 24:67. 

Our reckoning as given in the STUDIES is, therefore, 
sustained by all the known facts, as well as by the exact 
statements of Scripture. 



R5177 : page 42 

THE OATH-BOUND COVENANT 

-MARCH 2.-GENESIS 15:5-18.- 

"He is faithful that promised."— Hebrews 10:23. 

IN VARIOUS TERMS the Lord eight times 

repeated to Abraham His Covenant. Today's 

Study directs our attention to God's 

oath, whereby that Covenant was confirmed 

to Abraham. And St. Paul calls our attention 

to the fact that these numerous repetitions 

and specifications of the Covenant, as 

well as God's oath attesting, were intended 

specially for us— for Spiritual Israel— "that 

who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set 

before us [in the Gospel]; which hope [expressed in the 

Covenant made with Abraham and confirmed with an 

oath] we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and 

steadfast, and which entereth into that within the veil."— 

Hebrews 6:18,19. 

Thus the Apostle declares that this Covenant has not 
yet been fulfilled and that Christians, no less than the 
Jews and the whole world of mankind, are vitally interested 
in its fulfilment. We may have wondered, Why did 
God repeat the Promise so frequently to Abraham, and 
then confirm it to Isaac and to Jacob, etc.? But when we 
see that this Promise, as a nutshell, contains the entire 
Plan of God for human Redemption and Restitution, as 
an acorn contains an oak tree, this explains to us the 
Divine particularity. It explains to us also why this 
Promise made to Abraham is continually referred to by 
the Apostles in their presentation of the hope for the 
Church and for the world. 

The Promise primarily was to Abraham himself— 
"Lift up now thine eyes,...to the north, and to the 



south, and to the west, and to the east; all the land which 

R5178 : page 43 

thou seest, to thee will I give it, and thy seed after thee." 

Although God's providence led the children of Israel into 

that land, and although it was given to them by Joshua 

to be their inheritance, this did not fulfil the conditions of 

the Promise. The Israelites did not have permanent possession 

of the land. Time and again it passed under the 

rule of the Philistines, the Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, 

etc.; and now for many centuries it has been 

under the rule of the Turks. 

The Jews have now no more right to that land than 
had the Canaanites, Amalekites and others whom they 
drove out, except through this great Oath-bound Covenant 
made to Abraham. How foolish, therefore, do those intellectual 
Jews appear who disclaim Abraham as a mythical 
character, and who wholly distrust God and the 
promises that He made to Abraham, and who, nevertheless, 
claim the Land of Promise! It is not their Land 
of Promise, and never will belong to any except those 
who hold to the Promise.— Romans 4:11-14. 

ABRAHAM'S THREE WIVES TYPICAL 

While Abraham and his wives were all real personages, 
their affairs were so supervised by the Almighty 
that they became types. Thus Abraham was a type of 
God, and Isaac a type of Messiah. Isaac's wife, Rebecca, 
typified the Church, the Elect Little Flock of this Gospel 
Age, for whom God has provided joint-heirship with the 
Redeemer in His great Kingdom, and through whom, as 
the Seed of Abraham, all the families of the earth will 
be blessed.— Galatians 3:29. 

As Abraham was a type of the Almighty, so his wives 
were types of God's three great Covenants, through which 
all of His blessings will come by and by. St. Paul explains 
that, as Sarah was barren, so the primary, or chief, 
Covenant of God was barren for a long time— until Jesus 
came. Meantime, Hagar representatively became the 
wife, and attempted to bring forth the heir of promise, 
but failed. St. Paul declares that in this Hagar typified 
the Covenant made with Israel at Sinai, which failed to 
bring forth the real Seed of Abraham, competent to bless 
all the families of the earth. 

As Hagar was a bond-maid, she typified the bondage 
of the Law Covenant; and her child Ishmael, Inspiration 
points out, typified the Jewish people. They were indeed 
related to God, but as children of a Covenant of bondage. 
As later on, the barren Sarah brought forth the son of 
promise, so, St. Paul explains, God's original Covenant in 
due time brought forth the true Heir, Jesus— Messiah. 

In one figure, all the followers of Jesus are reckoned 
as His members, under Him as their Head, as the Apostle 
says, "We brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 



promise." In another figure, Jesus is pictured as a 
Bridegroom, and His followers a Bride company. This 
picture is shown in Rebecca, who became Isaac's wife, 
and joint-heir with him to the riches of Abraham 
and the promises to his seed. In the type Sarah 
died prior to the time that Isaac married, which signifies 
that this primary Covenant of God, made with Abraham, 
will reach its fulfilment in the bringing forth of the completed 
Messiah, Head and Body, Bridegroom and Bride. 
These will be the Seed of Abraham, through whom all 
nations will be blessed. 

ABRAHAM'S ALL GIVEN TO ISAAC 

In the type Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac, 
through him making provision for Ishmael and for his other 
children by his third wife, Keturah. In the antitype God 
bestows all His fulness upon Christ, The Messiah, and 
through Him makes provision for the Natural Israelites 
and for all the families of the earth— all who are to be 
blessed through the antitypical Isaac— The Christ. 

The inspired interpretation is that Hagar and Sarah 
were types of the Law Covenant and of our covenant 
of this Gospel Age, which gives us assurance that 
Abraham's third wife, who was taken after the death 
of Sarah and who bore him many children, typified 
the New Covenant, which the Bible declares will 
soon be inaugurated— at the close of this Gospel Age. 
Under that New Covenant and at the hands of the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, The Christ, during the thousand 
years of the Messianic reign, all the families of the 
earth will be blessed. Such is the length, the breadth, 
the height and depth of God's Love for humanity, and 
His provision for their future! 

Thus seen, God's Promise to Abraham had only a partial 
beginning at Mount Moriah, and the development of 
the real Seed of Abraham had only its start in Jesus, and 
the real Seed which is to bless the world, according to 
His Promise, is not yet complete. Our hope is that this 
Spiritual Seed will soon be completed by the First Resurrection. 
Then, the secondary part of the Promise, which 
relates to the natural man— the world in general— will 
begin to be fulfilled; because then the Messiah class, the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, in power and great glory 
beyond the veil, will set up a Kingdom— begin to exercise 
Messianic power and authority and thus begin to 
bless the world. 

Messiah's reign, according to the Scriptures, is to last 
a thousand years. Its effect will be the binding of Satan, 
the restraining of sin, the scattering of ignorance and 
superstition, and the general enlightenment of mankind. 
Under that enlightening influence, the "knowledge of God 
will fill the whole earth as the waters cover the great 
deep," until none shall need to teach his neighbor, because 
all will know, understand and appreciate the Divine arrangement 
and the privileges then possible to them. 



Under that reign, not only the living will be blessed 
and led back to health, perfection and everlasting life, 
but all that are in their graves will be awakened and come 
forth to similar knowledge, privileges and opportunities. 
Only thus could those families of the earth be blessed 
who died, before Abraham's time and since, in utter ignorance 
of God and His glorious arrangements. 

AS THE STARS AND AS THE SAND 

Only of late have Bible students discerned that Abraham 
is to have two seeds, exclusive of the Ishmaelites of the 
Law, or Hagar Covenant. "Thy Seed shall be as the 
stars of heaven, and as the sands of the seashore." The 
stars of heaven fitly picture to us a glorified Christ and 
His Church, the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, changed 
from human nature to Divine nature, from earthly conditions 
to heavenly conditions. These are the heirs of Galatians 3:29, 
and are referred to by St. Paul again when 
he says, "As star differeth from star in glory, so is the 
resurrection of THE dead."— 1 Corinthians 15:41,42. 

But God's glorious Plan will only begin its accomplishment 
in the glorification of the Church. All the families 
of the earth, like the sands of the seashore, will be privileged 
to come into relationship with God under Messiah's 
Kingdom. All who will then knowingly and wilfully reject 
the Divine arrangement will be cut off in the Second 
Death. But all who then will accept the terms of Messiah's 
Kingdom and become obedient thereto will be gradually 
brought to perfection, and because of faith and 
obedience become identified with God and become the 
earthly, or human seed of Abraham, blessed with human 
perfection and everlasting life in an earthly Eden. 

GOD'S OATH TO ABRAHAM 

Professor Dods has ably pointed out that the procedure 
of cutting animals in two parts and passing between 

R5178 : page 44 

them was an ancient form of solemn obligation or contract 
—an oath. Thus God adopted the strongest possible 
symbolism for assuring Abraham and all his posterity that 
His Covenant to bless Abraham and his Seed will never 
be broken. Incidentally, a prophecy was made, showing 
that it would be four hundred years before Abraham's 
posterity would have even a semblance of Divine favor, 
and that meantime they would be under the yoke of bondage 
to Egypt, and then would be brought forth. 

St. Stephen, evidently voicing the sentiment of all the 
Apostles, noted the fact that God's promise to Abraham 
had not been fulfilled up to that time, even though the 
Israelites had possessed Canaan off and on for centuries. 
The promise reads that the land shall come to Abraham 
and to his seed after him. St. Stephen noted the fact that 



Abraham never owned enough of Canaan to set his foot 
upon. His reasoning is that after Messiah and His Bride 
shall be glorified as the Kingdom, then Abraham will 
come forth from the dead to inherit the land and bestow 
it upon his posterity. But the antitype, we have seen, will 
be larger; for the whole earth shall be the Paradise of 
God, and the Land of Canaan, to all who shall return to 
harmony with God, and through faith and obedience be 
accepted as the seed of Abraham. 



R5178 : page 44 

HOPE FOR THE SODOMITES 

--MARCH 9.-GENESIS 19:12-17,23-29.- 

"Come ye out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the 
Lord, and touch no unclean thing."— 2 Corinthians 6:17. (R.V.) 

WHEN ABRAHAM was ninety-nine years old 
—about the year 1900 B.C.— his encampment 
was at Hebron. There the Lord and two 
angels appeared to him as men. He knew 
them not, but entertained them, and they 
did eat and talk with Abraham. St. Paul, 
noting this, urges that the Lord's people 
should be hospitable to strangers, and reminds 
us of how Abraham entertained 
angels unawares.— Hebrews 13:2. 
The one in this case called the Lord was doubtless the 

R5179 : page 44 

Logos, chief Messenger of Jehovah, who subsequently 
was made flesh that He might be man's Redeemer and 
Restorer. The Lord on this occasion told Abraham that 
Ishmael would not be the heir of the Promise, but that 
very shortly Sarah would have a son, notwithstanding 
her advanced age. Isaac was born the next year. 

It was as Abraham walked with his angelic visitors a 
little distance that he learned who they really were, and 
that the destruction of Sodom was imminent. Nobly and 
generously the heir of the Promises petitioned God's 
Mercy on the Sodomites, to spare them from destruction 
if there were fifty, forty, twenty or even ten amongst 
them doing as well as they knew how. The Lord gave 
assurance that if there were ten in the city thus righteous 
it would be spared. 

THE WICKEDNESS OF SODOM GREAT 

God's policy has been to allow mankind during this 
reign of sin and death to try their hand at self-government, 
etc. He has interf erred to cut off with destruction 



only those whose iniquity became very pronounced and 
whose fond enjoyment of life's privileges would be injurious 
to themselves and others. Thus of the Sodomites 
and the antediluvians God made illustrations of the great 
lesson, "All the wicked will He destroy." 

We are to remember, however, that these are not illustrations 
of eternal torment, but illustrations of destruction. 
We are to remember, also, that these merely passed 
into destruction a few years sooner than they would 
ordinarily have done. We are to remember, further, that 
the death sentence was upon all of Adam's race from 
the time when he was cast out of Eden. 

We are to remember, further, that Christ Jesus, by 
the grace of God, tasted death for every man; and that 
in Him all the families of the earth will be blessed. This 
means that all of Adam's children, under the reign of sin 
and death and the weaknesses of heredity, will 
eventually come forth from the tomb through the merit 
of Christ's sacrifice. And that sacrifice included the 
Sodomites as truly as it includes any of us, as this 
lesson will show. 

"AND DELIVERED RIGHTEOUS LOT" 

The Apostle Peter informs us that Lot was not in sympathy 
with the evils of Sodom, in the midst of which he 
lived. (2 Peter 2:7,8.) His family apparently had been 
all girls. These, except two, had intermarried with the 
Sodomites. Quite possibly it was the thought of marrying 
the daughters to prosperous husbands that, under the 
guidance of the mother, induced the family to settle in 
Sodom. How many others like Lot and his wife have 
made the serious mistake of claiming more for the physical 
and temporal interests of their families than for their 
intellectual and moral welfare! The story of the flight 
of Lot, his wife and two unmarried daughters is simply 
told in our lesson. 

Geologists declare that the region of the Dead Sea, 
the former site of Sodom and Gomorrah, was a gas and 
oil and asphalt deposit, with a deep crevice which led 
down to subterranean fires; and that the connection established 
between these by an earthquake or by a lightning 
bolt would have resulted in the manner described as the 
experiences of Sodom. The gas, throwing burning oil 
and asphalt into the air, would have produced a rain of 
fire and brimstone— a death-dealing terror. But had 
there been no such reservoir of inflammables, the Lord 
would have been quite able to accomplish the same results 
by other means, or in such a case perhaps accomplished 
the destruction in another way. 

The intimation of the 29th verse is that God's Mercy 
toward Lot was because of his relationship to Abraham. 
This view is consistent with all the Bible statements. 
Adam's entire race was condemned to death because of 
his disobedience. Hence Divine Justice owed nothing 
to any of them. Divine Mercy entered into a special 



Covenant of favor with Abraham, after he had demonstrated 
his faith, loyalty and obedience; but the Covenant 
did not extend to any others except to his seed. There 
was therefore no reason why Lot should be considered 
more than others except as stated— that God would show 
favor to him because of his relationship to Abraham. 

"THERE'S A WIDENESS IN GOD'S MERCY" 

This does not signify that God is merciless to our race, 
but merely that, having provided a way, or channel, 
through which He will exercise His Mercy, He will but 
rarely exercise it outside of that foreordained channel. 

The channel of all of God's Mercy is Christ Jesus, 
who declared, "No man cometh unto the Father but by 
Me." Of Him also St. Peter said, "Neither is there 
salvation in any other, for there is none other name under 
Heaven given amongst men, whereby we must be saved." 
(Acts 4:12.) Since no one could be saved except through 
Jesus, it follows that no one was saved before Jesus came. 
To some this may at first seem astounding, until they 

R5179 : page 45 

perceive that it is the clear teaching of the Bible, and the 
key which unlocks the wonders of God's grace. 

In proof of this, note St. Paul's words respecting the 
salvation which God has sent to mankind through Jesus. 
He says, "Which salvation began to be preached by our 
Lord and was confirmed unto us by those who heard 
Him." (Hebrews 2:3.) Again, we read that Jesus "brought 
life and immortality to light through the Gospel."— 
2 Timothy 1:10. 

Abraham and all the Hebrews had the intimation of 
coming blessing through the promises made to Abraham; 
but an intimation is one thing, and the blessing itself 
another. The Promise said that the people's blessing would 
come through Abraham's Seed. (Galatians 3:16,29.) 
Hence it could not come before. We should rid our 
minds of the thought that Abraham, Moses, David and 
others of the holy ones of the past went to Heaven, and 
the remainder of mankind to eternal torture. The Bible 
most distinctly declares that the ancients, good and bad, 
were gathered to their fathers and slept with their fathers. 
They are sleeping still, waiting for the time when 
Abraham's Seed will be complete, and will set up God's 
Kingdom in the earth, overthrow all the powers of sin 
and death, and deliver all the captives from the prison-house 
of the tomb. 

THE FIRST, OR CHIEF RESURRECTION 

The First Resurrection began with our Lord Jesus 
and is not yet completed, because all of the faithful Elect 
Bride class are called to share in His sacrificial death, 
and to share also in His glorious Resurrection to the 



Divine nature. All sharing in that First Resurrection, 
the Bible declares, will reign with Christ a thousand 
years, and as the Seed of Abraham, fully empowered, will 
bless all those redeemed by the precious blood of Calvary. 
-Rev. 20:4. 

St. Paul emphasizes this point in Hebrews 1 1:38-40, 
declaring that, while Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all 
the holy ones of the past received indications of God's 
favor, nevertheless that favor can come only through 
Christ. Consequently they cannot reach perfection in the 
flesh and everlasting life until the Body of Christ, the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, shall be completed— "that 
they, without us, should not be made perfect." Jesus also 
attested that the Ancient Worthies had not gone to 
Heaven, saying, "No man hath ascended up to Heaven." 
(John 3:13.) St. Peter specializes in the Prophet David's 
case, and declares, "David is not ascended into the 
Heavens."— Acts 2:34. 

HOPE FOR THE SODOMITES 

The hope for the Sodomites is exactly the same as the 
hope for all the remainder of Adam's race, except a few 
who, during this Gospel Age, have come into relationship 
with Christ as members of the Spiritual Seed. The hope 
of all the world is the Messianic Kingdom, and the deliverance 
from the power of sin and death which it will 
effect. With the setting up of that Kingdom the work 
of salvation will begin, so far as the world is concerned, 
for the salvation of the Church to a Heavenly condition 
is a separate salvation from that which God has provided 
for the world in general. The sacrifice at Calvary, however, 
is one sacrifice for all— the basis of all our hopes. We 
were all condemned to death through Adam; and justification 
to life can come to none except through the Redeemer. 

Jesus tells us that it will be more tolerable for the 
people of Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment 
(the thousand years of His Messianic reign) than for the 
people of His day who heard His Message and rejected 
it— the people of Capernaum, Bethsaida, Chorazin. 
(Matthew 11:20-24.) It will not be intolerable for the 
people who rejected Jesus; but it will be more tolerable, 
the Master said, for the Sodomites, because, He explains, 
"If the mighty works had been done in Sodom and 
Gomorrah, they would have repented," and would not 
have been overwhelmed. 

This shows us clearly that the eternal fate of the 
Sodomites is not sealed. When we turn to the Word of 
the Lord through Ezekiel the Prophet, 16:46-63, we have 
abundant testimony that the Sodomites will not only be 
awakened from the sleep of death, but when awakened 
will be brought to a knowledge of God and to an opportunity 
of obtaining everlasting life, through The Messiah, 
by willing obedience. 



R5180 : page 45 

ABRAHAM'S FAITH TESTED 

--MARCH 16. -GENESIS 22:1-13.- 

"I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge 
of God more than burnt offerings."— Hosea 6:6. 

TODAY'S STUDY tells us of one of the reasons 

why Abraham has been styled the 

"Father of the Faithful." His entire life 

history, as sketched in the Bible, was a life 

of faith, a life of trust in God, reliance upon 

the Divine promises. But the final test, 

which we study today, was terribly severe 

and marked the tested one as very high, according 

to any and every standard— Divine 

and human. Evidently Abraham's faith 

grew stronger and stronger as the years of his acquaintance 

with God multiplied. The faith recorded in our 

lesson is so colossal as to amaze us. Only a person very 

intimately acquainted with the Almighty, very sympathetic 

and trustful, could possibly have endured such a test. 

This test came through the Divine command that 
Abraham should take his son, his only son, Isaac, in whom 
was centered the promises, and should offer him a sacrifice 
to God on Mount Moriah. To appreciate the situation, we 
must remember that Abraham at this time was 125 years 
old, and that Isaac was the son whom the Lord had indicated 
would be the channel for all the blessings promised. 

We must go back of this, and remember the long years 
before Isaac's birth, when for fourteen years Abraham 
had been thinking that possibly Ishmael might be the 
channel of God's blessings. We must go still further 
back, and remember the long period before Ishmael's 
birth, in which Abraham wandered as a stranger and 
waited for the fulfilment of God's Promise, only to realize 
that his wife was absolutely sterile, barren. Now after 
half a century of waiting and trusting, could it be that 
God wished him to sacrifice all this to demonstrate his 
loyalty, his faith? It was so. He had positive assurance 
of the command. It was no imagination. It was no whispering 
of witches or wizards. It was no dream. 

To one of Abraham's character, the Divine command 
meant prompt obedience. Forthwith he started. "Whatsoever 
He saith unto you, do it." Forthwith he made 
ready for the journey, accompanied part of the way by 
his servants. Then leaving them, Abraham and Isaac 
journeyed to the top of Mt. Moriah, which long centuries 
afterward, in the time of Solomon, was the site of the 
Temple. The very rock upon which Isaac is supposed 
to have been bound, became the very location for the 
Brazen Altar. 

We looked with great interest upon this rock recently, 



R5180 : page 46 

when visiting Jerusalem. We thought of the Wisdom of 
God manifested in the sending of Abraham to the very 
spot which He had foreordained should be the Temple 
site. The rock is surrounded by an iron fence; and it 
may be seen, but not touched. In its center is a hole, 
which, tradition says, was a drainway for the surplus 
blood of the sacrifices, carrying the blood away. 

Well we remember how the features of today's Study 
came before our mind! The grand old man, Abraham, 
accompanied by his loyal son, the heir of the promises, 
and well acquainted with them, came to this spot. There 
the wood was placed; and then the father, with faltering 
lips, but determined heart, told his son of the Divine command. 
There he offered up his son, even though the knife 
did not strike the fatal blow. The offering was complete 
in the sight of Heaven, and the hand was stayed opportunely 
and, as the Apostle explains, "Abraham received 
his son from the dead, in a figure."— Hebrews 11:19. 

THE ANTITYPE OF ALL THIS 

These incidents of olden time had their own effect 
upon the actors; but to God's people, enlightened by the 
Holy Spirit, they have still further meaning. We have 
already seen that Abraham serves as a type of the Almighty, 
and that Isaac serves as a type of The Christ- 
Head and Body. Here then we have the antitype. The 
Heavenly Father freely offered up His Son on our behalf, 
for the sins of the whole world. "God sent not His Son 
into the world to condemn the world, but that the world 
through Him might be saved." "God gave His only Begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth on Him might not 
perish, but have everlasting life"— that in Him all the 
families of the earth might be blessed. 

God's great sacrifice of His Son did not mean His 
eternal death— His destruction. It meant merely that 
Christ should die to earthly interests, hopes, aims and 
ambitions, but should be begotten by the Holy Spirit to 
new hopes, to new aims, to new ambitions and to new conditions 
—beyond the veil. 

So God left not His Son in death when He freely 
offered Him up for us all, nor did He leave Him in the 
human condition of sacrifice. He raised our Lord from 
the dead, on the third day, to the glory that he had with 
the Father before the world was— yes, with and to an 
added glory, "far above angels, principalities and powers 
and every name." Here we have the antitype of Abraham's 
offering up Isaac. 

"IF WE SUFFER WITH HIM" 

But there is more to the antitype. In God's providence 
He arranged that Jesus should be the Head to the 



Church, which is His Body. Hence the sufferings of 
Christ, accomplished by Jesus the Head, which ended 
nearly nineteen centuries ago, were only a part of the 
sufferings of the antitype of Isaac. Here the Apostle 
declares, "We, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children 
of promise."— Galatians 4:28. 

The Church which God has been calling out of the 
world since the day of Pentecost is required to prove her 
loyalty and faithfulness and worthiness of sharing in the 
First Resurrection, by being made conformable to Christ's 
death. "If we suffer with Him"— as His members— "we 
shall also reign with Him"— as His members. The cup 
which the Father gave to Him of suffering and ignominy 
was a test to prove His faithfulness and loyalty. The 
same cup He has passed on to His followers, saying, 
"Drink ye all of it," following My example in demonstrating 
your love and loyalty to God and for His cause, 
even unto death. 

That the Lord Jesus guards His sheep is distinctly 
stated by Himself. When He reproved Saul of Tarsus 
for the death of St. Stephen and for troubling the Church, 
He declared, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me? 
Tarsus never saw Jesus personally in the flesh to persecute 
Him, but whatsoever was done to the least of His disciples 
was done to Jesus. This still is true, and will continue 
to be true until the Body of Christ, which is the 
Church Elect, shall have been completed and glorified. 
Meantime, he that harms one of the least of the Lord's 
little ones, and he that gives a cup of cold water to one 
of the least of these, does it to the Lord of Glory Himself. 

THE RAM IN THE THICKET 

When God through the angel stayed the hand of 
Abraham from accomplishing the sacrifice of his son's 
life, a ram caught in the thicket was provided as a sacrifice 
instead. Thus a ram in sacrifice became a symbol of the 
Seed of Abraham, and an indication of a part of the 
process by which reconciliation of Divine Justice will be 
made on behalf of all the families of the earth, to permit 
of their being blessed by the Messianic Kingdom. 

We are to remember that this same thought was kept 
up in God's subsequent dealings with Israel. Thus the 
Passover Lamb was slain, and its blood, sprinkled figuratively, 
typically, foretold the fact that there could be no 
Church of the First-born saved during this Gospel Age, 
except through the slain Lamb, "the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world." Similarly, the sin-offerings 
and burnt-offerings of Israel spoke of the necessity 
for a redemptive work to be accomplished before 
any blessings could come to Israel, or through them to 
other nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues. 

Amongst the many lessons which Christians may learn 
from the testing of Abraham's faith are these: 

(1) The necessity for the death of the One through 
whom the blessing will eventually come to all mankind. 



If Jesus had not died for our sins, there would have been 
no remission of them. Hence there would have been no 
resurrection from the dead, and in that event death 
would have been more than a sleep. It would have 
meant extinction. 

(2) Let us be sure that if Jesus had not faithfully 
consummated His part of the agreement and laid down 

His life, neither would He have shared in the grand consummation 
and exaltation to the Divine nature. St. Paul 
declares this, saying that He was faithful unto death, 
"even the death of the cross, wherefore [on this account] 
God also hath highly exalted Him."— Philippians 2:8,9. 

(3) We are to remember that the same rule applies 

to all of the Church. It is not sufficient that we consecrate 
our lives. We must show our loyalty and faithfulness by 
laying them down, by taking up the cross, by drinking of 
His cup, by being immersed into His death. Only these 
will share Messiah's Throne of Glory. "If we suffer with 
Him, we shall also reign with Him; if we be dead with 
Him, we shall also live with Him." 



Time was when I did think that with 
Abundant strength my rest from wily foe 
And subtle enemy would be assured; but 
I am undeceived. The light of Truth has 
Shone into my mind, and shown that He 
In whom doth lie my "perfect strength" shall 
"Teach my hands to war, my fingers how 
To fight"; and so I learn that powers 
Of ill are round about me as the air, 
Needing a constant watch; and I have constant 
Need that both my hands be free, and that 
My fingers, where the power to grasp the 
Sword lies hid, be taught of Him to wage 
The conflict whensoe'r the hour may be. 
C. BECKETT 



R5181 : page 47 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am writing you a few lines to tell you I am one happy 
man now. 

My wife bought the first three volumes of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and read them and proved them to be Bible Truth. 
She wanted to read them to me, but I would not listen to it. 
I had been converted, but had lost all faith in so-called preachers, 
that claimed to be called of God, and I believed you to 
be a false prophet. The Light had almost gone out of my 
heart, and I told my wife I did not want your stuff in my 
house. 



As the time went on I was like a mad man. At last I went 
with my wife to the class, still believing they were deceived 
and deceiving us; but they told me you were just pointing 
out the Bible Truths to us. I had persecuted them, but God 
soon melted my hard heart and I repented of my past sins 
and made it right with my brethren. Now we are dwelling 
together in unity and Love. 

I feel I have also persecuted you, for which I am very 
sorry and ask your pardon. When "one member suffers all 
suffer with it"; and, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one 
of these, ye have done it unto Me," says our Lord. So this 
has troubled me, and I want to stand clear before God. I 
may never see you in the flesh, but expect to meet you when 
we pass beyond the veil. 

Will close, waiting at the Bar for Pardon. May God's 
Love and blessing be with you now and forever. 

Ever your brother and co-laborer in the Harvest Work, 
JOHN WELCH. -Mich. 



DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I cannot hope to express much of my gratitude to the 
Lord or much of my regard for you, as the channel through 
which He has so wonderfully blessed me, with light and knowledge 
and peace such as I never thought to possess. 

For ten years an officer in the Salvation Army, engaged 
in "Rescue" work, my heart has been terribly burdened, not 
only with my own inability to live up to the Divine standard, 
but also with the apparently hopeless condition of others less 
favored than myself. 

Dissatisfied for a long time, and having lost almost all faith 
in God and in the Bible, I did not know what to do or what 
to believe. In my extremity I continued to pray like this: 
"O God (if there is any God) help me! Help me now! Send 
me a little light (if there is any light). Let me know what 
is the truth— the truth (if anything is true)." And in His infinite 
Love, He answered that prayer, by sending me the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. Since that time the language of 
my heart is expressed exactly in the words of the hymn, beginning 
—"My life flows on, in endless song." 

I made the Vow my own some months ago. How glad I 
am of anything that helps me to carry out my consecration 
vows. Your sister by His Grace, M. STROUD. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We think it proper to write you, to tell you we have taken 
the Vow, and to tell you of the many blessings we enjoy as a 
result of your labors as the Lord's honored servant. 

Three years ago, by the Lord's arrangement, we commenced 
reading Vol. I, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, finding it 
gave us a view of God's character and Plan that enabled us 
to "comprehend with all saints the height and depth and length 
and breadth of the Love of God." We were attracted and 



drawn onward to feast more and more on the Truth. 

Before then we were Socialists, full of discontent. How 
thankful we are that we were unable to buy the books that 
we then so much desired, for these very writings would no 
doubt have only ensnared us more, by leading into Evolution, 
Higher Criticism, etc. 

We pray the Lord's continued blessing upon you and all 
the dear friends, having much comfort because of our share 
of interest in the prayers of all the Lord's people. 
Yours, 

FRED AND LIZZIE MYERS.-Okla. 



page 47 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

Series VI., Study XIII. --Parental 
Obligations of the New Creation. 

MARCH 2 

Read P. 541, par. 1, to P. 554, par. 3 

PROPER EXERCISE OF THE CHILD-MIND 

(30) How should a child be taught to discriminate in 
his choice of reading matter? P. 541, par. 1. 

(31) How serious and lasting is the influence of evil suggestions? 
P. 541, par. 2. 

(32) Who should be the child's tutor in religious training? 
And why is it unjust as well as inexpedient to attempt 
religious instruction in the public schools? P. 542, par. 1; 
P. 543, par. 1,2. 

THE INFLUENCE OF SUNDAY SCHOOLS 

(33) From what viewpoint may the Sunday School be 
considered beneficial? P. 544, par. 1. 

(34) How have Sunday Schools been injurious to Christian 
parents? P. 544, par. 2. 

(35) Why is the Sunday School a disadvantage to the 
children of believers? P. 544, par. 3. 

MARCH 9 

Read P. 545, par. 1, 2, to P. 547, par. 2. 

(36) How is the Sunday School reacting to the disadvantage 
of both parents and children? P. 545, par. 1, 2. 

(37) Point out the decided advantage both to child and 
parent in the Scriptural arrangement for the child's religious 
training. P. 545, par. 3; P. 546, par. 1. 

(38) How is the Sunday School arrangement naturally 
in line with sectarianism? P. 546, par. 2. 



(39) What is the history of the Sunday School? P. 546, par. 3. 

(40) How may the New Creation rectify their mistakes 

of the past as respects the religious training of their children? 
P. 547, par. 1. 

THE CONFIDENCE OF CHILDREN 

(41) What should be the basis of a child's confidence in 
its parents? P. 547, par. 2. 

MARCH 16 

Read P. 548, par. 1, to P. 550, par. 1 

(42) How should a child's confidential questions be encouraged 
and answered by the parent? P. 548, par. 1. 

(43) How will a properly trained child regard a parent's 
word or command? And what three elements of character 
must combine in the parent in order to make his power and 
authority valuable in the home? P. 548, par. 2. 

THE POWER OF SUGGESTION IN CHILD -TRAINING 

(44) What is the importance of the human will, and how 
is a child's mind influenced by suggestion? P. 549, par. 1. 

(45) How is this principle illustrated in the Bible and in 
all proper preaching? P. 549, par. 2. 

(46) Explain the secret of a successful parent in respect 
to this suggestive method. P. 550, par. 1. 

MARCH 23 

Read P. 550, par. 2, to P. 554, par. 1 

(47) How may a mother's wise suggestions anticipate a 
child's disappointment over a rainy day? And how are such 
suggestions helpful also to the parent? P. 550, par. 2, and 
foot note. 

(48) Explain how the suggestive method may be applied 
with advantage to the child's dietary? P. 551, par. 1. 

(49) May suggestion be equally potent in teaching moral 
lessons to the child? P. 552, par. 1. 

(50) From what standpoint should reproofs be administered 
in case of disobedience on the part of the child? P. 553, par. 1. 

(5 1) What should be the standard in all suggestions? 
P. 554, par. 1. 

MARCH 30 

Read P. 554, par. 2, to P. 556, par. 2 

OUR CHILDREN IN THE TIME OF TROUBLE 

(52) Could the New Creation reasonably expect a miraculous 
protection for their children in the world-wide time of 
trouble? P. 554, par. 2. 



(53) What Scriptural promise would seem to apply to 
children as well as all lovers of righteousness? P. 555, par. 1. 

(54) What is the natural anxiety of parents for their 
children during this period, and how should it be overcome? 
P. 555, par. 2. 

(55) Explain the best possible provision the New Creation 
can make for the protection of their children in the time of 
trouble. P. 556, par. 1. 

PROPER AMUSEMENTS 

(56) What should be the attitude of the New Creation 
toward amusements for their children? P. 556, par. 2. 



page 49 
