Announcements
“MAKE KNOWN THE GOOD NEWS” TESTIMONY PERIOD
While serving as an ambassador of the government of God, the apostle Paul was bound in chains by those who opposed the truth. Rather than be silenced, however, Paul prayed that he might open his mouth “with all freeness of speech to make known the sacred secret of the good news”. (Eph. 6:19, NW) Jehovah’s witnesses, who serve similarly as ambassadors of the Theocracy in this day, follow Paul’s example and have selected “Make Known the Good News” as the theme for their activity during February. Their offer will be a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, at the yearly rate of $1, with three booklets (Evolution versus The New World, Can You Live Forever in Happiness on Earth? and any other self-covered booklet) given free to each new subscriber. The Watchtower magazine has long been foremost in bringing the good news of the Kingdom to men of good will. Would you not like to join in this beneficial activity? A letter to us, or an inquiry directed to the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses, will bring you any instruction you may require, together with forms for obtaining subscriptions and reporting what you accomplish.
1951 YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
All the joys and blessings of the Theocracy’s Increase Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses are emphasized in the 1951 Yearbook. Thousands thrilled as they attended the convention and heard reports from the representatives of over 65 nations. Now available to many more thousands of persons of good will is the report by the president of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society on the world-wide activities of Jehovah’s witnesses in their praise-giving work during the past year. With joy-filled hearts you will thrill at their experiences as they are recounted for you in the pages of this interesting Yearbook. In addition you will be able to read a daily Scripture text and appropriate comments to start your day right. Remit for your copy today, 50c each. If you attend any of the company meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses, turn in your order through that local organization. The beautiful new 1951 calendar may be ordered with your copy of the Yearbook. This may be obtained on a contribution of 25 cents each, or five to one address for $1.00.
CORRECTION
In the December 1, 1950, Watchtower, page 479, last paragraph, it states that the ancient cities of Sodom and Gomorrah “are now under water on the bottom of the Red sea”. It should have said “Dead sea”.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 4: Theocracy’s Increase ¶1-25.
Week of February 11: Measuring the Visible Part of the Restored City, ¶1-16.

