Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Breaking Free From Demon Influence
THE practice of spiritism has long dominated the lives of millions of people. But it is possible to break free! That is what happened with many in the ancient city of Ephesus. According to the Bible account, “quite a number of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them up . . . Thus in a mighty way the word of Jehovah kept growing and prevailing.”—Acts 19:19, 20.
The Christian congregation today is likewise experiencing growth. As was the case in Ephesus, among those becoming believers are ones who previously practiced demonism. The following experience from Zimbabwe illustrates this.
Gogo (Grandmother) Mthupha was well-known for her spiritistic powers. People came from as far away as Zambia, Botswana, and South Africa for her to treat them with her bush medicine. Gogo Mthupha also taught others how to be a n’anga, or witch doctor. And sometimes she would cast spells!
One Sunday morning Gogo Mthupha was visited by Jehovah’s Witnesses who were engaged in the house-to-house ministry. She thoroughly enjoyed a discussion with them about the Bible’s promise of a new world of righteousness, a world free of all wicked influences. She accepted the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth and agreed to have a home Bible study.a After only three studies, she started attending meetings.
Through her study of the Bible, Gogo Mthupha learned that her special powers came from wicked spirit creatures who had rebelled against Jehovah’s sovereignty. (2 Peter 2:4; Jude 6) She also learned that these demons are determined to turn everyone they can against Jehovah and against pure worship. Since her livelihood depended upon conjuring these wicked spirit creatures, what would she do?
Gogo Mthupha expressed the desire to get rid of all her charms and spiritistic paraphernalia. This included her special headdress and “talking bull horns,” which she used in her n’anga healings. Gogo Mthupha wanted to get rid of all such items so that she could serve the only true and living God, Jehovah.
Some of her relatives, though, objected because she supported them financially. They begged her to transfer the articles to them, along with her uncanny powers so that they could continue to profit. Gogo Mthupha refused.
With the help of the local congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses, she collected three large bags of spiritistic equipment and burned all of it. As flames engulfed her instruments of demon worship, Gogo Mthupha exclaimed: “Look! That horn, it can’t save itself.”
In time, Gogo Mthupha joyfully symbolized her dedication to Jehovah by water baptism. How does she make a living now? By selling vegetables. Yes, through the power of God’s Word, one can break free from demon worship. Says Gogo Mthupha: “I have never felt so free.”
[Footnote]
Published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.

