A Letter to Mom and Dad
HOW important are good parents? The following letter from a grown son to his mother and father demonstrates their value:
“Dear Mom and Dad:
“It’s been over 16 years since I left home, so it may seem a little odd for you to be getting this type of letter from me now. But after much thought I felt it necessary to write this. Years ago, when I left your house, I took a number of things from you that I never asked your permission to take. You might not even have noticed they were gone. In fact, I was so sly in making off with them that I didn’t realize I had them until some years later. I’ve itemized them as follows:
“Love for what is right: Oh, how this has protected me!
“Love for people: Sizes, shapes, and colors don’t count. Only what’s inside matters.
“Honesty: What’s mine is mine, preferably to be used to share with others. Let what someone else has alone.
“Determination: In my most difficult times, this has pulled me through.
“Patience: You were so kind and loving and patient with me. You never gave up on me.
“Discipline: You were never too harsh or too easy. But I didn’t know it then. Will you forgive me?
“Freedom: Freedom from the pain that so many other children have grown up with​—pain inflicted by physically, mentally, and emotionally abusive parents. You never had anything but my best in mind, and you protected me from harm. I’ll never forget what you’ve done for me.
“Love for simple things: Mountains, rivers, blue sky, hiking, camping. You made life so much fun. No two parents could ever have done more. And you never seemed to mind at all.
“Caution: Don’t be too quick to believe everything you hear. But when you do believe it, stick to it, no matter what.
“The Truth from God’s Word: Most important of all. It’s my inheritance. No money, boats, houses, or possessions can compare with it. It will give me what’s most important​—eternal life.
“The above things are hard to put a value on. They are priceless. I’ve used them so much. And I want to continue using them if I don’t have to give them back. I was hoping, if you don’t mind, to continue giving them to my young sons. I know they will serve my sons as well as they have served me. And I will always let them know where I got them​—from Grandma and Grandpa.
“Your son,”
(Name withheld upon request.)

