Answer to a Prayer
A WOMAN from Christchurch, New Zealand, says that the Awake! articles on “Healing the Wounds of Child Abuse” were an answer to her prayer. She explains:
‘In August 1991 a number of us had the horrific experience of witnessing a friend undergo the pain of remembering abuse. I remained in shock for about three days, but we prayed fervently to Jehovah for a magazine to deal with the subject. We wanted help. We only waited five weeks. Thank you on behalf of the many, many victims for the brilliant, sensitive articles of the October 8, 1991, Awake!’
The above is only one of many hundreds of letters of appreciation for the Awake! on child abuse. In another letter received earlier this year, the writer said that it took her several tries to get through reading the articles because she couldn’t stop crying. She observes:
“Even now, I am welling up inside as I try to express my appreciation for the time and energy spent on helping those of us who have such feelings of humiliation and guilt after being sexually and emotionally raped by someone who claimed to ‘love’ us when we were so young and vulnerable. I had no idea I had so much company. I still am having a hard time dealing with the feelings, but the suggestions on pages 10 and 11 are very helpful. I have so very much to say, but suffice it to say that my prayers go to Jehovah in your behalf for trusting in Jehovah to give you the courage to write about such a delicate subject.”
Still another said: “This was one of the most superb masterpieces ever published by you on human relations. It has ripped the mask off this satanic practice and its perpetrators, clarified to nonvictims its acid devastation; its victims have been comforted and educated. The door to expectation for compassion and support from God’s people has been fully opened.”
Jehovah’s Witnesses are an international organization of over four million Bible students who are devoted to helping people with their problems and to helping them learn more about God’s purposes. If you would like to have further information or a free home Bible study, please write to Watchtower, 25 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York 11201, or to the appropriate address listed on page 5.

