





Fulfill Your Role as an Evangelizer

“Do the work of an evangelizer, fully accomplish your ministry.”—2 TIMOTHY 4:5.
HOW WOULD YOU ANSWER?
What is an evangelizer?

Why do people need to hear the good news?

How can we become good evangelizers?







 1. Why is Jehovah the greatest Evangelizer?
AN EVANGELIZER is someone who tells good news. Jehovah God is the first and greatest Evangelizer. Right after Adam and Eve rebelled, Jehovah announced that Satan the Devil will be destroyed. (Genesis 3:15) Through the centuries, Jehovah explained how he will clear his name, how he will solve the problems that Satan caused, and how humans can again have a chance to live forever. All this good news is in God’s Word, the Bible.
 2. (a) In what way are angels evangelizers? (b) How is Jesus a good example for evangelizers?
2 The angels are also evangelizers. They tell good news, and they help others to spread good news on earth. (Luke 1:19; 2:10; Acts 8:26, 27, 35; Revelation 14:6) What about the archangel Michael? He too is an evangelizer. While he was on earth as Jesus, his most important work was to preach the good news. His example shows that preaching should also be our most important work.—Luke 4:16-21.
Jehovah God is the first and greatest Evangelizer

 3. (a) What is the good news that we preach? (b) What questions do we need to answer?
3 Jesus commanded his disciples to be evangelizers. (Matthew 28:19, 20; Acts 1:8) The apostle Paul told Timothy: “Do the work of an evangelizer, fully accomplish your ministry.” (2 Timothy 4:5) What good news do we preach? We tell people that our heavenly Father, Jehovah, loves us. (John 3:16; 1 Peter 5:7) God’s Kingdom is proof of his love for mankind. So we tell others that if they become subjects of his Kingdom, obey him, and do what is righteous, they can be his friends. (Psalm 15:1, 2) Jehovah will get rid of all suffering, and he will remove the sadness caused by bad memories from our past. This is very good news! (Isaiah 65:17) As evangelizers, we need to answer these two important questions: Why do people need to hear the good news today? And how can we do our best as evangelizers?



WHY DO PEOPLE NEED TO HEAR THE GOOD NEWS?






Good questions help people to think about why they believe the things they believe





 4. What lies are people told about God?
4 Imagine that someone lies to you, saying that your father has left you and your family. The person says that your father did not want to know you, that he kept secrets from you, and that he was cruel. Then the person says that your father is dead, so there is no reason for you to try to find him. Some say things like this about God. They say that it is not possible to know God, or they say that he is cruel. Some religious leaders teach that God will punish bad people forever in hell. Others say that God causes storms or other disasters that make people suffer. They say that although these disasters kill good people and bad, God is using the disasters to punish people.





Questions help us to reach their heart so that they will be willing to think about and accept the truth





5, 6. How have the theory of evolution and false religious teachings affected people?
5 Others say that God does not exist. Those who believe in evolution say that there is no Creator and that living things were not designed by anyone. Some believe that humans evolved from animals. So for those who believe this, it comes as no surprise that humans are sometimes violent or selfish. They believe it is natural for strong people to be cruel to weak people. So it is not surprising that some say that there will always be injustice. Therefore, those who believe in evolution do not have true hope.
6 The theory of evolution and false religious teachings are part of the reason why mankind is suffering during the last days. (Romans 1:28-31; 2 Timothy 3:1-5) These teachings are not good news. Instead, as the apostle Paul said, they have caused people to be “in darkness mentally, and alienated from the life that belongs to God.” (Ephesians 4:17-19) Also, the theory of evolution and false religious teachings have stopped people from accepting the good news from God.—Read Ephesians 2:11-13.





Questions also help them to reason on the Scriptures so that what they believe will be based on the Bible





7, 8. What is the only way that people can learn the good news?
7 If people are going to have a relationship with God, they first must be sure that Jehovah exists and that there are good reasons to get to know him. We can help them to learn about God by encouraging them to study what he created. When people are willing to look at creation around them and really think about what they see, they learn about God’s wisdom and power. (Romans 1:19, 20) How can we help people to understand that everything God created is amazing? We can use the two brochures Was Life Created? and The Origin of Life—Five Questions Worth Asking. But there are some questions that a person cannot answer by simply studying creation. For example, he cannot learn why God allows suffering, what God’s purpose is for the earth, or whether God cares about each one of us.
We have to do more than just teach people facts about God

8 The only way to learn the good news about God and his purpose is to study the Bible. It is a privilege for us to be able to help others to learn the good news! But if we want to help someone to believe in God and to be His friend, we have to do more than teach him facts. We have to convince him, that is, help him to understand why he needs to believe. (2 Timothy 3:14) So we need to learn to convince people, as Jesus did. Why was he so good at convincing people? One reason is that he used questions well. How can we imitate him?



GOOD EVANGELIZERS USE QUESTIONS WELL

 9. If we want to help people to believe the good news, what must we do?
9 Why should we use questions in the ministry, as Jesus did? Imagine that your doctor said that you needed to have a serious operation. You might believe him. But what if he said this without even asking you any questions about your health? Then you probably would not believe him. Even a skilled doctor needs to ask questions and listen to the answers before he can help a person. So if we want to help people to believe the good news of the Kingdom, we must learn to ask them good questions so that we can understand what help they need.
We should ask good questions so that we can help people to understand and accept the good news

10, 11. If we imitate Jesus’ way of teaching, what may we be able to do?
10 Jesus knew that a teacher can use questions not only to get to know a student but also to help the student to think and to give his opinion. For example, when Jesus wanted to teach his disciples about humility, he first asked them a question that would make them think. (Mark 9:33) Jesus once asked Peter a question, suggested two possible answers, and then asked Peter to select the right one. This helped Peter to learn an important lesson. (Matthew 17:24-26) Another time, Jesus wanted to find out what was in the heart of his disciples, so he asked several questions that helped them to say how they really felt. (Read Matthew 16:13-17.) Jesus did not just tell people what to do. By the way he asked questions, he motivated people to accept the good news and make changes in their lives.
11 When we imitate Jesus’ way of using questions, we find out the best way to help each person we meet in the ministry. We also learn how to reason with people when they disagree with us. And we teach people to benefit themselves. Now we will talk about three examples of how we can make good use of questions.
12-14. How can you help your child to be more confident about preaching? Give an example.
12 Example 1: What would you do if your teenager was afraid to talk to his classmates about creation? How could you help him to be confident about talking to them? Instead of criticizing him or simply telling him what to say, you could ask questions that help him to express his feelings, as Jesus taught us to do. How could you do that?
13 Read with your child some of the information in the brochure The Origin of Life—Five Questions Worth Asking. After looking at the five questions in the brochure, ask your child which one he thinks is the most interesting. Encourage him to think of other reasons why he believes in a Creator and why he wants to serve God. (Romans 12:2) Explain to your child that his reasons can be different from your reasons.
14 Then tell your child that he could talk to his classmate the same way you talked to your child. He could tell his classmate some facts about creation and then ask him what he thinks. For example, he could ask his classmate to read the box on page 21 of the brochure. Your child could then ask, “Is it true that DNA can hold more information than any computer in the world?” The classmate will probably say yes. Then your child could ask, “Since that is true, would it not make sense to believe that just as someone designed a computer, someone designed DNA?” To help your child to be more confident when talking with others about his beliefs, you can practice with him. If you train your child to make good use of questions, you will help him to be a good evangelizer.
Help your child to be more confident when talking to others about his beliefs

15. How could we use questions to reason with someone who does not believe in God?
15 Example 2: In our witnessing work, we might meet a person who is not sure if there is a God or who does not believe in God at all. We can still try to reason with him. We could kindly ask how long he has felt that way or why he decided not to believe in God. After we listen to what he says, we could acknowledge that he must have thought carefully about his beliefs. We could then ask if he would be willing to read a brochure that gives evidence that life was created. If he is willing, we could offer him either the brochure Was Life Created? or the brochure The Origin of Life—Five Questions Worth Asking. When we are tactful and ask questions kindly, we may be able to reach a person’s heart with the good news.
16. Why should we make sure that our students are not simply reading answers from a book or a brochure?
16 Example 3: When we conduct a Bible study, what might happen if we simply let our student repeat the answers printed in a book or a brochure? He might not make good progress in the truth. Why? Because a student who repeats answers without thinking about them can be like a plant that does not have deep roots. It can be difficult for him to stay in the truth when people oppose him. (Matthew 13:20, 21) To help our student, we need to ask him how he feels about what he is learning. Try to find out if he agrees with what he is learning and why he feels that way. Then help him to reason on the Scriptures so that what he believes will be based on the Bible. (Hebrews 5:14) If we make good use of questions, our students will likely be strong in the truth and be able to stay faithful when others oppose them or try to mislead them. (Colossians 2:6-8) What else can we do to be good evangelizers?



GOOD EVANGELIZERS ASSIST ONE ANOTHER

17, 18. When you are at a door and another publisher is speaking, how can you help him?
17 Jesus sent his disciples out in the preaching work in groups of two. (Mark 6:7; Luke 10:1) Later, the apostle Paul talked about his “fellow workers” who had worked “side by side” with him in preaching the good news. (Philippians 4:3) In 1953, the organization started a special program in which publishers would train others in the ministry.
If you interrupt another publisher when he is preaching, you could discourage him or confuse the householder

18 When you go to a door with another publisher, what can you do to help him while he is preaching to the householder? (Read 1 Corinthians 3:6-9.) Look up the scriptures in your own Bible. Pay attention as the publisher is speaking in case he needs your help to reason with the householder. (Ecclesiastes 4:12) But be careful not to interrupt if the publisher is already giving a good witness or if the householder is speaking. If you interrupt the conversation, you could discourage the publisher or confuse the householder. It is not wrong to make a comment or two, but after that you should let the publisher continue with what he was saying.
19. What should we remember, and why?
19 While you and the publisher are walking from house to house, how can you help each other to be good evangelizers? Use the time to discuss how to improve your presentations. Be careful not to make discouraging comments about the people in your territory. And do not complain about the brothers and sisters. (Proverbs 18:24) We should remember that none of us are perfect. Jehovah has very kindly given us the treasure of the ministry of the good news and instructed us to preach. (Read 2 Corinthians 4:1, 7.) So let all of us show appreciation for the good news by doing our best to be good evangelizers.



SOME EXPRESSIONS EXPLAINED
Evangelizer: Someone who tells others about the good news of God’s Kingdom

DNA: A special molecule that is in each cell in our body and that holds all the instructions for how our bodies are made




