Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
Note: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Each congregation may make adjustments to allow for attending the district convention and then for a review of the program highlights on the Service Meeting the following week.
WEEK STARTING MAY 30
Song 11
 8 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to participate in field service first Sunday of June. Briefly outline service arrangements.
15 min: Who May Share in Field Service? Talk by service overseer along with audience participation covering pages 128-130 in Organization book. Consider national and local March field service reports.
15 min: “Proclaim the Kingdom Hope Throughout Our Territory.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Include suggestions from publishers on talking points or relate experiences placing and starting studies in “Kingdom Come” book.
 7 min: Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Select those appropriate for congregation.
Song 25 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 6
Song 71
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Also include comments on congregation service report for May.
18 min: “Keep Kingdom Foremost in Planning Summer Activities.” Audience discussion. Interview several publishers or family groups, including young publishers, to ascertain their plans for spiritual activities during summer. Also, discuss opportunities for informal witnessing while traveling to and from convention.
17 min: Use this time for local needs or give talk on May 1, 1982, Watchtower article “Honor Jehovah With Your Valuable Things.”
Song 81 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 13
Song 36
10 min: Local announcements. Also cover material in Question Box.
20 min: “Working Together in Unity.” Audience discussion of article. Include comments from publishers on how application of Bible principles has helped them to get along with and work better with other publishers.
15 min: Talk by elder covering material in Organization book page 154 to subheading on page 156. Include discussion of scripture references as time permits. Highlight continual need to emphasize love among brothers as the expression of this quality wanes in old system.
Song 85 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 20
Song 73
 8 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Young People Ask . . . Getting Ahead—Is That All There Is to Life?” Discuss February 22, 1982, Awake! article, pages 16-18, with audience participation. Show how these articles designed for youth can be featured in magazine work.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—As Well-Trained Youths.” Question-and-answer discussion. Have parent and young publisher demonstrate how training might be given as suggested in paragraphs 5 and 7.
 7 min: Experiences from youths who are good examples showing how they got started in field service. Also, encourage all, young and old, to share in field ministry with magazines on Saturday.
Song 88 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 27
Song 55
10 min: Local announcements. Include field service arrangements for first Sunday in July. Remind congregation of continuing offer of “Kingdom Come” book and to get supplies of literature.
17 min: Elders can arrange locally or have a talk on May 8, 1982, Awake! article “Young People Ask . . . Honesty—Is It Really the Best Policy?”
18 min: Serving Jehovah Whole-souled. Organization book, pages 132 to 134. Cover material with audience discussion. Encourage auxiliary and regular pioneer service with appropriate points from pages 136, 137, 140 and 141 of book.
Song 105 and prayer.

