Proclaim the Kingdom Hope Throughout Our Territory
1 Commencing with June and continuing through July we have the opportunity of again using the fine Bible study aid “Let Your Kingdom Come” in our field service activity. As was previously announced, arrangements have been made to offer this book along with an older large-size book for a contribution of $1.00. These two months are usually district convention months for us and this means there may be some interference with our regular participation in the field ministry in our home territories due to traveling to and from and attending a district convention. However, that should not prevent our having a share in using this book in our preaching and teaching activity.
2 There continue to be various avenues of field service activity open to us whereby we can share with others the timely message in the book “Let Your Kingdom Come.” The door-to-door ministry, whether in our home territory or at the convention we attend, can include having this publication along with us. Every chapter of this publication offers talking points that can be used with householders. No doubt you have already developed an interesting introduction from some portion of the book that has worked well for you in speaking to people. However, the following are some suggestions you might wish to try.
SUGGESTED PRESENTATIONS
3 Note chapter 18 entitled “The Kingdom Triumphant!” On page 174 the introductory words ask: “Will mankind be destroyed off this earth?” Certainly in view of current conditions there are many among our neighbors who ask, or have heard others ask, if this will really happen. It is the type of introduction that may well bring a response from the householder and that could lead into the next two sentences of that opening paragraph which say: “No. And the Kingdom is the reason why.” From that point you can proceed, according to the householder’s reactions, and endeavor to show how this publication answers numerous questions in the minds of people about that kingdom for which many have prayed for so long.
4 The first chapter with its delightful picture of paradise-like conditions on pages 4 and 5 also offers an introduction that can be simple but very appealing. Something might be said such as: “I’d like you to look at this very beautiful picture of the kind of world that all of us long to see.” Then show the householder the picture and explain how the book “Let Your Kingdom Come” gives accurate information from the Bible about the nearness of that kingdom and how we can gain life under the rule of mankind’s Savior, the Lord Jesus. Then, offer the “Kingdom Come” book along with one of the older large-size books for a contribution of $1.00.
5 Do not forget to take some of these publications with you when traveling to the district convention. You may have an opportunity to offer the combination of books to a gas station attendant, store clerk or motel employee. You may be able to do informal witnessing on other occasions, featuring the “Kingdom Come” book.
6 When Jesus walked the earth nineteen hundred years ago the Kingdom was the theme of his message for mankind. When speaking about his future presence, he said that one of the outstanding evidences of the nearness of the world’s end would be the preaching of that kingdom in all the world for a witness. Among his last words to the faithful disciples before ascending to heaven were these: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.” (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) So our timely message about the kingdom of God by Christ Jesus, can be enhanced during June and July by effectively using the book, “Let Your Kingdom Come” and another older large-size book for $1.00. Many will benefit from this Bible-based message as we all make diligent effort to proclaim the Kingdom hope throughout our territory.

