Working Together in Unity
1 The wise man Solomon wrote that “two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their hard work. For if one of them should fall, the other one can raise his partner up.” (Eccl. 4:9, 10) These words help us to appreciate the need to work together in unity, to be single-minded in purpose so as to accomplish our goal to get along with one another.
2 Jehovah’s people earth-wide in more than 200 lands and islands have a reputation for working together as one in preaching and teaching the Kingdom good news and in caring for one another’s interests. A Brazilian newspaper said of Jehovah’s Witnesses: “Although there are many imposing religions with their propaganda in all parts of the globe, there does not exist a single one on the face of the earth today that shows the same love and unity as the organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
3 To maintain that unity each one of us must make diligent efforts every day to cultivate the fruits of the spirit in our lives and let the Word of God be our guide in doing so. How can we show we are working with unity of purpose in our regular contacts with one another in meetings at the Kingdom Hall, in field service and on other occasions when we are together? For one thing we must be careful that we do not think too much of ourselves. Paul wrote to the Roman congregation about that matter. (Rom. 12:3) There is a tendency in our human imperfection to feel that only what we think or what we do is right. This leads to disunity.
4 There are differing abilities and talents among Jehovah’s people. Some have greater aptitude than others in a certain field. But that is no reason for one who is gifted to become proud or haughty; rather it should make him humble and move him to use whatever aptitude or talent he has to benefit as many others as possible. (1 Cor. 4:7) In his letter to the Romans Paul further wrote about varying talents or gifts and showed that whatever abilities one has he is to use such for the benefit of others, and in brotherly love all are to have tender affection for one another. In fact, all Christians are to take the lead in showing honor to one another.—Rom. 12:6-10.
5 What does all of this mean to us within the congregation of Christians where we are now associated? It simply means we need to love one another in spite of our differing abilities. What the Brazilian newspaper said about our love and unity applies to us individually as we make every effort to work shoulder-to-shoulder with one another. We are not in competition but are promoting pure worship together. At times differences may arise. If so, in the spirit of Colossians 3:14, 15 settle these quickly so as to maintain unity.
6 Jehovah’s people are not without proper guidance. God’s Word and the many publications of the Society provide the help we need to work and walk together in unity always. Apply in your life what you learn from Jehovah through his organization. Encourage one another by upbuilding conversation. Watch your conduct and set a fine example for your brothers and sisters. We have a grand and important work to do, spreading the good news of the Kingdom in all the earth for a witness. Since “two are better than one,” invite others to share in the Kingdom proclamation. Be regular in attending congregation meetings. Doing all these things will enable us to walk in unity and avoid the divisive spirit that pervades the old world under the control of God’s chief adversary Satan the Devil. Thus we will be following the counsel: “Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil, but keep conquering the evil with the good.” (Rom. 12:21) As an organization of Jehovah’s zealous workers may we continue to experience the truthfulness of the words of Psalm 133:1: “Look! How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!”

