“If People Only Knew!”
AFTER finishing high school, when many youths set their sights on material goals, David had other ideas. In September 2003, he and a friend moved from Illinois, in the United States, to the Dominican Republic.a Davey, as he was called by friends and family, decided to learn Spanish and join the Navas Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses in their Bible-teaching work. The congregation embraced him. “Davey did whatever was asked of him,” says Juan, the only elder in that congregation. “He was always expending himself for others, and the brothers loved him.”
Davey loved his assignment. “I am having the time of my life here,” he wrote to a friend back in the United States. “The ministry is so refreshing! We talk for about 20 minutes at each door because people want to hear all you can tell them. I already conduct six Bible studies, but we still need help. At one meeting our congregation of 30 Kingdom publishers had 103 in attendance!”
Sadly, on April 24, 2004, an accident claimed young Davey’s life and that of another young man from the same congregation. Up to his death, Davey brimmed with enthusiasm for the work he was doing, and he encouraged other youths back home to join him. “It will change how you look at things,” he told one young Witness.
One change of view that Davey himself experienced was with regard to material things. “During a visit home,” recalls his father, “Davey was invited to go on a ski trip. He inquired how much it would cost. When he was told the amount, Davey said that there was no way he could spend that much on skiing when he could live for months in the Dominican Republic on the same amount!”
Davey’s zeal affected others. “When I heard all that Davey was doing and how happy he was,” said one youth back home, “it made me realize that I could be accomplishing things like that too. Davey’s death has made me ponder what people would say about me if I died and if I would have such a positive impact on their lives.”
As Jehovah’s Witnesses, Davey’s parents and siblings have every confidence that God will resurrect Davey in the coming new world of righteousness. (John 5:28, 29; Revelation 21:1-4) Meanwhile, they gain comfort from knowing that Davey used his life in the best way possible—to serve his Creator. (Ecclesiastes 12:1) Reflecting on his decision to serve where there is a greater need, Davey once said: “I just wish that every young person would do something like this and feel what I feel. There is nothing better than to serve Jehovah with all we have. If people only knew!”
[Footnote]
Like David, many of Jehovah’s Witnesses have volunteered to move to an area where there is a greater need for Kingdom preachers, some even learning a foreign language to teach others the truths of God’s Word. More than 400 such volunteers are currently serving in the Dominican Republic.

