He Did Not Give Up
ON October 5, 1995, 14-year-old Matt Tapio had surgery for a tumor on his brain stem. The tumor proved to be malignant. The operation was the first of many he would undergo in the next two and a half years. Chemotherapy and radiation treatments followed.
Matt lived in Michigan, U.S.A., where he attended public school and Christian meetings. He took advantage of opportunities to speak with teachers and classmates about his beliefs as well as to share in calling on others in the public ministry. During his frequent stays in the hospital—he spent 18 months of the last two and a half years of his life in hospitals—he placed hundreds of pieces of Bible literature with those he met there.
Many times it seemed that Matt wasn’t going to make it, but each time he bounced back. Once, on the way to the hospital, he had seizures and stopped breathing. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was started, and he was revived. When he came to, he started crying and said loudly: “I’m a fighter! I’m a fighter! I’m not a quitter!” People said that it was Matt’s faith in God that kept him going for so long.
Matt realized a cherished desire on January 13, 1996, when he was baptized in symbol of his dedication to Jehovah God. The baptism took place in a private pool because of the risk of infection. A few days later, he was back in the hospital for more surgery. In August 1997, Matt vomited continually for weeks, but he stabilized after further surgery.
Through all of this, Matt continued to have a good sense of humor, joking with the doctors and nurses. They couldn’t understand why he had such a wonderful sense of humor. One of the doctors told him: “Matt, if I were in your shoes, I would have the curtain closed, cover my head, and tell everyone to get lost.”
In February 1998, Matt returned home from the hospital for one of the last times. He was so thrilled to be alive and at home that as soon as he walked in the door, he said: “I’m so happy! Let’s say a prayer.” He then expressed his happiness to Jehovah in prayer. Two months later, on April 19, he finally succumbed to the cancer.
Earlier, a recorded interview with Matt was played during a meeting of Jehovah’s Witnesses at the local Kingdom Hall. He was asked: “What would you tell those of us who have a measure of health regarding our ministry and Christian meetings?”
Matt replied: “Do what you can now. . . . You never know what might happen. . . . But whatever happens, don’t ever stop witnessing about Jehovah.”

