When All People Will Love One Another
IN HIS Sermon on the Mount, Jesus Christ pointed to the time when all people will love one another. Introducing his remarks, Jesus quoted the 37th Psalm, saying: “Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.” That Bible psalm also describes how this marvelous situation will be realized, saying: “Evil-doers shall be cut off; but those that wait for Jehovah, they shall inherit the land.”—Matthew 5:5; Psalm 37:9; American Standard Version.
What a remarkable change that will be—all evildoers removed from the earth and only people who love one another left remaining! How could that ever happen? Jesus went on in his famous sermon to show how when he taught us to pray: “Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth.” (Matthew 6:10, AS) Note where God’s will is to be done. Not just in heaven. “We pray, thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven,” an article in The Christian Century emphasized.
So, then, what is God’s Kingdom for which Jesus taught us to pray? Clearly, it is a real government, one that rules from heaven. That is why it is called “the kingdom of the heavens.” (Matthew 10:7) The appointed Ruler of this Kingdom, or government, is God’s Son, Jesus Christ.
Long before Jesus was born of Mary, Jehovah’s prophet Isaiah foretold regarding that miraculous event and what would eventually follow: “Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and of peace there shall be no end.” (Isaiah 9:6, 7, AS) After Jesus’ death and resurrection, he sat down with his Father in heaven, waiting to be given the command to begin ruling as King.—Psalm 110:1, 2; Hebrews 10:12, 13; Revelation 11:15.
What, then, will eventually happen to this hate-filled world? Note how the Bible answers that question. God’s prophet Daniel foretold: “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”—Daniel 2:44.
Clearly, this Bible prophecy is pointing forward to a huge change in human affairs. This entire system of things, which includes those of this world of mankind who stubbornly refuse to submit to God’s rule, will be removed from the earth! Consider what will replace it.
Life in a Righteous New World
When the old world ends, there will be survivors. The Bible explains: “The world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.” (1 John 2:17) Yes, those who do the will of God will survive into a new world, even as Noah and his family lived through the end of the world of their day. The apostle Peter wrote: “There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to [God’s] promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”—2 Peter 3:5-7, 11-13.
Regarding the time when the only government operating is God’s Kingdom, the Bible promises: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.” (Psalm 37:29) The righteous will enjoy life in a cleansed earth. What a glorious time that will be! If you have not done so already, please examine the blessings described in the Bible that are illustrated on the preceding pages.
Does it not warm your heart to know that our Creator promises such wonderful things for the benefit of those who worship him? Surely, this was God’s purpose when he created the first human couple and placed them in an earthly paradise! Note what God told them: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving upon the earth.”—Genesis 1:27, 28.
Adam and Eve were to have children, and as these grew older, they were to share in the pleasant work of maintaining the earthly Paradise. Think of the joy of extending the boundaries of the garden of Eden as the human family grew in number! Clearly, it was God’s purpose for the entire earth to become a paradise. Will that purpose ever be fulfilled? We can be sure that it will be, for we have God’s own word on it! He promises: “I have even spoken it; . . . I shall also do it.”—Isaiah 46:11; 55:11.
Would you enjoy living forever in the earthly Paradise that is described in the scriptures illustrated on the preceding pages? As would be expected, not everyone will be permitted to live there forever. There are requirements. What are they?
Qualifying to Live Forever
First of all, those who live in God’s new world must learn to love one another, even as God teaches us to do. The Bible says: “You yourselves are taught by God to love one another.” (1 Thessalonians 4:9) How are we taught this by God?
It is particularly by means of his written Word, the Bible. This means that to live forever, we must accept the teachings of God in the Bible. An Oriental Bible student said: “I look forward to the time when, as the Bible promises, all people will have learned to love one another.”
In prayer to his Father, Jesus identified an essential requirement. He said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) The 32-page brochure What Does God Require of Us? will help you take in this knowledge. You can obtain a copy by filling out the coupon on page 32 and sending it to Watchtower, 25 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, NY 11201-2483, or to the appropriate address on page 5.
[Box/Pictures on page 8-10]
What God Promises
Loving Worldwide Brotherhood
“God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”—Acts 10:34, 35.
No More Crime or War
“As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth.”—Proverbs 2:22.
“[God] is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth.” —Psalm 46:9.
Plenty of Good Things to Eat
“There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.”—Psalm 72:16.
Peace Between People and Animals
“The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, . . . and a mere little boy will be leader over them.”—Isaiah 11:6.
Sickness, Old Age, and Death Removed
“[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”—Revelation 21:4.
A Resurrection on Earth of Dead Loved Ones
“The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear [Jesus’] voice and come out.” —John 5:28, 29.

