Coping with the “Realities of Life”​—A Worldwide Educational Program Shows How
LIFE had been cruel to the 17-year-old French girl. After a miserable childhood, she grabbed for happiness through marriage. This soon soured and she was viciously abused by her husband. Once, after regaining consciousness from a beating, she seized a rifle and fired​—her husband fell dead. Her troubles were just beginning.
Upon being released after a two-year prison sentence, she looked for love from another man. But the cruel reality was that all she received was an illegitimate child. Lonely, hopeless, completely lost and tired of living, one Sunday morning she decided to end her empty existence and take her children with her. She turned on the gas and waited to die.
But rather than becoming another suicide victim, amazingly, this young woman was among a joyful throng of over 90,000 conventioners who assembled in France this past summer. In fact, her life had now taken on real meaning. She had hope and now could cope with the problems of life. She was among the 25,276 baptized worldwide thus far in this series of conventions held by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
What made the difference? She became acquainted with a worldwide teaching program. The very moment that this woman had turned on the gas someone knocked on her door. It was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and the message was so heartwarming that it led to a weekly study of the Bible with the Witnesses and finally to her baptism this past summer. For many decades the Witnesses have been obeying Jesus’ command: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.” Thousands have been assisted yearly.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
KEY FEATURE OF TEACHING PROGRAM
These annual conventions, which currently carry the theme “Divine Love,” are a key feature of the teaching work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. There has been an outstanding response to these conventions. Last year, in over 80 lands, more than 3,400,000 attended such conventions. This is a 43-percent increase over the number that attended the conventions just five years earlier. In Japan, for instance, just a decade ago a national convention drew 12,615​—a thrilling new peak attendance at that time. This past summer 105,534​—over eight times as many—​attended!
Already in 33 countries, 2,267,955 have convened and there are yet many conventions planned in the southern hemisphere for the end of this year and the beginning of 1981. Present reports indicate that the total may top 3,600,000. But is it numbers alone that make this educational program outstanding?
A PRACTICAL EDUCATION
Though today education is stressed worldwide, many have been disillusioned with the results of mere academic learning. “We need to start giving our children practical educations that prepare them and train them for the realities of life,” stressed the mayor of Nairobi, Kenya. You may agree. Such education is needed not merely for children. Most of us realize that to cope with the pressures of today’s ‘real world’ we need more than knowledge of ‘reading, writing and arithmetic.’
Right standards of conduct, the strength to overcome bad habits, the ability to get along with others, and moral integrity are but a few qualities that need to be developed if a person is to cope with life’s realities and find genuine happiness. Using primarily the Bible, the Witnesses try to help individuals to develop such qualities.
Bible aids are also used. One of these, a word-and-picture story of the Bible (on the far right below), is a favorite of children. A note found in a convention contribution box in Japan, signed “A five-year-old girl,” said: “I have saved 745 yen [$3.35, U.S.] from the money I received helping my mother. It is only a little amount but I will be happy if you use it to print such pretty books as My Book of Bible Stories.”
So, with the assistance of such literature, this educational program helps create genuine disciples of Christ. Outsiders were often impressed by the conduct of these disciples at their recent conventions. “I am not a flatterer,” said the manager of a stadium in Naples, “but I feel it my duty to tell you that you are the most serious, orderly and educated people that I have ever met.”
Yes, this man could see that the education Jehovah’s Witnesses receive had created some very desirable qualities. After observing the Witnesses, a policeman on traffic control in Nagoya, Japan, declared: “It is quite obvious that the people here are learning something that lifts them up above the average person.” No, this knowledge does not make them feel superior to others, but it does elevate their thinking so that they can develop qualities that are sadly missing in today’s world.
But what is taught at these conventions? The next two pages give highlights from the program of the current “Divine Love” Conventions, including epitomes of the three Bible dramas presented there.
What Are the Results?
For their conventions, Jehovah’s Witnesses moved by the thousands into hundreds of cities. One Swedish newspaper called their arrival ‘probably the quietest and most friendly migration in the history of the world.’ They were keenly watched. What was seen? Was there tangible proof of the success of their educational program?
DISHONESTY REMOVED
In Italy, the woman who owned a store next to a convention site said to some of the Witnesses: “Yesterday I made a mistake in giving change to one of you. I gave the person 10,000 lire ($12, U.S.) more than he had coming. Well, a little later, he came back to return it to me. This has never happened as long as I have had this store.”
Just an isolated incident? No. The honesty of the Witnesses is well known. As she was paying her hotel bill by check, one of the conventioners in the United States asked if she needed some identification. “Oh, no!” replied the clerk. “If we can’t trust you people, whom can we trust?”
STRENGTH TO OVERCOME BAD HABITS
Perhaps you may know of some of your friends or neighbors whose lives were ruined because of slavery to bad habits, such as alcoholism, drug abuse or others. However, the Italian newspaper La Nazione reported: “Amongst them [newly baptized Witnesses] were ex-drug addicts, ex-alcoholics and persons of various ages who had found the strength to overcome serious family and social misfortunes.”
A man who attended one of the 108 conventions held in the United States admitted: “I had hit rock bottom in my life. It seems I was bent on living a degraded life, even though, through earlier discussions with Jehovah’s Witnesses, I knew better. Then one episode made me realize how much I was a slave to my bad habits.
“Drunk on alcohol and high on drugs,” explained David, “a companion and I retaliated against a neighbor by burning his house to the ground. Then I finally realized that I had gone too far. Agonizing over my guilt I searched out the Witnesses. I then began a serious study of the Bible with their help.”
He later turned himself in to the police and was imprisoned. Yet his Bible study continued​—even in prison. His conduct dramatically improved. Prison officials were so impressed that they shortened his sentence. Though he still was a prisoner, they allowed this former thug​—a slave to several ruinous habits—​to attend the convention on his own! He was one of the 1,034,364 who attended the conventions in the United States.
PEOPLE WORKING TOGETHER
“Never would we have imagined that persons like you existed if we had not seen you at work with our own eyes,” observed the caretakers of the stadium in Ascoli Piceno, Italy. They watched the Witnesses remove all the chairs in the covered stands, clean under them and put them back. “To do a work of this kind for us would be unthinkable,” declared the caretakers. Yet when people love one another many “unthinkable” tasks can be done.
For instance, in Japan a large sheet used in one of the halls as a floor covering was soiled the day before the convention. Usually a week is needed to clean it. To the astonishment of the management, the Witnesses cleaned it in 90 minutes!
“More than 1,200 local male members of the Jehovah’s Witnesses laid 8,000 sheets of plywood on the Astrodome floor last weekend in exchange for free rent this summer at the Astroarena for the Witnesses’ two [“Divine Love”] district conventions,” stated the Houston Chronicle of May 3, 1980. This unusual arrangement had developed because the officials of the Astrodome in Houston, Texas, were impressed by the Witnesses’ efficiency when previously using the stadium.
For two years the Witnesses have tackled the job of completely covering the playing field of the gigantic Astrodome with a double layer of 8,000 four-by-eight-foota plywood sheets and nailing them together in time for an incoming exhibition. The plywood was needed to protect the field from the heavy displays that were to be set up. Then after the exhibition ended, it would be necessary to remove the sheets, take out the nails and restack the sheets in the basement.
The Witnesses covered the field in record time​—in only about four hours. (It previously had taken professionals 11 hours!) The Witnesses were so fast that one observer said, “It looked like the floor was being poured!” Then, after the exhibition finished, they came back and picked up the plywood, removed the thousands of nails and restacked it, all within eight hours. This normally took weeks!
However, just how deep-rooted are the qualities developed by this educational program? What happens when real pressure is applied to make the Witnesses abandon their Bible principles?
UNDAUNTED BY PERSECUTION
“Go out on the veranda and yell for God’s help,” taunted the schoolteacher. The one addressed was a teenaged Witness in Japan. She was mocked before the entire class because of her stand for Bible principles. Despite repeated taunts and abuses, she stuck to her faith and was one of the 1,860 persons baptized at the conventions in Japan.
Others baptized in Japan had been locked out of their houses and forced to sleep outside for months in all kinds of weather because they attended Bible meetings. One person had water poured on her every night for weeks as she tried to sleep. Many were badly beaten by husbands who would not listen to reason. Yet the faith of these new Witnesses was undaunted.
A REAL HOPE
While inviting persons to the public talk “Why Will a Loving God Exact Vengeance?”, one Witness in Italy approached a group of workers who were near a cemetery. One worker saw the first part of the talk’s title and said, “A loving God? No, not at all!” Then, without a word, he led the Witnesses to a tomb covered with white flowers. “Here lies my little girl, just three years old. Why would a loving God do this?” said this distraught man.
The Witnesses kindly explained where death originated​—not with God—​and showed the man the Bible’s hope of a resurrection. (Rom. 5:12; Acts 24:15) He was deeply moved. That very evening he came to the convention asking for someone to teach him so that he could see his child again. This man and thousands of others have found genuine hope.
A SUCCESSFUL PROGRAM
The results show how this teaching program produces qualities that are so rare​—yet needed—​in our world. The program can help persons find genuine satisfaction. One hotel owner in Cosenza, Italy, said: “We have much to learn from Jehovah’s Witnesses. There is only one way to obtain happiness​—think as they do.”
Why not find out for yourself whether this man’s advice is sound? Get personally acquainted with this international educational program. There is no cost and you have much to gain​—the ability to cope with the “realities of life.”
[Footnotes]
One foot equals .3 meter.
[Box on pages 10, 11]
WHAT WAS TAUGHT?
WHY A LOVING GOD EXACTS VENGEANCE
  It is because God loves righteousness and hates wickedness. (Ps. 11:5-7) His great name and purposes need to be vindicated. When he soon exacts vengeance, God will cleanse our earth of all corruption and enable redeemed mankind to advance to perfection. Blind eyes then will be opened, deaf ears will be unstopped. Radiant health will be the portion of all.
ALLEGIANCE TO GOD’S KINGDOM
  The following resolution was endorsed by literally millions of delegates: “Be it resolved that we intensify our efforts to proclaim zealously the good news of the Kingdom as well as boldly declare God’s judgment message within the time divinely allowed. We will continue to give our whole-souled allegiance to God’s kingdom and strive to be loyal subjects of it.”
YOUTHS HATE WHAT IS BAD
  Serving God must be a decision of the heart, for, when faced with temptation to commit immorality, many have said: “My mind kept saying, ‘No! No! No!’ but my heart kept saying, ‘Yes! Yes! Yes!’” But one youth who overcame a serious moral weakness told how: “Whenever I was faced with a strong immoral sexual desire, I would repeat to myself, ‘Jehovah hates it so I hate it.’”
TRAIN CHILDREN IN RIGHTEOUSNESS
  Love of God is not inherited. Parents must not only punish their children at times, but also train them in righteousness. This requires reasoning with the child, showing him the undesirable outcome to which a wrong attitude will lead.
NEED FOR SELF-SACRIFICING LOVE
  Self-sacrificing love, like that demonstrated by Jesus, is the identifying “badge” of Christianity. (John 13:35) This love cost Jesus plenty​—including an agonizing death. Our being a real disciple means loving one another as Jesus loved.
HOW TO PUT UP WITH ONE ANOTHER IN LOVE
  In a program skit, a Christian woman who was harshly spoken to by another had to decide whether she could (1) simply forget the incident, or (2) apply the principle at Matthew 5:23, 24 and endeavor to make peace. She followed the second course, even though she had not done any wrong to her spiritual sister. It is this willingness to follow Bible counsel​—to humble ourselves and to seek peace—​that enables us to put up with one another.
MORAL FAITHFULNESS
  No matter how pleasurable the breaking of God’s law may momentarily seem to be, we must keep telling ourselves that it is just not worth it. The heart is deceitful and can always make excuses. (Jer. 17:9) If the apostle Paul had to keep fighting his fleshly tendencies, dare we content ourselves with doing any less? We must keep trying. If we stop, we are lost!
GOD HATES A DIVORCING
  Some have schemed to divorce their mate and marry another, even if it means being disfellowshiped from the Christian congregation. However, let these individuals never forget that even though the congregation may reinstate them, God, who knows the heart and all the circumstances, is the final Judge.​—Heb. 13:4.
DO NOT DESPISE SACRED THINGS
  Jacob imitated the faith of his grandfather Abraham, who, at God’s instruction, attempted to offer up his son Isaac as a sacrifice. Esau, Jacob’s brother, despised sacred things by exchanging his birthright for a meal. He put his own interests ahead of God’s. Do we build our lives around our sacred relationship with God or does it really take second place? Nobody wants to think of himself as an Esau, but if Jehovah thinks of him that way, will he get the promised reward?
JEHOVAH WILL GUARD THE WAY OF HIS LOYAL ONES
  A few today have stumbled because of the imperfections of some outstanding teachers associated with the congregation. A similar test of loyalty occurred during the time of King David. Despite his mistakes, over which he humbly repented, he remained God’s anointed one. Those who dealt loyally with David were rewarded; disloyal ones lost God’s favor. How vital that we never forget which organization God is using today and the need for heartfelt loyalty!
THE BATTLE IS NOT YOURS, BUT GOD’S
  There are enemies who would like to destroy Jehovah’s Witnesses as a people. Yet we can have the same confidence as that of King Jehoshaphat, who looked to God for protection from enemies who threatened to destroy his nation. The nation was delivered because the king made sure God’s laws were known and obeyed by the people. So today, if we practice true worship in all our ways and keep our congregations morally clean by the administering of God’s laws, we will have God’s protection and soon will see him deliver us from our enemies forever.
[Box on page 14]
SURPRISE GUESTS FROM CUBA​—INTEGRITY-KEEPERS
  “Among the highly publicized groups . . . who arrived in the United States in the Cuban boatlift,” reported the York (Nebraska) News Times, “is another less publicized group whose only crime is that they continued to worship God in their own way despite the fact their sect was outlawed.”
  Many of these Witnesses who were ordered out of Cuba attended the “Divine Love” Conventions in the United States. They told of the persecution they endured in Cuba. For instance, two young daughters of a Witness, while in Cuba, refused to participate in a patriotic ceremony. They were threatened with death. They were told to turn their back to a soldier with a machine gun and that they would be shot. The girls calmly turned and expected to die. Click! The gun was empty. The authorities realized that even the threat of death could not break their faith, so they released them.
  Another refugee, Miriam, was confronted by the Cuban police at 3 a.m. She and her husband were then given one hour to be ready to leave the country. Shortly afterward, while on an overcrowded boat headed for the United States, they faced a dreadful storm. Some of the nearby boats sank. Miriam and her children sat next to a convicted murderer. She prayed loudly to Jehovah for protection. Finally, she fell asleep. The next morning the murderer woke her up and said: “It looks like your prayers have been answered. There is Key West [U.S.].”
  The faith of these Cuban Witnesses was an inspiration to all in the audience.
[Picture on page 9]
Books used in educational program represented at Osaka, Japan
[Picture on page 11]
BIBLE DRAMAS
[Picture on page 13]
“We can help give out books too!” is the spirit of these children who have benefited from Bible education

