Good Listeners, Joyfully Enduring
How can one improve ones listening habits?
To improve one’s listening habits one must heed the apostolic injunction to “pay more than the usual attention to the things heard.” (Heb. 2:1) Jehovah, by his prophet Isaiah, gives similar counsel: “Listen intently to me, and eat what is good, and let your soul find its exquisite delight in fatness itself.” (Isa. 55:2)a To improve one’s listening habits one must take an interest in what a speaker has to say.
At times the mind may tend to wander because the delivery leaves something to be desired, as some felt about the apostle Paul’s talks. (2 Cor. 10:10) Especially here one can improve one’s listening habits by concentrating on the arguments, the reasoning, the principles and the facts being presented. We can also improve our listening ability by taking notes on the principles and facts mentioned in the talk.
What benefits come to those who are good listeners?
By being good listeners when the Bible is being discussed, whether in private or at public gatherings, we will greatly expand our personal knowledge of God’s Word. We will take in fresh, stimulating viewpoints and arguments that will strengthen our faith and deepen our appreciation of Scriptural truth. Listening attentively to good counsel helps one to maintain good conduct and a healthy mental attitude, becoming wise, even as we read: “Listen to counsel and accept discipline, in order that you may become wise in your future.” (Prov. 19:20) A good listener benefits even from talks on subjects difficult to understand, because he will make a greater effort to catch the principles and to reason on the supporting arguments. All this helps him to advance to maturity, and so be able to digest the spiritually deep things of God’s Word.
Being a good listener gives one the knowledge that enables one to give a witness with earnestness and conviction to the people to whom one preaches. Moreover, by being good listeners, by applying what we learn and teaching it to others we will save ourselves and those who listen to us.​—1 Tim. 4:16.
Who set for us fine examples of joyfully enduring although meeting up with much opposition and indifference?
Moses endured in spite of the indifference of his own people to what he told them. (Ex. 6:12) Elijah faithfully endured much indifference and opposition on the part of the nation of Israel. (1 Ki. 19:4, 15-19) Jeremiah endured much indifference and opposition, and that over a long period of time. (Jer. 20:7-9; 25:3-7) Jesus Christ likewise endured much when on earth. Neither his own people in Galilee nor the religious leaders in Jerusalem, with but few exceptions, listened to him. Yet, for the joy set before him, he endured. (Luke 10:13-15; 13:34; Heb. 12:1-3) A follower of Jesus who gave an outstanding example of enduring opposition and indifference was the apostle Paul. (2 Cor. 6:4; 2 Tim. 4:6-8) It was not the hardship or indifference that brought them joy, but the knowledge that they were doing the will of God and had his approval.
How can we endure joyfully in spite of indifference?
One of the ways is by strengthening ourselves by considering the fine examples of joyful endurance of indifference as mentioned above. Important also to our enduring is our being conscious of our spiritual need. (Matt. 5:3) We must keep strong our appreciation of Jehovah God and his life-giving truths. This requires not only that we regularly feed on the spiritual food that Jehovah provides in his Word and by his “faithful and discreet slave,” but also that we keep meditating on what Jehovah has done for us, is now doing for us and will yet do for us in the near future. This includes calling to mind the great undeserved kindness He showed us by providing His Son as our ransom sacrifice; the blessings of prayer and of association with God’s people, also the joys of the Christian ministry that we enjoy at the present time; and also the blessings awaiting us in God’s new system of things.​—Matt. 24:45-47.
When the complete end of this wicked system of things comes, we will be able to feel satisfaction and happiness for having completed the work God gave us to do. Until then may we recommend ourselves as God’s ministers by joyfully enduring indifference.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, June 1, 1969.

