Memorizing​—A Hobby for Christians
AMONG busy people today few are busier than the Christian who is faithfully living up to his dedication to God. With personal Bible study to do, preparing for and attending five congregation meetings each week, sharing in the field service and in other Christian activities, it would seem that he would have no “leisure hours” left. So when would he have time for a hobby? He should, for, after all, everyone needs some recreation.
But even if he did not have time for the usual kind of hobbies, he could, nevertheless, have the hobby of memorizing Scriptural material. How so? In that this hobby makes use of one’s idle moments, when one’s mind is not particularly occupied, as when walking along, when waiting for others, when riding on public transportation, or when lying awake nights.
If you would like to try this kind of hobby, why not begin by memorizing the sixty-six books of the Bible in the order in which they appear​—if you have not already done so? You will find such knowledge helpful time and again. Are you following a public speaker with your Bible and does he cite a certain text? Unless you know the location of the sixty-six books, he may have read the text before you find it. Then in your Christian preaching work at the doorstep, you will save time both for yourself and for your listeners, as well as demonstrate familiarity with your Authority, by being able to turn quickly to a Bible text. While walking along with a companion or your marriage mate, you can make a game of alternating in repeating the names of the Bible books. Especially can experienced ones help beginners by playing this game.a
Then there are quite a few other lists that one might do well to memorize as a hobby. There is the order of the days of creation (Gen. 1:3 to 2:3); the names of the twelve sons of Jacob (1 Chron. 2:1, 2); the ten plagues that came upon ancient Egypt in their order (Ex. 7:19 to 12:30); the Ten Commandments (Ex. 20:2-17); the twenty-one kings of the Davidic line from David onward (1 Ki. 2:12; 2 Ki. 24:18; see also Aid to Bible Understanding, pages 340-347); the twelve apostles (Matt. 10:2-4); the nine fruits of the spirit (Gal. 5:22, 23) and the fifteen qualifications of overseers listed at 1 Timothy 3:1-7.
Also, there are ever so many subjects, the Bible chapters on which one should be able to refer to quickly: The Ten Commandments at Exodus chapter 20; the Sermon on the Mount at Matthew chapters 5 through 7 (including the Lord’s Model Prayer in Mt chapter 6); Christ’s commission to his twelve apostles at Matthew chapter 10; his great prophecy at Matthew chapters 24 and 25, Mark 13 and Luke 21; the chapter that tells how love works (1 Cor. 13), and Paul’s fine discussion on the resurrection at 1 Corinthians chapter 15​—to mention just a few of the ones frequently referred to.
And what an asset it would be for the Christian proclaimer of the good news to have an ever-growing mental “index” of leading Scripture subjects, like those related to Jehovah’s name: Ex. 6:3; Ps. 83:18; to Christian preaching activity: Isa. 43:10-12; Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20; the Kingdom hope: Matt. 6:10; Ps. 37:10, 11; Rev. 21:3, 4; the issue of neutrality: Isa. 2:4; John 18:36; Acts 5:29; Jas. 1:27; the blood issue: Gen. 9:4-6; Acts 15:20, 29; the identifying mark of Christians: John 13:34, 35. For more subjects and Scripture citations see “Make Sure of All Things; Hold Fast to What Is Fine.”
Another fruitful field for Christians is the hobby of memorizing the words in the songbook “Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts.” People memorize the words of folk songs, patriotic songs, love songs and popular songs; why should not Christians learn the words of the songs they sing as part of their worship? As a rule, memorizing these songs is easier than memorizing Scripture texts, since the songs have both rhyme and meter. And what fine sentiments are expressed in such songs as “Living Up to Our Name,” “Be Forgiving!”, “We Are Jehovah’s Witnesses,” “Now Is the Time!”, “Walking in Integrity” and “We Thank You, Jehovah.” And the fact that there are melodies to go with these words makes one’s going over them most enjoyable.
Viewed as a hobby, the memorizing of such Scriptural facts, texts and songs can be a pleasure, a game, an education providing you with a most useful tool for your Kingdom service. And what is more, both memorizing these and then calling them to mind, when you have the opportunity to do so, will help to keep your mind occupied with things that strengthen your faith and your love for Jehovah God.​—Ps. 119:97.
[Footnotes]
For help along this line see The Watchtower, 1962, page 767.

