Encourage Others to Read and Study God’s Word
1 Of all the books ever written, the Bible is the only one that provides mankind with unfailing direction on how to cope with life’s problems. (Jer. 10:23) In addition to that, it also gives us a sure hope for the future. It is God’s gift to man. Although the Bible is the all-time best-seller, surveys show that only a small percentage of those who possess a copy take the time to read it. Can we help more people to benefit from God’s written Word?
2 No matter where people live on earth, they are faced with similar problems. Perplexing questions need answers, and only the Bible has the right answers. Why are we here? Why do people grow old and die? Where are we headed? Why the increase in lawlessness? Why does God permit wickedness? What remedy is there for inflation, housing and food shortages, and so forth? We have to read and study the Bible in order to obtain satisfying answers to these and other questions.
HOW TO ENCOURAGE OTHERS
3 In order to encourage people to read and study God’s Word, we need to instill in them confidence that the Bible is inspired of God. (2 Tim. 3:16) We may be able to do this by using selected portions of the information under the heading “Bible” in the Reasoning book. Pages 60 through 64 give a variety of conclusive proofs that the Bible is the inspired Word of God.
4 Many have started to read the Bible but then stopped. Why? Perhaps it was because they became discouraged over not being able to understand what they read. It may be that we can help such persons by encouraging them to read the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. Some 50,000,000 copies of this easy-to-read modern-language translation have been produced in nine different languages, making it one of the main 20th-century Bible translations in use today.
5 Whenever we find people who show interest in reading the Bible, we should offer to study it with them. We should show special interest in helping those who have the New World Translation. As was emphasized in the October Our Kingdom Ministry, we want to conduct progressive Bible studies. (Matt. 28:19, 20) This means that we will try to reach the student’s heart so that what is learned will influence his conduct and answer his Bible questions.
OFFERING THE BIBLE AND “KINGDOM COME” BOOK
6 During the month of November, we will feature the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and the book “Let Your Kingdom Come,” for a contribution of $5.00. By offering these two publications enthusiastically, we may be able to encourage more people to read and study God’s Word. As an introduction to the current Topic for Conversation, you may want to adapt the second introduction under “Bible/​God” on page 10 of the Reasoning book. Or an adaptation of the first introduction under “Family/​Children” on page 11 may be appropriate for you and your territory. Being prepared with these two introductions will equip you to assist many people during November.
7 As we come closer to the end of this system of things, many more individuals with questions will no doubt be searching for answers that can be found only in God’s Word. May we be diligent in offering them what they need. Let us persist in encouraging others to read and study God’s Word. November’s offer of the New World Translation and “Kingdom Come” book opens up a fine way for us to do this.

