Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 31
Song 108
10 min: Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Encourage all to share in witnessing on the first Sunday of November. Urge family heads to work with wife and children.
20 min: “Encourage Others to Read and Study God’s Word.” Elder handles part with questions and answers. When considering paragraph 6, have well-rehearsed demonstration using one of the suggested introductions along with the Topic for Conversation.
15 min: Be Prepared to Recommend the New World Translation. Elder who is effective in house-to-house ministry highlights appropriate portions of material on pages 276-80 of Reasoning book. Invite audience to follow along and share in discussion of points under “New World Translation” that could be useful in local territory.
Song 131 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 7
Song 75
10 min: Local announcements. Discuss appropriate presentations for current magazines, and encourage all to share in magazine work on second Saturday.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—To Children.” Question-and-answer discussion. After paragraph 5, have capable publisher demonstrate adapting current Topic for Conversation when speaking with a youth. How could literature be offered? How could conversation be terminated without offering literature?
15 min: Young Ones Praise Jehovah. Interview one or two mature publishers who started serving Jehovah during teen or preteen years. What made them respond to the Kingdom message? How did being a dedicated and baptized youth help them face problems while growing up? Also, interview one or two exemplary young publishers who have given a fine witness in school or who are effective in door-to-door ministry. Why are they effective? What has helped them to overcome the tendency to hold back? What role have parents and other mature ones in the congregation played in their progress? Christian parents will want to encourage their children to work progressively toward dedication and baptism.​—The Watchtower, March 15, 1988, pages 14-15, paragraphs 21, 22.
Song 15 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 14
Song 17
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Inform congregation of any contribution acknowledgments received from Society. Have service overseer review August service report from Our Kingdom Ministry and consider local activity during that month. Comment on aspects of field service needing attention locally as indicated by report or pointed out during visit of circuit overseer. Announce special field service arrangements for Thursday, November 24, a secular holiday.
20 min: “Do You Use an Appropriate Introduction?” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Encourage all to work at improving introductions. Practice with others, using suggestions in the Reasoning book. In considering paragraphs 4-6, have brief demonstrations by well-qualified publishers who can follow the Reasoning book introductions very closely.
15 min: Local needs or talk based on June 15, 1985, Watchtower article “How to Make Your Bible Reading Fruitful.” Demonstrate practical suggestions as audience follows along in Bible.
Song 214 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 21
Song 147
10 min: Local announcements, Theocratic News, and “A New Publisher Peak!” Remind all to prepare for fourth Saturday magazine witnessing. Demonstrate two brief presentations, one featuring Awake! and the other The Watchtower. Select articles having local appeal, and use publishers who can exemplify tact and positiveness.
20 min: “Are You Practicing the Things You Have Learned?” Questions and answers. Help brothers to make personal application of what was learned at “Divine Justice” District Convention.
15 min: “Keep a Positive Attitude.” Talk based on article in the June 1, 1986, Watchtower, pages 28-30. Make application to local situations, such as indifference of people and frequently worked territory.
Song 54 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 28
Song 62
12 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in field service on first Sunday of December. Review literature offer for December and have brief demonstration. Highlight specific points from publication featured.
18 min: Educating Our Tongue to Help the Discouraged. Many things tend to discourage people today: economic problems, loss of loved ones in death, illness, spiritual problems on the part of children or mate, and so forth. Giving way to discouragement makes us more vulnerable to Satan’s attacks. (Prov. 24:10; compare Luke 22:31.) Christians are under obligation to encourage and support one another. (1 Thess. 5:14; Gal. 6:2) In this we imitate Christ. (Matt. 11:28-30) How? By being sympathetic. (Rom. 12:15) By being ready to respond in practical ways. (Jas. 2:14-17; rs pp. 117-21) Using Reasoning book, have audience comment on what scriptures can be used to help persons in congregation and field deal with the specific problems outlined. Have two or three in audience prepared to give comments from seat to show how others encouraged them in time of need and when they faced personal problems. (Acts 28:15) Draw close to Jehovah, seek help of elders, and persevere in prayer, thus successfully fighting discouragement.​—Jas. 4:8; Isa. 32:1, 2; Eph. 6:17, 18.
15 min: Cooperate Fully With Congregation Book Study Arrangement. Talk by service overseer or qualified book study conductor. Encourage all to participate in study and field service and to support group in caring for assignments such as cleaning and caring for Kingdom Hall. Give appropriate commendation and counsel according to local circumstances.
Song 12 and concluding prayer.

