Announcements
FEAR OF THE SOVEREIGN JEHOVAH
“Let all the earth fear Jehovah.”—Ps. 33:8, AS.
Not a nation on earth today is free from fear. In fact, the world is now in the state so accurately described by Jesus, who predicted for this time that men would be “faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth”. (Luke 21:26, NW) But there is another fear which is healthful, upbuilding, reassuring and conducive to right living and long life. That is the fear of Jehovah, which is pure. It impels one to serve Jehovah out of love for his goodness, and Jehovah guards the eternal interests of those who fear him. (Ps. 34:7, AS) Millions of people need to be taught that fear of Jehovah is the way of life, and that, in brief, is the purpose of the Watchtower magazine. During January, 1953, Watchtower readers may join in presenting this journal to the people on a year’s subscription for $1. Three booklets will be given as a premium. Help people to fear Jehovah as Sovereign by directing their attention to his Word. Each issue of The Watchtower does that faithfully.
YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
The 1953 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses is now available on a contribution of 50c per copy. It tells the story of the work carried on under the direction of the Watch Tower Society in more than 100 countries. The reports from various lands are interesting, often demonstrating the zeal and enthusiasm of Jehovah’s people in overcoming obstacles in preaching the good news of the Kingdom. The response of the public to this ministry is likewise shown. The Yearbook this year contains color illustrations too. A Scripture text for each day of 1953, with helpful comment thereon, enhances the Yearbook’s value to you. The calendar for 1953 is also available in color, presenting five different scenes illustrating God’s servants engaged in his true worship. Calendars are 25c each, or five or more to one address at the rate of 20c each. Send for yours now.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 8: Happiness in Giving.
Week of February 15: Happiness of Kingdom Ambassadors.
Week of February 22: Maturity Brings Happiness.

