VOL. XXXIII SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A.D. 1912-A.M. 6040 



CONTENTS 

The New Creature's Responsibility to 
Divine Law 271 

Condition of Heart Tested Continuously 271 

The Two-Fold Trial of the New Creature 271 

Purpose of Our Lord's Suffering 273 

Feet Washing as a Lesson in Humility 273 

Selfishness Even in Love 274 

The Act, Not the Institution of a 

Ceremony 274 

"Cast Not Away Your Confidence" 275 

Positive Character Necessary 275 

Increasing Severity of Trials 276 

"Another Voice From Heaven" 277 

Babylon— Mother and Daughters 277 

Who May Fall From Grace 278 

Characteristics of a Sound Mind 279 

"It Is I, Be Not Afraid" 281 

The Three Fault-Finders 282 

God's Word, Not Man's 282 

"Cup of Cold Water" 283 

page 270 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. 
Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please 
address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



OUR SPECIAL "I.B.S.A." BIBLE 

The "I.B.S.A." Bible is becoming more and more indispensable to 
all readers as they learn how to use it. The translation, of course, is 
not at all different from that of other Bibles of the Common Version. 
We specially recommend it for its smallness of size, lightness of weight 
and good-sized print, and above all for the helps to Bible students and 
teachers bound with it; printed on India paper; excellent press work. 
Its special feature, distinguishing this Bible from all others, is 

BIBLE TEACHERS' MANUAL. 

Biblical Comments from Genesis to Revelation, with references to 
the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and others of our publications. It 
represents four hundred and eighty-one pages of matter. 

INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS. 

This is a topical arrangement of Bible subjects. It is in condensed 
form, very convenient, and consists of eighteen pages solid matter. 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX. 

This, alphabetically arranged, presents a large variety of subjects 
showing references to the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and others of 
our publications treating the same. This feature covers twenty-eight 
pages. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED-SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED. 

In this, specially difficult texts are brought to the attention and 
references given showing where they are treated in our publications. 
Following this is a full list of various interpolations and spurious 
passages of the Scriptures not in the original MSS., as proven by the 
oldest Greek MSS.— fifteen pages. 

All of our "I.B.S.A." Bibles contain the above, and some of 
them, the numbers of which end with a nine, contain additionally 
Bagster's Bible Study Helps, including an alphabetical index of proper 
names and Bagster's Bible Concordance and Maps— a total of one 
hundred and eighty-six pages. The price is the same whether the order 
be for one copy or for more. To save danger of misunderstanding 
we below quote the prices, including postage. 



DESCRIPTION AND PRICES. 

1918, price $1.65, postage prepaid, is a beautiful book. It is small 
and light. Size 4-3/4 x 6-3/4 inches. It has minion type, red under gold 
edges, divinity circuit, French Seal. Looks like the genuine seal-skin, 
but it is in reality good sheepskin. 

Number 1919, price $1.75, postage prepaid; the same book, the 
same Bible; the same every way except the addition of Bagster Helps, 
Concordances, etc., making this size a trifle larger. 

Number 1928, price $2.65, postage prepaid. This is the same book 
exactly as number 1918, except that it has genuine morocco binding; 
leather-lined. 

LITTLE LARGER, IONIC TYPE, SELF-PRONOUNCING. 

Number 1939, price $1.95, postage prepaid. This is the same book 
as 1919, the same binding and contents, but it has a coarser print and 
is a little larger book. Size, 5-1/2 x 7-1/2 inches. 

Number 1959, price $3.65, postage prepaid. This is the same book 
as 1939 except that it has splendid morocco binding, is calf-lined and 
silk-sewed. Bibles similar in quality and finish are listed in many 
catalogues at $11. 



R5088 : page 271 

THE NEW CREATURE'S RESPONSIBILITY TO DIVINE LAW 

PARTI 

THE LAW COVENANT was a Covenant 

that God made with Israel, based upon the 

keeping of the Law, which was briefly expressed 

in the Ten Commandments. The 

Apostle Paul says that our Lord was born 

under the Law (Gal. 4:4); not under the 

Ten Commandments merely, but under the 

Law Covenant. This Law Covenant, the 

Apostle elsewhere shows, was that addition 

to the Abrahamic Covenant which was 

typified by Hagar and not by Sarah. Our Lord was under 

this Hagar Covenant, then— under the Law Covenant, 

the Covenant of the flesh— up to the time when He was 

thirty years of age. 

We have no record whatever respecting our Lord's 
obedience to the Law before He became of age, although 
we have every reason to believe that He kept the Law 
Covenant. But the time of His special trial began at 
His baptism. The fact that God was willing to enter into 
a Covenant of sacrifice with our Lord shows that He was 
perfect at that time. Our Lord persisted in keeping the 

R5089 : page 271 



Law during the time of His ministry, and at the same 
time sacrificed those rights which were His because of 
keeping the Law. 

With our Lord it was the same as with Adam. Jesus 
was perfect at the time of His baptism; therefore, no one 
could question His right to life. Consequently, God dealt 
with Him as with One who had life rights. But as Adam 
was placed on trial to see whether he would prove faithful, 
so our Lord Jesus was on trial during the three and 
a half years of His ministry, to prove His worthiness to 
retain His life rights. If He had failed to keep the Law 
any time during His ministry, He would have failed to 
have Divine approval. Likewise if He had failed to 
keep His Covenant of sacrifice He would have failed to 
make His calling and election sure. 

CONDITION OF HEART TESTED CONTINUOUSLY 

What our Lord did in this matter is on a parity with 
what each one of us does. We come to the Lord in the 
beginning and present ourselves living sacrifices; His acceptance 
of us and the imputation of His merit to us 
makes us perfect beings from the Divine standpoint. 
Everyone who is perfect in the flesh has a right to life, 
according to the Divine Law. But the fact that we have 
a right to life for the moment, does not prove that it will 
be everlasting. 

At the end of the thousand years of Christ's reign 
the world will be actually perfect. They will then be 
subjected to a testing to prove whether or not this perfection 
is deep and abiding, whether or not it is the permanent 
condition of their hearts. So it was with our 
Lord. Before His consecration He certainly had no such 
trials and contradictions of sinners against Himself as 
He had afterwards. "Consider Him that endured such 
contradiction of sinners against Himself?" (Heb. 12:3.) 
Practically all His trials began at the time of His consecration. 
We have no reason to suppose that our Lord 
was undergoing a trial for life or death before His 
consecration. 

When our Lord was thirty years old, He was holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. His trial, 
which was to prove His worthiness, began at His consecration 
and continued until His death. For three years 
and a half the spirit of His mind was being tested. If 
during that time He had committed any sin whatever, 
would He have been accepted of God then? Surely not! 
He was on trial, not as an old creature, but as a New 
Creature, and His trial did not end until on the cross He 
cried, "It is finished!" This did not alter the fact, however, 
that He was still under the Law. The Law had 
dominion over Him as long as He lived. As a New 
Creature He did not have a body of the spirit kind. He 
had a human body, and was, therefore, responsible for 
everything that His human body would do. 

It is just so with us. The body is reckoned dead in 



one sense of the word. As the Apostle says, "If ye be 

risen with Christ, seek those things which are above." 

Does this refer to us merely as New Creatures? Yes. 

Is not our flesh reckoned dead? Yes, but we are figuratively 

raised from the dead. (Rom. 6:4,5; Col. 3:1.) 

To whatever extent our bodies fall short of perfect obedience, 

Christ, as the great Advocate, makes good. So 

if any of us sin, we have an Advocate with the Father. 

No matter how trivial the sin may be, it is a sin. God 

keeps no accounts with the flesh, but holds the New 

Creature responsible. It is for these weaknesses of the 

flesh that the New Creature goes daily to the Lord and 

says, "Forgive us our trespasses." We have an Advocate 

with God, and if we sin we may come to God and obtain 

grace in every time of need.— I John 2:1; Heb. 4:16. 

THE TWO-FOLD TRIAL OF THE NEW CREATURE 

As we have seen, when our Lord made His consecration 
at His baptism, He was a perfect human being. 
When the Father accepted His sacrifice, He was begotten 
again; and He was to this degree a new soul, a New 
Creature— spirit. But He had this treasure of the new 
mind in an earthen vessel, and the New Creature was 
responsible for all that the old creature did. If the old 

R5089 : page 272 

creature had gotten Him into trouble, the New Creature 
would have been responsible. 

As previously stated, our Lord was under the domination 
of the Law as long as He lived. The question then 
arises, How long did He live as a man? Our answer is 
that in a very important sense of the word He died at 
the time of His baptism; that is to say, He died so far as 
His human will was concerned, but His human body did 
not die. His human body, therefore, was still as liable 
to every Law as it had been before. He became a New 
Creature in the spirit of His mind, but a New Creature 
without a new body; and in the Divine arrangement the 
New Creature accepted and used the old earthly body, 
with all the responsibilities of that earthly body, whatever 
they might be. 

In other words, the flesh has its law and its responsibilities. 
But as a New Creature our Lord was under an 
additional law. We are not to understand that as a New 
Creature He was released from the Ten Commandments. 
In his flesh He was a perfect human being, under the 
Law. As a New Creature He undertook to do more than 
merely keep the Law; and so the New Creature was on 
trial— not merely to prove whether the flesh would live 
up to the requirements of the Law, but whether the flesh 
should be brought into subjection to the higher law of 
the New Creation. Thus our Lord more than kept the 
Law— not less than kept the Law. 

Jesus died to the Law Covenant, but not to the Law, 



at the time that He made His consecration. He was not 
relieved from His responsibility to the Law according to 
the flesh, but as a New Creature He gave up all hope, 
all anticipation, as respects that Law Covenant. When 
He gave up the human nature He would have no use for 
that which applied to the human nature, which He was 
giving up in order to get something better. Therefore, 
He died to the Law Covenant, not because He could not 
keep it, but because by becoming dead to that Covenant 
He might become alive to the Covenant of sacrifice. The 
blessings of that Law Covenant would have been merely 
earthly life. So when our Lord consecrated Himself, He 
sacrificed everything that went with the Law Covenant. 

NO ADVOCATE FOR OUR LORD 

If our Lord's human nature had failed to keep the 
Law, the New Creature would have been held responsible. 
It is the same with us, as we have illustrated before in 
the case of a man and his dog. The New Creature is 
like the man and the old creature like the dog. But the 
man is responsible for the dog. If the dog does damage 
or bites anyone, the owner is responsible. God has made 
a special arrangement for us, however, by which we may 
go to the throne of heavenly grace for the imperfections 
of the flesh, because we have an Advocate. But Jesus 
had no Advocate; and therefore any misdeed on the part 
of His flesh would be charged to Him directly, as He 
would be responsible for all the flesh might do. 

As we have seen, our Lord at thirty years of age was 
a perfect man, accountable under the Law Covenant. 
When He had made a consecration and when that consecration 
had been accepted by the Father, He was 
counted alive as a New Creature and reckoned dead as an 
old creature. These facts should not cause us to lose sight 
of the other fact that He was not really a New Creature, 
but merely begotten to a new nature, and that He would 
not be entirely free from the earthly nature until He was 
actually dead. 

So, then, as a New Creature our Lord was responsible 
for all of God's laws that applied to Him as a man. The 
fact that He had given up all the earthly hopes and ambitions 
and privileges did not give Him liberty to violate 
the Law of God; and therefore His passing from under 
the Law Covenant did not give Him liberty to break the 
Law. 

Even so with us. We cannot trespass against our 
neighbor in any degree. The fact that we have become 
New Creatures in Christ makes us still more responsible 
for good behavior. We have need of the Lord's covering 
merit for every fleshly imperfection that we have. The 
very fact that we have need of that covering for our 
fleshly imperfections shows that our every thought, word 
and action are taken cognizance of by God; and since 
we are still imperfect, an arrangement is provided for 
us by which we may go to the Throne of Grace and have 



our weaknesses covered by our Lord's merit. 
GRAVE RESPONSIBILITY RESTING ON OUR LORD 

But our Lord had nothing to shield Him. Although 
He had given up all hope of human life, that He might 
have the spiritual blessings, yet He was responsible for 
every feature of the Divine Law. 

The Divine Law has always existed. God always had 
certain laws of right and wrong; He Himself is under a 
law of righteousness. Our Lord Jesus and all the holy 
angels are subject to a law of righteousness. What 
ceased at our Lord's consecration was the Covenant promise 
of life which was based upon that Law and which 
had been won by our Lord. Since no imperfect being 
can keep that Law, another arrangement is made for us 
—a sacrificial arrangement, based upon our Lord's merit, 
imputed to us. "Gather My saints together unto Me; 
those who have made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice." 
-Psa. 50:5. 

From the Divine standpoint our Lord kept the Law 
as a New Creature; from the human standpoint He kept 
it as an earthly creature. To God we are one thing; to 
men we are another. Before God Jesus had the standing 
of the New Creature. But He did not keep the Law 
merely in the spirit; He kept it in the letter as well. As 
for ourselves, we cannot keep the letter of the Law, but 
we must keep the spirit of it. Our Lord, being perfect, 

R5090 : page 272 

kept the Law both in spirit and in letter. Every act of 
obedience to the Law was credited to the New Creature, 
and any failure would have brought death. Even though 
the account was entered in the name of the New Creature, 
these acts of obedience were only credited to it. Just as 
a parent might put into the bank money for a child, the 
child does not have the money and cannot receive it until 
he becomes of age; so with our Lord. Everything that 
He did was put to His credit. And if He had done anything 
wrong, it would have been charged to the New 
Creature. "The wages of sin is death."— Rom. 6:23. 

CHANGE OF NATURE A GRADUAL PROCESS 

But had our Lord remained under the Law Covenant, 
He would not have become the heir; for the child of the 
bondwoman could not become heir with the son of the 
freewoman. (Gal. 4:30.) The son of the freewoman 
was the New Creature. 

When our Lord made the Covenant of sacrifice at 
Jordan He passed from His position under the Law 
Covenant and from His fleshly relationship to Abraham, 
into the spiritual relationship and became the spiritual 
"Seed" of Abraham; for there He sacrificed all the blessings 
and favors which were His under the Law Covenant. 



But we are to remember that in our Lord's case, this 
change of nature required three and a half years. He 
did not pass instantaneously from one relationship to the 
other, but by a process in which He was dying daily and 

R5090 : page 273 

also becoming alive daily. He had accepted the terms of 
the Covenant of sacrifice. During those three and one-half 
years, He was in the process of transfer from the 
Law Covenant to the Sacrificial Covenant. After He 
had fulfilled the terms of that Covenant, He was put to 
death in the flesh, and quickened in the spirit. (I Peter 3:18. 
R.V.) But He did not enter into the glorious station 
typified by Isaac until after His resurrection from 
the dead. 

So it is with us. We renounce the earthly that we 
may share in the heavenly. But the change requires a 
period of time, during which we are dying daily and becoming 
more alive daily. We shall be made fully alive 
only in our resurrection, for flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the Kingdom of God. (I Cor. 15:50.) While this 
change is not instantaneous, but by degrees, yet the 
Father dealt with our Lord from the moment of His consecration, 
and so He deals with us. We have the foretaste 
of the blessing now, but it will not be ours completely 
until the sacrifice shall have been finished. Our 
Lord's baptism did not constitute Him The Christ in the 
full sense of the word, but He was declared to be The 
Christ with power when He was raised upon the spirit 
plane.— Rom. 1:4. 

PURPOSE OF OUR LORD'S SUFFERING 

The Scriptures give us to understand that our Lord's 
sufferings produced a variety of results. First of all, 
those sufferings were in fulfilment of the Law, and by 
them He testified His obedience to the Law of God. He 
suffered for well-doing and not for evil-doing. Second, 
it was appropriate that He should prove to God His 
loyalty and faithfulness, so as to establish His worthiness 
to be made the great Messiah and to be granted the great 
power and glory which Messiah will exercise. 

The Apostle Paul gives us this particular thought, 
when he says that it pleased God to make the Captain 
of our salvation perfect through suffering. (Heb. 2:10.) 
At the same time this suffering would demonstrate our 
Lord to be the great Messiah who would eventually lead 
the people out of sin and death. The Apostle also intimates 
that His sufferings were expedient and wise for 
the assistance of those who would be His followers, when 
he says that this High Priest was touched with a feeling 
of our infirmities, that He might be able to sympathize 
with those who are in trouble. He was faithful Himself, 
having gone through various trials and testings.— 
Heb. 4:15. 



When mankind come to know how it was that Messiah 
assumed control of the world, all humanity will have 
full confidence in Him— not only in the power with which 
He will rule His Kingdom, but also in His justice, His 
love and His mercy. He has been tempted in all points 
as the Church is, and therefore, not only can we have 
the benefit resulting from His experience, but the whole 
world in the future may also have an opportunity to appreciate 
it. 

The sufferings of Jesus became a witness both to angels 
and to men. He gave the demonstration of the full 
extent of loyalty even unto death. As a reward the 
Father did not give Him merely the high position that 
He had at first, but exalted Him to His own right hand 
in the heavenly places, "Far above all principality and 
power and might and dominion, and every name that is 
named" (Eph. 1:21); even to the divine nature. All this 
was a part of the Father's great Plan; and by our Lord's 
experiences we see that the Heavenly Father has demonstrated 
His Justice, His Power and His Love in a most 
marvelous way. 

THE CHURCH'S EXPERIENCES SIMILAR TO OUR LORD'S 

Our Lord's perfecting, indeed, was a little different 
from ours, and yet there is a similarity between the two. 
He was perfect before He humbled Himself; He was 
still perfect as the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself; 
but as a result of His consecration He received a begetting 
of the Holy Spirit to the divine nature, and His development 
as a New Creature required that He faithfully 
carry out His vow, or Covenant, of sacrifice, in the doing 
of the will of the Heavenly Father. By such faithfulness 
He perfected Himself on the divine plane— that is, He 
proved Himself worthy according to the Covenant— 
"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power and 
riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and 
blessing."— Rev. 5:12. 

Similarly the followers of Jesus are to be sharers with 
Him of the sufferings of this present time and in the 
glories which shall follow, for "If we suffer [with Him] 
we shall also reign with Him." (2 Tim. 2:12.) Although 
we are imperfect in the flesh, while He was perfect, yet 
the Robe of His Righteousness, the merit of His sacrifice, 
covers all of our blemishes and makes us, as His footstep 
followers, holy and acceptable before the Father, as joint-sacrificers 
with Jesus. 

The begetting of the Holy Spirit starts us in the life 
divine. We are not to be perfected in the flesh, but in 
the spirit; and our perfection and acceptance with the 
Father will be demonstrated by our loyalty of heart and 
the fulness and thoroughness with which we submit our 
all to the Divine will and seek to glorify God in our bodies 
and spirits, which are His. Our justification comes to us 
as a reward of faith, regardless of works, but our glorification 
will follow only as a reward for faithfulness— "Be 



thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of 
life. "-Rev. 2:10. 

(Continued in next issue.) 



R5090 : page 273 

FEET-WASHING AS A LESSON IN HUMILITY 

"Ye also ought to wash one another's feet."— John 13:14. 

WE REMEMBER the occasion on which our 

Lord washed the feet of His disciples. The 

Lord and His twelve Apostles had met in 

the upper room to commemorate the Passover 

Supper. This feast was followed by 

the inauguration of the Memorial Supper, 

the bread and wine of which represented 

the body and the blood of our Lord Jesus. 

The disciples, full of the enthusiasm which 

had been incited for some days previous, 

were all at a loss to understand the sadness of our Lord 

Jesus. While He was saying, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, 

even unto death" (Matt. 26:38) and desiring that 

His baptism might be accomplished, they were inclined 

to think that He was taking a pessimistic view of matters. 

During the five preceding days the disciples had witnessed 
the feast in the house of Lazarus, Martha and 
Mary, the breaking of the alabaster box of ointment, the 
riding on the ass, and the spreading of palm branches 
for the little animal to walk on, and the demonstration 
of the people, who had cried, "Blessed is He that cometh 
in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest!" 
(Matt. 21:9.) They had heard the Pharisees ask Jesus 
to put a stop to this demonstration. But He had said to 
them that if these people should hold their peace the very 
stones would cry out. (Luke 19:40.) To fulfil the 

R5090 : page 274 

prophecy (Zech. 9:9) there must be a shout, and there 
was a shout. 

We remember that the little company went to the 
Temple, that the whole city was in commotion, that the 
rulers were impressed, and that they were afraid of the 
people. We remember that Jesus had gone into the 
Temple and had driven out those who sold merchandise; 
that when the Pharisees, the Sadducees and others tried 
to make Jesus appear confused, He had wisely turned all 
their arguments upon themselves; and that they dared 
not ask Him any more questions, for by so doing they 
would only make a bad matter worse. 

From all these things it must have seemed to the 
Apostles that they were on the eve of attaining great 



prominence and that Jesus would be exalted. Therefore, 
they could not understand His attitude of sorrow. As an 
evidence, we have the fact that James and John went to 
Jesus and asked about the place they might occupy in 
the Kingdom. Could they be next to Him? There was 
no doubt in their minds that the Kingdom was near. 
They specially loved Him and would like to have the 

R5091 : page 274 

favor of being near Him. Others might not care so 
much where they were placed, but James and John would 
like to be close to the Master. 

These were the thoughts uppermost in their minds. 
As a result, when they came to the upper room, they had 
not the humility of mind to take thought of serving. No 
doubt it was the custom of the Jews to have a servant 
to minister to the comfort of the guests. But there was 
no servant here and not one of them had the humility of 
mind to offer to be the servant. Apparently they not only 
did not have the disposition to serve one another, but they 
did not desire to wash even the Master's feet. 

SELFISHNESS EVEN IN LOVE 

Since it is difficult for us to gage our own hearts 
thoroughly, we should use great charity in measuring the 
hearts and intentions of others, and should err on the 
side of too great sympathy and leniency rather than on 
that of too strong condemnation. Doubtless had the 
Apostles been asked as to their motives and conduct, they 
would have denied that these were selfish, and would 
have spoken only of their zeal for the Lord and their 
desire to be near Him. This illustrates to us what the 
Scriptures declare, that the human heart is exceedingly 
deceitful, and that it requires careful scrutiny, lest under 
the cloak of good motives, it harbor qualities which, if 
recognized, it would spurn. 

Apparently our Lord let the matter go to its full limit 
to see whether or not any of His followers would improve 
the opportunity to make himself servant of all. 
He waited until supper was being served (not ended as in 
our common Version); then, arising from the table, He 
laid aside His mantle and got a basin and a towel. Then, 
girding up His garments to keep them from getting into 
the water, He proceeded to wash their feet. 

We can well imagine the consternation of the Apostles 
as they watched the procedure, and then saw the 
Lord go from the feet of one to those of another, as they 
protruded from the couches on which the Apostles reclined. 
The method of feet-washing at that time was 
different from that of today. The water was poured 
from a pitcher in a small stream upon the feet, which 
were washed and rinsed. The basin was merely a receptacle 
for receiving the soiled water. 



OUR LORD'S ACT A DEEP SPIRITUAL LESSON 

This act was a pointed reproof for their neglect to 
wash His feet and one another's. They were all silent 
until He came to St. Peter. When our Lord paused before 
him, St. Peter said, "Thou shalt never wash my 
feet!" St. Peter had too much reverence to wish the 
Lord to be his servant. He had as a natural trait, more 
than had some of the others, that courage, or boldness, 
which led him to speak out. But the Lord said to him, 
"If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with Me." (John 13:8.) 
St. Peter did not understand how this washing 
would give him a part with the Lord, but he said eagerly, 
"Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head," 
if this gives me a more particular part with You. The 
Lord answered him, "He that is washed needeth not save 
to wash his feet, but is clean every whit." I am doing 
all that is necessary. What I am doing you do not understand 
now, but you shall understand hereafter.— See 
verses 7-10. 

In all this the Lord was giving a deep spiritual lesson 
—that no one is naturally fit for the Kingdom. Each 
one needs to be washed, to be cleansed, before he can 
be a joint-sufferer, before he can be a joint-heir. He must 
be a joint-sacrificer in order to become a member of The 
Christ. Jesus said to His disciples, You have witnessed 
My humility in this matter, and now I want to tell you 
that you ought to have this attitude toward one another. 
You should have been careful for even the humblest one 
in your number. Whether or not it was by washing My 
feet and those of all the others, you should have done 
whatever was necessary for the refreshment of the 
company. 

THE ACT NOT THE INSTITUTION OF A CEREMONY 

We are to remember that things were different then 
from what they are today. Because of the wearing of 
sandals, the feet would be considerably soiled even after 
only a short journey and would, therefore, need refreshing. 
It was the custom that the servant should come forth 
and make the guests comfortable— not to the inconvenience 
of the traveler, but to his further comfort. This 
was a menial service, which afforded Jesus the opportunity 
to impress upon His Apostles the lesson of the necessity 
of humility in all the members of the Body of Christ. 

We do not get a lesson of the institution of a formal 
ceremony. It was only a case of necessity, of which the 
Lord took advantage to give a lesson of humility. No 
such need exists with us today. Our streets are paved 
and we wear shoes that are closely laced and are sufficient 
protection. So there is no necessity to wash each 
other's feet, at a public gathering, to have a public exhibition 
of feet-washing. 

The incident affords a lesson in humility to us as well 
as it afforded one to the Apostles. We should be glad 



to do any service, even to the humblest of the members 
of Christ, in whatever way the opportunity may come. 
There is no suggestion in the Scriptures that feet-washing 
was ever done as a ceremony. We have an intimation, 
however, that feet-washing was a custom in Palestine. 
In I Tim. 5:9-16, we read that if a widowed sister had 
washed the saints' feet, meaning that if she had shown 
such a disposition, St. Paul would advocate a special care 
for such a sister in need; for she had manifested a loyal 
and true spirit. 

There are some very good Christian people who have 
adopted feet-washing as a religious custom. We are not 
to berate them unnecessarily for following their consciences. 
Rather we should say to them that so long as 
they think they are doing the Lord's will, they are right 
to follow the custom; but that the Scriptures relate only 
this one case where the feet-washing was done in public, 
and it was very unlikely, therefore, that it was ever done 
in public by the Church except on this occasion. As the 

R5091 : page 275 

commandment, "Thou shalt not kill," has a deeper meaning 
than that one shall not take the life of another, so this 
washing of feet has a deeper meaning. Throughout His 
ministry Jesus indicated the deeper thought by His treatment 
of others; He lightened the burden and happified 
the condition of those with whom He came in contact. 
So we should do all in our power for the consecrated ones, 
members of Christ's Body. 

OUR RESPONSIBILITY TO ONE ANOTHER 

This lesson suggests that the members of Christ's 
Body should have a mutual watch-care over one another's 
welfare; to keep each other pure, holy, clean and 
to assist one another in overcoming the trials, temptations 
and besetments of this present evil world, arising from 
the three sources of temptation— the world, the flesh and 
the Devil. Only as we cultivate the various graces of 
the Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly-kindness, 
love— can we hope to be specially helpful to 
others in putting on these adornments of character and 
purities of life, and in getting rid of the defilements of 
the world and of the flesh. 

It requires peculiar qualifications to enable us to assist 
each other in this respect. Before we can help others to 
cleanse their way of life in every little particular, so that 
every thought, word and deed shall be brought into subjection 
to the Divine will, it is necessary that we have 
experience along the same lines. Only as we cultivate 
purity of thought, word and deed in our own lives, only 
as we put on the various graces of the Spirit, can we 
wash the feet of the saints. 

Many who would reject well-meant criticism of conduct, 
who would resent well-meant offers of assistance to 



a higher standard of character, as interferences with 

their private business, would be very amenable to the influence 

of the same person if he approached them with 

such evidences of true devotion and loving interest as 

would be indicated by the performance of some menial 

act. It is the sympathetic ones who are most successful 

in helping the various members of the Body of Christ 

out of the besetments and difficulties incident to the following 

of the Lord in the present time. Oh, let us study 

and strive and pray that we may be very successful in 

obeying the Master's injunction, "Ye also ought to wash 

one another's feet!" 

How many opportunities we have for comforting, refreshing, 
consoling and assisting one another in some of 
the humblest affairs of daily living or in respect to some 
of the unpleasant duties, experiences or trials of life! 
By love we are to serve one another, but not as a mere 
formality. Any service done or attempted to be done in 
love, with the desire to do good to one of the Lord's 
people, has, we may be sure, the approval of the Head of 
the Church. 

Let us lose no opportunities of this kind; let us remember 
the Master's example. Let us not merely assume 
the guise of humility, but let us actually have that grace 
of character which will enable us to do kindnesses and 
service to all with whom we come in contact. Then we 
shall all the more enjoy this privilege as we find the needy 
ones to be members of the Body of Christ— The Christ. 



R5095 : page 275 

"CAST NOT AWAY YOUR CONFIDENCE" 

"Cast not away therefore your confidence, which hath 
great recompense of reward."— Hebrews 10:35. 

WITH VERY MANY of God's people, as well 

as with the world's people, the ideal Christian 

life is one of constant peace and tranquility. 

They have never learned that "the 

peace of God which passeth all [worldly] 

understanding," promised to the Christian, 

is to rule in and keep his heart (Phil. 4:7; 

Col. 3:15), but does not apply to his outward 

life. They forget, or perhaps never 

learned, that our Master's words were, "In 

the world ye shall have tribulation, but in Me ye shall 

have peace" [in your hearts]. "If the world hate you, ye 

know that it hated Me before it hated you." "If they 

have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how 

much more them of His household?" "Yea, and all that 

will live godly in Christ Jesus [in this present world, or 

dispensation], shall suffer persecution." It is of a wicked 

class, and not of the saints, that the Prophet declared, 



"They are not in trouble as other men."— John 16:33; 15:18; 
Matt. 10:25; 2 Tim. 3:12; Psa. 73:5. 

Only to those who have some knowledge of God's 
great Plan is His dealing with His people understandable 
and readable. The world marvels that those whom God 
receives into His family, as sons by redemption and adoption, 
should be required or even permitted to suffer afflictions. 
But to the well-instructed saint the Apostle 
says, "Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial that 
shall try you, as though some strange thing happened 
unto you." (I Pet. 4:12.) And this saint may now 
clearly discern the object and utility of present trials, 
afflictions and persecutions. He sees that these are in 
fullest accord with his high calling, his heavenly calling 
—to be an heir of God and a joint-heir with Jesus Christ 
our Lord, "if so be that we suffer with Him, that we 
may be also glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

But why should a share in the coming glory be made 
dependent upon present sufferings? We answer, For 
two reasons: 

POSITIVE CHARACTER NECESSARY 

(1) Severe trials and testings of our love for God 
and for His Truth, and of our faith in Him and in His 
promises, are only a wise provision on God's part, in view 
of the very high honor and responsibility of the great 
office to which He has called us. If it was proper that 
our Lord and Redeemer should be tested in all points as 

to faith and obedience before His exaltation to the excellent 
glory and power of the divine nature, much more so 
it is fitting that we, who were once aliens and strangers, 
far from God, and children of wrath even as others, 
should be thoroughly tested. 

We are not tested as to the perfection of our earthen 
vessels, for God and we well know that in our fallen 
flesh dwelleth no perfection; but tested as to our new 
minds, our consecrated wills, whether or not these are 
fully consecrated to the Lord, firmly established in the 
love of truth, purity and righteousness in general. We 
are also tested to see whether we will compromise any 
of the principles of righteousness for worldly favor, 
selfish ambition, or for any of "the pleasures of sin for 
a season." Those who love righteousness and hate iniquity, 
who develop positive characters, these are the 
"overcomers" who shall, as members of Christ, inherit all 
things. The undecided, the lukewarm— neither cold nor 
hot— are far from having the spirit of the Kingdom class, 
and will surely be rejected— "spewed out."— Rev. 3:16. 

LOVE, NOT SELFISHNESS, THE RULING PRINCIPLE 

(2) A share in the coming glory is dependent upon 
present sufferings, for the reason that the coming glories 
are to be bestowed only upon those who have the Spirit 



R5095 : page 276 

of Christ, the spirit of holiness. And whoever has received 

this Holy Spirit, or disposition, and has been transformed 

by the renewing of his mind, or will, so that no 

longer selfishness but love shall rule over his thoughts 

and words and deeds, that person, if in the world at all, 

could not avoid present suffering. His love for God, his 

zeal for God's service and people, his faith in God's 

Word and his uncompromising attitude respecting everything 

relating to these, would be so greatly in contrast 

with the prevalent spirit of doubt, selfishness and compromise 

that he would be thought peculiar, called an extremist 

and a fanatic, if not a hypocrite. 

Evil surmisings, out of hearts not fully consecrated, 
will attribute every good deed to some selfish or evil 
motive, and, therefore, "Ye shall be hated of all men for 
My [Christ's] name's sake"; for "the world knoweth 
[understandeth] us not, because it knew Him not." 
(Luke 21:17; I John 3:1.) The reason for all this is 
evident: it is because "the god of this world hath blinded 
the eyes" of the vast majority of men; because the faithful, 
who appreciate the Truth, who have new hearts 
(wills) and the right spirit on these subjects, are but a 
"little flock." 

PRESENT CONDITIONS MOST FAVORABLE FOR 
OVERCOMING 

These conditions will not be changed until the testing 
of the "little flock" is finished. God will permit evil to be 
in the ascendancy until that testing, sifting, refining and 
polishing of the Bride of Christ is fully accomplished. 
Then Satan shall be bound for a thousand years, and not 
be permitted to blind and deceive the nations during the 
Millennial Age of blessing; but, on the contrary, the 
"little flock" of overcomers, with Christ, their Lord and 
Head, will bless all the families of the earth with a full 
knowledge of the Truth. 

Therefore, dear brethren and sisters, let us give heed 
to the Apostle's words, and not cast away our confidence 
—confidence in God, in the outworking of His great 
Plan, and in all who trust in the precious blood and are 
bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit in their daily lives 
—meekness, patience, brotherly kindness, love. 

CONFIDENCE THE BASIS OF CHRISTIAN EFFORT 

With some of the Lord's people, however, there is a 
tendency to become discouraged, to think that they may 
have been unfaithful and thus to lose their peace of mind. 
In some instances, this feeling of discouragement leads to 
such fear and distress that the Second Death is apprehended. 
The Apostle seems to have in mind this condition. 
We are surrounded with imperfection of both 
judgment and conduct; and those who have a proper estimate 



of themselves must know that they come far short 

of the Divine standard and of their own vow of consecration. 

This knowledge should tend to make all very 

humble, and very generous in considering others, but not 

to discourage us. 

St. Paul exhorts all such, saying, "Cast not away your 
confidence." Let such remember that the fact that they 
have received this Divine favor is an indication that their 
offering has had Divine acceptance. Faith, or confidence, 
in God and in the "great and precious promises" is the 
very basis of all Christian endeavor. Without this faith 
one cannot fight a good fight. In proportion as the promises 
are before our minds, in that proportion we have 
strength and courage to run the narrow way. 

If a follower of the Lord has been thus discouraged 
or has felt that his expectations have not been realized, 
he should not be weary in well doing. He should go to 
the Lord in prayer and renew his vow of consecration. 
He should rise from the ashes of discouragement and 
lift the cross with renewed zeal. He should endeavor to 
walk on a higher plane than ever. If he lose confidence, 
lose faith, he will easily be overcome by the Adversary. 

The very ones whom God will approve are those who 
walk by faith. The rewards are for those who hold the 
faith even unto death. We must beware of everything 
that tends to weaken or destroy our faith. The Lord 
deals graciously and generously with us. He will do for 
us whatever is right. Knowing this we can have confidence 
in God, even though the decision of Divine Justice 
should bar us out of Divine favor. Those whose hearts 
are right are submissive to the Divine will. The Lord 
wants us to have a faith that will continue in sorrow and 
in sunshine; that will trust where it cannot see, that will 
continue under all the leadings of Divine providence. 

COMMUNION WITH CHRIST IN SUFFERING 

In Hebrews 10:32-39 the Apostle clearly shows that 
there are two ways of enduring the afflictions of Christ: 
(1) to be made a gazing-stock both by afflictions and 
reproaches, and (2) by avowing our sympathy for the 
reproached ones and thus sharing their reproaches and 
afflictions. For if one member suffer, all the members of 
the Body of Christ suffer with it. 

"Call to remembrance the former days," and note that 
your afflictions and trials came principally after you had 
been illuminated with the light of the knowledge of God, 
shining in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord; and that 
they have increased as the light of Present Truth has 
increased with you. It is not difficult to discern the reason 
for this. The great Adversary is not interested in 
disturbing those who are "asleep in Zion"; but he is ever 
on the alert to mislead and entangle those who are awake. 
And the more active we become in the service of the 
Lord and the Truth, and, consequently, the more actively 
opposed to Satan and error, the more he will fight against 



us. And the more faithfully and vigorously we fight the 
good fight, as good soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
the more we shall have of the Master's approval now, 
and the greater will be our reward in the Kingdom. 

INCREASING SEVERITY OF TRIALS 

No doubt there are many and more severe trials just 
before us. From God's standpoint, having been blest 
with greater light, we should be able to endure greater 
trials and afflictions. From Satan's standpoint we, as a 
Gideon's band, armed with the Truth, are more injurious 
to his cause than all others combined. The only wonder 
to us is that he has not assailed us still more fiercely in 
the past. Perhaps he was hindered; perhaps he will be 
granted yet more liberty to buffet us, as the night draws 
on. Such is our expectation, based upon the direct statements 
and the types of Scripture. 

But such reflections should bring us no sadness, no 
fear; for He that is on our part is more than all that be 
against us. (I John 4:4; Rom. 8:31.) His promises, as 
well as His providences, are walls of salvation and protection 
on every hand. What shall separate us from the 
love of God in Christ? Shall tribulation? No! it shall 
but cause us to draw closer to Him; and under His protecting 
care we shall rest. His grace is sufficient for us. 
His strength is made manifest in our weakness. When 
we feel weak in ourselves, then we are strong in Him. 
He will never leave us nor forsake us. 

"Watchman, what of the night?" "The morning 
cometh, and also the night."— Isa. 21:11,12. 



R5092 : page 277 

"ANOTHER VOICE FROM HEAVEN" 

"Come out of her, My people, that ye be not partakers of her 
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

THE REVELATION of our Lord to St. John 

is a Book of signs, in which the things 

stated symbolize the things meant. To illustrate: 

In this Book a woman is used to 

represent a Church— a pure woman a pure 

Church, a false woman an apostate Church. 

In Rev. 17:1-6 a picture is given of a false 

woman, disloyal to her engagement, and 

therefore no longer worthy to be the Bride 

of Messiah. This unfaithful woman is 

branded "Babylon." We read that she sat upon a beast, 

a symbolic statement of her control of the power at Rome. 

In her hand this woman held a golden cup full of 
abominations, and thus symbolically she is represented as 
making all nations drunk with the wine of false doctrine. 



The cup suggests that the unfaithful Church, symbolized 
by this woman, had once been the receptacle of Divine 
Truth— "Babylon hath been a golden cup in the Lord's 
hands." (Jer. 51:7.) In Revelation 17:5 she is called 
"The Mother of Harlots"— a term suggesting a mother 
church, and daughter churches which are said to closely 
resemble the mother. As the mother was called "Babylon," 
the daughters— so like their mother— bear also the 
family name. 

BABYLON-MOTHER AND DAUGHTERS 

All about us we see the fulfilment of this prophecy. 
We see that the daughter systems have proceeded out of 
the mother system; that they are all developed from her. 
In Pittsburgh, some years ago, a very prominent Presbyterian 
minister said, "Wince as you will, you must admit 
that this [the Catholic Church] is the Mother Church. 
She possesses an unbroken history extending back to the 
times of the Apostles. For every fragment of religious 
truth which we prize, we are indebted to her as the depository. 
If she has no claim to being the true Church, 
then are we bastards and not sons." 

A fair examination of the denominations shows that 
they are more or less in sympathy with the mother system. 
Revelation 18 traces the history of the Apostate Church 
and foretells that Babylon— both Papal and Protestant 
systems— will fall. But the Lord has a true Church, to 
which He says, "Come out of her, My people!" In other 
words, the saints of God are scattered throughout the denominations. 
But now, in the closing of the Age, God 
sends forth the Message that His people shall no longer 
remain in the denominations; for the time is coming 
when the doom of Babylon will be upon her and she will 
fall.-Isa. 13:1-22. 

PROPHECY A GRAPHIC PICTURE OF HISTORY 

When we examine the Scriptures with the purpose of 
understanding prophecy, we find that during the Jewish 
Age, God made various types and pictures. The Jews 
themselves were typical. The Scriptures also show that 
there are two Israels, one of which is to be as the 
"stars of heaven" and the other as the "sand of the seashore." 
(Gen. 22:17; Isa. 8:14; I Cor. 10:18; Gal. 6:16.) 
Natural Israel was used of God to make types of 
the spiritual things— the "better things." Their Jubilee 
years were types of the antitypical Jubilee of better times; 
their Levitical priesthood was a type of the Priesthood in 
glory, etc. 

During the great Babylonian captivity the Jews were 
compelled to live in Babylon, to be a part of her, to support 
her, although their bondage was not severe. So today 
God's people are required to stay in Mystical Babylon, be a 
part and parcel of Babylon; to support some of her wards 
and denominations. Therefore it becomes a difficult matter 



to flee out of Babylon. But we find in the Scriptures 
graphic pictures of what is coming upon Mystic Babylon, 
and those who would escape must flee. As Cyrus, a type 
of Christ, overthrew Babylon, so a part of the work of 
the Second Advent will be the overthrow of antitypical 
Babylon.-Jer. 51:6; Rev. 18:21. 

BABYLON THE SYMBOL OF CONFUSION 

Originally "Babylon" signified "Gate of God." But 
the word came subsequently to have the meaning of confusion, 
mixture; and in this sense it is used in the Revelation. 
Babylon is a symbol of confusion. God's people in 
Babylon are dishonored; they are held in restraint. Now, 
through the prophecy we hear the command, "Come out 
of her, My people!" This call applies not only to those 
in Babylon the Great, but to those in other denominations 
—mother and daughters. "Come out of her, My people, 
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) Be not of those who 
cannot see the errors of Babylon and who, consequently, 
are not of the called ones. 

The object of the call to come out is not for people 
merely to withdraw from a nominal Church; but whenever 
any true Christian comes to see the error in which 
he has been held, and which Babylon has taught, he will 
see that he will misrepresent not only himself and the denomination 
to which he belongs, but also the Heavenly 
Father and the Word of God, if he remains connected 
with what he sees to be error. As he realizes his position, 
the voice of the Lord through His Word tells him that he 
must stand for truth and righteousness. 

No one is called out of Babylon until he sees her true 
condition. So then, never urge anyone to come out of 
Babylon; for if they have "ears to hear," God's voice tells 
them plainly to take this step, and gives the reason why 
they should do so. This Book of Revelation shows us by 
symbols that dire trouble is coming upon Babylon. The 
nominal Church claims that Christ's Kingdom was set up 
hundreds of years ago. Consequently, they are not looking 
for Christ to come to establish His Kingdom, for they 
think that He set up His Kingdom at the time of His 
First Advent. 

"GATHER MY SAINTS TOGETHER UNTO ME" 

The expression, "Come out of her," signifies that the 
Lord's people are to separate from all things which are 
in conflict with the Divine Word. We are to come out 
of the errors and systems of error which are contrary to 
the Word of God. But we are not to organize another 
denomination, for the original call was to membership in 
the Body of Christ. 

"Come out of her, My people," is a call to associate 
with Christ, with Messiah. This call is given by the 
Lord through the Prophet when He says, "Gather My 



saints together unto Me; those that have made a Covenant 
with Me by sacrifice." (Psa. 50:5.) They were to be 
gathered, not to the Roman or other systems, but to the 
Lord, to become one with Him. Therefore they could not 
be gathered to all these different denominations, nor to 
any one of them. Those who hear the call should come 
out of Babylon and take their stand with the Lord. They 
are no longer to be mis-representatives of God and of 
themselves. 

Those who see these things and have sufficient courage 
will come out. Those who see these things and lack the 
courage to come out are more responsible than are the 

R5092 : page 278 

majority of people who are in Babylon, but who do not see. 
If those who see do not have sufficient courage to obey 
the Lord, they will surely receive of her plagues by remaining 
in, and will probably have a large share in the 
punishments of the day of vengeance. 

MANY BECOMING IRRELIGIOUS 

Many people who have been identified with the different 
denominations are not coming into the Truth, but 
are becoming irreligious. They are by no means bad 
people; and they feel convinced that there has been a 
great error connected with Christianity. They repudiate 
much that Babylon does and says. Babylon claims that 
she has civilized the world; but she forgets that civilization 
existed before Christianity began. She forgets that 
Jews are just as civilized as Christians; and that Mohammedans 
are more temperate than many so-called Christians. 
By no means do we wish to say anything against 
whatever good people have received from her. If they get 
a still further blessing, they will probably find that while 
the blessing which they previously had was better than a 
message from heathendom, yet Babylon's best is far inferior 
to the Truth, the Light. 

Dearly beloved, we are permitted to enjoy wonderful 
things! By the grace of God, we are privileged to see the 
meaning of things that were once mysterious, not only 
to us, but to our parents. While some in Babylon are 
going into infidelity, some out of Babylon are becoming 
stronger spiritually, entering by hope "into that which is 
within the veil." If Christ is our Forerunner, we shall 
enter there with Him. To do so will mean to become 
partakers of The Messiah, by becoming the Bride of Messiah, 
as symbolically represented. The true Church is to 
become associated with Christ in His Kingdom. Then 
will come the promised blessings to "all the families of 
the earth." 

As we perceive the consistency of the Divine Plan of 
the Ages, our hearts are full of thanksgiving to God. 
We see that the New Dispensation will be ushered in with 
"a Time of Trouble such as never was"; and that this 



Time of Trouble is located, among other ways, by that 
prophecy which tells that "Many shall run to and fro, and 
knowledge shall be increased"; that there will be a time 
of trouble; but that "the wise shall understand." From 
what source do the wise receive their instruction? They 
will understand according to the wisdom from on high— 
in humility accepting the Divine Word and being blessed 
in so doing.— Dan. 12:4,10. 



R5093 : page 278 

WHO MAY FALL FROM GRACE 

ONE WHO is down cannot fall. Originally 

Father Adam was up; that is to say, he 

was perfect, created in God's likeness, free 

from sin. He was in God's favor, and 

while in that condition, he was on trial for 

life or death. He sinned and fell from 

favor into disfavor— condemnation, death. 

His posterity, the whole human race, have 

been born in God's disfavor. They are 

fallen. As we read, "I was shapen in iniquity, 

and in sin did my mother conceive me." (Psa. 51:5.) 

By nature mankind are all children of wrath. 

They cannot fall any further down; for as it is written, 

"The whole world lieth in the Evil One."— I John 5:19. 

-Diaglott. 

But something occurred which has raised a portion 
of the race of mankind from the fallen condition. Christ 
came into the world, gave His life a Ransom-price, and 
ascended into heaven "to appear in the presence of God." 
(Heb. 9:24.) Thus far, however, He has appeared only 
for us, not for the world, but for all those who have 
trusted in the precious blood of Christ. His appearance 
for these enables them to approach God, to become disciples 
of Christ and to receive the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit. 

This is the attitude in which we stand: we have accepted 
the Redeemer, we are seeking to walk in His steps, 
we are lifted up out of condemnation, we are no longer 
dead in Adam. "You hath He quickened, who were dead 
in trespasses and sins." (Eph. 2:1,2.) Once we were 
strangers and foreigners, but having been "made nigh by 
the blood of Christ" we are now members of the Body of 
Christ. (Eph. 2:12,13.) So, then, we are children of 
God by adoption. 

After Adam had fallen, he was regarded as an enemy 
of God. But we have come near to God through Christ. 
We are "accepted in the Beloved," accounted worthy of 
life everlasting, if we are faithful; for eternal life is the 
gift of God. (Eph. 1:6; Rom. 6:23.) The Church, then, 
have come back from the fallen state; but the world remains 
in that condition and, therefore, cannot fall. The 



only ones who can do so are those who are the recipients 
of the Holy Spirit. 

The manner of life here during the present existence 
may indeed affect the opportunity and future destiny of 
the world. If they knowingly violate obligations, they 
sin against light and they injure their characters; but 
they cannot sin away their share of the merit of Christ's 
sacrifice, for they have not yet received that share. Only 
the consecrated children of God are in the position to do 
so; as the Apostle points out, "It is impossible for those 
who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the 
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy 
Spirit, and have tasted the good Word of God and the 
powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to 
renew them again to repentance."— Heb. 6:4-6. 

This thought will well bear repetition: The only class 
that can fall away are those who have been made partakers 
of the Holy Spirit; but if any of those who have 
been brought into full harmony with God, through the 
begetting of the Holy Spirit, neglect or misuse their 
blessed privilege, there remains for them no more an interest 
in the great Atonement; because they have received 
their portion in Christ's redemptive work. 

KNOWLEDGE BRINGS RESPONSIBILITY 

The only evidence there is at the present time that we 
are begotten of the Holy Spirit is the fact that we have 
"received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry, Abba, 
Father." (Rom. 8:15.) The world, having had no life 
in them, cannot lose what they never possessed. But as 
for us, "If we sin wilfully after that we have received 
the knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more 
sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of 
judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the 
adversaries. He that despised Moses' Law died without 
mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer 
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy who 
hath trodden the Son of God under foot and hath counted 
the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified 
an unholy thing and hath done despite unto the spirit of 
grace? "-Heb. 10:26-29. 

Only those who have been sanctified through the blood 
of the Covenant can do despite to it. Only those who 
have a knowledge of the Son of God can "trample Him 
under foot." The world in its ignorance cannot do these 

R5093 : page 279 

things. So, "If we sin wilfully after that we have received 
the knowledge of the Truth" (not if the world sin 
wilfully, but if we sin wilfully), there remaineth no 
longer a share for us in the sacrifice of Christ. 

For the others, there would still remain their share in 
the sacrifice of Christ, and their responsibility will be in 
proportion to their knowledge. We have large responsibility, 



because we have large knowledge. We have tasted 
of the Holy Spirit, we have been made partakers of it. 
The Apostle says that "those who despised Moses' Law 
died without mercy." There was nothing more for them 
then. They did not get eternal torment for disobedience 
to Moses, but theirs was the death penalty. Those who 
thus died will, nevertheless, have their share in the redemptive 
work of Christ. 

Those who died under the Law will eventually have 
an opportunity to receive God's grace in Christ Jesus. 
But if they were cut off from life under the typical penalty 
of death, how much more severe would the penalty 
be upon those who have the understanding and enlightenment 
through the antitypical Moses— Christ! The intimation 
of the Scriptures is that such will die the Second 
Death for wilful disobedience. For such there is no 
hope of recovery whatever. Let this solemn thought be 
made emphatic. There will be a recovery from the death 
by Moses' Law. But for those who die the Second Death, 
there will be nothing further. They have had their share 
in the Atonement. They have counted the blood of the 
Covenant with which they were sealed an unholy thing. 
"Christ. .dieth no more!"— Rom. 6:9. 



R5093 : page 279 

CHARACTERISTICS OF A SOUND MIND 

"God has not given us the spirit of fear; but of 
power, and of love, and of a sound mind."— 2 Tim. 1:7. 

IN THIS TEXT St. Paul is addressing the 
children of God— those who have left the 
world, who have turned their backs upon 
the things of sin and selfishness, who have 
been begotten of the Holy Spirit because of 
full consecration to God and to whom the 
Advocate has imputed His merit. They 
have received of His Spirit, the new mind, 
and so have the spirit of a sound mind. 

In the beginning of the Gospel Age there 
were marked manifestations of the Holy Spirit, known as 
"the gifts of the Spirit" (I Cor. 12:4-1 1), such as knowledge, 
healing, miracles, tongues, etc. These gifts were bestowed 
at that time for two reasons: first, to witness who 
were God's people; and second, to confirm the faith of 
the early Church. They were necessary that the Church 
might have a start, so to speak. 

The Apostle says that these miraculous gifts were to 
continue only for a time, but that the fruits of the spirit 
were to abide— meekness, patience, gentleness, brotherly 
kindness, faith, hope and love, the greatest of all. (I Cor. 13.) 
The gifts of the Spirit died out with the death of 
the Apostles and of those also upon whom they had conferred 



the gifts. But the fruits and graces remain to this 
day. 

Just as soon as we have been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit a transforming work begins with us. But in general 
the reception of the Spirit is at first without marked 
manifestation. We grow in knowledge, love and all the 
fruits of the Spirit, in proportion as we have received 
the Holy Spirit, which is given in order to develop our 
minds and hearts and to do a transforming work, bringing 
forth the fruitage of the spirit in our characters and 
our lives. With some of us the fruitage develops rapidly; 
with others, slowly. 

The grape-vine gives us gifts in that it bears grapes. 
As fruit-bearing in nature is in one sense of the word a 
miracle, so also are the fruits and graces of the Spirit 
which show in our lives, but which are such a gradual 
development that they do not seem to be miraculous. 

The Lord is the true Vine and His true disciples are 
the branches. The Spirit of the Vine must permeate all 
the branches, and the fruit of the Vine must appear on 
every branch. The one thing necessary to remember is 
that our ultimate blessing and acceptance of the Father 
depends upon our abiding continually in this blessed relationship 
of branches in the Vine and our bearing fruit. 
If we fail to do this, we shall not remain in this relationship. 
But if we bear the fruits of the Spirit abundantly, 
we shall some day be branches in the glorified Vine— The 
Christ of God. 

FEAR A FORM OF SELFISHNESS 

In our text the Apostle is discussing the character of 
this Spirit which God has given us. It is not the spirit 
of fear, not the spirit of dread, not the spirit of timidity. 
Where the spirit of selfishness goes, there is more or less 
fear accompanying it. We can realize that with our first 
parents the spirit of fear led them to hide themselves from 
the Lord. We recall that Cain feared and fled. (Gen. 3:10; 4: 14.) 
So all down through the ages, the spirit of 
fear has exerted a powerful influence upon mankind. If 
a storm comes up, many people act as if they feared that 

R5094 : page 279 

it was something sent especially after them. 

All fear, being a manifestation of one form of selfishness, 
is made up of the elements of self-love. People 
fear lest they may lose some of the things which they 
selfishly desire to retain. The spirit of many of the heathen 
as well as of many in Christian lands is a spirit of fear. 
They are serving God, not from a desire to be co-laborers 
in His work, but from fear. They have been taught that 
they ought to go to Church. They know not what God 
might do to them if they were to neglect to go. Some 
ministers have said, "If I believed, as you do, that there 
is no eternal torture, I would do all the wicked things 



imaginable." They show by these words that they are not 
impulsed by a Holy Spirit, but by a spirit of fear, a spirit 
that belongs to sin. The spirit of fear does not come from 
God. 

There is, of course, a holy fear— a fear to do anything 
to offend God or to offend a friend. And we ought to be 
afraid of offending a friend, afraid of hurting or injuring 
a friend or anybody. If we love our Heavenly Father, 
we ought to fear to do anything to displease Him. 

In Hebrews 4:1 the Apostle says, "Let us fear, lest a 
promise being left us of entering into His rest, any of you 
should seem to come short of it." Let us not fear evil— 
but let us fear lest we fail to attain the blessings promised 
to the overcomers. God will give those blessings only 
to those who reach a certain development of character. 
But the fear of the world is wholly improper. If any of 
the Lord's people have that fear, they have received it 
from some other source than the spirit of Truth. 

TRANSFORMING INFLUENCE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 

The Apostle proceeds to tell us what this Spirit of the 
Lord has brought to us. It has been a spirit of power, of 
strength. All who are seeking to walk after the Spirit and 
have a knowledge of the Lord's love— these He will not 

R5094 : page 280 

forsake, but will deliver them from evil. These have a 
courageous spirit, or influence of mind proceeding from 
this spirit of power. It gives them such energy that they 
are able to do more than otherwise they could. They 
astonish themselves. They have the peace of God to 
work in them to will and to do His good pleasure.— 
Phil. 2:13. 

Those who receive the Truth are very different from 
what they were before they had received its spirit; and 
as a rule their neighbors and friends discern the change. 
Where a wife comes to the knowledge of the Truth, her 
husband is often surprised to find how much more firmness 
she has for everything that is right. This firmness 
is not a spirit of arrogance, but a spirit of assurance that 
God is able and willing to work things together for good. 
It is the same with the husband. Many wives have seen 
how much the Truth has strengthened the husband. This 
change is due to the spirit of power which the Lord has 
given His people. In proportion as we get this spirit, we 
get this power. Of course, some characters are naturally 
strong, but the Truth will make them stronger. Others 
naturally weak are made so much stronger that they surprise 
their friends and neighbors. 

All who have been in the School of Christ seem to 
make like development. They become better people than 
they have ever been before. They are not necessarily 
better looking, but the Spirit of the Lord helps them to 
keep their clothes tidy and neat. It helps them to be more 



particular as to what they say and how they say it. It influences 
their words, actions, conduct— everything. It 
makes them more patient, brotherly-kind. All these qualities 
are manifested increasingly. 

Some who have been a little while in the Lord's service 
have been remarked upon by others. They say, "These 
are a very intelligent people. Where did they get their 
vocabulary? They are not well educated, yet how much 
they know of affairs in the world! They seem to have a 
general knowledge of everything." God's Word gives 
this broad knowledge, and His Spirit gives us power to 
use this knowledge and to appropriate it to ourselves, for 
we see it to be the Word of the Lord. 

We receive the spirit of love also. The Apostle says 
that the Spirit of God is the spirit of love, because "God 
is Love." (I John 4:8.) God's Spirit is God's mind, 
God's disposition, God's influence. Since God is love, His 
Spirit must partake of all the qualities which go to make 
up love. 

In proportion to the measure of the Holy Spirit which 
we have, we shall have love— first, toward God; secondly, 
to the children of God; thirdly, to our neighbors and 
friends, and lastly it will extend even to our enemies. It 
would lead us to be considerate of birds and beasts also. 
The spirit of love has a generally benevolent influence. 
Whatever affects the thoughts is sure to affect the words. 
Whoever has the spirit of love will manifest its influences 
and will become more loving and more lovable as that 
spirit increases. 

DISREGARD FOR THE RIGHTS OF OTHERS A FORM OF 
SELFISHNESS 

Finally, the Apostle brings in the spirit of a sound 
mind. Man was created with a well-balanced mind. Adam 
and Eve did not need an outward record of God's Law. 
They had the sense of right and wrong so well defined in 
their minds that they knew right from wrong intuitively. 
But when they fell, they lost this balance of mind. 

As we come down the centuries from their day to ours, 
we find that this keen sense of right and wrong has become 
dull. Thus in cannibal lands the inhabitants believe it 
right to eat each other. They think that if they feed on 
enemies who are strong, they will be made strong. This 
utter disregard for the rights of others is the spirit of 
selfishness. We see this spirit manifested in civilized 
lands also, where they do not eat up the enemy literally, 
but eat up his fortune, his reputation. 

Our Lord said that while the Pharisees were very particular 
to give a full tenth of the mint, anise and cummin, 
yet they had omitted the weightier matters of the Law- 
judgment, mercy and faith. He showed that the Law 
which says, "Love thy neighbor as thyself," is more important 
than the giving of tithes. He also said that the 
Pharisees were full of extortion and excess, and that 
they strained at a gnat and swallowed a camel, that they 



devoured widows' houses.— Matt. 23:23-25,14. 

By this our Lord meant that when a widow was left 
alone, with no one to look after her interests, some of 
these professors of religion would get possession of her 
property if they could. So in our day there are people 
who scheme to discover how they can injure their neighbor. 
They do not eat the persons of their neighbors, but 
they eat their substance, their property. These people are 
cannibals in spirit. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF A SOUND MIND 

In proportion as we get the spirit of love, we get the 
spirit of a sound mind. This spirit leads us to consider 
what is right and what is wrong, in all the affairs of life. 
Not only have we the spirit of the Law, but in addition we 
have the spirit of the Lord to instruct us. The Law says, 
"Thou shalt have no other gods before Me." The spirit 
of the Law says that we shall not permit wealth or anything 
else to take away our minds from the Lord. We 
today find people worshipping bonds, stocks, giving the 
best of their time to the worship of Mammon. They do 
not know what they are doing. 

These people are very well illustrated by Bunyan's 
picture. You remember that when the pilgrims were in 
the house of the Interpreter, he took them into a room 
where there was a man with a muck-rake in his hand, 
drawing to himself straws, small sticks and the dust of the 
floor. Above his head was one with a celestial crown in 
his hand. This crown he proffered to the man in exchange 
for the muck-rake. But the man neither looked 
up, nor regarded what was said. 

Today we see some who use muck-rakes, gathering all 
the trinkets of life, not knowing what to do with them 
after they have been accumulated. When such people 
die, perhaps these things will be injurious to those to 
whom they are left. The pilgrims had sound minds, but 
the man who was raking for sticks and straws and dust 
had an unsound mind. More or less we see all around us 
the spirit of an unsound mind, overlooking the things that 
are really valuable and grasping at trifles. 

As we develop the spirit of a sound mind we get to see 
what things are valuable, and we look at other things as 
being insignificant. More and more we desire the heavenly 
things. But the world thinks, "Look at this dust! Is 
not this fine straw?" or what not. They say, "Get some 
of these sticks and worm-eaten fruits that we have here." 
But what they strive for is all illusion. 

They say of us that we are of unsound mind because 
we care for the better things, the heavenly things. So 
they said of Jesus, "He hath a devil and is mad." (John 10:20.) 
As the Apostle said, "Whether we be beside ourselves, 
it is to God." (2 Cor. 5:13.) Others think it 
strange that we run not to the same excess of riot. (I Peter 4:4.) 
And it is true today that whoever will live 
godly will be misunderstood, slandered. (2 Tim. 3:12.) 



But it is for us to show our courage, our faith and our 
loyalty to the Lord and to manifest His Spirit "of power 

R5095 : page 281 

and of love and of a sound mind." (2 Tim. 1 :7.) The 
manifestation of His Spirit will help those who are His to 
become "more than conquerors." (Romans 8:37.) Thus, 
even if we are not helping the world, we build one another 
up in our most holy faith.— Jude 20,21. 

The spirit of a sound mind is a most wonderful manifestation 
of the Holy Spirit in the Lord's people. It gives 
them much advantage every way over the remainder of 
mankind. It sees in the present life opportunities for the 
attainment of character. It broadens and deepens the 
mind along all good lines. It makes one less touchy in 
respect to his own rights, privileges and preferences, and 
more considerate of the rights and feelings of others. 

The spirit of a sound mind makes one's judgment 
clearer, truer, more trustworthy than before, for it impels 
him to accept the instructions of the Word of God in 
respect to what he should and should not do, and to reject 
his own faulty judgment. The meek will He guide in 
judgment. Whatever may be the imperfection of mind and 
body resulting from the fall, those who receive the spirit 
of a sound mind are thereby made purer, kinder, gentler, 
less selfish and more thoughtful in regard to others. Those 
who are thus rightly exercised will develop the spirit of 
love increasingly until that which is perfect shall have 
come and that which is in part shall have been done away. 
-I Cor. 13:10. 



R5095 : page 281 

"IT IS I, BE NOT AFRAID" 

-MARK 6:45-56. -OCTOBER 6.- 

Text:— "Straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be 
of good cheer, it is I; be not afraid."— Matt. 14:27. 

TODAY'S STUDY shows us how interested 

people become in anything that will relieve 

them of sickness and ailments, which cause 

our race to be, as St. Paul described it, "a 

groaning creation." The crowds continued 

to gather wherever Jesus went, partly for 

hearing, partly from curiosity, and partly 

because the Message that He gave was one 

of consolation, comfort, hope. He was not 

forever blaming them for not keeping the 

Law, but, on the contrary, He was continually expressing 

sympathy for them in their weaknesses, and helping them 

out of them and encouraging them to "go and sin no 



more. 

After the feeding of the five thousand, Jesus urged His 
disciples to leave Him and to return to the other side of 
the Lake. He dismissed the multitude and went into the 
solitude of the hills for prayer. It is noteworthy that 
nearly all of the Great Teacher's prayers that are recorded 
are simple and brief. Whenever He wished to make long 
prayers He went to the Father alone, by Himself. Undoubtedly 
this would be a good example for all of His 
followers to observe. Long prayers are frequently a 
weariness to the flesh, and so far as we can discern are 
likely to contain many vain repetitions, or to be attempts 
to instruct the Lord and counsel Him concerning matters 
which He understands much better than do any of His 
children. 

WALKING ON THE SEA 

The disciples in their fishing boat experienced contrary 
winds and found the rowing toilsome. In the night 
they saw what they supposed to be an apparition, a spirit 
manifestation in human form, walking on the water, and 
apparently intending to pass by their boat. They cried 
out, for all saw it and felt troubled. Then they heard a 
voice saying, "It is I, be not afraid." Jesus got into the 
boat with them, and the wind ceased, to their amazement, 
for they had already forgotten the lesson of the previous 
afternoon— the feeding of the five thousand with the five 
loaves and two fishes. 

In addition to seeing in this a further manifestation 
of Divine power operating through the Redeemer, we 
may see a further suggestion of a spiritual lesson. No 
doubt, after the Master's ascension, the disciples felt 
themselves very much alone in the midst of a contrary 
people, and found progress difficult and all of their experiences 
stormy. No doubt it helped them to look back 
to this occasion and to remember the Master's ability to 
come to them on the troubled seas, and how His coming 
brought peace and quiet. 

Thus their hearts may have been led to look for Him 
who instructed them, "I will never leave nor forsake 
thee;" and again, "Lo, I am with you alway, even to the 
end of the Age." And this precious lesson still holds 
good for all who are truly the Lord's people— all who 
have made a Covenant by sacrifice with the Lord, all who 
have presented their bodies living sacrifices through the 
merit of Jesus. He is with them continually, to sanctify 
to them their deepest distress. 

"LORD, SAVE, OR I PERISH!" 

St. Matthew gives an additional feature of this lesson 
not recorded by St. Mark. He tells us that when St. 
Peter learned that it was Jesus who walked upon the sea, 
he requested the Lord to sanction his walking on the water 
to Him. The Lord consented, and St. Peter had the 



wonderful courage to make the effort. Had his faith 
continued, doubtless he would have been sustained, but 
the Lord's rule with His people seems to be, "According 
to thy faith be it unto thee." We are not to encourage 
credulity in ourselves or others, but we are to remember 
that faith which has a true foundation is very precious in 
the Lord's sight. 

In St. Peter's case it was entirely proper that he should 
attempt to go to the Lord, because the effort had been 
sanctioned. It would have been credulity for him to have 
supposed himself able to walk on the water, without the 
Lord's sanction and invitation. But when he saw the 
boisterous waves his faith failed, he began to sink; and 
then it was that he cried, "Save, or I perish!" How true 
it is of all God's people that like St. Peter they would 
like to do some wonderful thing to show their faith in 
the Lord! And how like St. Peter's are their experiences, 
often! They would utterly fail did not the Lord interpose 
for their rescue. However, as the Lord found no 

R5096 : page 281 

fault with St. Peter for his effort, we are bound to admire 
the degree of faith and courage which he manifested. 

ST. PETER THE TEACHABLE 

Much has been said respecting St. Peter's rashness 
and the difficulties he repeatedly got into. The criticism 
is surely to some extent justified, but we are to remember 
that the Master loved him greatly, partly on account of 
his zeal, partly on account of the energy which on several 
occasions got him into difficulty. One thing should always 
be remembered in his favor, that although he was 
the oldest of the Apostles he was evidently one of the 
most meek and most teachable of them all. Of his mistakes 
he made a mirror, and thus, learning to know himself 
more particularly, he was safeguarded through the 
many dangers natural to his temperament; and he stands 

R5096 : page 282 

forth in the Scriptures as one of the very noblest of the 
Apostles. The wisdom of St. Peter's course is illustrated 
in a little verse published in the New York Sun. 

THE THREE FAULT FINDERS 

The poem tells that the three fault-finders were provided 
each with a crystal, to do with as he pleased; and 
this was the result: 

"The fool contrived of his a lens, 

Wherein, to gloating eyes, 
The smallest blot that could be found 

Was magnified in size. 



"The just man made of his a pane, 

All clear without a flaw; 
Nor summer sun nor winter rain 

Affected what he saw. 

"The wise man pondered long and well 

How best to search, to aid, 
Then, taking up the crystal given, 

Of his a mirror made." 

There must have been a great strain continually upon 
the Great Teacher and Healer, for He was continually 
expending His vitality in both directions at once. In 
healing the sick, virtue, or vitality, went out from Him 
and He healed them all, we read. And all His public 
teaching cost considerable vitality, especially when He 
addressed large multitudes. Thus was fulfilled in part the 
saying of the Prophet respecting Him, "Himself took 
our sicknesses and bore our infirmities." 

Nevertheless, we find Him ever ready, ever alert about 
the Father's business, and looking after the welfare of, 
and instructing all who gave evidence of being, or of ever 
becoming, children of God. 

When the ship reached shore in the morning, the 
people recognized Him and ran round-about that whole 
region, and began to carry about on beds those that were 
sick, to where they heard Jesus was. And wheresoever 
he entered, into villages, or into cities, or into the country, 
they laid the sick in the public places, and besought 
Him that these might touch if it were but the corner of 
His garment; "and as many as touched Him were made 
whole." 

The healings which our Lord gave forth during His 
ministry were physical. As we have already seen, none 
but Himself had yet received of the Holy Spirit in its 
begetting power. But did we not hear His word saying, 
"Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the Age"? 
And have not God's consecrated people throughout the 
past eighteen centuries realized a blessing also— a spiritual 
blessing— as Jesus passed their way, as they came to 
a knowledge of Him, as by faith they reached out and 
touched the hem of His garment, realizing Him to be 
the Son of the Highest, the Redeemer of the world, the 
Head of the Church which is His Body, and shortly to 
be the King of Glory, reigning for the blessing of all the 
families of the earth? 



R5096 : page 282 

GOD'S WORD NOT MAN'S 
-OCTOBER 13.-MARK 7:1-13.- 



"For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness 
and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit."— Rom. 14:17. 

THE STUDY TODAY shows that the Pharisees 

of eighteen centuries ago, while professing 

to keep carefully the Divine Law, 

and while even boasting of faithfulness in 

this respect, had gradually gotten away 

from God's Word and become followers of 

human tradition. It is so with the Jews 

today. Although they read the Holy Scriptures 

of the Old Testament it is regarded 

as a sealed Book which they cannot understand; 

instead of endeavoring to comprehend it they study 

and shape the course of their lives by the Talmud. The 

latter admittedly contains both wise and unwise statements, 

sound and foolish advice; but according to it the 

orthodox Jews shape all their religious sentiments. 

And surely the same is true of Christians today. The 
Bible is the recognized Authority and Standard, but each 
denomination of Christians has its own theory, its own 
proof-texts, its own catechism. When the Bible is read 
the gloss or interpretation of the accepted creed is before 
the mind and veils it. Thus it is that with Bibles in our 
hands and with reverence in our hearts Christians are 
divided into six hundred different sects, with very little 
prospect of coming together, because each one insists 
upon using his own creedal spectacles in the study of the 
Bible. 

If truly wise would not all Christians cast aside and 
destroy these creed spectacles which have so long separated 
us, given false coloring to various passages of 
God's Word and confused our minds in general? Would 
it not be following Heavenly counsel and Heavenly wisdom 
to take a different course and to begin a study of 
the Word of God afresh in the light which shines from 
one page upon another? We surely will all agree to 
this theoretically; shall we not put our agreement and resolution 
into practice? 

EATING WITH UNWASHED HANDS 

The Pharisees would have liked nothing better than 
to have had so very able a person as Jesus to be one of 
their number— to conform to their usages and thus to 
mark them with His approval. They could not fail to 
note the lofty character of His teachings along the lines 
of Justice, Mercy and Love. They could have forgiven 
Him for some of the truths which He uttered and made 
them wince, if only He had enforced their formalism. 
As it was, He really suited nobody. To the impure He 
was too pure; to those of loud, hypocritical profession 
He was too sincere; to the worldly-wise He was too 
frank, too truthful. 

In this lesson the Pharisees inquired why the followers 
of Jesus were not instructed along the lines of the Talmud 



—to be very careful to always wash their hands before 

eating, as a religious duty. We may be sure that 

Jesus set His followers no example of filthiness or impurity. 

Indeed, we know that in proportion as truth 

enters the heart it has a cleansing and purifying effect 

upon the entire life, upon the whole person— mental, 

moral and physical. What the Pharisees meant was a 

ceremonial washing, whether the hands were clean or 

unclean— to make a formal washing a part of their religion. 

This was what Jesus objected to. He could not 

so teach because it would have been ceremonial hypocrisy. 

As He said on another occasion, These customs of the 

Pharisees, of wonderful washings of their persons and 

of the vessels in a perfunctory and ceremonial way, consumed 

much of their time and were burdensome upon the 

poor, who had no servants to do these things for them, 

and not doing them were considered unclean, unholy, out 

of accord with the Divine arrangements, not true Jews. 

Answering the Pharisees on these points, Jesus said 
to them, You are the holy people mentioned by Isaiah 
the Prophet saying, "This people seeketh Me with their 

R5096 : page 283 

lips, but their heart is far from Me. But in vain do ye 
worship Me, teaching for doctrines the commandments 
of men," for ye leave the commandments of God and hold 
fast the traditions of men. 

Jesus gave them an example of how they neglected 
the Divine commandments while giving so much attention 
to ceremonial washings, which were commanded, not 
of God, but of the Talmud. The illustration was that the 
Mosaic Law commanded that father and mother should 
be honored and that he that spoke evil of either of them 
should be put to death. But this command had been 
changed by the Talmud and any man might be free from 
his parents by consecrating himself and substance to God 
and religious uses. Having done so, according to the 
Talmud, he was freed from all obligations to his parents. 
Thus they had made God's direct commandment on this 
subject null and void, which they had no right to do. 

This was the conflict between the teachings of Jesus 
and the teachings of the Pharisees. Both claimed holiness 
and strict observance of the Divine Law, but Jesus 
held to the Word of God and rejected the Talmud, the 
traditions of the Elders, and the Pharisees neglected the 

R5097 : page 283 

Word of God and held to the traditions. What are we 
as Christians doing today? "Let us hold fast the faithful 
Word," "The Word of God, which is able to make us 
wise." Let us search the Scriptures daily and critically, 
and let us abandon everything which conflicts therewith. 

WHAT IS GOD'S KINGDOM? 



Our text is frequently misunderstood to mean that 
God's Kingdom consists in righteousness and peace and 
joy in the Holy Spirit. The context shows that this is 
entirely a wrong thought. Let us follow the context 
and see. 

Let us bear in mind what we have already seen respecting 
the Kingdom mentioned in the Bible— that it is 
the glorious reign of Messiah for a thousand years, for 
the uplift of the human family, and that during that reign 
the Church will be associated with Jesus in His Kingdom 
glory, power and honor. The call of this Gospel Age is 
to select this Bride class and to develop them and make 
them "meet for the inheritance of the saints in light." 

We have seen that in the present time these called out 
ones— called to be the "Bride, the Lamb's Wife"— are 
the Kingdom in embryo or in an undeveloped state. 
These probationary members of the Kingdom, the Scriptures 
tell us, are not under the Law of Moses, expressed 
in the Ten Commandments; they are not hoping for 
eternal life through them, but they are under Grace- 
under a gracious arrangement which God has made for 
them through the merit of Christ's death. St. Paul points 
out that while these are free from the various commands 
of the Jewish Law they are not without Law, but under 
the great Divine Law, as members of the Body of Christ. 
He says that thus we, as New Creatures, do fulfil the real 
meaning of the Divine Law when we "walk, not after 
the flesh, but after the spirit," even though we be not able 
to walk fully up to the spirit of the Law because of weaknesses 
of our flesh. It is the New Creature, the desire, 
that is being judged and not the flesh. 

Accordingly the Gentiles who came into membership 
in the Body of Christ were not required to conform themselves 
to the demands of the Jewish Law. For instance, 
a Jew, according to the Law, might not eat fish that had 
no scales, mackerel, etc., neither might he eat rabbit meat, 
nor pork, etc., and in a variety of other ways he was restrained 
and limited in his eating and drinking. But none 
of these restraints apply to Christians who had come from 
amongst the Gentiles and who never had been under the 
Law Covenant. 

In our text St. Paul urges that these liberties respecting 
what they might eat and drink were not to be esteemed 
as the real blessings of this embryo Kingdom class 
in the present life. Far from it; the real blessings of this 
class consisted in their enjoyment of righteousness and 
peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. Transformed by the 
renewing of their minds, they had come to appreciate and 
love righteousness and truth; good things rather than evil 
things; pure things rather than impure things; spiritual 
things rather than earthly things; their citizenship now 
was in Heaven instead of being an earthly one. They 
had come to appreciate "the peace of God which passeth 
all understanding," and its rule in their hearts was one of 
the grand blessings which they enjoyed as members of 



the embryo Kingdom class. 

"There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." 
"The wicked are like a troubled sea which cannot rest." 
Our heavenly peace and confidence in God are the result 
of our union with Christ as members of His Kingdom 
class. This we prize and not specially the privilege of 
eating pork or some other thing forbidden to the Jews. 
Joy in the Holy Spirit— fellowship with the Father and 
with the Son and with all who possess the spirit of righteousness 
—is the blessed privilege of every member of 
the embryo Kingdom class, every member of "the Church 
which is the Body of Christ." 

Thus the Apostle would have his hearers place a 
proper valuation upon the various favors which they had 
received, so that if the interests of the Lord's cause or 
the interests of the brethren in Christ should ever require 
them to forego their liberties in respect to food and drink, 
they would count such self-denials for Christ's sake and 
for the brethren's sake as nothing— as sacrifices they 
could make with joy, because they would not interfere 
with or disturb in the least the real value of the blessings 
and privileges which are ours in Christ. 



R5091 : page 283 

"A CUP OF COLD WATER" 

"The Lord of the Harvest walked forth one day, 

Where the fields were white with the ripening wheat, 

Where those He had sent in the early morn 
Were reaping the grain in the noonday heat. 

He had chosen a place for every one, 

And bidden them work till the day was done. 

"Apart from the others, with troubled voice, 
Spake one who had gathered no golden grain: 

'The Master hath given no work to me, 
And my coming hither hath been in vain; 

The reapers with gladness and song will come, 

But no sheaves will be mine in the harvest home.' 

"He heard the complaint, and He called her name: 
'Dear child, why standest thou idle here? 

Go fill the cup from the hillside stream, 

And bring it to those who are toiling near; 

I will bless thy labor, and it shall be 

Kept in remembrance as done for Me.' 

"Twas a little service, but grateful hearts 

Thanked God for the water so cold and clear; 

And some who were fainting with thirst and heat, 
Went forth with new strength to the work so dear; 

And many a weary soul looked up, 

Revived and cheered by the little cup." 



page 285 
