From Our Readers
Criminal Injustice  I want to share with you how I used an older issue of Awake! My daughter was held at gunpoint in a carjacking. The thief was convicted, but as to the charge of his having used a gun, evidence was disallowed. Disheartened, I was permitted to speak on my daughter’s behalf at his sentencing. Earlier, I had come upon the article “Does Crime Pay?” (August 8, 1985) Using the material in the box entitled “The Criminal Injustice System,” I told the court that “the criminal has a choice​—to commit crime or not. The victim has no choice.” The thief was sent to jail, receiving the maximum sentence.
D. M., United States
Neglectful Parents  Thank you so much for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Don’t My Parents Show More Interest in Me?” (November 8, 1992) Tears ran down my face as I read it. A couple of months ago, I was feeling neglected, so I rebelled. I guess I had a lot of anger and hurt inside. The article really made me think about what happened. Thank you for caring enough about us young ones to give us this vital information.
N. C., United States
The article reached the heart of my ten-year-old daughter. As a single parent, I try so hard, but I don’t always have the energy and patience to deal with the stress that I have to face daily. After my going over the information with her, she better understood what I feel at times. We both cried, and she was able to realize that I do love her.
C. L., United States
Top of Europe  I want to thank you for the article “To the Top of Europe by Rail.” (December 8, 1992) It encouraged me to visit the Jungfraujoch, near Interlaken, Switzerland. At the altitude of 11,332 feet [3,454 m] above sea level, I could better appreciate the beauty of God’s handiwork and the immensity of the snowcapped mountains.
P. L., Italy
Music  I am 12 years old. The article “Young People Ask . . . What’s Wrong With My Music?” was very helpful. (February 8, 1993) I too have been unable to turn my music off, even listening to it while I study. I also have several compact discs that aren’t too good, and I have clashed with my parents many times over them. When I read how listening to music influences me, I felt as though my heart was being stabbed with a knife. I am now considering getting rid of any disc that features bad things. Thank you very much.
M. H., Japan
I found the article extraordinarily topical. It is incredible how droves of youngsters let themselves get involved in rebellious songs and styles of clothing. These articles are truly a safeguard for us Christian youths.
M. M., Italy
The article presented rap music in a very unfavorable light. Now and again I get together with other youths, and we play rap. True, there are songs with bad lyrics. But to generalize about rap music is not correct.
B. R., Germany
The article did not make a blanket condemnation of rap as a musical form. Rather, it warned against getting involved with any form of music whose overall message and spirit does not meet Bible standards. The evidence clearly shows that rap music has woeful shortcomings in this regard.​—ED.

