Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind
1 “The great day of Jehovah is near. It is near, and there is a hurrying of it very much.” (Zeph. 1:14) Zephaniah and the other 11 so-called Minor Prophets lived with Jehovah’s day in mind. Considering their inspired writings at our Congregation Book Study as outlined in the book Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind will help us to prepare for that fear-inspiring day.​—Zeph. 2:2, 3.
2 Unique Features: Rather than focusing on symbolic meanings or verse-by-verse explanations of these 12 prophetic books, the Jehovah’s Day book explains how these inspired writings apply to real-life situations that we face every day. It emphasizes why a sense of urgency should permeate all our decisions and actions. Matters of family life, relationships with fellow believers, entertainment choices, our ministry, and career decisions are brought into focus.
3 Section 1 of the book acquaints us with the 12 prophets and their writings. Who were they? What do we have in common with them? Section 2 focuses attention on Jehovah and his qualities. What insight into Jehovah and his personality do these prophets provide? Section 3 concentrates on our own conduct and dealings. How may we daily please God in practical ways? Section 4 explains how to live joyfully while keeping in expectation of Jehovah’s day.
4 Plan Now to Benefit: Resolve now to benefit fully from the study of the Jehovah’s Day book, which will begin the week of August 4, 2008! Aim to be present at the Congregation Book Study every week. Prepare each lesson carefully, looking up the scriptures to see how they relate to the material presented. Meditate on the information by asking yourself, ‘How can I apply this information at home, at school, at work, in my ministry, and in my dealings with my Christian brothers and sisters?’ Come to the book study prepared to comment so as to share in an interchange of encouragement.​—Rom. 1:12.
5 May our consideration of the Jehovah’s Day book prepare us now, so that we may “hold up under” the “great and very fear-inspiring” day of Jehovah. That day is indeed close at hand!​—Joel 2:11.

