Preparation​—A Key to Effective Return Visits
 1. In what way was the early Christian ministry to be expanded?
1 Jesus thoroughly prepared his disciples to be effective preachers of “the good news of the kingdom.” (Matt. 4:23; 9:35) The training took place in the confined area of Palestine. However, before ascending to heaven, Jesus made it known that the Christian ministry would be widely expanded so as to “make disciples of people of all the nations.”​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
 2. What is involved in obeying Jesus’ command ‘to make disciples’?
2 That work would involve calling back on individuals who manifested interest in the good news of God’s Kingdom and teaching them to observe all the things that Christ commanded. To make such effective return visits, we need to be well prepared.
 3. Even on the initial call, how might you open the way for a return visit?
3 Plan Ahead: Some publishers endeavor to raise a question at the end of the initial call and then promise to return and discuss the answer. They have found that making reference to information in the Bible Teach book on the return visit has helped them lead right into a Bible study.
 4. Why should we not delay making a return visit until we have new issues of the magazines?
4 Having just one set of magazines for each month does not mean that we should wait until we receive the next month’s issues before calling back. It may be possible to stimulate interest by discussing information featured in the magazine the person already has.
 5. Of what benefit is having an objective in mind?
5 Have an Objective: Before going back, take a few minutes to review your records and to determine what you want to accomplish. For example, discuss a point from the publication you left previously. Or leave additional literature that relates to a prior conversation. If you raised a question the last time, your objective will surely include answering that question. When highlighting a scripture that establishes a point being made, endeavor to read directly from the Bible.
 6. What is our goal in making return visits?
6 Our Goal: Of course, our goal is to start a Bible study. One brother offered a Bible study on a return visit, but the man refused. The brother returned with the latest magazines and said, “While we are here, we are answering one Bible question for people today.” After obtaining the man’s comments, the brother read a scripture and an applicable paragraph from a publication used for Bible studies. That led to a regular Bible study.
 7. How has being well prepared helped you to get a Bible study started?
7 Taking the time to prepare for return visits is well worth the effort. Our joy will be increased, and we may have the privilege of assisting a “rightly disposed” one on the road to life.​—Acts 13:48.

