Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting July 14
Song 126
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the July 1 Watchtower and the July Awake!
15 min: Do You Have “Freeness of Speech”? Talk based on the May 15, 2006, Watchtower, pages 13-16. Emphasize the importance of preaching with boldness.
20 min: “Live With Jehovah’s Day in Mind.”a Point out unique features of the publication. Review the schedule for the book study and the instructions found on page 3 of this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to be regular in attendance and have a full share in commenting. Briefly interview one or two publishers who are known for preparing well for the meetings, and ask them what motivates them to do so.
Song 147
Week Starting July 21
Song 95
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Remind audience to bring the August 1 Watchtower and the August Awake! to the Service Meeting next week and to be prepared to discuss appropriate presentations for the local territory.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Preparation​—A Key to Effective Return Visits.”b Include a four-minute soliloquy of a publisher preparing for his return visits. He reviews his records and determines that he needs to call on two individuals this weekend. Then, for each of the two, he considers what he discussed in the past, determines his objective, and prepares how to accomplish his objective. For one, he prepares to offer a Bible study. For the other, he prepares to cultivate the interest by using a suggestion from paragraph 5.
Song 189
Week Starting July 28
Song 6
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for July. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Mention the literature offer for August, and have one presentation demonstrated.
15 min: Maintaining Our Sense of Urgency. Enthusiastic talk based on the December 15, 2006, Watchtower, pages 18-19, paragraphs 17-21.
20 min: Prepare to Offer the Current Magazines. Audience discussion. After giving a brief overview of the August Awake! and the August 1 Watchtower, ask the audience which articles may appeal to people in the territory and why. Invite audience to mention specific points in articles they plan to feature. What question could be asked to start a conversation? Which scripture in the article could then be read? Using one of the sample presentations from Our Kingdom Ministry or a presentation suggested by the audience, demonstrate how each magazine might be offered.
Song 106
Week Starting August 4
Song 222
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Are Your Children Prepared for Their Unique Territory? Talk and audience discussion. Outline some of the challenges Christian youths face at school. Explain how parents and their children may use the Watch Tower Publications Index to locate helpful information. Give some examples. (See main heading “Schools,” subheading “experiences.”) Invite those in the audience who were raised in Christian households to comment on how their parents prepared them to face challenges and apply Bible principles at school. They may also mention school reports they prepared on subjects found in Awake! Have them explain how working their unique territory served as a protection.
20 min: “We Are Overturning Strongly Entrenched Things.”c Invite audience to comment on how their Bible teacher patiently helped them to let go of strongly held false religious beliefs.
Song 83
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

