Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., MAY 1, 1918 


No. 9 


ZION'S TRIUMPH NEAR 

"Cast not away therefore your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward. For ye have need of patience, that, after 
ye have done the will of Qod, ye might receive the prorrtise" — Hebrews 10:35, 36. 


With bated breath and joyful heart the watchera in Zion 
beihold the closing of the harvest. Next the dark night, followed
 shortly by the glorious sunburst of everlasting happiness
. Wonderful is the present privilege of the faithful watchers
. The graduating test is now upon the church. 

By the words of our text St, Paul clearly proves that 
patience (cheerful endurance) is the final test, and that this 
test must come after we have done the will of God. What, 
then, has been and is the will of God for the members of Zion 
in the closing days of the age? During the past forty years 
the harvest of the age has been in progress. That the harvest 
began in 1878, there is ample and convincing proof. The end 
of the harvest is due in the spring of 1918. During the period 
of the harvest the will of God concerning his people finds 
expression in the words of the Master: 'In the time of harvest
 I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the 
tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather 
the wheat into my barn." (Matthew 13:30} In that time, 
according to nia word, he has sent forth his messengers with 
a great sound of a trumpet, to gather his elect from one end 
of heaven to the other. (Matthew 24:31) Again God expressed
 his will concerning his people, saying, "Gather my 
saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant 
with me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5) Again Jesus expressed 
the will of out Father: "Thrust in thy eicfcle and reap; for 
the time is come for thee to reap ; for the harvest of the earth 
[order-loving people] is ripe." — Revelation 14:15. 

The sickle here mentioned is the message of truth; thrusting
 it in means to send out the truth to those who hunger for 
it. Again God expressed his will concerning the called ones 
when he commissioned them to preach the good tidings to the 
meek, to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to 
the captives, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord and 
the day of vengeance of our God (Isaiah 61:1-3); and that 
this vengeance should be declared against Babylon. (Jeremiah 
51:6) Jesus makes it clear that the latter part of the work 
of the harvest is the gathering of the vine of the earth. (Revelation
 14:18) If, then, we see these things fulfilled and we 
have joyfully participated in the work o«f their fulfillment, we 
have been doing the will of God; and it is after thus doing 
his will that we moist cheerfully endure "before receiving the 
promise. 

HOW FULFILLED 

It is doubtless true that every saint this side the vail who 
has a knowledge of present truth came to such knowledge 
of God's plan since 1878 — the opening of the harvest work. 
At that time the church nominal was composed of both wheat 
and tares, true and false Christians. During the time of the 
harvest these classes must be separated. In outward appearance
 the two are much alike. The great Master had personally 
instructed that there should be no attempt at separation until 
the harvest time. 

He himself has been present, directing the work of separating
 the two classes; and he has used various ■consecrated instruments
 as his messengers to do this work. The separating 
and gathering work has been accomplished with a sickle, 
which is the message of truth, and which necessarily must 
be understood by the consecrated. The thrusting in of that 


sickle of truth has had the effect of causing all denominations 
or religions systems to bind themselves together in bundles; 
thus uniting to oppose the message of truth. This binding together
 in bundles, according to the parable, must take place 
before the destruction of the tares. That these bundles have 
for some time been bound together cannot be gainsaid. The 
tacit union of the systems is complete, all together composing 
Babylon, mother and daughters. The doom of Babylon is 
sealed and has been announced. God has smitten her with 
plagues (Revelation 16:20, 21); and her destruction will follow
 shortly. 

SEALING OF THE SAINTS 

During the entire forty years of the harvest the sealing 
of the saints progressed. A knowledge and appreciation of 
God's plan has served as both a sealing and a separating 
agency. To those who hungered and thirsted for the truth, 
God gave the satisfying portion; and those who appreciated 
it have been prompt in doing his will concerning them by 
gladly engaging in the harvest work. These heard tae call, 
"Come out of Babylon," and joyfully obeyed, took up the 
trumpet and engaged in sounding forth the message of the 
kingdom. 

The great Master of the harvest, through St. John, shows 
that this sealing is in the forehead and must be accomplished 
-before the storm of destruction breaks, upon Babylon. This 
seems clearly to indicate that every one who will be of the 
kingdom claas must have a knowledge and appreciation of 
God's plan by the end of the harvest. If the harvest has 
ended, then the sealing is complete. The evidence strongly 
indicates that all the saints are sealed. This would mean 
that all the saint3 have been gathered into the "barn" — into 
the condition of separateness from the world. 

Concerning this point, the Laodicean messenger wrote: 

"When this night cometh, when the reapers must cease 
their labors, it will prove that this final work of the Gospel 
age is accomplished; that the elect number of the bride of 
Christ have al] been 'sealed/ and 'gathered' into a condition 
of separateness from the worldly — into the barn condition; 
for God will not permit anything to put an end to his work 
until it is finished. Then all the true and faithful servants 
of God will have been sealed in their foreheads; and, the 
work of the Gospel age being finished, no more can enter into 
that work or reap its rich reward." — C 211, 212. 

"The forehead sealing indicates that a mental comprehension
 of the truth will be the mark of seal which will separate
 and distinguish the servants of God from the servants 
and votaries of Babylon. And this agrees with Daniel's testimony
: 'The wise [of thy peoplel shall understand; but none 
of the wicked [unfaithful to their covenant] shall understand.' 
(Daniel 12:10) Thus the classes are to be marked and separated
 before the plagues come upon rejected, cast-off Babylon
."— C 165, 166. 

PLAQUE OF HAIL 

It has heretofore been shown (Z. 1918-119) that the firstborn
 of Egypt pictured or represented the clergy of Christendom
, claiming to be the first ones of importance in the systems
. The exposition of the prophecies of Ezekiel and Revelation
 in "The Finished Mystery" shows to the world that the 


[6243] 


(132-133) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. V. 


clergy are not what they have claimed and think themselves 
to be. The Bible Students Monthly which contains the 
article on "The Fall of Babylon" is likewise a pointed message 
directed against the same class. In the picture, the angel 
that smote the first-born of Egypt passed through the land 
about midnight; and, as heretofore suggested in The Watch 
Tower, "about midnight" in the antitype would apply to about 
January 1, 1918. On December 30 and 31, 1917, and 
January 1, 1918, approximately 10,000,000 copies of the above 
mentioned issue of The Bible Students Monthly — the message
 against Babylon, and particularly the clergy of Babylon 
— were placed in the homes of the people of the United States 
and Canada. This was like a great hailstorm, and brought 
to the attention of the people the fact that Babylon is not 
whet she claims to be, Kothing has so angeped Babylon as 
this. Twenty-seven years before that "hailstorm," the Laodicean
 messenger wrote: 

" After the truth, which Babylon now begins to regard as 
her enemy, and as calculated to accomplish her destruction, 
shall have become more generally known and widely circulated; 
after 'the hail' has to a considerable extent swept away the 
refuge of lies; and after the now smoldering and menacing 
hatred of the truth is thereby roused to an opposition so 
violent and so general as to effectually stop the further progress
 of the great work in which the saints are engaged," will 
be 'the approximate time of the deliverance or 'change' of 
the last members of the body of Christ."— C 231, 232. 

MANTLE OF ELIJAH 

After Elijah smote the Jordan with his mantle, he crossed 
over with ElisJia; and while the two walked together on the 
otlier side, Elijah was taken up by a whirlwind into heaven. 
Elisha then took up the mantle of Elijah, that had fallen 
from ihim, and went back over the Jordan. It -seems quite 
reasonable that the mantle represented -the message of truth 
which the Elijah class has possessed throughout its journey 
during the harvest period. (Psalm 91:4) Elijah had this 
mantle with Mm all the way from Gilgal to the Jordan. Elijah 
and Elisha stood at the Jordan, talking; then Elijah wrapped 
up his mantle and smote the waters. This seems to explain 
the waiting period from 1914 to 1917, when the smiting of 
the antitypical Jordan began by the message "wrapped up for 
the slaughter." (Ezekiel 21 ;15) "The Finished Mystery" 
contains the message of truth in brief, compact form, specially 
directed against Babylon. It was used particularly from the 
latter part of 1917 to the spring of 1918. 

About the middle of March, 1918, the distribution of "The 
Finished Mystery" was suddenly stopped. The suggestion 
does not seem unreasonable that, "The Finished Mystery" being
 the mantle, the quantity of these printed and not distributed
 will be used by the Elisha class for a second smiting 
of the waters (peoples). 

HAS THE HARVEST ENDED? 

The saints need not be disturbed by the suppression of the 
message against Babylon. This is not man's work, but the 
Lord's work. God nas permitted it to be interrupted for some 
good purpose and will overrule it to his own glory. "The 
Finished Mystery" has been suppressed on the theory that it 
interferes with the prosecution of the war. (Jeremiah, 38:4) 
Doubtless the clergy have represented to officials that it is 
interfering with the war. We cannot agree that the circulation
 of this book in any manner interferes with the war's 
prosecution. Those having to do with its distribution have 
had no intention whatsoever to interfere with the prosecution 
of the wa r. Something, however, must interfere with the 
harvest work. Excessive use of authority may be expected in 
this time of stress. In many places, petty officials of the law 
have arrested, without warrant, some of the faithful Colporteur
 brethren; have thrown them into jail and refused to 
give them opportunity to arrange for bail; and after several 
days have turned them loose with the warning that they 
should not sell any of the Studies in the Scriptures or any 
publications of the Society. Undoubtedly officials have thought 
it absolutely necessary to suppress this message. The Scriptures
 indicate that such a course would be taken. In 18ft 1, 
the faithful messenger of Laodicea, discussing this point 
said : 

"When repressive, restrictive and coercive measures are 
thought to be necessary, such measures will probably include 
not only labor organizations and the publications which advocate
 their rights and wrongs, but also such others as point 
out the plan of God, and the real cause and only remedy for 
the great distress of the nations. Yes, the time is probably not 
many years distant, when repressive measures may be brought 
to bear against every effort of the saints to spread the good 


news of the coming kingdom, all on the plea that the general 
interests and the public welfare demand such a course. 

"Thus would be fulfilled the predictions of the Second 
Psalm, and probably in the end with more 'bitterness than can 
now well be imagined, though it has been partially fulfilled 
upon the Head of the body. — Acts 4:25-20. 

"The same necessity for restricting liberty on political and 
social questions will probably be supposed to apply equally to 
freedom of expression on religious questions which really lies 
at the foundation of all liberty. It would not be surprising 
if a 'strong government* would some day replace this present 
great republic; and it is entirely probable that one common 
standard of religious belief will be deemed expedient and will 
be promulgated, to teach outside of which will be treated and 
punished as a political offense. Such a persecution would 
not only furnish, in the end or harvest of this age, another 
parallel to the harvest of the Jewish age, but would also give 
a wider and deeper significance to the words of the Apostlea 
Paul and John, and to the typical illustrations of the close of 
the earthly career of the true church, as represented in Elijah's 
whirlwind departure and John the Baptist's imprisonment 
and beheading."— B 263, 264. 

THE DOOR CLOSING 

The door which toy the way, our Lord calls a gato — represents
 the way of entrance into a certain condition or privilege
. (Luke 13:24, 25) In this instance it represents entrance
 into the race fox the prize of the heavenly calling to 
joint-beirship with Christ Jesus in his kingdom. That door 
opened at Pentecost. It must be closed some time. It must 
remain open until all the "wise virgins" have been sealed in 
their foreheads. While open, it means that those who enter 
have the blessed privilege of sacrificing and suffering with 
Christ Jesus, which, suffering is not ordinary suffering, but 
such suffering as results from faithfully walking in the footsteps
 of the Master in loving devotion to the cause of righteousness
, and in joyfully defending the truth, which is unpopular
, and in exposing errors which are popular. It means 
a zealous and energetic promulgation of the truth as we 
have opportunity, at all hazards. It means to be true, loyal 
and faithful to the Lord under all conditions, even unto death. 
Such privileges are the greatest ever afforded to any creature
. The ceasing of such privileges to any and all persons 
would seem to mark definitely the closing of the door. "The 
night cometh when no man can work." (John 9:4) That 
time will mark the closing of the door. Discussing this point, 
the last messenger to the church said : 

"There are three ways in which the closing of this door 
might be indicated: first, by a definite Bible statement of the 
exact date; second, by such a reversal of public sentiment with 
reference to the truth that fidelity and zeal in its service would 
no longer meet with opposition, and when suffering with Christ 
for the truth's sake, would be no longer possible; or third, 
by .such a condition of affairs obtaining in the world that all 
opportunity for such service would be effectually obstructed, 
thus leaving no opportunities for candidates to enter into 
the work and to develop and prove their love and faithfulness
 by their activity and endurance. . . . We have a clear 
intimation that the door will be shut in the manner last 
named; for, before the Millennial day breaks, we are forewarned
 of a dark night wherein no man can labor." — C 207, 
208. 

"The closing of the 'door/ in the parable of Matthew 25, 
marks the full end of all opportunity for any, even of the 
'called* ones, thereafter to attain the prize of the high calling. 
It marks the end of all opportunity to prove worthy of the 
prize by faithfulness in the service: all opportunity for 
service will there terminate in the 'night 3 wherein no man 
can work."— C 213. 

WHO IS EESPONSIBLE? 

" 'The morning cometh, and also the night.' The night 
cometh wlien no man can work.' When that is true, you may 
know that 'the door is shut/ that all the wise virgins have 
entered in, that all have been proved, and that all vacancies 
have been acceptably filled."-— C 225. 

"Ere long our work will be cut short — gradually at first, 
and then completely and finally, when 'the night cometh, when 
no man can work/ And the gloom of that 'night' will be 
dispelled only by the Millennial sunrise. When our work is 
done, and that night closes in around us, we may expect not 
only to see the storm-clouds grow much darker, but also to 
hear and to feel the rising 'winds' which will culminate in a 
wild hurricane of human passion — a whirlwind of trouble. 
Then, having finished our appointed work, it will be our part 
to 'stand/ patiently, until our Vshange' comes." — C 230. 

We record here some of the trying experiences through 


[6244] 


May 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(133-134) 


which our brethren are caused to pass because of their faithfulness
 to the Lord. About the 14th day of March, the Attorney
 General instructed the District Attorneys throughout 
the country to prevent the further sale and distribution of 
"The Finished Mystery/' but to arrest no one who had sold 
or distributed the book prior to that date without wrongful 
intent. Notwithstanding this order, local Government officials 
in different places have exceeded their authority. Some of 
the dear friends have been arrested and thrown into jail for 
distributing The Bible Students Monthly, others because 
they were selling the first six volumes of Studies in the 
Scriptures; others, 'because they sold the Scenario of the 
Photo-Drama of Creation. Two were arrested and brought 
into court because they had distributed the Kingdom News. 
After yieir incarceration, some one induced a woman to make 
a false affidavit against one of them. When the case was 
heard, the affidavit was proven to be false and both brethren 
were released. 

EEPOBTS FROM THE FRIENDS 

Following are a few extracts from letters such as have 
been received here every day during the past few weeks: 

» County Jail. In harmony with the Lord's will, 

I am having a quiet season of study and fellowship with him 
here." — Conn. 

« j a ii. We shall bo taken from here by an officer 

to the District Attorney's office for distributing Kingdom 
News."— X. Y. 

"Your telegram received yesterday in the Jail. They 

turned us loose yesterday, after keeping us four days and five 
nights, making us promise to quit selling any of the Studies 

i n County before they would release us. As the 

people are so stirred up there, we thought best to take up the 
work in the new territory in Illinois." — Ind. 

"Wo are experiencing considerable opposition. Thursday 
four sisters went to a neighboring town and distributed The 
Bible Students Monthly — 'Clergy Ordination Proved Fraudulent
.* Just as they got through with the distribution, the city 
marshal, with another, insisted that they go and gather the 
tracts up, and then they had a public burning." — 111. 

"Sheriff's Office. Last night I was placed in jail here for 
selling 'The Finished Mystery.' "— N. Dak, 

"Last Saturday I went to to attend the trial of 

two Colporteurs, and, while looking for them, was arrested. 
They could not prove that I had circulated any of the book3 
since the ruling was made." — Okla. 

"While busily engaged in cutting out the pages objected 
to [in "The Finished Mystery"], an officer of the federal government
 arrested us. My request to show me his warrant was 
completely ignored. We were conveyed to the police station 
and no one was allowed to communicate with us. From the 
press account, next morning, I learned that two of my friends 
came to bail me out, hut were not allowed to see us at all. 
After spending several nights in jail, we were released without
 any explanation whatsoever. Two people told me that the 
officer gave them several books, with instructions to burn them 
when they had finished reading them." — La. 

"We are undergoing great persecution while trying to do 
colporteur work. The officers are gathering up all the Seventh 
Volumes and the question booklets; also The Bible Students 
Monthly, 'The Fall of Babylon.' Wc have been working some 
with the other volumes and the Scenario and 'booklets; but 
hear threats of arrest every day." — Tex. 

" . County Jail. There are three brothers and myself
 in jail here for selling 'The Finished Mystery.' We are 
rejoicing that we have a share in drinking the Lord's cup." — 
Calif. 

"At my brother and I were stopped from selling 

the six volumes of Studies in the Screptubes by a secret 
service man. He told us if we tried to sell any more books 
we would be arrested. We were not selling any Seventh Volumes
." — Wash. 

In Texas two of the pilgrims have been arrested for preaching
 the Gospel, one of them being held in $10,000 bond for appearance
 'before the Grand Jury. Another of our traveling 
ministers was waited upon by the mayor and chief of police 
in a western town and warned not to preach. When he attempted
 to do so, a mob chased him out of town, but captured
 hi9 companion and tarred him. The governor co-operated 
to furnish protection. This mob violence indicates that the 
demons are loose and inhabiting the minds of men, inciting 
them to lawless deeds. 

DEMONS LOOSE 

St. John the Revelator wrote: "And I saw. another angel 
ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God; 
and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom 
it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt 


not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have 
sealed the servants of our God in their foreneads." (Revelation
 7:2, 3) The conclusion to be drawn from this is that 
the demons will be loosed when the saints are sealed and the 
door is closed. The Scriptures clearly show that the demons 
will inhabit Babylon. (Revelation 18:2) It is reasonable to 
conclude that, after being loosed, some little time might be 
occupied by the demons in influencing the minds of the willing
 one3 in Babylon and in the formulation of plana for 
operation against the last members of the body of Christ, and 
that during that time the saints would .be concluding their 
work. These demons will inhabit the members of Babylon 
by taking control of the body and mind, as in the days of 
Noah. They will probably first vent their spleen or vengeance 
upon the members of the kingdom class. 

Conditions which have recently developed in Russia strongly
 indicate that the evil spirits are loose. It is well known 
that the czar of Russia consulted the demons through mediums
. The violent disposition recently manifested by the clergy 
toward some of our brethren indicates that the demons are 
occupying their minds. Wo may expect this violence to increase
 in the near future. Let U3 not be surprised if within a 
short time every avenue for the promulgation of the truth 
is closed. 

A BRIEF RESPITE 

We need not be at all disturbed because the opportunity to 
distribute "The Finished Mystery" has been taken from ua. 
The work is the Lord's. Our business, as nis ambassadors, 
is to deliver the message. In the days to come the clergy 
will not be heard to say that they did not have opportunity 
to know of this message. This message must he delivered to 
Babylon. Only the faithful will engage in delivering it. If you 
have had anv opportunity to do so, rejoice and give thanks to 
the Lord. Tne fiery chariot that took away Elijah represents 
the fiery experiences that would come to the faithful ones 
who persist in making proclamations of the message of the 
kingdom, and who are anxious to enter the fiery chariot and 
be taken home in the Lord's own due time. 

Some, when seeing these fiery experiences — the fiery chariot 
— appearing, have sought a place of safety by ceasing their 
labors in the harvest field and by refusing to speak anything 
concerning Babylon, declining even to mention it in class 
stud^. It seems^that this shows a lack of faith in the Lord. 
Let us have in mind the Apostle's woraa: "Now the just 
[the justified, having the robe of Christ's righteousness] shall 
live by his faith; but if any man draw back, my soul shall 
have no pleasure in him." (Hebrews 10:38) This is the 
time above all times to stand firm and trust in the Lord. 
Even though we see the persecution becoming more violent 
day by day, because of our faithfulness, let us keep in mind 
that he who is on our part is greater than all that can be 
against us. Let us not waver. Let us proceed in the declaration
 of the message of the kingdom as long as the Lord gives 
us any opportunities. "And probably at this juncture the 
Elijah class, persisting in declaring the truth to the last, will 
suffer violence, pass into glory and escape from the severest 
features of the great time of trouble." — C 231. 

The Lord has permitted some of his people to remain to 
this time in order to leave records concerning his kingdom 
that will be valuable to the undeveloped great company class 
and to the world in general. It therefore becomes the privilege
 of all the consecrated, as opportunity offers, to make 
proclamation of the message of the kingdom. The time is 
short. Let every one be active. Let every one who is able 
to give a public address, and who can find an opportunity, 
do so, using the subject, "The World Has Ended — Millions 
Now Living Will Never Die." It is a great privilege to announce
 this message of the kingdom to the poor world in this 
hour of distress. If we are privileged to be the very last 
ones on the earth, to do this, such will be a great honor. "To 
be among those who remain is no dishonor; and to be the 
very last one of those to be 'changed* will be no discredit. 
Several Scriptures show that there is a special work for the 
last members of the body to do on this side the vail, as important
 and as essentially a part of kingdom work as that 
of the glorified members on the other side," — C 235, 

SPECIAL WORK 

Seeing, then, that some avenues of service are closing, let 
us look quickly for some other avenue remaining open. Soon 
all will close. Gradually the work will close down, and then 
suddenly will stop completely. But let us remember that the 
feet members — the last members — have some work to do even 
yet. 

"The mission of the feet, whioh is no insignificant part of 
the kingdom work, will be accomplished. Though their message
 is popularly hated and discredited and they ar« despised 


[6245] 


(134 136) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn N. Y. 


by the world as fools (for Christ's sake) — as all his faithful 
servants have been throughout the Gospel age — yet, before they 
are all 'changed.' and joined to the glorified members beyond 
the vail, they, as agents of the kingdom, will have left euch 
records of that kingdom and its present and future work aa 
will be most valuable information to the world and to the 
undeveloped and over-charged children of God who, though 
consecrated to God, will have failed eo to- run as to obtain 
the prize of our high calling. 

"And let it not be forgotten that all who are of the 'feet' 
will be thus engaged in publi«hang these good tidings and in 
saying to Zion, *Thy God reigneth!' — the kingdom of Christ 
is begun! And all who are true watchmen can at this time 
see clearly, as one man, and can together harmoniously sing 
the song of Moses and the Lamb."—-C 237. 

Keeping always in mind the peat honor conferred upon us 
by being granted the opportunity to make proclamation of 
the kingdom, and rIbo by faith beholding the glories of the 
kingdom in full operation, our faith will he strong and we 
will keep our faces to the enemy and valiantly press on. 
Plainly we can -see the disintegration of the present order. 
Let us rejoice to proclaim to the peoples of earth the blessings
? of the great King, who has come to reign and bring 
righteousness in the earth. Long ago the prophet of the Lord, 
beholding the privilege now enjoyed by the last members of 
the body of Christ on earth, in ecstasy exclaimed: "How 
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringe
-th good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good 
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto 
Zion, Thy God reigneth!"— Isaiah 52:7. 

P AMENDE PERFECTING HBB WOEK 

Let no one slack his hand as long as any opportunity for 
proclaiming the truth is afforded. Remember the words of 
the Apostle: "Ye have need of patience [cheerful endurance], 
that after ye have done the will of God ye might rctive the 
prornise." 'The will of God is that we do all in our power 
to give testimony to his glorious character and coming kingdom
. Having done this, we must wait and behold the salvation
 of the Lord, patiently biding his time to call us home. 
The Apostle Paul, again speaking to the church, says: "Having
 done all, stand." (Ephesians 6:13) This clearly indicates
 that the last of the feet members must-stand a while 
after the door is closed, stand, letting patience perfect Iter 
work ; waiting until the Lord Jehovah shall deliver us. Some 
will be required to stand in enforced idleness for a time, despised
 and rejected of all men. deprived of opportunities to 
labor either for the production of the necessities of life or in 
testifying of the kingdom. Let us remember in thi3 connection
 the words of the Master: u He that shall endure unto 
the end, the same shall be saved." (Matthew 24:13) Nearly 
twenty years ago, the faithful Laodicean messenger wrote: 

"How lonar the Lord may be pleased to let his saints stand 
in enforced idleness so far as his work is concerned, we do 
not know, but probably only long enough to let faith and 
patience* have their perfect work. Here, these virtues will be 


most fully developed, tested and manifested. This test of 
patience will be the final trial of the church. Then 'God will 
help her, at the dawning of [her] morning.' (Psalm 46:6 — 
Leeser) — not the morning which is to dawn on the -world at 
the brightness of her rising with her Lord as the 
sun of righteousness, but at the dawning of her morning, 
in which she is to be changed to the nature and likeness of 
her Lord. Her morning is to precede the Millennia] morning
."— C 230, 23L 

TRIUMPHANT ZION 

Having made a consecration unto death, the child of God 
understands that he must die before he can gain the promised 
prize. "Ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes." 
(Psalm 82:7) The journey of the consecrated has not been 
one strewn with flowers. It has not been one of ease. God 
permitted it to be otherwise, in order that by trying experiences
 a strong, firm, crystalized character might be developed. 
The last of the feet members have come to a very trying time 
in the church's history. Poor, bruised and despised ones; 
misunderstood by all in the world, persecuted, ridiculed, the 
victims of scoffers, charged as violators of the law and denounced
 as the offscourgings of the earth. And yet they have 
pressed along and are still pressing along the naTrow way! 
No one appreciates them; indeed, none except the consecrated 
can appreciate them. But how beautiful they are and how 
wonderful their privilege! They are highly honored and esteemed
 by the Lord himself and greatly loved by him — not 
because of their own merit, but because of faithful, loving 
devotion to duty and to his cause. They are now performing 
their precious mission of proclaiming that the kingdom of 
heaven is at hand. A little while, and their journey will be 
ended, and their "change" shall suddenly come. And that 
"change" will bring them into fellowship and glory and 
power already possessed by those who have preceded them 
into glory. 

Of the last members, St. Paul says: "They shall be caught 
away to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall they ever be 
with the Lord." The term "caught away" is rendered "removed
 by force" by some translators. It seems that some 
of the Lord's dear saints may go down into the very anarchy, 
yet at all times protected by the Lord. When the true church's 
hour seems the darkest, then God will help her. She will 
emerge from the turmoil and distress of earth into glory and 
beauty, in the likeness of her Lord and Head. Triumphant 
Zion she then shall he. Thus will God help Zion in the dawning
 of her morning — in the morning of the eternal day of 
Christ's triumph. 

"Triumphant Zion, lift thy head 
Prom dust and darkness and the dead ! 
Though humbled long, awake at length, 
And gird thee with thy Savior's strength. 

"Yea, soon astonished men shall see 
The laurels of thy victory; 
And thou, with grace and glory crowned, 
May'st lavish blessings all around." 


JESUS TRIUMPHANT OVER DEATH 


June 23.— Mark 16:1-11. 

IMPORTANCE OF OUR LORD'S RESURRECTION — ERRORS OF DARK AGES LEAD TO CONFUSION IN MAN? MINDS — PROOFS OF THE RESURRECTION
 NUMEROUS AND WFJ/L SUBSTANTIATED — THE WITNESSES MOST RELIABLE — OUR LORD'S RESURRECTION CHANGESPURPOSE
 OF HIS VARIOUS APPEARANCES IN DIFFERENT BODIES OF FLESH— HIS EXALTATION "FAR ABOVE ANGELS, PRINCIPALITIES
 AND POWERS, AND EVERY NAME THAT IS NAMED" — HIS GREAT REWARD. 

"Now hath Christ been raised from the dead." — 1 Corinthians 15:20. 
Few seem to realize the importance of the doctrine of the of him as being alive during f Ixat time, and that it was merely 


resurrection of the dead, its bearing upon the entire Gospel 
message. The Apostle indicates how much d^epended upon our 
Lord's resurrection when he wrote: "If Christ be not risen, 
then is our preaching vain, and vout faith is also vain. . . , 
They also who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished." (1 
Corinthians 15:14, 18) The number of the Lord's professed 
followers, both clergy and laity, who fail to appreciate the 
resurrection, yea. who actually do not believe in it, is very 
large. The number of those who really believe in it is very 
small. 

Under the teachings which have come down to us from the 
dark ages, the majority of professed Christians fail entirely 
to realize that death means a cessation of life, ag the Scriptures
 clearly teach. On the contrary the masses of Christendom
 have come to believe that there is no death, that the 
dead are more alive than they were before they died. Applying 
this erroneous thought to our Lord, as well as to others, they 
do not appreciate the Scriptural declaration that "Christ died 
for our sins and rose again on the third day." They think 


his fleshly body that was inanimate in the tomb, and that the 
resurrection which occurred on the third day was not his resurrection
 to life, but merely the reanimation of his dead body. 
Confused thu3 by the errors of medieval times, which were 
also adopted by the reformers and which are engrafted upon 
the minds of the civilized world today, the great majority of 
Christian people cannot appreciate the Scriptural declarations 
in respect to the importance of the resurrection of our Lord^ 
Instead of believing the Apostle's assertion that our faith is 
vain, our preaching vain, if Jesus did not rise from the dead, 
the majority of Christendom would be inclined to say just 
the reverse of this. Hence only those who realize that the 
dead are dead, that until awakened from the sleep of death 
they can have no conscious existence — only these can really 
appreciate the importance of the resurrection. 


CONFUSION THE RESULT OF EBBOB 

Some one may ask: "What difference would it make to 
our beloved dead, what difference would it make toourpreacb- 

[*246] 


May 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(136-137) 


ing, what difference would it make to our faith, if Jesus had 
been left in the tomb?" We reply: If Jesus had not been 
raised from the dead we would have had no basis for the 
preaching of the Gospel; for the Gospel message is that by the 
grace of God the death of our Lord Jesus provided the ransom
-price for father Adam and his posterity, and that therefore
 in God's appointed time Adam and all his posterity will 
be released from the death sentence and be brought back to the 
original perfection of nature lost in Eden. Ohrist Jesu3 as 
the great King of earth is to establish the kingdom of God 
in the earth, and through it to lift from mankind the burden, 
the penalty of death. All that are in their graves shall hear 
the voice of the Son of God and come forth to the glorious 
opportunities of the Millennial kingdom, opportunities for 
reconciliation with God and for release from all the imperfections
 and weaknesses resulting from Adam's fall from perfection
. 

With the fact before us that Jesus had died, but without 
any proof of his resurrection, the preaching of any such gospel
 would be vain preaching, foolish preaching, deception of the 
people. To believe such a gospel under such circumstances 
would be to brand ^ourselves as simpletons; and to have any 
hope that our dead friends could ever be benefited by a dead 
Christ would be absurd. 

Seeing, then, that every feature of the Gospel is dependent 
upon the great fact of our Lord's resurrection, we understand 
why it was that the apostles based everything upon the fact 
that Jesus not only died for our sins a3 our ransom-price, 
but also arose from the dead for our justification, for our 
deliverance from the sentence, the guilt, the penalty, that is 
upon the human family — the death penalty. No wonder that 
our Heavenly Father arranged that we should have so explicit 
an account, so detailed a statement, of everything pertaining 
to our Lord's resurrection! No wonder that the Evangelists 
recorded matterB with such minuteness! No wonder that in 
all the preaching of the apostles this great fundamental truth, 
which was the basis of their own faith toward God, was set 
before the church as being all important! From this viewpoint 
the lesson for today must he of deep interest to all of the 
Lord's people for all time, until the outward manifestations 
of the kingdom shall attest the things which the household of 
faith must now accept by faith. 

PBOOFS OF THE EESUBEEOTIOK 

Summing up the proofs that our Lord arose from the dead 
on the third day we find that they are numerous and well 
substantiated, as follows: 

( 1 ) Our Lord's death could not have been a case of suspended
 animation. The spear-thrust made this fact evident, 
not only because it was a mortal wound, but because it furnished
 proof that our Lord was already dead, for water as 
well as coagulated blood issued from his side. 

(2) The centurion charged with the execution was convinced
 of his death, and so reported to Pilate, the Roman 
governor. 

(3) The request of the chief priests that the stone against 
the door of the sepulcher be sealed and a guard be placed 
around the tomb, so that no one could remove the body and 
then pretend that he had risen, was a further evidence that 
Jesus was dead. 

(4) His friends believed that he was dead, and wrapped 
him in spices for burial. Indeed, in their grief they seem to 
have forgotten his promise of a resurrection, so much so that 
even after he had arisen it was with difficulty that they were 
convinced of the fact. 

(5) The record that the guards dissembled and declared 
that the disciples stole Jesus' body while the soldiers slept, 
being bribed by the Jewish rulers, served at least to prove 
that the guard had been set and that everybody recognized 
that Jesus was dead. 

(6) The tomb in which Jesus was buried was a new one, 
in which no one had previously been buried, so there could be 
no doubt as to the identity of the one who arose. We are 
glad that there is such satisfactory evidence that Christ died, 
and that thus we have further foundation for the Scriptural 
assurance that he died as man's Redeemer. 

TWO VIEWS OP THE BEflURBEOTIOtf 
The view held by the majority of Christian people is that 
our Lord arose from the dead to exactly the same conditions 
that he had during his life upon earth — a man, subject to the 
same limitations that he had before he died. The other view 
is that he arose from the dead a spirit being; but that since 
spirit beings cannot be seen by the human eye without injury, 
our Lord clothed himself, as it were, with flesh and clothing 
in order to be seen by his followers, to demonstrate to them 
that he was no longer dead. The latter we find to be the 
Scriptural view. 


The majority of Christian people are greatly confused over 
the matter of the resurrection; for they believe the doctrines 
received from heathen philosophy during the dark ages, the 
very same doctrines which were communicated by the devil 
to all the heathen 3 namely, that the dead are more alive than 
they were during their life-time. Consequently people often 
wonder why the Scriptures lay such stress upon the resurrection
 and why there should be any necessity for a resurrection
. They properly enough reason that if, as they are usually
 told at the time of the funeral, their dead friend is now 
"free, no longer trammeled with his earthly body," why need 
he be trammeled with it in the future any more than in the 
present, and if some have gotten along for centuries without 
bodies, why should they need bodies thereafter any more than 
before ? 

All this confusion of thought is directly traceable to 
Satan's falsehood, "Ye shall not surely [really] die," and the 
rejection of God's statement, ( ln the day that thou eatest 
thereof, thou shalt surely die." (Genesis 3:4; 2:17) When 
we accept the teachings of the Word of God that the dead 
are really dead, then we perceive that there is no hope whatever
 for them to have any knowledge or consciousness except 
by a resurrection. Then we realize the truthfulness of the 
Scriptural statement that there is neither knowledge nor 
device nor wisdom in the grave, sheol, the death state, whither 
all go.— Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10; Job 14:21; Psalm 146:4. 

The cause of popular confusion on this subject is due to 
the error of supposing that the dead are not dead, and to the 
failure to see that our Lord was "put to death in the flesh, 
but quickened in the spirit," as the Apostle Peter explicitly 
tells us. (1 Peter 3:18) Thank God that with the morning 
light now shining upon the divine record these shadows, so 
confusing to heart and mind, are gradually fleeing away, disclosing
 to us new beauties in our heavenly Father's Word, 
consistencies, harmonies! When permitted to interpret themselves
, the Scriptures* are beautiful, reasonable, irrefutable. 
A COMMON BUT GROSS EEEOR 

The Apostle Peter informs us that Christ was "put to death 
in flesh, but quickened in spirit," as we have said. These 
words being true (we give a literal translation), those who 
declare that our Lord arose from the dead a fleshly being are 
grossly in error. Indeed, it is evident that they have misconceived
 the entire subject of the atonement; for if our 
Lord, a3 the man Christ Jesus, gave himself a ransom, he 
could not be restored to manhood in a resurrection without 
annulling the ransom — taking back the price he had provided 
for the sin of the world. The Scriptural thought i3 that as 
man had sinned and been sentenced to death, it was necessary
 that the Redeemer become a man and give his manhood 
as the ransom-price for Adam and his race. Moreover, the 
Scriptural declaration is not that this ransom-price was 
taken back, but that God raised our Lord from the dead a 
new creature of a new nature, not in flesh, not in human 
nature, but in spirit, a spirit being. 

St. Paul agrees with St. Peter's testimony, that Jesus 
was quickened in spirit, saying that Jesus was "declared to be 
the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, 
by the resurrection from the dead." (Romans 1:4) Again, 
he says in describing the first resurrection: "Thus, also is 
the resurrection of the dead: it is sown in corruption, it is 
raised in incorruption ; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in 
glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is 
sown a natural [animal] body, it 13 raised a spiritual body." 
(1 Corinthians 15:42-45) Elsewhere he declares, that the 
church's highest ambition is to be a partaker in this first 
resurrection, which he denominates "his resurrection," the 
Ghrist-resurrection, the resurrection to spirit conditions, nature
, which came first to our Lord and in which all of his 
body, the church, will have a share. — Philippians 3:10; Revelation
 20:6. 

OTJB LORD'S EESUBBECTION CHAKGE 

This being true, we know that the time when our Lord 
received his spirit body was at his resurrection and not subsequently
* Speaking of our Lord's humiliation and his subsequent
 exaltation at his resurrection, St. Paul assures us that 
Jesus left the glory which he had with the Father and humbled
 himself to become a man; and that in due time he humbled
 himself unto death, even the death of the cross. , "Wherefore
 God hath highly exalted him and given him a name above 
every name." The exaltation came to him in his resurrection 
change. It was true of him then, as in due time it will be 
true of all the members of his body, that he was sown in 
weakness, raised in power; sown a natural [animal, human 1 
body, raised a spirit body. 

This spiritual body- was just as glorious in the moment of 
onr Lord's resurrection as it was at any subsequent time. It 


[6247] 


(13M38) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


had all the powers properly granted to spirit beings in harmony
 with Jehovah God. He was not, as previously, the man 
Christ Jesus merely, but the Lord of glory. As such he was 
able to associate himself with his disciples, either visibly or 
invisibly, to appear as a gardener, as a traveler, as a stranger 
on Galilee's shore, or in any manner he might see fit. He 
was the same glorious being who subsequently appeared to 
Saul of Tarsus, shining as the lightning, imich as the angel 
appeared when the Roman guard was overcome. 

Some may inquire, 'Why did not our Lord appear to the 
women and the apostles in the same glorious manner, with 
shining features?' We answer that to have done so would 
have been to hinder the very object he had in view. How could 
his followers, who were not then begotten of the holy Spirit 
and who consequently were unable to understand spiritual 
things (1 Corinthians 2:14), have understood that a being 
shining like an angel was the Master whom three days before 
they had seen crucified? Even if they could have associated 
the two in some manner, what evidence would there have been 
for others who have lived since then? 

The removal of our Lord's remains from the tomb was an 
essential to the faith of the disciples of that day and of all 
who would believe on him since that time through their word. 
Manifestations of his being alive from the dead were also necessary
 to all these. The instructions which our Lord gave, 
his expositions of the prophecies and his application of these 
to himself, given at that particular time, were necessary as 
a firm foundation for faith. None of these objects could have 
been so well served in any other way than that which was 
adopted. 

THE VARIOUS ACCOUNTS HABMOKIZED 

To harmonize the various accounts of the resurrection we 
must suppose that the women charged with the work of embalming
 our Lord's body lived in different parts of Jerusalem, 
and did not all arrive at the same hour. Mary Magdalene 
arrived first, and finding the tomb empty hastened to tell 
some of the disciples. First she found Peter and afterward 
John, both of whom at once ran to the sepulchetr, while Mary 
probably returned more Blowly, arriving there after the two 
disciples and the other women had gone. It was at this second
 visit that our Lord revealed himself to her. She had been 
weeping, and had stooped down to look through the low doorway
 of the tomb, as if to reassure herself that it was empty. 
Then she saw for the first time two angels in white, who 
inquired respecting her sorrow. Doubtless the angels had 
been there when she was there before, but had not chosen 
to manifest themselves. 

Doubtless holy angels had in charge not only our Lord's 
body, but also the interests of his bereaved followers; and 
now and then some of these appeared as young men, though 
they were not flesh, but spirit beings, assuming fleshly bodies 
for a time, that they might render the service necessary. They 
are said to appeaT, because they could not be seen except as* 
they manifested themselves. In Luke 24:4 these same angels 
appearing as men are said to have been clothed in shining 
garments, so that they might not be understood to be men, 
but might at once be recognized as heavenly messengers. On 
the contrary, when our risen Lord as "a quickening spirit" 
similarly appeared in flesh in order to come closer to his followers
, he did not appear in shining garments, hut in ordinary 
apparel, assumed for the purpose, in order that he might 
have the 'better opportunity for giving the instructions which 
his followers needed. 

IMPORTANCE OF OTJB LORD'S RESURRECTION 

That our risen Lord is no longer flesh, but a spirit being 
with celestial glory, is clearly established by Paul's narrative 


of his own experiences. He explains that it was necessary 
that the twelve apostles should be able to bear witness to 
the fact that Jesu3 had risen from the dead. There could 
have been no Gospel message of hope of divine favor through 
a dead Savior. If Christ had not risen from the dead, who 
would there have been who could establish the Messianic 
kingdom? Who would there have been who could have given 
the church a share in the first resurrection and in the heavenly 
glory? Who would there be who could call forth from the 
tomb the sleeping thousands of millions of Adam's race, 
awakening them to the opportunities of life everlasting 
through obedience to the laws of the kingdom? 

All this the Apostle calls forcibly to our minds, saying, 
'Tf "Christ be not risen from the dead, your faith is vain; 
and all who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished." (1 
Corinthians 15:16-18) From this we see that St. Paul in no 
way shared the views of those who unscripturally claim that 
Jesus, while dead, was really alive, and that the resurrection 
of the dead is a mere formality, quite unnecessary to the 
carrying out of God's plan of salvation. On the contrary the 
divine teaching is that the dead know not anything, and that 
the resurrection of the dead 13 an absolute necessity to future 
life or blessing. 

The fact that Christ has risen from the dead is a guarantee 
of God's power to raise the dead. Additionally, it is a guarantee
 that Jesus accomplished the work which he came into 
the world to do. It proves to us that he must have kept the 
divine law perfectly; else he would not have been worthy of 
a resurrection from the dead. It also proves the value of his 
death, its efficacy as the offset of Adam's sin, and thus as the 
ransom-price for the sin of the world. 

POST-RESURBEOTIOH MANXFE STATIONS 

Our Lord's manifestations in the flesh during the forty 
days subsequent to his resurrection correspond exactly to 
those manifestations which he had made long before, one of 
which was to Abraham, The Logos ate and talked with Abraham
, but the Hebrew thought of him only as a man, because 
the- heavenly guest appeared in human form and ordinary 
clothing. He vanished from Abraham's sight just as he did 
from the apostles' sight and from the sight of Saul of Tarsus. 
When he appeared to Abraham, he was a spirit being, and he 
was a spirit being again after his resurrection, when he appeared
 to his apostles. But in the meantime, he had been 
made flesh for the very purpose of suffering for the unjust. 

Having accomplished the suffering, taere was no further 
reason why our Lord should remain flesh. The heavenly Lord 
of Glory is not flesh, not a man. If he were, he would still 
be "a little lower than the angels." But the Scriptures assure 
us that in his resurrection he ascended "far above angels." — 
Philippians 2:9-11; Hebrews 1:3, 4. 

It was just as easy for Jesus to appear in one form as in 
another, in one kind of clothing as in another. He appeared 
in various forms to impress the double lesson that he was not 
dead and that he was no longer a man. His second appearance
, with the wounds with which to convince St. Thomas, is 
especially noteworthy. Our Lord was ready to give any demonstration
 that was necessary to convince his disciples that he 
had actually risen from the dead; for unless they were so convinced
, they could neither do the work before them nor receive
 the holy Spirit at Pentecost. The holy Spirit was given 
only to those who believed in Jesus, those who accepted the 
fact of his death as the sacrifice for sin and who trusted in 
him as the Savior through whom would come the divine bless - 
ing.^ This impartation of the holy Spirit had the effect of begetting
 them to a new nature, and restoring them to fellowship
 with God as his children and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
their Lord. 


NOT ASHAMED OF THE GOSPEL 

June 30. — quarterly review. 

the reasonableness of st. paul's teachings — the false gospel of the dark ages a travesty on justice and love the 

true gospel, of which the great apostle was not ashamed cross and crown shame and glory— spiritual seed 

of abraham to bless all the eamilies of the earth — the millennial kingdom. 

"/ am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth." — Romans 1 :16 

Whoever has studied the masterly writings of the Apostle 
Paul, constituting so large a portion of the New Testament, 
must surely have been impressed with the reasonableness and 
logic of his mental positions as therein stated. While it is 
true that not many really understand tha Bible, yet even those 
who do not grasp the full import of the Apostle's teachings 
can see enough therein to convince them of the soundness of 
his logic; and the comparatively few, begotten of the holy 
Spirit, who really understand the depth of his writings 


unanimously give his epistles the first place among the books 
of the Bible as well as in general literature. 

Now we ask all who recognize St. Paul's ability and sterling
 honesty of expression: Is it possible to stippose that 
when the Apostle wrote the words which constitute our Golden 
Text he had in mind anything akin to the grosg travesty on 
justice and love which during the dark ages was branded the 
Gospel of Christ, and which has been handed down to us under 
that caption? Could we suppose that the great Apostle had 


[6248] 


May 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(139-140) 


in mind a race not only born in sin and shapen in iniquity, 
but condemned by its Creator to an eternity of torture since 
the time of Adam's disobedience? Gould we suppose that St. 
Paul had in mind for such a race a message that Christ had 
died and that the net result of the Savior's sacrifice for sin 
would affect only about one in ten thousand of earth's thousands
 of millions, to open the eyes of their understanding 
and to lead them from sin to righteousness, to obedience as 
saints with a reward of heavenly glory? 

Even in the Apostle's day he had noted the tendency of 
the adversary to bring false doctrines and to put "another 
gospel" instead of the true one. (Galatians 1:6-9) The 
faithful Paul was not only ashamed of this false gospel, but 
denounced it and forewarned the church to be on guard against 
the wiles of the devil, who would attempt to present himself 
as an angel of light in order to deceive the followers of Christ. 
(2 Corinthians 11:13-15) To what extent Satan has been 
successful as a theologian and teacher in the church let all 
the creeds of the dark ages bear witness! 

MANY ASHAMED OF THE PEEVEBTED GOSPEL 

For many years past, and especially since the beginning of 
the harvest of the Gospel age, thinking people have been perplexed
 and fretted in respect to the creeds of Christendom, 
Both heart and head told them that these creeds are wrong, 
that such a plan as therein outlined, so far from being a 
heavenly one, is earthly, sensual, devilish, far beneath the 
standard of moral honesty and decency among men — not to 
speak of love for our neighbor as for ourselves, which would 
do for others as we would that they should do for us. This 
false gospel contradicts entirely the Lord's statement that as 
the heavens are higher than the earth, so are his ways higher 
than man's ways. — Isaiah 55:8-11. 

Many of our fallen race, alas! are very mean, and are 
impelled 'by very wicked, malicious influences at times. But 
we have yet to find a man or a woman so wretchedly degraded, 
so unjust, so unsympathetic, so unloving, so fierce, so venomous
, so deficient, that he or she would purposely, knowingly, 
intentionally, bring into being a creature, human or brute, 
and then take continual pleasure, year after year, in torturing 
that creature, in witnessing its sufferings, its groans and its 
agonizing cries. Yet by following Satan's delusion foisted 
upon humanity during the dark ages, many Christian people 
have unwittingly ascribed to the God of wisdom, justice, love 
and power a plan which would make him more detestable 
than any other being in the universe. 

Alas, for such a slander of our heavenly Father, for such 
blasphemy of his holy name, we might well mourn in sackcloth
 and ashes for the remainder of our earthly life. But 
he is gracious to us, and does not impute our transgressions 
to us. He remembers that we are fallen dust, and that as a 
race we have come largely under the deceptive influence of 
our adversary, who has blinded mankind with ignorance and 
superstition. It is high time that all mankind awake, that 
they learn to use our God-given reasoning faculties upon religious
 matters, as well as upon the affairs of daily life. 
THE GOSPEL OF OHEIST 
How different from the false gospel of the dark ages is 
the Gospel of Christ! The Bible teaches that man was created 
in God's image and likeness, but that he fell into sin through 
disobedience of his Creator's commands, and so incurred the 
penalty of death, extinction. The Gospel of which the Apostle 
Paul was not ashamed declares that God in mercy provided 
Jesus as our Redeemer. It shows that no member of the 
fallen race could redeem it because each child of Adam was 
himself under the divine sentence of death. It explains that 
Christ's death was the offset to Adam's sentence, and that 
as the whole race suffered through Adam's disobedience and 
sentence so likewise God could with equal justice permdt the 
redemptive work of Jesus to apply not only to Adam but to 
all of his posterity. 

This Gospel of which St. Paul was not ashamed is clearly 
set forth in Romans 5:12-19. The Apostle does not say that 
the penalty upon Adam was eternal torment, but that it was 
death; nor does he say that the penalty upon mankind ia 
eternal torture. He does not say that Christ went to eternal 
torment to pay the penalty -upon man, but that "Christ died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures." (1 Corinthians 
15:3) He does not say that mankind is to be recovered from 
eternal torment, but rather brought back from the dead, that 
"there is to be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just 
and of the unjust." — Acts 24:15. 

Delineating still further the Gospel of which he was not 
ashamed, the Apostle explains that during this Gospel age 
God is gathering out of the world a special elect class to be 
the bride, the Lam'Vs wife, to suffer with him that they may 


be also glorified with him, to die with him that they may 
also live with him. (Romans 8:17) He declares that there 
has been a mystery connected with this subject which is designed
 of God to be understood only by the spirit-begotten 
ones, the faithful. He tells us that this mystery consists 
in the fact that the heavenly Father foreknew and predestinated
 that the great Messiah, the Seed of Abraham through 
whom all the families of the earth are to be blessed, would 
be composed not only of our Lord Jesus, but also of the elect 
church, which symbolically is the body of Christ. — Galatians 
3:8, lb, 29. 

The false doctrines of the dark ages, of which we are greatly
 ashamed, declare that after the elect church shall have 
been gathered, all the families of the earth shall forever be 
condemned and eternally tortured. But the Gospel of which 
the Apostle Paul was not ashamed declares to the contrary, 
teaching that after the elect church shall have been completed, 
its mission as the Seed of Abraham, as the glorified kingdom 
of Christ, the Millennial kingdom under the whole heavens, 
shall be to bless all the families of the earth, to convert 
them, to lift them up out of sin and death conditions, to give 
all the willing and obedient a full opportunity to return to 
divine favor as Adam at first enjoyed it and to an earthly 
Paradise restored. 

WHAT KINGDOM HONOBS WILL COST THE ELECT 
The Gospel of which the Apostle was not ashamed, and 
which he preached faithfully, invited those having hearing 
ears to consecrate their lives to God in order that they might 
be of the elect church. It gave assurance that the cross of 
uhe present time would, if faithfully carried to the end of the 
way, bring glory, honor and immortality, a share with our 
Lord Jesus in his Millennial kingdom and its glorious work 
of blessing all mankind. In view of this sure reward'believers 
were urged to present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy and 
acceptable to God through Christ, and then to suffer with him 
now, to be sharers in his ignominy, shame and death in order 
that in due time they might be sharers with him in his kingdom
 and its blessed work. 

In all of his teachings our Lord kept before the minds of 
the church the fact that the cross and the crown are inseparably
 united in the divine program. "If we suffer with him, 
we shall also reign with him." At the second advent of Christ 
his faithful followers were to receive a crown of glory which 
fadeth not away. (1 Peter 5:4) In their glorified condition 
they are to be the exalted Seed of Abraham with the glorious 
mission of blessing Israel after the flesh and ail the other 
families of the earth. (Romans 11:25-32) Even the casting 
away of the Jews from divine favor upon their rejection of 
Messiah, the Apostle assures us, will eventually be overruled, 
so that Natural Israel will receive mercy at the hands of 
Spiritual Israel. 

In his letter to the Ephesians the Apostle indicates that 
the glories of the church are not to be expected in the present 
time, which is a period of sacrifice and of suffering with 
Christ. The glory i3 to follow, and is to last not only during 
the thousand J-eare set apart for the world's blessing, but 
during the ages to come, throughout eternity. The elect 
church, proved and tested by present disciplines, will be forever
 blest with her Lord, and joint-heir with him in the riches 
of the grace of God. (Ephesians 2:7) 'Therefore the Apostle 
urges us not to cast away our confidence, our trust in the 
promises of God; for in due season we shall receive them if 
we faint not. 

In Hebrews 6:17-20 attention is called to the fact that 
during this trial time of suffering with Christ the oathbound 
promise made to Abraham is to be, to us who believe God's 
word and oath, an anchor to our souls sure and steadfast 
and entering into that* which is beyond the vail. There our 
forerunner is entered for us, even Jesus, who has already been 
glorified as the great an ti typical High Priest, who during the 
Millennial age shall exercise his priestly office for the blessing 
of the world. 

In line with this thought is the assurance that all of the 
faithful of the church of Christ, the "little flock," shall in 
due time be members of the Royal Priesthood, who as enthroned
 priests associated with their royal High Priest, Jesus, 
shall snare with him the blessed privilege of ruling, instructing
 and assisting the world of mankind. Who, we ask, needs 
to be ashamed of such a Gospel 1 This is not the Gospel of the 
dark ages, not bad tidings of great misery for nearly all people
, but the Gospel of tie Apostles, of our Lord Jesus, the 
Gospel which the angel announced to the awe-stricken shepherds
 when he said: "Behold, I bring you glad tidings of 
great joy which shall be to all people," not merely to the Jews, 
not merely to the "little flock/' but eventually to all the 
families of the earth. — Luke 2:10, 11 ; 12:32; Genesis 22:16-18. 


[6249] 


SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


chbist my LIFE; death my gain 

Question. — In the comment on Philippians 1:23, pages 970- 
673 of "The New Creation," the statement ia made that the 
Greek word anatiisai ia used in only one other place in the 
New Testament — in Luke 12:36 — whereas I find the same 
word used in Paul's second letter to Timothy, 4:6, "the time 
of my departure is at hand." Here the thought seems to be 
exactly opposite to that in Volume Six. Kindly explain. 

Answer. — It was Brother Russell's intention to alter the 
comment referred to, that it might conform more clearly to 
all the facts, but evidently failing strength and press of other 
matters interfered. We submit the following, first quoting a 
free translation of the passage involved: 

"For as to life, life to me is Christ. As to death, it is 
gain. Now if to continue to live means fruitful labor I have 
nothing to say as to my preference. I am strongly appealed 
to from both sides. But if I should consult my own real 
desire, it is for the final release and for the being with 
Christ, for that is by far the best thing. But, on the other 
hand, I am assured that, for your sake, it is more necessary 
that I should continue to live; and therefore I know that 1 
shall remain with you, that I may promote your advancement 
and your joy in your faith; so that, in Christ Jesus, your 
joy in me may abound through my being present with you 
again." 

TWO THINGS AND A THIED 

Only two things of importance are mentioned by the Apostle
 up to this point, which might call for an expression of 
preference on his part. The one is a continuance of his life 
as a messenger of Christ, which, as he says, involves considerable
 labor. The other is the rest from his irksome surroundings
 which the sleep of death would afford. He tells 
the brethren that he is really unable to determine which of 
these two is preferable; the former would have advantages 
for the believers and the latter would have an advantage to 
himself, for aside from his privileges of service he felt that 
there was small incentive to continue to live. But there was 
yet a third thing which he did desire, about which there was 
no uncertainty and. which he expressed as a thing much better 
than the undecided subject which he had just mentioned. 

Those who translated our King James version, and many 
others of equal ability, have felt justified in making the Apostle
 say that he had a desire "to depart and to be with Christ." 
There has seemed to them defense for such action in the fact 
that the Greek word rendered "depart" is 'the . same as that 
employed by the same Apostle in 2 Timothy 4:6, where he 
says: 'The time of my departure is at hand." As a matter 
of fact, neither of these passages is translated as accurately 
as could be desired. 

Literally, the Apostle says in Philippians 1:23: "Having 
a desire for the releasing." The Greek word here employed 
iff to (maliisai. Ana as a prefix is exactly correspondent to 
our English prefix re, and lusai is readily recognizable, even 
without the Greek lexicon, as related to our English words 
loose and lease. Analyze is the English cognate form of the 
Greek word analiisai. If a thing is analyzed it means that 
it is broken up into its constituent parts; the component particles
 or elements are released from one another, either in 
one's mind or in fact. But in the literary or general sense, 
the exact English equivalent is release. It will be noted that 
in this vord there is no indication whatever as to what 
course, if any, the released person or object would take after 
the release. The word in itself means neither depart nor return
, though either of these thoughts might attach to the 
word if the circumstances surrounding the release were well 
enough known. 

This word occurs only two other times in the New Testament
, namely, Luke 12-36 and 2 Timothy 4:6. In the Luke 
passage the Master says: "And ye yourselves I be] like unto 
men that wait for their Lord, when he lets loose [analiisee] 
from the nuptial feast." In other word3, 'when he disconnects
 or disengages himself from the social obligations which 
he took upon him when he went to the celebration.' Since 
he was not at home and the circumstance describes the Lord's 
servants as watching for him, it becomes a fair translation 
to use the word return, but it is confusing when compared 
with other usages of that word in the sacred writings. Our 
modern expressions, "when he breaks away/' or "when the 
party breaks up" have a similar thought at the bottom of 
them. 

The other instance in which the Apostle Paul uses this 
word manifestly refers to the time of his death. Here he 
says: "The time of my release [tees analiiseos, release or 
dissolution] is at hand." It would be merely captious defense
 to say that this word is a noun and the other two words 
are verbs, and that thus the significance might be altered, because
 the words are identical in root and meaning. No 
amount of argument could prove to anyone who understands 
the Lord's plan that the Apostle meant return in this instance
, for he had never been dead before. He evidently had 
reference to the time when he would be released from the 
labors and burdens which were his in the flesh and concerning 
which he wrote in another letter: "0 wretched man that I 
am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? (Romans 
7:24) Again, it carries with it the thought of his dissolution
, both socially and physically: the body would return to 
dust and the spirit of life into the care and keeping which 
God had provided, awaiting the day of ''His appearing," 
when the faithful Paul should be raised incorruptible and 
glorious in the first resurrection. 

Coming back to the expression of the 23rd verse of the 
first chapter of Philippians, the Apostle must have had reference
 neither to departing nor to returning directly, but 
simply to "the releasing;" that is, either to hi3 own final release
 from death at the time of the first resurrection, or to 
Christ's return, when loosed from the heavens, which were 
to retain him until that time (Acts 3:21), and probably ambiguously
 uttered as meaning both things, for the two are 
inseparably linked together. Of one thing we are certain: he 
did not in this instance have reference to his own demise, 
because that item is one of the two things concerning which 
he said he had no preference. Had the inspired Apostle desired
 to convey the idea of 'going away or departing elsewhere
' he would have continued to use the word porevomaK, 
as he does one hundred and fifty times in the New Testament. 

But the question might properly arise: 'Why did the 
Lord allow the Apostle to use the same word in 2 Timothy 
4:6 as he does in Philippians 1:23, in the former case referring
 to his death, and in the latter case having evident reference
 to his release from death at Christ's second presence?' 
In response to this we cite the words of our Lord Jesus when 
he quoted from the prophet of old: "By hearing ye shall 
hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see and 
shall not perceive." It will be readily discernible that no one 
not possessing a general knowledge of God's plans and purposes
 would be able to understand and fit into their proper 
places these apparently inconsistent expressions. Plenty cf 
opportunity is left for the wise ones of the earth to stumble, 
plenty of margin left for those Avho prefer to doubt. 

"FOB YOUR INIQUITIES »» 

Question. — 'Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your 
mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? Or which of 
my creditors is it to whom 1 have sold you? Behold, for 
your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions
 is your mother put away!" (Isaiah 50:1) What 
does this passage mean? 

Answer. — It was a custom among the Jews that if a wife 
proved to be undesirable to her husband, she might be given 
a bill of divorcement and put away. ( Deuteronomy 24 : 1 ; 
Matthew 19:6-8} Another part of their law provided that 
if any one got into debt- he and his family might be sold for 
the debt, sold into a measure of service; Unit is, they could 
be compelled to give a certain amount of their time to the 
creditor to make good the obligation, or debt. 

Now, the Lord is saying to these Jews, 'You are sold, but 
I have not sold you; it wa3 not that I was in need. A debtor 
could not claim you for debt, as my household. It is not 
that I became involved and therefore must turn you over, 
lose control over you. I have no creditors, nobody could <x>me 
upon me and take you away. 1 have not put away your 
mother, the Law Covenant: I still recognize the contract. 1 
still agree to all that 1 engaged to do under that Law Covenant
. Therefore, you are not put away illegally. 

'Then what is the trouble' I wish you to think about this, 
Why is it that you are cast off into a foreign land, into 
Babylon? What is the reason I am not showing you favor? 
It is not because I have violated my obligations. The Law 
Covenant has not been put away by me. It is still in force. 
I still recognize it. It is not that you have been sold into 
slavery because I had a debt* Look to the reason. The reason
, I tell you plainly is this: You are the violators of the 
Covenant, you have gone off into sin. I am merely chastening
 you that you may recover yourselves and return to me. 
The sooner you get this proper idea, and chasten yourselves 
and renew your covenant of faithfulness, the better it will 
be for you, and I will be ready to receive you/ 
THE THIEF IN PARADISE 

Question. — Does the Greek text of our Lord's words to 
the thief on the cross, "Verily I say unto thee this day, 'inou 
ahalt be with me in paradise," warrant the change of the 
comma from before "this day" to after it, as suggested in 
Volume Six of Studiks in the Scriptures. 


(140-141) 


[6250] 


May 1. 1918 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(141-142) 


Answer. — Yes. Grammatically, whenever secmeron, "today
," comes after a verb it belongs to that verb, unless it is 
separated from it and thrown into the next clause by the 
presence of the particle hoti, "that." See e. g. Mark 14:30; 
Luke 4:21; 19:0; Matthew 26:34. In the first and last texts 
hoti is translated, hut in the Luke passages it is not, though 
in the Greek text. A Greek concordance will show how continually
 Hoti is used to divide the clauses. The Hebrew idiom 
of "today" attached to the preceding verb is very common to 
Moses. See Deuteronomy 4:26, 40; 6:6; 8:19; 9:3; 11:26, 
28; 30:15, 18, 19, and many others. A translation and an 
interpretation that makes our Lord himself contradict the 
Scriptures, cannot be correct; must of necessity be false. See 
further explanation in Volume Six, pages 667-670. 
THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB 

Question. — Wncn will the marriage of the Lamb take 
place? Who will perform the ceremony? 

Answer. — The marriage of the Lamb will come when "his 
wife hath made herself ready," in the end, the harvest, of 
this Gospel age. The bride is a multitudinous number and 
since this marriage began in 1878, its consummation will, 
we think, take place probably in 1918 — forty years from the 
time it began. We are not sure that we have the matter of 
the marriage fully correct. What we say about it is merely 
our opinion. If the Lord shall see fit to take us home this 
year we shall of course rejoice. When the last member of 
the body shall have gone beyond the vail, the door "will then 
be shut. After that time none will be recognized as of the 
bride class. 

Then another work will be under way, pertaining to those 
who are called "the virgins, her companions, that follow 
her." After having passed through great tribulations, these 
also will be received on the other side of the vail, but not 
with the same degree of honor as the bride class. It will 
be to great honor, though they are not worthy of the highest 
place. But they will be worthy of the place which they will 
receive. 

When thinking of the marriage ceremony, we are very 
apt to think of the marriage ceremonies of today, and to 
draw our conclusions from them. But this is a mistake. 
The marriage service among the Jews was very different from 
such as we have now. With the Jew?, the father or the 
brother of the bride would make the arrangements. The 
bride had nothing whatever to do with it. There was a 
covenant entered into by which she was engaged to the prospective
 bridegroom, and certain papers were drawn up, stating
 what dowry she should have and what provision her 
husband should make for her in life. Then these papers 
were sealed. 

That agreement constituted the engagement, the betrothal. 
Nothing more was to be done except that the would-be bridegroom
 must wait for a number of months, and then at the 
appropriate time, within a year, he would come to receive 
his bride to himself. During the interval he would be preparing
 the home for her. Should she in the meantime prove 
unfaithful, it would work a cancelation of the contract; for 
this covenant arrangement was official. When the time came 
for the bridegroom to receive the bride, he came to the home 
of the bride, who was immediately received by him and taken 
to her new home. There was nothing in the way of a ceremony
. The friends would then be ushered into that home for a 
feast, which would last for a week or so. The taking away 
of the bride was often in the evening, but not always so; 
it was sometimes in the morning. 


THE TIME OF BETROTHAL 

All this is the picture, we believe, that the Lord would 
give us respecting the church and her relationship with Christ. 
The members of the church do not come into relationship with 
Christ until the Father first draws them. The Lord said: 
"No man can come to mc, except the Father which hath sent 
mo draw him." (John 6:44) After the Father has drawn 
us, the contract is entered into— that we make our consecration
. Having done this we receive some token of the Father's 
favor — we receive the earnest, the holy Spirit. We become 
espoused to Christ. Then after we have proved faithful to 
him through the remainder of this life, the great One who 
is to be the Bridegroom comes to receive us to himself. Jesus, 
having gone to prepare a place for us, will come again that 
wo may be with him in the heavenly condition. — John 14:2, 3. 

-As for the marriage feast, it will delay awhile after the 
bride has entered in, waiting for the bridesmaids; for the 
Scriptures promise that they Bhall be present at the festival 
— the opportunity for expressing good wishes. — Fsa. 45:14. 

The a nti typical betrothal began in the Pentecostal outpouring
. There the church was betrothed to her Lord; and 
the betrothal will not be ended until the Lord has taken to 
himself the last member of the bride class. We do not regard
 the Jewish marriage as a type, but as a symbol, a figure 
of the marriage of the Lamb. 

The church class is not at first ready for the high position
 to which she is called. Indeed, the Scriptures represent 
that the Lord Jesus was made ready for his high position. 
(Heb. 2:10) But he was, to begin with, "holy, harmless, undefined
, separate from sinners." We, on the contrary, are 
imperfect. We need a good deal of preparation in order to 
make us ready for the glorious position to which we have 
been called. Among other things, we are to do a certain 
embroidery work, the pattern for which was given in our 
Lord's own character. 

THE WEDDING PEEPARATION 

This embroidery represents the fruits of the Spirit; and 
we are to copy our Lord's meekness, his gentleness, his 
brotherly kindness, his love. We are to copy his full consecration
 — to do the Father's will, in every sense of the word. 
We are to delight in him, we are to do his will, to regard him 
as our Head, and to order all the affairs of life with that 
thought in mind. 

The bride class must have not only a wedding garment, 
but an embroidered wedding garment. It must be also without
 spot or wrinkle. The bride class is a very special order; 
hence the particularity represented in this robe. Its members 
are to assist each other in the matter of preparing the wedding
 robe, and the class will have made itself fully ready 
for entering into the marriage when the lost member shall 
have passed under the vail. 

In the 45th Psalm the picture is given of the Bridegroom 
bringing his bride into the presence of the great King,^ Jehovah
. Later, the bridesmaids, the companions of the bride, 
follow her. It will be after the bride class is glorified that 
she will be presented to the Father — apparently very shortly 
after her glorious change. The great company, we think, 
will be presented very soon after; for the Scriptures tell us 
that they will be present, by invitation, at the marriage supper
 of the Lamb. This seems to indicate that the principal 
part of the joys and festivities attending this will be deferred 
until the great company will be there to participate in them. 
—Revelation 19:9. 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


THINKS THE LORD HIMSELF IS SPEAKCNa TO US! 

Beloved Brother Rutiierfobd: — 

You will be no doubt surprised to hear that the Seventh 
Volumes are still missing from South Africa. Our dear 
Brother Johnston received two copies, and Sister Reeson of 
Durban, brought one over from England recently. These 
three are the sum total of Volume Seven in this country. 

In the Lord's providence I was the first in the country 
to read Volume Seven. As you are aware, Brother Johnston 
was on a pilgrim tour. On her way to Durban Sister Reeson 
came to the Watch Toweb office here; and to my unbounded 
astonishment and pleasure she produced the volume. I could 
scarcely restrain my tears of joy on handling the pTecious 
"wages of the Lord/* The dear sister had only a few hours 
to spare; but I got through 175 pages as quickly as I could. 
I cannot describe my feelings to you as I read. I was not 
large enough to contain all the joy that the Lord was literally 
pouring into me. Who of the Lord's little ones can doubt 
for a moment the authenticity of this volume? It is the Lord 


himself speaking to us. Praise be to Jehovah's holy name 
and to his dear Son! 

When Sister Reeson left, I was wondering what would 
happen next. The following day Brother Johnston's copy 
turned up. When I went to the office, the volume was lying 
on the table out of its cover. As Brother Johnston was expected
 back in a day or two, I made the most of my opportunity
, and read until about four o'clock in the morning. 
The next day I had the volume finished. 

I have also read "Light after Darkness" and "Harvest 
Sittings No. 2." My thought ia that the great adversary is 
attempting to sidetrack you from smiting his evil forces, and 
he is failing miserably. Not one of the Lord's true sheep will 
doubt for a moment regarding the channel through whioh 
the "meat in due season" is coming. Each Watch Tower 
is a remarkable testimony to the fact. 

My heart burns with love to you and to all of "like precious 
faith.'' The goal is in sight. The vail is thin; and soon we 
shall see him who died for ua, and Bhall he presented to J& 


[62511 


(142-143) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


hovah himself, the very essence of love. The Lord bless you 
and keep jrou is my earnest prayer. 
In Christian love and service, 

Your brother in Christ. H. P. Williams.— S. Africa. 
KEPOKTS DISAFFECTION SLIGHT 
Dear Brethren": — 

Instances are brought to my attention where members of 
the opposing faction are endeavoring to confuse and mislead 
the Lord's saints into believing that there is a split in many 
of the classes, and that a considerable proportion of the class 
numbers are taking side with the opposers of the Society. 
As for instance, it is reported that at Pittsburgh 180 have 
deflected from the ecclesia and are now meeting with the 
opposition class ; whereas in my recent visit to Pittsburgh 
I learned there is no split, and that the dozen or so sympathizers
 with the opposers of the Society are still meeting 
regularly with the 450 or more members of the Pittsburgh 
congregation. 

Aj3 you know I have been regularly in th« pilgrim, service 
since the first of last November, and in all that time I have 
found only about four classes in which there are opponents 
of the Society or any antagonistic to the "Finished Mystery" 
— in fact very few who have any sympathy with the opposition
 movement; and yet as I move along from class to class, 
I am told that this or that class ahead of me is reported to 
be in trouble along this line. When I reach there I find nothing
 of the kind, and the class members manifest much surprise
 at having been so wrongly reported. In the few instances
 where I have found wavering ones I have experienced
 but little difficulty in setting them straight. By the 
Lord's grace, and by my knowledge of the facts, I have been 
enabled to show clearly why rfche Seventh Volume is really 
the posthumous work of Pastor Russell, and when the facts 
are set forth the hesitating ones usually grasp the situation 
and thank me for having made the matter plain. 

I notice, however, that the brethren who are decidedly in 
support of the opposers are amongst those who are absent 
from the meeting where I bring the Seventh Volume into my 
talk/ It seems to be the pleasure of the Lord to favor and 
encourage only those whose hearts are right. I would not 
presume to judge anyone, but experience teaches me that 
divine favor rests with the dear ones who are not grounded 
in the teachings of error and misrepresentation, but who adhere
 to the policy of the Society which all along has been 
the divine instruaneivt for comfort and blessing to the Lord's 
dear saints. I am heartily glad to find so vast a majority in 
full harmony, and to note the sweet spirit of Christ manifested
 by the ecclesias in general. 

Your brother in Christ, J. A. Bohwet. — Pilgrim. 

REJOICING IK THE TBUTH AT 68 
Dear Brethren: — 

I desire to express my joy and feeling to you for the 
unspeakable grace our heavenly Father has been pleased to 
bestow upon me. He pulled me out of that state of ignorance, 
darknesB 'and superstition, in which I had been unfortunately 
plunged, first by having spent the first twenty years of my 
life as a Roman Catholic, afterward as a member of the 
Presbyterian Church for some time, and finally as an unbeliever
 for a number of years. 

The blessedness I have experienced since I came to the 
knowledge of God's wonderful Present Truth is due absolutely 
to the efforts of that "faithful servant" of our Lord, the late 
Pastor Russell. Blessed be his memory; for the "Crown 
of Life" promised to every overcomer on this side the vail 
must have been his reward. 

By the grace of God, I have had the privilege and opportunity
 to read and study the first six volumes of Studies 
from his pen, ajid also The Watch Tower you have been 
kind enough to send me since November, 1910. Being willing 
to learn, I prayed the Almighty Father to help me, and, 
blessed be the Lord, the result was that I was brought down 
to the feet of our Master and Savior Jesus Christ. Brother 
Nettletcm, the elder of our Union Avenue Ecclesia, always 
stood by me, assisting me in all my wants most generously. 
T am an old man, 68 years of age, a widower without 
children. I am poor and afflicted with bodily pains and infirmities
 to such extent that, being unable to earn my living 
by ordinary work, I have been compelled, since a few years, 
to become an inmate of a benevolent institution. But although
 poor and afflicted in the flesh, I feel like singing God's 
praises constantly. Being a French-Canadian, I am thoroughly
 well educated in the French language, besides being 
familiar with the English and Italian languages. 

Dear Brethren of the Editorial Committee, my prayers 
go up to the throne of grace for you, and may our heavenly 
Father help us all to carry on to the end the good work of 


spreading the glorious Gospel truth, "while it is yet day light 
for the night will soon come when no one shall be able to 
work." 

Your brother in Christ. Joseph Daoust.— Can. 

"CONVICTION TO THE CONSECRATED" 
Dear Brethren: — 

Please accept my very best thanks for Volume Seven, 
Studies. I am enjoying my study of this work greatly, and 
think, the more I peruse it, that it is compiled in a masterly 
way. The interpretations carry conviction to the consecrated 
jnind as to their truth, all being in perfect harmony with the 
teachings we have received in the preceding six volumes. I 
have no doubt that we are now receiving the meat in due 
season through this Seventh Volume for which I desire to 
tnank our loving heavenly Father as the great Author of all 
the glorious plan. With much love in the Lord. 

Your loving brother, Morton Edgar. — Scotland. 

"TONGUE FILLED WITH SXNOING" 
Dear Brethren: — 

I have hesitated some time about writing you, realizing 
what an enormous daily mail you must receive. But I can 
remain silent no longer; I so much desire to be identified 
with you, 

I came out of the Baptist denomination in October last, 
took the Vow, made my consecration, symbolizing it at the 
Cleveland Convention, November 18. 

What a wonderful experience the coming out of Babylon 
was! I thought I was making an enormous sacrifice to leave 
the denomination and associations of a lifetime. And now, 
brethren, after being out of it for only six months and looking
 back at it with the searchlight of' God's truth, I can see 
what I really did leave — "a great pile of husks and junk." 
When I remember how I believed it, taught it, and enjoyed 
it, I stand amazed. What am I that he was mindful of me? 
It is wonderful to be brought out of darkness into his marvelous
 light. 

While I feel like the eleventh hour laborer, I am rejoicing 
in the hope of my calling, and striving daily to be worthy 
to see my dear Redeemer face to face. 

Like all of the friends, words cannot express my feelings 
of gratitude for our dear Brother Russell; so I will only 
say, Praise God for the Seventh Messenger. 
Yours in the service of our Lord and King. 

G. L. B.— Ohio. 
EXPRESSES LOVE AND CONFIDENCE 
Dear Brethren in the Anointed: — 

Grace, mercy and peace be multiplied to you with our love. 
It is our privilege at this time to express to you our love. 
We desire also to inform you of our confidence in you 
as the Lord's channel of blessing and to tell you of our sympathy
 with you in this your hour of trial, 

T*he Watch Tower is still full of sweet encouragement 
and refreshment and our hope is being strengthened by the 
prospect of early participation, while we are bestirring ourselves
 the more in order to the securing of the prize of the 
high calling of God in Christ Jesus; laboring the more diligently
 "if by any means we might attain unto the resurrection
 of the dead." 

Be assured, in conclusion, of our constant prayers on your 
behalf. 

Your brother in the Lord, 

The Brighton Ecclesia, — England. 
SATISFIED WITH THE POOD 
Dear Brethren: — 

I am attaching my check for $ for Good Hopes 

fund. I assure you that it is a genuine pleasure for me to 
forward this and sincerely regret that circumstances will not 
permit my sending a great deal more. 

It seems to me the March 15th issue of The Watch 
Tower was about the most inspiring we have had for a long 
time, particularly the first article; and as a brother expressed 
it last evening, I am thoroughly satisfied with the food the 
Lord is still dispensing through'TiiE Tower. Undoubtedly it 
continues to be the greatest journal published on earth, and 
I hope it is the Lord's will to permiit us to continue to receive
 it unto the end. 

Earnestly praying our heavenly Father's richest blessings 
on the work of the Society, and all engaged in it, particularly 
those in places of responsibility, I am, 

Your brother by his grace, P. IT. G. — Tenn. 

TAKE PEESH COUEAGB 
Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings in the Lord. Have just received our Watch 
Tower of Siarch 1st. After reading it very carefully, noting 
its contents, its ring and tone, we take fresh courage. 


[6262] 


May 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(130-147) 


Dear brethren, continue the good work. The Lord haa 
said: "No weapon formed against thee shall prosper; and 
every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou 
^halt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the 
Lord."— Isa. 54:17. 

We do hereby express by unanimous vote our confidence 
in the integrity of the present head and management of the 
So-ciety. 

Your brethren in the Lord, Houston Ecclesia. — Tex. 
IS BE SEVENTH VOLUME STUDY 

Section 22 of Title XI of the Espionage Act provides: 
"Whoever in aid. of any foreign government shall knowingly 
or wilfully have possession of or control over any property 
or paper designed or intended for use or which is used as 
the means of violating any penal statute or any of the rights 
or obligations of the United States under any treaty or the 
law of nations, shall be fined not more than $1,000", or imprisoned
 not more than two years, or both." 

United States District Attorneys and other local officers. 


we are informed, have compelled the brethren to surrender 
their personal copies of Volume VII of Studiks in the Scriptures
, and have broken up Bible classes. If such surrender 
is being compelled without search warrant, or such meetings 
broken up without proper complaint filed charging that such 
meetings are in violation of law, then such surrender and 
such breaking up of meetings are in violation of law. 

The Seventh Volume of Studies in the Scriptures is a 
commentary upon the Bible. We do not understand that the 
Government desires to interfere with such study at all, but 
some over-zealous local officials have interfered as above, 
which we believe is in violation of their instructions; and this 
matter is being called to the attention of the Department of 
Justice at Washington. We have no information that the Department
 of Justice has ruled that the possession by any 
member of our Association of a copy of Volume VII is in 
violation of the Espionage Act; and we do not believe that 
department has made such ruling. We make this statement 
upon advice of counsel. 


KINGDOM NEWS No. 3 


Kingdom News No. 3 is now on the press and will be ready 
for distribution within a few days. You will receive the same 
number of copies that were sent to you of the B. S. M. No. 99. 
Wo advise that the Volunteer Captains arrange the work and 
get these papers into the hands of the people as quickly as 
possible. We regard No. 3 as one of the most important issues
 of the Volunteer matter, especially at, this time. We 
have had each issue of Kingdom News carefully gone over by 
lawyers and other competent person© and are certain that 


these papers contain not one word that is in any way violative 
of the law of the land; and therefore there should be no difficulty
 in putting them out. Where local officers rai-se objection, 
ask them to read the paper carefully and then they will see 
that it is entirely proper, in the interest of the people and 
the nation, and contains a great deal of information which is 
particularly pertinent to the time in which we are living. Be 
diligent and get these issues out quickly. The "dark night" is 
near at hand, when no man can work. 


IN RE PUBLIC MEETINGS 


The persecution of the International Bible Students Association
 has aroused a great desire in the minds of many 
to know what we believe and teach. We strongly recommend 
to the friends the great importance of well located halls and 
properly advertised meetings. This door of opportunity should 


be quickly entered, that the people may have the truth concerning
 the Lord's kingdom, which is at hand. One public 
address should be given in each place on "The World Has 
Ended — Millions Now Living Will Nhver Die.". Let us 
be zealous in proclaiming the truth while we have opportunity. 


CHRONOLOGICAL CHART OF REVELATION 


We now have in stock Blue Print Oharts of Revelation 
similar to the one in the Question Booklet of Vol. VII, Size 


3 ft. x 6 ft. printed on linen. Price per chart $2 postpaid. 
These charts are very helpful in class study. 

