A Letter from the Governing Body
HOW THRILLING it has been to relive in our mind’s eye the history of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the lands of Hungary, Mozambique, and Venezuela! Surely our hearts are filled with thankfulness to Jehovah that following “the day of small things,” he is now filling these lands with knowledge of him.​—Zech. 4:10; Isa. 11:9.
Take time now to glance back to the 1995 Service Year Report on pages 34 to 41. We must agree that a tremendous amount of Kingdom preaching and teaching has been accomplished by just over five million men and women, young and old, all devoted to Jehovah, all united in the work dearest to Jehovah’s heart​—the preaching of the good news of the Kingdom. Jesus said that “joy arises among the angels of God over one sinner that repents.” (Luke 15:10) Now think of the joy that Jehovah’s heavenly family must have experienced when they witnessed 338,491 become dedicated, baptized servants of their loving heavenly Father. We also rejoice, but surely our joy is only a reflection of what is experienced in the heavens. We say to all of you newly baptized ones, Welcome into Jehovah’s loving organization!
We trust that all of you who took such a positive step last year will continue to grow in knowledge of the truth. Keep in mind Jesus’ words: “No man that has put his hand to a plow and looks at the things behind is well fitted for the kingdom of God.” (Luke 9:62) Never forget, whatever trials you have to face, “the God of all undeserved kindness . . . will make you firm, he will make you strong.”​—1 Pet. 5:10.
What of the future? The prospect for speeding up the work is bright, with the use of our new Knowledge book. None of us can determine how long the door of opportunity will remain open for sheeplike persons to enter the safety of our spiritual paradise. Jesus said regarding the start of the great tribulation: “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.” (Matt. 24:36) This very fact should make us all the more alert to “keep on the watch.” (Matt. 24:42) How tragic it would be at this late hour to fall out of the race for life! If we love Jehovah and his Son for all they have done for us, we will never let that happen!
The Educational Center at Patterson, New York, is now in full operation, making possible the training of more Gilead classes and of branch personnel, as well as whatever additional groups may seem appropriate as time goes on. Arrangements are available in many lands for brothers to attend the Ministerial Training School. Branch facilities are being built or renovated. All of this proves that “the faithful and discreet slave” is anxious to make every provision for giving as great a witness as possible before Jehovah indicates that our witness work is completed. (Matt. 24:45-47) Surely none of us want to be held accountable by Jehovah for the death of any who are wicked in God’s eyes because we failed to give the warning.​—Ezek. 3:18.
Therefore, we are very concerned about the millions of persons who apparently are favorable toward true worship but who hold back from dedicating their lives to serve Jehovah. There are some eight million in this category. What can we do to help these? Why not offer to study the new Knowledge book with them? The last four chapters in that publication should really stir their hearts to love Jehovah. We hope many will respond in this positive way and so be among those whom Jehovah will love forever!
Jesus said: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.” (John 13:35) During the past service year, this love has been manifested to a very marked degree by our brothers around the world as they handled various situations​—in Eastern Europe, in Rwanda and Burundi, and in the Kobe earthquake disaster in Japan, as well as in other areas. As a result, many onlookers, such as the people in Makoko, near the Zaire border, have been greatly impressed. When they saw our brothers returning to Rwanda in fine form both physically and mentally, they cried out in admiration: “Your brothers in Europe and in the whole world truly love you; they have taken care of you in the camps while members of other religions died from famine and disease.” What a credit to Jehovah’s organization!
Exciting days lie ahead of us as we see the ongoing fulfillment of Isaiah 11:9: “The earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.” So we have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord,” and we know that our “labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) Of course it is not! We are laying a basis for the nucleus of a new world society. Never give up your precious relationship with Jehovah! Be determined always to manifest the attitude of the prophet Micah, who said: “As for me, it is for Jehovah that I shall keep on the lookout. I will show a waiting attitude for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me.”​—Mic. 7:7.
May Jehovah continue to bless you richly as you work for the vindication of his sovereignty and the sanctification of his holy name.
Your brothers,
Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

