Announcements
● Literature offer for October: One-year subscription for either Awake! or The Watchtower, or both, for contribution of $5.00 each. Six-month subscriptions and subscriptions for monthly editions are $2.50 each. November: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures along with book “Let Your Kingdom Come” for contribution of $4.50. December: My Book of Bible Stories for a contribution of $2.50. The “Look!” brochure can also be offered for a contribution of 30¢. January and February: Any two of the older pocket-size books the congregation has in stock for a contribution of $1.00. May include Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” Evolution (old edition), Good News, Holy Spirit, Peace and Security (old edition), This Life, Truth, and World Government.
● With this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, we are including the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1988. This will enable school overseers to become familiar with the instructions and make assignments well in advance. All should become familiar with the instructions so as to prepare and present assignments properly.
● Congregations should begin ordering Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1988 with their October literature order. (See 1987 Cost List, paragraphs 7-10.) Examining the Scriptures booklets will be available in Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Iloko, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Samoan, Spanish, Swedish, and Tagalog. Until these booklets are available and shipments are made, they will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. Examining the Scriptures booklets are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at 30¢ each, which is the publisher rate. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1987, may receive one free copy and obtain additional copies at 20¢ each. A separate entry should be made on the monthly remittance form (S-20), showing free copies to pioneers. (See the 1987 Cost List, paragraphs 23-25.)
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—1987 Edition (Regular; bi12 with marginal references)​—French
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 7, Ri-Zo)​—French
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Polish
“Look! I Am Making All Things New”​—Malagasy, Polish
The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever​—Polish
Tract No. 13​—Dutch, French, German, Swedish
● A quarterly edition (four issues per year) of the Awake! magazine in Hungarian is being made available by the Society. Congregations should send in a Distributors’ Order form (M-202) listing the quantity they will require. Please note there is no subscription arrangement for this quarterly magazine.

