Help Others to Dedication and Baptism
1 What a joy it is to see the increasing number of people who are studying the Bible and associating with Jehovah’s organization! And there is an even greater joy in helping them to develop and maintain a close spiritual relationship with Jehovah God himself.​—Compare Acts 20:35.
2 Commendably, many new ones have progressed to the point of becoming approved associates, and most of them are sharing regularly in the preaching work. Now they should be working toward dedication and baptism. How can we aid them in taking these important steps?​—Matt. 28:19.
HOW WE CAN HELP
3 We need to help Bible students cultivate love and appreciation for Jehovah so that they will be moved by faith to dedicate themselves to him. (1 Chron. 28:9a) Accordingly, during the home Bible study, teach them to discern Jehovah’s qualities as you discuss his deeds and standards. Also, help the students appreciate the ransom. Help them to get an accurate knowledge of Jehovah God and Jesus Christ.​—John 17:3.
4 Highlight Jehovah’s loving purpose for man and the earth, as well as the sanctification of His holy name. Help the student to see clearly how he is involved and how he can provide an answer to the one taunting Jehovah. (Prov. 27:11) Take every opportunity to help the student in his spiritual growth so that he will “disown himself and pick up his torture stake,” getting baptized as a disciple of Jesus Christ.​—Matt. 16:24.
5 Help your Bible students see that Jehovah’s laws and principles are for our good. They must realize that if they wait until the last minute to take a stand for true worship, they could lose out on the prize of life. (Luke 21:34, 35) Speak to them of your appreciation for his organization, the congregation, the meetings, and the brotherhood. (Ps. 100:2) Show them that God’s Word is alive and exerts power. Use it to move the students to associate with God’s people at meetings, assemblies, conventions, and otherwise. This will help them develop a desire to have a close personal relationship with Jehovah.
DO NOT DELAY
6 The Ethiopian eunuch to whom Philip spoke did not delay in getting baptized. He searched his own mind and heart and asked Philip if there were any factors that prevented him from getting baptized. Finding no cause for delay, he promptly got baptized. (Acts 8:26-38) That is the spirit we want to cultivate in Bible students today.​—Compare John 14:23; 2 Corinthians 5:14, 15.
7 Only those ‘marked’ for salvation will survive into Jehovah’s new system. (Ezek. 9:2-6) How happy those who submit to this ‘marking’ for survival will be because of their dedicated relationship with Jehovah God, as symbolized by water baptism!

