Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 4
Song 148
12 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to share in the magazine service this Saturday. Suggest talking points from current magazines. Announce special field service arrangements for October 12 where this is a designated holiday.
18 min: “As for Me and My Household . . . ” Discussion of article with audience by elder or ministerial servant who has exemplary family. Reason on need for united worship to strengthen family against Satan’s attack. Encourage family heads to shoulder responsibility to arrange regular family field service and work with individual members personally. In connection with paragraphs 5 and 6, demonstrate parent and child concluding family practice session, followed by child offering subscription to householder.
15 min: “The Watchtower on Cassette” and “Reprint of Watchtower Bound Volumes.” Discuss articles with audience. Emphasize information explaining how individuals may obtain these items.
Song 63 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 11
Song 113
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Include acknowledgments of contributions on monthly statement. Give suggestions with brief demonstration for placing the October 15 issue of The Watchtower and October 22 issue of Awake!
18 min: Using the Reasoning Book Effectively. Many of us have used this publication with good results in the field or on calls. The more we are acquainted with it, the more it can help us. Demonstrate a family group discussing a few of the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses listed on pages 199 and 200. For example, on “Bible,” refer to pages 58 and 59. Note 2 Timothy 3:16, 17 and Revelation 1:1. Comment also on the statement ‘Men wrote the Bible,’ page 65. Next you might discuss how our belief in connection with God’s purpose for the earth is different, using appropriate points from pages 112-17. If time permits, another teaching of Jehovah’s Witnesses that is of local interest might be considered.
17 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Special-Interest Articles in Our Magazines.” Brief introductory comments on paragraphs 1 and 2, followed by question-and-answer discussion of remainder of article. Highlight opportunities to place the magazines and need for good preparation. If time permits, local experiences may be given.
Song 133 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 18
Song 13
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to support magazine day on the fourth Saturday of October. Review talking points in current issues of Awake! and The Watchtower.
20 min: “Help Others to Dedication and Baptism.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Emphasize need for approved associates to set goal of qualifying for baptism. Interview two or three newly baptized publishers regarding their spiritual progress and decision to get baptized.
15 min: Must Christians Keep the Sabbath? Audience discussion based on Reasoning From the Scriptures, pages 345-52.
(3 min.) Brief introductory talk using definition on page 345. Include quote on page 346 explaining how Sunday came to be the principal day of worship for much of Christendom.
(12 min.) Audience discussion of selected points from Reasoning book. Explain Scripturally that Christians are not obligated to observe weekly Sabbath. (Ex. 31:16, 17) However, there is a sabbath resting for Christians. (Heb. 4:9, 10) Highlight how we can reason if someone asks, ‘Why don’t you keep the Sabbath?’
Song 211 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 25
Song 14
 5 min: Local announcements. Give loving encouragement for all to share in witnessing on first Sunday, November 1. Mention November literature offer and encourage publishers to get supplies for weekend service.
13 min: “Use New Releases to Do God’s Will.” Lively discussion with audience. Draw out personal reactions to announcement of new releases and to publications when actually received. Emphasis should be placed on the importance of using these provisions from Jehovah to preach and teach the good news.
15 min: “‘A Time to Speak’​—When?” Talk by elder based on article in September 1, 1987, Watchtower.
12 min: Local needs. Or review of encouragement and counsel given by circuit overseer on his most recent visit. Additional counsel by local elders may be included.
Song 170 and concluding prayer.

