Presenting the Good News​—With Special-Interest Articles in Our Magazines
1 When Jesus foretold that “this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations,” none of his disciples could have foreseen the scope of the work as we now see it being accomplished. (Matt. 24:14) There were no printing presses in those days, nor could anyone have conceived of MEPS (Multilanguage Electronic Phototypesetting System), which is currently capable of setting type in 186 different languages.
2 Watch Tower publications are making the good news available to interested people everywhere. The Watchtower is published in 103 languages with an average printing of 12,315,000, and Awake! is now in 54 languages with an average printing of 10,610,000. It is our privilege to use these magazines in presenting this good news to “all sorts of men.”​—1 Tim. 2:4.
FEATURE SPECIAL-INTEREST ARTICLES
3 When you get a new issue of the magazines, do you enjoy reading it through in order to find out how Jehovah is benefiting us by the material prepared? (Isa. 48:17) After that, why not decide which article you would like to present in the field and thus be ready for service? Perhaps you will note something that would be of particular interest to certain people in your territory. A judge in Ohio wrote a letter of appreciation to a Witness couple who brought him an issue of Awake! dealing with the problem of drinking and driving.
4 In addition to presenting the magazines from house to house, do you show articles you find particularly interesting to people where you work? Do you visit business places to offer the magazines at times when the proprietors are not rushed? Do you share the truth with others on the streets as you have occasion? Many brothers and sisters, including those who find it difficult to climb stairs in city territory, do this work very effectively, approaching people who cannot be reached otherwise. In this way they give a modern application to Proverbs 1:20.
A GOOD EXAMPLE TO FOLLOW
5 When Jesus spoke to the Samaritan woman who had come to a well for water, he said: “If you had known . . . who it is that says to you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.” (John 4:7-10) Just as that woman did not know Jesus or the life-giving truth he had, so the people today may not know who we are or the importance of the message we bring them. Jesus spoke with the people on every appropriate occasion and everywhere​—a good example for us to follow.
6 As we enjoy the fine spiritual food in the well-illustrated magazines now reaching us, may we do what we can to share it with others! They too may respond as did the Samaritan woman who said to Jesus: “Sir, give me this water.” Indeed, those now receiving with appreciation this fine spiritual food may finally be guided to the “fountains of waters of life.”​—John 4:11-15; Rev. 7:17.

