Reprint of Watchtower Bound Volumes
1 What a wonderful provision the Watch Tower Publications Index 1930-1985 is for research and study! However, many brothers do not have in their personal or Kingdom Hall library all the publications referred to in the Index. In order to help provide some of this material, the Society is planning a reprint of The Watchtower bound volumes for the years 1960 through 1979, in English only. These reprints will be produced as we are able to work them into our schedule. It is our intention to make these available five volumes at a time. Orders for the years 1960 through 1964 will be accepted during November.
2 The Society does not intend to stock a supply of these reprint volumes. Therefore, we urge all to consider the matter carefully and place orders for what they need. If congregations decide to stock one or two volumes for future needs, these should be paid for out of the congregation cash account and not kept on the shelf at the Society’s expense. Since these are controlled stock items, they are to be paid for upon receipt. The price will be $6.00 each. The Literature Order form (S-14 6/87) lists the volumes that are available for ordering at this time.
3 Congregations and individuals desiring to have these volumes for their library should determine the total number of volumes they desire for each year and submit their request through the congregation. The total quantity should be entered on the Literature Order form (S-14) and be submitted during the month of November. The reprint volumes will be shown as back ordered on the congregation invoice until they are shipped.
4 The Society will announce each group of bound volumes to be made available. Please be guided by such future announcements, and place your orders accordingly. At this time, do not place orders other than for the five years now being made available. The presiding overseer and the secretary should make sure that everyone has an opportunity to order the volumes desired and see that this order is placed during the month of November.
5 We trust that these Watchtower reprints will enhance the value of the Watch Tower Publications Index 1930-1985 by making available many spiritual treasures the organization has provided.

