Use New Releases to Do God’s Will
1 Without doubt, Jehovah God has ‘equipped us with every good thing to do his will.’ Accordingly, as we effectively use the things he provides, Jehovah ‘performs in us through Jesus Christ that which is well-pleasing in his sight.’​—Heb. 13:20, 21.
2 The modern history of his people clearly shows that Jehovah God has provided direction and has equipped us with the publications we need in order to accomplish the work he has given us to do. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20; Rev. 9:17, 19) Jehovah has blessed the effective use of these provisions, and the Christian congregation continues to experience outstanding growth.
NEW RELEASES
3 Recently, at our “Trust in Jehovah” District Conventions, we were thrilled to receive new publications to help others establish their trust in God. At the close of his address Friday morning, the chairman released a new tract, Why You Can Trust the Bible. Then, in the afternoon appropriate demonstrations showed us how to use it.
4 Have you been using this tract? It goes well with our current Topic for Conversation. Some who need to use a simple presentation will find this tract very helpful. Most of us will be able to use it effectively in our ministry in a variety of ways​—perhaps to introduce our presentation, to offer when a householder is busy, and to leave when we find no one at home.
5 It was a pleasure to know that three more tracts are now available. They are What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe?, Life in a Peaceful New World, and What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? These tracts will also help others learn what the Bible teaches and why they can trust God’s promises. Be sure to carry some of them with you for use in both regular and informal witnessing.
6 A most treasured new release at the “Trust in Jehovah” District Convention is the pocket edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. Over the years, we have used different Bibles in the field ministry, but now we have one that can be carried in pocket or purse. Here is another evidence that Jehovah God has ‘equipped us with every good thing to do his will.’ So whether we are engaging in the regular features of service or witnessing informally, we can have a copy of God’s Word handy to support what we express. How happy we are to have this new pocket edition of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures!
PUT THEM TO GOOD USE
7 These new convention releases brought forth spontaneous applause when they were announced. Immediately we could see the good to be accomplished in the preaching and teaching work with the aid of these timely provisions from Jehovah, ‘the Giver of every good and perfect gift.’ (Jas. 1:17) To the extent that we use these publications, we can expect our joy to increase because of the fine Kingdom fruitage that will result.​—John 15:8.
8 Taking a lesson from Jesus’ parable of the talents, we know that Jehovah expects us to put to good use all that he has given us. Therefore, let us fully accomplish our ministry with the use of his provisions, including these new releases. As a result, we will receive our Lord’s approval and blessing.

