“As for Me and My Household . . .”
1 “As for me and my household, we shall serve Jehovah.” (Josh. 24:14, 15) Such determination on the part of Joshua and other family heads was absolutely necessary if Israelite families were to resist the pressures against true worship in the land of Canaan. Similarly today, we must be resolute in our stand for true worship in order to fortify ourselves and our families to withstand the unwholesome influences of the system of things that surrounds us.
2 It is the God-given responsibility of family heads to provide for their households. (1 Tim. 5:8) This is true not only regarding material things but much more so in a spiritual way! Family heads, do you have a good program of family worship, including practical Bible instruction, and do you take the lead with your family in the field ministry?
FAMILY BIBLE DISCUSSIONS
3 Since Jehovah’s acts of loving-kindness are “new each morning,” would it not be proper for the entire family to give thought to these each day? (Lam. 3:22, 23) An excellent way to do this is by discussing the day’s text from Examining the Scriptures Daily.​—See suggestions in the foreword of 1987 edition.
4 In addition to the daily text discussion, many theocratic households have a regular time for family study and worship. (Deut. 4:9; 6:1, 2) To help in this, the Society’s publications have provided encouragement and suggestions that each family head would do well to follow.​—See w86 11/1 p. 24; School Guidebook pp. 36-8; km 2/79 pp. 1, 7.
FAMILY FIELD SERVICE
5 Since the field ministry is a major aspect of our worship, the family should share in this together. (Heb. 13:15) Family heads can do much to promote family unity and build spiritual strength by working in field service with each member of the household. (Prov. 22:6) October presents a fine opportunity to do this, since we will be offering one-year subscriptions for either Awake! or The Watchtower, or both, for $5.00 each.
6 At times, parents may wish to make the introduction at the door and then allow the child to read a scripture or simply to show the magazines and offer a subscription. If the subscription is refused, single issues can be offered for 25¢ each. Do not underestimate what children can do in the ministry! Often householders are impressed by young ones who can express themselves well at the doors.​—Matt. 21:16.
7 Are you, like Joshua, determined that you and your household will serve Jehovah faithfully? Pray for Jehovah’s direction as you apply the suggestions presented above. He will bless your determined efforts to serve him faithfully.

