How to Identify True Ministers of God
IT HAPPENED in 1948. Two ministers, Jehovah’s Witnesses, were traveling in a dilapidated bus on a bumpy road, heading from a town in northern Spain toward the Pyrenees Mountains. They were on their way to visit an isolated minister. As the bus stopped at the point nearest the village where the minister lived, they noticed him waiting for them with his donkey. But they also noticed nearby an unusual group​—four well-armed Civil Guards and a priest! As the ministers climbed the steep path leading to the village, one of the Guards drew his revolver and shouted, “Manos arriba!” (Hands up!) The visitors were arrested. Why? The priest had told the Guards that the visitors were terrorists​—a blatant lie! As a result, all three ministers were put in prison.
What does this prove? That not all those who claim to be priests or ministers are God’s true ministers. In fact, there is often a vast difference between true and false ministers. What are the basic requirements for true ministers?
The Requirements for True Ministers
The basic meaning of “to minister” is “to render aid or service.” True Christian ministers must have a firm belief that the Bible is the inspired Word of God. (John 17:17) However, that basic requirement is not sufficient. They must also have a good knowledge and understanding of the Bible. But they must not use that knowledge selfishly​—for their own benefit alone. They should also be ardent preachers of the Gospel​—the good news about God’s Kingdom and the hope of everlasting life on a paradise earth.​—John 17:3; Psalm 37:11, 29.
Incidentally, the fact that Jehovah’s Witnesses are preaching the Kingdom good news not only in Spain but throughout the world is in fulfillment of what Jesus prophesied for the time of the end of this wicked old system of things. He said: “And this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations; and then the end will come.”​—Matthew 24:14, 33, 34.
Another basic requirement for true ministers is that, as Jesus said, they should be “no part of the world”; hence, they should keep out of politics. (John 15:19) They should also be very humble, loving, and kind, always ready to help deserving ones in need.​—1 Corinthians 13:1, 4; 1 Peter 5:6.
This is a very serious matter. To distinguish between true and false ministers is a matter of life and death. It is that serious! In his famous Sermon on the Mount, Jesus warned: “Be on the watch for the false prophets that come to you in sheep’s covering, but inside they are ravenous wolves.”​—Matthew 7:15.
However, true ministers of God not only have duties and requirements but also have many privileges. In fact, as a group, they are the most privileged, the most successful, and by far the happiest group on earth today, as you will see in the next article.

