





How to Make Your Study of the Bible More Effective and Enjoyable









JOSHUA had to lead the nation of Israel into the Promised Land. This was going to be very difficult. However, Jehovah strengthened and encouraged him by saying: “Be courageous and very strong.” He told Joshua that if he read and obeyed the Law, then he would make wise decisions and be successful.​—Joshua 1:7, 8.
We live in “critical times hard to deal with,” so our life can also be difficult. (2 Timothy 3:1) If we want to be successful like Joshua, we need to follow the advice Jehovah gave him. We need to read the Bible regularly and use what we learn to make good decisions.
But some of us may not know how to study, or we may not enjoy studying. Yet, personal Bible study is very important. As you review the box “Try These Suggestions,” you will find tips that will help you benefit from your study and enjoy it even more.
The psalmist sang: “Guide me in the pathway of your commandments, for in it I take delight.” (Psalm 119:35) You too can enjoy studying God’s Word. You will discover many beautiful thoughts as you continue to study the Bible.
Although you do not have to lead a nation as Joshua did, you do have your own difficulties. So, like Joshua, study and obey God’s Word. If you do, you will make wise decisions and be successful.



TRY THESE SUGGESTIONS





Pray before you study. The Bible contains Jehovah’s thoughts, and they have been written for your benefit. So when you read the Bible, ask Jehovah to help you understand what you read, remember it, and use it to make good decisions in your life.​—Ezra 7:10.






Ask yourself questions as you read the Bible or Bible-based literature. For example: ‘What does this section tell me about Jehovah? How does this relate to the theme of the Bible? How can I use these thoughts to help others?’






Meditate on what you study. Stop for a moment, and think about what you just read. Ask yourself: ‘How does this make me feel? Why does it make me feel that way? How does it relate to what has happened to me in the past, what is happening to me now, or what may happen to me in the future? How can I apply these Bible principles or this counsel in my life?’ (Job 23:5; Psalm 49:3) When you meditate, see if you can explain why Jehovah tells his people to avoid certain practices. Or think about what the consequences would be if the person you just read about had done things differently.​—Deuteronomy 32:28, 29.






Use your imagination when reading. For example, can you imagine the scene when Joseph’s brothers sold him to the Ishmaelites? (Genesis 37:18-28) What do you see, hear, and smell? Put yourself in the place of the characters. What were they thinking and feeling? When you use your imagination, your study will be much more meaningful.






Use the study tools that the organization has provided. These can make your research interesting. Learn how to use the tools available in your language, both online and in print. Do not hesitate to ask others to help you learn how to use them effectively. For example, the Watch Tower Publications Index or the Research Guide for Jehovah’s Witnesses will help you to find what has been written on certain subjects and will explain many Bible verses. Use the appendixes of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures if these are available in a language you can read. They have useful information on geography, chronology, weights and measures, and other subjects.






Summarize the main points. That will help you to remember what you have just studied. Better still, talk to others about what you learned. Is there something you can use in your ministry? By doing these things, you will remember the main points, and others will benefit from your study as well.




