A New Series for Starting Bible Studies
 1. What new series will appear in the public edition of The Watchtower, and how has it been designed?
1 Beginning next month, a new series will appear in the public edition of The Watchtower to help us start Bible studies. It is entitled “Learn From God’s Word.” While some in the territory will no doubt enjoy reading each installment, the articles are really designed to be discussed.
 2. What are some features of these articles?
2 Features: The title and subheadings are written as questions to ask the householder during the discussion. Key scriptures are cited, not quoted, so that the householder can enjoy learning directly from the pages of God’s Word. Paragraphs are short so that they can be considered right on the doorstep. Each article refers to the Bible Teach book to help you transfer the study to that publication when appropriate.
 3. When going from house to house, how may we use this series to start a doorstep Bible study?
3 How to Use It: When offering magazines you could ask an interest-arousing question on the general topic of the article. For example, the January 1 issue discusses the value of the Bible. You might ask: “Do you view the Bible as God’s Word or simply as a good book? [Allow for response.] I have something interesting on this subject.” Point out the first question, read the first paragraph, and look up the cited scripture. Read the question again, and ask for the householder’s comments. Consider as much material as appropriate, using the numbered questions as discussion points. Before leaving, direct attention to the next numbered question and make definite arrangements to return and discuss it. Go back to consider more of the article each week until you can bring the next issue. Another option is to use the direct approach and simply offer a Bible study to the householder. Then use the magazine article to demonstrate the study.
 4. How may we use these articles when making return visits?
4 You can also use this new series effectively on your magazine route and other return visits. You could simply say: “There is a new feature in The Watchtower. Let me show you how to use it.” It is our prayer that this new series will enable many more to “come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”—1 Tim. 2:4.

