Use It on Every Occasion
 1. The Know the Truth tract is useful for doing what?
1 The tract Would You Like to Know the Truth? has been designed to help us start Bible studies. But it is also an effective tool that we can use to scatter seeds of truth. (Eccl. 11:6) Here are some suggestions to help us make good use of it.
 2. How could we use the tract to start a conversation?
2 To Start a Conversation: You might hand the tract to the householder, point to the six questions on the cover, and ask: “Which of these questions have you wondered about?” After getting his reply, consider from the tract the Bible’s answer to one of the householder’s questions and read one of the cited scriptures. Read or summarize the back page, and offer the Bible Teach book. Even if he does not accept the book, he has received the tract, which may enable the truth to take root in his heart.—Matt. 13:23.
 3. If a householder is busy, what might we do?
3 If the Householder Is Busy: You might say: “Since this is an inconvenient time, let me leave you this tract. It lists six basic questions that most of us have asked and gives a direct answer to each one from the Bible. When I see you again, let me know what you think.”
 4. What could we say when offering the tract in street work?
4 When Doing Street Work: You could say: “Hello. Have you ever asked any of these questions? [Allow for response.] This shows the clear, satisfying answers that are found in the Bible.” If the person is not in a rush, you may be able to discuss one of the answers from the tract and even offer the Bible Teach book.
 5. How may we occasionally use the tract at not-at-homes?
5 Not-at-Homes: In some territories, publishers usually leave literature out of sight at not-at-homes. If that is the custom in your congregation, why not occasionally leave the Know the Truth tract? When returning you could say: “When we were here before, you were not at home, so we left this tract in your door. Which of these questions would you like to have answered?”
 6. What makes the Know the Truth tract an effective preaching tool?
6 The Know the Truth tract presents the truth in a simple, straightforward way. It appeals to those of all religions and cultures. It is easy to present; even young and new publishers can place it. Are you using it on every appropriate occasion?

