From Our Readers
Self-Medication  I was delighted to see the series of articles “Self-Medication—Can It Help or Harm You? (July 8, 1998) It is well written and gives a balanced overall view of the subject, which could be practical in most countries around the world. It is excellent in stressing the importance of taking personal responsibility for our health by means of healthy life-styles rather than resorting to a ‘pill for all ills.’
J. M. J., England
Flirting  Thank you for the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: What Is Wrong With Flirting?” (July 8, 1998) My family is recovering from the effects of my flirtatious life. I allowed myself to ignore the pain I was causing my family, especially my loving wife. If I could say anything to my Christian brothers and sisters, it would be: “Please listen to our Father, Jehovah. Turn away, get help, pray to Jehovah, and run, run, run from badness.”
D. B., United States
For me, this article confirmed the fact that flirting is not a trivial matter. Our family was hit by a blow in the form of divorce, and seemingly innocent joking played a key role in the problem. I hope this counsel will help those who on their own would not foresee how their conduct, speech, or gestures could influence the opposite sex.
O. M., Czech Republic
It was like a soothing balm for the aching hearts of many sisters. Through this article, we have seen that Jehovah notices and cares about our innermost feelings.
A. M. P., Spain
The paragraph under the subhead “Emotional Affairs” was a revelation to me. My husband was developing an intellectual attachment to another sister in the congregation because of similarities in their backgrounds. In our 17 years of marriage, he had never given me any reason to mistrust him, but I was having doubts. Telling my husband wasn’t easy. He was taken aback at first but tried to understand my point of view. He said that he didn’t want to hurt me or our three children, and he stopped all contact immediately. I was so relieved by his response.
D. T., Canada
Nazi Peril  I read the article “Jehovah’s Witnesses—Courageous in the Face of Nazi Peril” with great interest. (July 8, 1998) In the Christian ministry, I have often met people who, in good or bad faith, have accused Jehovah’s Witnesses of compromising with the Nazi regime. The information in this article will help me to assist sincere people to understand the historical truth behind the false accusations about us that are in circulation.
A. F., Slovenia
Thank you very much for the article. A few months ago, my husband, who does not share my faith, saw some negative material published by apostates. I am so grateful for the article that gives an answer to such lies.
C. G., Germany
Bird-Watching  I am a seven-year-old girl. I liked the article “Bird-Watching—A Fascinating Hobby for Everyone?” (July 8, 1998) The photos and explanations really helped me to see that Jehovah made the world in a wonderful way. The animal I liked best was the black-crowned crane from Africa—because it looks funny. Thank you for the research you did.
F. C., Italy

