VOL. XXV. MAY 1, 1904 No. 9. 
CONTENTS 



Views From the Watch Tower 131 

College Education Anti-Christian 131 

The Search for God 131 

Calls Scriptures Intolerant Lies 132 

A Minister's Indictment of His 

Profession 133 

France Freeing Herself from 

Romanism 134 

When Did the Stone Strike? 134 

"Bring Forth the Best Robe and 

Put It on Him" 135 

Only the Humble Shall be Exalted 138 

The Last Supper 141 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, LOS ANGELES, CAL., MAY 7,8,9. 



All sessions of the Convention will be held in Elks 
Hall, 231 S. Spring St. Visiting friends who desire accommodations 
secured for them should write in advance 
their intention to attend, stating the number in each party, 
the name, color and sex of each individual, and the price 
of accommodations desired. On account of long distance 
from Allegheny, applicants for accommodations should address 
the chairman of Committee direct., viz., Brother F. 
P. Sherman, 211 N. Spring St., Los Angeles, Cal. 

Accommodations can be secured at 50c each for three or 
four persons in a room and $1.00 each for rooms for single 
persons or couples. 

Reduced rates are available over the railroads on account 
of "M.E. General Conference." From points within 
the State of California the rate is one fare and a third for 
the round trip. Very Low Rates are granted from outside 
the State. Travellers should enquire for "General 
Conference Excursion Ticket." Friends arriving over 
the Santa Fe Railroad can reach hall by Washington St. 
car; and those arriving by Southern Pacific, should board 
yellow car marked "Arcade Depot." 

Going and returning the Editor will hold several 

ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS, AS FOLLOWS: 

DALLAS, TEX., MAY 1.--A morning rally at 10 o'clock 
will be held in the Woodmen's Hall, 349 Main St. The 
public afternoon meeting will be held at 3 o'clock in Carnegie 
Hall, Public Library. Subject: "To Hell and 
Back! Who are there? Hope for the return of many." 
An evening meeting specially for the interested will take 
place at 7.30 in the Maccabees' Hall, 373 Main St. 

AUSTIN, TEX., May 2. --Meeting for the interested at 
1401 E Ave., at 7.30 p.m. 

HOUSTON, TEX., MAY 3. -All meetings will be held in 
the Auditorium; at 10 a.m., a rally, and at 2.30 p.m. a 
meeting for the interested. A public meeting will be 
held at 7.30 p.m. Subject, "The Oath-bound Covenant." 

SAN ANTONIO, TEX., MAY 4.-Morning rally, at 10 
o'clock, and afternoon meeting, specially for the interested 
at 3 o'clock, will be held at Red Men's Hall, 219 
St. Mary's St. Public meeting at 7.30 p.m. at Beethoven 
Hall, 418 S. Alamo St. Subject, "To Hell and Back." 

SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., May 12.-Meetings will be held 
in Alcazar Building, OFarrel St., between Stockton and 
Powell. At 2.30 a meeting specially for the interested; 
at 7.30 a public service— subject, "The Oath-bound 
Covenant." 

PORTLAND, ORE., MAY 15. -All meetings in Elks Hall, 
Marquam Building, Sixth and Morrison Sts. Morning 
rally at 10 o'clock. Meeting for the interested at 2.30; 



and for the public at 7.30— subject, "The Oath-bound 
Covenant." 

ST. PAUL, MINN., May 19. -Meeting place, Central 
Hall. At 3 p.m. for interested friends, and 7 p.m. for the 
public. Subject, "The Oath-bound Covenant." 

MILWAUKEE, WIS., May 20. -Meeting for the interested 
at 2.30 p.m. at Christ Chapel, 465 Superior St. 



R3357 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
COLLEGE EDUCATION IS ANTI-CHRISTIAN. 



WHAT we have already pointed out,— that the 

whole trend of college training is along the 

lines of skepticism as respects the revealed religion 

of Bible, along the lines of "higher criticism"— is 

well sustained by the following statement of the matter 

by Doctor J. A. Leavitt, President of Ewing College, 

Ills. Among other things he says in the March Homiletic 

Review:— 

"Every observant person has known of numerous 
instances of believers who have had their faith unsettled 
by their scientific studies. ...Can studies so pursued 
as to atrophy one's spiritual nature be said to tend 
toward Christ? Can an education be truly Christian 
that does not increase one's powers to apprehend God 
and to make him known? 

"It will hardly be supposed by any one that the 
study of the ancient classics tends toward Christ. Few 
thoughtful parents will entertain for a moment the idea 
of having their children study for years modern authors, 
however beautifully written, which are based upon 
the amours of characters like Paris and Helen, and 
such corrupt beings as pagan gods and goddesses. It 
is known that the rites and practices in the worship of 
some of them were prohibited by the heathen themselves. 
White, in his 'Mythology,' says: 'There can 
be no doubt that the stories concerning them had an 
unfavorable influence on the pagan world, and they 
contributed to weaken whatever respect remained for 
public or private virtue.' Is it reasonable to suppose 
that the imagination of our youth can dwell for years 
upon the vices of the pagans and their gods and remain 
untainted? 

"Students should be grounded in the fundamentals 
of morals. Christian evidences should have a 
larger place. Psychology should be Biblical and emphasized 
on the spiritual side.... 

"The ancient classics should be greatly curtailed. 
In its place we should have much of the oldest and 



purest history, the most exalted poetry, and the profoundest 
thought found in the Bible; the most productive 
of originality, the most fertile in ideas, the most 
disciplinary of any work given to man. It is a misnomer 
to call any college Christian which studies pagan 
authors six or eight years and gives the Bible only a 
nominal recognition.... 

"The sciences should have a large place. God has 
given us three books, each one revealing himself. The 
first is external nature, the second is the nature of man, 
and the third is the Word of God. It is absurd to suppose 
that these three works by the same omniscient 
Author are not in perfect accord. Wherever a lack of 
harmony appears, there is a lack of the truly scientific. 
...Our education should be Christocentric. In so 
far as any education is not Christocentric, it is partial, 
inadequate and unscientific." 

THE SEARCH FOR GOD. 



We extract the following from the public press. 
The more we perceive the blind, unsuccessful groping 
of the worldly-wise after truth, the more do we value 
it; and the more do we appreciate the Scriptural declaration 
that "the secret of the Lord is with them that 
fear him"— the humble. 

"The era in which we live has often been called an 
age of religious doubt. Perhaps it could more correctly 
be described as one of religious hesitation 
and helplessness. The bewildering changes of recent 
years have created for us a new world, but we have 
not discovered a heaven to match it. The old conception 
of God has become impossible, and we have not 
found another to take its place. So has come about 
what a recent writer regards as "one of the most wonderful 
phenomena in the history of religion,"— the withdrawal 
of multitudes of good men from affiliation with 
the Church. They have turned their backs upon Christianity, 
not at all because they are out of sympathy with 
the religious impulse, but because they are intellectually 
unconvinced. They have lost faith in God. 

"Such is the train of thought suggested by a perusal 
of the Rev. S. D. McConnell's new book, entitled 
"Christ"; and the significance of the "phenomenon" 
disclosed is best indicated in his own words: 

"This is the situation of modern men by the thousands. 
'Where is now my God?' they ask in every mood, 

R3358 : page 132 

from flippant contempt to moral despair. Nothing less 
than the rediscovery of God will serve the occasion. 
Most of the medicaments offered to the spiritual malady 
of the times must avail little or nothing because 



the diagnosis has not been sufficiently searching. It is 

no mere phase of superficial skepticism through which 

we are passing. Half the men we meet are 'agnostics,' 

and this whether they call themselves that or call themselves 

Christians. As Professor Flint truly says: "As 

regards knowledge of God, religious and irreligious men 

take up the same attitude. Both endeavor to persuade 

men that there is and can be no such knowledge, that 

the best attainable is to be content with unreasoned 

and unenlightened belief." 

'"But that sort of belief is becoming more unsatisfying 
every day. Belief in a God about whom the 
believer avowedly knows not anything may be sustained 
for a time as a sort of religious obligation, or as 
a surviving habit, but sooner or later must be given up. 
One cannot stand on tiptoe forever stretching up his 
hands to the inane. He gets tired, settles down upon 
his feet, and goes about his every-day business. This 
is what men are doing. Numbers of them have given 
up all idea of ever getting hold of anything coherent 
in the realm of religion, and disturb themselves but 
little about the matter. Still larger numbers yet join 
with the worshipers and listen to the preachers, hoping 
that they may yet, somehow, be converted and 
enlightened.' 

'"If we would understand the religious restlessness 
of our age, we must remember,' says Dr. McConnell, 
that 'the idea of God, as it floats in the mind of the 
average man, is compounded of three or four inherited 
conceptions, each of which has to a large extent ceased 
to fit in with the other portions of his mental furniture, 
and all of which have grown to be impossible.' 
There is, first of all, the conception of the 'Kingly God,' 
called into being by a Hebrew people who believed implicitly 
in absolute monarchy, and who regarded the 
earth as the center of the universe. There is, secondly, 
the conception of a God of Justice— a Roman God, worshiped 
by Calvin and Augustine and Tertullian. Thirdly, 
we have to deal with the idea of God considered purely 
as the Creator— an 'infinitely skilful Architect and 
Engineer,' who may awaken awe, dread, wonder, or curiosity, 
but who 'has no commerce with the conscience 
or the heart' Fourthly must be mentioned the quasipantheistic 
conception of a 'God Immanent,' which appeals 
to the mystic sense, but is 'too incoherent and 
evasive to serve the every-day uses of the average 
man.' Dr. McConnell continues: 

"At this point speaks the philosophy which controls 
the thought of our time. Its word is, "God is 
Unknowable." This is not the judgment of evil or shallow 
men. It is the deliberate conclusion of the earnest-minded 
and best men. Nor is it an excuse offered by 
intellectual laziness or moral indifference for declining a 
painful and difficult task. It is the sober judgment of 
those who have tried by "searching to find out God," 
and have failed. It is the conclusion of Christian and 



non-Christian philosophy alike. When Mr. Herbert 
Spencer had arrived at this conviction for himself, he 
preferred to state his conclusion in the words of Dr. 
Mansel, a dignitary of the Church of England. Spencer, 
the master in philosophy, formulates the dictum; 
Mansel, the master in theology, phrases it; Huxley, the 
master in science, gives it its name— Agnosticism; Balfour, 
a Christian prime minister, indorses and extends 
it. "Who by searching can find out God?" To the 
challenge of Job comes the reply of today, No one.' 
"But Agnosticism, in spite of all the forces ranged 
on its side, is not, according to Dr. McConnell's view, 
the final word. It has failed to reckon with the strongest 
argument of all, the argument of Christ. It has 
overlooked the words of one who said: 'Ye have not 
known him, but I know him. ...I am the light of the 
world; he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, 
but shall have the light of life.'" 

THE WORLD BY WISDOM KNOWS NOT GOD 



The discovery of the new element which has been 
named Radium, is remarkable, not only as pointing to 
the existence of hitherto unsuspected forces in creation, 
but also as exposing the folly of the dogmatism of scientists. 
How frequently have we been told that much 
of Bible statement has collapsed before the tests of 
science, and that some finite theory of the universe has 
superseded the inspired narrative. Yet here we have 
the unexpected discovery of an element possessing the 
quality of developing illimitable heat and light without 
combustion, and which throws off "spontaneously" 
minute particles traveling at the rate of 186,000 miles 
per second. It is said the discovery "will be of vital 
interest to the future of humanity." Meanwhile, it 
would not be without value if it inspired some of our 
scientists with a little more humility in the presence of 
the handiwork of God, "when he appointed the foundations 
of the earth." (Prov. 8:29.)— The Christian. 

CALLS SCRIPTURES INTOLERANT LIES. 



London, April 9.— Canon Hensley Henson of Westminster, 
one of the most distinguished of Anglican militant 
divines, has aroused a terrific storm by his outspoken 
declarations on the future of the Bible. He 
says:— 

"The very fact that so many of our people are 
prepared to acquiesce in what they hear from the lectures, 
and even believe that, in some way or other, what 
they hear is divinely true, makes the present indiscriminate 
reading of the Bible in public an extremely perilous 



proceeding. 

"Educated men have at their disposal a means of 
escape from the perplexities stirred in their minds by 
the incredible, the puerile, or the demoralizing narratives 
which the Old Testament contains. But the 
transition is prompt and obvious in untutored minds 
from a sacred volume— too sacred for discussion— to a 
pack of lies too gross for tolerance. 

"What will be the place of the Bible in the future? 
It cannot be questioned that many causes have conduced 
to work something like a revolution among educated 
Christians throughout the world with respect to 
the sacred writings of Christianity. In time there will 
be a great revolution in current teaching with respect 
to the New Testament. Three broad considerations justify 
in the future the paramount place which the Bible 
has traditionally held in the life of Christian society: 

"(1) The Bible remains the best manual of fundamental 
morality which experience has any knowledge. 

"(2) It is the best corrective of ecclesiastical 
corruption. 

R3358 : page 133 

"(3) It is, perhaps, the most effectual check on the 
materialistic tendencies of modern life." 

The Bishop of Norwich, the Rev. Dr. Sheepshanks, 
commenting on these remarks, says: 

"There is not at the present time that bright, 
hopeful feeling among churchmen which prevailed until 
within the last few years. Religion is by no means 
gaining ground throughout the country. Definite belief 
in the Bible is on the wane, and the forces of indifference 
and irreligion are gaining strength." 

"Sir Oliver Lodge asks, 'Now that religion is becoming 
so much more real, whether the formal statement 
of some of the doctrines we have inherited from medieval 
and still earlier times cannot wisely and inoffensively 
be modified?' He shocks many of his coreligionists 
by declaring that he regards the 'doctrine of 
atonement in its concrete form as a survival from barbarous 
times,' repudiating the belief in 'an angry God 
appeased by the violent death of Christ,' and maintaining 
that human nature now is 'rising to the conviction 
that we are part of nature and so part of God. In this 
sense the union of divinity is what science some day 
will tell us is the inner meaning of the redemption of 
men.' 

"These outspoken utterances have caused public 
and private appeals to be made to the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, but so far no action has been taken." 



The duplicity of the leading ministers respecting 
current doctrines of Christianity, the inspiration of the 



Bible, etc., is giving way. Increasing numbers of them 
dislike the dishonesty they have long been practising, 
and are publicly expressing the unbelief that for so long 
has possessed them— engendered by "Higher Criticism" 
and "Evolution." The above are samples. As the 
clergymen find that the public in general will stand it, 
they will in larger numbers and in more explicit terms 
avow themselves. 

We are glad of it. The more outspoken the error 
the more clear and the more precious the Truth will 
appear to those who have it and love it. Those who 
are appealing to the Archbishop to have such utterances 
squelched little realize that the Archbishop and 
nearly all prominent ecclesiastics really sympathize 
with the views, and merely think such men as Canon 
Henson, Lodge and others too outspoken for public 
appreciation— yet. 

It will soon be evident that only the few know or 
care much for such matters— that the vast majority 
merely draw near to the Lord on Sunday in a formal 
manner with their lips, while their hearts are immersed 
in other things. 

Ere long the prediction will be fulfilled, "A thousand 
shall fall at thy side"— a thousand shall thus fall 
into unbelief to one who will stand firm for the Lord 
and his Word. "Who shall be able to stand?" Those 
who have on the whole armor of God, St. Paul explains. 
(Eph. 6:13.) Our Lord says that those who 
will stand will be the "very elect."— Matt. 24:24. 

A MINISTER'S INDICTMENT OF HIS PROFESSION. 



The New York Independent publishes anonymously 
an article from a clergyman under the title: "Why 

R3359 : page 133 

I Gave Up the Ministry— a Soul's Tragedy." The 

writer claims that "every man in the ministry today" 

is "in much the same condition" as himself. He declares 

in this article, that of thirty men who were graduated 

with him from a theological seminary six years 

ago, ten have already abandoned the ministry. He 

says: 

"I am thirty-two years old— at that point where 
I should be most active in that profession for which I 
have spent my life thus far in fitting myself, and just 
now ought to be most happy in it. Instead, I am deliberately 
resigning it and leaving all behind me. My 
purpose here is to set forth a statement of my motives, 
to analyze a situation, and to search for reasons why 
other men along with myself are doing this.... 

"The church has sent its clergy out, or at least 
has allowed them to go out, to do many things in the 



name of religion which have nothing whatever to do 
with it. The clergy today are busy? Yes. But busy 
doing what? Not things they ever were ordained to do. 
They are busy as managers of institutions, as members 
of committees, as representatives on boards, as trustees 
of asylums, orphanages, schools, and hospitals, dispensaries 
and colleges, and builders for themselves of parish-houses, 
where they organize and execute affairs of 
clubs and guilds, societies and institutes. They were 
not 'ordained' to do these things, nor did they need 
years of professional training to become able to do 
them. Thus it would seem that those men who are 
busiest in the ministry today are busy only doing things 
which lie wholly outside of that especial sphere, so far 
as there ever was a special sphere for work in which 
they were specially trained, in so far as they ever were 
specially trained. For my own part I must either find 
for myself some work in the Church which is sufficiently 
unique to justify my continuing in the unique position 
of a 'calling,' or I must abandon the latter here to find 
the former somewhere else." 

ADVANCING TOWARD CHURCH FEDERATION. 



The Christian Observer (Presbyterian) says:— 
"In Britain, all the non-conformist churches have 
formed a 'free church union' in the interest of their 
common cause over against the established Episcopal 
Church. In Scotland, the United Presbyterian Church 
and the Free Church came together after years of negotiation 
to form the United Free Church of Scotland. 
In Canada, a good many years ago, the Methodists and 
Presbyterians, both of whom had several branches in 
the Dominion, united, so that there is only one Presbyterian 
and one Methodist Church in the wide domain 
north of us. In Australia the Presbyterians have gotten 
together, and now the Congregationalists and Presbyterians 
are talking of some sort of federal union. 
For some time there has been talk of union between 
the United Presbyterian and the Associate Reformed 
Presbyterian bodies in this country. And most of our 
readers are aware that union between our Church and 
the Reformed [Dutch] Church has been mooted more 
than once." 

R3359 : page 134 

FRANCE FREEING HERSELF FROM ROMANISM. 



The work of breaking the shackles of Priestcraft in 
France continues. Priests and nuns are no longer permitted 
to teach in the public schools; no private schools 



taught by them or others are licensed where government 
inspection is not permitted; the court houses are being 
stripped of crucifixes and other religious emblems; the 
army and navy are being freed from bondage to Romanism. 
The new conditions are roundly denounced 
by Catholics as high-handed, infidel and anti-christian; 
but thus has Papacy ever fought Protestantism and 
liberty until they got free from her power; then she 
was propitious toward them, and, as in this country, 
would pose as a leader in the crusade for Liberty and 
Truth. 

HIGHER CRITICS AND THE BIBLE. 



If the press report is correct, another College president 
has spoken— Dr. Samuel Plantz of Lawrence University. 
He said: "The fact is that men have overlooked 
the great truth that the Bible is literature, and 
put hard mechanical interpretations on what is to be 
regarded, and what was conceived and executed in the 
free and flowing spirit of imagination." It cannot be 
that a university president believes, if he believes anything 
that men have not noticed that the Bible is literature. 
It must mean merely literature uninspired, like 
other "literature [fiction] conceived and executed in the 
free and flowing spirit of the imagination." He adds: 
"We must not feel that the Bible is worthless because 
Job is not a historical character; is Hamlet worthless 
because there never was a real Hamlet?" 

If the Bible be "free and flowing imagination" is 
Christ historical or only an imaginary character? 
Would the Gospel be worthless with its Hamlet left 
out? What an "imagination" the imaginary Christ had! 
We need not now hesitate to term much higher critical 
literature as "conceived and executed in the free and 
flowing spirit of imagination." 

WHEN DID THE STONE STRIKE THE IMAGE? 



We quote with approval the following clipping 
forwarded to us by one of our friends:— 

"The image is the symbol of the world power in 
its whole future development and of its final 
destruction. 

"The transfer of political power from Judah, now 
a captive of the nations, to the Gentiles, is also indicated 
by it. 

"The image measures the duration of the times of 
the Gentiles— Luke 21:24. 

"The Stone is symbolic of a supernatural power, 
'not made with hands,' heavenly, divine; the mountain 
is the Messianic Kingdom; all is symbolic of Messiah 



and his Kingdom. --Gen. 49:24, Isa. 2:1-4; Matt. 21:44; 
Luke 20:17,18. 

"The toes of the image correspond to the ten horns 
of the Beast of chapter seven, i.e., the horns are kingdoms, 
the toes are kingdoms. 

"Now, when did the Stone strike? 

"I. The Stone struck when there were feet and 
toes to be struck. 

"There were no feet in the Babylonian day, none 
in the Medo-Persian, none in the Graeco-Macedonian, 
and none in the Roman, when the iron legs of a Western 
and Eastern Empire did not yet exist in a divided 
form; in other words, toes and feet of iron and clay 
must be looked for at a time later than the twelve 
Caesars, and nearer to a time when the iron of imperialism 
and the clay of democracy in vain try to cleave 
together [We should say— the iron of civil power and 
the clay of ecclesiastical power]; and not until then 
does the Stone strike. 

"It is evident, therefore, the Stone cannot have 
struck at the birth of Christ, nor at Pentecost, nor at 
the destruction of Jerusalem, nor at the edict of Constantine, 
for there were no feet or toes of ten kingdoms 
to strike. 

"II. The Stone struck when the whole image went 
to pieces 'together;' i.e., suddenly and simultaneously. 

"It did not strike repeatedly, but once, and so 
shattered all together. The image did not decrease 
gradually, but 'together;' all became like chaff and was 
swept away that no place was found for them. 

"Such total and final ruin of all the kingdoms that 
once composed the Roman Empire or succeeded it did 
not overtake them when Christianity began to be 
preached, or since; the world power of the Gentiles is 
still a reality, and will be until the Stone falls and grinds 
it to powder. 

"It is therefore evident that such a crushing, annihilating 
blow is utterly unlike the peaceful power of 
the Gospel. 

"III. The Stone struck before it began to grow 
and not while it was growing into a great mountain. 

"It would seem incredible that such a notion could 
ever have been drawn from this prophetic vision, but 
it is the popular idea that the Stone is growing while 
the kingdoms are shattering. 

"In a certain volume of 'Messianic Prophecy' by a 
'Higher Critic,' it reads: 'The living stone rolling down 
from the mountain, growing as it descends in strength 
and power, is a simple but appropriate symbol of the 
Kingdom of God.' 

"This is even worse, for here the Stone is said to 
be growing in strength and power before it strikes. 

"Daniel says the Stone grew after it struck, and 
then covered the place once possessed by the kingdoms. 

"There is not the least hint that as the Stone increased 
the image decreased. The two are not seen 



side by side, one gradually encroaching upon the other's 
ground; but with mighty blow on its brittle feet, the 
colossal form crushes into shapeless ruin, and is swept 
away like the chaff of the summer threshing floor, and 
for it no more place was found. 

"It is therefore evident that if the world-power 
disappears in one simultaneous and sudden ruin, the 
Stone Kingdom has not yet begun to grow and the 
mighty Stone is yet to fall. 

"In other prophetic language 'the times of the 
Gentiles' are not yet fulfilled; Jerusalem is still trodden 
under foot of the Gentiles; their God-defying and man-defying 
governmental power is to meet its crisis and 

R3359 : page 135 

catastrophe in a day still future; the nations are yet to 

become angry against Jehovah and his Christ; the winepress 

of the wrath of God is yet to be trodden, and not 

till then will the Son of man set up his Kingdom, of 

whom it is written: 'And there was given him dominion 

and glory and a kingdom, that all people, nations, 

and languages should serve him; his dominion is an 

everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and 

his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.'— Daniel 7:14." 

— W. J. Erdman. 



R3360 : page 135 

"BRING FORTH THE BEST ROBE AND PUT IT ON HIM. 

-LUKE 15:ll-24.-MAY 15.- 

Golden Text: "Come and let us 
return unto the Lord."— Hosea 6:1. 

OUR Lord gave three parables illustrative of God's 
grace: (1) The parable of the hundred sheep, of 
which one was lost and carefully sought. (2) The 
parable of the ten pieces of silver, of which one was lost 
and carefully sought. (3) The parable of the two sons, 
the lost one of whom was so eagerly welcomed back on 
his return. 

The Pharisees "trusted in themselves that they were 
righteous and despised others." They had forms of 
righteousness, ceremonies, outward obedience to God and 
his laws, and reverence, piety and sanctity in outward 
appearance. We may assume that with some these matters 
were genuine— of the heart and not merely of formality; 
but the evidences are strong that there were few of 
this professed "holiness people" who were really at 
heart holy, as judged by the Lord's standard. The harvesting 
of the Jewish age surely found all of the true wheat, 
all the truly holy; and, so far as we have knowledge on 



the subject, comparatively few of these were found amongst 
those who outwardly made the profession of special sanctity 
—the Pharisees. 

PUBLICANS AND SINNERS. 

There was a measure of truth in the assertion of the 
Pharisees that the majority of people were living in sin, 
neglecting the divine Law, and thus living much after the 
manner of the Gentiles, who were without God and had 
no hope in the world. But our Lord wished them to see 
that they took a wrong attitude in the matter. Instead of 
holding aloof from their fellow Jews, their brethren, they 
should have been deeply interested in them and ready to 
do anything in their power to help them back to harmony 
with God and fellowship with themselves. Instead, the 
Pharisaical class rather delighted to proclaim that they 
were the heirs of God's favor and that the others were 
estranged from God. These estranged ones were called 
publicans and sinners. The sinners were the more or less 
immoral, who made no professions of keeping the Mosaic 
Law, observances of the more sacred rites and ceremonies, 
holy days, etc. True, they took part in some of the festivals, 
but largely from the standpoint of the merchant and 
trader and sightseer rather than from the standpoint of 
worship offerer. The publicans were Jews who had become 
somewhat estranged to their laws and to the patriotic 
sentiments of the nation, and who accepted service 
under the Romans as tax-gatherers. They were looked 
down upon by those who held that the seed of Abraham, 
heirs of the great Oath bound Covenant, should never, in 
any sense of the word, become the servants of a foreign 
master, and particularly should not serve the foreign master 
in collecting taxes from his brothers; for they held 
that it was not proper that they should pay taxes to 
Caesar's government. 

Our Lord, though attentive to all of the duties of the 
Jew under the Law, was out of touch with such Pharisaism, 
and instead of holding himself aloof from the publicans 
and sinners, "the common people," he preached his 
message to everyone who had ears to hear, making no distinction 
as between scribe and Pharisee, publican and sinner. 
For this the Pharisees scorned him, considering that 
thus he acknowledged himself and his teachings to be on 
a lower plane— more closely allied with the common people, 
the sinner class. The three parables already referred 
to were spoken particularly as a reproof to the Pharisees— 
to show them the impropriety of their attitude toward the 
masses, "the common people." 

Our Lord did not deny that the publicans and sinners 
were in the wrong, were in some respects further estranged 
from God than the Pharisees; but he wished the latter to 
see that their hearts were not in accord with the mind of 
the Lord, else they would not feel so indifferent toward 
their brethren. The three parables were lessons drawn 
from the common affairs of life— which man of you having 



an hundred sheep, if he lose one would not go after it? or 
which woman of you having a bracelet with ten pieces of 
silver ornaments, prized as a marriage memento, would not 
search diligently if one of these pieces were lost? and if 
so, why should they not consider a brother of much more 
value than the sheep or a coin, and why not seek for the 
brother and endeavor to bring him back again? As capping 
the climax came the parable of the prodigal son, 
which constitutes our present lesson. It represents our 
heavenly Father and his attitude toward the two classes. 
The elder son represented the Pharisees; the younger man, 
the prodigal, represented the publicans and sinners; the 
father represented God. The parable showed God's willingness 
to receive back again the penitent one, and forcefully 
represented the impropriety, the inconsistency, of the 
Pharisees in objecting to the recovery of their brothers 
from the ways of sin and their return to the family of God. 

THE YOUNGER SON OF THE PARABLE. 

The wrong course of the publicans and sinners is 
graphically illustrated: they had been in God's favor under 
the Mosaic Covenant, but feeling released from the 
restraints of home, the restraints of the Law of Moses, 

R3360 : page 136 

they had wandered from God into the ways of sin and 
suffering, looking for pleasures and prosperity in the 
wrong direction. They should have been glad to remain 
under divine protection and care and to have enjoyed the 
Father's house and all of its blessings. They should have 
realized the blessed privilege they enjoyed of being separated 
by the Lord from the world in general; but they 
did not appreciate this, and had gone off into sin, and, 
though really Israelites, had been living after the manner 
of the Gentiles, and worse than some of them. They had 
been serving Satan, and many of their sicknesses were the 
result, as well as much of their destitution and especially their 
moral degradation. God's covenant with them as Jews 
was that, if obedient to his arrangements, they should 
have temporal prosperity. In this particular their position 
was the reverse of ours, to whom the Lord promises 
temporal adversity and spiritual prosperity under the 
Gospel dispensation. 

Satan may be said to be master of this far country— 
afar from God and his love and protection and care. He 
it was who degraded them to the level of swine, and in 
his service they starve for any satisfying portion. The 
swine in the parable represented the worldly, those engrossed 
in the things of the present time and wholly indifferent 
to spiritual matters, and this prodigal is represented 
as having nothing more for his sustenance than 
have the worldly; yet there was a difference between him 
and the swine, for while the swine could fill their bellies 
and grow fat on the bean pods of the locust or carob tree, 



the prodigal found it hard to subsist on that diet. He 
realized his degradation. "He came to himself," he realized 
that he had been insane, stupid, dreaming, when he 
left so gracious a father's house and so great blessings as 
he had once enjoyed and come down to this degraded 
position, where his whole being hungered and thirsted for 
the blessings of the home he had left. The first thing he 
did was to resolve to will, and then he proceeded to do. 
The willing would have amounted to nothing had it not 
been followed by the doing, but the doing could not have 
preceded the willing. 

The picture drawn by the Lord of the beggared and 
tattered prodigal, with a look of shame and fearful forebodings 
of what reception he might have from his father 
and from his brother, is graphically set forth in the Lord's 
parable. His elder brother, represented by the Pharisees, 
was not on the lookout for him; but the father, representing 
God, saw him a long way off— was looking for him, 
was compassionate toward him, and, lest he should be discouraged 
in his fearfulness, the father ran to meet him, to 
welcome him. His reception was as though he had never 
sinned: the best robe, the shoes, the ring, all were his, 
and the feast proclaimed the father's joy to the entire 
household. This is given by our Lord to show the Pharisees 
how God viewed the returning of these publicans and 
sinners who were hearing the Gospel message and coming 
back to lives of righteousness and harmony with God. 

SCRIBES AND PHARISEES THE ELDER SON. 

The majority of our Lord's followers were of this 
class, and the Pharisees, instead of hating the Lord and 
hating the message which was attracting these former wanderers 
back to love and service and hope and of fellowship 
with God, should have been glad. Then, picturing the 
Pharisees and their attitude in the matter, the Lord showed 
them that they were angry with the Father because of his 
goodness, and were refusing to go into the feast to which 
they were made welcome by the Father, and which they 
should have enjoyed with these returning prodigals. The 
loss would be theirs, the gain would be that of the more 
humble minded. The Father, who was pleased to give 
them his blessings in every way and pleased to continue 
with them, would not force them to have his favors, even 
though by nature they were his chosen ones. If they 
would not come in to share the Father's hospitalities with 
the returned prodigal they could not share them at all. 
The Gospel feast is but one feast, and all who participate 
in it must come in under the Father's terms and 
arrangements. 

While the parable is thus seen to be, strictly speaking, 
a Jewish parable which in none of its features includes 
the Gentiles, we may nevertheless draw from it an 
illustrative application to our day. As we have frequently 
noted, fleshly Israel was a type or foreshadowing 
of spiritual Israel, and the harvest of the Jewish age 



a pattern of foreview of the harvest of this Gospel age. 
In a broad sense of the word the whole world may be 
viewed in the light of this parable. Those who have 
sought to remain in harmony with the heavenly Father— 
those who have striven to walk in holiness of life and in 
obedience to the divine will— may be considered the elder 
brother; while the younger brother represents those described 

R3361 :page 136 

by the Apostle in Romans, first chapter, "Who 
when they knew God glorified him not as God, neither 
were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations and 
their foolish hearts were darkened. Professing themselves 
to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of 
the incorruptible God," etc. "Wherefore God gave them 
up to uncleanness, to the lusts of their own hearts," etc. 
"For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections 
...and even as they did not like to retain God in their 
knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to 
do those things which are not convenient, being filled 
with all unrighteousness," etc. 

From this standpoint nearly the whole world of mankind 
is still in a far country, in the land of the enemy, 
under the blinding influences of the god of this world. 
And now by the grace of God we learn in advance that 
ultimately an opportunity is to be given to all of these 
everywhere to come to themselves, to realize what they 
have lost, and come to realize the Father's willingness to 
receive them back again— an opportunity for reformation 
during the Millennial age under the ministry of him who 
loved us and bought us with his precious blood. To those 

R3361 :page 137 

who are in the right attitude of heart this message gives 
joy and rejoicing, while to another class today the very 
thought of the estranged world being granted an opportunity 
for returning to the heavenly Father and to have 
the robe of Christ's righteousness placed upon them, and 
to be accepted to sonship to God again, is a repulsive 
thought, just as the thought of the favor of God going to 
the publicans and sinners was repulsive to most of the 
Pharisees of our Lord's time. 

The first returning prodigal under the new dispensation 
will be the poor Jew— for thus it is written, 
"There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob: for this is my covenant 
with them when I shall take away their sins. As 
concerning the Gospel they are enemies for your sake; 
but as touching the election, they are beloved for the 
fathers' sakes. For the gifts and calling of God are 
without repentance." (Rom. 11:25-30.) The Prophet 
describes the experiences of the Jew as a prodigal returning 
to the Father's house, saying, that the Lord 
will pour upon them the spirit of prayer and of supplication, 



and they shall look upon him whom they have 
pierced and shall mourn because of him. Neither will 
they be the only ones upon whom the Father will pour 
his Spirit, as it is written, "After those days [after the 
Gospel age, the time of dealing with the servants and 
handmaidens only] the Lord shall pour out his Spirit 
upon all flesh."— Joel 2:28,29. 

MANKIND IN GENERAL PRODIGALS. 

The same thought is brought to our attention in Nebuchadnezzar, 
who in a general way represents the madness 
upon the world. At the end of the days— at the end of 
his period of bestial degradation— he came to himself, and 
we read, "At the end of the days, I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted 
up mine eyes unto heaven, and my understanding returned 
unto me, and I blessed the Most High and I 
praised and honored him that liveth forever... my reason 
returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, 
my honor and brightness returned unto me." (Dan. 4:33.) 
So at the end of the Gentile times, after 1915, reason 
will begin to come back to the prodigal ones, and the 
light of the Lord Jesus will begin to shine in every quarter, 
and a blessing will come to the whole human family 
released from the blinding influences of the Adversary. 
The Prophet again describes this coming blessing to the 
whole world saying, "At that time many nations shall go 
and say, Come, let us go to the mountain of the Lord's 
house; he shall teach us of his ways, and we will walk in 
his paths; for then the law shall go forth from Mount 
Zion [the spiritual Kingdom, the glorified Christ] and the 
word of the Lord from Jerusalem [earthly representatives 
of the Millennial Kingdom and glory]." 

"THE SAME YESTERDAY, TODAY AND FOREVER." 

It is remarkable how some people can see a little yet 
are unable to grasp the glorious vision of divine wisdom 
and power. For instance, Rev. Alex. McKenzie, writing 
along the lines of divine compassion and the open door 
for those who will return to the Father's house, couches 
his thought in the following words: 

"It would not be amiss to say that the Gospel of 
Christ is the Gospel of the second chance. Men have 
curiously wondered if there was a second chance in another 
world. There is something much better than that, a second 
chance in this world. 'Now,' cries the great Archer, 
'now is the accepted time to try again! Now is the day 
to hit the mark.' Repentance is a new opportunity. So 
the prodigal came back to his father, saying, 'Father, before 
heaven and in thy sight I have missed the mark. Let 
me be as one of thy servants to make bows and arrows for 
better men.' But his father understood the confession. 
'Bring out a new bow and give it to him.' The brother 
said, 'But, father, he has had his bow and missed the mark.' 
'Bring out the best bow and give it to him. My boy has 



come back to try again.'" 

We are glad that our heavenly Father gives us and 
our brothers and sisters and children opportunities to recover 
themselves after they have wandered into sin— opportunities 
to profit by the lessons of life and the sad experience 
of being strangers, aliens from God. It is well 
for us that we can see this. Fortunate it is that so few 
have gotten the thought that one failure, one mistake, 
would seal their destiny. Glad we are that so many are 
able to realize the divine compassion and forgiveness 
manifested through Jesus, which makes allowances not 
only for our original estrangement but for various missteps 
subsequently. But shall we limit the grace of this 
God when he himself has expressed no limits? Shall we 
say that it is only to those who have heard his voice and 
come into his family in the present time that his grace 
shall be extended at all? Why is it that so many find it 
difficult to realize that the same God who has had compassion 
on their weaknesses and failures and has accepted 
them back as prodigals, without any violation of 
justice, may not be equally generous toward those who as 
yet have not even had an ear to hear or the eyes to 
see his grace and goodness in Christ? 

It is passing strange that now, in the dawning of the 
new dispensation, as the Lord brings to our attention the 
glorious features of his plan, which shall surely make 
for the uplift of the world of mankind and their complete 
restitution if they are willing, back to all that was 
lost in Eden— purchased for them by the Father through 
the gift of his Son at Calvary— these blessings should arouse 
the opposition and anger of any who have ever named 
the name of Christ, or have ever been made in any measure 
partakers of the Father's spirit. How is it that 
such close their ears to the message respecting our dear 
Redeemer— "This is the true light that lighteneth every 
man that cometh into the world"? How is it that they 
refuse to give credence to the message which the Lord sent 
by the angel choir on the plains of Bethlehem— "Behold, 
we bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be 
unto all people"? 

NONE BUT REPENTANT PRODIGALS RECEIVED. 

In the parable there was joy at the return of the 

R3361 :page 138 

prodigal from the fields of sin and disloyalty, and this 

was explained by the Lord to mean that there is joy 

in heaven over the return of every one who, after being 

a child of God, has wandered from the Father's house. 

The same principle now holds true in this Gospel age, 

and any who, having been accepted in Christ, shall wander 

away and return again in true humility, as represented 

in the parable, may again experience God's favor and 

have their past forgiven, and the robe of Christ's righteousness 



shall cover their blemishes. They shall have the 
evidences of divine favor and mercy again. We can see 
that God's heart is large enough to have made a provision 
for the world of mankind through the same Redeemer 
and through the same precious atonement sacrifice; and 
not only do we rejoice to see this unfolding of the larger 
features of the divine plan, but we are sure that the angels 
in heaven likewise rejoice to see the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the love of God as exhibited 
toward his fallen creatures. 

Nothing in the above is meant to intimate in any 
sense of the word that any will be received of God at any 
time on any other terms than are represented in this 
parable, in the case of the prodigal. The prodigal must 
will to return, the prodigal must strive to return, but 
the Father will meet him on the way to encourage him, 
to receive him, to bless him, to bring him into all the 
glorious things which he has in reservation for those 
who love him and his righteousness. There is a part, 
however, in all such reformation which belongs in some 
measure to divine providence— it is that represented by 
the words, "When he came to himself." Sin and degradation 
have brought unreason, unbalanced judgment, 
and have made the good to appear bad, the light to 
appear darkness, the true to appear false, and contrariwise. 
It is of divine providence that the eyes of our 
understanding open to see just where we are, and to 
realize our need and our loss. And so, as we have 
shown above, divine promises reach out for the world 
of mankind and attest to us that in due time God will 
cause reason to come to mankind that they may appreciate 
their lessons and desire to return to the Father's 
house. The will and the effort, however, they must exercise, 
else the results will not be attained. All through 
the Millennial age mankind will be brought to a discernment 
of their needs, and as they respond they will 
have the Father's provision in Christ for meeting them 
on the way and helping them back through the provisions 
of restitution to a condition that will be full of 
peace and blessing in accord with the Almighty. 

The eye of some prodigal may rest upon this article, 
and he may feel a longing for the Father's house, 

R3362 : page 138 

the family association and the gracious blessings and 

spiritual fellowship which belong there and which he in 

the past enjoyed and has left. If so, we remind 

him that this thought is the beginning of the return to 

reason— he is coming to himself. Let him arise immediately 

and go unto the Father through the appointed 

way, the Lord Jesus; let him be assured of the Father's 

willingness to receive him; but let him not return in 

any self-righteous or self-excusing attitude of mind, 

which would be sure to frustrate the blessing hoped for. 

He must go back as did the prodigal, with contrition of 



heart, with full confession of his error, and with a willingness 
to take the very lowest place in the Father's family as 
a servant. It is to such that the Father is pleased to give 
a full restoration of the privileges of sonship. 



R3362 : page 138 

ONLY THE HUMBLE SHALL BE EXALTED. 

--MARK 10:35-45.~MAY 22.- 

Golden Text: "For even the Son of man 
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister." 

SEVERAL weeks intervened between the incidents 
of the last lesson and the present one. In that 
time the Lord had crossed over Jordan in answer 
to the request of Mary and Martha that he should come 
and heal their brother Lazarus, who was sick. Jesus arrived 
intentionally too late for this, but awakened Lazarus 
from sleep, and thereby aroused a great storm of opposition, 
especially amongst the scribes and Pharisees, who 
sought to put him to death. Knowing that his time was 
not yet come, he retired into a mountain of northern Judea, 
but at the time of this lesson he with his twelve apostles 
was en route for Jerusalem. He had just explained to 
them more particularly the ignominy, shame and death 
which he would experience, and repeated his assurance of 
his resurrection. The rich young ruler had just visited 
him, and gone away sorrowful upon learning the terms of 
discipleship. Jesus had just said, How hardly shall they 
who have riches enter into the Kingdom; the apostles 
had inquired what they should have since they had left all, 
and Jesus assured them that they should have a hundred 
fold more in this present time, with persecution, and in 
the world to come everlasting life. 

The context says that Jesus was walking in advance 
of the twelve, who were discussing matters amongst themselves, 
overawed by the stupendous things which the Lord 
had declared to be imminent. The courage of our Lord 
in the narrow way fills us with admiration. What a strong 
character was his! He had no thought of turning back; 
he was intent upon accomplishing his Father's will— upon 
sacrificing himself in the interest of others. A noble pattern 
the apostles saw before them— greatness in humility, 
victory through service. 

A GOODLY HERITAGE DESIRED. 

It was at this time that James and John approached 
the Lord in a private manner. Matthew tells us that their 
mother Salome was with them and really made the request 

R3362 : page 139 



for them in their names. Salome is supposed to have 
been the sister of Mary, the aunt of Jesus, in which event 
James and John were his full cousins. Realizing that matters 
were drawing to a crisis they sought of the Lord an 
assurance that they two might be very close to him in the 
Kingdom, one on his right hand and one on his left, the 
two positions of chiefest favor. 

Our Lord did not reprove them, for doubtless he read 
in their hearts a great love and loyalty toward himself; 
and the desire for the positions indicated not merely the 
desire for the honors and authority implied, but specially 
because this would bring them closer to himself. Had 
the Lord seen in their hearts an evil form of ambition, 
undoubtedly he would have reproved it on the spot. His 
answer, however, was so framed as to impress these brothers 
and all of his followers since with what is implied in 
joint-heirship with the Lord in the Kingdom. Very forceful 
is the expression, "Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye 
able to drink of the cup that I drink of, and be baptized 
with the baptism that I am baptized with?" 

The cup signifies experiences— as, for instance, when 
our Lord said, "The cup which my Father hath given me, 
shall I not drink it? " (John 18:11.) Our Lord wished 
his disciples to see clearly that the Father had poured for 
him a special cup of experiences, and had required of him 
special baptism into death, as conditions precedent to his 
glory and Kingdom; and that whoever would become his 
associates in the Kingdom must become also his associates 
in the sufferings of this present time— in the ignominy and 
whatever experiences the Father might see best to permit as 
tests of faith and devotion and character. Our Lord did 
not refer to the Memorial Supper cup, but to the experiences 
which it symbolized, even as he did not refer to water 
baptism, but to the baptism into death which is symbolized 
by the water immersion. 

How heart-searching was this question! It meant, 
Are ye willing? because it would be impossible for the 
disciples to have known their own ability except in the 
sense of having confidence in God that he would give the 
ability to those who had their wills thoroughly subjected 
to his. This is illustrated in the symbolical baptism, in 
which one no more buries himself than he raises himself. 
We merely surrender our wills, our all, to the Lord, and 
he by his Word and grace works in us to will and ultimately 
to do his good pleasure— expecting from us only 
the possibilities, and assisting us to these with grace sufficient 
for us, for every time of need. 

"MY GRACE IS SUFFICIENT FOR YOU." 

That these two noble apostles were not inspired by 
selfish ambitions in this request is evidenced by their 
prompt reply to the Lord's searching question and later on 
evidenced by their faithfulness even unto death. They 
said, "We are able"— that is, "We are willing. God 



helping us, we will sacrifice everything to follow in your 
footsteps; we will count nothing dear unto us; we will 
lay aside every weight and every sinful besetment; we 
will run with patience the race set before us, looking unto 
Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith." This we may 
assume to be a larger statement of their devotion. 

Our Lord's love and sympathy went out to them 
afresh as he answered them, guaranteeing that with such 
willingness of heart they should indeed have the experiences 
necessary to fit them for a place in the Kingdom. 
What a comfort this is to even the weakest of the Lord's 
followers who are sincere. 

The Lord looketh at the heart, and if he sees there 
full devotion to himself, he is pleased to grant to such his 
blessing, his aid, saying, "I will never leave thee nor forsake 
thee." "My grace is sufficient for thee— my strength 
is made perfect in weakness." We, too, are desirous of 
sharing the Kingdom with our Lord, yet not from love of 
exaltation above others, but from a desire to have this 
evidence that we please our Father and our Lord Jesus— 
to have this closeness of relationship to him, and to have 
the privilege of participation with our dear Redeemer in 
the great work of blessing all the families of the earth in 
due time. It is well that we should have the Lord's answer 
clearly before our minds, and know that unless we 
partake of his cup and are immersed into his death, we can 
have no share in his Kingdom of glory. Let us then 
count all things else as loss and as dross to obtain this 
necessary experience. As it comes to us let us not be fearful, 
nor think strange of the fiery trials that shall try us, 
as though some strange thing had happened unto us. On 
the contrary, even hereunto were we called, that we might 
now suffer with the Lord and by and by be glorified together 
with him. 

As for the particular place to be occupied in the 
Kingdom by the sons of Zebedee or by us, our Lord pointed 
out that the assigning of such positions was in the 
Father's hands— the choicest positions shall be given to 
those for whom they have been prepared by the Father. 
Not that we are to understand that the Father prepared 
the places in advance by any arbitrary divisions, but 
rather that the Father's pre-arranged plan is that each of 
the followers of Jesus shall have positions of honor in the 
Kingdom proportionate to the zeal of their faithfulness in 
the present time— for none shall have any part in the 
Kingdom who do not now prove faithful. 

THE MEEKEST AND MOST ZEALOUS. 

It is not for us to decide the zeal and faithfulness of 
the apostles— to say which two would better fill these positions 
of chiefest honor. The Father will make no mistake. 
It will not surprise us, however, should we find the 
Apostle Paul in one of these two positions. His faithful, 
loving zeal and loyalty seem to shine out conspicuously 
even amongst those who were also faithful and loyal. It 



is not for us to have any ambitious feelings respecting this 
matter, except that we desire always to serve the Lord 
and be pleasing to him, and eventually to be as close to 
him as possible. When we remember that the closer 
we come to him in the present trials and experiences and 

R3362 : page 140 

suffering with faithfulness the closer we will be to him in 
the future, it explains to us the meaning of the Apostle's 
words when speaking of his severe trials: he called them 
light afflictions but for a moment, working out a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.— 2 Cor. 4: 17. 
We recall that there had been, a little while before, 
some rivalry amongst the apostles as to which should be 
greatest in the Kingdom. At that time Jesus took a 
little child as an exemplification of candor and guilelessness, 
and assured them that unless they became as little 
children— simple-hearted, honest, candid, they could in 
no wise have any part in his Kingdom. Now, when the 

R3363 : page 140 

ten other disciples learned the special mission of Salome 
and the request made by and for James and John, they 
were indignant at them. Possibly some of them, Judas 
included, were very anxious for the authority and power 
and dignity of the throne, but without the very special 
love and longing to be near the Master himself which 
seem to have influenced James and John in their request. 
But Jesus set matters straight with them all, and turned 
their displeasure into an opportunity for another good lesson, 
by the assurance that the chief positions in the Kingdom 
would be given along the lines of meritorious service, 
and that thus each one of them would have his opportunity 
to strive for the chief position by striving to render 
service to the others. 

Amongst the Gentiles the rulers are lords, who do no 
serving but are served, but among the followers of Jesus 
the rule is to be reversed; he who would serve most was 
to be esteemed most highly. What a beauty there is in 
the divine order of things ! how thoroughly all who are 
right minded can sympathize with the principles here 
laid down! How reasonable they are and how contrary 
to the spirit of the world. Truly, the Lord's followers 
will in this sense of the word be a peculiar people in their 
zeal for good works— for serving one another and for doing 
good unto all men as they have opportunity. The 
Apostle Peter emphasizes this point (I Pet. 5:6), "Humble 
yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, 
that he may exalt you in due time." "He that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted, and he that exalteth himself shall 
be abased."— Luke 14:11. 

OUR LORD SERVANT OF ALL. 



The Lord did not have one standard for his followers 
and another standard for himself. Consequently, when 
they heard him say, Whosoever of you will be chief shall 
be servant of all, they could promptly recognize that this 
was the course that he had pursued— that he had been servant 
to them all; and it was on account of the services 
that he was continually rendering them that they delighted 
to serve him, to acknowledge him their Master and to 
walk in his steps. Indeed they had seen only a small fragment 
of the Lord's sacrificing and of its far-reaching influence 
as a service to others. We can see this as we recognize 
the fact that our Lord was about to die, not merely 
for his disciples, not merely for the Jews, but to be a propitiation 
for the sins of the whole world, that the whole 
world eventually might have a blessing— a blessed opportunity 
for coming to life eternal through the merit of his 
service. Our Lord called this to their attention, saying, 
"For verily the Son of man came not to be ministered 
unto [served] but to minister [serve], and to give his life 
a ransom for many." This is one of the very explicit 
statements of Scripture respecting the object of our Lord's 
death— that it was not for his own sins that he died, that 
on the contrary it was for ours, and that in thus dying he 
gave himself a ransom price— a corresponding price for 
the sins of the whole world. 

No other lesson requires to be so carefully learned by 
the Lord's people as this lesson of humility. It has to do 
with the very humblest of the flock, as well as with those 
who are teachers and elders and pilgrims, etc.; but the 
degree of force that seems to come with the besetment or 
temptation seems to multiply in proportion to the position 
and attainments of the individual. Pride and ambition 
may be in those who have no official position in the 
Church, often asserted in fault-finding and criticism 
which, to the hearers, is intended to imply superior wisdom 
or ability on the part of the critic— that his wisdom and 
ability only wait for opportunity to manifest his greatness 
above his fellows. We are not objecting to a kindly brotherly 
word of criticism given privately and with a view to 
helpfulness, but merely to the kind which vaunteth itself 
and seeks to do injury to the reputation of another occupying 
a preferred position. 

"BE NOT MANY OF YOU TEACHERS." 

As the Apostle intimates, however, this besetment 
bears chiefly upon those who have some talent, some ability, 
and whom their fellows have to some extent honored 
as teachers. Little men, like little ships with broad sails, 
are in great danger of being capsized if too strong a wind 
of popularity play upon them. Not only so, but we believe 
that even the most humble, the most faithful, the 
most zealous to be servants of the cause, have continual 
need to be on their guard lest their good intentions should 
be used of the Adversary as a trap for their ensnarement. 
Let us remember the Apostle's words, "Be not many of 



you teachers, my brethren, knowing that a man [who is a 
teacher] shall receive greater condemnation"— he is exposed 
to greater trials and temptations as a result. This 
must not hinder any who have talents from using them, 
but it should make each one very careful that he does not 
think more highly of himself than he ought to think, but 
to think soberly. If the judgment of the majority of the 
congregation does not recognize his adaptation to the 
service of a teacher, he should humbly accept its conclusion 
as correct, no matter how highly he had thought of 
himself previously. And even if the majority should conclude 
that he is worthy of a position as a teacher in Zion, 
he should tread very softly before the Lord, very humbly, 
realizing that those who in any degree attempt to impart 
instruction in spiritual things to others are to that extent 

R3363 :page 141 

acting as representatives and mouthpieces of the Lord himself, 

the Head of the body; and all should keep in mind 

the Lord's words in this Golden Text and his own exemplification 

of the matter— that he who serves most and not 

he who lords it most should have the chief respect of the 

Lord's people. 



R3363 : page 141 

THE LAST SUPPER 

-MATT. 26:17-30. -MAY 29.- 

JESUS and the apostles came to Bethany, near 
Jerusalem, that they might eat the Passover 
Supper in the holy city, and that our Lord might 
suffer at the hands of his enemies, as he had foretold 
his disciples— that thus he might accomplish an atonement 
for the sins of the people. His arrival was just a 
week before his crucifixion. The following day at the 
supper Mary anointed him. On the next day he rode 
on the ass into Jerusalem, was not received, wept over 
the city, and said, "Your house is left unto you desolate." 
On the following day he visited the temple, 
driving out the money changers with the scourge of 
cords. The next day he gave his last public teaching 
in the temple, declaring himself to be the light of the 
world. Every night he seems to have returned to Bethany 
to the house of Lazarus and Martha and Mary, 
which was also the home of himself and the apostles 
whenever they were in that vicinity. The next day, 
Wednesday, the Lord remained in Bethany in retirement, 
and on Thursday sent two of his disciples to 
make ready the Passover, which was eaten by himself 
and the twelve that night— "the same night in which 
he was betrayed." 



The feast of Passover lasted a week, and was one 
of the most important celebrated under the Jewish arrangement. 
During that week, leaven, as a type of sin, 
was carefully put away from all the food and destroyed 
in every house, in intimation of the holiness and purity, 
the unleavenness, of the Lord's people— spiritual Israel 
—typically represented by natural Israel. The whole 
week was a festival of rejoicing because of God's deliverance 
of Israel from the bondage of Egypt. The feast-week 
began on the 15th day of the first month, Jewish 
reckoning, but it was preceded on the 14th by the killing 
of the lamb, and the sprinkling of its blood upon the 
doorposts of the houses, as a memorial of what took 
place in Egypt on the night in which the Lord spared 
the first-born of Israel under the blood and slew the 
first-born of the Egyptians, and thus made the latter 
willing to let his people go free. It was for the eating 
of this memorial lamb on the night previous to the beginning 
of the Passover feast-week that our Lord sent 
his disciples to make ready, as explained in our lesson. 

Luke tells us that it was Peter and John who were 
sent on this mission, and Mark tells us that they were 
to know the man at whose house the feast would be 
held by his carrying a pitcher of water. It has been 
surmised by some that the house was that of Mark's 
mother, Mary, and that the upper room thus used was 
the same one in which the apostles subsequently met 
and where the pentecostal blessing was poured out upon 
them. We do know that it was at the house of this 
Mary that many gathered to pray for the release of 
Peter from prison. It was a "large upper room" and 
was already prepared with a suitable dining couch of 
proper dimensions. It has been surmised that Jesus 
took this indirect way of indicating the place that Judas 
might not be informed until the time for the gathering, 
so that there might be no interruption of the 
feast and our Lord's subsequent discourses, recorded in 
John 14:17, on the part of those who were seeking his 
apprehension. Peter and John made ready the Passover 
in the sense of furnishing and preparing the lamb, 
the unleavened bread, bitter herbs and the fruit of the 
vine, and in the evening at the appropriate time the 
entire company gathered for the celebration. 

A LESSON IN HUMILITY. 

Luke only records (22:24-30) that there was strife 
amongst the apostles on this occasion, though John (13) 
also implies this. We are not to suppose that the 
apostles were actuated wholly by ambition and selfishness. 
We may well suppose that the strife was for 
position of nearness to the Master because of their love 

R3364 : page 141 

for him. The Lord improved the opportunity to give 



them a most wonderful discourse, which doubtless lasted 
them through the remainder of their lives. They 
had arrived late in the afternoon, over dusty roads, 
and, not being of the wealthy class, no servants were 
there to receive them and to wash their feet; and instead 
of thinking to do this one for another, to their 
mutual comfort, they had been striving with one another 
for favored positions at the table, John evidently 
gaining the most desired position next to the Master- 
possibly accorded him because he was not only a relative, 
and one whom Jesus specially loved, but also because 
he was the youngest of their number. 

The customs of olden times differ from those of 
the present in many respects. In eating they reclined 
on a couch surrounding a table. They leaned on their 
left elbow and used the right hand for conveying food 
to the mouth; thus their heads were brought comparatively 
close together, while their feet extended out behind 
over the couch. Apparently permitting the dispute 
to run its course and the supper to begin, Jesus 
arose, and going behind them began to wash the feet of 
one after another of them. Such a service rendered to 

R3364 : page 142 

them by the Master was of course a severe reproof. 

They should have thought of washing his feet and each 

other's and now probably wished that they had done 

so, but at the time each was apparently intent upon 

establishing the fact that he was in no degree inferior 

to the others. They had forgotten so soon the lesson 

of a short time before— that he who would be greatest 

amongst them should be servant of all. Our Lord here 

had the opportunity of illustrating this very matter: 

he was willing to serve them all, was continually serving 

them all in the spiritual things, and hence they regarded 

him truly and properly as their Master; but now 

he showed them his humility to the extent that he was 

willing to serve them in the most menial capacity also. 

Valuable lesson! May it never lose its import amongst 

the Lord's true followers. Some, however, have erred 

in supposing that this became an institution or ordinance 

similar to the Lord's Supper and baptism: to our understanding 

the lesson to be conveyed by this symbol, 

and its application to each of us at any time and at any 

place, would be that we should seek to render some useful 

service to the brethren regardless of how menial it 

might be, and that so doing to them it would be reckoned 

of the Lord as though done unto him. 

"BETTER THAT HE HAD NOT BEEN BORN." 

It was while they were at supper that Jesus, appearing 
very sorrowful, gave as an explanation that it 
would be one of his own chosen twelve that would betray 
him and thus become accessory to his death— one 



of those who dipped with him in the dish, partaking 

of the same supper, the same bread, the same 

roasted lamb. Then he pointed out that although this 

was all written, and thus no alteration would be found 

in respect to the divine plan, nevertheless it signified a 

very gross breach of friendship— one sad to contemplate. 

It really made no difference to the Lord, so far 

as his intention and consecration were concerned, 

whether he were apprehended by the rulers without 

any betrayal or whether the betrayal were by a comparative 

stranger or by a disciple: the fact would make 

no change in the divine arrangement; but it was a cause 

for great sorrow that it should be one who had been a 

bosom friend and disciple. 

"It had been good for that man if he had not been 
born," implies to us that, from the Lord's standpoint, 
Judas had already experienced so large a measure of 
knowledge and opportunity for better things that his 
responsibility for his act was complete, and that there 
would be no hope for him at any time in the future. 
We will certainly have no objection to it if the Lord 
should find some excuse for granting Judas a further 
opportunity for correcting his character, but we see no 
Scriptural reason for thinking there will be such further 
opportunity. From our standpoint it appears as 
though he sinned against great light, experience and 
knowledge— contact with the Lord and under the 
power of the holy Spirit— one of those commissioned 
to heal diseases and cast out devils in the name of the 
Lord, and as his representative, and using his power. 
His end was a sad one: every suicide by his act confesses 
his wish that he had never been born. 

"LORD, IS IT I?" 

Another account tells us that each of the disciples 
inquired of the Lord. "Is it I?" and last of all Judas. 
The others felt sure that they had nothing to do with 
it and wished the Lord to confirm their innocency, and 
the eleven having asked and no response from the Lord 
indicating their culpability, the implication would be 
that Judas was the one; yet such was his spirit of bravado 
that he also asked the Master, "Is it I?" Jesus 
answered him, "Thou hast said," or "It is you." How 
noble was the Lord's reproof; he could have scarcely 
said less— not a threat, not an imprecation, not a manifestation 
of bitterness, but merely an expression of sorrow 
and of pity. What a lesson for us! Our enemies 
are to be pitied, not hated; to be blessed as far as we 
are able, but never to be cursed. It is well for all of 
Jesus' disciples to watch and pray against any Judas-like 
disposition to sell the Lord or his Truth or his 
brethren for money or other selfish considerations. 
Knowing that there will be others of the Judas class, 
let us guard our hearts and ask, "Lord, is it I?" 

While they were eating the Passover Supper prescribed 



by the Jewish Law, or rather while they were 
still at the table after they had finished the supper 
proper, Jesus took some of the remaining bread— which 
in shape at least more particularly resembled what we 
today would call crackers— he blessed it, broke it and 
gave it to his disciples saying, "Take, eat, this is my 
body." Another evangelist adds, "broken for you." 
Romanists and some Protestants claim that in consequence 
of the form of this statement, "this is my body," 
and the next statement, "this is my blood," we should 
understand that whenever the memorial bread and 
fruit of the vine have been consecrated they are 
changed from being bread and wine and become the 
actual body of Christ and his actual blood. We dissent 
from this as being most unreasonable and most 
untrue; the bread and the wine merely symbolized or 
represented the body and blood of our Lord. In absolute 
proof of this note the fact that our Lord at the 
time he used these words had not yet been broken and 
his blood had not yet been shed. Hence to have used 
these expressions in any other way than the way we do 
use them, namely, as meaning that the bread and the 
wine represented his body and his blood, would have 
meant to misrepresent the truth— to have falsified; and 
we cannot perceive that this was done or would have 
been proper to have been done by the Lord or any of 
his followers. 

R3364 : page 143 

The bread, as our Lord explained, represented the 
bread from heaven— his flesh which he sacrificed for the 
sins of the world. He invites all of his followers to 
eat of it, and we partake of his flesh when we appropriate 
to ourselves the blessings, the mercy, the grace 
secured by the breaking of his body. We thus appropriate 
to ourselves the benefits of the sacrifice which 
secures to us the forgiveness of sins and reconciliation 
with the Father. 

"THE BLOOD OF THE NEW COVENANT." 

He took the cup and gave thanks and gave it to 
the apostles, saying, "Drink ye all of it, for this is my 
blood of the New Covenant which is shed for many for 
the remission of sins." This represents my blood— it 
will continue to represent my blood with you and with 
all my dear followers at all times, and will be to you 
on such occasions a reminder of my death and of the 
covenant which was thus sealed between God and sinners 
by myself as the great Mediator between God and 
man. 

The New Covenant or New Testament sealed by 
the blood of Christ is the one that is mentioned throughout 
the Old Testament and referred to by the Apostle 
in his letter to the Hebrews (8:6-13; 10:29; 12:20). It 



supersedes the Law Covenant. The latter, mediated 
through Moses, provided that whosoever would do the 
commandments of the Law should have everlasting 
life; but the New Covenant provides for mercy, and, 
recognizing the fact that in our fallen condition we 
cannot do the things we would, the Mediator of the 
New Covenant, by his death on behalf of the people, is 
able to keep Justice whole and yet deal with us according 
to our intentions instead of according to our actual 
accomplishments, and meanwhile to lift mankind up, up, 
up, out of degradation to that plane or condition of 
being where they will be able to do perfectly all the 
good desires of true and honest hearts. 

The Apostle Paul shows us that this bread and cup 
had a still further and broader signification. He it was 
who had so clear an understanding of the "mystery"— 
Christ in you— that we are members of the mystical 
body of Christ, participators now in his sufferings, and, 
if faithful, to be members of his glorious body and participators 
also in his glory. From this standpoint, as 
the Apostle explains, the broken loaf represents not 
only the breaking of the Lord Jesus personally, but the 
breaking of all his mystical members throughout this 
Gospel age; and the drinking of the cup was not only 
his own participation in death that he might thus seal 
the New Covenant on behalf of mankind, but that his 
invitation to us to join with him in partaking of the 
cup, "Drink ye all of it," implied that we could have 
participation with him in the sufferings and death in 
the present time— participation with him in the inauguration 
of the New Covenant conditions during the 
Millennial reign. How grand is the thought, how deep, 
how broad! What a wonderful privilege that we should 
be permitted to fill up that which is behind of the 
afflictions of Christ and to look forward to a participation 
in his glories in the future. From this standpoint 
we see fresh force in his word to the apostles noted in 
a previous lesson, namely, "Are ye able to drink of the 
cup that I shall drink of, and be baptized with the 

R3365 : page 143 

baptism that I am baptized with?" As not every 
one is worthy to be invited to such participation, so 
also not every one who is invited will so appreciate the 
privilege as to participate in this matter joyfully and 
gratefully. Let us each resolve and say to the Lord, as 
did James and John, "Lord, we are able"— we are willing. 
By thine aid we will come off conquerors and 
more than conquerors. 

THE NEW WINE-THE JOYS OF THE KINGDOM. 

Our Lord declared that he would no more participate 
in the fruit of the vine until he would drink it new 
in the Kingdom. The thought is not that he would 



drink new or unfermented wine in the Kingdom with 
them, but that until in the Kingdom the new or antitypical 
thing represented in the wine would not be fulfilled. 
When the Kingdom shall come all the sufferings 
and trials of the present time will be past, the treading 
of the winepress, the wine making, will all be over, and 
instead the wine shall be that of joy and exhilaration, 
representing the joys and the blessings beyond imagination 
or expression that will be the portion of all those 
who truly have fellowship with our Redeemer in the 
sufferings of this present time and also in the glories that 
shall follow. The Kingdom time is very close at hand 
now— certainly 1800 years and more nearer than it was 
when our Lord spoke these words— and the evidences 
of its steady inauguration are multiplying on every 
hand. Our hearts should be proportionately rejoicing 
in anticipation and we should proportionately be 
faithful in the present time in the drinking of the cup 
of sorrow, suffering, shame and contumely, and thus 
testifying of our love and our loyalty. 

Following this was the discourse which has blessed 
so many of the Lord's people down through intervening 
centuries recorded by John (chapters 15, 16, 17). 
Then they sang a hymn and went out to the Mount of 
Olives— to the Garden of Gethsemane and to fresh trials 
upon all of the disciples. So it has seemed to us that 
with every recurrence of the Memorial season, and 
every fresh symbolization of our pledge to the Lord, 
come fresh trials, fresh testings, fresh sittings upon the 
Lord's people. Who shall be able to stand? Let us 
hold fast the confidence of our rejoicing firm unto the 
end, hold fast the faithful Word, hold fast the exceeding 
great and precious promises, hold fast to our Passover 
Lamb, our Deliverer! 



page 145 

SEMI-MONTHLY 