What Gives Life True Meaning?
WHEN Jesse, a 17-year-old high school student, was asked about the meaning of life, he replied, “Have as much fun as you can, as long as you’re alive.” Suzie had a different view. “I honestly believe that the meaning of life is what you make it mean,” she said.
Have you wondered about the meaning of life? Is there a single universal purpose for mankind? Or is Suzie right—that life is essentially what each of us makes of it? No matter how technologically advanced our society gets, something inside us seems to yearn for meaning. At some point in our life, most of us wonder, ‘Why are we here?’
Modern science has struggled to answer that question. With what result? “There is no intrinsic, evolutionary meaning to being alive,” stated David P. Barash, a professor of psychology and zoology. For evolutionary biologists, living things have only one purpose: survive and reproduce. Thus, Professor Barash suggests: “In a huge universe that is devoid of purpose and uncaring about people, it is the human project to give meaning to our lives by the free, conscious, intentional choices we make.”
The Source of Meaning and Purpose
Is that all there is, then, to life—each one of us doing what he or she wants? Rather than leave us to wander aimlessly in a universe devoid of purpose or meaning, the Bible has long revealed that we are here for a reason. Our existence is not the result of some cosmic accident. The Creator, we are told, took years to prepare the earth for man’s arrival. Nothing was left to chance. He made sure that everything was “very good.” (Genesis 1:31; Isaiah 45:18) Why? It was because God had a purpose for man.
Yet, interestingly, God did not predestine the future of each individual, either by divine intervention or by some biological process. Although we are influenced by our genetic inheritance, we are largely in control of our actions. We are all free to choose our own course in life.
While it is up to each of us to choose what to do with our life, it would be a mistake to exclude the Creator from our deliberations. Actually, many have discovered that real meaning and purpose in life is bound up in a relationship with God. The vital connection between God and our purpose in life is highlighted in God’s personal name, Jehovah, which literally means, “He Causes to Become.” (Exodus 6:3; Psalm 83:18) That is, he progressively fulfills whatever he promises and always accomplishes what he has set out to do. (Exodus 3:14; Isaiah 55:10, 11) Think about that. The name Jehovah is a pledge to all of us that he is the ultimate and enduring Source of meaningful purpose.
Simply acknowledging the Creator’s existence has a profound impact on a person’s perspective on life. Linet, a 19-year-old, says: “Seeing all the wonderful things Jehovah has created and their purpose shows me that I too was created for a reason.” Amber adds: “When people speak of ‘the unknown,’ it always reminds me that I do know. The proof that Jehovah exists is simply in the things he has made.” (Romans 1:20) Of course, recognizing that the Creator exists is one thing, but developing a meaningful relationship with him is another.
Friendship With God
Here again, the Bible can help. Its opening chapters provide clear evidence that Jehovah God is a loving Father. For instance, he did not create Adam and Eve and then leave them guessing about who he was. Rather, he regularly communicated with them. He did not leave them in Eden to find their own way in the world while he pursued other interests. Instead, he gave them specific direction on how best to live. He assigned them satisfying work, and he arranged for their ongoing education. (Genesis 1:26-30; 2:7-9) Is this not what you would expect of a capable, loving parent? Now think about what that means. “Knowing that Jehovah created the earth and designed us with the ability to enjoy his creation,” says Denielle, “shows me that he wants us to be happy.”
More than that, like any good father, Jehovah wants all his children to have a personal relationship with him. To that end, Acts 17:27 assures us: “He is not far off from each one of us.” What difference does that make? Amber says: “Getting to know Jehovah has given me the confidence that I am never completely alone. No matter what, I always have someone to turn to.” Moreover, as you get to know Jehovah, you will find that he is kind, just, and good. You can depend on him. “When Jehovah became a close friend,” says Jeff, “I knew that there was no one else that was better prepared to be there for me.”
Unfortunately, many negative things have been said about Jehovah. He has been held responsible for much human suffering and religious misconduct. Some of the worst atrocities in human history have been put to his account. But Deuteronomy 32:4, 5 explains: “All his ways are justice. . . . They have acted ruinously on their own part; they are not his children, the defect is their own.” We, therefore, are obligated to investigate the facts for ourselves.—Deuteronomy 30:19, 20.
God’s Purpose Fulfilled
No matter what we decide, however, nothing will stop God from fully accomplishing his purpose for this earth and mankind. After all, he is the Creator. What, then, is that purpose? Jesus Christ referred to it in his Sermon on the Mount when he said: “Happy are the mild-tempered ones, since they will inherit the earth.” Later, to his apostle John, he indicated that God is determined “to bring to ruin those ruining the earth.” (Matthew 5:5; Revelation 11:18) Because Jesus was with God during creation, he knows that from the beginning it was God’s purpose to have a perfect human family dwell on earth forever in a paradise. (Genesis 1:26, 27; John 1:1-3) And God does not change. (Malachi 3:6) “Surely just as I have figured,” God promises us, “so it must occur; and just as I have counseled, that is what will come true.”—Isaiah 14:24.
In our time, Jehovah has already begun laying the foundations of a united community that is based, not on greed and self-interest like so much of our world today, but on love of God and neighbor. (John 13:35; Ephesians 4:15, 16; Philippians 2:1-4) It is a voluntary association of progressive and highly motivated individuals with a mission—to preach the good news of God’s incoming Kingdom before this system of things ends. (Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20) In over 230 lands, more than six million Christians are already worshiping together in a loving, united international brotherhood.
Give Your Life Meaning
If you are looking for greater meaning in your life, you should know that Jehovah God is inviting you to associate with his people—his “righteous nation”—now. (Isaiah 26:2) You may be wondering, though, ‘What is life like in this Christian community? Do I really want to get involved?’ Listen to what some young people have to say:
Quentin: “The congregation is my protection from the world. Realizing that Jehovah is active in my life helps me to see that he exists and wants me to be happy.”
Jeff: “The congregation is the best place I can go for encouragement. My brothers and sisters are there, offering their support and praise. They really are my extended family.”
Linet: “The joy of seeing someone embrace Bible truth and make a decision to serve Jehovah cannot be compared to any other. This brings great satisfaction to my life.”
Cody: “My life would be valueless without Jehovah. I would drift like so many others from one thing to another, trying to find happiness yet not finding it. Instead, Jehovah has given me the unbelievable privilege of being in a relationship with him, and that gives my life meaning.”
Why not investigate for yourself? You will discover that by drawing close to your Creator, Jehovah God, you will find real meaning in life.
[Pictures on page 31]
A relationship with God gives our life meaning
[Picture Credit Line on page 29]
NASA photo

