Endurance Is Rewarded
1 “By endurance on your part you will acquire your souls.” (Luke 21:19) Those words, which form part of Jesus’ prophecy concerning “the conclusion of the system of things,” make clear that in keeping our integrity, we must be prepared to face many trials. But in Jehovah’s strength, each of us can ‘endure to the end’ and “be saved.”​—Matt. 24:3, 13; Phil. 4:13.
2 Persecution, health problems, financial difficulties, and emotional distress can make each day a trial. We must never forget, however, that Satan is trying to break our integrity to Jehovah. Each day that we remain loyal to our Father is another day in which we have helped furnish a reply to the Taunter’s challenge. How rewarding it is to know that our “tears” in the face of trial are not forgotten! They are precious to Jehovah, and our integrity makes his heart glad!​—Ps. 56:8; Prov. 27:11.
3 Refined by Trials: Affliction can show up a weakness of faith or a personality flaw, such as pride or impatience. Rather than seeking to evade or end trials by unscriptural means, we must heed the counsel of God’s Word to “let endurance have its work complete.” Why? Because faithfully enduring trials helps us to become “complete and sound in all respects.” (Jas. 1:2-4) Endurance can help us to cultivate priceless qualities, such as reasonableness, empathy, and mercy.​—Rom. 12:15.
4 Tested Quality of Faith: When we endure trials, we acquire a tested quality of faith that has great value in the eyes of God. (1 Pet. 1:6, 7) Such faith equips us to remain steadfast through future trials. Moreover, we can sense God’s approval, and this strengthens our hope, making it more real to us.​—Rom. 5:3-5.
5 The ultimate reward for endurance is highlighted at James 1:12, which says: “Happy is the man that keeps on enduring trial, because on becoming approved he will receive the crown of life.” Hence, let us remain steadfast in our devotion to Jehovah, confident that he will richly reward “those who continue loving him.”

