New Arrangement for Reviewing Assembly Programs
As Satan’s world continues to advance from bad to worse, Jehovah fortifies us “to repudiate ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid the present system of things.” (Titus 2:12) Among the provisions that he makes through “the faithful and discreet slave” are the annual circuit assembly and special assembly day programs. (Matt. 24:45) How strengthening we find these spiritual gatherings to be!
To help us to retain and put into practice the instruction that is provided, a new arrangement for reviewing these assembly programs will be used during the 2005 service year. Pages 5-6 of this insert contain articles that provide a preview of what will be presented as well as review questions for each assembly program. Congregations will consider this information at the Service Meeting shortly before and shortly after they attend their assemblies. How will this be arranged?
One or two weeks before the congregation attends the circuit assembly, a ten-minute talk based on the article “New Circuit Assembly Program” will be presented on the Service Meeting to build anticipation for the program. The speaker will also draw attention to the review questions and encourage all to take notes in preparation for the review that will follow a few weeks after the assembly.
Within a few weeks after the assembly, a 15-minute review of the first day of the assembly program will be included on the Service Meeting. The following week, 15 minutes will be devoted to reviewing the second day of the program. The review questions provided in this insert will serve as the basis for those discussions. The review should focus on the practical value of the information. The elders may arrange to abbreviate, eliminate, or reschedule other Service Meeting parts to accommodate these review sessions.
The same arrangement will be followed in connection with the special assembly day program, except that there will be one 15-minute part to review the entire program. All of us will want to save this insert and use it to benefit fully from the fine instruction that Jehovah provides.​—Isa. 48:17, 18.

