Part 2​—Conducting Progressive Bible Studies
Preparing to Conduct the Study
1 Teaching effectively on a Bible study involves more than just discussing the material and looking up the cited scriptures. We need to present the information in a way that touches the student’s heart. This requires thorough preparation with the student in mind.​—Prov. 15:28.
2 How to Prepare: Begin by praying to Jehovah about the person and his needs. Ask Jehovah to help you reach the student’s heart. (Col. 1:9, 10) To get the theme clearly in mind, take a moment to consider the title of the chapter or lesson, the subheadings, and any visual aids. Ask yourself, ‘What is the thrust of the material?’ This will help you to focus on the main points as you conduct the study.
3 Carefully review the material paragraph by paragraph. Identify the answers to the printed questions, marking only the key words and phrases. Analyze how the cited scriptures relate to the main point of the paragraph, and decide which ones to read during the study. You may find it helpful to make brief notes in the margin of the publication. The student should clearly see that what he is learning is from God’s Word.​—1 Thess. 2:13.
4 Personalize the Lesson: Next, consider the lesson with the particular student in mind. Try to anticipate his questions and the points that he may have difficulty understanding or accepting. Ask yourself: ‘What does he need to understand or work on in order to make spiritual progress? How can I reach his heart?’ Then adapt your teaching accordingly. At times, you may see a need to prepare an illustration, an explanation, or a series of questions to help the student grasp the meaning of a certain point or scripture. (Neh. 8:8) But avoid inserting additional information that contributes little to the theme. A brief review at the end of the study will help him to retain the main points.
5 What joy we have when new ones bear righteous fruit to Jehovah’s praise! (Phil. 1:11) To help them reach that goal, prepare well each time you conduct a Bible study.

