Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting August 9
Song 57
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. If the suggestions on page 8 are practical for your congregation territory, use them to demonstrate how to present the August 15 Watchtower and the August 22 Awake! Other presentations may be used. Include mention of the donation arrangement. Remind audience to bring a copy of the Require brochure next week.
15 min: “Endurance Is Rewarded.”a Include brief comments on the December 15, 2000, Watchtower, pages 22-3, paragraphs 15-18.
20 min: Using Tracts to Start Bible Studies. Talk and audience discussion based on the November 2001 Our Kingdom Ministry, pages 3-4. Highlight that we are willing to adjust to the circumstances of each student, as noted in paragraph 5. Include one or two brief demonstrations based on paragraphs 8-10. If another approach is effective locally, explain and demonstrate that presentation instead. Invite audience to relate experiences they have had using the tract Would You Like to Know More About the Bible?
Song 74 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 16
Song 189
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Inculcate the Truth in Your Children. Talk based on the Family Happiness book, pages 55-9. Discuss the four ways parents can help their children to form a close personal relationship with Jehovah, making practical application of the material.
20 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies​—Part 2.”b Include a five-minute demonstration. A publisher asks an elder how to help a Bible student to progress. The elder mentions that a common pitfall is spending too much time during the study discussing minor details and side points. Using lesson 9 of the Require brochure, he shows the publisher how to (1) focus on the main points in the material, (2) use the cited scriptures effectively, and (3) tailor the lesson to the needs of the student. He notes that good preparation is needed each time a study is conducted.
Song 85 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 23
Song 33
15 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Demonstrate how to present the September 1 Watchtower and the September 8 Awake! In one of the presentations, demonstrate witnessing to a schoolteacher.
10 min: “New Arrangement for Reviewing Assembly Programs.” Talk and audience discussion based on the article on page 4. Mention the dates of the next circuit assembly and special assembly day programs if these are available. Those who wish to be baptized should make this known to the presiding overseer well in advance.
20 min: Offering the Creator Book During September. Talk and demonstration. Mention some comments that have been made about the publication. (w99 6/15 pp. 25-6) Give an overview of the contents of the book, and highlight some specific points that might appeal to those in the local territory. (km 2/99 p. 1; km 4/99 p. 2; km 9/99 p. 2) Outline a simple presentation that consists of an introduction from the Reasoning book or Our Kingdom Ministry, a scripture, and a point or chapter from the Creator book. Have a capable publisher demonstrate the presentation.
Song 220 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 30
Song 90
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for August.
15 min: “Ministerial Training School​—A Large Door That Leads to Activity.” Talk and audience discussion. Include comments on the 2004 Yearbook, pages 239-40. Mention the meeting for those interested in attending Ministerial Training School that is held in connection with the circuit assembly. Encourage those who qualify to attend this meeting.
20 min: Have You Benefited? Audience discussion. Review the following suggestions that appeared in Our Kingdom Ministry during the past service year: Write your introduction on an index card. (km 10/03 p. 8) Offer commendation that is personal, specific, and sincere. (km 11/03 p. 1) Witness when people are more likely to be at home. (km 12/03 p. 1) Set definite times for Bible reading, meeting preparation, and the field ministry. (km 1/04 p. 4) Use the “Good Land” brochure when doing personal study and Bible reading. (km 3/04 p. 2) Set a goal to read the entire Bible. (km 4/04 p. 1) Witness in business territory. (km 7/04 p. 4) Use tracts to start Bible studies. (km 8/04 p. 2) Invite audience to comment on benefits they received from applying these suggestions.
Song 145 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 6
Song 197
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs.
25 min: “Demonstrate the Pioneer Spirit.”c Briefly interview one or two pioneers. Have them comment on how the example of parents, elders, or others encouraged them to pursue the full-time ministry.
Song 142 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

