
The Most Useful Comparison You May Ever Make




DO YOU consider yourself to be a Christian? If so, you are among the more than two billion people on earth—almost 1 in every 3—who profess to be followers of Christ. Today, there are thousands of denominations that are called Christian, yet they are divided by conflicting doctrines and differing views. So your beliefs may be very different from those of other professed Christians. Does it really matter what you believe? Yes, it does—if you want to practice the Christianity taught in the Bible itself.
The early followers of Jesus Christ became known as “Christians.” (Acts 11:26) There was no need for other names to identify them, since only one Christian faith existed. Christians unitedly followed the teachings and instructions of the Founder of Christianity, Jesus Christ. What about your church? Do you believe that it teaches what Christ taught and what the early followers of Christ believed in? How can you know for sure? There is only one way—to use the Bible as a measuring stick.
Consider this: Jesus Christ had a deep respect for the Scriptures as the Word of God. He did not approve of those who watered down the Bible’s teachings by giving priority to man-made traditions. (Mark 7:9-13) We can thus safely conclude that true followers of Jesus would base their beliefs on the Bible. So each Christian does well to ask himself, ‘Do the teachings of my church agree with the Bible?’ To answer that question, why not compare what your church teaches with what the Bible actually says?
Jesus said that our worship of God must be based on truth—the truth found in the Bible. (John 4:24; 17:17) And the apostle Paul said that our salvation depends on our coming to “an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Timothy 2:4) So it is vital that our beliefs be based on accurate Bible truth. Why, our very salvation is at stake!



HOW TO COMPARE OUR BELIEFS WITH THE BIBLE

We invite you to read the accompanying six questions and note the Bible’s answers to those questions. Look up the Bible texts that are cited, and ponder over the answers. Then ask yourself, ‘How do my church’s teachings compare with what the Bible says?’
This short quiz may help you to make the most useful comparison you could ever make. Are you willing to compare other teachings of your church with what the Bible says? Jehovah’s Witnesses would be happy to help you to examine clear Bible truth. Why not ask one of the Witnesses for a free Bible study? Or you can visit our website, jw.org.



1 QUESTION: Who is God?
ANSWER: Jehovah, the Father of Jesus, is the eternal God and the almighty Creator of all things.

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS:
“We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you.”—Colossians 1:3.
“You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things.”—Revelation 4:11.
See also Romans 10:13; 1 Timothy 1:17.


2 QUESTION: Who is Jesus Christ?
ANSWER: Jesus is the firstborn Son of God. Jesus was created, and thus he had a beginning. Jesus is subject to God and obedient to His will.

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS:
“The Father is greater than I am.”—John 14:28.
“[Jesus] is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.”—Colossians 1:15.
See also Matthew 26:39; 1 Corinthians 15:28.


3 QUESTION: What is the holy spirit?
ANSWER: The holy spirit is a force that God uses to accomplish his will. It is not a person. People can be filled with holy spirit and empowered by it.

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS:
“As Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the infant in her womb leaped, and Elizabeth was filled with holy spirit.”—Luke 1:41.
“You will receive power when the holy spirit comes upon you.”—Acts 1:8.
See also Genesis 1:2; Acts 2:1-4; 10:38.


4 QUESTION: What is the Kingdom of God?
ANSWER: God’s Kingdom is a heavenly government. Jesus is the King of God’s Kingdom. Soon this Kingdom will cause God’s will to be done everywhere on earth.

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS:
“The seventh angel blew his trumpet. And there were loud voices in heaven, saying: ‘The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king forever and ever.’”—Revelation 11:15.
See also Daniel 2:44; Matthew 6:9, 10.


5 QUESTION: Do all good people go to heaven?
ANSWER: No. A limited group of faithful humans, called a “little flock,” are chosen by God to go to heaven. They will rule with Jesus as kings over mankind.

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS:
“Have no fear, little flock, for your Father has approved of giving you the Kingdom.”—Luke 12:32.
“They will be priests of God and of the Christ, and they will rule as kings with him.”—Revelation 20:6.
See also Revelation 14:1, 3.


6 QUESTION: What is God’s will for the earth and mankind?
ANSWER: Under God’s Kingdom, the earth will become a paradise and faithful humans will enjoy perfect health, permanent peace, and endless life.

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS:
“The meek will possess the earth, and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”—Psalm 37:10, 11.
“He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”—Revelation 21:3, 4.
See also Psalm 37:29; 2 Peter 3:13.





