
DO YOU REMEMBER?




Have you carefully read the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
Should Christians pray to Jesus Christ?
No. Jesus himself taught us to pray to Jehovah, and he set the example by praying to his Father. (Matt. 6:6-9; John 11:41; 16:23) Accordingly, his early followers prayed to God, not to Jesus. (Acts 4:24, 30; Col. 1:3)—1/1, page 14.
What can we do yearly to prepare to commemorate Jesus’ death?
One thing we can do is keep up with the schedule of Bible reading related to this event. We can also make an effort to increase our ministry during this period. And we can give prayerful thought to our God-given hope.—1/15, pages 14-16.
How did things turn out for the two Egyptian prisoners who related a puzzling dream to Joseph?
Joseph told Pharaoh’s cupbearer that he would be restored to his former position. As for the baker, his dream meant that Pharaoh would have him killed and hung on a stake. Both interpretations came true. (Gen. 40:1-22)—2/1, pages 12-14.
What surprising gift did the brothers in Japan receive?
They received a booklet containing the book of Matthew from the New World Translation. It is being offered in the ministry, and it has been accepted by many people who are unfamiliar with the Bible.—2/15, page 3.
What circumstances in the first century helped the spread of the good news?
The stability of Pax Romana meant that there was less strife. The early disciples could travel on a network of good roads. The Greek language was widely used, facilitating the preaching, even to Jews spread throughout the empire. And the disciples could use Roman law in defending the good news.—2/15, pages 20-23.
Why do true Christians not celebrate Easter?
Jesus directed his followers to commemorate his death, not his resurrection. (Luke 22:19, 20)—3/1, page 8.
In recent years, why are Biblical types and antitypes seldom discussed in our publications?
The Bible says that some individuals served as types of something greater. One example of this is found at Galatians 4:21-31. But otherwise, it is best not to imagine or assign antitypical applications. However, we can look for lessons to be learned from individuals and events mentioned in the Bible. (Rom. 15:4)—3/15, pages 17-18.
Why is a papyrus fragment recovered from an ancient trash heap in Egypt of special interest?
In the last century, a fragment was found that contains portions of John’s Gospel. It may date from a few decades after John wrote his book, and the content confirms the text that has come down to us, underscoring the Bible’s reliability.—4/1, pages 10-11.
Why is it loving to disfellowship an unrepentant wrongdoer?
The Bible outlines the serious step of disfellowshipping, which can bring benefits. (1 Cor. 5:11-13) It honors God’s name, protects the clean congregation, and may bring the wrongdoer to his senses.—4/15, pages 29-30.




