Announcements
“STRONG REFUGE” WITNESSING PERIOD
“God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.” (Ps. 46:1) So spoke a God-fearing man some two thousand years ago at a time of great crisis. So, too, may God-fearing persons express themselves today, when there is “anguish of nations, not knowing the way out”. God, “whose name alone is Jehovah,” has proved himself again and again a secure refuge in times of stress. His watchful eyes scan the earth and take note of those who are devoted to him, in order that he may show his strength in their behalf. Such ones, knowing that his special purpose for these days is to make known his name, are anxious to let others hear of this great and powerful refuge. During the “Strong Refuge” Witnessing Period, occupying all of the month of June, there will be hundreds of thousands telling others about and seeking to aid them to find this refuge, by presenting the books What Has Religion Done for Mankind? “This Means Everlasting Life”, and any other bound book, on a contribution of $1.50. You, too, are invited to have a share in this blessed work.
WOULD YOU LIKE TO DO MISSIONARY WORK?
Have you ever dreamed of being a missionary? or longed to serve God in some such way? It is not only by going to foreign lands that one can do so. You can do missionary work by carrying the message of God’s kingdom to isolated territory that can be reached, possibly over the week end, from the place where you live. There may be parts of the territory in your vicinity where “this gospel of the kingdom” has been preached in only a limited way, or perhaps not at all. During June, July and August, you may share in a special missionary effort to reach such isolated places and experience the joy of bringing glad tidings to some who are as yet uninformed about these important things. Be a “missionary” during your summer vacation period, or at week ends. Write the Society’s office (address inside front cover), if there is no group of Jehovah’s witnesses in your vicinity that you can contact.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of June 1: 1914 a Marked Year!
Week of June 8: Determining the Year by Fact and Bible.
Week of June 15: Evidences of the Year’s Correctness.

