Good News from Trouble Spots
LETTERS are frequently received in the offices of the Watch Tower Society asking about the well-being of fellow Christians in lands where there has been severe persecution. How are they faring? Are they loyally continuing to serve Jehovah? Do they have needed food and clothing?
In answer, we reply: By far the majority of Jehovah’s Witnesses in these lands are standing firm in the faith. Loyally they continue to make opportunities to talk to others about the glories of Jehovah’s kingship. And in harmony with his word of promise, Jehovah blesses their efforts to obtain the necessities of life.​—Luke 12:22-31.
No matter what they have experienced at the hands of the rulers, Jehovah’s Witnesses keep in mind what the apostle Paul wrote to his associate Timothy: “I therefore exhort . . . that supplications, prayers, intercessions, offerings of thanks, be made concerning all sorts of men, concerning kings and all those who are in high station; in order that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with full godly devotion and seriousness.” (1 Timothy 2:1, 2) In harmony with that prayer, the Witnesses conscientiously endeavor to obey all laws that are not in conflict with God’s commands. Especially are they zealous about doing God’s will, namely, telling others the good news concerning his kingdom.
Favorable Change of Heart
It is good to see that some governments have had a change of heart toward Jehovah’s Witnesses in recent years, granting them legal recognition and freedom after years of official suppression. Two outstanding examples are Spain and Portugal, where former dictatorships had the Witnesses under ban. When the ban in Spain was lifted in 1970, 11,000 Witnesses were active there. Now, 11 years later, that figure has multiplied to 48,000!
How do the Spanish authorities now view the Witnesses? A recent case from the city of Barcelona illustrates their attitude. The municipal government, in an official publication, included the Witnesses in a blanket condemnation of certain unscrupulous sects now operating there. However, when the matter was appealed to the city officials, they immediately apologized and published a front-page correction in the next issue, which stated: “We want to make it known that in regard to this Association [of Jehovah’s Witnesses], the Barcelona City Hall as well as its governmental organs hold it in the very highest esteem.”
The situation in Portugal is also impressive. In 1962, when six Watch Tower missionaries were expelled, there were only 1,285 Witnesses active there. And now there are more than 21,000 for a population of less than 9,500,000, a ratio of one Witness for every 438 inhabitants.
In spite of freedom, granted in 1974, the Witnesses in Portugal had never been able to hold a circuit assembly in a certain southern city. Thanks to the intervention of a liberal-minded mayor, permission was granted for use of the prestigious Municipal Theatre. At the first council meeting after the assembly the mayor and council members congratulated the Witnesses on their splendid organization and postassembly cleaning operation.
In another Portuguese town the Witnesses offered to pour a cement floor at the agricultural pavilion, where they planned to hold an assembly. Seventy turned up and did the job in one day. The mayor was moved to comment: “I never would have believed it possible. You may have as many assemblies as you like in this pavilion, free of charge, for the next three years!”
Community Projects and Relief Work
Even where persecution persists, Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to pray respecting the rulers and that they might take a more balanced and tolerant view of the Witnesses’ activities. There is no spirit of resentment. In fact, they willingly collaborate in community self-help projects in such countries.
For example, in one African community two self-help plans were projected, the building of a road and a school. Work was to start at six o’clock in the morning. The Witnesses arrived before the hour and worked without letup. Some other villagers arrived late and their work performance was poor. Then they started to quarrel among themselves. The brothers continued working to get the job completed. Since that time people around that neighborhood have had a high opinion of the conscientious Witnesses.
From another African country where the Witnesses have withstood persecution comes the following report: “Materially speaking, our brothers in the restriction camps . . . have been able to provide for themselves throughout the year to a large extent. They have had good harvests. Even so, it has been necessary to provide relief for some, especially insofar as clothing and medicine are concerned, and the Watch Tower Society has been happy to make such provisions.”
In fact, worldwide each congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses takes the necessary steps to help the genuinely needy in its midst. When national disasters occur, aid is immediately mobilized through the local and neighboring branch offices of the Watch Tower Society.​—Acts 2:44-47; 6:1-6.
Favorable Impression Created
Like the misunderstood early Christians, Jehovah’s Witnesses have often had a “bad press.” Certain Jews in Rome reported to the apostle Paul regarding their knowledge of Christians in their time: “Truly as regards this sect it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against.” (Acts 28:22) Yet, where the political authorities have had the opportunity to know the Witnesses face to face, the result has often been very favorable. Why so? Because they cannot help but recognize that they are dealing with clean-living, law-abiding people who promote better social conditions by improving the moral fiber of those with whom they study the Bible. This is evident in the news received from the Republic of The Gambia, situated on the west coast of Africa. The report states: “Good work is being done in the prisons and Jehovah’s Witnesses are the only religious group permitted into certain restricted areas, because of the fine success they have had in helping prisoners transform their lives.”
In another African country where the Witnesses have not yet been granted official recognition, it is reported: “The authorities have a very high regard for the brothers. It was heartwarming to hear the officials speak about our brothers and commend them for their honesty and industriousness.”
It is the earnest desire of Jehovah’s Witnesses that people from all walks of life should come to know Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. Therefore they will continue to preach the good news of God’s Kingdom government to people at all levels of society, including those “in high station.” They will also pray concerning them in order that ‘we may all go on leading a calm and quiet life with full godly devotion.’​—1 Timothy 2:1, 2; John 17:3.

