From Our Readers
Images as Aids in Worship?
I am very disappointed that you should underestimate the intelligence of millions of Catholics in believing that they would adore pieces of wood, carvings, etc., as mentioned in your article “Now I Play a Different Tune.” (January 22, 1987) These items only represent those whom Catholics love and pray to, just as you would have photographs of those you love in your own home. You would never burn these up or regard them as objects to be destroyed in any way. Otherwise your publications are very interesting, advocating following the Ten Commandments as Catholics are taught.
M. F., Scotland
The “New Catholic Encyclopedia” (1967, Volume VII, page 372) says: “Since the worship given to an image reaches and terminates in the person represented, the same type of worship due the person can be rendered to the image as representing the person.” However, the second commandment (part of the first according to Catholic tradition) states: “You shall not make yourself a carved image or any likeness of anything in heaven or on earth beneath or in the waters under the earth; you shall not bow down to them or serve them. For I, Yahweh your God, am a jealous God.”​—Exodus 20:4, 5, “The Jerusalem Bible.”​—ED.
Multiple Sclerosis
It is my habit to read all Awake! magazines, even old issues. I came across the article “Multiple Sclerosis​—A Baffling Disease.” (February 22, 1972) It really saved the life of my beloved wife. She had been suffering for the last seven years. Then I read that article on multiple sclerosis. We tried all the suggested vitamins as treatment, and I tell you, she came back to life. I took her to a specialist, and it was confirmed that she had multiple sclerosis. He prescribed the vitamins that Awake! had already suggested. Though my wife is not cured, her days that were numbered now are multiplying. We would like more information about this baffling disease.
D. K., Uganda
Cancer
We want to thank you for the articles on cancer that you published. (October 8 and October 22, 1986) Last year our daughter, who had never had a day’s illness in 16 years, was suddenly diagnosed as having tuberculosis and was hospitalized for six months. Then, as no tubercle bacilli were present, she was discharged from the hospital. But the following month we learned that she had cancer of the thyroid and that the cancer had metastasized to her lungs. She immediately underwent surgery to remove her thyroid and surrounding lymph glands, and she had part of her lungs removed. She is now taking cobalt treatments. Her operation was successful, and she is living a normal life. But as parents, we were constantly anxious and worrying as to what to do to help our daughter. Through your articles we felt reassured and regained peace of mind. The articles provided good direction as to how we can encourage our daughter in the future.
H. K., Japan

