From Our Readers
Hand Washing  I am 11 and want to thank you for the article “Wash and Dry Your Hands!” (November 22, 1998) It encouraged me to wash my hands before eating and after using the toilet. In my town, infections are common, so the article was very useful.
M. F., Italy
Simple Pleasures  Thank you for the “Watching the World” item “Children Prefer Simple Pleasures.” (November 22, 1998) I live apart from my children, and I am allowed to see them only once every three months. I didn’t know what to do when we spent time together, so I would do a lot of planning, fearing that they would get bored. Right before our day together arrived, I read this item. It came at exactly the right time!
M. Y., Japan
Snakes  Thank you very much for your article “Common Fallacies About Snakes.” (October 22, 1998) The seven points you brought out certainly cleared up a lot of public ignorance concerning these fascinating, yet misunderstood, animals.
R. K., United States
Preventing Burns  I was concerned when I read the item “Precautions While Cooking,” in “Watching the World.” (December 8, 1998) It referred to a newsletter that suggested cooking on the front burners of the stove. However, this contradicts advice I’ve heard given to parents—that they should always use back burners, which children cannot reach.
M. B., England
We appreciate this safety reminder. The advice we reported on was primarily directed to elderly ones, some of whom have had sleeves catch on fire while reaching for pots on the back burner. Mothers with young children, though, naturally keep cooking pots out of their reach.—ED.
What Jesus Looked Like  Many thanks for the series of articles “Jesus—What Did He Really Look Like? What Is He Now?” (December 8, 1998) Jesus is often portrayed incorrectly in churches, pictures, and films. I particularly liked reading about the part Jesus is playing now and will play in the future. He is not just a small baby in a manger.
M. W., Austria
I have never been so delighted with an article! I am convinced that this series will help many people to trust Jehovah’s Witnesses and our magazines.
B. D., Yugoslavia
It was wonderful to read that Jesus was not a weakling and that he did not go about with a permanent melancholy expression on his face, as popular art has portrayed. Instead, he was a manly and robust person who imitated his Father, “the happy God.”—1 Timothy 1:11.
R. O. R., Brazil
On page 8, you stated that “God transferred the life of Jesus to the womb of a Jewish virgin.” Since Jesus was perfect, does this mean that no trace of Adam’s genes was in him?
J. G., United States
Prior to Jesus’ conception, the angel Gabriel told Mary: “Holy spirit will come upon you, and power of the Most High will overshadow you. For that reason also what is born will be called holy, God’s Son.” (Luke 1:35) Evidently, God’s holy spirit caused an ovum in Mary’s womb to become fertile, transferring the life of God’s firstborn Son from the spirit realm to earth. The holy spirit no doubt saw to it that this Son’s perfect male life force canceled out any Adamic imperfection in Mary’s ovum, while retaining certain genetic traits. Likely, Jesus resembled Mary.—ED.

