Be Harmoniously Joined Together
1 How often have you marveled at the masterful design of the human body? (Ps. 139:14) Each member of the body works in concert with the others. God’s Word likens the Christian congregation to a well-coordinated body. Under the Head, Christ, all the members of the congregation are ‘harmoniously joined together and made to cooperate through every joint that gives what is needed.’ (Eph. 4:16a) Thus, Jehovah is able to use his united people to accomplish wonderful things.
2 Members of the first-century congregation acted “with one accord” in caring for one another’s spiritual and material needs. (Acts 2:44-47) With Jehovah’s backing, they unitedly faced and overcame fierce opposition. (Acts 4:24-31) They declared the Kingdom message wherever they went, covering the then-known earth with the good news. (Col. 1:23) In modern times, the Christian congregation has unitedly accomplished these same things on an even larger scale. What factors contribute to this oneness?
3 Drawn Together by Divine Teaching: Around the globe, we are united by our worship. How is this possible? We recognize Jehovah’s visible channel for providing spiritual “food at the proper time.” (Matt. 24:45) We also appreciate the “gifts in men” he has given as teachers in the congregation. As we humbly accept Jehovah’s provisions to feed us spiritually, our understanding of God’s Word grows and stirs within us a common desire to imitate Jesus as his disciples. We must go on studying God’s Word, earnestly endeavoring to “attain to the oneness in the faith.” (Eph. 4:8, 11-13) Are you contributing to our spiritual unity by reading the Bible daily?
4 United by Christian Association: Love draws us together in close association at Christian meetings. At these meetings, we “consider one another.” (Heb. 10:24, 25) This involves looking beyond outward appearances and really getting to know our brothers, seeing them the way Jehovah sees them, as precious. (Hag. 2:7, ftn.) As we listen to their expressions of faith, our love for them deepens and our unity is strengthened. Are you known as one who regularly attends the congregation meetings?
5 Fellow Workers in the Field: Preaching the good news with fellow believers unites us in doing God’s will. The apostle Paul appreciated his “fellow workers for the kingdom of God.” (Col. 4:11) Sharing experiences and assisting one another while in the ministry helps us to accomplish our Christian commission and strengthens our bond of unity.​—Col. 3:14.
6 Unifying Influence of Holy Spirit: As we apply ourselves to doing his will, Jehovah blesses us with his spirit. This helps us to smooth over differences and dwell together in unity. (Ps. 133:1) It motivates us “to observe the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.” (Eph. 4:3) Each of us can contribute to the harmony that exists among God’s people by manifesting the fruitage of the spirit in our dealings with one another.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.
7 Serving together unitedly under Christ’s headship “makes for the growth of the body for the building up of itself in love.” (Eph. 4:16b) Moreover, it glorifies Jehovah, “the God who gives peace.”​—Rom. 16:20.

