Question Box
▪ What should we bear in mind when using cellular telephones and electronic pagers?
Such devices can enable us to contact others nearly any place we might be. While this may be useful, we must be careful not to allow the use of cell phones and pagers at inappropriate times to detract from our ministry or Christian meetings. How could this happen?
Consider the effect it would have if our cell phone rang or our pager beeped while we were engaging in the field ministry giving a witness. What would the householder think? What impression might we leave if we stopped to answer the call? We would certainly not want to do anything to hinder others from listening to the Kingdom message. (2 Cor. 6:3) Hence, if we are carrying a cell phone or a pager, we should set it so that it does not interrupt us or others while we are engaging in the field ministry.
What about when we are waiting while others are giving a witness? If we have set aside a period of time for field service, should we not keep our minds on that activity? Out of respect for our sacred service, please care for unnecessary personal business or social interests at another time. (Rom. 12:7) This would not, of course, rule out using a phone to give a further witness or to make an appointment to do so.
We must be especially cautious about using cell phones while driving, since some studies show that doing so greatly increases the risk of having an accident. We should strictly observe any laws that restrict the use of cell phones while driving.
We come to Christian meetings, assemblies, and conventions to worship Jehovah and be taught by him. Should not appreciation for the sacredness of these occasions move us to set cell phones and pagers so that they do not distract us or others? If there is an urgent matter requiring our immediate attention, we should attend to it outside the place of meeting. Otherwise, we should arrange to care for personal and secular matters at times other than those designated for worship.​—1 Cor. 10:24.
May the way we use cellular phones or any other electronic equipment always show consideration for others and deep appreciation for spiritual things.

