Papias Valued the Lord’s Sayings
“I DID not . . . enjoy those who have much to say, but those who taught what was true.” So wrote Papias, a professed Christian of the second century of our Common Era.
Papias lived in the period immediately following the death of Jesus Christ’s apostles. In fact, he was an associate of Polycarp, who reportedly learned from the apostle John. These credentials, coupled with Papias’ method of acquiring knowledge, make it likely that he was well-informed.
Careful Method
Papias’ thirst for truth is clearly evident in the five books making up his work on the sayings of the Lord. In his earlier years, no doubt Papias stored up many of the sayings of truth that he had heard. Later, from his residence in the Phrygian city of Hierapolis, in Asia Minor, Papias inquired of elderly ones to ascertain if they had ever seen or heard any of Jesus’ apostles. He eagerly questioned them and recorded what they had to say.
Papias explains: “I will not hesitate to put down . . . whatever I carefully learned at any time from the elders, and carefully remembered, assuring you of their truth. For I did not, like most people, enjoy those who have much to say, but those who taught what was true; nor those who relate commands of others, but those who report the ones given by the Lord to the faith and proceeding from the truth itself. And if anyone should come my way who had been a follower of the elders, I would ask for the accounts given by the elders​—what Andrew or what Peter said, or what Philip or what Thomas or James, or what John or Matthew said, or any other disciples of the Lord.”
His Work
Doubtless a wealth of spiritual knowledge was available to Papias. We can only imagine how intently he must have listened to the details surrounding the personal life and ministry of each of the apostles. About 135 C.E., Papias put what he had to tell into a book of his own. Regrettably, this book has disappeared. It was quoted by Irenaeus, a professed Christian of the second century C.E., and by the fourth-century historian Eusebius. In fact, it was still read in the 9th century C.E. and may have existed until the 14th century.
Papias believed in the coming Millennial Reign of Christ. (Revelation 20:2-7) According to Irenaeus, he wrote of a time “when creation, renewed and liberated, shall yield an abundance of all kinds of food, from the dew of heaven and the fertility of the earth, just as the elders, who saw John, the disciple of the Lord, related that they had heard how the Lord would teach about those times.” Papias further wrote: “To believers these things are credible. And when Judas, the betrayer, refused to believe and asked, ‘How will such production be effected by the Lord?’ the Lord said, ‘Those who reach those times will see.’”
Papias wrote at a time when Gnosticism was rampant. The Gnostics intertwined philosophy, speculation, and pagan mysticism with apostate Christianity. Actually, Papias’ exposition of the Lord’s oracles, or sayings, was an attempt to stem the tide of Gnosticism. After him, Irenaeus continued to resist the Gnostics’ false and exaggerated spirituality. Gnostic literature must have been voluminous, sparking Papias’ sarcastic allusion to “those who have so very much to say.” His objective was clear​—to counteract falsehood with truth.​—1 Timothy 6:4; Philippians 4:5.
Comments on the Gospels
In the fragments of Papias’ writings that still exist, we find mention of the narratives written by Matthew and Mark. For instance, Papias says of Mark’s document: “Mark, having become the interpreter of Peter, wrote down accurately everything that he remembered.” Further attesting to this Gospel’s accuracy, Papias continues: “So then Mark made no mistake, while he thus wrote down some things as he remembered them; for he made it his one care not to omit anything that he heard, or to set down any false statement therein.”
Papias provides external evidence that Matthew originally penned his Gospel in the Hebrew language. Says Papias: “He wrote the sayings in the Hebrew language, and each one interpreted them as best he could.” It is likely that Papias made reference to the Gospel accounts of Luke and John, as well as to other writings of the Christian Greek Scriptures. If so, he would be one of the earliest witnesses establishing their authenticity and divine inspiration. Unfortunately, though, only meager fragments of the writings of Papias survive.
Conscious of His Spiritual Need
As an overseer in the congregation at Hierapolis, Papias was an indefatigable investigator. In addition to being a hardworking researcher, he displayed keen appreciation for the Scriptures. Papias judged correctly that any doctrinal statement of Jesus Christ or His apostles would be far more valuable to explain than the capricious statements found in the literature of his day.​—Jude 17.
Papias reportedly suffered martyrdom at Pergamum in 161 or 165 C.E. How deeply the teachings of Jesus Christ actually affected the life and behavior of Papias cannot be said with certainty. Yet, he had a keen desire to learn and discuss the Scriptures. So do true Christians today, for they are conscious of their spiritual need. (Matthew 5:3) And like Papias they value the sayings of the Lord.

