Preaching With Endurance in the Land of Ice and Fire
ICELAND is located in the North Atlantic about midway between North America and Europe. Though it lies just below the Arctic Circle, its climate is milder than might be expected, thanks to the warming effects of the Gulf Stream. Iceland has been called the land of ice and fire because it has Europe’s biggest glacier and is also one of the most active volcanic areas in the world. Well-known are its many hot springs and solfataras, volcanic areas that give off hot vapors and sulfurous gases.
The 260,000 inhabitants of this second-largest island of Europe are descendants of the Vikings, who settled here more than 1,100 years ago. Icelandic is essentially the same as Old Norse, the Scandinavian language of the Viking age. It has remained nearly unchanged because Icelanders were fond of reading their old sagas, which were written mostly in the 13th century.
By the 16th century, the Bible began to be translated into Icelandic. A “New Testament” appeared in 1540 and a complete Bible by 1584. Over 90 percent of the people belong to the Evangelical Lutheran Church, the official State religion. Though the Bible is found in almost every home, few believe that it is God’s Word. Most Icelanders have liberal views about religion and,  generally, are independent thinkers.
The Good News Reaches Iceland
The first Icelanders to hear the good news of the Kingdom were then living in Canada. One of them was Georg Fjölnir Lindal. His parents were from Iceland, and he spoke Icelandic. Shortly after dedicating his life to Jehovah God, he became a full-time preacher of the good news. In 1929, when he was 40 years old, he took the good news to the people in that land of ice and fire.
What a tremendous task for one person! Iceland is about 200 miles [320 km] from north to south and some 300 miles [500 km] from east to west. The coastline, including fjords and inlets, is about 4,000 miles [6,400 km] long. At that time, there were no real roads and practically no automobiles or any other modern ways of getting around. Yet, Brother Lindal covered the whole island within ten years and distributed thousands of books. He traveled along the coast in boats, and when he visited the farms inland, he used two horses, one to carry him and the other to carry his literature and his belongings.
For almost 18 years, Brother Lindal was the only Witness in Iceland. Despite his hard work, he did not see anyone take a stand for the Kingdom during that time. His long, lonely stay ended on March 25, 1947, when the first graduates of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead arrived. You can imagine his joy when Jehovah finally answered his prayers for more workers for the harvest. (Matthew 9:37, 38) Brother Lindal continued his service in Iceland until he returned to Canada in 1953.
More Workers for the Harvest
The missionaries who came in 1947 were two Danish brothers. More missionaries arrived two years later. As they continued the preaching work together with a few friends who had moved to Iceland, thousands of publications were distributed. Most Icelanders are avid readers, but not many responded to the good news. After 27 years of planting and watering, the patient brothers began to see the fruits of their labor. In 1956 seven new ones took their stand for the Kingdom and dedicated their lives to Jehovah.
During the last ten years, the number of Kingdom publishers has more than doubled. Now, there are seven congregations and one isolated group, a total of 280 proclaimers of the good news. Let us take a trip around the island to visit these congregations.
Around the Capital
The brothers and sisters who endured all those years have been richly blessed. There are now two prospering congregations in Reykjavík, the capital city. They meet in a fine Kingdom Hall located in the same building as the branch office, dedicated in 1975.
Friðrik and Ada were among the seven who got baptized back in 1956. “I recall that we used to have meetings in a small room in the attic where the missionaries lived,” says Friðrik. “There was room for 12 chairs, but sometimes, when more than the usual number showed up, we opened the door to the next little room. What a difference today when two congregations fill the Kingdom Hall!”
Friðrik was in charge of the Food Service Department when the first assemblies were held. “I did most of the work myself, and at the same time, it was not unusual for me to have three or four parts on the program each day. While working in the kitchen, I wore an apron. When it was time to give a talk, I put my jacket on and hurried into the hall. Several times the brothers had to remind me to take off the apron. Now we have from 400 to 500 attending the assemblies, including fine elders who share in handling parts on the program. There are also many willing hands helping in the Food Service Department.”
The congregation closest to Reykjavík is Keflavík, about 30 miles [50 km] to the west. The drive takes us through lava fields. Ten percent of Iceland is covered with lava. The first vegetation to appear in these fields consists of lichens and mosses, but in the older lava fields, you will find wild berries and low-growing shrubs.
The congregation in Keflavík has 19 publishers and was formed in 1965. Nearby is the international airport, and a U.S. military base is also situated here. Though the Witnesses have never been able to work from house to house on the base itself, many Bible studies have been conducted there, and quite a few individuals have learned the truth.
Another congregation is in Selfoss, 35 miles [55 km] east of Reykjavík. Here we see green farming country with cattle and sheep, including Iceland’s largest dairy. On the way, we pass by Hveragerði, a small town in a picturesque valley. From a distance we notice columns of steam from hot springs all over the valley. This is one of the most extensive thermal areas in the country, and many greenhouses have been built to utilize these resources and provide hothouse tomatoes, cucumbers, and a variety of flowers.
In this area there is a small but active congregation of 19 Kingdom publishers. Sigurður and Guðrún Svava moved from Reykjavík to support this little group about the time the congregation was formed in 1988. Sigurður is the only elder here. Before he became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses almost ten years ago, he was a well-known musician, playing the drums in various bands. Today, he makes a living as a window cleaner, and he also teaches music. His life-style as an entertainer brought him many problems, such as drug abuse, heavy drinking, and a broken marriage. How satisfied he is now, having a purpose in life and serving Jehovah!
To the East End
Leaving Selfoss, we embark on a 420-mile [680 km] drive, mostly on narrow and rough gravel roads. We head for the next congregation, in the town of Reyðarfjörður, on the east coast. Within half an hour, we come into view of Hekla, the most famous Icelandic volcano. It has erupted four times in this century.
In 1973 a dramatic volcanic eruption took place on Vestmannaeyjar (Westmann Islands). The entire population of some 5,300 was moved safely to the mainland in a matter of hours. After restoration of the town, most of the inhabitants gradually returned. Two Witnesses now live there and preach the good news to people in this small community. Driving for another two hours, we are treated to a beautiful view of the majestic Vatnajökull, by far the largest of Iceland’s glaciers, with an area of 3,200 square miles [8,300 sq km]. Along the way, we also pass many beautiful waterfalls and rivers.
Having spent about ten hours on the road, we reach our destination. In Reyðarfjörður we meet the 12 publishers of the youngest congregation in Iceland. No Witnesses lived in this area until a missionary home was established in the latter part of 1988. Kjell and Iiris, a Swedish missionary couple who have served in Iceland since 1963, are assigned to work among the 15,000 people in this rural area. Many live in small fishing villages along the coastline, stretching about 300 miles [500 km].
Kjell relates: “There is no doubt that Jehovah has richly blessed the Kingdom work in this part of Iceland. On January 1, 1993, a congregation was formed, and we are conducting many good Bible studies with individuals who are making fine progress. Though the means of transportation has changed since Brother Lindal traveled on horseback, it is not always easy to drive over the mountain passes on icy roads during the dark winter months, even with a four-wheel-drive jeep. Once, it was blown off an icy road and rolled over two or three times down a slope. How happy we were to escape without injury!”
After 30 years in Iceland, Iiris says: “Over the years many have come from other countries to help. Though most have had to leave for various reasons, they have certainly had a great share in the planting and watering work. We are glad that we are able to stay, since we now have the privilege of seeing the harvest coming in. Jehovah is speeding up his work here also.”
Much of the increase has come because new ones witness to their workmates. Atli learned the truth from the missionaries and started talking to others in the construction company where he worked. Two of his workmates are now sharing in the preaching work, one being baptized together with his wife in November 1992. A third workmate has been studying the Bible with the Witnesses.
Taking the Northern Route
Leaving Reyðarfjörður, we head west. The next congregation is 190 miles [300 km] away, in the town of Akureyri. Special full-time preachers were assigned to work there in the early 1950’s. From the very beginning, the work met with hard opposition from some clergymen. Articles were published in the local newspaper to warn people against Jehovah’s Witnesses. Many of the townspeople were also involved in spiritism. But thanks to the endurance and patience of various pioneers and missionaries, today there is an active and loving congregation of 35 Kingdom preachers.
Friðrik, one of the elders here, was a fisherman. After attending the district convention in 1982, he was convinced that what he was learning was the truth. He returned to Akureyri determined to witness to his family, friends, and workmates. Friðrik made plans to quit his job as a fisherman so that he could have more time with the congregation. He told his girlfriend, Helga, that they could no longer live together until they were married, since he was going to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Friðrik also wanted her to study the Bible because he would not ‘marry an unbeliever.’ (1 Corinthians 7:39) To his surprise Helga started studying. They were married in February 1983 and were baptized shortly thereafter. In time Friðrik’s mother and sister also accepted the truth.
Our last stop is Akranes, 220 miles [350 km] from Akureyri, over three mountain ranges and through many beautiful valleys. Here the road is paved, making this a pleasant drive compared to the rough and narrow gravel roads we have traveled on most of the way. In Akranes we have the smallest congregation in Iceland​—five publishers, two of them serving as elders. They consist of two families that responded to the Macedonian call, left one of the larger congregations in Reykjavík, and settled down in this little town to serve where the need is greater. (Acts 16:9, 10) For more than two years now, they have patiently preached the good news in this territory, confident that Jehovah will make things grow.​—1 Corinthians 3:6.
Bright Prospects for Increase
With greenhouses heated by geothermal energy and artificial lighting, Icelandic farmers have been able to grow a great variety of fruits, vegetables, and other plants. Likewise, the Witnesses, equipped with spiritual truth, the warmth of gentle persuasion, and the blessing of Jehovah’s holy spirit, have been experiencing wonderful results in the Icelandic field.
This year 542 persons attended the Memorial of Christ’s death, and close to 200 home Bible studies are now being conducted. In addition, the positive response to the encouragement to serve in unassigned territories gives us confidence that all sheeplike people in this vast island will hear the voice of the Fine Shepherd, Jesus Christ. (John 10:14-16) What a joyful outcome for those faithful Kingdom proclaimers who have shown so much patience and endurance in preaching the good news in the land of ice and fire during the past 64 years!
[Map on page 24]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Akureyri
Akranes
Keflavík
Selfoss
Vestmannaeyjar
Reyðarfjörður
Hekla
Geysir
VATNAJÖKULL
REYKJAVÍK
[Credit Line]
Based on map by Jean-Pierre Biard

