A Book for You?
“To the making of many books there is no end,” stated Solomon some 3,000 years ago. (Ecclesiastes 12:12) That observation is as appropriate today as ever. In addition to the standard classics, thousands of new books are printed every year. With so many books to choose from, why should you read the Bible?
MANY people read books either to be entertained or to be informed, or perhaps for both reasons. The same can be true of reading the Bible. It can make for uplifting, even entertaining reading. But the Bible is more than that. It is a unique source of knowledge.—Ecclesiastes 12:9, 10.
The Bible answers questions that humans have long pondered—questions about our past, our present, and our future. Many wonder: Where did we come from? What is the purpose of life? How can we find happiness in life? Will there always be life on earth? What does the future hold for us?
The collective force of all the evidence presented here establishes clearly that the Bible is accurate and authentic. We have already considered how its practical counsel can help us to live meaningful and happy lives today. Since its answers about the present are satisfying, surely its answers about the past and its prophecies about the future are deserving of careful attention.
How to Get the Most Benefit
Many people have started to read the Bible only to stop when they found parts of it difficult to understand. If that has been your experience, there are some things that may be of help.
Select a reliable translation in modern-day language, such as the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.a Some people start by reading the Gospel accounts of the life of Jesus, whose wise teachings, such as those found in the Sermon on the Mount, reflect a keen awareness of human nature and outline how to improve our lot in life.—See Matthew chapters 5 to 7.
In addition to reading through the Bible, a topical method of study can be quite informative. This involves analyzing what the Bible says on a particular subject. You may be surprised to learn what the Bible really says about such topics as soul, heaven, earth, life, and death, as well as God’s Kingdom—what it is and what it will accomplish.b Jehovah’s Witnesses have a program for topical Bible study, which is provided free of charge. You may inquire about it by writing to the publishers, using the appropriate address listed on page 2.
After examining the evidence, many people have concluded that the Bible is from God, whom the Scriptures identify as “Jehovah.” (Psalm 83:18) You may not be convinced that the Bible is of divine origin. But why not examine it for yourself? We are confident that after a process of learning, meditating, and perhaps experiencing the practical value of its timeless wisdom for yourself, you will come to feel that the Bible is indeed a book for all people, and more—a book for you.
[Footnotes]
Published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
A book that has helped many in a topical study of the Bible is What Does the Bible Really Teach? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

