VOL. XXII. NOVEMBER 15, 1901. No. 22. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 
Human Forces Bursting all 

Bonds and Barriers 355 

A New Chemical Agent 356 

Streams in the Desert 356 



In Peril from Their Own Troops 357 

Faith Severely Tested 357 

Certainly I Will Be With Thee 359 

The Ten Plagues of Egypt 361 

An Editor Lectures Churchianity 364 

Love Ye One Another 364 

The Church Expectant 364 

A Usurpation of Authority 367 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



PILGRIM VISITS ARE FREE OF ALL CHARGES. 

We find that some of the friends have refrained from requesting 
"Pilgrim" visits because they supposed they would 
be expected to contribute for his railway fare and also for his 
support. This is a mistake: the services of the preaching 
"Pilgrims" laboring under the auspices of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY are absolutely without charge;-nor do 
they take up any collections. The Society pays their railway 
and all other expenses out of its funds, which are all voluntary 
donations, from such as are able and anxious to serve thus. 

All we ask of the friends visited is that they provide a 
parlor, hall, school-house or church building for the meetings 
and that they board and lodge the "Pilgrim" during the two 
or three days of his visit. We attend to all else. 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM SERVICE. 

The Pilgrim routes are made out months ahead; so it is too 
late to write us, as some do, when they learn from last page 
that a Pilgrim is coming to their vicinity. If you desire visits 



write us a Postal Card (or on a card of that size) answering the 
following questions: (a) Have you regular meetings now? 
(b) How many usually attend? (c) Who are the chosen leaders 
of the class? (d) Did the class vote its desire for Pilgrim 
visits? (e) Are you able and willing to secure a suitable room 
for private meetings? (f) Could you arrange also for one public 
meeting? and what number could probably be gathered? 

You can answer briefly, thus: (a) Yes. (b) 14. (c) John 
Smith and Amos Brown, (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes: 100 to 300. 

When you see a notice of a "Pilgrim Visit" near you and 
do not know the meeting address, enquire of us by Postal card 
immediately. Those arranging for "Pilgrim meetings" will 
please notify us early respecting their arrangements. 



R2906 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



HUMAN FORCES BURSTING ALL BONDS AND BARRIERS. 



JUSTICE BREWER, of the Supreme Court of 
the United States, was one of the speakers at 
the recent Yale bi-centenary celebration, and 
he made some statements which were extremely 
startling as coming from one in his high judicial position. 
The Picayune epitomizing his speech says: 

"Commenting on the extraordinary results attained 
in scientific discovery and mechanical invention, 
and their use in all the business and economies 
of daily life in a country inexpressibly rich in natural 
endowments, and inhabited by a vast and rapidly increasing 
population of the most enterprising and intelligent 
races of men, he said: 

'"These various causes are operating in our midst 
to produce wealth, consolidation, centralization. The 
rapidity and multitude of mercantile transactions are 
seen in colossal fortunes, in gigantic undertakings, 
in enormous financial consolidations, and corresponding 
organizations of labor. Local self-control is giving 
way before the pressure for centralized power. The 
town meeting is supplanted by the State Legislature, 
while the latter in its turn is yielding to the expanding 
power of Congress. Political parties are largely under 
the management of bosses, and the whole great 
forces of industry, business and politics seem passing 
under the domination of single central control.' 

"The eagerness with which the physical forces 
brought into play by scientific discovery and invention 
have been adopted and enlisted in every branch 
of industry and business is not more remarkable 



than is the tendency towards the concentration and 
centralization of human forces and agencies. On one 
side capital is concentrating. On the other labor is 
combining. Each is mustering all its forces so that 
each may work with the other with completer system 
and to better advantage, and, in case of a conflict, 
each will be able to hurl itself against the other with 
all the great energy and effectiveness, and the prospect 
is that, sooner or later, both sides will attain conditions 
of such formidableness as that the shock, 
should they come in full collision, will destroy the existing 
social and political organization of the Republic, 
unless the masses of the people, who will not be bound 
to either side, shall rally to crush out the combatants 
and save the country's institutions. 

"It has been declared by jurists that there is no 
evil which can occur in human economy that cannot 
find its remedy in the courts, but Justice Brewer does 
not agree with any such doctrine. He said in his 
Yale address: 

'"You cannot stay this movement towards consolidation 
and centralization. It is a natural evolution. 
The commercial spirit is taking advantage of the wonderful 
facilities given by steam and electricity. Injunction 
against strikers will not stop it; legislation 
against trusts will not. Attempting to stay the movement 
of its chariot wheels by injunction or statute is 
lunacy, compared with which Dame Partington's effort 
to stop the Atlantic with a mop was supreme 
wisdom.' 

"Then the last appeal is to the court of public 
opinion, and it must be a court independent of the 
contending parties. Not all the people of the United 
States belong to the privileged class of combined capitalists 
any more than they are members of labor organizations. 
The aristocracy of capital is made up of 
only a few thousands at the most. Organized labor 
may embrace a few millions of men not yet united 
under a central power. But although they may be so 
combined when the great conflict shall come, they 
will only make up a minority proportion of the entire 
population. There will be a great body of the people, 
to the number of tens and scores of millions, who 
will to a greater or less degree be independent, in 
sentiment at least, of both concentrated capital on 
one side and combined labor on the other, and this 
great majority will sit as a court to judge and determine 
what is necessary to protect the people's 
liberties and their free institutions from the aggressions 
of either or both of the combinations." 



The thinking people of the world all perceive that 
R2906 : page 356 



the great day of trouble is approaching,— very much 
as we have shown it from the Scriptures in The Day 
of Vengeance and The Divine Plan of the Ages. Yet, 
as above stated, they hope that the masses will at the 
proper moment save society from complete wreck 
and ruin in anarchy. It is well for mankind that hope 
occupies so large a place in the natural heart which 
has nothing else to lean upon. 

But if the Scriptures forbid us to exercise such 
hopes they give "us who believe" a still better hope of 
blessings to follow. The learned Justice hopes for 
the farming element, which heretofore has always been 
the conservative one, to preserve society and to enforce 
law and equity. But the Scriptures show the 
reverse of this. They show that it will be the reapers, 
the farmers, who will specially suffer and cry out at 
this time, and be specially instrumental in bringing 
about the anarchy. 

Already the "Agrarian Party" (the farmers) of Europe 
are now causing kings and emperors serious 
trouble. They cry out that they cannot make a living 
at present prices and want prohibitive tariffs 
which would so increase the cost of living for laborers 
and mechanics as to seriously disturb manufacturing 
and all foreign commerce. This is the result of the 
demonetization of silver— farmers of gold standard 
countries being obliged to compete with farmers of 
silver standard countries, while manufacturing is all 
done in gold-standard countries and has no such competition 
with the cheap labor of heathendom. 

Phenomenal conditions have given American 
farmers great prosperity— at the expense of millions 
in India and Russia, who have suffered from famine. 
But we are not to expect bountiful harvests here, 
and famines elsewhere to keep up prices, always. 
When the reverse movements come, the farmers of 
this favored land will also begin to cry out as represented 
in James 5. 

A NEW CHEMICAL AGENT. 



"The first milestone on the journey toward bloodless 
surgery has been reached. Its name is Adrenalin, 
that being the title of a chemical composition recently 
discovered by Dr. Jokichi Takamine, a well 
known and highly educated Japanese, who is connected 
with a chemical house that has a local office 
in this city. Adrenalin is to medicine what liquid air 
is to science, the only difference being that the chemical 
is under complete control, with unlimited possibilities 
before it. 

"By the local application of Adrenalin, in solution 
of one part to 5,000, operations may be performed 



on the nose, ear and eye without the spilling 

of a drop of blood. Such operations have also been 

performed with Adrenalin in solution of one part to 

10,000. 

R2907 : page 356 

"Thus has it been demonstrated that the discovery 
is the most powerful medicine known, and at 
the same time, it might be said, the most expensive. 
Physicians but it at $1 a grain, or $7,000 a pound. 

"The isolation of the blood pressure raising constituent 
of the suprarenal gland is of course the chief 
virtue of Adrenalin, and its uses and developments 
along this particular line are unlimited. It has also 
been ascertained, however, that Adrenalin is a most 
powerful cardiac stimulant, and it has been hinted 
by physicians that it may be possible to resuscitate 
persons who have died of heart failure. 

"Premature childbirth may also be made obsolete, 
as it is said Adrenalin can be made to revivify the 
heart of the dead child. Work along these lines is 
now being carried forward by Dr. Takamine in his 
laboratory, and before another year is gone it may 
be possible to perform amputations without the loss 
of blood, which is so disastrous to the patient."— New 
York Herald. 

STREAMS IN THE DESERT. 



"Surely the 'Great American Desert' of our childhood 
days will soon be a thing of the past. The only 
conception of a desert that the next generation will 
be able to obtain must come from pictures and descriptions 
of something that once existed, but is no 
more. Indeed, it is quite likely that we shall not have 
to wait for the next generation to witness the realization 
of this change. 

"A special from San Bernardino announces that 
an artesian gusher, with a flow of nearly 200 inches 
of water, has been struck on the Mojave desert, near 
Victor, at a depth of less than 200 feet, by parties who 
were drilling for oil. This is not, by any means, the 
first time that water has been struck in Southern 
California by persons who were seeking for oil, and 
in some cases the water has proved to be more valuable 
than a moderate amount of oil would be. 

"Out on the Colorado desert, below sea level, 
they have obtained a fine supply of artesian water at 
a moderate depth, and at the other end of the desert, 
near Yuma, water is flowing through a canal which 
is big enough to be navigated by a steam launch. 

"All this is only a slight foretaste of what is 
to come within the next few years. That favorite 



quotation of our friend, the country editor 'The desert 

shall blossom as the rose,' is destined to be exemplified 

to a remarkable degree in Southern California 

within the next decade. Not only shall the 

desert blossom as the rose, but also the less beautiful 

but more profitable cabbage and potato and cauliflower 

and sugar beet and watermelon and fruit tree, 

and many other things which profit a man's stomach 

and swell his bank account."— Los Angeles Daily 

Times. 



The foregoing clippings corroborate the testimony 
of the Scriptures,— that we are in the dawn of 
the new epoch, long by God's prophets foretold— the 
Millennium, the period of divine favor for the blessing 
of Adam's race through him who redeemed it- 
Christ. They corroborate the assurance that under 
that Kingdom of Messiah the "curse" shall be lifted 
from the race and as Sin and Death have reigned for 
6,000 years, now soon Grace and Truth shall reign 
unto righteousness and life.— Rom. 5:17-21. 

Meantime, also let us not forget the teaching of 
the Lord's Word that so far as humanity is concerned, 
it is so full of selfishness that it cannot enter 
into these blessings now due peaceably; but 
must needs pass through "a time of trouble [anarchy] 

R2907 : page 357 

such as was not since there was a nation." 

We must note the trend of events in this direction 

therefore, also. It is significant that one Socialist 

publication claims to have sent out during the forty 

weeks of this year, over 6,000,000 papers and pamphlets. 

And below we quote a cable to the Chicago 

Daily News— also significant. 

IN PERIL FROM THEIR OWN TROOPS. 



"London, Sept. 30.— Dangerous social fanatics in 
the ranks of continental armies are causing unrest in 
a number of the principal capitals of Europe, according 
to a high officer of the British army who 
has just returned from a professional tour of the continent. 
He asserts that some monarchs are in peril 
when in the presence of their own troops and are 
now taking drastic measures to correct the evil. To 
the correspondent of The Daily News he said today: 

"The barracks of Europe have become nurseries 
of anarchism. Realizing the opportunity offered to 
them in the leisure hours of army life, anarchists have 
gladly submitted to conscription and subsequently 



have poured the poison of their doctrine into the 
ears of their comrades. They have appealed especially 
to young peasants caught in the net of compulsory 
military service, and have sent many of the latter 
out of the army convinced of the tyranny of the 
ruling classes and eager to identify themselves with 
the radical element of the population. 

"This has happened on a particularly large scale 
in Germany, Austria and Italy, and the officials of 
those countries are greatly disturbed. They have 
adopted measures for strangling revolution in the 
barracks. The latter are now frequented by government 
eavesdroppers and spies who make short 
work of the preachers of assassination and 
insurrection." 



R2907 : page 357 

FAITH SEVERELY TESTED. 



"By faith, Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac;... 
accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the 
dead, from whence also he received him 
in a figure."— Heb. 11:17,19. 

WITH CHANGES of dispensation come 

changes of divine methods of dealing with 

the faithful. The Lord's command to Abraham to 

sacrifice his son was totally different from any command 

he would give to his people now; and yet tests 

of a similar import, though of different kind, are laid 

upon the Lord's people to-day, and for a very similar 

purpose, viz., the testing of our heart-loyalty toward 

the Lord:— testing of faith in him,— in his wisdom, in 

his power, in his goodness. 

In Abraham's day the patriarchal form of government 
prevailed, and under it the father of a family 
held an autocratic power which seemingly was rarely 
questioned by the children. The same extreme 
view of paternal government prevails, at least outwardly, 
in China to-day, we are informed. The patriarch, 
Abraham, was amenable to no earthly law or 
ruler, but to God only; and when the Lord proved or 
tested his faith and obedience by calling for the sacrifice 
of Isaac upon Mount Moriah, Abraham, full of 
faith and obedience, promptly responded, and there 
was no law or power to restrain the obedience. Even 
Isaac, who by this time was twenty-five years of age, 
seems to have offered not the slightest resistance to 
the divinely arranged program as set before him by 
his father; for in the vigor of youth he certainly need 
not have been bound to the altar contrary to his own 



will. 

A severer test upon Abraham than this one could 
not be imagined. What could be a more difficult thing 
for any father to do than to slay his own child, even 
in response to the divine command? But in Abraham's 
case the sacrifice was a doubly keen one, because, 
not only had he the natural parental love for 
his offspring, but this was the son of promise, for 
whose birth he had waited according to divine promise, 
and longed and prayed, for twenty-five years— the 
son whose birth in his old age was admittedly a miracle 
of divine power— the son in whom, according to 
the divine word, centered all the gracious promises 
which had filled Abraham's heart for now fifty years; 
and which, during all this period, had constrained him 
to be a pilgrim and a stranger in the earth, so that he 
might in due time inherit these gracious promises 
which belonged to the future. How strange it must 
have seemed to him— how utterly inexplicable, that 
the Lord should ask him to surrender Isaac as a 
sacrifice! 

Our respect for Abraham's faith rises higher and 
higher, as we behold the various manifestations of his 
confidence in God, and his obedience to the divine 
command. We say to ourselves, even as new creatures 
and partakers of the divine nature, O that we 
might have in fullest measure this abounding faith, 
this willing obedience, this trust, resting securely in 
God, this assurance that he is able to accomplish all 
that he has promised, even though the accomplishment 
of it should make necessary a resurrection from 
the dead! For the Apostle assures us that Abraham 
philosophized upon this matter— respecting the fact 
that Isaac was his legitimate heir, and had been so 
acknowledged of the Lord, saying, "In Isaac shall thy 
seed be called." He could see no other way that 
God's word could be true; yet so strong was his faith 
that he trusted that the Lord was able to raise his son 
from the dead in order to fulfil the promise. 
Heb. 11:19. 

This is exactly the kind of faith that the Lord desires 
to find in the spiritual seed of Abraham, the Gospel 
Church— a faith that will trust him even where it 
cannot trace him; a faith which recognizes his perfect 
wisdom, perfect love and perfect power. It is not a 
faith, however, that is a spontaneous growth, under 
present fallen conditions. It requires years for its 
development. Abraham had not this degree of faith 
when first he entered the land of Canaan as a pilgrim. 
It was the lack of this perfect trust in God which 
made him fearful to acknowledge Sarah to be his wife, 
when later he went into the borders of Egypt; it was 
a faith that had grown through his continued intimacy 



*This was written as the S.S. Lesson for Aug. 25 but was 
accidentally omitted. Many requests lead us to present it now. 

R2908 : page 358 

with his Almighty "Friend." His previous 

trials and testings had already contributed to the development 

of this his finished faith; the long waiting 

and frequent disappointments in respect to Isaac had 

been beneficial; the attempt to assist the Lord in the 

fulfilment of the promise, in the begetting of Ishmael, 

and the subsequent rejection of Ishmael as not being 

of the Lord's arrangement, had no doubt helped to 

establish the patriarch in his confidence that God's 

purposes are immutable, and his power unlimited. 

And so it is with the spiritual seed of Abraham, 
the Christ, the Church:— our faith-development also 
is a work of time and patient endurance of trials and 
testings, which, rightly received, work out for us an 
increase of knowledge, an increase of faith, and an 
increase of fellowship with God,— until, by the Lord's 
grace, we later on reach such a development of faith 
in him as sometimes surprises ourselves, and assures 
us that we have made some progress; because at the 
beginning of our way we could not have endured the 
same trials successfully. Thus we see that in many 
respects even our faith is a gift of God— that while 
we exercised some faith in the beginning of our experiences, 
yet the development of it to such a condition 
and degree as will be acceptable to God is of 
God's grace, through his providential leadings, dealings, 
instructions. To him, therefore, we must render 
the praise, not only for the glorious results, but 
also for the faith and the works of this present time, 
which fit and prepare us for the coming glory and 
blessings. 

Mount Moriah is one of the hilltops embraced 
in the city of Jerusalem, which of course was not in 
any degree built or inhabited in Abraham's time. 
The Temple was built upon this hilltop, and the original 
rock upon which it is supposed Abraham offered 
his son— later represented by the ram— is now to be 
seen. True, it is no longer called the Temple, but a 
Mohammedan mosque— the Mosque of Omar. 
Nevertheless, the Mohammedans have preserved this 
natural rock from any desecration, and visitors are 
permitted to look upon it over a railing;— the writer 
so viewed it with keen interest in 1892. In Solomon's 
Temple it constituted the base of the altar of sacrifice, 
and a drain (apparently a natural one) leads from 
this place of the killing of the sacrifice, underground 
toward the valley of Jehoshaphat, or the "valley of dry 
bones," which typically represents Adamic death, as 
the Valley of Hinnom symbolizes the Second Death. 
We see in this the divine foreknowledge and fore-arrangement 
in respect to every feature of the plan of 



salvation. God not only foreknew that he would use 

the land of Palestine in connection with the development 

of typical Israel, but he premeditated also the 

construction of the Temple, centuries afterward, upon 

the site which he selected for it. And that site, and 

the Temple, and the city, Jerusalem, and the Valley 

of Jehoshaphat and the Valley of Hinnom, all were intended 

to be, and are, so many lessons in respect to 

the divine plan, past, present and to come— to those 

who have the eyes of their understanding opened to 

see these matters from the right standpoint— from the 

standpoint of Jehovah, who promised forgiveness and 

blessing through Abraham's seed, and who has since 

been gradually working out his great and glorious 

propositions. Although our Lord Jesus, the Head, 

and the Church which is his body, were not slain upon 

this typical rock in Mount Moriah, nor in any other 

one spot in the world, nevertheless, the lesson is a 

clear one to all who understand that the blood of bulls 

and of goats, which can never take away sin, offered 

upon this spot— typified the better sacrifices, holy and 

acceptable to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Only those who recognize the fact that Abraham 
was a type of God (Rom. 4:17, margin), as Isaac was a 
type of Christ, can have any clear and satisfactory 
comprehension and appreciation of the incidents of 
this lesson. As Abraham was willing to offer his only 
son, in whom centered the promises, so Jehovah gave 
his Only Begotten Son, in whom centered the promises, 
that he should die on our behalf— a sacrifice to 
meet the demands of Justice, to the intent that thereby 
every promise of God respecting the blessing of 
all the families of the earth might be made possible, 
and in due time be accomplished. Although Abraham's 
hand was stayed, that he should not obey the 
Lord's command, nevertheless, the entire incident illustrates 
what other Scriptures affirm, viz., that 
"without the shedding of blood there is no remission" 
of the world's sins;— that unless the heir of the promises 
should die for man's redemption the promises 
could never be fulfilled. And this lesson is fully carried 
out in the picture before us; for although Abraham 
was not permitted to offer Isaac, a representative 
of Isaac was offered, the ram which God had 
provided. 

So, throughout the Jewish age, God permitted 
the natural children of Abraham to rejoice in his 
promise of blessing, requiring of them also that they 
continuously show forth the fact that the blessings 
could not come without a great sin-offering;— requiring 
them also to sacrifice bulls and goats, as sin offerings 
year by year continually, though these could 
never take away sin. They pointed to the great sin-bearer, 
who should also be the great deliverer. And 
now we, of this Gospel age, viewing the matter from 
the standpoint of its accomplishment, can see, as the 



Word of God declares, that the same God who in 
times past provided for the typical sacrifices has now 
provided the real one,— "by whose stripes we are 
healed." We can see also, as the Apostle explained, 
that as Isaac was so are we— the antitypical Isaac, 
members of the body of Christ— offered upon the 
Lord's altar. We see that Jesus, our Lord and 
Head, "offered up himself," and that we, covered by 
the merit of his sacrifice, are permitted to "present our 
bodies living sacrifices" upon the same altar, and to 
"fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ."-Col. 1:24. 

What a joy, what a blessing, to see the real 
meaning and value of the antitype; and to realize that 
the death of Christ the Head, and the sacrifice of the 
Church, his body, so far from annulling or destroying 
the original divine plan, are only steps in its accomplishment: 
that in the divine order the sacrifice 
of the human nature is essential to a part in the first 
resurrection, with its glory, honor and immortality. 
It rejoices us to realize that so far from the divine 
plan being frustrated by the death of the antitypical 
Isaac it is being consummated thereby— that the 
death of the Christ is the broad foundation which 
God is laying, by which he can "be just and yet the 

R2908 : page 359 

justifier" of all them that believe in Jesus; so that 
when this glorious Messiah and his house of sons 
shall be exalted to the power intimated in the promise, 
he will be fully competent and fully authorized to 
confer upon the world the great and wonderful blessings 
which God forestated to father Abraham in an 
obscure and typical manner. 

In the light of the spirit's revelation we rejoice 
to see that the blessings which are coming through 
this "seed of Abraham" (Gal. 3:16,29) will not only 
be, first of all, the divine favor toward the Church, 
evidenced in the glory, honor and immortality bestowed 
upon every member thereof, but additionally 
the blessing also upon the natural seed of Abraham, 
Israel according to the flesh; and furthermore, the 
blessing upon all the families of the earth, as the 
Lord has promised;— the blessing of release from the 
control and deceptions of Satan, and from the dominion 
of sin and its weaknesses: so that all who will 
may hear the voice of that great Prophet, Priest and 
King, and come forth step by step, not only out of the 
prison-house of death, but also out of "the valley of 
the shadow of death,"— clear up, up, up, to the mountain-tops 
of perfect life and perfect harmony with the 
divine Creator, lost for all through father Adam by 
disobedience, but redeemed for all— for as many as 
will accept it— by the precious blood of Christ. 

Occasionally some poor creatures of unbalanced 



mind, untaught and ignorant as respects the divine 

character and plan, misapprehending the Lord's dealings 

with Abraham and his posterity as types, imagine 

that as God called upon Abraham to sacrifice his 

son, so he calls upon them to make some human sacrifice. 

Fortunately these poor deluded creatures are 

not numerous, and they call for our sympathy rather 

than for our denunciation. The friends of God, the 

children of God, will make no such mistake respecting 

the divine will, because, as it is written in the 

Scriptures, "they shall be all taught of God." Those 

who are taught of God know that human life is to be 

held very sacred. They know also not to lean to 

their own understandings, nor to dreams nor to imaginings. 

They see further that even in Abraham's 

case God did not wish the human sacrifice, but merely 

tested Abraham's faith. Nor have we such promises 

made to our children; we have, therefore no such 

faith to be tested by the death of our children; hence 

it would be impossible for God to test us thus. 

Moreover, when we see that the entire procedure with 

Abraham was typical, and when we understand its lessons, 

the entire matter is clear and plain to us. 

While the seed of Abraham, the Church, has no 
such testing as his, it has, nevertheless, many severe 
faith-trials and testings, and as these are rightly received, 
and in proportion as faith abounds and triumphs 
in respect to all of our affairs of life, we are 
more and more blessed and taught of the Lord, and 
more and more acceptable to him, and more and more 
meet for the inheritance with the saints in light, as 
Abraham's seed. 



R2909 : page 359 

"CERTAINLY I WILL BE WITH THEE." 

--EXOD. 3:1-12.-DEC. l.~ 

MOSES, at forty years of age, having been 

schooled in all the learning of the Egyptians, 

and recognized as mighty in word and in 

deed, as noted in a previous lesson, determined to 

cast in his lot henceforth with the people of God. 

He renounced his relationship to the king's family, 

"refusing to be any longer called the son of 

Pharaoh's daughter." He chose rather to suffer affliction 

with the people of God, and with them to have 

an inheritance in the promises made to their fathers. 

While with the Egyptians he was a sharer of the 

riches which were accruing to that people through the 

oppression and bondage of the Israelites; and Moses 

could no longer be a participator in the fruits of this 

wrongdoing, nor enjoy these pleasures of sin, injustice. 



We have this attestation to his moral rectitude, 
his love of justice. It indicates that he was naturally 
high-minded, noble, just. How many of the Lord's 
people, living under the instructions of the Gospel, 
and the enlightening influences of the holy spirit at 
the present time, need to take a lesson from Moses' 
course. How many would be willing to enjoy the 
fruits of sin and injustice— to continually receive and 
enjoy wealth and luxuries known to be unjustly 
wrung from poor unfortunates? How many would be 
inclined to console themselves with the thought that 
they were not directly responsible for the injustices 
and oppressions whose profits they nevertheless 
would enjoy? How noble was Moses' course, and 
how much approved of the Lord! It is proper that all 
who know and love righteousness and justice should 
take a firm stand upon these principles.— 
Heb. 11:24-26. 

It is written that Moses' course in this matter was 
the result of his "esteeming the reproaches of Christ 
greater riches than the treasures of Egypt." The reproaches 
of Messiah were heaped against the Israelites; 
for undoubtedly the Egyptians had learned that 
the Israelites believed themselves to be the heirs of 
the great promises from the Almighty made to their 
father Abraham, and repeated to Isaac and Jacob,— 
that through this nation should come the great Messiah, 
the great Deliverer, who should bless and rule 
the world. No doubt the oppressed people were frequently 
taunted upon these extravagant hopes, by 
their oppressors. But Moses, believing these promises, 
preferred to associate himself with the despised 
people, and left the courts of Egypt. As the Apostle 
explains, this was because "he had respect unto the 
recompense of the reward"— he hoped by allying 
himself with his own people to preserve his share in 
these Abrahamic promises and in the blessings which 
must ultimately come through them by a better resurrection. 
-Heb. 11:35,39,40. 

Although, naturally, Moses was meek, he nevertheless 
was not ignorant of his education and abilities; 
and these being known to the Israelites he had 
every reason to suppose that they, expecting deliverance 
from Egypt about this time (in harmony with 
God's Word to Abraham about four hundred years 
before) would rejoice in having him for a counsellor, 
a representative, a qualified law-giver, amongst them. 

R2909 : page 360 

In his zeal for his brethren, and in his abhorrence of 
the injustice practised upon them, he smote one of 
the Egyptian task-masters, and delivered the oppressed 
Hebrew. He presumed that by such a course 
he would awaken the energies and spirits of his people 
and that they would accept him as their leader 



and that the deliverance from Egypt would forthwith 
begin. But his disappointment was great when the 
next day he discovered that his kinsmen had no such 
loyal feeling toward him as he had toward them; for, 
while endeavoring to correct a dispute between two 
Israelites, the one who did the other wrong resented 
the endeavors of the peacemaker, and showed that he 
and a large class whom he represented failed to appreciate 
the conduct of Moses, and failed to accept 
him as a law-giver. The erring Israelite demanded, 
"Who made thee a judge or a law-giver over us?" 
Where is your authority? We deny that you have 
any. Would you slay me, as you did the Egyptian 
yesterday? Moses was completely disheartened, and 
fled to the wilderness of Paran. He had fondly hoped 
that his sacrifice of the throne and glory of Egypt for 
his people's sake would be appreciated by them, at 
least, but coming to his own his own received him not. 
Apparently he had made a great sacrifice, and to no 
purpose. Undoubtedly the natural meekness of his 
disposition was intensified by this rebuff. 

Thoroughly discouraged, cut off from the cultured 
class of Egypt, cut off also from his kinsmen, 
whom he had hoped to assist, Moses hermit-like, settled 
down to a life in the wilderness. His natural nobility 
and training made him chivalrous in the defence 
of women, and soon he found himself defending the 
seven daughters of Jethro, who, as shepherdesses, 
were tending his flocks. This led to his marrying one 
of these, and himself becoming a shepherd, caring for 
his father-in-law's flocks. Forty years was the period 
of this isolation, this great change of life from one of 
culture, refinement and honor amongst men, to the 
solitudes of that wilderness. Moses, so far as we 
have information, up to this time had no direct manifestation 
of God's favor. He merely had a knowledge 
of the hopes which belonged to his people 
through the promises made to Abraham. He doubtless 
regarded as a mistake his action at forty years 
of age, in attempting to become the leader of his people; 
yet from the inspired record we must suppose 
that his faith in the divine promises never faltered, and 
that he preferred to be on God's side, and an outcast 
from Egyptian society, rather than the reverse. 
Nevertheless, we can see that God's supervision was 
over all of his affairs, and that with the tests of his 
loyalty came valuable experiences, preparing him for 
the Lord's great work, in the Lord's time. It gave 
him another kind of schooling, and a valuable one, 
though he was ignorant of it at the time. We cannot 
doubt that his wandering as a shepherd over that 
wilderness for forty years made him thoroughly familiar 
with every road, every hill, every stream, in it, 
and that this was subsequently of great advantage to 
him, when, under the Lord's direction, he became the 
leader of Israel through that wilderness toward Canaan. 



Neither need we doubt that Moses' own character 
received valuable lessons of patience and humility 
and obedience to the divine will during those forty 
years. Even his marriage here to Jethro's daughter, 
who bore him two sons, would seem to have been 
overruled by the Lord for the good of his people; for 
the woman being an African, a black, the sons would 
of course be mulattoes, and would correspondingly 
have less respect amongst the Israelites than if they 
had been Moses' children by an Israelitish woman, 
for as such they might have had the reverence of the 
people in Moses' stead at the time of his death, and 
thus the tendency might have been to establish a 
rulership in his family line, which evidently was not 
the divine purpose. 

How often the Lord's people— spiritual Israelites 
—find that they have experiences somewhat along 
the line of Moses! How sometimes our efforts and 
energies and plans for good, yea, our self-sacrifices, 
seem to be rejected, their value nothing, and ourselves 
turned away from activities and opportunities 
which we had coveted as opportunities for the Lord's 
service. How disheartening we have found this, until 
later on we discovered that the Lord's hand was able 
to bring blessing out of our disappointments, and 
how we could and have learned lessons under trying 
circumstances, which we could never have learned 
otherwise. And how these lessons have been ordered 
of the Lord so as to fit and to prepare us for future usefulness 
in his service and to his people. Let us, then, 
have the more courage and the more faith and the 
more trust in God— trusting him where we cannot 
trace him, knowing that all things shall work together 
for good to them that love him— the called ones according 
to his purpose. 

It was at this time, when Moses was eighty years 
old, that the Lord sent him to deliver Israel. Perhaps 
it was not accidental that Moses' career was thus 
divided into two equal periods— 40 years of Egyptian 
training, and rejected; then 40 years' absence followed 
by his successful deliverance of God's people. 
Perhaps in this Moses was a type. So also the 
period from the time Israel started as a nation (at 
the death of Jacob, the last of the patriarchs) until the 
antitype of Moses "came unto his own and his own 
received him not" (1845 years) is the same length as 
the period of his absence, at the end of which is his 
second advent, shortly to be followed by the successful 
deliverance of all of God's people from the oppressions 
of Satan, sin and death. 

What a change the forty years wrought in Moses! 
At its beginning he was ready and anxious to lead the 
Israelites; full of modest confidence in himself, as a 
leader, a commander, a law-giver, for that people- 
no doubt realizing by faith that God had prepared him 
and educated him that he might have the proper qualifications 



to be their leader. But now, when the 

Lord's time has come, his courage is gone, his self-confidence 

is upset, and he protests to the Lord that 

he is totally unqualified. Now the Lord needs to encourage 

him, and Moses receives more deeply than 

he could have done forty years before the thought 

that Israel's deliverance was not to be by man or 

through man, but by the Lord himself,— and that the 

human agent would be merely the Lord's representative. 

What a valuable lesson Moses was learning, and 

how necessary is such a lesson to all of the Lord's people, 

especially to any and to all whom he would use in 

R2910 : page 361 

any special sense in connection with his work. We 
must learn that it is not our work, but God's work, 
not our power or ability or wisdom, or greatness or 
learning, but the divine power working in and 
through us, which is mighty to the pulling down of 
strongholds, and to the lifting up of weak, and to the 
bringing in of the great salvation which he has promised. 
The more thoroughly we learn this lesson the 
better it will be for ourselves, and for all who, in the 
Lord's providence, we are sent to assist in his way— 
to deliver from the bondage of sin and death. 

Our Golden Text, "Certainly I will be with thee," 
is an inspiration to the Lord's people everywhere and 
at all times, when endeavoring properly to do any 
part of the Lord's work, heeding his call through the 
Word. If God be for us, and if God be with us, who 
can prevail against us eventually? There may be 
with us, as there were with Moses and his service, 
various difficulties, trials, vexations and disappointments, 
—for we have the treasure of the new nature in 
earthen vessels, and the weaknesses and imperfections 
and short-sightedness of these are sure at times 
to cause us difficulties and discouragements. On 
such occasions our duty is to turn the eyes of our 
understanding to Him whom we serve, whose ambassadors 
and representatives we are, and to recall his 
promise, "Surely I will be with thee." This means 
eventual victory, though, perhaps, through devious 
ways that we know not, and expect not, which nevertheless 
will ultimately prove to have been advantageous 
to us and to our Master's glory. 

"This shall be a token unto thee, that I have 
sent thee." No doubt Moses thought now of his failure 
to interest his people when he went to them still 
covered with the honors of the schools and the army, 
and in the prime of life; and perhaps he now contrasted 
his present condition as a shepherd, forgotten 
by many who knew him in Egypt, without renown, 
without favor before the court, without influence or 
prestige; and no doubt he said within himself, If I 
could make no impression before, how could I hope 



now to accomplish as much? But, "This shall be the 
token unto thee," to prove "that I have sent thee." 
He was to know that when God sent it meant that the 
right time had come, and that all of God's good purposes 
would be accomplished. He was to know that 
without the Lord he could do nothing; that with the 
Lord he could do all things. And so all of the people 
of God, who would be useful and used in his service, 
must learn this lesson: "Without me ye can do nothing." 
Then God gave Moses the absolute assurance 
that he and his people should come forth out of 
Egypt, and should worship in the very mountain in 
which now he beheld the burning bush, and talked 
with the angel of the Lord. 

By various signs God established the faith of his 
servant. The burning bush itself was one of these 
demonstrations of divine power. Another demonstration 
was the casting of his rod upon the ground, 
and its becoming a serpent, a symbol of evil, and the 
divine power exercised again by which the serpent 
was turned again into a staff, representing God's 
power to turn evil things into good things through the 
operation of faith. Again, his hand was thrust into 
his bosom, and taken out was found to be leprous, 
and being thrust in again and taken out was found to 
be restored to health. In sending out his people in 
the present time, his ambassadors, the body of Christ, 
to service (services that are much inferior in many 
respects, yet superior in some regards), the Lord 
does not give us these visible demonstrations of his 
power, but we may be sure that none are sent unless 
first they are given some testimonies on a higher 
spiritual plane. They must behold the Lord as the 
great light; they must realize that his justice is as a 
consuming fire as respects everything sinful, everything 
evil, but that through Christ he has mercy upon 
our imperfections, and grants us to see his light and 
to enjoy it without being consumed thereby. 

Only after such lessons have been learned in the 
school of experience under our great Teacher and 
Pattern, Jesus, are we ready for the Lord's service 
in various ways, as he may be pleased to indicate 
them and to send us and use us. Let us learn 
thoroughly the lesson that our undertakings, even for 
the Lord and in the interest of his people, can only 
prosper in the Lord's time, and when we are sent of 
him; but that nevertheless every effort we may put 
forth, even in our ignorance, if done in meekness, humility, 
and with a respect for the recompense of reward, 
will surely be owned of the Lord, and blessed 
of him to our good and to our development for future 
service, even as in Moses' case. 



R2910 : page 361 



THE TEN PLAGUES OF EGYPT. 
-EXOD. 11:1-10.~DEC. 8.- 
"The angel of his presence saved them."— Isa. 63:9. 



HE WHO SEES, in the narrative of the ten 
plagues upon Egypt, and Israel's deliverance 
thereby, nothing beyond what is contained 
in the simple story recognizes only the shell, and 
not the kernel of the lesson. In the type it was 
typical Israel alone that was delivered by Moses and 
the first-born; in the antitype it will be "the groaning 
creation" that will be delivered— all such who will accept 
deliverance, under the leadership of the antitypical 
Moses, Christ, and his Royal Priesthood,— the 
elect Church of this Gospel age. In the type it was 
Pharaoh and his coadjutors that were first chastened 
by the plagues and subsequently destroyed in the Red 
Sea. Their antitype is Satan and all his coadjutors, 
—all who profit by evil; and in the beginning this will 
include many who unwittingly are under his blinding 
influence; but ultimately it will include only such 
as are wilful and deliberate servants of sin and lovers 
of unrighteousness— injustice, etc. 

A previous lesson showed us Moses, receiving 
instruction and encouragement from the Lord respecting 
his future work as the deliverer. We saw 
him at the burning bush, and noted his reverence for 
the Lord and yet his need of being thoroughly convinced 

R2910 : page 362 

that God, with his infinite power would go with 

him, if he would again go to his countrymen, and essay 

to be their deliverer from bondage. We noted 

that the Lord gave him, as a sign or evidence of his 

commission, the miracle of his rod or walking stick 

turning into a serpent, and being changed back to a 

stick; and another sign in respect to leprosy coming 

upon his hand, and being instantly healed by putting 

it again into his bosom. When Moses had been himself 

convinced he enquired of the Lord by what means 

he should convince the Israelites of his authority as 

their leader, and that the Lord would now deliver 

them. He was commissioned to introduce himself 

to the Israelites by these same signs by which he himself 

had been convinced of the divine authority and 

backing for his undertaking; and if either or both of 

these evidences were insufficient Moses was commissioned 

to take water from the Nile river, in sight of 

his countrymen, and to pour it upon the dry land, 

where it would become blood, the Lord assuring him 



that by means of some or all of these signs the people 
would be convinced and accept his leadership. 

These three signs, which were so convincing to 
the Israelites, doubtless signified certain truths which, 
in the present time, will be convincing to the Lord's 
true people at the proper time; and demonstrate to 
them that there is to be a great deliverance of all who 
trust in the Lord, from the power of Satan and the 
bondage of sin and death. Time and space forbid a 
thorough examination of the antitypical significance 
of these signs here; but in our next issue we hope to 
show that we are now living in the time when the 
antitypes of these signs are due to antitypical Israel, 
as proofs of the presence of the Deliverer and the imminence 
of the deliverance. We expect to show that 
the antitypes of these signs are now being given, and 
of what they consist. 

Moses' next mission, with Aaron, was to go before 
Pharaoh and make a demand that the Israelites 
might be permitted to go a three-days' journey into 
the wilderness to worship God and do sacrifice to him. 
Nothing was said respecting their non-intention of 
returning, nor was it necessary to do so. They were 
not in a just sense bondmen; they had not forfeited 
their liberties, either through war or debt; they had 
the same right to depart that they had to come into 
Egypt; and, if their request for a temporary absence 
were granted, they could later determine whether or 
not they would return to Goshen. The request in this 
form made the trial of Pharaoh the less severe; nevertheless, 
his refusal to grant the holiday proved conclusively 
that he would have refused to grant them 
full liberty. Instead, Pharaoh sent forth instructions 
to the task-makers to increase the burdens upon the 
Hebrews, declaring that if they were worked hard 
enough they would have no time to think, and speculate 
about holidays, etc. It was at this time that the 
Israelites were required to turn out their full quota of 
brick per day, without having a straw furnished them, 
as had previously been the custom— straw being then 
used as a binder for bricks, which were sun-dried, 
instead of being burned hard, as at the present time. 
This stage of the Israelitish bondage is fully corroborated 
by certain recent excavations in Egypt, which 
show some structures built of brick, with straw 
binder; some with brick with binders of reeds and 
rushes, and some, finally, with practically no binders 
at all, and therefore that much the more difficult to 
handle in the making. 

The effect of this move was at first to discourage 
the Hebrews and to lead them to complain to Moses, 

R2911 : page 362 

through their elders, that instead of being a deliverer 
and a helper he was bringing increased miseries. And 



so, likely, it will be with many of the groaning creation, 
in the near future. Their first efforts and aspirations 
toward the deliverance which the Lord has 
promised them will be resented by "the powers that 
be," and for a time their efforts at attainment of coveted 
blessing will seem to work disadvantageously. 
Nevertheless, the effect in the end will be to the more 
deeply impress upon all the evils of the present reign 
of sin and selfishness, and to make all the more appreciative 
of the Millennial blessings and liberties of 
righteousness, when they shall be attained; and the 
more determined that they will follow the leadings of 
the Lord, and be obedient to him, that they may attain 
that liberty. 



PHARAOH'S HEART HARDENED. 

Under the Lord's instructions Moses presented 
himself before Pharaoh, and made formal demand that 
the people be let go. Nevertheless, the Lord said to 
him, "I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my 
signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt." "But 
Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my 
hand upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies and my 
people, the Children of Israel, out of the land of 
Egypt, by great judgments; and the Egyptians shall 
know that I am the Lord." 

This is perhaps as appropriate a place as any to 
consider the sense in which the Lord "hardened" 
Pharaoh's heart. And we may here also consider the 
Apostle's expression on the subject, saying: "The 
Scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same 
purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my 
power in thee, and that my name might be declared 
throughout all the earth.' Therefore hath he mercy 
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he 
hardeneth." (Rom. 9:17,18.) The Lord had raised 
up to the throne of Egypt a man of iron will and perverse 
spirit, who would not readily yield, and upon 
whom, therefore, repeated and severe judgments 
would be necessary, which would demonstrate divine 
power on behalf of Israel. Secondly, these would 
incidentally constitute a retribution against the whole 
people of Egypt, as participators in the unjust oppression 
exercised toward Israel. In a word, divine 
power would be better shown, and retributive justice 
better rendered, and a lesson for all time better written, 
by the raising up to the throne of Egypt of this 
man, than by raising up to the throne any of the 
others who might have been heirs, had they lived, or 
had he not lived. 

It should be noticed that neither here nor elsewhere 
does God interfere with the freedom of the will 
of any individual, whether amongst those who profess 



obedience to him, or others. As respects the hardening 
of Pharaoh's heart: as we look carefully into the 
narrative we find that it was accomplished through 
God's mercy only, and hence that no charge could be 

R2911 : page 363 

laid against divine justice on this account. It was 
because of Pharaoh's repenting that the Lord stayed 
one and another of the plagues brought upon him, 
and the nation which he represented. But this goodness 
and mercy of God, which should have led him to 
repentance, led him in an opposite direction, to greater 
hardness of heart. And so it is with the world in 
general today: when the judgments of the Lord fall 
severely upon the world there is a tendency to contrition, 
humility and repentance; but when the Lord's 
blessings abound there is the greater likelihood 
amongst those who are rebellious of heart to become 
hardened and unappreciative. So it was with Pharaoh, 
and so it will be with "the powers that be" in the 
end of this age; but so it must not be with those who 
are truly the children of God. To all these God's 
mercies and blessings, favor upon favor, should and 
do lead to greater appreciation, thankfulness and loving 
obedience, because they are his. 

It has been surmised that these ten plagues upon 
Egypt began about July 1st, and lasted until the following 
April,— in all about nine months. This surmise 
is based upon the character of the different 
plagues, and what is known of the climate and usual 
conditions of Egypt favorable to the plagues. The 
first three, the waters changed to blood, the frogs, and 
the lice (insects), appear to have been common to the 
Israelites as well as to the Egyptians, the land of 
Goshen being spared from the remaining seven 
plagues— flies or winged pests; murrain, or cattle disease; 
bains, or smallpox; hail and fire; locusts; darkness; 
and finally the death of the first-born. During 
this series of plagues Pharaoh relented a little occasionally 
to the extent that he agreed that the males 
of the Hebrews should go forth, as requested, to sacrifice 
in the wilderness, the females and children being 
held as hostages for their return. But this brought 
out the answer that when they would go it must be all 
of them, including their cattle and herds, and to this 
Pharaoh would not hear, until Egypt was smitten 
with the tenth plague, and all the first-born of Egypt 
(humanity and animals) died; then he urged them to 
go. The chastisement was sufficient. So it will be 
in the end of the time of trouble that is approaching, 
and which is figuratively represented by these 
plagues, especially "the seven last plagues."— Rev. 15: 

When the last plague has been poured out, as 
a vial of divine wrath, "the powers that be" will realize 
that it is useless to fight against God. And as 



Pharaoh and his people received a severe retributive 

punishment for every evil they had inflicted upon the 

Israelites, and as their first-born became retributive 

representatives of the Israelitish babes they had 

caused to be drowned in the Nile, so their flocks and 

herds, and the crops that were destroyed by the locusts 

and insects, etc., and all the troubles upon them, 

were retributive punishments, for the unjust exactions 

made of the Israelites. So we may suppose that 

the great troubles and losses which will come upon 

"the powers that be" of the present time, in the approaching 

trouble, will, in some sense or degree, be 

a retributive requirement,— an offset for a not sufficiently 

benevolent and just treatment of many under 

their control in the present time, when the blessings 

and inventions of our day should be accruing more 

generally to the benefit of the masses. 

Objection has been found by some to the statement 
that the Lord, through Moses, instructed the 
Israelites to "borrow" of their Egyptian neighbors 
jewels of silver and gold, etc., and that they did so, 
and thus "spoiled the Egyptians"— took away a great 
spoil or trophy of valuables, when they went. Two 
answers may be made to this objection. The first is 
that our Common Version translation is very inaccurate, 
and thus gives ground for the thought of a deception; 
the word in the original signifies asked, requested, 
or begged for, and should not be rendered 
"borrowed." The Revised Version renders this 
properly, "asked for." The Hebrew word is the same 
as when Solomon "asked" wisdom, and did not "ask" 
long life; neither "asked" he riches; neither "asked" 
he the life of his enemies. (1 Kings 3:11.) As it 
would be improper to render the word "borrow" in 
Solomon's case, it is equally inappropriate in the case 
of the Israelites. Similarly the word rendered "lent" 
should be "gave." The fact is that the Egyptians 
were thoroughly sore of heart under the repeated 
castigations given them by the Lord, during the nine 
months of the plagues. They were glad to learn that 
their representative and king had finally ordered the 
people to leave the country. They felt themselves 
like hastening them out, lest some further visitation 
should come upon them; or lest Pharaoh should again 
change his mind. Hence, when the Israelites importuned 
them for jewels and fine garments, etc., they 
gave them freely, hoping to be rid of them the 
quicker. The other answer to the argument is that 
in all justice the Egyptians owed the Hebrews the 
value of these jewels, and more too, for the onerous 
services they had compelled them to render; and 
hence the Israelites were not asking an alms for 
which they had given no equivalent, but were really 
asking for their back pay. 

Our Golden Text seems to be wholly misapplied. 
It seems to have no reference to Israel in Egyptian 



bondage; neither does it fully and completely apply to 
their antitype— those who will be delivered from the 
power of Satan, sin and death during the Millennial 
age. It applies merely to the overcoming Church, 
the "Church of the First-born," which was represented 
only by Moses and the first-born of Israel, 
spared during the night of the Passover. The Lord 
is specially with this class, the "little flock," the 
"elect," "the body of Christ," who shortly shall lead 
the people out of bondage into the liberty of the sons 
of God. As many as obey the voice and follow the 
leading of this great Prophet, Priest and King, of 
which Jesus is the Head, and his elect Church the 
members in particular of the body, will be fully delivered 
from the power of Satan, represented by 
Pharaoh. 

A general lesson, applicable to all persons and at 
all times, is that justice should be done; that none 
should be oppressed; that the Lord cherishes the 
cause of the oppressed, especially if they be his people; 
and that he will deliver them and will permit the 
wrath of man to work out retributive justice and punishment 
upon all oppressors. 



R2912: page 364 

AN EDITOR LECTURES CHURCHIANITY. 



REMARKABLE as it may appear, the editors 
of the secular press seem to grasp the religious 
situation much better than do the average 
ministers of the gospel or editors of religious 
journals. Perhaps this is because they are in a 
better position to see truthfully and point out tersely 
what they do see; they are bound neither by creedal 
obligations nor by "bonds of bread and butter" to abstain 
from seeing and narrating honestly, truthfully. 

In evidence, note the following, clipped from the 
editorial columns of the Cleveland Press. 

"LOVE YE ONE ANOTHER." 



"That there is a great need of revival today is 
evident to all. The church has allowed politics, business 
and speculative thought to get beyond her influence 
as a spiritual impulse and ethical standard. 
Modern reforms which have as their end the betterment 
of men's lot have sprung very largely from a 
diffused Christianity, and too often the bearing of the 
church toward them is cold and unfeeling, if not actually 



antagonistic. 

"The churches are all blessed with a proportion of 
really Christian men and women, whose giving and 
prayers and unselfish service keep the world from falling 
into ruin. These are the church. But these are 
not satisfied. They feel a deep need of revival. It 
is only the dead and frivolous and indifferent that are 
satisfied. Modern scribes and pharisees, hypocrites, 
cleansing the outside of the platter, whited sepulchers, 
self-deceived, measuring themselves by themselves, 
in daily deadly danger of crucifying their Lord afresh 
and putting Him to an open shame— these are the 
satisfied ones. 

"We need a revival of religion because of our 
lack of love. This is the center and core of Christianity. 
You love them that love you, your families, 
your friends, but what thank have ye? Do not the 
heathen the same? When you make a feast you invite 
persons agreeable to yourself, for your enjoyment 
and theirs. This is not a sin, but it is no better than 
the heathen, for they do the same. The Christian 
feast is for the poor and the homeless and friendless. 
The Christian love is for one's enemies. The Christian 
service is for the disagreeable and weak and vicious 
and unclean. The Christian duty is to all the 
world. But Christian men live under rules and 
standards that are the incarnation of selfishness. 
There is no love in business, no love in war, no love 
in modern pleasure. 

"Frivolous and selfish wives, deadening the religious 
life of husbands; worldly and godless husbands, 
making it difficult for their wives to live as 
Christians; parents a stumbling block to growing 
children and a byword to them that are without; professing 
Christians mad with lust of gold and place 
and power, silent and unfeeling in the face of social 
wrong, without compassion for the multitude, ambitious 
for social preferment, given over to vanity, 
envious, skilled in the hypocrisies and expedients of 
selfishness, denying daily in word and deed the power 
of godliness. Surely these need revival. 

"How few Christians there are who can lead an 
inquiring soul to a knowledge of Jesus! They are 
without excuse. To say that they cannot do this is 
to hide behind a lie. There is not a housewife but 
can teach her maid to cook and clean and sew; not a 
mother but can teach her children the elements of 
etiquette; not an artisan but can talk intelligently 
about the trade he has mastered; not a scholar but can 
give some account of what he knows; not a political 
partisan who is not eager to explain his views; not a 
lawyer but stands ready to argue any case, pro or 
con; not a doctor who cannot give some reason for 
the cure he prescribes; not a business man but can 
train others for his business. But many of these say 
they cannot talk to another upon the subject of 



religion. 

"For many a Christian employer to speak to his 
workmen of the love of Jesus would be to cause bitter 
mirth and deepen the conviction among them that 
he is a hypocrite. Those who do not confess Jesus 
with their lips because they consider their example 
sufficient, too often furnish an example of everything 
but Christianity. But it is the insistent, searching 
word of Jesus that every man is responsible for his 
neighbor, no matter how he may feel about the responsibility 
or how cleverly he may shirk it. 

"The spiritual energies of the modern church 
are paralyzed and neutralized by a great and plain 
contradiction between what church members say and 
do. 

"Christian gentlemen organizing great financial 
undertakings and incidentally corrupting governments, 
bribing the public, overriding the laws of the 
land; such believers would find it hard indeed to lead 
another to the Savior. Their proper method is to 
hire an evangelist, for it is very evident in this case 
that religion is religion and business is business. 

"It would seem that the next great revival will 
be a revival within the church itself. It will consist in 
an improvement in quality, rather than increase in 
quantity of church members. It will turn away from 
machinery and artificiality and organization, and will 
depend upon personality and character. It will deal 
directly as between man and man. It will be a thing 
of life; of everyday life to be lived as the hours go, 
simply and honestly. 

"A witness is useful only in so far as he knows. 
He is not permitted to testify upon what he has heard, 
or upon what he imagines, or guesses, or hopes. 
What he has seen and knows, this is his only testimony 
of any power. To what great realities does the 
average modern Christian testify? A man eager, almost 
frantic, in his striving for wealth; the frivolous, 
shallow member of some Christian church, intriguing 
and degrading herself for the sake of social preferment 
among worldlings; to what do these testify? 
Church 'service,' misnamed, wherein indolent believers 
luxuriate in enjoyment of observing with critical 
eye the intellectual gymnastics of their minister; to 
what do these testify? Cold and formal prayer meetings, 
sepulchral and oppressive, to what do these 
testify? 

"THE CHURCH EXPECTANT." 



"The brightest glory of the new century's dawn 
springs from a hope, deep and widespread, of coming 
religious revival. In the last few years a great 
change in the matter of worldliness has swept over 



Christian people everywhere, chilling into deadly torpor 

R2913 : page 365 

their spiritual energies. Worldliness has come to 
characterize those who profess to be citizens of 
heaven. 

"Earnest Christian parents are everywhere perplexed 
and saddened because church membership is 
of little aid in keeping the children unspotted from the 
world. Cash, like charity, covers a multitude of sins, 
and failure to make money is about the only hell believed 
in and feared. 

"The great contradiction between what Christians 
say and do threatens to destroy the churches. 
It is now commonly, if not universally, held that financial 
success is proof positive that a church is 
prosperous. 

"It was inevitable that the masses should find in 
the Sermon on the Mount just that moral ideal and 
standard which best expressed their unspoken aspirations 
and desires. Turning to the church, they expected 
to meet a powerful and sympathetic ally, for 
the church professed to base its life upon these very 
teachings of Jesus. But alas! stupefied with worldliness 
and prostrate under the sturdy blows of an unspiritual 
rationalism, the church had no answer for 
the masses. Mutual antagonism, suspicion, misunderstanding 
and, on the part of the workingmen, very 
often hatred, was the result. The church preached 
and professed to believe the moral ideas which formed 
the only hope for the masses and did not practice 
what it preached. The church stood for religion, the 
masses for morals; and both were wrong inasmuch as 
a half truth is not the truth. Now, these alienated 
forces are coming together. Religion has got 
as far as it can without an adequate morality; and social 
ethics has got as far as it can without religion. 

"A first feature of the coming revival will be its 
emphasis upon the teachings of Jesus. In the transaction 
of business, in the giving and taking of the exchanges, 
in the close touch and stress of politics, in 
the lighter and happier amenities of social intercourse, 
Christian men and women will endeavor to set forth 
Jesus. The new revival will powerfully affect the 
daily lives of Christians. It will make a distinction 
in the way a Christian man works and enjoys himself 
and the way an unconverted man does these things. 
It will be marked by a return to the morality of the 
golden rule." 



We fear that in the above description of "The 
Church Expectant" the writer has described what he 
hopes for rather than what he sees evidences of as approaching 



There is already such a "Church of the 

living God, whose names are written in heaven" (and 

some of these are probably to be found in all the denominations 

of Christendom, and some of them outside 

of all); but they are, as a rule, poor in this world's 

goods and not very highly esteemed among men, and 

often are spoken evil of, falsely, for their fidelity's 

sake. 

Whoever expects nominal Churchianity to reform 
and become a household of saints will be 
grievously disappointed. On the contrary the Scriptures 
clearly show us that all denominations are, and 
will increasingly be, merely moral clubs "having a 
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof,"— 
"drawing nigh unto God with their lips while their 
hearts are far from him." 

But, let it come;— it is a part of the "harvest" 
work of separating the "wheat" from the "tares." As 
the worldly spirit of formalism more and more gains 
control of all sects, it will wean and separate more 
and more the Lord's true people, who alone have ever 
been the true Church in our Lord's estimation. These 
must realize their lean and starved condition, and that 
Babylon has no substantial food for their nourishment 
and upbuilding,— only the husks and chaff of 
formalistic piety. They must realize that the doctrinal 
tables spread by Babylon are unreasonable and 
nauseating— musty and putrid "traditions of men" 
(Isa. 28:8), before they will look beyond Babylon's 
bondage of sectarianism and creedal fences, and leap 
the barriers to freedom and the feast of fat things 
spread for them now by our present Shepherd. 



R2912: page 365 

THE WIDE-MARGIN LINEAR BIBLE. 



THE ARRANGEMENT of the Tower and Dawn 
references, for the margins of these Bibles, has 
proven to be much more of a task than was at first 
anticipated. The work is progressing, though slowly, 
and none must expect the Bibles before February, 
1902— though we will do our very best to have them 
a month earlier. 

In one way the delay has been to the advantage 
of some of our readers: had we met with no 
obstacles the edition would have been far too small. 
We first thought of 1,000 copies— then concluded to 
risk 2,000; but the orders have rolled in on us until 
now they exceed 3,000. We felt sure the Bible would 
be what every Watch Tower student would need; but 
were not sure to what extent all would appreciate 



our efforts and trust our judgment. The evidences 
are gratifying to us, as we are sure the books will 
be appreciated by you, and profitable to you in Bible 
study, when you have received them and learned to 
use them. 

We had fixed October 1, as the limit of the time 
during which we would receive advance orders at the 
prices already mentioned— $2.00 for "French Seal" 
(sheep) binding, and $3.00 for the "Persian Morocco" 
(tougher leather) binding; however, we have concluded 
to allow all who will to place their orders at 
the same prices up to November 15, next. We will, 
meantime, order some more than we expect orders 
for; but as there will be some financial risk in so doing, 
the tardy must pay for this, and the prices will 
then be $1.00 additional on each kind.— Still, however, 
they will be the cheapest Bibles in the worlds- 
worth double. On the other hand, the coming orders 
may again be more than we expect, and the 
tardy may get none,— for the orders must be filled 
in rotation as received. 

We regret that we cannot encourage our British 
readers to hope for these Bibles. The "Oxford Press 
Co.," of England, has notified us that they will not 
allow the book on British soil, as they hold exclusive 
copyright privileges for Great Britain and Ireland on 

R2912: page 366 

the "Revised Version," which constitutes a feature 

of the Linear edition. We have written them explaining 

this edition, and offering a royalty, and will 

get them to our British friends, if possible. They 

may send in their orders to our British Branch 

(prices, 9s. and 13s.); we will include these in our orders 

anyway. 

Money may be remitted later— anytime before 
January 1st, 1902. Books not paid for by then will 
be granted to others, if the supply be short. 



page 366 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FRIENDS. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

I am very glad to inform you that we, that is, those 
of us who attended the Richmond, Va., Convention, enjoyed 
the meetings very much. We reached the hall on 
Sunday morning, when you were about half through your 
discourse on Baptism, regret that we were not in time to 
hear it all. The afternoon Sermon on "Salvation" was 
grand, and gave us impressions which shall be as lasting 



as life. I thought of the large number of people in Richmond, 

and yet so few, comparatively, to listen to the 

discourse. 

I informed you some months ago that I had rented a 
space in the ferry house where I placed a box for the 
distribution of Tracts. We were arranging for continuing 
it for another month when the Agent informed me that 
he had taken tracts from the box, to his wife, who had 
become very much interested; and desired him to refund 
the money which I had paid as rent, and also to continue 
the box in the ferry house at her expense. This, you 
must see, was very encouraging. 

A brother at the Richmond meeting from this locality 
testified there that he had become interested through reading 
tracts taken from the boxes in the Ferry waiting 
rooms. We are quite sure that large numbers of people 
are reading the tracts, seldom do we find one cast aside 
or destroyed. 

Your Brother in the blessed truth, 

GEO. M. TURNER.-Virginia. 



R2913 : page 366 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

Maybe you will remember that, coming home on the 
train from the Richmond Convention, I mentioned to you 
my friend who lives in Vermont. I think I spoke of 
feeling somewhat anxious, because I had not heard from 
her for some little time. Two days after that I received 
a letter, a long one, from her, from which I wish to quote 
just a bit. She says: "For myself— I can truly say, Margaret, 
that I now see clearly what our high calling is. I 
realize that once having seen it, and made a full and complete 
consecration of ourselves, we have surrendered all 
hope of life on the human plane— that if we fail then to 
be "faithful unto the end," nothing is left for us but eternal 
death. I have "counted the cost"— I have laid my 
little all upon the altar. It is too late for me to draw back 
now. You will not think I have been hasty. It is seven 
months now since I began to study these things for myself. 
Slowly, but surely, I have come into the light. The 
Truth has held me and I could not escape. I know it is 
God's own truth. And oh, Margaret, how could I do anything 
else but yield to my King fullest allegiance!" 

You can understand what joy it gave me to hear this 
—in fact I cried for joy (and I am not easily moved to 
tears) to know that she has made the consecration, and 
has begun to realize joy and peace. She says further 
along in the letter: "With prayer and humility for weeks 
I have been counting the cost; and it has been a solemn 
and a glad surrender. I realize how utterly I am nothing; 
I know I am weak— but I know that I have His almighty 
strength to lean upon. It has brought such a blessed 
peace and rest and joy. I need not tell you, for you know 



it. And yet I must tell it— only I have not words to express 
it. I cannot see why He should have chosen me, 
and loved me, and taught me, but I know He has. I do 
not know where or when or how my trials will come. I 
dare not say I am ready for them, only as He gives me 
strength. I am not worrying about it. There is no room 
for worry in this strange, glad peace that fills me." She 
had read Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5, and when she wrote had just 
finished chapter eleven of Vol. 4. I can see she is not 
clear on some points yet, she does not yet realize that all 
who are truly the Lord's are called to "come out"— but I 
believe it will not be long before she will see this. 

Pardon the length of this letter, but I wanted you to 
know this, because I am sure you will rejoice with us. 

We have just enjoyed our Pilgrim Draper's stay with 
us, and feel it has been a season of refreshing. 

With much Christian love, I am your sister in the 
Lord, 

MARGARET SMITH.-Washington, D.C. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

I do not often have opportunity to express to you my 
appreciation of your great benefits to me, for my time is 
taken up very much and I am studying the Bible with 
those wonderful helps, the Dawns. 

Since my coming into the truth, one year ago last 
month, my views, plans, ambitions, hopes, condition of 
heart, knowledge in serving Christ, attitude toward mankind, 
and attitude toward many other things, have changed. 
What blessed truths the Lord has provided for his 
humble servants at this time! 

I think one of the brethren wrote you that there were 
thirteen believers immersed here at Washington, Sunday, 
August 25th. There were three sisters and ten brothers, 
and I am happy to tell you that I was one of the ten that 
symbolized their consecration to the Lord. 

My dear brother, I know your time is taken up in 
something greater, grander than reading letters; but I 
wish to say a word in connection with the spreading of the 
truth. Since starting out in the one hope and faith, one 
year ago, I see what wonderful progress the truth is making 
in separating the wheat and tares, the Lord's true 
people from the world. Truly the way is narrow and few 
will find it, but that few are in such an attitude of heart 
that they look for a "thus saith the Lord," for every step, 
so that they can follow the leading of the truth which we 
find in the Scriptures. I can see and testify that this 
light is doing the work it was sent to accomplish; and as 
the great time-lock that holds the time prophecies is now 
open it enables the true virgin class to obtain a much 
better understanding of God's word. 

Trusting that you may continue to be "the steward 
of Christ," upholding all truth, I am your brother in 
Christ, 



MARSHALL G. ELLIS,-Heights, D.C. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

To let the brethren know what may be accomplished 
by a little with the Lord's blessing, and to encourage the 
brethren who read the Tower to send out to their friends 
and relatives "Dawns," "Towers" and tracts, I send you 
the following short sketch of how the Lord gave us the 
light and gospel of peace, and how it has grown in so 
short a time. 

Three years ago this winter a brother in Wisconsin 
sent a "Dawn Vol. I." to a brother in Spokane, Wash. At 
that time, so far as I have been able to find out there 
were but two "Dawn" and "Tower" readers in the city, 
and they were not acquainted. That one "Dawn" was the 
means of starting the work which has brought together a 
class of eighteen brothers and sisters, all of whom have 
been engaged in the "Volunteer" work, so far as circumstances 
would permit. All are now firm believers in the 
Gospel of Peace (Eph. 6:15); and together they have distributed 
about eight thousand sample tracts, booklets and 
"Watch Towers," and there are many others who are 
brothers who do not take part in the "Volunteer" work. 
So my dear brethren, be not discouraged if you see no results 
from your efforts (1 Sam. 18:7). Continue in the 
good work for it is indeed handing forth "meat in due 
season" to the household of faith. 
Your brother in the Lord, 

CHAS. E. BELL, -Washington. 



R2914: page 367 

A USURPATION OF AUTHORITY. 



CONGRESS is the law-making branch of the 
United States Government: the President and 
his Secretaries are the executive branch— whose 
duty it is to enforce the laws as Congress makes them. 
Congress passed the present postal laws nearly thirty 
years ago, and all Postmasters General since, until 
now, have enforced them faithfully, even though 
several of them have appealed to Congress to change 
the laws, so as to prevent so general a circulation of 
cheap periodicals. Congress in every case has refused 
to change the laws which have done so much to make 
the American public "wide awake." 

Now, however, we have a Postmaster General 
who attempts to usurp the law-making functions 
of Congress and to ride rough-shod over the will of 
the people as repeatedly expressed through their representatives 



in Congress. The duty of the people is to 
resent such unlawful disregard of their rights; and 
the protests should properly go to the President of 
these United States, who undoubtedly is quite unaware 
of this piece of injustice and lawlessness being 
practiced under his administration. 

Postmaster General C. E. Smith, and his third Assistant, 
E. C. Madden, who have engineered this nefarious 
violation of the law, and who are glorying in 
their shame, show clearly that they are not men to 
be trusted, when they plan for ruling the people and 
decide what liberties the people ought to be allowed 
and what disallowed. 

What is the remedy? It is to make such conduct 
odious to all lovers of liberty— to all who love justice. 
And the best way to do this is to promptly inform 
President Roosevelt (addressing him at Washington, 
D.C.), telling him that the credit of his administration 
is involved by the conduct of these his representatives, 
and calling for their dismissal and for the appointment 
of men who are not of their lawless (anarchous) 
cast of mind. Send postal cards or letters, 
or if convenient get up general petitions and obtain 
as many signatures (of old and young) as you can. 
All are interested, and all have a right to protest 
against the infraction of the laws favorable to "the 
poor of this world," who are the chief users of the 
paper-bound pamphlets whose circulation is being 
interfered with. The rich buy cloth-bound books, 
which are not affected by these acts of these 
pseudo-law-makers. 

We do not claim that the Postmaster General is destitute 
of good impulses in this matter: his claim is that 
he wishes to save the people's money. But our reply is 
that the people do not wish him to economise at the expense 
of violation of the people's laws. They do not need 
a paternal government. They are able to change the 
laws, through their representatives when and how they 
please. 

If the laws of the land were being enforced we 
should not have one word of remonstrance to make, 
however much their enforcement might injure us. 
But when, under divine providence, the laws are on 
our side it would be wrong for us to submit without 
protest and thus to encourage still further violations 
of law in disregard of the rights and wishes of the law-makers 
—the people. Office holders should be held to 
account as the public's servants;— otherwise they will 
be justified in concluding that the people are serfs and 
desire to be ruled by Czars. 

SOME SUGGESTIONS. 



Many need no suggestions from us, but are quite 



competent to express themselves forcefully and cogently. 
Others, however, may be helped by the following 
general suggestions as to brief forms, which 
each may change and modify to suit his own tastes. 

Hon. Theo. Roosevelt, Washington, D.C.: 
Respected Sir:— 

Doubtless you are unaware of the gross injustice 
being done the poor by your subordinates— the 
Postmaster General and his Third Assistant. They 
have undertaken to make "rulings" respecting pamphlets 
(2nd class mail), which are gross violations of 
the laws of Congress of nearly 30 years standing. We 
call upon you to cleanse your Cabinet of such law-breakers. 
Give us examples of obeyers of the laws 
in their stead, and we will esteem you, for your justice, 
accordingly. 

(Signature.) 

To the President of the United States, 
Washington, D.C. 

Your Excellency is respectfully petitioned to 
overrule recent Postoffice legislation against second-class 
mail matter. 

(Signature.) 

To the President of the United States: 
Washington, D.C. 
Your Excellency: 

We call upon you to redress the grievance of the 
poor, and at the same time uphold the Postal Laws 
of Congress, by causing the unlawful act of the Third 
Assistant Postmaster General to be set aside and its 
perpetrators ousted. We refer to the recent illegal 
"rulings" respecting pamphlets, refusing them second 
class mail privileges such as Congress designed and 
expressed; and such as they have enjoyed for the past 
30 years. The acts of your subordinates must be regarded 
as the acts of your administration. We hope 
to have this wrong speedily righted. 
(Signed.) 

To the President of the United States. 
Washington, D.C. 
Hon. Sir:~ 

We, the common people, hold you responsible 
for the violation of our Postal Laws at the hands of 
your Postmaster General and his Third Assistant. 
Congress enacted the law for second class mail in the 
interest of education and intelligence amongst the 
poor and the middle classes. It is robbery and fraud 
for these men now to frustrate that law which the people, 
by their representatives in Congress, have now 
three times refused to alter. We urge you to dismiss 
these law-breakers and to put in their stead men who 
will obey the laws as the people, through their representatives, 



enact them. Thus you will win the esteem 
of lovers of law and equity. 

(Signature.) 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 