From Our Readers
Epilepsy  I am writing to express my great concern about your article on epilepsy. (June 22, 1990) It states that in order to prevent Sandra from biting her tongue or mouth during a seizure, her husband placed a book in her mouth! This is against all medical practice in this country. As an epileptic myself, I certainly don’t want anyone to do this to me, as this could result in broken teeth.
L. M., England
The article was not making medical recommendations but relating a personal experience. Most authorities generally advise the public not to insert hard objects or fingers into the mouth of a person having a seizure or to attempt to force the jaws open. Doing so can do more harm than good, injuring both the victim and the one rendering aid. However, the executive director of the New York Epilepsy Institute assured “Awake!” that placing something relatively soft (such as a folded handkerchief) into the side of a victim’s already open mouth can prevent damage to the mouth.​—ED.
Teen Pregnancy  I must compliment you on the excellent advice you gave in your article on teen pregnancy. (May 8, 1990) At age 16, I gave birth to my daughter. Though her father was willing to marry me, my family advised me that I was too young. My family helped me till I later married. Years later I began studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Today my daughter serves as a full-time minister. I am so glad I did not get an abortion or enter a premature marriage!
L. B., United States
It was disappointing to read that while adoptive parents can provide better for a child materially, love and affection are best supplied by its natural parents. As an adoptive mother, mine is the wonderful privilege of raising our small son in Jehovah’s ways.
C. R., Federal Republic of Germany
We are sorry if the article caused some misunderstanding. Many adoptive parents do a superb job of giving their children needed support and love. However, the article was discussing the possibility that a child put up for adoption might not be raised by Christian standards. Such being the case, an unwed girl should not conclude that she has nothing to offer her child. She can raise him by Bible standards and show him true love​—something that is more important than economic advantages.​—ED.
Guarantees  Your article “It Pays to Know Your Guarantee” (June 8, 1990) contains good suggestions. Another factor to have in mind is that some warranties are valid only in the country where the item is purchased, even though the manufacturer has a worldwide service network. I bought a well-known camera in another country, and when I found it to be defective, local representatives of the company refused to repair it.
J. K., Spain
Thanks for the reminder. Read all warranties carefully!​—ED.
Five Common Fallacies  Thank you for your article. (May 22, 1990) It stimulated my thinking and was very useful in helping others to distinguish between sound reasoning and empty deception.
R. C., Italy
Dinosaurs  The article about dinosaurs (February 8, 1990) was very practical for our country, where many people believe in evolution. Awake! has begun to appear in our country for the first time this year. We read each issue with enthusiasm.
F. C., Czechoslovakia

