Accepting, Applying, and Benefiting From God’s Word
1 Although millions of people have a copy of the Bible, many do not accept it as the Word of God, most do not apply its wise counsel, and thus few benefit from it. However, Jehovah’s people truly believe that it is the Word of God and that it is beneficial for all things. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Hence, the theme for the circuit assembly program for the 1993 service year will be “Accepting, Applying, and Benefiting From God’s Word.”
2 There will be talks, demonstrations, skits, experiences, and interviews to encourage us, to deepen our appreciation for God’s Word, and to help us apply it more fully in all aspects of life. The Saturday afternoon program will consider counsel and discipline within the family circle in connection with entertainment, association, and materialism. It will show how we must be different from the world and not adopt its bad manners and irreverent or obscene language. In addition, encouragement will be provided to benefit single parents and fatherless children.
3 Also, on Saturday newly dedicated persons will have the opportunity to be baptized after hearing a Scriptural talk on the subject. Those planning to be baptized at the circuit assembly should make their wish known as soon as possible to the presiding overseer of the congregation so that he will have sufficient time to arrange for elders to go over the questions for baptismal candidates.
4 The Sunday morning program will examine ways in which we distinguish ourselves from the world by conforming to God’s Word. The importance of our appearance and how to avoid corrupting our mind are among the subjects that will be examined. In the afternoon, the district overseer will deliver the public talk entitled “What Marks the Bible as Authentic?” We want to be sure to invite all interested persons to this fine program.
5 The dates and location of this circuit assembly program will be provided by your circuit overseer, and we encourage all to be in attendance so as to accept, apply, and benefit from the counsel of God’s Word.​—Jas. 1:22-25.

