Cultivating Interest in the Kingdom Message
1 Some time has passed​—perhaps a day or two, perhaps a week—​since you last spoke to someone who showed interest in the Kingdom message. Whether he accepted Bible literature or not, it is important to cultivate any interest as soon as possible.
2 Review the notes you carefully made after the initial call. Then, when you pack your witnessing bag, be sure to include a copy of the literature you placed so that you can refer to it during the return visit.
If you placed the “Look!” brochure, you might say:
▪ “I am glad to see you once again. The last time we spoke, I showed you the cover of this brochure, and we read a scripture from the Bible to prove that, through his Kingdom, God will provide housing and employment for everyone. But God has also promised to put an end to sickness, old age, and even death. Do you find that hard to believe? [Allow for householder’s response.] Notice this point in paragraph 4 of the brochure I left you.” Read the paragraph, and consider one or two of the scriptures listed at the bottom of the page. A Bible study is being started!
3 To prepare the way for a future visit, you could bring the conversation to a close by saying:
▪ “Of course, everything we have considered is in the Bible, but many people wonder whether they can really believe what the Bible says. The next time I come, I would like to take a few minutes to consider this subject with you.” When you return to cultivate the interest, take up the discussion from the subheading “The Book That Explains Paradise,” beginning with paragraph 5 of the brochure.
4 In Territories Where Little Literature Is Placed: The same general presentation may be used when visiting people who showed some interest but accepted no literature. You may refer to the brochure that you offered in the course of the previous conversation. It may be necessary to make repeated calls using the Bible and your personal copy of the brochure before the householder accepts a brochure. If you placed either the July 1 or the July 15 issues of The Watchtower, refer to related subjects in the “Look!” brochure when returning to cultivate the interest.
5 Fine return visits leading up to a Bible study in the Government brochure may be prepared from material on pages 154-6 of the Reasoning book. Or a Bible study may be started by asking the question: “Did you know that the Bible holds out two hopes? One is to live forever on earth. This brochure explains how that will be possible.” Then turn to page 15 of the brochure, and read the three cited scriptures.
6 If you have placed two magazines, a bound book, or a brochure or have simply had an interesting Bible discussion with someone, you have the responsibility to cultivate the interest. We encourage all of you to set aside some time during July to share in this lifesaving work.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

