Feature Brochures to Share Your Kingdom Hope
1 As we witness the fulfillment of Bible prophecy, we rejoice in our Kingdom hope, and we are moved to speak about it to any who will listen. (Luke 6:45; Rom. 12:12) Our featuring brochures in the field ministry during July is one way in which we can share our Kingdom hope with others as Jesus commanded.​—Matt. 24:14.
2 Since we have a number of colorful and informative brochures to choose from, which of them might best meet the needs of those in our territory and stir their interest? To make the best possible use of the brochures, we must know their contents. The following brief review will help us in this regard.
3 The Government That Will Bring Paradise: When Jesus was on earth, the Kingdom of God was the theme of his preaching. This brochure shows that the Kingdom is a real government and how it will solve problems that make life so difficult today.
4 Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!: It explains why God made man and how we can enjoy life on earth forever. Descriptive illustrations and the concise text in this brochure appeal to young ones and to those with limited reading ability. It may also be used to convey basic Bible teachings to those with impaired hearing.
5 The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever: This brochure discusses God’s name from a Scriptural and historical perspective, showing why it is vital for Christians both to know the name and to use it in their worship.
6 “Look! I Am Making All Things New”: This brochure portrays paradise and builds appreciation for the Bible and our Creator. After discussing why God permits badness, it focuses on three basic Bible teachings: the ransom, the resurrection, and the Kingdom. This brochure also has questions at the bottom of the pages, which makes it easier for us to conduct a Bible study in it.
7 Should You Believe in the Trinity?: People may say they believe in the Trinity, yet they differ in their understanding of it. This brochure answers such questions as: What is the Trinity? Does the Bible teach it? Is Jesus Christ the almighty God and part of a Trinity? What is the holy spirit, and how does it function?
8 Once we have selected the brochures that we would like to use in the house-​to-​house ministry or when witnessing informally, we should review the articles on the back page of this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. There we will find suggestions for offering our literature and making return visits with a view to developing interest and starting a Bible study.
9 On many occasions, whether witnessing formally or informally, a particular brochure is just what is needed to give a fine witness. However, we must be prepared, have an adequate supply of brochures, know what is in them, and be discerning. May Jehovah’s blessing on our zealous ministry result in many more rejoicing with us in the Kingdom hope!​—Acts 13:47, 48.

