Question Box
▪ How may the service overseer oversee the work of ministerial servants handling the literature and magazine departments?
The service overseer’s sphere of interest is not limited to visiting book study groups on a monthly basis and arranging regular meetings for field service. This zealous elder is keenly interested in everything that could affect the progress of the preaching work in the congregation’s assigned territory.
He will ensure that each month ample supplies of campaign literature and magazines are readily available and that they are in very good condition. To this end he oversees many of the responsibilities of ministerial servants assigned to handle the literature and magazine departments.
The service overseer pays particular attention to announcements of upcoming literature campaigns when these appear in Our Kingdom Ministry. He and the brother caring for the literature work closely together to ensure that a sufficient quantity of literature will be available for use, but they must be careful not to request too much. If a publication is to be used in the field for the first time or if it will soon be studied in the congregation, these factors should be considered when a request is placed with the Society. If the literature has been offered before, the congregation field service report for the last campaign will indicate whether supplies on hand will be adequate. Of course, consideration should also be given to such factors as the number of publishers who will serve as auxiliary pioneers for the month as well as the growth in the number of publishers and regular pioneers since the last time the literature was offered. Literature should be available both before and after congregation meetings. Cartons of literature should be properly stored in a clean, dry place and stacked so as to prevent any damage.
The service overseer will also cooperate with the brother who cares for the magazine department. From time to time, the service overseer and the brother handling the magazines should compare the number of magazines that are requested each month with the number of magazines that are actually placed in the ministry. It may be that some publishers should reduce their requested quantity of magazines if these regularly accumulate in their homes. Magazines should not be wasted.
With the same principles in mind, the service overseer should personally check the amount of campaign literature that the congregation is requesting on the Literature Request Form (S(d)-14). He will then turn the form over to the congregation secretary, who will carefully check the rest of the form, paying particular attention to the number of special-​request items listed.
Of course, a certain amount of paperwork is required in properly caring for the literature and magazine departments. If the assigned brothers have questions in connection with their use of forms and record keeping, the secretary will be happy to assist in this aspect of their work.

