Service Meetings for July
Week Starting July 6
Song 123
10 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and any local announcements. Also, highlight two specific talking points that may be used when presenting July 1, 1992, Watchtower.
20 min: “Feature Brochures to Share Your Kingdom Hope.” Question-and-answer discussion; demonstrations. Inform congregation about stock of brochures available, and ask for comments from audience on brochures that would be especially appropriate for local territory. When considering paragraph 9, demonstrate how appropriate brochure might be offered in an informal setting to a neighbor, to an associate at work, or elsewhere. As time permits, have preassigned publishers relate experiences they have had in using brochures. Enthusiastically encourage brothers to have a full share in offering brochures during July.
15 min: Use Your Time Wisely on Vacation. Encourage publishers to plan now to use extra time during vacation months to advance theocratic interests. Include suggestions for informal witnessing when traveling. Encourage all to set personal goals, including keeping up with weekly Bible reading, reading Society’s publications, and making wise use of extra time during summer months.
Song 165 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 13
Song 193
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Theocratic News. Remind congregation of arrangements for field service.
20 min: “Tying In Our Introduction With the Literature.” Brief talk and demonstrations. Arrange for young publisher to demonstrate Scriptural presentation using suggestions set out in paragraph 2. When introducing Isaiah 65:21-23, use approach outlined in paragraph 5. Another publisher may demonstrate offer of “Look!” brochure, incorporating suggestions in paragraphs 3 and 4. In both cases chairman should stress how presentation was tied in with literature offer. In one demonstration show how publisher would proceed if no particular interest is manifested by householder. Remind congregation to pick up supply of brochures and magazines after the meeting.
15 min: Questions About Armageddon. Talk covering material from the Reasoning book, pages 44-9.
Song 137 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 20
Song 8
15 min: Local announcements. Discuss congregation’s June field service report, giving commendation along with needed encouragement for improvement. Point out how reflecting on yeartext along with context helps us to find true happiness as we share in field service and associate with congregation. (Rom. 12:9-16) If time permits, suggest one or two appropriate talking points for use in field service this weekend.
15 min: “Are You Offering Bible Studies?” Question-and-answer discussion followed by selected experiences that show how Bible studies can be started on initial call or on a return visit.
15 min: Local needs, or interview three or four publishers on what it was that attracted them to the truth. May include any obstacles they had to overcome.
Song 184 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 27
Song 180
10 min: Local announcements. Question Box. Service overseer may be assigned to handle this part.
20 min: “Cultivating Interest in the Kingdom Message.” After brief introduction, demonstrate return visit on (1) person who accepted latest magazines, (2) person who showed interest but did not accept literature, and (3) person who accepted “Look!” brochure. In each case lay foundation for another return visit.
15 min: “Accepting, Applying, and Benefiting From God’s Word.” Call for brief prepared expressions of appreciation for circuit assemblies in general. May call attention to valuable points learned at previous circuit assembly. Then have question-​and-​answer discussion of article on page 1. Announce date of next circuit assembly, if known, and encourage all to attend.
Song 157 and concluding prayer.

