Tying In Our Introduction With the Literature
1 When preparing your presentation this month, you might first consider the major problems facing people in your area and then select statements from the latest magazines or from a brochure that point to the practical, Scriptural solution.
2 In some neighborhoods, people may be concerned with rising unemployment and the high cost of living. If you encounter that situation, you could mention the problem specifically in your introduction.
You might say:
▪ “We’ve been talking with our neighbors about what can be done to ensure that there is employment and housing for everyone. Do you believe it is reasonable to expect that human governments will accomplish this? [Allow for householder’s response.] There is someone who knows how to solve these problems; notice his reassuring promise at Isaiah 65:21-23. [Read.] Our Creator had this promise written down for our encouragement, and all of us need that in these difficult times, don’t we?”​—rs, p. 11.
3 At this point in your presentation, you could tie in material from the latest magazines or from a brochure. If you are sharing in magazine work, you may select an appropriate point in the article “Hope Conquers Despair!” in the July 1 issue of The Watchtower. If you are offering the “Look!” brochure, why not show how the concept of housing and employment for all is illustrated on the front and back covers of the brochure. You can open it so that the householder will see the entire illustration at one time.
4 In territories where householders have a variety of concerns, a more flexible introduction will be helpful. You may want to try the second introduction listed in the Reasoning book under “Kingdom.”
You could say:
▪ “Jesus taught us to pray for God’s Kingdom to come and for His will to be done on earth as it is in heaven. Do you think that if God’s will is ever done here, the earth really will become a paradise?” After householder responds, introduce and read Revelation 21:3-5.
Then, if you are offering the Government brochure, read selected portions of the introductory paragraph on page 3. Note the statement: “By means of the Kingdom, God will soon put an end to wars, hunger, disease, and crime.” Ask the householder which of these problems he feels to be the most serious.
If you are featuring the July 15 “Watchtower,” you might say:
▪ “Many people would like to believe that this promise will be fulfilled, but they are not sure whether the Bible is a reliable guide. I am sure you will find this article, ‘Does the Bible Contradict Itself?,’ to be faith strengthening.”
5 Young people too can effectively present the Kingdom message, even to older persons.
In introducing Isaiah 65:21-23, young publishers might say:
▪ “I know as an older person you are much more experienced in life than I am, but this scripture is comforting to all of us.”
6 Be sure to make a careful record of any placements, including the specific brochure or magazines placed. You will need this information when you return to cultivate the interest.

