From Our Readers
Unbiased Coverage
I would like to express my appreciation for the unbiased coverage of many articles in your magazine. For research in my studies I chose articles on drug abuse, suicide, smoking, abortion, nuclear war and moral decline. Due to the intensity of the articles, I did not need to look elsewhere for additional information. I was overjoyed when I received the highest grade, an “A,” in my “O” level sociology course. It just shows the quality of your information.
J. C., England
We appreciate this acknowledgment received. Even so, for such purpose as outlined, additional research would always be recommended, either to confirm the material or to expand on it.​—ED.
Learning Problems
I just had to write and let you know how thankful I am for your article on learning problems. (May 8, 1983) When I first got the issue I did not pay much attention to those articles. But after our daughter started school we were faced with the decision of sending her to a specialized group in this area. This morning while reading your magazine I ran across some letters thanking you for these same articles and decided to read them. After a couple of minutes I felt as if someone had turned on the light for me. Now I know we made the right decision for her. Thank you for helping us close a gap in our understanding.
B. J., Wisconsin
We can never thank you enough for the articles on learning problems, which we have read in the Portuguese edition. These are proving most useful to us since our son is partially afflicted with this problem. We showed the article to our son’s teacher and she not only read the articles right away but circulated the magazine among the other teachers.
I. J., Brazil
Thank you for the articles on children with learning difficulties. I am a widow with two children, and the younger (age nine) has these problems. I tried everything​—school psychology, child psychiatry, hospitalization—​only to learn that there was no physical defect. The psychiatrist said my child was “just a big baby.” Finally we settled down to live with it. Then came your article and so many things have been put right in our minds. I gave the magazine to my son’s teachers and they thought the articles were excellent, describing my son’s problems exactly. It is often difficult to bring up a child with learning problems, but your articles have renewed my spirit.
K. N., Denmark
Headphone Hazards
I want to thank you for publishing the item “Headphone Hazards” in your feature “Watching the World.” (April 8, 1983) I have always made use of headphones and I can now see how harmful they could be. The information will help me to be careful from now on.
M. S., Brazil

