Peter Champions God’s Truth and Principles
THE apostle Peter in his second letter, even as in his first, wrote much to ‘strengthen his brothers.’ (Luke 22:32) However, rather than doing so by encouraging them to endure persecution he strengthens his brothers by boldly championing God’s truth and principles.
Because of the great difference in style of writing, as well as in subject matter, Bible scholars in Christendom argue that he did not write this second letter. If that were so, this would mean it is a forgery, for 2 Peter 1:1 plainly states: “Simon Peter, a slave and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have obtained a faith.” He also writes that he was an eyewitness to the transfiguration scene (Peter was one of the three apostles that witnessed this), that Jesus had foretold his death, and that this is his second letter.​—2 Pet. 1:16-21; 3:1; Matt. 17:1, 2; John 21:18, 19.a
Though the theme and thrust of his second letter differs from that of his first, Peter begins it by calling to mind the glorious hope set before those called to “become sharers in divine nature.” (2 Pet. 1:3, 4) Continuing, Peter champions God’s principles by telling Christians to ‘supply to their faith virtue, knowledge, self-control, endurance, godly devotion, brotherly affection, love.’ What a great deal Peter here gives Christians to work on! If they do these things to their utmost ability they will never fall but will gain an entrance to God’s kingdom. And although they knew these things, Peter was disposed to remind them always of these. Championing God’s truth, Peter notes that he was not following “artfully contrived false stories” in preaching Jesus, for he had witnessed the transfiguration scene in which God himself spoke from heaven, saying about Jesus: “This is my Son, my beloved, whom I myself have approved.” Peter also emphasized that Scriptural prophecy does not originate with man but “men spoke from God as they were borne along by holy spirit.” No question about it, Christian faith is not built on fables or imaginary things, but on facts, on truth! This being so, ‘we do well to take heed to inspired prophecies as to a light shining in a dark place.’​—2 Pet. 1:16-21.
In chapter two Peter champions God’s truth and righteous principles by speaking out strongly against apostates. These with counterfeit words seek to exploit their fellow Christians. Rightly they will suffer the same kind of fate that befell the wicked antediluvian world and the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah. But people of godly devotion will be preserved just as Noah and his family were. Those false teachers follow the mercenary path of Balaam. By their fleshly desires and loose habits they offer others greater freedom while actually they themselves are slaves of corruption. Having once known the truth and turned away from it, they are in a worse condition than they would have been had they never known the path of righteousness.​—2 Pet. 2:1-22.
In his concluding chapter 3, Peter further champions God’s truth by exposing the falseness of the ridiculers’ claim that ever since ancient times things have continued in the same way. But not so! Such overlook the flood of Noah’s day. And so in the last days, Jehovah’s day will come suddenly, like a thief in the night, when He executes the wicked. True, the time may seem to delay, but, after all, with God a thousand years are as but one day. Actually Jehovah is patient because he desires that all attain to salvation by repenting.​—2 Pet. 3:1-10.
Peter reminds Christians that God’s patience means salvation. This truth the apostle Paul also noted in his letters, which some twist as they do the rest of the Scriptures​—Peter here championing Paul’s letters as being inspired. And since God’s Word is so sure and the present wicked system is to be dissolved, what sort of dedicated lives should we lead? Should we not be known for our holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion? Yes, we should do our utmost to be found by God “spotless and unblemished and in peace.”​—2 Pet. 3:11-16.
Truly by thus championing God’s truth and righteous principles Peter strengthens our faith in them and our resolve to live by them. Doing so, we can look with confidence to ‘the new heavens and a new earth in which righteousness will dwell.’​—2 Pet. 3:13.
[Footnotes]
For more on this subject see “All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” p. 252.

