Questions From Readers
● Do Jehovah’s Witnesses believe in Jesus Christ?
We most certainly do. We wholeheartedly accept and preach everything that God’s Word says about Jesus Christ. That includes the apostle Peter’s declaration: “There is no salvation in anyone else, for there is not another name under heaven that has been given among men by which we must get saved.”​—Acts 4:12.
Even outsiders who have examined our Bible-based teachings realize that we believe in Jesus. For instance, the New Catholic Encyclopedia (1967) says in its article “Jehovah’s Witnesses”:
“They consider Jesus as the greatest of Jehovah’s Witnesses, ‘a god’ (so they translate John 1.1), inferior to no one but to Jehovah. Before existing as a human being, he was a spirit creature called the Logos, or Word, or Michael the Archangel. He died as a man and was raised as an immortal spirit Son. His Passion and death were the price he paid to regain for mankind the right to live eternally on earth.”​—Vol. VII, page 864.
So the view that Jehovah’s Witnesses do not believe in Jesus is clearly untrue! This gross untruth has sometimes been spread by religious opposers because Jehovah’s Witnesses do not teach the Trinity. These opposers adamantly hold to their belief in the Trinity doctrine, that Jesus was part of a triune deity, and that when on earth he supposedly was God in the flesh.
The fact is that Jehovah’s Witnesses recognize and accept that the Bible uses the designation “god” with regard to Jesus. (John 1:1, 18) But Jesus himself quoted Psalm 82:6, agreeing that even powerful human judges might be termed “gods.” (John 10:33-36) And the Bible even uses the word “god,” signifying a powerful one or one who is worshiped, in reference to Satan. (2 Cor. 4:4) Obviously it would be incorrect to conclude simply from such uses of the term “god” that any creature given life by Jehovah God the Almighty is equal to the Creator himself.​—Rom. 1:25.
Jesus openly acknowledged that he was not equal to or the same person as his Father to whom he prayed. Christ said: “I am going my way to the Father, because the Father is greater than I am.” To the Almighty in prayer Jesus addressed these significant words: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”​—John 14:28; 17:3.
Jehovah’s Witnesses fully accept this plain statement of fact. And we are active in the vital Christian work of aiding others to know of and accept what the Bible says about ‘the only true God Jehovah and about the one whom he sent forth, Jesus Christ.’

