Be Whole-Souled in the Field Ministry
Part 5​—The Rich Benefits of Whole-Souled Service
1 Jehovah makes available to his whole-souled servants a boundless supply of rich benefits. (Ps. 116:12) How can we enjoy a full measure of blessings from Jehovah in our ministry? What benefits are in store for us? What must we do to assure ourselves of his approval and favor?
2 Personal Effort Required: The extent to which you enjoy God-given benefits depends in large measure on your individual efforts to do God’s will. Regarding the ministry, Paul wrote: “Each person will receive his own reward according to his own labor.” (1 Cor. 3:8) Let us therefore have as full a share in the ministry as we possibly can. The apostle Paul had the personal reward of helping many people, even entire congregations, to come to know God. What joy he felt in observing their firmness in the faith! (1 Thess. 2:19, 20) Likely, your circumstances will not allow you to be as fully involved in the ministry as Paul was. Yet, would it not be a rich blessing to help a person or even a family of sheeplike ones become firmly established on the road to life? What an incentive to work hard in the house-to-house ministry and follow through with return visits and Bible studies!
3 Further Benefits: An invaluable benefit of whole-souled service is that, as a fellow worker, one is drawn closer to Jehovah and Jesus Christ. (Matt. 11:29, 30; 1 Cor. 3:9) What joy there is to sense God’s spirit helping you in the ministry! (Matt. 10:20; John 14:26) Furthermore, diligently working side by side with others in the congregation strengthens our bond of love and unity.
4 We cannot enjoy full benefits from Jehovah unless we fully support the organization he is using to accomplish his will in these last days. (Compare 2 Kings 10:15.) When we closely and wholeheartedly follow the direction we receive through God’s channel and are actively involved in congregation activities, we are spiritually protected from Satan’s crafty devices. We are enabled to have a more productive share in the ministry.
5 This five-part series of articles on being whole-souled in the field ministry has highlighted a number of factors that are involved. Do you recall what the keys are to building appreciation for Jehovah, which motivates a person to be whole-souled? (July) Why is preparation essential for building up enthusiasm in the field ministry? How can we prepare? (August) How can experienced publishers help others to be whole-souled? (September) How can good personal organization help us be whole-souled in the ministry? (October) Are you applying these suggestions?
6 Jehovah wants us to benefit ourselves by obeying him. (Isa. 48:17) Furthermore, the benefits of whole-souled service extend to those who listen to you. (1 Tim. 4:15, 16) You can be sure that as you diligently apply yourself to the work at hand, Jehovah will observe this and “you will receive the due reward of the inheritance,” everlasting life.​—Col. 3:23, 24.

