Presenting the Good News​—Offering Home Bible Studies
1 The August 1991 Our Kingdom Ministry insert reminded us of our responsibility to plant and water in the process of making disciples of Christ. It showed us we should be motivated to conduct Bible studies because of our love for people who respond to the Kingdom message. Offering home Bible studies will help us fulfill our commission to make disciples.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
2 It is good to see that many of us have begun to put into practice the fine encouragement given. Reports indicate that many more Bible studies are being conducted. The number of Bible studies being reported in the United States increased about 5 percent in 1991 over the 1990 service year. Certainly those who have begun conducting studies for the first time are rejoicing in the share they are having in the disciple-making work. But how could more participate in this rewarding feature of our ministry?
3 Use the Offer for the Month: November is an especially appropriate month to seek to start new Bible studies. We will be offering the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and the book The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? A good way to develop the interest of the householder would be to use the suggestions found in the Reasoning book.
4 We could feature the Bible by using the introductions suggested on page 10 of the Reasoning book. There are five different ways listed to direct attention to the Bible. Encouraging people to seek the Bible’s answers to life’s questions may open the way for a Bible study.
5 Under the subheading “Home Bible Study” on page 12 of the Reasoning book, there are two suggestions that would be useful in directing attention to the God’s Word book. Both encourage using the book in a method of systematic study. If you are using the direct approach to start a Bible study, you can follow the fine suggestions contained in the September 1991 Our Kingdom Ministry.
6 Trust in Jehovah: To be successful in the Bible study work, we must remember that success in offering home Bible studies can be achieved only with Jehovah’s help. He plays the key role in our efforts to help people. (1 Cor. 3:6) Therefore, we should pray not only about finding someone to study with but also about the progress made by interested ones we have located. (John 16:23) We must remember we are “God’s fellow workers.”​—1 Cor. 3:9.

