Service Meetings for November
Week Starting November 4
Song 180
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Call attention to outstanding publisher peak, and commend publishers for their part.
20 min: “Skillfully Handle the Word of Truth.” Questions and answers. Highlight the need to use the Bible at the doors. After discussing paragraph 5, demonstrate suggested presentation. Also, briefly demonstrate how to offer the Bible with Topic for Conversation. Point out that at times publishers may wish to offer just the God’s Word book to individuals who do not appear to want another Bible.
15 min: “The New World Translation​—Scholarly and Honest.” Discussion of article appearing in the March 1, 1991, Watchtower. Highlight points that may be useful in presenting the Bible in service.
Song 23 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 11
Song 161
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage auxiliary pioneering during December.
25 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Offering Home Bible Studies.” Question-and-answer coverage. Have an experienced publisher demonstrate how a Bible study might be started with a person who has expressed interest in the Bible offered. Encourage brothers to follow up any interest shown, whether placements are made or not.
10 min: Question Box. Elder discusses points with audience. Remind congregation to review regularly previous direction given in Our Kingdom Ministry so that all speak in agreement.
Song 167 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 18
Song 96
10 min: Local announcements, accounts report, and Society donation acknowledgments. Commend brothers for their share in giving. Announce service arrangements for November 28.
20 min: “Congregation Book Study Arrangement​—Part 5.” Question-and-answer discussion conducted by service overseer. Ask for comments on how some have benefited from this provision.
15 min: Local needs or “Kingdom Proclaimers Report.” Talk. Draw upon experiences in this feature of The Watchtower showing the powerful effect that the Bible has on the lives of people. Could include reports in April 1, 1991, and August 1, 1991, issues.
Song 75 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 25
Song 105
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Encourage all to share in field service Sunday, December 1. Remind brothers to pick up supply of new book, The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived.
20 min: “Be Whole-Souled in the Field Ministry​—Part 5.” Question-and-answer discussion. Warmly encourage all to follow through on suggestions given. Include interview of zealous publisher or pioneer who can relate the personal benefits from having a full share in the ministry.
15 min: Offering the new book, The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived. Present well-rehearsed demonstration of the following: After introducing self, publisher might say, “If we were to ask who the greatest man who ever lived is, we would receive a variety of answers. Of all the men in history who have been called great, no one has affected the life of so many of mankind in such a powerful way as Jesus Christ. His example is one we do well to follow. See what his disciple Peter said of him. [Read 1 Peter 2:21.] True worship of the Father is only through Jesus, as he said at John 14:6. [Read.] How much do we know about Jesus as a man? What did he teach? How did he live and treat others? This book, The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived, will answer those questions and many more.” Show highlights in the book. If genuine interest is shown, you may say: “I would like to offer you this personal copy that I know you will enjoy. If you desire to read it, you may have it.” When showing the householder the book, refer to a couple of the quotes in the introduction, such as those by H. G. Wells and Napoléon. Point out the many excellent color illustrations.
Song 205 and concluding prayer.

