Skillfully Handle the Word of Truth
1 Our skill in using God’s Word can affect the way people respond to the good news. Thus, Paul encouraged developing proficiency in the ministry, saying: “Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God, a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.”​—2 Tim. 2:15.
2 Skill in using the Bible must be developed. Setting aside time for personal study and attending Christian meetings is essential. However, we must put into practice the things we learn by regularly using the Bible in the ministry. This requires continual effort as we seek God’s help and guidance.​—1 John 3:22.
3 Focus on God’s Word: It is important for people to realize that our message is not of our own originality but from God’s written Word. (John 7:18) Showing a person what God says on a subject in the Bible can have great impact. Righteoushearted people are drawn to the Bible’s powerful message. As we make greater use of the Scriptures, we become more proficient and will be able to provide others with greater exposure to God’s Word, which will be of benefit to them.
4 Most people are unfamiliar with the Bible. When using it, we must do more than just read texts. Thoughtful preparation is necessary to determine how to introduce a scripture. Questions or a stated problem may be used to arouse interest. Also, attention must be given to what we say after the scripture is read. The person may not be able to absorb the point in just one reading. Reemphasizing key words and making application will permit the ideas to sink in.​—See School Guidebook, studies 24 and 25.
5 The Offer: When we find people during November who are sincerely interested, we will offer them the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures along with The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? How might we approach people with this offer? After introducing ourselves we could say: “Today, many look to various individuals or publications for guidance. What do you feel is the best source of practical guidance? [Allow response.] Consider what the Bible says about the true source of wisdom. [Read Proverbs 2:6, 7.] Human wisdom has proved sadly lacking, leading to misfortune and despair. God’s wisdom, though, has always proved reliable and beneficial. [Read Isaiah 48:17, 18.] Therefore, we should look to God, who provides the direction needed to cope with the problems facing us.” Then we could turn to chapter 12 in the God’s Word book and direct attention to paragraph 2. After that, an applicable point from the chapter could be tied in.
6 After using Proverbs 2:6, 7 to highlight the superiority of God’s wisdom, introduce the New World Translation and explain to the householder why you have come to respect and treasure the Bible. Let him know that its teachings will benefit him and provide a solid hope for the future. Such a discussion may open opportunities to point out some of the Bible’s wise counsel on everyday problems and may lead to a Bible study.
7 Jesus always referred to the Scriptures to aid honesthearted ones and refute his opposers. It was Paul’s custom to ‘explain and prove by references’ the things he taught. (Acts 17:2, 3) Our confidence and joy in the ministry will increase as we earnestly strive to become ever more skillful in handling the Word of truth.

