“Bearing Fruit in Every Good Work”
DUE to following the Scriptural injunctions highlighted in the previous two articles Jehovah’s Witnesses have indeed been “bearing fruit in every good work.” (Col. 1:10) Not only do they zealously preach and teach, but they also report their activities for the enjoyment of all other Kingdom proclaimers.
In doing so they have good Scriptural precedents. For example, at Acts 2:41 we read that, as a result of the apostle Peter’s stirring discourse, as well as the preaching of other disciples, “on that day about three thousand souls were added.” Then, a short time later, further zealous preaching resulted in the number of disciples becoming “about five thousand.” (Acts 4:4) And when new Christian converts were baptized at Ephesus, the Bible account says: “All together, there were about twelve men.”​—Acts 19:2-7.
ENCOURAGING INCREASES
The 1980 service year for Jehovah’s Witnesses, which began September 1, 1979, and ended August 31, 1980, has indeed been a good one. Worldwide there has been an overall increase of 3.7 percent in the number of those preaching the Kingdom message. It is indeed heartwarming to see how country after country showed increases, whereas last year they showed decreases. For example, last year the work in Paraguay had an 11-percent decrease, doubtless due to increased legal difficulties. Well, this year the work there showed a 13-percent increase, more than compensating for last year’s decrease. In the Philippines, after having a decrease for several years, they had an increase of 2 percent. Korea last year had a 1-percent decrease but this year had a 6-percent increase. Uruguay went from a 2-percent decrease last year to an increase of 9 percent this year.
Many other lands had better increases than last year. Thus, in Bolivia there was a 1-percent increase last year, but this year there was a 7-percent increase. The United States last year also had a 1-percent increase, but this year the increase was 4 percent. Last year Jamaica similarly had a 1-percent increase but this year saw an 11-percent increase. Venezuela, which last year reported a 3-percent increase, this year reported one of 9 percent. Japan, which last year had a phenomenal 10-percent increase, bettered it this year with an 11-percent increase.
In Belgium the Italian Witnesses are demonstrating noteworthy zeal and having remarkable results. There are now 31 Italian congregations there with a total of 2,500 Witnesses. This means that one out of every 100 Italians in Belgium is now a Witness. In fact, a Witness seldom finds an Italian who does not have either a neighbor, a friend or a relative who is a Witness.
EXPERIENCES FROM THE FIELD
Especially refreshing are the reports of experiences had while the Witnesses engage in the preaching work. In Ireland the convention badges worn by the Witnesses attracted the attention of six alcoholics who were living in shacks in a park. One of these showed real interest and obtained the book Life Does Have a Purpose. Further Bible discussions with him resulted in his quitting the use of alcohol altogether.
Getting familiar with Bible principles, this man saw the need of working and so got a job, at the same time moving out of the park and renting a flat. His appearance changed dramatically as he shortened his hair and bought himself a suit. When he appeared in court, for an offense committed before he learned the truth, he looked so respectable that the judge gave him a suspended sentence and commended him on his appearance.
While attending the “Divine Love” Convention of the Witnesses in Dublin, the former alcoholic called on his relatives, who had previously forbidden him to enter their homes. They could hardly believe their eyes and found it difficult to believe that he was the same person. He now regularly attends Witness meetings and keeps preaching to policemen, court officials and men on his job.
From a Witness in Argentina comes this experience. “I was going from house to house and a man asked me if I was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I at first hesitated because I was not certain as to his motive, since the work here suffers from legal restrictions. But upon learning that I was one of them he asked that I study the Bible with him. This was arranged. In fact, I returned the same day and we started a Bible study using the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. In one week he had read this Bible study aid through and was beginning to read the Bible. I asked him why he wanted to study the Bible with me, and he said it was because of the great change a neighboring couple had made in their lives. They had been about to separate because they could not get along with each other. They began studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and what a change took place in their lives! Now they are getting along fine. This man decided at once to change his religion, and now he is teaching his children what he is learning.”
“Bearing fruit in every good work” also includes showing love to fellow Christians. A brother in Panama read the story in the April 15, 1978, issue of the Watchtower magazine that told of a Panamanian Witness who had lost both of his hands. He wrote the Society’s branch office, stating that he would like to help the crippled brother get mechanical hands, and that he would defray all the costs. Arrangements were made for this to be done in Mexico. The crippled brother was happily received by the brothers there. Now he has returned home, and imagine his joy in being able to take up a pencil in one “hand” and write his name, something he had not been able to do for more than 30 years!
A letter of encouragement for the work Jehovah’s Witnesses are doing was received by the Watch Tower Society’s Austrian branch office. It read:
“I have deliberated for a long time whether I should write this letter or not. I know that you go from house to house in order to bring to the people the ‘good news.’ I could very well imagine that this is not always a satisfying work, to be confronted day by day with hardened persons and not to lose your zeal and friendliness. Some of you might think that people are not thankful, and therefore I would like to thank you, that you have sent someone to me. If it would not have been for your preaching activity I would have walked, without any question of a doubt, the broad road. [Matt. 7:13, 14] However, because of you I have received a real opportunity to get to know the will of God. Therefore I would like to say this one thing: A love gained and sincere thankfulness counts for a thousand closed doors. With great admiration for your work.”
YOUNGSTERS BEAR FRUIT
That little children can also bear fruit to God’s praise the following experiences from the island of Jamaica show: A father went to pick up his five-year-old boy after school. Not being able to find him, the father decided he would just wait and let the youngster find him. After a while he noticed a crowd of children gathered around and wondered what they were doing. The father investigated and found his youngster in their midst preaching to them with his copy of My Book of Bible Stories.
A young Witness girl, upon finding a dollar bill at school, turned it over to the teacher. Shortly after that some money was stolen and the teacher warned that the entire class would be punished if the money was not returned; all, that is, except the Witness girl, for the teacher knew that the Witness child would not have been the one who took the money.
LEGAL VICTORIES
There are also other aspects to this “bearing fruit in every good work.” The apostle Paul wrote his beloved congregation at Philippi: “It is altogether right for me to think this regarding all of you, on account of my having you in my heart, all of you being sharers with me in the undeserved kindness, both in my prison bonds and in the defending and legally establishing of the good news.” (Phil. 1:7) Some of the legal victories have doubtless also resulted because Jehovah’s Witnesses heed the admonition of the apostle Paul found at 1 Timothy 2:1, 2: “I therefore exhort, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, offerings of thanks, be made concerning all sorts of men, concerning kings and all those who are in high station; in order that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with full godly devotion and seriousness.”
Thus a letter was received from Bangui, Central African Republic, dated October 1, 1979. It told that on September 27 the state radio had announced publicly that the ban of August 19, 1976, against Jehovah’s Witnesses was annulled, and that they had authorization again to preach freely throughout all the territory of Central African Republic. In particular was this grounds for rejoicing, as this decree was issued by a government only one week old.
In April of 1980 the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Zaïre was accorded legal recognition by the government. About a month before that Jehovah’s Witnesses gained a signal legal victory in Turkey. The previous year had seen 42 of the Witnesses acquitted of the charge of subversion and violation of the Law of Laicism (Secular Rule). The case was appealed by the attorney general and so went to the Turkish Supreme Appeal Court. It ruled in favor of the Witnesses. Because it is the highest court in Turkey, all other courts there are bound by its decision. Among other things, it stated:
“If one day the things occur which the accused ones believe and God rule will be established over the world, a punishment of the accused ones, because of such belief, will not prevent such events. But if their expectation is just a fancy idea and an empty belief, then their beliefs can in no way cause harm to our laical order of the State.” Certainly a wise decision, which reminds one of what Gamaliel said about the early Christians and their teachings, as recorded at Acts 5:34-40.
All such reports and experiences are indeed as refreshing as “cold water upon a tired soul.” (Prov. 25:25) They also show that Jehovah is true to his promise, that if we bring all our “tenth parts,” so to speak, into his house of worship he will richly bless us. (Mal. 3:10) May all dedicated Christians likewise exert themselves, bearing in mind that “he that sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.”​—2 Cor. 9:6.
[Chart on page 26-29]
1980 SERVICE YEAR REPORT OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES WORLDWIDE
(See bound volume)

