Jehovah—Who Is He?
HACKING his way through the jungle in Cambodia, Henri Mouhot, a 19th-century French explorer, reached a broad moat surrounding a temple. It was Angkor Wat, the largest religious monument on earth. Mouhot could tell at a glance that the moss-covered structure was the work of human hands. “Erected by some ancient Michelangelo,” he wrote, “it is grander than anything left to us by Greece or Rome.” Despite its having undergone centuries of abandonment and neglect, he had no doubt that behind the complex structure, there was a designer.
Interestingly, a book of wisdom written centuries ago used similar reasoning, stating: “Of course, every house is constructed by someone, but he that constructed all things is God.” (Hebrews 3:4) But some may say, ‘The workings of nature are different from what is man-made.’ However, not all scientists agree with that objection.
After conceding that “biochemical systems aren’t inanimate objects,” Michael Behe, associate professor of biochemistry at Lehigh University, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., asks: “Can living biochemical systems be intelligently designed?” He goes on to show that scientists are now designing basic changes in living organisms through such methods as genetic engineering. Yes, both animate and inanimate things can be “built”! Examining the microscopic world of living cells, Behe noted amazingly complex systems made up of components that are dependent on one another to function. His conclusion? “The result of these cumulative efforts to investigate the cell—to investigate life at the molecular level—is a loud, clear, piercing cry of ‘design!’”
Who, then, is the Designer behind all these complex systems?
Who Is the Designer?
The answer is available in that ancient book of wisdom quoted earlier—the Bible. In its opening words, the Bible answers with remarkable simplicity and clarity the question of who designed all things: “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.”—Genesis 1:1.
In distinguishing himself from others who are said to be God, however, the Creator identifies himself by a unique name: “This is what the true God, Jehovah, has said, the Creator of the heavens . . . , the One laying out the earth and its produce, the One giving breath to the people on it.” (Isaiah 42:5, 8) Jehovah is the name of the God who designed the universe and made men and women on the earth. But who is Jehovah? What kind of God is he? And why should you listen to him?
Significance of His Name
First of all, what does the Creator’s name, Jehovah, mean? The divine name is written in four Hebrew letters (יהוה) and occurs nearly 7,000 times in the Hebrew portion of the Bible. This name is considered to be the causative form of the Hebrew verb ha·wahʹ (“to become”) and thus means “He Causes to Become.” In other words, Jehovah wisely causes himself to become whatever he needs to be in order to accomplish his purposes. He becomes Creator, Judge, Savior, Sustainer of life, and so forth, in order to fulfill his promises. What is more, the Hebrew verb takes the grammatical form that denotes an action in the process of being fulfilled. This indicates that Jehovah is still causing himself to become the fulfiller of his promises. Yes, he is a living God!
Jehovah’s Predominant Qualities
The Bible shows this Creator and fulfiller of his promises to be a very appealing person. Jehovah himself revealed his distinctive qualities and said: “Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abundant in loving-kindness and truth, preserving loving-kindness for thousands, pardoning error and transgression and sin.” (Exodus 34:6, 7) Jehovah is depicted as a God of loving-kindness. The Hebrew word used here can also be translated “loyal love.” In accomplishing his eternal purpose, Jehovah loyally continues to show love to his creatures. Would you not cherish such love?
Jehovah is also slow to anger and quick to forgive our errors. It is heartwarming to be around a person who is not faultfinding but who is willing to forgive us. Yet that does not mean that Jehovah condones wrongdoing. He declared: “I, Jehovah, am loving justice, hating robbery along with unrighteousness.” (Isaiah 61:8) As the God of justice, he does not forever tolerate brazen sinners who continue in their wickedness. Thus, we can be sure that in his due time, Jehovah will correct injustice in the world around us.
Maintaining perfect balance between the qualities of love and justice calls for wisdom. Jehovah balances these two qualities in a wonderful way when he deals with us. (Romans 11:33-36) Of course, his wisdom can be seen everywhere. The wonders of nature testify to it.—Psalm 104:24; Proverbs 3:19.
Yet, having wisdom is not enough. To bring to complete realization what comes into his mind, the Creator must also have full power. The Bible shows him to be such a God: “Raise your eyes high up and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who is bringing forth the army of them even by number . . . Due to the abundance of dynamic energy, . . . not one of them is missing.” (Isaiah 40:26) Indeed, Jehovah has “the abundance of dynamic energy” at his command to accomplish his will. Do not such qualities attract you to Jehovah?
Benefits of Knowing Jehovah
Jehovah “did not create [the earth] simply for nothing” but “formed it even to be inhabited” by humans who have a meaningful relationship with him. (Isaiah 45:18; Genesis 1:28) He cares about his earthly creatures. He gave mankind a perfect start in a gardenlike home, a paradise. Humans, for their part, are ruining it, much to Jehovah’s displeasure. Yet, true to what his name indicates, Jehovah will bring his original purpose for mankind and the earth to its completion. (Psalm 115:16; Revelation 11:18) He will restore Paradise on earth for those who are willing to obey him as his children.—Proverbs 8:17; Matthew 5:5.
The last book of the Bible describes the quality of life you can enjoy in that Paradise: “He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” (Revelation 21:3, 4) That is the real life Jehovah wants you to enjoy. What a benevolent Father he is! Are you willing to learn more about him and what is required of you to live in the Paradise?
Unless otherwise indicated, all Bible quotations are from the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.

