Can the Bible Help You?
THE idea that the Bible, a book written centuries ago, could aid persons in coping with life’s problems today may sound strange to many. But it has done so. The Bible has assisted even people whose circumstances appeared hopeless. It has given them a purpose in life and therefore a reason to keep on living.
In the Netherlands one of Jehovah’s Christian witnesses awoke from a long state of coma caused by a car accident. She was a physical and mental wreck, given a 2-percent chance of surviving and regaining sanity. But slowly she did recover. Then she learned that her brother, sister-in-law and husband, all of whom were also Jehovah’s witnesses, had been killed in the same car accident that had crippled her. Did she have reason for still wanting to live?
Yes, for she appreciated that the Bible’s promise of the resurrection is backed up by solid evidence. She had every confidence that she would see her dead relatives again. Then, too, she had not lost the desire to aid others to appreciate that, regardless of the circumstances, life becomes truly meaningful when one is serving the Creator. She has learned to write and speak again. Though her right side is paralyzed, she is concerned about her service to God, including sharing Bible truth with others. As she put it: “I serve Jehovah God the best I can. That is why I learned to write with my left hand, because I want to serve Jehovah. If I were not to continue serving Jehovah, I would shame my husband. That is why I press on to witness to Jehovah’s honor.”
In the same land one of Jehovah’s witnesses was able to aid a man who was at the point of death to find a reason to live. Looking out of the window of his home one evening, this Witness noticed a commotion on the other side of the street. He feared that there might have been an accident perhaps involving a child. So he hastened to the scene. There he saw a man who had hanged himself and was now lying on the ground apparently dead. But life was still within the man. The Witness lost no time in applying artificial respiration. The man regained consciousness and was hospitalized.
This man had tried to commit suicide because he was tired of life. He had no hope for the future. His domestic affairs were in a pitiful state and his wife ran the home.
After his recovery, he asked for the Witness who had come to his rescue. Soon a Bible study was started with this man, his wife and their five children. In conjunction with the Bible, the book “The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life” was used for this study. The subject given consideration first was “Building a Happy Family Life.” In a few weeks the homelife of this family changed for the better as all saw the wisdom of applying the Bible’s counsel. Happily the man has found a new life.
Since the Bible has helped persons in extreme situations, is it not reasonable to expect that it could help you to cope with problems whether they be large or small? Might not the Bible’s counsel regarding what can be done to improve family life and one’s relationship with others be helpful to you? Jehovah’s witnesses would be glad to assist you in a study of the Holy Scriptures.

