Announcements
◆ When ordering the 1975 Yearbook, publishers and pioneers are requested to do so through the congregation with which they are associated. Orders for the English edition of the 1975 Yearbook may be placed starting November 15. Please order only after that date. The Yearbook will also be available in Dutch, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese and Spanish by about December 15. Yearbooks are 50c each. All orders for the Yearbook will be charged to your congregation literature account. Regular and special pioneers on the list since before July 1, 1974, may receive a free Yearbook by making request of the brother handling the literature. This will be included in the congregation’s order and, later, credit may be requested from the Society for the pioneers’ copies. Pioneers may obtain additional copies at 15c each. Calendars are no longer available.
◆ Any Kingdom News not distributed by November 10 should be used thereafter when sharing in regular features field service.
◆ Literature offer for November: “Eternal Purpose” book for 25c. For December: New World Translation and This Life book for $1.25. If you run out of This Life books, use whatever 25c book you have available. January through April: Watchtower subscription, with three booklets, for $1.50.
◆ Available in Grade-two English Braille:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life
Is the Bible Really the Word of God?
Listening to the Great Teacher
True Peace and Security​—From What Source?
Available in Grade-one Spanish Braille:
This Good News of the Kingdom
Tract #8, Life in God’s New Order
Any of these publications will be sent free of charge and may be requested by writing the Braille Desk. The publications must be returned to the Braille Desk after completion of reading or studying. These are not to be stocked by the congregation.
◆ New Publications Available:
“Things in Which it is Impossible for God to Lie”​—Malagasy
Paradise Restored to Mankind​—By Theocracy!​—Portuguese
Divine Victory​—Its Meaning for Distressed Humanity—​Chishona, Cinyanja
This Good News of the Kingdom​—Chokwe
◆ Available Again in U.S.A.:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, Regular Edition (bi12) ​—English
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Divine Purpose​—Spanish
◆ The Society now publishes a monthly edition of The Watchtower in the Bohemian and Romanian languages. The subscription rate is 75 cents for one year. The Watchtower is also available semimonthly in Ibo, at $1.50 for a year’s subscription.

