Others Need What We Have
1 There are many honest-hearted persons who do not yet know the truth about God and his purpose. They are distressed at what they see taking place in the world, but do not know which way to turn. They, too, need the truth that comes from God.
2 The hour is very late for this dying system of things. Appreciating the urgency of the times, we arrange our affairs to make time to reach others with the truth. And we rejoice to see so many responding favorably. As one publisher wrote, “Isn’t the fine increase wonderful? It certainly bears out the fact that not all of the ‘sheep’ have been gathered yet, and it makes us want to go ‘hunting’ all the more.” Nothing we could be doing at this time could be more rewarding. Why so? Because, as we share in it, we are actually ‘fellow workers with God,’ and the results of our work will endure.​—1 Cor. 3:9.
3 The first ten days of November are being spent distributing Kingdom News No. 19. Undoubtedly, thousands who read it will be moved by the information, as were thousands through previous issues of Kingdom News. One couple who were moving into an empty apartment found a copy of Kingdom News No. 18 in a drawer, the only thing left in the whole apartment. After reading it, they called the phone number given, a study was started, and not only are they attending all meetings regularly, but they have also expressed a desire to be baptized. Another man called the same congregation and wanted to know what he could do to help in the distribution. A study was started, and he too is attending Sunday meetings.
4 Interestingly, every month to date during which we have distributed Kingdom News, a new peak of publishers has been reached: 512,738 shared in field service in September 1973; 525,007 published in December of that year; and our present peak of 539,262 was reached last May. Likely, many more contacted in our witnessing activities will be sharing with us this month in field service. Wouldn’t it be grand to see another peak of publishers for November!
5 It is suggested that, after we distribute Kingdom News No. 19, we work the same territory again as soon as possible with the offer of the “Eternal Purpose” book on a contribution of 25c.
6 In addition to placing literature as we work territories covered with Kingdom News, we should have in mind starting Bible studies wherever possible. How encouraging it is to note the fine increase in Bible study activity! Our monthly average for the 1974 service year was 316,112, an average increase of 34,775 over the 1973 monthly average. Yes, many people are realizing they, too, need the truth and are responding to our invitation to have a Bible study.
7 Letters continue to be received stating that evening witnessing is an excellent time to find householders at home and in a relaxed, receptive mood. Some congregations have made arrangements for evening service, starting around 5:00 p.m., and are receiving fine support from the publishers. Often where no one was at home on weekends or during the day because both husband and wife work, contact was made through evening witnessing. Could you make use of this proven means of locating those who might otherwise be overlooked in daytime field service?
8 Just as we need the truth and appreciate what having it means to us, all others need what we have if they desire to ‘do the will of God’ and ‘remain forever’ on earth enjoying the blessings of God’s eternal purpose.​—1 John 2:17
[Blurb on page 4]
Are You Sharing in the Bible Study Work?

