Question Box
● In view of our understanding of 2 John 9-11 as discussed in The Watchtower of August 1, 1974, would there ever be circumstances that would allow for a disfellowshipped person to attend a meeting held in a private home?
Generally speaking, disfellowshipped persons are not invited to meetings held in private homes. The Organization book (page 174) said: “A disfellowshipped person is not prohibited from attending meetings in the Kingdom Hall open to the general public as long as he conducts himself properly. None will greet him, of course, and he may not attend any meetings held in private homes.” This is true concerning those who are ‘pushing ahead’ and do not “remain in the teaching of the Christ.”
However, if a disfellowshiped person is trying to make a comeback, showing repentance, and if he is not in violation of what is stated at 2 John 9-11 by continuing to practice or to advocate what is contrary to “the teaching of the Christ,” it may be he would be allowed to attend meetings in a home if there is no Kingdom Hall in the town and where brothers open up their homes for public meetings, Watchtower studies and service meetings so that the home serves in the place of a Kingdom Hall. In such cases the home would be viewed as similar to a Kingdom Hall during the hours when those meetings are held. The meetings are under the control of the body of elders. They will know the facts concerning the disfellowshipped person and can consider whether his attending a meeting in a home would bring reproach upon the congregation. They may discuss the question among themselves and with the householder. If there is no objection on the part of the householder to the disfellowshipped person’s attending, then the elders may so inform the disfellowshipped one and he would be allowed to enter that home during the hours when the home is used as a Kingdom Hall. At all times when he is there, the disfellowshipped person must conduct himself properly.
Where the only meeting held in a private home is the book study, a disfellowshipped person would not be invited to attend but he may attend meetings held at the Kingdom Hall.
As pointed out in The Watchtower, of August 1, 1974, page 465, a Christian may greet a disfellowshipped person who is not like those described at 2 John 9-11, but he would certainly not go beyond a word of “hello” or greeting. The Watchtower, August 1, 1974, page 472 suggested that where fleshly relationships are not involved, it would be well to leave to the elders further conversation or exhortation.

