Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 10
15 min: Song 54. Introduction, text and comments. Father discusses text with family, children read selected Theocratic News items, and then father reviews high points of Branch Letter.
15 min: “Others Need What We Have.” Question-and-answer discussion. When considering paragraphs 3 and 4, ask for local experiences enjoyed in connection with any of the Kingdom News distributions or experiences publishers have heard from other congregations. (Have some selected in advance.)
18 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Illustrations.” Talk, with demonstrations appropriate to local territory. As time permits, also consider pictures that could be used effectively in this week’s magazine service.
12 min: Concluding comments. Include accounts report, appropriate Announcements. Song 59.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 17
10 min: Song 69. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “Maintaining a Balanced Viewpoint Toward Disfellowshipped Ones.” Two elders of the judicial committee are approached by newer publisher. They review high points of this August 1, 1974, Watchtower article. Cover following points: (1) Why the Christian congregation rightly takes action toward those exercising an immoral influence among them, (2) how and why Christians guard against developing an attitude approaching that of some Jewish rabbinical writers, (3) what spiritual fellowshipping involves (include material in Question Box), (4) the meaning of Paul’s words at 2 Corinthians 2:11, (5) the need for a balanced view within family circle, (6) the importance of conducting ourselves properly at all times. Invite any who have questions on the subject to speak personally to the elders after the meeting.
20 min: “Do Not Neglect the Elderly Among Us.” Question-and-answer discussion. After discussing material, ask audience for suggestions regarding the following: What can we in our congregation do to be of help to older ones to get to meetings and in the field service to the extent that they are able? How can we aid any who are confined at home, in the hospital or rest homes? Invite the audience to inform the elders of aged brothers or sisters who are confined and may need spiritual assistance so the elders can arrange for such to be given.
10 min: Concluding comments. Mention plans for activity on world’s Thanksgiving Day. Song 61.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 24
10 min: Song 68. Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: Study of the “Eternal Purpose” Book. Talk covering following: Special series of talks now helping us to get familiar with material in the book, we will study it from December through May. Book study conductors should endeavor to cover book as follows: First three chapters during five weeks of study, averaging 8 pages per week; then remaining 12 chapters the following 20 weeks at about 7 pages per week. By studying thoroughly beforehand, book study becomes “in depth” review with two valuable purposes: (1) Ensures our gaining best possible understanding of material, (2) provides better training in expressing the information to others.
15 min: “Use the Publications Wisely.” Elder discusses this information with his family, using scriptures cited in a very simple way to help all in the family, including young ones, to appreciate the Christian view of wastefulness. Allow each member of family to express himself on how principles can be applied personally. Give primary attention to the matter of literature but can mention that in all aspects of life the Christian example is not one of wastefulness but of faithful use of all that Jehovah gives us.
15 min: Talk on article “What Do You Say to God?” in June 8, 1974, Awake!
10 min: Concluding comments. Many publishers of school age have one to two weeks of vacation over the holiday period. Many will be in position to temporary pioneer during December. Song 71.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 1
10 min: Song 20. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “What is the Bible’s View?” Panel discussion of various Awake! articles under this subject that are applicable to local territory. Select three or four subjects that may be of help in overcoming objections encountered in field service, such as, for example: “Must You Be Born Again?” (8/22/74). “Does Fate Rule Your Future?’’ (7/8/74), “Are They Harmless Observances?” (2/8/74), etc.
15 min: Offering the New World Translation and This Life Book. Chairman opens with encouraging talk for all to share in field service during December. Preparation is necessary. Discuss and demonstrate how various illustrations in the book can be used successfully in local territory, and Bible and book offer made. After each presentation, allow audience to analyze what was done, how they can use the suggestions in their field service. Include also demonstration of publisher using table of contents to arouse interest of householder in This Life book and then make Bible and book offer. Appreciating the importance of Bible study work, encourage all to start Bible studies at every opportunity.
15 min: Concluding comments, including brief, motivating talk on December theme: “Exult in Jehovah Despite Earthly Hardships.”​—Hab. 3:17, 18. Song 79.

