
LIVING AS CHRISTIANS
Prepare Now for a Medical Emergency




Why prepare? Medical emergencies and hospitalization can occur suddenly and without warning. Therefore, before an emergency arises, take full advantage of the provisions available to help you receive the best medical care possible. By doing so, you show respect for life and Jehovah’s law on blood.​—Ac 15:28, 29.
What can you do to prepare?
  Carefully and prayerfully fill out a durable power of attorney (DPA) card.a Baptized publishers can obtain from the literature servant a DPA card for themselves as well as an Identity Card (ic) for their minor children

  If you are pregnant, ask your elders for a copy of Information for Expectant Mothers (S-401). This document will help you make good decisions about medical issues that may arise during pregnancy and childbirth

  If you require a medical procedure that may involve the blood issue or a hospital stay, let your elders know in advance and inform the hospital that you would welcome a visit from a minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses


How can the elders assist? They can help you fill out your DPA card. However, elders will not make medical decisions for you or express their personal views on matters of individual choice. (Ro 14:12; Ga 6:5) When you inform your local elders that you are facing a medical situation that may involve blood, they will promptly contact the Hospital Liaison Committee (HLC) on your behalf.
How can the HLC help? Brothers serving on the HLC are trained to help those in the medical and legal communities understand our religious position regarding blood. They can discuss medical treatment strategies for avoiding blood transfusions with your health-care provider. If needed, they can help you to find a cooperative doctor.
WATCH THE VIDEO HOW TO MAKE HEALTH-CARE DECISIONS REGARDING BLOOD, AND THEN ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTION:
  What did you learn from this video that can help you be prepared for a medical emergency involving blood?

Your answer







a Lesson 39 of the Enjoy Life Forever! book can help you to make medical decisions that involve the use of blood.

ARE YOU PREPARED?
When facing a medical situation that may involve blood,


Find out what options are available where you live



Be prepared to explain to a doctor why you reject or accept the use of certain blood fractions



Be prepared to explain to a doctor why you reject or accept the use of your own blood in the course of a medical procedure



Put your decisions in writing on your DPA card



Inform your health-care agents of your decisions



Have ready access to the contact information of a local elder



