Do Not Limit Yourself—Dealing With a Busy Schedule
 1. Why do some hesitate to offer a Bible study?
1 Some hesitate to offer a Bible study because they have a busy schedule. Caring for a Bible student takes time. Time is needed to prepare for the study, to conduct it, and to help the student overcome personal obstacles. The apostle Paul said that he imparted his soul to help those in Thessalonica come to know Jehovah. (1 Thess. 2:7, 8) How can we conduct a Bible study even if we have a full schedule?
 2. How does love for Jehovah affect how we use our time?
2 Worship Takes Time: The simple truth is that worship requires time. For example, we regularly take time to attend the meetings, to share in the ministry, to read the Bible, and to pray. A busy married person will happily make time to spend with his or her mate. How much more should we gladly ‘buy out’ time to worship Jehovah because we love him. (Eph. 5:15-17; 1 John 5:3) According to Jesus, a vital part of our worship is the disciple-making work. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Reflecting on this will help us not to hold back from accepting the responsibility of conducting a Bible study.
 3. How can we care for a Bible study even if circumstances disrupt our schedule for the ministry?
3 But what if our schedule is disrupted by employment, chronic health problems, or theocratic assignments? Some publishers who must occasionally be away conduct their Bible study over the phone or by computer conference. Those whose schedule is disrupted by chronic health problems have arranged for the student to come to their home for the study. Some have arranged for a reliable publisher to be their back-up and conduct the study when they are not available.
 4. What blessings come from participating in the Bible study work?
4 Paul got much joy from giving of his time and energy to help others learn the truth. (Acts 20:35) When he contemplated the fruitage of his labor in Thessalonica, he was moved to thank Jehovah. (1 Thess. 1:2) Our joy and satisfaction in the ministry can be increased if we do not let a busy schedule limit us from participating in the Bible study work.

