See Good for Your Hard Work
 1. What could dampen our zeal for the ministry?
1 Man was designed to “see good because of his hard work.” (Eccl. 2:24) However, when we fail to see good results from our ministry, discouragement can rob us of joy and dampen our zeal. What can help us to maintain a positive attitude?
 2. Why should we have realistic expectations about the response to our ministry?
2 Have Realistic Expectations: Remember that although those who responded to Jesus were few, his ministry was unquestionably a success. (John 17:4) In his illustration of the sower, Jesus foretold that most hearts would ultimately not be receptive to the seedlike Kingdom message. (Matt. 13:3-8, 18-22) Nonetheless, our diligent efforts still accomplish much.
 3. How may we “bear fruit” even if we see little response to our preaching?
3 How We Bear Much Fruit: According to Jesus’ illustration, those who accept the message would “bear fruit.” (Matt. 13:23) After a wheat stalk sprouts and matures, the fruit it produces is not little wheat stalks, but new seed. So the fruitage that successful Christians produce is, not necessarily new disciples, but the many-fold duplication of Kingdom seed—our expressions about the Kingdom. This results in much “good” from which we can obtain satisfaction, regardless of whether people respond. We are contributing to the sanctification of Jehovah’s name. (Isa. 43:10-12; Matt. 6:9) We are enjoying the privilege of being God’s fellow workers. (1 Cor. 3:9) And such “fruit of lips” delights Jehovah.—Heb. 13:15, 16.
 4. What results, unknown to us, may our ministry have?
4 In addition, our hard work may be having results that we do not see. It is possible that some who heard Jesus preach did not become his disciples until after he finished his earthly ministry. Similarly, Kingdom seed that we sow may not take root and grow in a person’s heart until later, and he may come into the truth without our knowing. Indeed, our ministry accomplishes a great deal of good. Therefore, may we “keep bearing much fruit” and prove ourselves Jesus’ disciples.—John 15:8.

