Persistence
◆ Sometimes, even when one is attempting to do good for another, considerable persistence is required. This often proves true with the ministers of Jehovah’s witnesses who are doing the best possible good, that of aiding people to understand and apply God’s Word and thus be in line for divine blessings.
A woman minister of Jehovah’s witnesses in Malaysia called on a young Chinese girl living in a garage behind a large home. She left with the girl a copy of the Bible study aid From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained in the Chinese language. Arrangements were made for a return visit to establish a free home Bible study with the girl.
On the first visit the girl was busy with a big pile of ironing and had not read any of the book. Saturday was her day off from work, and so arrangements were made to call then. On the second call the Witness found that the girl still had a big pile of ironing as well as a room full of visiting relatives. Coming the next Saturday for the third call, the minister learned that the girl was behind in her ironing. But she was still interested in the free Bible study and planned on speaking with her sister to see if her fleshly sister would like to join in the study. The next call, the fourth, the girl had some good news; her sister wanted to study also, so the following week they were all to meet at her sister’s home some two miles away.
Early the next Saturday a thunderstorm was brewing. But the witness of Jehovah, not wanting to fail to keep her appointment, went anyway, getting drenched to the skin in the process. She found the house locked and nobody at home. The Witness thought to herself: ‘I am determined to give the girl one more chance.’
On the sixth visit the Witness went to the girl’s residence and found her sincerely apologetic. Arrangements were made for the study to be held the following Saturday. On the seventh visit the Bible study actually got under way, and from then on there was no delay or interruption at all. The young Chinese girl studied well, began coming to Christian meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses and is now herself an ordained minister. All of this because of perseverance in doing what is good.​—Gal. 6:9.

