From Our Readers
Dungeons and Dragons
I’m an avid D. & D. player and have been for three and a half years. I read your article and thought it was very good. It was the most accurate account of the game I’ve read. However, I found some exaggerated statements. You state that “there is hardly a game where players do not indulge in murder, arson, torture, rape, or highway robbery.” This simply isn’t true. “The game teaches greed and materialism.” That’s only to people who are greedy and materialistic. “The game teaches polytheism and demonism.” Do you believe that ignorance is bliss? The Bible also teaches that knowledge is very important. The game doesn’t have to be played on a greedy, materialistic level. And that stuff about the game making people selfish and untrusting isn’t always true. That’s only one level or style of play.
P. S., Connecticut
Perhaps the game doesn’t always draw on qualities of badness, but it appears that this is often the case. The Bible does not advise one to seek out knowledge of badness and demonism. It states: “Be babes as to badness; yet become full-grown in powers of understanding.” (1 Corinthians 14:20) And again: “What sharing does light have with darkness?”​—2 Corinthians 6:14.​—ED
Thank you very much for the article on “Dungeons and Dragons.” I used to be a rather avid fan of this game. I spent hundreds of dollars on it and thousands of hours, and let it completely monopolize my time. I spent my spare time devising new dungeons, new monsters, new ways to kill. Although I always advocated “good” characters, even they were evil and used killing to pursue good aims. I wish to warn all your readers not to indulge in this game. Not only does it promote demonism and spiritism, to say nothing of violence and killing, but it takes time away that we could use more wisely and fruitfully.
D. H., Texas
I’d like to express my appreciation for your recent article entitled “Dungeons and Dragons​—Dangerous Entertainment.” Less than two weeks after I read this article my teenage daughter was offered a job drawing game characters for several adult games. It seemed OK until I was told the characters would be goblins and other mythical creatures. I recalled the article I’d read and asked if these games were similar to ‘Dungeons and Dragons’ and was told they were. Had I not read that particular article some serious problems could have arisen, but we were able to avoid them. I now make sure I never miss reading Awake! from cover to cover. I don’t want to miss anything.
D. K., Missouri
Art of Listening
I am eleven years old and I just read the article “The Art of Listening.” I think it is wonderful advice for younger people. Keep on printing these fine articles.
T. S., Canada

