VOL. XXVIII JUNE 15 No. 12 
A.D. 1907--A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Admonitions for the Consecrated 179 

Patience and Forbearance Commended 180 

"Consider One Another to Provoke" 181 

"Love Seeketh Not Her Own" 182 

Led by a Way that They Knew Not 183 

"The Bread that Came Down from Heaven" 184 

"Come Near Before the Lord" 185 

This Doth God Require 186 

The Law Covenant for Israel Only 187 

"Fulfil the Law of Christ" 188 

A Scape-goat Query 190 

Some Interesting Letters 191 

page 178 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



THE INDIANAPOLIS CONVENTION, JUNE 14-17 



ALL SESSIONS IN 
"TOMLINSON HALL," COR. DELAWARE AND MARKET STS. 
BUREAU OF INFORMATION IN UNION DEPOT 

RAILROAD RATES 

We have secured a rate of two cents per mile within the 
territory of the Central Passenger Association, embracing railroads 
west of Buffalo, Pittsburg and Wheeling, in Ohio, Indiana, 
Lower Michigan and a considerable portion of Illinois. 
Excursion tickets should be asked for the "Watch Tower Convention, 
Indianapolis." These tickets will require to be signed 
at Indianapolis before using on return passage, and will be 
sold on June 13th and 14th, and be good for return journey to 
leave Indianapolis not later than June 18th, and return ticket 
must be signed in the presence of the Agent. (However, in a 
considerable portion of this territory, the two cent a mile rate 
already prevails without a special excursion ticket.) 

The Western Association has declined to make any special 
concession; friends from that territory must do the best they 
can in the matter of purchasing tickets. Remember the "mileage" 
plan; or, where a number are in one party, the "theatrical rate." 

The Eastern Trunk Lines Association, governing New 
York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia, Delaware, New 
Jersey, and Maryland Railroads, will grant us a special rate, 
on a signature ticket, of two cents a mile each way, provided 
we can furnish at once the names and addresses of those desirous 
of attending. Friends within this territory desirous of 
attending the Indianapolis Convention will say so at once; a 
postal card will do. On receipt of it we will procure a special 
order for a ticket and mail it to you. 

Friends from Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Maryland, 
New York, New Jersey, etc., desirous of attending the Convention 
at Indianapolis should ADVISE US AT ONCE, so that we 
may procure for them from the railroads orders for two-cent-per-mile 
rates. 

Reports seem to indicate that there will be a large gathering 
at Indianapolis. 

ACCOMMODATIONS 

In private residences accommodations can be had for 50c 
and $1.00 each per night. In hotels board and lodging can be 
procured for $1, $1.25, $2, and upward to $5 per day. 

Write at once, if you wish us to procure accommodations, 
stating briefly and pointedly what kind, number of persons, 
sex and color, and if married couples wish to room together. 
Do not expect any alteration of your party's location after 
writing. If others join it later they will be accommodated in 
the order of notification. Address all letters to C. A. Wise, 



1112 W. 30th St., Indianapolis, Ind. 



BRITISH PILGRIMAGE OF BRO. A. E. WILLIAMSON 



Thornhill, Eng. 


June 26 East Kirkby, Eng. 


July i: 


Oldham, 


" 27 Liverpool, 


14, 15 


Macclesfield, 


" 28 Warrington, 


16 


Manchester, 


" 29, 30 Atherstone, 


17 


Poulton-le-Fylde, 


July 1 Leicester, 


" 18, 19 


Belfast, Ire. 


" 3,4 Nottingham, 


20,21 


Bangor, 


" 6 Worcester, 


22 


Dublin, 


" 7, 8 Tewkesbury, 


23 


Carlow, 


10 Cardiff, Wales 


24, 25 



R4008 : page 179 

ADMONITIONS FOR THE CONSECRATED 

"I write unto thee. ..that thou mayest know how thou 
oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is 
the Church of the living God, the pillar and 
ground of the truth."— I Tim. 3:14,15. 

IT is one thing to make our consecration to the 
Lord, to be his and to serve him even unto death, 
and another thing to carry out that service day 
by day in all the little details of life. Our Lord's words 
—that he that is faithful in that which is least would 
be faithful also in greater things— is well illustrated 
by the fact that it would be comparatively easy for us 
to finish our sacrifice by suicide, or even by going to 
the stake, and a much more difficult thing to day by 
day hold our sacrifice on the altar in all the little affairs 
of life— in self-denials, in patience, in perseverance, in 
brotherly kindness, in gentleness— to receive reviling 
and revile not again, to be smitten mentally or physically 
and not to retaliate; this endurance of a lingering 
crucifixion-death is much more difficult. But we 
can readily see that the Lord's plan is greatly to our 
advantage, in the sense that while the consecration 
evidences a right spirit, will or intention, the gradual 
carrying out of that consecration tends more and more 
to develop the character-likeness of our Lord in us. 
Hence the Apostle urges that we learn to rejoice even 
in tribulations, knowing that they will work out in us 
various fruits and graces of the Lord's Spirit, as we 
receive them in the proper attitude of heart and seek 
to learn the lessons they teach. 

GOOD BEHAVIOR IN THE CHURCH 



Recognizing that we are all defective according to 
the flesh, that none of us come up to the divine standard 
of perfection, and that our only perfection is that 
of the heart, the will, we must not wonder if occasionally 
we have trials and testings, aggravations, one 
from the other, though it must be the will, the desire, 
the intent of each to provoke one another to love and 
good works and not to anger, hatred and evil works. 
(Heb. 10:24.) For ourselves we must recognize the 
very highest standard of God-likeness, and as for others 
of the Body we must be prepared to allow our love 
for them and for the Lord to cover a multitude of blemishes 
should they appear to us. And each one, in proportion 
as he or she follows this course, is pleasing to 
the Lord, is pure in heart— a copy of God's dear Son— 
and, covered with the robe of the Redeemer's merit, is 
considered from God's standpoint, not according to his 
imperfect flesh, but according to his perfect-intentioned 
heart or will. To us, "in the Church" does not 
signify in a meeting-house, but amongst the Lord's 
people. Neither does it mean merely when we are 
assembled together, but it includes all of our dealings 
with them, every day and all the time. And we all 
should desire to learn the lesson how we ought to conduct 
ourselves in or amongst the members of the 
Church, the Body of Christ, the tabernacle of the holy 
Spirit amongst men. 

Everywhere in the Bible the Lord sets before us 
perfect Love as the standard, and we must therefore 
suppose that all who have passed the standard of 
babes in Christ, and have come to some measure of 
knowledge of the Lord through his Word and Spirit, 
recognize this love standard and are seeking to conform 
to it. We must therefore suppose that the difficulties 
which from time to time arise amongst such are 
largely because of imperfect development of knowledge 
and experience in applying the love standard, as well 
as because of imperfections of the flesh. Hence the 
Scriptural exhortation that we grow in grace as well as 
in knowledge, and that we be more and more filled 
with the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of love, the spirit 
of a sound mind, the spirit of brotherly kindness, the 
spirit of meekness, the spirit of patience— the holy 
Spirit. 

ARE CONTENTIONS NECESSARY? 

We reply that they are sometimes, but not nearly 
so often as they occur. There is just one ground of 
contention authorized, and we find it in the words, 
"Contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the 

R4008 : page 180 

saints." (Jude 3.) But since the spirit of contention is 



everywhere in the Bible reprehended, we must understand 
the Apostle to mean that only the important 
points of our faith are to be contended for. We must 
not give place to any who deny the personality of the 
heavenly Father, and who would teach in the Church 
that God is a great big nothing, merely a principle of 
good; and if there is anything good in the sense of 
useful in the piece of iron or wood or stone or in any 
other substance, there is that much of God in it. We 
must contend earnestly against such vain philosophies, 
as being not only foreign to the faith once delivered to 
the saints, but antagonistic to it to the last degree. 
We must contend also for the ransom, because it is the 
very foundation of the faith once delivered to the saints 
—that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures 
and that he rose for our justification. This would 
imply a contention against various false claims, such 
as that our Lord was not made flesh but remained a 
spirit being, to whom death was quite impossible— that 
he merely assumed for a time the human body, pretending 
that it was himself, and pretending that he 
died when it died. 

We must hold to the faith once delivered to the 
saints, that our Lord left the glory which he had with 
the Father before the world was, that he humbled himself 
and was made flesh, and that he did this not as an 
example, but that he by the grace of God "tasted death 
for every man"— that he might die the Just for the unjust 
to bring us to God. This means additionally that 
we must contend that his death was a real death, the 
Just for the unjust, else our faith in him as a Savior 
and Redeemer would depart. Furthermore, if we did 
not believe that he really died, really gave himself as 
a corresponding price for father Adam, thus purchasing 
him and his race, how could we believe in his resurrection 
from the dead? How could anyone be resurrected 
from death if he had not gone into it? We must 
also hold to and contend earnestly for the great fact 
that God's work during this Gospel Age is the selection 
of the Bride of Christ— the Church of the First-born— 
and that this election, completed at our Lord's second 
coming, will have its consummation in the resurrection 
of the little flock to glory, honor and immortality in the 
Kingdom, as the Royal Priesthood under Christ their 
Royal Head and High Priest, that as the Spiritual Seed 
of Abraham they may fulfil the Abrahamic Covenant, 
"In thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." For all these fundamentals of our religion, 
including the declaration that sin entered into the 
world by Adam's transgression and that we are all 
partakers of his sin and of its penalty, and all need 
redemption— all these first principles of the faith we 
must stand for, contend for. To be indifferent to these 
and to allow error to creep in and to be promulgated, 
taught in the Church, would be a serious sin and show 
unfaithfulness on the part of those who had pledged 



themselves as soldiers of the cross to defend it. 
But aside from such fundamentals, the Lord's 
people should seek to exercise great moderation 
amongst themselves upon any point of doctrine not 
clearly enunciated— upon the meaning of any parable 
not explained in the Scripture itself. Neither should 
there be any dispute or division as respects Brother 
Russell or any other brother. Each should be allowed 
to exercise his own judgment in respect to things not 
specifically stated in the Word of God. Each should 
feel a delicacy or reserve about promulgating any doctrine 
or matter not specifically and clearly taught in 
the Scriptures, and above all he should be sure never 
to teach or attempt to teach speculations if he himself 
is not thoroughly convinced respecting the same. 
Each one has enough to contend with in the twists and 
kinks of his own imperfect judgment without having 
others add to his difficulties by the rehearsal of matters 
which they admit they do not clearly understand. 
There is so much in God's Word that is simple and 
plain and well substantiated that we can talk about 
and think about, that we are well nigh inexcusable for 
far-away speculations. The Scriptures declare, "The 
secret things belong unto God, but the things revealed 
belong unto us."— Deut. 29:29. 

PATIENCE AND FORBEARANCE COMMENDED 

If some dear brother has a peculiar theory or 
hobby and feels that he cannot rest until he has presented 
it to the Church, there should be some opportunity 
given him to let off steam— even if it would not 
be advisable to hear him in the most public manner 
lest visitors should conclude that his fancies represented 
the general thought of the Church. But if after 
he has been heard on some occasion, and it be the 
judgment of the Church that his theories are unreasonable, 
unscriptural, he should be content with having 
given his view; and if he be not content, but desires 
to ride his theory continually as a hobby, to the annoyance 
of others and to the interference with the general 
spirit of worship and progress in study, it would seem 
to be the duty of the elders to call his attention to the 
fact, and to remind him that he has been heard, and 
therefore his urging the matter is in the nature of a 
contention, not for a fundamental of the truth, but for 
a theory, and that such contention is reproved 

R4009 : page 180 

throughout the Scriptures as contrary to the will of 

the Lord and to the good of his people, themselves included, 

and that therefore they cannot permit the matter 

to continue.— Titus 3:9. 

The Apostle speaks of those who are "contentious 
and obey not the truth." (Rom. 2:8.) The intimation 



is that the contentious spirit or disposition is generally 

to be found amongst those who are not living up 

to the spirit of the truth which they have already recognized. 

They have been attempting to grow in 

knowledge without growing in grace— in love, in kindness, 

gentleness, meekness, patience, etc.; and those 

who are right at heart will be pleased to note this as 

their difficulty, and to correct the same, because what 

would it profit us to contend for our theories and cause 

confusion in the Church of God, and be ultimately reprimanded 

by the Lord and be unable to pass the examination 

for perfect love and Christ-likeness, and 

R4009 :page 181 

therefore be counted unworthy a place in the Bride 
class! Surely such contentions, such theorizings, are 
well worthy of the Apostle's reprimand, and well 
worthy to be heeded by us all. 

The Apostle's exhortation that "nothing be done 
through strife or vain-glory" gives another suggestion 
along this line, namely, that some have naturally the 
spirit of strife, and therefore more to overcome along 
this line than have some others. Some, it is intimated, 
have a vain-glorious spirit, the spirit of pride and ambition, 
which gets themselves and others into difficulty. 
But are we to reject those who are naturally 
combative, naturally ambitious? Are we to say that 
they therefore are not of the Body, and cut them off? 
By no means; rather we should seek to so exemplify 
the proper course in our own conduct as to impress a 
lesson upon them and upon all with whom we have 
contact. Wherever we see a wrong spirit in another 
our first thought should be, Have I any of that disposition 
myself? and our first correction should be in 
our own hearts and conduct. Thus casting the mote 
or beam out of our own eyes we would be the better 
prepared to approach our brother with gentleness and 
kindness, and unobtrusively to render him assistance 
in getting the better of his difficulties. 

BEREANS WHO "FIGHT TO A FINISH" 

Some of the Lord's dear brethren of excellent heart 
and noble intention seem to get the improper thought 
in connection with the Berean studies. They seem to 
say to themselves, There can be but one right thought 
on this subject, and that one the truth; and everyone 
else here should want the truth, and we should contend 
and dispute on this question if necessary all night and 
fight the matter until some one gives up and sees that 
he is wrong. This is an evil thought entirely, and is 
productive of great discomfort and disadvantage, and 
a hindrance to spirituality in various classes. On 
the one hand we are to appreciate more those who do 
some thinking of their own about a subject than those 



who do no thinking, and who merely swallow a statement 
set forth by others. But there is a proper limit 
to be observed: the Lord has had great patience with 
us all in our slowness to learn, and surely we should 
be patient with each other. He lays down line upon 
line, precept upon precept, and is slow to anger and 
plenteous of mercy, and very generous toward all those 
who give evidence of desiring to do his will. 

We certainly are not authorized to do less than this 
in his name and as his representatives. Rather our 
realization of our own obtuseness in the past should 
make us very sympathetic with others who are slow to 
see, slow to hear, slow to understand. Each therefore 
should be content if he have a reasonable opportunity 
for presenting his view on any question, and should 
not attempt to enforce and crowd it in upon another. 
If the Editor has stated his view, and one or more do 
not see the matter exactly so, and the question is not 
fundamental, then it would be the proper course to let 
the matter rest there, and to allow the Lord eventually 
as the great Teacher, through his providences to gradually 
bring us to where we could the more completely 
see eye to eye. In this we have the opportunity for 
learning the lesson of patience and forbearance, 
brotherly kindness, meekness, gentleness— Love. 

"CONSIDER ONE ANOTHER TO PROVOKE" 

If anyone of a contentious mind would set himself 
about it, he would have no difficulty in provoking in 
others resentment and evil works; but the Apostle 
urges, that having the holy Spirit of love dwelling in 
our hearts, we should consider one another to provoke 
unto love and good works. We should study one 
another's natural dispositions from a sympathetic 
standpoint, with a view to helping each other over 
difficulties and weaknesses. And how much of this is 
possible! Frequently it is possible by speaking a 
kind word, gently, sympathetically, lovingly, to help 
some dear brother or sister to keep balanced— to overcome 
some of his or her weaknesses, the expression 
of which would be injurious to himself as well as to 
the Church or others. How we should all study this 
spirit of helpfulness and recognize it as the spirit of 
love, the Spirit of the Lord! Let us remember that a 
soft answer, a kind and gentle word, may be helpful 
and turn away anger, but that grievous words and 
strifeful words, cutting words, sarcastic words, are 
almost sure to stir up anger. (Prov. 15:1.) Let us therefore 
study more and more to be gentle toward all and 
kind and affectionate one toward another, forgiving 
one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven 
you.— Eph. 4:32. 

Another point upon which forbearance and consideration 
seem very necessary is in respect to the 
choosing of leaders. Some very devoted brethren seem 



to get the impression that they should have no part in 
electing as an Elder anyone they could not endorse in 
every particular. We agree that no immoral person 
should be chosen to eldership under any consideration, 
and that if an Elder be found to be immoral his 
resignation should be immediately called for. But 
usually this is not the ground of difference: the Lord's 
people would never knowingly choose an immoral person 
as a standard-bearer or leader in spiritual things. 
But suppose that in a congregation there be one person 
whom the majority may consider vastly superior 
and better qualified every way than any other of their 
number to be their Elder or leader, and suppose that a 
minority of the congregation have a liking for the presentations 
or manners or what not of another brother, 
and suppose that another minority have a preference 
for still another brother, or at least a desire to see him 
brought forward into the public service of the Church, 
believing that he has talents that could be used of the 
Lord to his glory. What shall each party do?— fight it 
out on political lines and say, We have power, and 
therefore authority to elect our man, and you must 
either join in this or quit the company? By no means! 
This might be "good politics" amongst the worldly, 
but it would be quite out of harmony with the spirit of 
love which must govern in the Church. In gaining such 
a victory we might wound one or more of the Lord's 

R4009 : page 182 

brethren, might offend our Lord, and do ourselves incalculable 

injury in our race for the great prize. Such 

a "victory" would be a defeat of our real aims and aspirations 

—a victory for our great Adversary. Are we 

not to consider one another, and seek not every man 

merely his own preferences, but seek to build one another 

up in the most holy faith? The spirit of love 

would therefore seem to dictate that more than one 

Elder should be elected in such a case— two or three or 

more, as the supply of material and the desires of the 

company could be reasonably interpreted, without violating 

the general directions of the Lord's Word. A 

fair and reasonable decision should be such as would 

be proportionate to the number of the brethren. Some 

might be found specially well adapted to the leading 

of one kind of meeting and others to the leading of 

another kind, and the Apostle points out that we have 

need of every member of the body, so that the eye 

cannot even say to the hand or the foot— I have no need 

of you. The thought we should have in mind is that 

there is plenty of room for all of the Lord's people to 

do service. 

When the Apostle points out the qualifications of 
an Elder he mentions the ideal, just as our Lord mentions 
the ideal to us all when he says, "Be ye like unto 
your Father which is in heaven." We cannot be like 



the heavenly Father fully, completely, but we can have 
him as our standard or pattern to which we are striving 
to attain. Similarly, few elders may come up to the 
standard of qualification mentioned by the Apostle, 
but these qualifications should not be overlooked by 
any in their expression of a choice, or rather in their 
expression of what they believe to be the Lord's choice 
in the matter. "Forbearing one another in love," says 
the Apostle. O, how this forbearance and consideration 
of one another's preferences, tastes, views, would 
help to make us all more and more like the glorious 
Lord himself, and how it would smooth many of the 
wrinkles and difficulties, and bring peace in every little 
company of the Lord's people! We are not thinking 
of nor striving for the kind of peace and quiet that prevails 
in the graveyard or which prevails in the sleeping 
room, but the kind which the Lord would approve 
amongst those who are awake and alive and thoroughly 
consecrated to him, and forbearing and considering 
one another because of their love for the Head and for 
all those who are seeking to walk in his steps. 

R4010 :page 182 

"LOVE SEEKETH NOT HER OWN" 

All of the Lord's people should gradually come 
more and more to be ashamed of a self-seeking spirit 
and disposition and to appreciate more and more the 
spirit of love, which thinks not of personal interests but 
of the good of others, especially those of the household 
of faith. If a brother thinks that he has some talents 
which he would be pleased to use in the Lord's service 
in the Church, it is proper for him to be on the 
alert for opportunity to use these, but also proper for 
him to avoid imposing himself or his services on the 
Church. While glad to serve the Church freely, without 
money or price, while glad to give time, strength, 
energy and every talent to the service of the Truth, 
the spirit of meekness as well as the spirit of wisdom 
should hinder him from crowding his services upon the 
Church more than the latter could appreciate. Better 
go gently, and trust to the Lord to guide and to eventually 
indicate who shall serve the Church and to what 
extent they shall serve and in what capacity. This, 
the Lord's way, the Scriptural way, will be found to be 
the wisest one— any other course will sooner or later 
bring difficulty to all concerned. 

"WHOM THE SON MAKES FREE" 

It is difficult for many of us to keep balanced respecting 
our personal liberties: we are largely influenced 
by the customs and practices of those surrounding 
us, and need continually to hearken to the voice of 
the Lord in his Word. Because in Babylon it is customary 



that nothing should be done without ordination, 

a feeling sometimes creeps in amongst those less developed 

in grace and truth that is somewhat in accord 

with that: the feeling, for instance, that no meetings 

must be held except as they are appointed by the 

Church and conducted by one of the elected elders. 

There are advantages coming from a recognition of the 

oneness of the Church, and the appointing of meetings 

when and where they may be most helpful and to be 

led by those esteemed to have superior qualifications. 

But we must never lose sight of the fact that neither 

the Lord nor the apostles placed any limitations upon 

the liberties of individuals, and hence we may not 

do so. Note our Lord's words— "Where two or three 

are gathered together in my name, there am I in the 

midst of them." (Matt. 18:20.) That promise is as 

true today as it ever was, and places no restriction 

upon any of the Lord's people. 

If, therefore, any of the Lord's flock feel that their 
best spiritual interests are not served by the arrangements 
already made by the Church, they are fully at 
liberty to start a meeting that will be more helpful to 
them— any kind of a meeting not in conflict with the 
provisions of the Scriptures. In case of such a necessity 
seeming to present itself to any, our advice would 
be that they seek to appoint such meetings at a time 
and place that would not be in conflict with the appointments 
of the general congregation. If then it be desirable, 
as we hold that it generally is, that the Church 
should take a general supervision of such matters, it 
should recognize its responsibility and appoint a sufficiency 
of meetings and of the desired kinds, and under 
such leadership as will meet the necessities of the dear 
people— that all may be fed, that all may be strengthened, 
that all may progress, and that all may be maintained 
in unity of heart and in love and fellowship and 
cooperation. 

This may be as suitable a time as any for mentioning 
again, what has already been emphasized in DAWN 
STUDIES, Vol. VI., namely, that in our opinion the 
Lord's dear flock grow most in grace and strength 
where testimony meetings and Berean classes and 

R4010 :page 183 

DAWN studies are given quite a prominent place 
amongst their meetings. In these social gatherings, 
especially in the meetings devoted to testimony, prayer 
and praise, the dear friends have opportunities 
for getting into sympathetic touch with one another, 
which is most helpful, and which binds them more together 
in the bonds of Christian love than perhaps any 
other meetings could do. In the Allegheny Church 
these meetings are held every Wednesday evening, and 
are eight in number, in various parts of Pittsburg and 
suburbs. The average attendance for last quarter 



was more than one hundred and fifty, and the influence 
going out from these meetings is, we believe, excellent. 
How glad we would be if all the dear company who are 
able would attend them and partake of their refreshing 
influences. Many, we are sure, if obliged to choose 
one kind of meeting only would vote for the testimony 
meeting, or else that the testimony feature be made an 
important part of some other meeting. Let us remember 
that this is much of the kind of a meeting described 
by the Apostle in the early Church, as "When you come 
together."--! Cor. 14:26. 



R4010 :page 183 

LED BY A WAY THAT THEY KNEW NOT 

-EXODUS 16:1-15. -JULY 1 .-- 

Golden Text:— "I am the living bread which 
came down from heaven."— John 6:51. 

FULL of exultation at their great deliverance by the 

mighty hand of God, the Israelites, still guided by 

the cloudy pillar, journeyed for the promised land 

by a circuitous route. They started upon the journey, 

which lasted forty years, while it might have been accomplished 

in as many days. The object of the long delay was 

their instruction in righteousness, especially in faith. This 

would have been profitable for any people, but especially 

for a subject people born in a state of serfdom, and hence 

unused to liberty and initiative. But, more than this, natural 

Israel was intended of the Lord to constitute a type or 

shadow of spiritual Israel, and the lessons of the former 

were to be illustrative of the lessons of the latter. Whoever 

has read the story of Israel, and failed to discern that they 

and their experiences were foreshadowings of better things 

coming, has failed to get the gist of the lesson the Lord 

would teach. The experiences and instructions of the wilderness 

journey remind us of the poet's words, "God moves 

in a mysterious way his wonders to perform." 

The first lesson of the journey showed that the people 
had much to learn along the lines of faith and trust in the 
Lord. One would have thought that the plagues upon 
Egypt resulting in their liberty would have been convincing 
proof to them of divine favor, and would have secured them 
from every doubt and fear that he who had begun a good 
work on their behalf would surely not desert them on the 
threshold. Nevertheless, after journeying for three days 
slowly they came to the waters of Marah, and sore was their 
disappointment when they found that they had been appropriately 
named— Marah, signifying bitter. The waters were 
brackish and unpalatable and unfit for use. A great murmuring 
ascended from all sides, the disappointment was intense. 
Where was Moses? Why was the water brackish? 



The cry of the people to Moses was in unbelief, reproach; 
but Moses cried unto the Lord in faith, and the Lord 
showed him a tree which, cast into the waters, acted as a 
medicine, sweetening them, making them fit for use. The 
lesson to the people must have been a valuable one, leading 
them to trust the Lord more fully and to realize his continued 
care for their interests. 

Water, one of the most important elements for human 
sustenance, is used in the Scriptures to represent the Truth 
—the message of God— the hope of everlasting life. In a 
certain sense the Law Covenant made with Israel was such 
a hope, such a fountain of water, of which the Israelites 
might drink and be refreshed and be enabled to gain eternal 
life. But while the Law was good in many respects, it 
had in it certain condemnatory qualities which hindered it 
from giving to the Israelites the refreshment and the life 
everlasting which they had hoped for. The Law made 
nothing perfect, writes the Apostle— yea, he adds, that 
which was thought to be unto life was found to be unto 
death. -Rom. 7:10. 

HEALING THE BRACKISH WATERS 

Moses, the Mediator of the Law Covenant, typified the 
Christ (Head and Body), the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
and the tree that Moses cast into the waters for their sweetening 
represented another tree— the one referred to in the 
statement, "Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree." 
(Gal. 3: 13.) The tree represented the cross of Christ, the 
agency through which the waters of truth and divine law 
become waters of grace and blessing for the world of mankind 
in general when, in the Millennial Age, they shall be 
delivered from the bondage of Satan and sin, represented 
by the slavery of Egypt. As the Apostle points out, it will 
not be possible for God to make a new law under which to 
bless mankind, for the Law given to Israel was good, was 
perfect, as the law of God must always be. The divine 
promises represented by the water were poisoned by sin- 
by Adam's disobedience— and hence were unsuitable and 
could not give the desired blessing. The cross of Christ, 
by cancelling Adamic sin, cancelled also the condemnation 
of the divine law against mankind, and eventually will permit 
the great antitypical Mediator to make the gracious 
promises of God good, refreshing, applicable to all who seek 
to walk in the ways of the Lord. The New Covenant between 
God and Israel, in which all the families of the earth 
are to share the benefit, will shortly be sealed with the 
precious blood— be confirmed, made operative. It merely 
waits for the completion of the sacrifices of the Day of 
Atonement, and meantime the Church of the First-born are 
counted in as members of the Body of the Mediator, and 
permitted to suffer with him— to share with him in the sufferings 
of the present time, that they may also have a share 
in the glory that shall follow, when the New Covenant shall 
be sealed, and through it the blessing of the Lord extend 
to every creature. 



R4011 :page 184 

"Traveling o'er the desert's scorching sand, 
Father, lead me! grasp my hand. 

Lead me on! Lead me on! 
When at Marah, parched with heat, 
And the sparkling fountain greet, 
Make the bitter water sweet. 

Lead me on ! Lead me on ! " 

The New Creation is not under the Law but under 
grace— not under the Law Covenant nor under the New 
Covenant, but under the original Covenant, the "Everlasting 
Covenant," which reads, "In thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." As the Apostle assures us, it is 
the privilege of the Church of the First-born, who make 
their calling and election sure, to constitute members of the 
"Seed," which under the New Covenant is to bless first natural 
Israel and subsequently all nations: "Ye, brethren, as 
Isaac was, are children of promise." (Gal. 4:28.) "If ye 
be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according 
to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) The original Covenant, 
as the Apostle explains, was typified by Sarah: 
that Covenant was the mother of our Lord and of all 
his members. We have nothing to do with the Hagar 
Covenant, the Law Covenant, nor with the Keturah Covenant, 
the New Covenant, except that the promise is that in 
and through the elect Seed of the Sarah Covenant the offspring 
of both the other covenants, are to receive their blessings. 

TWELVE FOUNTAINS AND SEVENTY PALMS 

A journey of a few hours brought the Israelites to Elim, 
noted for its twelve fountains, or springs, and its seventy 
palm trees. It was a delightful resting place, symbolical of 
the blessings which may be enjoyed after our trials. The 
twelve springs, fountains, remind us of the apostles, God's 
special gift or blessing to the Church, through whom have 
come the refreshments of the water of life, and who are to 
be prominent also, according to the Lord's promise, in the 
Kingdom— in the work of blessing Israel and all the 
nations. The seventy palm trees remind us of the seventy 
whom our Lord commissioned subsequently to the 
twelve apostles, and whose ministries typified the public 
services of this Gospel Age down to its harvest or close. As 
the seventy were directed to go into every city whither our 
Lord would ultimately go, and were instructed, "Ye shall 
not have gone over the cities of Israel until the Son of man 
be come," it signified that our mission is to all nations, peoples, 
kindreds and tongues, wherever we may find a hearing 
ear, with the assurance that we shall not have more than 
accomplished the work of declaring the good tidings to 
every nation until the second coming of the Son of man in 
the power and great glory of his Kingdom. 

Our lesson opens with the declaration that the Israelites 



removed from Elim, going toward Mount Sinai, on the 

fifteenth day of the second month— just thirty days from the 

time they left Egypt, following the Passover. Apparently, 

therefore, they stayed at Elim about two weeks before entering 

the wilderness region surrounding Mount Sinai, one 

of whose peaks was called Mount Horeb, where God manifested 

himself to Moses in the burning bush. Not only had 

Moses made this journey several times, but Aaron also, for 

we remember that after the Lord's first revelation at the 

burning bush he sent Aaron to Moses and they met in Horeb, 

the Mount of God. That meeting of Moses and Aaron 

prior to the passing over of the first-born, etc., might not 

improperly be understood to symbolize the beginning of this 

Gospel Age, and to be a picture of the two features 

of the work of Christ: Aaron representing the sacrificial 

work as the priest, and Moses representing the future work 

as the leader and commander of the people. The Church 

of the First-born was typically represented in the under-priests, 

the sons of Aaron, and also typically represented 

in the body of Moses, illustrating our participation in 

the sufferings of Christ in this present time and also our 

inheritance in him in the glory that shall follow. 

The journeying of the people toward Mount Sinai, then, 
would represent the carrying out of the great program outlined 
at the beginning, when Moses and Aaron met by divine 
arrangement; the gathering of all the hosts of Israel 
to Mount Sinai typified not the blessings which came to the 
Church at Pentecost, but the blessings which are about to 
come to the world, all mankind who are ready and willing 
to receive them under the New Covenant. The covenant 
made with natural Israel at Sinai by Moses, the mediator 
of that Law Covenant, typified specifically the new and 
better Covenant about to be made with Israel, and incidentally 
with the whole world of mankind through the better 
Mediator, the Christ, Head and Body. The Apostle clearly 
sets this forth in his delineations in Hebrews 1 2, where he 
pictures the time of trouble in the end of this age in connection 
with the sealing of the New Covenant with its type 
at Mount Sinai when and where the Law Covenant was 
sealed and made effective. His intimation is that in the 
trouble near at hand everything that can be shaken, political, 
social, religious, financial, will be shaken thoroughly, 
until only the unshakable, true things, shall remain. And 
these unshakable things he tells us will be related to the 
Kingdom of Messiah in which we shall share, "We receiving 
a Kingdom that cannot be shaken." 

"THE BREAD THAT CAME DOWN FROM HEAVEN" 

Travelers tell us that the wilderness surrounding Sinai 
is far from barren. One declares: "The whole sides of the 
valley through which the children of Israel marched are 
still tufted with brushwood, which doubtless afforded food 
for their beasts. Lastly, the herbage under these trees and 
shrubs is completely covered with snails of a prodigious 
size and of the best sort. However uninviting such a repast 



might appear to us, they are here esteemed a great delicacy. 
These mollusks of the land would aid in sustaining 
the people." 

We can see, however, that so mighty a host would have 
a very limited bill of fare, and realizations of the conditions 
will help us to sympathize with them in their murmuring s 
when they said, "Would to God we had died by the hands 
of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots, 
and when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have 
brought us forth into this wilderness to kill the whole assembly 
with hunger." It appeared to them that their first 
hopes had died, that no preference of the Lord had been 
shown them, and that they should have continued under 
the Egyptian bondage. We see their lack of faith and that 
the lessons of the plagues and the sea and the healing of 

R4011 :page 185 

the waters of Marah had not given them full assurance of 
faith that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob was leading 
them forth to fulfil in them his glorious promises made to 
the fathers— the blessing of the world. 

But while blaming them for lack of faith we are not to 
blame them for desiring some of the necessities of life, nor 
does the Lord blame them for the latter; rather he was 
waiting for them to appreciate their need, so that they might 
the better appreciate the bountiful provision which he had 
intended. In answer to their cry God sent them bread from 
heaven— not indeed baked, cut in slices and buttered, but 
according to the Lord's usual way he did for them what 
they could not do for themselves: he provided the substance 
from which they might make their bread. The distribution 
of the manna and its daily sending through a long period 
marks it as a miracle. 

There are indeed other mannas from that desert of 
Arabia. One kind is exuded in drops from the tamarisk tree, 
and is a sweet, semi-fluid substance. The manna of commerce 
is an exudation from the flowering ash. But none of the 
known mannas of Arabia correspond to this described in 
Exodus: (1) The supply is very small and only at special 
seasons of the year; (2) they are unsuitable for food; (3) 
they can be kept indefinitely. The manna of the Israelites 
spoiled after twenty-four hours except that gathered on the 
sixth day, which corrupted not for forty-eight hours, leaving 
a rest from the gathering on the seventh day, the Sabbath. 
It was ground in mills, and baked as bread or stewed. By 
this miracle of the manna the Lord taught the Israelites 
faith in him as their great Provider. 

To Spiritual Israelites there is a lesson in connection 
with the manna also: it is Scripturally called the "bread of 
angels," and again, the "bread of the mighty," and again, 
the "bread of heaven." (Psa. 78:25.) It was a food supplied 
by the Lord's providence. Our Lord Jesus tells us that he 
was the antitype of this bread— that it typified the life-giving 
qualities which he possessed and which he sacrificed on our behalf; 
that all the dying race might profit through his death and 



obtain a right to life eternal. Thank God that some of us 
have had the eyes of our understanding opened to hear the 
message of good tidings respecting its value. More than 

R4012:page 185 

this, some of us have already tasted that the Lord is gracious, 
and we have already fed on this bread from heaven, 
rejoicing the while that it is not only for the First-born but 
for all Israel— for all who eventually shall desire to come 
into accord with our God. It was some of this manna that 
by divine direction was put into the golden pot which was 
hidden in the ark with the scroll of the Law under the 
golden mercy seat, typifying, illustrating, the immortality 
which the Lord has provided for the Church of the First-born, 
to whom he has sent the message, "To him that overcometh 
will I give to eat of the hidden manna." (Rev. 2:17.) 
That incorruptible hidden manna in the golden pot 
represents the grace of God in the Church of the First-born, 
and teaches what is elsewhere plainly stated in the Scriptures, 
that the "little flock" shall enjoy the incorruptible life, 
immortality. While these will have inherent life, the remainder 
of God's creatures in their eternal perfection will 
instead of this have supplied to them eternal life. 

"COME NEAR BEFORE THE LORD" 

The lesson of faith was to be so impressed before the 
sending of the manna that its coming was foretold, and the 
Israelites were gathered to behold the glory of the Lord. 
They looked at the cloud which represented the Lord and 
which was caused to shine with resplendent glory. And as 
Aaron spoke to the congregation, telling them that their 
murmurings had been against the Lord and not against 
himself and Moses, and directing their attention to the cloud, 
behold, the glory, the brightness, of the Lord appeared in 
the cloud, and a message, saying, "I have heard the murmurings 
of the children of Israel: speak unto them saying, At 
even shall ye eat flesh and in the morning ye shall be 
filled with bread; and ye shall know that I am the Lord 
your God." How patient was the Lord in his dealings with 
his people— full of compassion and of tender mercy. The 
people should have cried unto the Lord, "Give us this day 
our daily bread," but should not have murmured and stipulated 
that they wanted something as good as the flesh-pots 
of Egypt. 

Many Spiritual Israelites may learn a lesson along this 
line. It is not for us to dictate to the Lord how he shall 
provide for us, but by faith to accept his provision according 
to his promises, and while waiting for the same to make 
our requests, make them unto the Lord— but always according 
to his will. "Thy will be done" should be the spirit of 
our hearts, and hence the spirit of our prayers. Our Father 
knoweth what things we have need of before we ask him, 
and he is more willing to give good gifts unto his children 
than are earthly parents to give good gifts to theirs. 



"He that hath led will lead all through the wilderness; 

He that hath fed will feed; he that hath blessed, will bless." 

QUAIL ABOUT TWO CUBITS DEEP 

Travelers tell us that in the spring of the year large 
flocks of quail frequently cross the Arabian Gulf of the Red 
Sea. They come in great flocks, and, wearied with their 
long flight across the water, they fly low, so as to be easily 
within the reach of man. Tristram says, "I have myself 
found the ground in Algeria in the month of April covered 
with quail for an extent of many acres at daybreak, where 
on the preceding afternoon there had been none." The 
reading of Numbers 1 1:7 seems to imply that on this occasion 
the quail were nearly two cubits deep, and infidels 
have pointed to the fact as an absurdity. It would be entirely 
possible, however, for us to understand the narrative 
to signify that the great quantities of quail flew low, even 
within two cubits of the ground, thus insuring a large catch 
on the part of the flesh-hungry Israelites. The subsequent 
narrative indicates that the quail were not sent regularly, 
but only on rare occasions— so far as appears only here in 
the wilderness of Sinai and in the wilderness of Paran.— 
Numbers 11:31-34. 

The next morning after the shower of quail the Israelites 
had a new experience with the "corn from heaven." It 
came with the dew, and when the latter left the little grains 
of food were scattered all over the country side. Thenceforth 
it became a part of the regular labor of each family to 
gather its portion of the heavenly manna. The word manna 

R4012:page 186 

is supposed to signify, What is it? Moses answered, "It is 
the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat." What a 
constant reminder they would have, in the necessity for gathering 
this grain, grinding it, making bread of it, etc., of the 
Lord's providential care for their interests. How full of 
faith and loyalty to him they should have subsequently become 
—more and more as the days went by. We are, therefore, 
continually astonished to find evidences of lack of faith 
and a disposition to contamination with idolatry, etc. If all 
this seems strange to us we should allow it to make a deep 
impression upon our minds and apply it to ourselves. For 
have not we the true Bread that came down from heaven? and 
has not God so arranged our affairs and interests that it is quite 
necessary for us to go continually to the throne of the heavenly 
grace to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time 
of need? Nevertheless, is it not true that many find their 
hearts overcharged with the cares of this life, and that their 
faith in the Lord continually needs to be refreshed? How 
few there are who go regularly to the throne of grace to 
obtain their supply of daily refreshment! How few who 
belong to the New Creation realize that the New Creature 
needs daily bread as much as does the natural man. 



The supply of manna was a beautiful figure of the supply 
of grace in Christ: it needed to be gathered daily; it 
would not keep over for succeeding days. The lesson of 
this would seem to be that those who accumulate much of 
God's grace and truth must also be dispensers of it. It is 
not provided with a view to the creation of a spiritual aristocracy. 
How often we have seen this exemplified: those 
who study the Word merely for themselves, and who do 
not commingle with the brethren and share their blessings, 
are not in the long run as much advantaged as we would have 
expected. Our gathering of the manna is to be day by day: 
our feeding on the heavenly bread is to be a continuous 
privilege, without which we will not have the strength for 
the journey of life; but with it we would be strong in the 
Lord, and may perchance be permitted to assist others by 
the dispensing of divine grace to them. 

When our Lord declared himself to be the Bread from 
heaven, many of his hearers failed to comprehend the simile, 
and said, "This is a hard saying. Will this man give us of 
his flesh to eat?" They failed to see that our Lord personified 
the Truth, the great plan of God which centered in 
him, the life which he had come to give on behalf of the 
world, that we might live through him. To eat the flesh of 
Jesus literally would have merely produced flesh, but to eat of 
him in the sense of partaking of the blessings and mercies of 
God provided in him, and in the sense of appropriating his 
Spirit and disposition, is the proper thought. As we partake 
of our Lord's qualities they become ours, as we feed upon 
him in our hearts we become strong in faith and in all the 
graces of his Spirit. Let us then daily gather our portion 
of manna and daily seek to use it all, and realize that it 
will be our portion until we reach the heavenly Canaan. 
Surely then all the supply of divine grace experienced by 
the Lord's faithful should be stimulating to our faith and 
confidence in him who has called us from darkness into his 
marvelous light. 



R4012:page 186 

THIS DOTH GOD REQUIRE 

--EXODUS 20:1-11.-JULY 14.- 

Golden Text:— Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy 
might.— Deut. 6:5. 

OUR lesson relates to the first four of the ten commandments 

delivered to the Israelites at Mount 

Sinai as the basis of the Covenant which the Lord 

made with the nation of Israel there. The journey from 

Egypt to Mount Sinai is about 150 miles, and with intermediate 

stops nearly fifty days were consumed in reaching it. 

We recall the leading experiences of these fifty days: (1) 



The passing at the Red Sea; (2) the making sweet the 
waters of Marah; (3) the rest at the wells of Elim near the 
palm grove; (4) the beginning of the supply of manna; 
(5) the smiting of the rock from which gushed waters for 
their refreshment— typical, as the Apostle tells us, of Christ 
and the life and refreshment which now come to spiritual 
Israelites by faith (1 Cor. 10:4); (6) the battle with the 
Amalekites, in which Israel, untrained to battle, was victorious, 
while Aaron and Hur upheld the hands of Moses and 
"the Lord fought for them"; (7) the organization of the 
nation by the appointment of seventy elders as judges under 
Moses. 

R4013 :page 186 

All of these experiences were designed of the Lord to 
prepare Israel for further blessings and mercies, and to make 
them typical of Spiritual Israel and the heavenly favors 
to be bestowed upon them in due time. When Moses said 
to Pharaoh that the Lord commanded that the people should 
go into the wilderness to offer sacrifices to him, it was but 
a vague statement of a great fact. The sacrifice which the 
Lord proposed was a consecration of themselves and all that 
they possessed to him and to his service. The experiences of 
the fifty days were calculated to establish faith in the Lord, 
and to ground and establish the hope of the Abrahamic 
Covenant under which they had essayed to leave Egypt to 
seek the promised land where the blessing would be granted. 
They had now arrived at the spot in the wilderness, at 
Mount Sinai, where God proposed to enter into covenant 
relationship with them. This was, therefore, the important 
epoch in their history. God proposed to adopt them as his 
people, and that Moses should be the mediator between him 
and them. 

THE LAW COVENANT SEALED 

The Law was read in the hearing of the elders and 
representatives of the people, and signified the terms and 
conditions upon which the Lord would grant them his 
special favor and blessing. If they would obey his statutes 
and keep his commandments he would make of them a 
great nation; he would give them prosperity of every kind; 
he who would do those things should live, and the blessing 
of the Lord would prosper his every interest. This implied 
eternal life, though it is doubtful if the faith of the people 
could fully grasp this part of the blessing. They all, however, 
could appreciate the fact that they were promised 

R4013 :page 187 

health and wealth if obedient to the Law. On the other 
hand, if disobedient it was to mean to them disease, national 
and individual sickness, pain, sorrow, poverty. They were 
called upon to take their stand once and forever. Would 
they be the Lord's people and nation and enter into this 



covenant, or would they not? They responded favorably; 

they declared, "These things will we do." But little did 

they appreciate the comprehensiveness of these divine commands 

—they saw only the outward aspect and not the spirit 

of the Law. 

The Apostle assures us that it was impossible for them 
or for any other members of the imperfect race to fulfil the 
requirements of that Law in its real spirit and depth— 
that the divine Law measures the full capacity of a perfect 
human being, and hence that no imperfect being, none of 
the fallen race, could possibly keep that Law. He says of 
it, "The commandment which was ordained to life, I [we 
Jews] found to be unto death." (Rom. 7:10.) This was not 
the fault of the Law, for, as the Apostle declares, the Law 
was just and perfect and good. It was the fault of the fall, 
because "there is none righteous, no not one," therefore 
there is none able to keep the perfect Law in its very spirit. 
This fact, however, was kindly veiled from the eyes of the 
Israelites that they might with the greater courage undertake 
to do their best and receive the full measure of possible 
blessing under the circumstances. God from the beginning 
foresaw the entire plan, and meant in this Law Covenant 
with Israel merely their blessing at the time, and to use them 
as a type of Spiritual Israel, who as the great antitypical 
Mediator will in due time provide for them the benefits of 
the New Covenant, which will make allowance for their imperfections, 
and during the Millennium bring them and all 
others of mankind who desire harmony with God back to 
full relationship with the Creator and to eternal life— destroying 
wilful evil-doers. 

THE LAW COVENANT FOR ISRAEL ONLY 

Much needless confusion prevails respecting the application 
of the Decalogue. Few seem to notice that it was the 
basis of the Covenant made with Israel, and that it included 
in its provisions, promises and penalties only the Jewish 
nation. Its commands had nothing whatever to do with the 
Egyptians or any other nation of that time or since, neither 
are they now applicable to Spiritual Israel. Even those 
Jews once under this Law Covenant needed to be freed from 
it before they could become espoused to Christ. The Apostle 
most distinctly states this, saying to the Jews that, so far as 
its blessings and opportunities were concerned, these ended 
at the cross of Christ, that Christ made an end of the Law 
Covenant, nailing it to the cross. (Col. 2:14.) He further 
shows us that every Jew who believed in Christ needed first 
to recognize the death or end of the Law Covenant under 
which he had previously been bound before he could become 
married to Christ, betrothed to Christ as a member of the 
Bride class, Spiritual Israel. 

It will be remembered that the Apostle tells us that the 
Law Covenant was typified in Hagar, whose son Ishmael 
typified the Jewish nation under the bondage of the Law— 
not free, not sons of God in the highest sense, not heirs of 
the Abrahamic Covenant. He points out that this higher 



position of the sons was represented in Isaac, whose mother, 
Sarah, represented the original Abrahamic Covenant, which 
God made 430 years before the Law Covenant was added at 
Mount Sinai. As Hagar, the bondservant, brought forth her 
son first, so Natural Israel was developed before Spiritual 
Israel: as later Sarah bore the true heir to Abraham, so 
later the Abrahamic Covenant bore the antitypical house of 
sons, Spiritual Israel, of which Jesus is the Head and the 
Spirit-begotten ones members. Our Lord also refers to this 
change of dispensation and shows that all who were of suitable 
condition of mind in the Jewish nation were privileged 
to be transferred from the Law Covenant and the Ishmael 
seed to the better Covenant, as members of the Isaac class, 
the house of sons. He says he came unto his own and his 
own received him not [as a nation], but to as many as received 
him, to them gave he liberty [power, privilege] to 
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his 
name."— John 1:12. 

If the ten commandments, the basis of the Jewish Covenant, 
were only given to that nation and not to the world, 
is the world without a covenant? We answer, Yes: the 
world never has been under any law of God, never has been 
recognized by God, whose time for dealing with the world 
is in the future under the terms of the New Covenant, at the 
hands of the greater Mediator than Moses, namely: Christ, 
Head and Body. Thus we read, "God has appointed a day 
in the which he will judge the world in righteousness." 
(Acts 17:31.) That day has not yet come, hence the world 
is not on trial, is not being judged, rewarded or punished. 
The day of the world's trial will as surely come as Natural 
Israel's time of favor and trial came when they were delivered 
from Egypt, and as surely as Spiritual Israel's day 
of favor and judgment came, beginning with our Lord and 
Pentecost. 

Meantime, since the casting off of Natural Israel at the 
time of our Lord's crucifixion, God has been dealing only 
with Spiritual Israel, rewarding, punishing, chastising, etc., 
"every son whom he receiveth"— but not the world, whom he 
has not received nor entered into covenant relationship 
with. "The world still lieth in the wicked one," is still 
blinded by the "god of this world," is still under Adamic 
condemnation, and therefore still "children of wrath," to 
whom no favor is due until the inauguration of the Millennial 
Kingdom. 

ALL COMMANDED TO REPENT 

With the end of the Jewish Law Covenant, with the accomplishment 
of Christ's sacrifice at Calvary and the application 
of the merit thereof to the household of faith, all men 
everywhere were commanded to repent, and to know that 
God was prepared to give the trial or testing to all, to the 
intent that the willing and obedient might be adjudged 
worthy of everlasting life if assisted thereto through the 
Redeemer. The law of God was originally written in man's 
constitution in that he was created in the image and likeness 



of God, with the qualities of mind which would enable 
him to appreciate right and wrong, justice and injustice, and 
esteem righteousness. But the fall largely erased this law 
from the human heart, until today, in some of the more savage, 
only the merest trace of conscience and appreciation of 
right and wrong remain. Consequently the eyes of their 

R4013 :page 188 

understanding and the ears of their heart remain closed to 
the message that is now promulgated, urging all everywhere 
to repent and turn to the Lord. That this is true is demonstrated: 
our Lord called attention to the fact that few 
have ears to hear and eyes to see, and declared of some who 
received his message, "Blessed are your eyes for they see, 
and your ears for they hear." Furthermore, the promise is 
that eventually, during the Millennial age, all the blind eyes 
shall be opened and all the deaf ears be unstopped. 

"FULFIL THE LAW OF CHRIST" 

The Decalogue is styled the Law of Moses because, as 
the Apostle declares, "The Law came by Moses, but grace 
and truth by Jesus Christ." The Jew who did not receive 
Christ did not receive the grace and truth, and the Christian 
who has received Christ and his grace and truth is "not 
under the Law [Covenant] but under grace." (Rom. 6:14.) 
The Law of Christ is a very different one from that of the 
ten commandments, and yet there is an agreement between 
them, because, though Moses' Law was given to the house of 
servants and the Law of Christ was given to the house of 
sons, both emanated from the Father and both are based 

R4014:page 188 

upon his eternal law of righteousness. 

No wonder, then, that there is a harmony between them. 
The Law of Christ is positive and is called a new commandment. 
It does not attempt to say what we shall not do, as 
did Moses' Law, but taking the positive form tells us what 
all of Christ's followers shall do, must do, in order to be acceptable 
to him. His law is that we shall love God and 
"love one another as I have loved you." Under this divine 
arrangement with the house of sons he that loveth not is 
not of God— "if any man have not the Spirit of Christ [the 
spirit of love] he is none of his," and if he have the spirit 
of love for God and consequently for his fellowmen he would 
not think of doing things forbidden the house of servants in 
the Decalogue. What was proper enough as a prohibition 
to the natural man would be wholly inappropriate to the 
members of the New Creation, the Body of Christ, who have 
been begotten of the holy Spirit of love. What an insult it 
would be to such to command them not to blaspheme God's 
name, not to worship other gods, not to kill, not to steal! 
Would God steal? would God murder? and would any who 
have been begotten of his Spirit have the wish or desire to 



do these things? Surely not! Hence the prohibitions contained 
in the ten commandments are not for the New Creation 
and were never given to them. As the Apostle declares, 
"The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me 
free from the law of sin and death"— the Mosaic Law.— 
Rom. 8:2. 

"MOSES GAVE YOU THE LAW" 

These were Jesus' words, and he adds, "none of you 
keepeth it." (John 7:19.) They could not keep it, could not 
be justified by it. Do we then of the New Creation keep 
the still higher law of love? and if so, how? The Scriptures 
answer— "The righteousness of the Law [its requirements 
—full obedience] is fulfilled in us who walk not after 
the flesh but after the Spirit"— who are striving to the best 
of our ability to be in harmony with the very essence of the 
divine will, Love. Not that we can walk up to the spirit of 
the Law, but that when we walk after it with our best endeavors 
God counts it unto us as though we walked up to 
its requirements— the merit of Christ our Lord and Head 
being imputed to and compensating for all our unwilling 
imperfections. 

Nevertheless, although we are not under the Mosaic 
Law, we— the New Creatures, begotten of the holy Spirit 
and accepted in the Beloved under the Covenant of grace- 
may gain valuable lessons from an examination of the Law 
of Moses, because the study of it will open wider and wider 
the eyes of our understanding to see what are the particular 
and exact requirements of the divine law and our own 
natural shortcomings. Our study of the Law, however, will 
not bring to us condemnation, for we remember that we are 
not under the Law but under grace— not condemned because 
unable to fulfil every requirement of the Law, but justified 
before God and the Law through the merit of Jesus when we 
put forth our best efforts to the accomplishment of the divine 
will. In the declarations of the Law designed for Natural 
Israel we see the outlines of the perfect will of God, and the 
more clearly we discern this the more it will enable us to 
fulfil the desires of our hearts and to come into fuller accord 
with God's perfect will in thought, word and deed. 

THE FIRST TWO COMMANDMENTS 

God properly puts himself first, for he is first, head, 
chief over all beings and all things, and to him properly 
belongs their homage, their reverence, and only as mankind 
come to realize this do they approximate the spirit of a 
sound mind. The Israelites had been in contact with idolatry 
in Egypt, and would again be in contact with it when 
they entered Canaan. The first lesson they were to learn 
was, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one"— Jehovah— 
and "thou shalt have no other gods before me." No other 
rulers of any kind were to be allowed to usurp the place 
and honor of the great Ruler, nor should they attempt to 
make any likeness of the true God, for a true representation 



of him could not be made. They were to bow down to 

nothing in the sky or on the earth or in the waters as an 

object of worship, but were to recognize the true God as the 

invisible one, whose energy and power are everywhere present 

throughout the universe. Disregard of this command 

would bring upon them trouble, for God would not consider 

it a light thing, but would visit the iniquities upon them to 

the third and fourth generations of those despising him, and 

would show mercy unto thousands of those loving him and 

keeping his commandments. The application of this commandment 

to Natural Israel is very evident; its language is 

simplicity itself. What lessons can Spiritual Israelites draw 

from this command given to Natural Israel? 

We can, as the Apostle urges, keep our hearts from 
idols; we are not in danger of making idols of wood or stone 
or metal in the image of God. We have too thoroughly 
gotten rid of the ignorance and superstition engendered by 
the fall to take such a course; but we should remember how 
natural it is for us to turn the organs of reverence and worship 
into improper channels, and to give a measure of worship 
to children or parents or husband or wife or minister; 
or to have such an appreciation of and desire for honor of 
men as to reverence their gift of office, or to have such a 
love for money and the honors and blessings it will give as 

R4014:page 189 

to become Mammon worshipers. Thus we may draw valuable 
lessons from what the Lord said to the house of servants, 
and although we cannot apply the letter of the commandment 
to the sons, the latter can get blessings from the 
spirit of it. 

THE THIRD COMMANDMENT 

The command, "Thou shalt not take the name of the 
Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless 
that taketh his name in vain," was evidently very appropriate 
as a limitation upon the Jews, the house of servants. 
It forbade profane swearing of every kind, and 
would be proper for the natural man everywhere and 
always. Why should any profane the name of the Almighty? 
Why should not all the world fear so wrong a 
course? This taking of God's name in vain would include 
perjury, false swearing, which has always been punished by 
all civilized peoples. Under the Jewish Law an offender was 
to be punished with the very penalty which his perjury was 
intended to prevent. It was punished by the Egyptians with 
death or mutilation, and by the Greeks with a heavy fine, 
and ultimately with the loss of civil rights. In the world 
the man who uses the name of the Deity profanely is properly 
esteemed to be no gentleman— to be coarse, rude, vulgar. 
It may well be noted here, however, that nothing in this 
command even among the Jews would have hindered them 
from the taking of a legal oath before a court of law. Such 
oaths are not profane nor taking the Lord's name in vain. 



They are merely affirmations in public that the thing said is 
the truth as God knows it to be the truth. 

What lesson may the Spiritual Israelite learn from this 
commandment? We reply that none who are Israelites 
indeed, begotten of the spirit of love for God, would need 
any command not to blaspheme his name by profane swearing. 
We can make still more deep and suitable application 
of the command, however: we who have accepted Christ, 
who have vowed the full consecration of all we have and are 
to the Lord, have been begotten of his Spirit, and been told 
that we may consider him our Father and ourselves his 
children— we should realize that in one sense of the word 
we have taken upon us the name of the Lord. Just the same 
as a child adopted into a family takes the name of the family, 
so we have taken upon ourselves the name of the sons 
of God in accepting the divine proposition to this effect. As 
we accepted this holy relationship with a realization of what 
it signifies— "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it 
doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that 
when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see 
him as he is (1 John 3:2)— having confessed this relationship 
before man, it is for us to show and for them and the 
Lord to see whether it has been in vain or with a sincere 
heart. If the latter, we will to the extent of our ability be 
showing forth the praises of him who hath called us out of 
darkness into his marvelous light, and this thought will 
help to hold us firm and loyal to our obligations to the 
Lord and his truth, and to all the members of the household 
of faith, to each of whom we have become related through 
this spirit of adoption. In line with this the Apostle exhorts, 
"See that ye receive not the grace of God in vain." 
(2 Cor. 6:1.) Our adoption into the Lord's family in the 
present life is merely on probation. If faithful the matter 
will be confirmed, and we will be granted our perfect bodies 
in the First Resurrection and a share with our Redeemer 
in his glory, honor and immortality. If we receive this relationship 
in vain sin lieth at the door, and we will be excluded 
from the family in glory whatever may be our portion 
either in the Great Company of Rev. 7 or wherever. 

THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT TO ISRAEL 

In this command the Lord set apart the seventh day in 
each week that thereon the people should do no work. 
This would be a blessing to them in giving rest from toil 
and opportunity for recuperating and for thoughts of him 
who had made this provision for their necessities. The command 
contained no obligation to do good, to preach, to 
teach, nor even to receive instructions on this day. It merely 
commanded rest, leaving it to the individual Jew to determine 
how he would employ his own time. By general 

R4015 :page 189 

consent, however, the nation seemed to recognize the propriety 
of devoting the Sabbath day to consideration of the 



divine Law and the precious promises, and even to the 

prophecies. The appointment of the day was in the interest 

of all; to the poor it would mean protection from the greed 

of capital, and to the enterprising and prosperous it would 

mean a break upon their selfish propensities— the acknowledgment 

of the Lord and of the interests of their fellow-creatures. 

With the command was a reminder that in some 

respects it resembled the course of Jehovah, who, after six 

creative epochs, "rested on the seventh." The lesson to 

Natural Israel was plainly evident; what does this command 

impart to Spiritual Israel? 

We might be at a loss to know what lesson would be 
in this commandment for us did not the Lord through the 
Apostle make the matter very clear, assuring us that the 
Sabbath rest of the Jewish nation was typical of the higher 
and better rest of the house of sons. The Israelites were 
obliged to rest every seventh day, every seventh year and 
every jubilee year, that they might make a type of a better 
rest which God provided, and which would be entered into 
first by Spiritual Israel and subsequently by Natural Israel 
and the whole world. The Apostle explains this matter in 
Hebrews 4, where he speaks of a rest [Sabbath] into which 
the Spiritual Israelites now enter, represented by the Sabbath 
day of the Jew, and also of another rest that remaineth 
for the people of God which we should fear to come short 
of, namely, the great Sabbath, the Millennial Kingdom— the 
seventh thousand-year period. 

As elsewhere more fully pointed out,* Israel's day Sabbaths 
every year pointed to a culmination, for following the 
Passover they counted seven times seven days, which brought 
them to the fiftieth day or Pentecost. As the Passover typified 
the death of Christ, so their fiftieth day pointed out 
the full complete rest or Sabbath of the present time, into 
which the Spiritual Israelites entered at Pentecost, when 
they received from the Father through the Lord Jesus the 
holy Spirit, which indicated that their sins were covered and 
that they were accepted of the Father as New Creatures, begotten 
of the holy Spirit. So all followers of Jesus from 
that time to the present, when begotten of the holy Spirit, 
are accepted into this rest of faith, and, ceasing from all 
hope of self -justification, accept Christ as the end of the Law 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI. 

R4015 :page 190 

for righteousness, and the imputation of his merit as the full 
satisfaction for their sins and reconciliation with the Father. 
Only those who have had this experience have ever kept the 
real antitypical Sabbath. And so long as they maintain 
this faith and trust they are fulfilling the antitype of the 
Sabbath day given to Natural Israel. 

This, as the Apostle explains, excludes works and the 
Jewish Law as a basis of reconciliation to God, and accepts 



instead the blood of Christ; but it does not exclude works 
as manifestations of our love, thankfulness and devotion to 
God in view of his mercy in the forgiveness of our sins. On 
the contrary, our faith and hope and trust without the works 
of thankfulness would, the Apostle assures us, soon die, for 
a faith not manifested by endeavors to do right would not 
have the divine approval. Indeed, the measure of our rest 
in the Lord and his finished work will depend largely upon 
the measure of our thankfulness and appreciation, and the 
latter will manifest itself in loving devotion to him and the 
righteousness which he represents. 

Thus has God bound together our faith and obedience 
to the extent of our ability and the rest or Sabbath which 
we may enjoy. He who lacks this rest lacks the evidence 
that he is an Israelite indeed and in covenant relationship 
with God through Christ. He who has this rest of heart 
has in it a foretaste, an assurance, of the perfect rest of the 
future. For if now we can rest by faith, notwithstanding 
the besetments of the flesh and the Adversary under present 
adverse conditions, how gloriously we will rest by and by, 
when that which is perfect shall have come, not only in our 
own change to the Lord's character-likeness, but in the 
change of all the outward environments which will then be 
accomplished. On the other hand, the hope and faith respecting 
a future rest or Sabbath is without foundation if 
we do not enjoy the present rest by faith, if the peace of 
God which passeth all understanding is not ours. 

We are not in this repudiating the observance of a day 
of rest every week, but we are repudiating any demands of 
the fourth commandment upon Spiritual Israelites as respects 
any day of the week, for that commandment was not given 
to us but to Natural Israel. Ours is the higher commandment. 
Nevertheless we are to recognize as of divine oversight 
and permission the fact that a weekly Sabbath day is 
enjoined by a civil law throughout Christendom. We rejoice 
in such a privilege, and consider it a great mercy to the natural 
man that he has thus by law a portion of time set apart 
for rest, with the privilege and opportunity for mental improvement. 
This wonderful privilege and blessing should 
be especially appreciated by all those who enjoy the higher 
light of Present Truth. If it is a privilege for the world to 
have one day in seven for rest from physical toil, how much 
more is it a blessing to those whose eyes and ears of understanding 
are gradually opening more and more to the heavenly 
things! We could use profitably two or three Sabbaths 
every week for the study of the divine Word and for building 
one another up in the most holy faith. 

We trust that with this view clearly before our minds 
none will use his knowledge on this subject to his own injury, 
to his own loss, nor to the breaking down of an institution 
which, however falsely based in the minds of the 
public, is so great a blessing to all and almost indispensable 
to us who are seeking to walk not after the flesh but after 
the Spirit. By obedience to the laws of the State respecting 
abstinence from labor and business we not only set a good 
example in letter and in spirit as obedient to the powers 



that be, but we strengthen our influence for the Truth as 
lovers of law and order and righteousness, and thus furnish 
ourselves with better opportunities for presenting to those 
who have the spiritual sight and hearing the true significance 
of the Sabbath to the Israelite indeed. 

While this Sabbath-keeping of rest is especially for the 
consecrated, as the Jew commanded that his children and 
his servants were similarly to rest, so all who come under 
our influence, either as our children or employes, should be 
influenced by our rest and be partakers of our trust and 
confidence in God— through our knowledge of him, which 
they could only partially appreciate. 



R4015 :page 190 

A "SCAPE-GOAT" QUERY 

WHY is it that after telling of the Atonement 
Day sacrifices and of the application of their 
blood— the first for the sins of the priest and 
his house or the Levitical family and the second "for 
the sins of all the people"— then we read of the confessing 
of the trespasses of the people on the head of the 
Scape-goat? What sins would remain after the atonement 
for all with the blood? 

We reply that the antitypical sacrifices of the 
Atonement Day for the sins of all the people cancel all 
of the Adamic guilt and condemnation for all; and 
this includes all hereditary sins and blemishes. None 
of these sins remain to be confessed over the head of 
the Scape-goat. 

But there are other sins of measurable wilfulness 
committed against a measure of light and knowledge. 
These are not Adamic and are not covered by the sin 
offerings. It is these sins and trespasses that are represented 
as put upon the Scape-goat class— the "Great 
Company." In the antitype, shortly to be enacted, the 
"great company" will be allowed to suffer for some of 
the partly wilful sins of the world— especially 
"Babylon's." 

Glancing back to the "harvest" of the Jewish Age 
we see there a picture of what is coming here. There 
the Jewish people, cast off from divine favor, went 
into an awful time of trouble. And our Lord, referring 
to that trouble, said, "Upon you shall come [the penalty 
for] all the righteous blood shed upon the earth— from 
the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias. 
...Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come 
upon this generation."— Matt. 23:35,36. 

Similarly, all the blood of God's holy ones, from 
the beginning of this Gospel Age, will be required of 
the present generation, and will bring about the great 
"time of trouble, such as was not since there was a nation." 
The martyrs of the past, "the souls under the 



altar," are represented as crying out symbolically for 

R4016 :page 191 

this vindication of Justice, saying, "How long, O Lord, 
holy and true, dost thou not judge the world and avenge 
our blood upon them that dwell on the earth." They 
were bid wait until others, their brethren, should be 
killed similarly, when the guilt for all would be 
avenged.— Rev. 6:9-11. 

Why require the full payment for all the wrongs of 
the ages at their closing?— is it asked? 

Because the chief light of each age comes at its 
close, and because those who sin against such light 
are worthy of more severe judgment than similar evildoers 
preceding them who had less light. 

It was on this principle that our Lord charged the 
Jews of his day, who opposed the true light, with being 
more guilty than all their predecessors who had persecuted 
the just. And on the same principle he declares 
to us, "Come out of her ['Babylon'], my people, that 
ye be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her 
plagues." Those who remain in Babylon now, in the 
light of Present Truth, are endorsers of Babylon and 
indirectly endorsers of all of her past wrong doing. 
And to endorse the wrongs of the past in the light of 
the present is to double the responsibility and to deserve 
the plagues of the whole, is the Scriptural 
argument. 

Let us, then, see that in the Scape-goat type the 
Lord pictures the sending into the "wilderness" of isolation 
and persecution the "Great Company," who after 
consecration were unwilling to go voluntarily "outside 
the camp, bearing the reproaches" of the Christ. They 
shared not in the sin-atonement, but will be permitted, 
yea forced, to bear the weight of the world's sins 
and thus to become dead to the world— that their spirit-bein^ 
may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 



page 191 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Many, many thanks indeed for your kindness in 
sending me reading matter which I appreciate far more 
than words or pen can tell. 

I now feel like a new person altogether since reading 
the TOWER and tracts. I was brought up a Catholic 
and was, therefore, kept in ignorance of the divine 
Truth. I no longer feel afraid to read the Bible, as 
through your kindness and charity in sending me the 
reading you have I now see everything in a new, more 
reasonable and loving light. With many, many thanks, 



lam, V. K.,-Mo. 



R4016 :page 191 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I am meeting with larger success than ever before 
in getting people to read Vol. I by using the following 
two simple plans: 

(1) I fold the 5c DAWN and carry it in my hip-pocket 
under my coat. When I find someone that I 

can interest, I immediately tell him I have a book I 
have been reading and pull out the copy. I then give 
him a regular Colporteur's canvass as though to sell it 
to him but finally loan it to him under his promise to 
read and return when through with it. Loaning it gives 
me the right to look it up after a lapse of time. 

(2) Carrying several 5c copies in this way and 
canvassing house after house, beginning right next 
door to my house, I get the right party by inquiring, 
"Is there anyone here who is specially interested in the 
Bible?" My object is to get Vol. I in the hands of the 
most religiously inclined person in each house. I loan 
it saying I will call after two or three weeks. The call 
gives an opportunity to water seed or to secure the 
book. Right in my own block I have found about six 
or seven interested readers already. There is nothing 
like being prepared. 

Your brother, G. H. F.,— Pa. 



page 191 

MY DEAR BROTHER:- 

Having just read the article under the heading, 
"She hath done what she could," I was moved to lay 
the paper down and write you. Of course, I will not 
be able while in the flesh to express my feelings while 
reading and weeping as I realized that I could not 
wash my dear Redeemer's feet. Oh how I longed that 
I could have the honor of washing yours. Yes, I got 
the ready consent of my mind that I could so joyfully 
go through the Bible House bathing the feet of each 
member of the same, even if it required the entire night 
till dawn. For a time I felt I was unfortunate in not 
having an opportunity to bathe the feet of some dear 
brother tonight. Then I was made to rejoice with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory that I had in some sense 
bathed the feet-members of Christ with tears. All 
glory and honor be to him for such ecstacies of peace 
and joy even while in the flesh. 

Bless the Lord, oh my soul, for ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER. If such is the sweetness of the streams, what 
must the fountain be? If such joys are lavished upon 



us here, what must it be to be there? 

Dear brother, enclosed find an increased "Good 
Hopes" offering as a token of my increased love. 

Your brother in the faith, J. T. B.,— Fla. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Love and greetings! It was too cold here to 
do very much colporteur work this winter, but what I 
could do has been a great blessing to me and we will 
leave results to the Lord. 

He has richly blessed the work the past year. Several 
have, through books it was my privilege to carry, 
already come out of Babylon and are rejoicing in the 
Lord and his Truth. 

The past year has been one of the happiest I have 
known since engaging in the work, as it has been so 
full of opportunities of service. Pray for me that I may 
prove worthy of the vocation to which I am called. You 
are all remembered daily by me at the throne of grace. 

Brother K., who is one of the Cleveland class, has 
sold fifteen volumes since January 1 . These he sold to 
people with whom he comes in contact in his business. 
Reading the last year's report was what made him 
want to have a share in the harvest work. 

Oh that all could see what a privilege it is to engage 
in some way to spend and be spent in the service 
of the Lord. May the Lord's blessing be with you all 
in rich measure. 

Yours in the one hope, T. B.,— Ohio. 



page 193 



SEMI-MONTHLY 