A Book of Positive Faith
THE Bible is not a book of doubt but a book of faith. It does not raise questions such as, Does God exist? Or, Is the Bible his Word? To the contrary, it opens with the statement: “In the beginning God created.” And the Bible specifically states: “Prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God as they were borne along by holy spirit.”​—Genesis 1:1; 2 Peter 1:21.
Of course, many of the Bible’s accounts are brief. So the Bible may not always tell us everything we might wish to know. But it does give the information that God knew we would need in order to understand the world’s troubled situation, to bring our lives into harmony with his will and to receive his favor and his gift of everlasting life. What could be more valuable?
Early in the Bible’s pages we learn that long ago a rebel angel challenged the rightness of God’s universal rulership. But it was also revealed that a “seed” eventually would come to end that rebellion and vindicate Jehovah God as Universal Sovereign. (Genesis 3:1-15; Job 1:6-12) The Bible gives the lineage through which that “seed” would come​—through such men of faith as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and David.​—Genesis 26:4, 5; 2 Samuel 7:12, 13; Matthew 1:1-16; Luke 3:23-38.
This amazing book tells about the birth, life, death and resurrection of the principal member of that “seed,” Jesus Christ. It tells how Jesus made known his heavenly Father’s name, Jehovah, and provided the ransom for obedient mankind.​—Galatians 3:16; John 17:6-8, 26; Matthew 20:28.
The Bible also speaks of everlasting life, tells about the resurrection of the dead and announces the magnificent “new heavens and a new earth” in which “righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Peter 3:13; John 3:36; 5:28, 29) Moreover, it indicates that these marvelous blessings are near at hand, that many now living will survive the present world woes to see them!​—Matthew 24:3-14, 32-34.
The Finest of Fruits!
Jesus said that “every good tree produces fine fruit.” (Matthew 7:15-20) Yes, you can recognize upright people by their fruits. Well, the Bible’s teaching enables teachable people to produce the best of fruit. This book provides knowledge, builds faith and imparts wisdom. (John 17:3; Proverbs 1:1-4) It gives us better standards on which to base the decisions that affect our lives.​—Romans 12:2; Colossians 3:9, 10.
Furthermore, the Bible touches hearts. It motivates people to bring their lives into harmony with God’s ways and to serve him. Its teachings produce contentment, happier lives, better health, higher morals and finer marriage mates, parents and children. All who have learned Scriptural ways and also follow them have become a loving worldwide brotherhood, in harmony with Jesus’ statement: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”​—John 13:35.
The Bible’s value is evident in the everyday lives of those who really apply its principles. Why should anyone doubt its promises? As we will see in the following article, it is possible to be solid in the faith, not doubting at all.

