Maintain a Solid Faith
“How long will you sit on the fence?”​—1 KINGS 18:21, The New English Bible.
 1. How do some react to the truth?
THE tendency to doubt, so common today, could affect even your own attitude toward God and the Bible. Some people hear the truth, like it and study the Bible for a while. They attend a few Christian meetings but do not really grasp the fact that serving God should be their purpose in life.​—Matthew 13:3-9.
 2. (a) How do others react? (b) What fine counsel is found at Hebrews 10:36-39?
2 There are others who have accepted the truth, have dedicated their lives to Jehovah God through Jesus Christ and have symbolized that dedication by water baptism. But they fail to progress. Occasionally they spend an hour or two in the field ministry. But they are not really living up to their dedication, for being unreservedly dedicated to God means being wholly and earnestly devoted to him.​—Matthew 16:24; Hebrews 10:36-39.
 3. What did Elijah say about a somewhat similar situation?
3 Vacillating individuals may like the truth, but they also like the world. They may still yearn for some of the old ways. Their loyalties waver. Long ago, Elijah asked the Israelites: “How long will you be limping upon two different opinions? If Jehovah is the true God, go following him; but if Baal is, go following him.” One translation renders it this way: “How long will you sit on the fence?”​—1 Kings 18:21; NE.
 4. What is the value of zealous service?
4 Jehovah’s people find joy and refreshment in zealous service. (Titus 2:13, 14) It helps them to stay alive spiritually. Many, especially those with long experience in God’s service, demonstrate notable zeal. But reports from many places suggest that some younger or newer ones are still being tempted by the world, rather than throwing themselves wholeheartedly into Jehovah’s service. Think of the joys and blessings that they could have if they took firm hold of the truth and vigorously moved ahead in sacred service, perhaps as full-time pioneers, zealously impressing upon others the urgency of our times.
 5. What questions might it be good to ask yourself?
5 It might be good to ask yourself: Am I really solid in the faith, or am I facing both ways? Do I let things that are enjoyable but of little value consume my time? Do I spend more time watching television, pursuing sports or doing other pleasurable but time-consuming things than I devote to God’s service? Or is humbly obeying and serving God my life’s real purpose? If doing the divine will is your purpose in life, God will uphold you, and you will be able to rejoice in his blessings forever.
 6. What counsel in the letter of James can help us to maintain a solid faith?
6 It is important to take positive steps to keep your faith solid with a view to everlasting life in God’s New Order. Elijah urged others to take a bold stand for what was right. James wrote: “Subject yourselves, therefore, to God; but oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you. Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you indecisive ones.” James was writing to those who needed to repent because their indecisive hearts were leading them to engage in activities displeasing to God. His counsel can be helpful if you have been tempted by the world’s ways. James wrote: “Give way to misery and mourn and weep. Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into dejection. Humble yourselves in the eyes of Jehovah, and he will exalt you.”​—James 4:7-10.
Knowledge Builds Faith
 7. (a) How does knowledge relate to faith? (b) Why should you use the Bible in developing faith?
7 Faith is an act of trust. It is based on accurate knowledge and experience. The more you know about God and the more experience you have with his Word and his ways, the stronger your faith will be. The Bible says: “Faith is the assured expectation of things hoped for.” (Hebrews 11:1) How could your faith be assured if you had only a shallow knowledge of what Jehovah has done? God gave you intellect, intelligence and the ability to understand. These are gifts, and he expects you to use them in learning about him. If you write a letter to someone, you expect him to read it, not just put it on a shelf or leave it on a table as an ornament. Have you read and studied God’s letters to us​—his written Word? By studying and understanding it you will learn things you would not otherwise know. It is important to remember the value of the information that the Bible provides. One Christian elder said: “Persons who express doubts usually don’t study very much. They don’t know a lot about the Bible​—they never really make the truth their own.”
 8. What is recommended if someone raises a question you cannot answer?
8 When someone raises a question that you cannot answer, should this trouble your faith? Of course not. No one knows everything. So, do research. Examine the text. Read the surrounding verses and verify the matter. The Comprehensive Concordance of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, the book Aid to Bible Understanding and the Watch Tower Publications Indexes can help you to find related texts, background information and a discussion of the subject. More experienced Christians can also help. A Witness with years of experience said: “I have never failed to get a satisfactory answer.”
 9. What can we learn from the example of the Beroeans?
9 We should be like the Beroeans who are spoken highly of in the Bible because they were “carefully examining the Scriptures daily” to make sure that the things the apostle Paul taught were true. They were not disappointed in what they found. Thus, “many of them became believers.” One of their number, named Sopater, had the privilege of traveling with Paul through Macedonia on that apostle’s third missionary tour.​—Acts 17:10-12; 20:4.
Humility Essential
10. (a) How can knowledge be misused? (b) What effect, do you think, should Proverbs 16:5 have on our attitude?
10 Knowledge is not an end in itself. Instead, it is a tool that should help us to appreciate Jehovah God and his Word. Accurate knowledge, combined with love, should prompt humility, not an exaggerated opinion of our own importance. Some people study, not to learn how to serve God better, but to exalt themselves and their own opinions. They may get puffed up and criticize others​—older brothers and even the Christian congregation and the body of Bible truth that it teaches.​—Proverbs 16:5; 1 Corinthians 8:1.
11. From where did our knowledge and intelligence come, and what should this teach us about humility?
11 However, we have nothing that we did not get from some other source. We inherited our intelligence from our parents, but originally it was given to humankind by our Creator, Jehovah God. Our knowledge came through those who helped us, from things we read and from God who is the source of truth. In fact, everything that we have originally came from God. The apostle wrote: “For who makes you to differ from another? Indeed, what do you have that you did not receive? If, now, you did indeed receive it, why do you boast as though you did not receive it?”​—1 Corinthians 4:7.
12. What powerful point is made at Psalm 25:9 and James 4:6?
12 Jehovah does not judge us by the intelligence we inherited but by our humility and by our willingness to learn his way and to follow it. Humility and faith go together. The Bible says that it is “the meek ones” whom God will teach his way. It also states: “God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.”​—Psalm 25:9; James 4:6.
13. What are some examples of teachableness?
13 Humility involves a willingness to be corrected. The apostles Peter and Thomas were outstanding examples of this. Peter was foremost in speaking, but this was matched by his being most frequently corrected, reproved or even rebuked. Yet Peter was a zealous, active doer, and his faith, initiative and courage are outstanding examples for all of us. Thomas did not believe that Jesus had been resurrected, but when brought face-to-face with the evidence, he accepted it immediately. Do we show similar humility when our mistakes or misunderstandings are corrected by the Scriptures?​—John 20:24-29.
Test Your Faith
14. What does one Christian elder do that helps him to maintain a solid faith?
14 One Christian elder, who has been in the truth for a long time, often asks himself why his faith is still strong while some people whom he used to know have drifted away. He says that he has always kept Paul’s counsel in mind: “Keep testing whether you are in the faith, keep proving what you yourselves are.” (2 Corinthians 13:5) Often as this elder drives to work he tests himself, reviewing Bible truths in his mind. He imagines a discussion of these truths, mentally making himself explain them and defend them before all kinds of people. This brother points out that public talks at the Kingdom Hall often reestablish in our minds the fact that the Bible truly is the Word of God. But he asks: “How would we know these things if we hadn’t been at the meetings where they were discussed?” Regularly he asks himself about God’s goodness and His organization. This Christian overseer includes appreciation of these in his prayers and says: “I thank Jehovah for his having allowed me to stay with his people.” Could you benefit from applying similar tests to see if you really are “in the faith”?
Prayer Is Vital
15, 16. Why is prayer so vital to our maintaining a solid faith?
15 This example brings up two points vital in maintaining a solid faith: prayer and Christian meetings. Often, persons whose faith is weak pray only rarely. One Christian father keeps in mind the fact that Daniel prayed several times a day, even after an antiprayer law had been passed. (Daniel 6:6-10) Several times a day this father looks to Jehovah for wisdom and guidance.
16 Do you hesitate to pray? The psalm says: “Jehovah is near to all those calling upon him, to all those who call upon him in trueness.” Jesus asked: “If you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will your Father who is in the heavens give good things to those asking him?” (Psalm 145:18; Matthew 7:11) Jehovah will, indeed, give “good things” to those humbly asking in faith.
The Role of Meetings
17. What Biblical examples show the importance of meeting with fellow believers?
17 In addition to prayer, meeting regularly with fellow believers also is necessary for faith. Three times each year every Israelite male was to “appear before the face of the true Lord, Jehovah” in Jerusalem. Realizing the high spiritual value of such occasions, many men took their entire family. (Exodus 23:14-17; Luke 2:41-45) Furthermore, Paul looked forward to faith-building encouragement from the congregation in Rome. He longed to be with fellow believers there so ‘that there might be an interchange of encouragement’ and spiritual upbuilding through one another’s faith.​—Romans 1:11, 12.
18. How do those strong in the faith view Christian meetings?
18 People whose faith is strong take advantage of all Christian meetings. They do not leave after the first hour, or come only for the second. They value these meetings, realizing that these provide an opportunity to learn, to be encouraged, to be blessed, and that at such meetings we can receive help from loving brothers and can incite one another “to love and fine works.” (Hebrews 10:24, 25) How could we receive such encouragement without associating with those who can give it?
Witnessing and Our Faith
19. How does Christian witnessing strengthen faith?
19 Christian witnessing is another aid in building faith. James wrote: “Show me your faith apart from the works, and I shall show you my faith by my works. Indeed, as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.” (James 2:18, 26) A main work of Christians is teaching others, and any one of Jehovah’s Witnesses will tell you: ‘Witnessing definitely builds faith!’ It benefits not only the one who is taught but also the teacher. It is an upbuilding, faith-strengthening activity. Witnessing makes you defend your faith. It sharpens your thinking. Yes, and Kingdom witnessing brings blessings from God, including the guidance of his spirit.​—Mark 13:11; Romans 10:14, 15.
Confidence in the “Slave”
20, 21. (a) What is it important to remember about the “faithful and discreet slave”? (b) How did one Christian express this?
20 It is also important to remember where we first learned the truth. Who helped us to build our faith in the Bible and its promises? How did we come to understand what the Bible means for us today? Jesus said that upon his return he would find a “faithful and discreet slave” providing spiritual food and that the “slave” found so doing would be appointed over all the master’s belongings.​—Matthew 24:45-47.
21 One Christian husband said: “Jehovah’s visible organization is a tremendously dependable source. Never once has it misled me in any way. Everything it has said has been based on God’s Word and has been the best for me, for my family and for everyone I know. This builds tremendous faith as far as I am concerned.”
22. What questions can help you to analyze how you are caring for your own faith?
22 Have you studied Jehovah’s Word, accepted it and believed it? Have you dedicated your life to God and symbolized that dedication by water baptism? Are you now living in harmony with that dedication? Do you ask God for guidance, knowledge and faith? Do you continue your personal study, regularly and diligently? Are you always at Christian meetings? Are you active and zealous in God’s sacred service? And are you improving the quality of your disciple-making activity, or have you let it become a mere routine?​—Matthew 28:19, 20.
23. How should you face problems, trials and obstacles?
23 Of course, all of us have problems, and we have our own shortcomings. But when facing trials and obstacles we must not vacillate, waver or straddle the fence. Rather, we want to be single-minded and sure of the truth. James wrote: “Consider it all joy, my brothers, when you meet with various trials, knowing as you do that this tested quality of your faith works out endurance.” Paul counseled: “Stay awake, stand firm in the faith, carry on as men, grow mighty.” (James 1:2, 3; 1 Corinthians 16:13) To remain in the true faith as witnesses of Jehovah, we must develop the quality of faith, a fruit of God’s holy spirit.​—Galatians 5:22, 23.
24. Why is it so important to have a solid faith?
24 Why should you do this? Because faith is a shield against Satan, who “walks about like a roaring lion seeking to devour someone.” “Above all things, take up the large shield of faith, with which you will be able to quench all the wicked one’s burning missiles.” (1 Peter 5:8-10; Ephesians 6:16) If you maintain a solid faith, you will want to do things God’s way. Your heart will be right. Your works will be in harmony with his instructions, and you will move ahead, ever progressing on the narrow road that leads to life.​—Matthew 7:14.
By Way of Review:
□ Why do some people doubt, and what could they do about it?
□ What did you learn about knowledge and humility?
□ How can you strengthen your faith?
□ Why is it so important to maintain a solid faith?
[Picture on page 9]
Watch Tower publications are a great aid in researching Bible subjects and questions

