
LIVING AS CHRISTIANS
Uphold Jehovah’s Moral Standards




Jehovah God sets the standard of morality for humans. For instance, he decrees that marriage is a permanent union between a man and a woman. (Mt 19:4-6, 9) He condemns all types of sexual immorality. (1Co 6:9, 10) He even provides principles regarding dress and grooming that set his people apart.​—De 22:5; 1Ti 2:9, 10.
In today’s world, many people reject Jehovah’s standards. (Ro 1:18-32) They allow popular opinion to influence their dress and grooming and their conduct. Many flaunt their gross wrongdoing and criticize those who live by a different standard.​—1Pe 4:3, 4.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we must courageously uphold God’s moral standards. (Ro 12:9) How? We should tactfully make known what is acceptable to him. But we also need to maintain a high standard in our own life. For instance, when selecting styles of dress and grooming, we might ask ourselves: ‘Do my choices reflect Jehovah’s standards or the world’s? Does my dress and grooming identify me as a God-fearing Christian?’ Or when choosing a program or a movie to watch, we might ask ourselves: ‘Would Jehovah approve of this program? Whose standards of morality does it promote? Might my choice of entertainment weaken my moral defenses? (Ps 101:3) Could it be a stumbling block to family members or others?’​—1Co 10:31-33.
Why is it so important that we uphold Jehovah’s moral standards? Christ Jesus will soon destroy the nations and all wickedness. (Eze 9:4-7) Only those who are doing the will of God will remain. (1Jo 2:15-17) Let us, then, champion Jehovah’s moral standards so that eyewitnesses of our good conduct may glorify God.​—1Pe 2:11, 12.





What do my choices of dress and grooming say about my moral standards?




WATCH THE VIDEO BECOME JEHOVAH’S FRIEND​—ONE MAN, ONE WOMAN, AND THEN CONSIDER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS:
  Why is it wise to live by Jehovah’s standards?

  Why should parents start to teach Jehovah’s moral standards to their children at an early age?

  How can young and old alike help people to benefit from God’s goodness?





WHAT WOULD YOU SAY IF SOMEONE SAYS . . .
“What’s your view of homosexuality?”

“The Bible’s view of homosexuality is narrow-minded!”

“Homosexuals can’t change the way they are; they’re born that way.”


(yp1 chap. 23; yp2 chap. 28)


