Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless recall these points:
● Why is the present strength of Christendom’s churches and other religious bodies no indication that Jehovah’s fiery day of judgment is far off?
The end of the religious systems making up “Babylon the Great” will come about suddenly while they are still functioning and outwardly powerful organizations. Revelation 17:16, 17 shows that God will put it into the heart of the political systems to destroy them.​—Pp. 53, 54.a
● What shows that Jesus’ words, “there will be great earthquakes,” have been fulfilled since 1914 C.E.?​—Luke 21:11.
The earthquakes since 1914 C.E. have been “great” in terms of power, lives lost and property damage. In fact, their destructiveness has been more widespread and greater than in the years prior to 1914 C.E., claiming approximately 30 percent of all persons killed in earthquakes during the last thousand-year period.​—Pp. 73, 74.
● What will a Christian overseer who is “lowly in heart” avoid when being given suggestions?
He will not incline to take the suggestions as a criticism of his motives or manner of handling matters but will give them consideration, realizing that he, too, can benefit from counsel.​—P. 104.
● How are we to understand the words of the disciple James that, in answer to prayers made in faith, ‘God gives generously to all and without reproaching’?​—Jas. 1:5.
God will not reproach us for our weakness or as being “stupid”; he gives generously, wholeheartedly, in a way that makes us happy that we asked.​—P. 138.
● To what extent can God’s servants expect his protection during the “great tribulation”?
They can be sure that not a single one of them will be swept away by mistake when Jesus Christ and his angelic forces take action against the wicked. Some may die as a result of the attack of the symbolic “Gog,” Satan the Devil, but as a class they will be delivered. (Ezek. 38:2) The strain of the conditions brought on by the “great tribulation” may lead to the death of some, but we will have to wait and see to what extent Jehovah God may shield and strengthen those having physical weaknesses. We are assured that a “great crowd” will survive.​—Pp. 171, 172.
● In what sense were the apostles a “theatrical spectacle”?​—1 Cor. 4:9.
Because of being reproached and persecuted they were as if exposed in a Roman theater before a universal audience.​—P. 215.
● What is the “place that is called in Hebrew Har–Magedon”?​—Rev. 16:16.
It is not a literal place but denotes a world situation that involves a decisive war. It denotes the stage in world hostility toward God that, when reached, requires the settling of the issue that has given rise to such hostility.​—P. 232.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1974.

