Bear Witness to the Truth
1 Jesus made it clear that he had come into the world to bear witness to the truth. He declared: “For this I have been born, and for this I have come into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth.”​—John 18:37.
2 By his zealous preaching, Jesus honored Jehovah’s name. He also showed genuine love for the people in recognition of their sad spiritual state. Matthew wrote concerning his activity: “And Jesus set out on a tour of all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom . . . On seeing the crowds he felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” (Matt. 9:35, 36) Like Jesus, our devotion to Jehovah along with our love for others should move us to preach.
OUR VITAL ASSIGNMENT
3 Genuine love for people and for Jehovah motivates us to take advantage of every opportunity to teach people the truth about Jehovah and his wonderful works. (Ps. 96:2, 3; 145:10-13) However, the pressures of daily living, the anxieties of life, and the abundance of distractions could easily divert us from our witnessing activity. Therefore, we need to keep in focus the urgency of bearing witness to the truth about God and his Kingdom. We must not allow ourselves to be sidetracked from this all-important lifesaving work that we have been assigned to do. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) Keeping busy in Jehovah’s service is a protection for us, and it can bring lasting benefits to those who are in need of hearing the message of truth.​—1 Cor. 15:58.
4 Can you serve as a regular or an auxiliary pioneer? Why not consider your circumstances to see if you can enlarge your service in this way. Are you retired from secular work? Why not use your time more fully in preaching? Many young ones still in school have auxiliary pioneered regularly. These have found it refreshing both spiritually and physically, bringing joy of heart.
5 Effectively bearing witness to the truth requires careful scheduling of our time. (Eph. 5:15, 16) Auxiliary pioneering requires an average of only two hours a day for the month. Some choose to rise an hour earlier so they can go out in service before going to school or work. Many congregations have helped auxiliary pioneers by arranging for evening witnessing. Also, you may be encouraged and get helpful suggestions by talking with others who have done well in scheduling their time to auxiliary pioneer.
6 Jehovah God has always shown goodness to his servants. Those serving him in faithfulness have received blessings in great abundance. Jehovah’s goodness is still being exercised toward those loving him. He is pleased to accept whatever our circumstances allow us to do as we bear witness to the truth.​—Heb. 6:10.

