Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MAY 7
Song 67
 5 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Review weekday and weekend group witnessing arrangements.
20 min: “Share Spiritual Riches With Others.” Question-and-answer discussion. Warmly encourage generosity in our spiritual giving. As time allows, have selected experiences related on placing Watchtower and Awake! subscriptions.
20 min: “Use Our Literature Wisely.” Question-and-answer discussion. After discussing paragraph 7, present two or three brief demonstrations using some of the suggestions offered in paragraphs 4-7.
Song 19 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 14
Song 28
 8 min: Local announcements, Theocratic News, and accounts report. Include any donation acknowledgments. Warmly commend congregation for their financial support of Kingdom interests.
15 min: “What Is Your Custom?” Question-and-answer discussion. Highlight appreciation for meetings and need to avoid the custom of missing meetings. Brother handling this part can include information on how local congregation is doing as to meeting attendance.
22 min: “Come to the 1990 ‘Pure Language’ District Convention.”​—Part One. Audience discussion of paragraphs 1-15 and a brief review of “District Convention Reminders.”
Song 65 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 21
Song 133
 5 min: Local announcements. Briefly highlight one or two talking points from the current magazines. Outline local arrangements for field service on May 28.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Through Bible Studies.” Question-and-answer coverage. Commend publishers conducting studies and kindly encourage those who do not to consider what they can do to improve the situation. Briefly demonstrate suggestions in paragraphs 4 and 5.
25 min: “Come to the 1990 ‘Pure Language’ District Convention.”​—Part Two. Discuss with audience paragraphs 16 to 36 of insert. Emphasize the Scriptural principles that should govern our conduct at conventions. Encourage brothers to review the insert with Bible students and help them make arrangements to attend.
Song 127 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 28
Song 29
13 min: Local announcements and Question Box. Discuss with audience offer of Survival book during June. Point out how survival of God’s impending war is vital question today and that we must keep in expectation of this war, according to Zephaniah 3:8. To survive, we must practice God’s judicial decisions. (Zeph. 2:2, 3) This book shows what God requires for survival into new world.
17 min: “Bear Witness to the Truth.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Interview publishers who have been able to arrange their schedule so as to share in the auxiliary pioneer work.
15 min: “Winning the Battle Against Depression.” Talk by elder, based on article in the March 1, 1990, Watchtower, pages 5-9. Introduce talk by referring to the roots of severe depression listed on page 4. This material should be presented with compassion and understanding. Encourage brothers to benefit from information and share it with others.
Song 30 and concluding prayer.

