Share Spiritual Riches With Others
1 Like faithful Moses, modern-day Witnesses of Jehovah know that the material treasures of this world cannot compare in value with spiritual riches. (Heb. 11:26) Money may buy houses, cars, and other possessions, but it cannot buy life, peace of mind, or the approval and blessing of Jehovah God.
2 Knowledge and understanding of God’s Word and purpose are true spiritual riches. (Col. 2:3) These unique riches can bring genuine happiness now, along with a solid hope for the future. How favored we are to have received such spiritual riches!
HOW TO MAKE OTHERS RICH
3 We can help make many others spiritually rich by introducing them to The Watchtower, since it can lead them to ‘hidden treasures’ of godly wisdom. (Prov. 2:4) During May, we will offer the Watchtower subscription on every appropriate occasion. If we keep in mind how The Watchtower has enriched our lives, we will not hold back but will seek out ways to offer it to as many people as we can. (Prov. 3:27) Make notations of addresses where individual magazines and brochures are placed, with a view to following up and regularly supplying magazines by having your own route.
4 In a spiritual sense, how can we be like the God-fearing man of Psalm 112 who distributed widely his valuable things? (Ps. 112:1, 3, 9) We need to search for sheeplike people and help them fill their spiritual need. (Matt. 5:3) This requires that we take advantage of every opportunity to witness formally and informally.
5 In some areas, evening witnessing has been very productive because more people are likely to be home then. Have you tried working door to door an hour or so before your Congregation Book Study or on another evening during the week? Why not make definite arrangements to do this? It may prove to be very rewarding for you.
6 Can you find appropriate times to witness at your place of work? One sister laid several magazines on her desk so that fellow employees could see them as they passed by. Before the morning was over, all the magazines were placed. Quite a number of her coworkers showed genuine interest, and she was able to place 18 subscriptions.
7 Silver, gold, and all other material treasures cannot compare to the spiritual riches of knowledge and understanding that we have gained through Jehovah’s organization and our study of the Bible. Genuine happiness, ways of pleasantness, peace, “length of days”​—even eternal life—​all become possible to those who seek spiritual riches. (Prov. 3:13-18) By sharing our spiritual riches with others, we show our appreciation for what we have received and we gain Jehovah’s continued blessing.​—Prov. 19:17.

