Service Meetings for March
Week Starting March 2
Song 3
 8 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Keep Doing This in Remembrance of Me.” Talk by an elder. Comment briefly on Our Ministry book, pages 80-1, stressing the importance of attending the Memorial.
22 min: “Instill in Others the Hope of Everlasting Life.” Audience discussion of article. Briefly explain how questions can be used effectively to continue a conversation. Give some examples of both leading and viewpoint questions that might be used in a presentation. (See School Guidebook, pages 51-2, paragraphs 10-12.) Have a capable publisher demonstrate one of the suggested initial presentations along with the return visit, showing a Bible study being started. Include some mention of the donation arrangement.
Song 88 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 9
Song 60
 8 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Benefit Fully From the 1998 Yearbook. Father reviews pages 3-6, 31 with his family, featuring worldwide theocratic achievements of the past year. Consider benefits enjoyed by the family from reading and discussing the daily text and portions of the Yearbook together at mealtimes, determined to keep doing so throughout the year.
22 min: “Will We Do It Again?” (Paragraphs 1-11) Questions and answers. Relate highlights of last year’s spring campaign to auxiliary pioneer, as reported in the 1998 Yearbook. Mention the number that auxiliary pioneered locally during that period. Discuss immediate personal benefits we derive from pioneering, and show how this extra effort contributes to the congregation’s progress. Outline service arrangements being planned locally in April and May to assist more to pioneer. Publishers may obtain applications after the meeting.
Song 195 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 16
Song 43
 8 min: Local announcements. Invite all interested ones to attend special public talk on March 29. The talk is entitled “Why You Can Trust the Bible.”
15 min: Local needs.
22 min: “Will We Do It Again?” (Paragraphs 12-19) Questions and answers. Review qualifications outlined in Our Ministry book, pages 113-14. Explain how auxiliary pioneering prepares one for regular pioneer service. Invite some who auxiliary pioneered last spring to tell how they arranged their schedule to meet the requirement of 60 hours. Which sample schedule on the last page of the insert worked best for them? As time permits, relate experiences in the 1987 Yearbook, pages 48-9, 245-6. Encourage publishers to obtain applications after the meeting.
Song 224 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 23
Song 94
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to begin inviting interested ones to the Memorial, on April 11. Display a copy of the invitation, and urge all to obtain a supply and to begin distributing them this week. Announce the names of all who are auxiliary pioneering in April. Explain that it is not too late to submit an application. Outline entire schedule of meetings for service planned for April.
20 min: Prepare New Ones for Field Service. Talk and audience discussion. Those conducting a study in the Knowledge book should consider preparing their student to share in field service. Point out what is stated in the Knowledge book, pages 105-6, paragraph 14, and page 179, paragraph 20. Review procedure in the November 15, 1988, Watchtower, pages 16-17, paragraphs 7-10, for new ones to become recognized as unbaptized publishers. Consider suggestions in the June 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, paragraph 19, for helping new unbaptized publishers to get started in service.
15 min: Question Box. Questions and answers. Elder reviews material in Our Ministry book, page 131, paragraphs 1 and 2.
Song 47 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 30
Song 29
12 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in their field service reports for March. Display current issues of the magazines, suggest which articles you might highlight when offering them, and mention some specific talking points. Review “Memorial Reminders,” and outline local Memorial arrangements. All should make final plans to help Bible students and other interested ones to attend. Remind all to be sure to follow the Memorial Bible reading scheduled for April 6-11, as outlined in Examining the Scriptures Daily.
13 min: “Children​—You Are Our Joy!” Questions and answers. Relate experience from August 1, 1987, Watchtower, page 25.
20 min: Ways to Fight Spiritual Fatigue. Two elders discuss the box in the January 15, 1986, Watchtower, page 19. For each of the “Symptoms of Fatigue,” Scripturally explain how one can benefit from the corresponding “Aids to Endurance.” Then interview two publishers who comment on how application of such points helped them to maintain their spiritual strength.
Song 140 and concluding prayer.

