“Keep Doing This in Remembrance of Me”
1 Humans tend to let the significance of important matters fade with time. This is one reason why, when instituting “the Lord’s evening meal,” Jesus commanded his disciples: “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” Ever since then, on the anniversary of Jesus’ death, Christians have obediently kept “proclaiming the death of the Lord, until he arrives.”​—1 Cor. 11:20, 23-26.
2 Very soon now, Jesus will receive into the heavenly abode the last ones of the diminishing remnant of the “little flock.” (Luke 12:32; John 14:2, 3) This year the remnant of anointed ones along with the ever-increasing great crowd of “other sheep” will again have the privilege of observing the Lord’s Evening Meal, on April 11. (John 10:16; Rev. 7:9, 10) Appreciation will be strengthened for Jehovah’s great love in sending his only-begotten Son in behalf of mankind. Highlighted will be Jesus’ example, his love, his faithfulness to death in providing the ransom, and his ruling now as King of God’s established Kingdom, as well as the blessings that the Kingdom will bring to mankind. Truly an occasion of remembrance!
3 Prepare Now: Let us all work to make this Memorial season one of great joy and thankfulness for ourselves and for all those who will associate with us. We can prepare our heart by reading again Bible accounts regarding the last few days of Jesus’ ministry and the events leading up to his death. Our family study several weeks before Memorial might be devoted to reviewing chapters 112-16 in the Greatest Man book.
4 How many do you know who might come to the Memorial if you would take the initiative to build up their appreciation for this occasion, invite them, and make them feel wanted? Make a list now, and do what you can to assist them to come. Afterward, help them to keep on growing spiritually by encouraging them to attend meetings regularly.
5 During the Memorial season, special arrangements will be made to increase everyone’s preaching opportunities. With good scheduling, can you auxiliary pioneer in April? in May? One of the best ways to show that we remember appreciatively all that Jesus’ sacrifice means to us is to talk about our God, Jehovah, and the blessings that Kingdom rule by his Son will bring.​—Ps. 79:13; 147:1.

