Retirement—An Open Door to Theocratic Activity?
RETIREMENT—for many it closes the door on a long period of stress and aggravation. After being locked into a tedious or frenzied routine, many look forward to having retirement open a door to years of ease and personal freedom. All too often, though, that door leads to boredom and listlessness. Recreation and hobbies simply do not provide the sense of worth that work does.
For Jehovah’s Witnesses, retirement can open “a large door that leads to activity.” (1 Corinthians 16:9) Although advancing age does have its problems and limitations, some older ones have found that with Jehovah’s help they can increase their service to him. Consider the experiences of some older Christians in the Netherlands. During the 1995 service year, 269 of the more than 1,223 pioneers (full-time Kingdom proclaimers) were 50 years old or older. Of these, 81 were 65 years of age or more.
Some are able to pioneer simply by continuing the busy pace they established while in the work force. (Compare Philippians 3:16.) One retired Christian named Karel recalls: “When I worked at my secular job, I used to start work at 7:30 a.m. When I began receiving my pension, I decided to keep the same routine. I would start the day off by doing magazine street witnessing in front of the railroad station each morning at seven o’clock.”
Careful planning is also a key to success. (Proverbs 21:5) For example, some have been able to set aside sufficient funds to support themselves in their ministry. Others have decided to cut back on personal expenses and obtain part-time employment. Consider Theodore and Ann. They started out married life as pioneers until family obligations required that they stop pioneering. But their pioneer spirit stayed alive! As their daughters grew up, they were constantly encouraged to pioneer. More important, Theodore and Ann set a good example, often serving as auxiliary pioneers. As the girls got older, Theodore and Ann began cutting back on secular work so as to have more time for field service.
After their daughters entered the full-time ministry and left home, Ann began pioneering. One day she encouraged Theodore to quit his job. “Both of us can pioneer,” she suggested. Theodore informed his employer of his intentions. To his surprise his boss offered to help by giving him part-time work, saying: “I guess you want to work full-time for your boss up there [in heaven].” Theodore and Ann now enjoy pioneering together.
Some began to pioneer in response to circumstances that developed in their lives. The tragic death of their daughter and granddaughter made one older couple seriously contemplate the way they were using their remaining years. (Ecclesiastes 7:2) Instead of being swallowed up by grief, they took up the full-time service, which they have now enjoyed for over eight years!
Admittedly, it takes real determination to stay in the full-time ministry. For instance, Ernst and his wife, Riek, began pioneering as soon as their children left home. Shortly thereafter a former business associate offered Ernst a lucrative job. Ernst replied: “We have the best employer ever, and we are not willing to quit on him!” Because Ernst and his wife remained in the “employ” of Jehovah, other privileges of service opened up for them. They served in the circuit work for over 20 years and continue as pioneers to this day. Do they regret their self-sacrificing course? Some time ago the couple wrote: “If it be Jehovah’s will, in three months we expect to celebrate our 50 years of marriage, which is often called the golden anniversary. But with full conviction we say that our real golden years began when we started pioneering.”
Many find that the door leading to increased activity also leads to increased joy! One brother who began pioneering two weeks after reaching the age of 65 says: “I must say that I have never experienced a period in my life so richly filled with blessings as the past ten years of pioneering.” A married couple who have pioneered for over seven years say: “What else should a couple our age and with our circumstances be doing? We often see our kind in the territory—comfortably settled at home, just getting fat, old, and stiff. The service keeps us fit mentally and physically. We are always together. We laugh a lot and enjoy life.”
Of course, not all older ones have circumstances that permit them to pioneer. These Christians can be assured that Jehovah appreciates whatever they are able to do in his service. (Compare Mark 12:41-44.) For instance, one disabled sister is confined to a nursing home. However, a door of activity is still open for her! A doctor asked her how she manages to pass her time. She relates: “I told him that I always run short of time. He could not comprehend this. I told him that this is because my days are filled with satisfying activities. I am not lonesome, but I look up others who are lonesome and try to tell them what God has in store for mankind.” She sums matters up by saying: “From someone who is almost 80, one cannot expect too much. Pray for me so that I can still lead many to Jehovah.”
Are you of retirement age? The door to ease may be very tempting, but it is not the door to a spiritual blessing. Give your circumstances prayerful thought. It may be that you can go through the door leading to greater activity in Jehovah’s service.
[Pictures on page 25]
Retirement can lead to increased activity in the ministry

