Do You Remember?
Have you found the recent issues of The Watchtower of practical value to you? Then why not test your memory with the following questions:
▫ Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses continue to call on their neighbors?
Jehovah’s Witnesses themselves want God’s blessing through the promised Kingdom, and out of love for their neighbors, they want the same blessing for them. Thus, following Jesus’ example, they feel compelled by unselfish love to visit their neighbors. (Matthew 6:9, 10; 22:37-39)​—8/15, pages 8, 9.
▫ Why is belief in evolution a matter of faith?
Scientists have never seen mutations​—even beneficial ones—​produce new life-forms, yet evolutionists claim that this is how new species arrived. Evolutionists have not witnessed spontaneous generation of life, yet they insist that this is how life began.​—9/1, page 5.
▫ How can we best overcome discouragement that may come from restrictions in life?
Whatever our situation, if we concentrate on what we can do rather than fret about what we cannot do, life will be more satisfying, and we will find joy in God’s service. (Psalm 126:5, 6)​—9/1, page 28.
▫ What are the benefits of forgiving?
Forgiving others promotes good relations (Ephesians 4:32); it brings not only peace with fellow humans but inner peace as well (Romans 14:19; Colossians 3:13-15); forgiving others clears the way for our sins to be forgiven (Matthew 6:14); also, it helps us to remember that we ourselves are in need of forgiveness. (Romans 3:23)​—9/15, page 7.
▫ How does the example of the prophet Amos help us in our preaching activity?
Like Amos, we neither change nor water down God’s message. Instead, we obediently declare it regardless of the reaction of our hearers.​—9/15, page 17.
▫ What characteristics of God should we imitate?
Two significant ones are Jehovah’s organizational ability and his happiness. (1 Corinthians 14:33; 1 Timothy 1:11) These qualities of God are balanced, so that one of them is not made paramount at the expense of the other.​—10/1, page 10.
▫ What are some positive steps parents have taken to help their children serve Jehovah?
A vital key is to start early. Impressions received and lessons learned during tender years will last for a lifetime. (Proverbs 22:6) It is important to teach them obedience and respect for Jehovah and his worship at all meetings. Successful parents learn to recognize wrong tendencies, and they help their children to correct them. (Proverbs 22:15) Finally, start early to set theocratic goals for your child that he can reasonably achieve.​—10/1, pages 27-8.
▫ What distinctive feature of Jehovah’s forgiveness should we try to put into practice?
Jehovah both forgives and forgets. (Jeremiah 31:34) This is difficult for human creatures to do. The importance of doing so was emphasized by Jesus, as recorded at Matthew 6:14, 15.​—10/15, pages  25-6.
▫ What are three obstacles to our becoming compassionate?
Because of our sinful human nature, feelings of envy can take root. If we become envious of someone, how can we treat him with tender compassion? Unnecessary exposure to violence is another obstacle. This tends to make us unfeeling toward the suffering of others. Furthermore, a self-centered person is likely to lack compassion. (1 John 3:17)​—11/1, pages 19, 20.
▫ What lessons can be learned from the Scriptural account regarding Job?
The account of Job makes us more aware of Satan’s devices and helps us to see how Jehovah’s universal sovereignty is related to human integrity. Like Job, all who love God must be tested. We too can endure as Job did, prove Satan a liar, and enjoy the blessings of God’s Kingdom.​—11/15, page 20.
▫ How can the chairman of a body of elders show proper recognition to each elder?
Whenever possible the chairman should provide an agenda far enough in advance to allow the other elders time to give careful and prayerful thought to each item featured. At the elders’ meeting, he will not try to shape the opinion of the elders but encourage them to exercise “freeness of speech” on matters under discussion. (1 Timothy 3:13)​—12/1, page 30.

