From Our Readers
TV  Thank you for the series “Television​—The Box That Changed the World.” (May 22, 1991) I have always had a problem with TV; I don’t have the willpower to turn it off. Your suggestions helped. I’m going to keep track of how much television I watch. I have also put my TV in the closet so that when I want to watch it, I can first weigh the advantages and disadvantages of doing so. Thank you again.
W. H., United States
School Teams  I just finished reading the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Join the School Team?” (June 22, 1991) My peers pressure me to join the school team because they know I love sports. Thanks to you, I can now explain just why I am not going to do so.
D. K., United States
Changing What You Are  I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the excellent suggestions given in the series “Should You Change What You Are?” (July 8, 1991) I realized I needed to make some changes in my personality, but I did not have the incentive to do so. I am currently making an effort to apply the counsel you gave, and I am already finding it greatly beneficial.
S. C., Italy
After getting out of a hospital psychiatric ward, I read the articles on ‘changing.’ Talk about hitting home! It took me some 30 years to see that I have a very serious behavior disorder. Now I see myself as I truly am, and now that I am aware of my problem, I can take positive steps to control myself.
J. D., United States
The Lungs  I am 13 years old. I remember studying about the lungs in the fifth grade, but I had forgotten most of the information. Your article “The Lungs​—A Marvel of Design” (June 8, 1991) refreshed my memory. It was very well written, and the diagram was very accurate. Thank you so very much for articles like these that help deepen our appreciation for Jehovah’s wonderful creations.
A. M., United States
TMJ Syndrome  The article “Out Of the Jaws​—The Great Impostor” (June 22, 1991) was of special interest to me, since I am an oral-maxillofacial surgeon and have been treating TMJ problems for over 14 years. You state that the most common cause of TMJ disorders is malocclusion, that is, a misalignment of the upper and lower teeth. Recent medical literature and my own experience show that while occlusion does play a role in some patients, it is not the major cause. Most patients have an actual internal derangement within the jaw joint itself. Other factors appear to be involved, such as spine problems. Nonsurgical procedures such as physical therapy and chiropractic treatments may thus be effective in relieving a patient’s complaints. Patients with TMJ syndrome should also consider restricting their diet to soft foods. Relieving the load on their muscles and jaw joints can result in an improvement in their symptoms. But for the vast majority of patients, there is no real cure​—the only real cure will come under God’s Kingdom.
C. A., D.M.D., United States
Thank you for this additional information, supported by your firsthand experience. We appreciate these further observations.​—ED.
Finishing What You Start  When I read the article “Young People Ask . . . ‘Why Can’t I Finish What I Start?’” (September 8, 1991), I thought you were writing about me. With the help of your article and the help of Jehovah, I will be able to finish what I start. Thank you so much for your timely information.
A. P., United States

