Aliens​—How Can You Help Them?
JOURNALIST Günter Wallraff disguised himself as a Turkish worker and labored in a German steelworks. When he revealed his findings regarding the treatment of foreign, or guest, workers, the public was both shocked and enraged. He documented case after case of blatant discrimination and degrading prejudice aimed at foreign workers. In one instance, he witnessed Turkish workers being ordered to work in a dangerous area despite emergency sirens and flashing red lights. When one man became frightened and wanted to leave the area, he was threatened with loss of his job.
Wallraff’s experiences graphically expose the plight of immigrants. As sympathetic citizens become more aware of the problems foreigners face, many wonder what they can do to help the immigrant and his family.
Take Us as We Are
Avoid prejudice. Nothing more quickly creates a wall of suspicion and intolerance between the local citizen and the alien than does blanket prejudice. “[Culture] distorts our view of how other people do things, especially when their ways differ . . . from our accepted norms,” says writer Ben Levitas in his book Tribal Life Today. He says that these differences “often lead us to be critical of the way that others act.” Helen, a Korean immigrant in Canada, clearly remembers the day her teacher angrily shouted at her for failing to perform a task that the class had been asked to do. “She didn’t realize that I couldn’t understand her,” says Helen, who felt very hurt at the time.
Misunderstandings and preconceived notions about other nationalities are often based on fiction rather than on fact. Authors Mildred Sikkema and Agnes Niyekawa-​Howard in their book Cross-​Cultural Learning & Self-​Growth, tell of one American professor who tested his new foreign students by telling them a joke. He would then watch to see their reaction. If they failed to laugh, the students would immediately be sent off to English classes. “[The professor] did not seem to realize,” say the authors, “that understanding an American joke requires familiarity with American culture as well as language . . . What people from one culture may consider funny may be perceived by [others] as poor taste.” Such well-​intentioned actions on the part of locals betray a lack of insight in dealing with aliens.
If you accept the alien just the way he is, without prejudice, he will appreciate you for it. Such a course is in harmony with a guiding principle expressed by Jesus: “You must love . . . your neighbor as yourself.” (Luke 10:27) Yasushi Higashisawa, a lawyer in Tokyo, Japan, who has much to do with aliens, recommends that “close contact with people of other cultures is the best remedy for prejudice.” This type of contact enables the immigrant to be helped in many other ways too.
Practical Assistance
There is much the foreigner wants to know about his new country​—how to obtain housing, learn the language, get the children into a school, make use of health and social services. You can save him much unnecessary trouble and effort by sharing with him what you know.
For example, can you help the foreigner to locate agencies or organizations that will help him to adjust to the language and the culture? Or can you perhaps accompany an immigrant woman on her first few shopping trips to help her identify foodstuffs and household items? What about offering advice to an immigrant family going through the often complicated formalities concerning their legal status, obtaining employment, filling out tax forms, and the like?​—See footnote in box.
Someone to Lean On
It is always helpful to ask yourself: ‘If I were in another country, how would I like to be treated?’ “All things . . . that you want men to do to you, you also must likewise do to them,” said Jesus in the famous Golden Rule. (Matthew 7:12) Having a friend to lean on through the trying experience of adjusting and adapting is a help that many aliens would appreciate. Such hospitality on the part of the local resident brings mutual benefits. Another Bible principle states: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”​—Acts 20:35.
If you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, the best gift you can give an alien is the prospect of a united brotherhood. You will almost certainly be able to find some upbuilding printed matter to share with him in his native language.
Of course, the responsibility for successful migration lies primarily with the alien. But with a little forethought, there is much you can do to make him feel at home, thus allowing the migration experience to be less traumatic, even satisfying.
[Blurb on page 11]
“We assume that people of another culture . . . see, feel, and think as we do. . . . Much misunderstanding is caused by the assumption that our own reactions are universal.”​—Cross-​Cultural Learning & Self-​Growth
[Blurb on page 12]
Said a student after spending time on the island of Guam: ‘I have become more tolerant of new or different ways of doing things.’​—Cross-​Cultural Learning & Self-​Growth
[Box on page 12]
You can help the foreigner to . . .
▶ settle in by being a hospitable neighbor
▶ deal with officials while legalizing his presencea
▶ fill in tax formsb
▶ contact organizations that teach local culture and language
▶ obtain accommodations
▶ make use of medical and social services
▶ get the children into school
▶ shop for needed items at the right prices
▶ find employment
[Footnotes]
Some countries, such as Germany, have strict laws regarding who can counsel on legal, immigration, and tax matters. These should be checked before offering any help to aliens regarding their legal status.
Some countries, such as Germany, have strict laws regarding who can counsel on legal, immigration, and tax matters. These should be checked before offering any help to aliens regarding their legal status.

