From Our Readers
Kidnapping  Thank you for the article “Don’t Do Anything Stupid, or I’ll Kill You.” (November 22, 1991) I too was a victim of a robbery in which I was held victim in my car. My abductor knew that I was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses because I constantly called Jehovah’s name out loud. Fortunately, I suffered no physical abuse other than swollen wrists from being tied up and a few scars from being thrown into the trunk. I remained calm and was able to dig my way out of the trunk through the backseat of my car. The incident and the trial made local news. My lawyer, neighbors, friends, and family gave credit to Jehovah for my escape.
E. M., United States
The Bible does not promise miraculous protection for God’s people today. Nevertheless, it is quite appropriate to express thanks to God when a Christian is delivered from a life-​threatening situation. (1 Thessalonians 5:18)​—ED.
Coffee  Your article “The Coffee Dilemma” (April 22, 1991) said that tea, cocoa, and cola drinks contain caffeine. This may be true of tea and cola, but not of cocoa. Cocoa contains theobromine, which is different from caffeine. A cup of cocoa may give you energy, but that is because of the sugar in it.
E. B., Israel
Theobromine is a chemical having physiological properties similar to caffeine. According to “The Encyclopedia Americana,” cocoa beans ‘contain up to 3% theobromine and small quantities of caffeine.’ “Compton’s Encyclopedia” says that “in some sensitive people the theobromine content [of chocolate] can produce the same effects as caffeine.”​—ED.
Body Warnings  My doctor was on vacation when I began having what I thought were minor medical problems. I was well on my way to ignoring the warning signals when I received the article “Heeding the Body’s Warnings.” (October 8, 1991) As suggested, I pursued medical help, and the diagnosis was cancer. Because I heeded my body’s warnings, it has been caught early and treated.
S. S., United States
Cricket  Many thanks for the excellent description of the game of cricket in the article “Cricket or Baseball​—What’s the Difference?” (November 8, 1991) It was a pleasant change from the way cricket is often spoofed on souvenirs from this country. For the benefit of the British, perhaps we could one day have an article giving an equally lucid description of the game of baseball. Unlike American football, the game has never caught on over here.
A. E., England
Terrorist Bombing  I finished reading the article “We Survived a Murderer’s Bomb.” (January 8, 1992) Honestly, I don’t know what to say! It really was an example of endurance. Sue Schulz’s faith and determination with regard to the issue of blood transfusion were very important; so was the way her husband, Peter, expressed his love for Sue despite the physical flaw caused by the explosion. Surely, I am not the only one who was thrilled by this article!
G. J. S., Brazil
Radon  Since I am professionally engaged in the measurement of radon in homes, the article “Radon​—A Danger in Your Home?” (October 22, 1991) was of particular interest to me. You mentioned that radon affects the lungs of smokers more than those of nonsmokers. It is also worth mentioning that cigarette smoke increases the number of dust particles to which radioactive products, or “daughters,” can cling. This increases the health risks for nonsmokers in a smoke-​filled environment.
O. B., Germany

