Announcements
● The September 8, 1978, issue of Awake! will contain an interesting report based on the November distribution of the Blood booklet. It is a fine issue to leave with your own doctor because it presents the favorable response of many doctors, lawyers and judges, which may have a wholesome effect on your own doctor.
● The September 22 Awake! reports on persecution of our brothers in Argentina. Further information is contained in a special letter to all congregations. We encourage everyone to write one or more letters to Argentine officials.
● Literature offer for September: Your Youth​—Getting the Best out of It for 35c. May also use Listening to the Great Teacher or any other pocket-size book. October: Awake! subscription for $2.00 with any 384- or 416-page book free to new subscribers. Brooklyn still has a supply of the books Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand! and “The Nations Shall Know that I Am Jehovah”​—How? that may be ordered. Credit for such free books given to new subscribers may be requested as in the previous campaign with similar offer. November: Tract distribution.
● Congregation accounts should be audited on September 1, or as soon thereafter as possible, by the presiding overseer or someone appointed by him.
● New Publication Available:
Life Does Have a Purpose​—Japanese, Korean, Norwegian
Making Your Family Life Happy​—English, Finnish, Spanish
My Book of Bible Stories​—English, German
Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood​—Greek, Korean
Unseen Spirits​—Do They Help Us? Or Do They Harm Us?​—English, Spanish
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century​—English, French, Spanish
The Good News According to John (Cassette recordings)​—English, French, Spanish
● When ordering the 1979 Yearbook, publishers and pioneers are requested to do so through the congregation. Orders for the Yearbook in the following languages may be placed after the dates here listed. November 1: English. November 15: French, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, Spanish. February 1: Dutch, German, Korean, PAYMENT SHOULD NOT ACCOMPANY ORDERS. Congregation account will be charged at rate of 50 cents each for publishers. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1978, may receive a free copy for which the congregation may request credit. Pioneers may obtain additional copies at 15 cents each.
● During their meeting in September, elders should review any needs for repair or decoration of the Kingdom Hall in harmony with guidelines in May 1976, Our Kingdom Service. Results on this meeting will be discussed with congregation in October 8 service meeting.
● Copies of the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century should be reported as booklets when placed by the publishers in the field or when provided to groups or organizations by the congregation.

