Convention News
The “Victorious Faith” International Conventions got off to a good start in June with a total attendance of 600,489 for the public lecture at 14 conventions. There were 3,856 baptized. At Montreal, in Canada, July 5-9, the peak attendance was 80,008, and 831 were baptized.
The convention program was enthusiastically received. The overall spiritual provision has been described as “most faith strengthening.” Many expressed appreciation for the way field service was stressed. “It is a call to action.” observed one brother. Another remarked: “It has really gotten to the hearts of the brothers. We will see . . . a more serious view of service​—and this is the time for it.”
On Friday morning thousands shared in field activity, using the special kits, which attracted much attention. One report said: “People knew Jehovah’s Witnesses were in town.” It was exciting to participate in the well-organized campaign. Kingdom publishers appeared like a swarm of locusts as they covered residential territory, did street work and called on persons in offices and stores. In several places, news reporters accompanied brothers in the door-to-door activity, and they wrote interesting reports.
And what about the conduct of the conventioners? Time and again brothers were impressed with the attentiveness of the audiences, the way families stayed together and the fine behavior of children. Compared with past assemblies, fewer persons worked during sessions and there was less milling around. All this contributed toward the orderliness of the conventions. “One thing that impressed me,” an elder said, “was the lack of movement and restless running around. Everybody was sitting and listening. It was a real joy to be there and concentrate on the outstanding program.” Outsiders, including hotel managers and stadium personnel, commented on the orderly way conventioners conducted themselves.
So many reports being received tell about the benefits resulting from applying the counsel and reminders given prior to the conventions. Surely, this pleases Jehovah. This is evident by the outpouring of his rich blessings. May we all continue to ‘maintain our conduct fine among the nations,’ as we now press ahead with the same spirit in the field service as was shown at the international conventions.​—1 Pet. 2:12.

