Enjoying Organized Service
1 A Bible principle that should mean much to a book study group and its conductor is that stated at 1 Corinthians 14:40: “Let all things take place decently and by arrangement.” This principle, when applied, makes for joyful, productive service.
2 As publishers, we appreciate it when the conductor follows this principle. One thing the group will need is territory. So the conductor should plan in advance how the territory can best be worked. Will there be enough for the group? If territory is not nearby, could the group meet earlier or even in the territory? Will safety require publishers to work in groups or pairs? Dividing up the assignment can be done “by arrangement” with brothers assisting in taking groups to different parts of the territory. In this way, the publishers will not create a scene by congregating on a street corner. The conductor wants things to be done “decently.”
3 Does your book study group organize for service right after the Sunday meetings or meet again later? Or do you meet at the book study location either Sunday morning or afternoon? These are arrangements that can be worked out locally, but it is important for all to know clearly what the arrangements are.
4 Another thing that can contribute to effective, organized service is when the conductor arranges to work with us from door to door. As we observe how he handles matters at the door or on a return visit, possibly we can see ways to improve our own service. We appreciate his suggestions and observations. And do not words of commendation move us to greater zeal? By making appointments in advance and working with even one or two each week, he may be able to work with all in the group during a period of a few months. He can be alert, too, to enlist the help of his assistant and others, perhaps aiding them to make appointments to assist others. He must be a good organizer, because “when there is no skillful direction, the people fall.”​—Prov. 11:14.
5 Are you personally supporting the arrangements in your group? If we wait until Saturday or Sunday morning to make our decision about field service, might the Adversary help influence our decision? Sticking to a regular schedule for service will let “things take place decently and by arrangement.”
6 When you reach the first house in the territory, are you really ready to knock on the door? Have you organized things? What about your book bag? Are Bible, books and magazines arranged neatly? Do you have a pencil? Subscription slips? Do you keep a House-to-House Record so you can call back on interested ones? Thoughtful organization will contribute to a more productive and joyful day in service.
7 Jehovah has foreseen the needs of the people of this generation. Their greatest need is to have the truth. He has given us the privilege of declaring his truths to mankind. Our enjoyment and effectiveness in doing this will be greatly increased by organized service in our book study groups, doing everything “decently and by arrangement.”

