Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 3
Theme: Youth​—Firmly Establish Your Way.​—Prov. 4:26.
20 min: Song 73. Local announcements.
Safeguard Your Heart. Audience discussion of Proverbs chapter 4. Ask several young persons to read verses. Discuss questions with audience. (Vss. 1, 2) What kind of attitude should young people have toward their parents? Why? (Vss. 3-6) What are the benefits of listening to advice of parents who are older and more experienced? (Vss. 7-9) How can a young person demonstrate wisdom? (Vss. 20-23) How can you guard your heart and why is it so important? (Vss. 24-27) What kinds of bad conduct will you avoid if you firmly establish your way? (Invite young people to relate experiences where they did apply good counsel and it turned out well.)
20 min: Do You Understand Why? Audience discussion dealing with questions that concern young people. Questions should be directed toward parents and older ones, asking them kindly to explain why certain counsel is given. Try to help young people look beyond rules and appreciate why it is wise for them to listen. Strive to be positive, helpful; avoid being critical.
Chairman: Some young people become resentful toward parents, teachers and others in authority, feeling that they are restricted in many areas without good reason. Result: resistance to counsel and a communication gap. How can we help them understand why guidelines are established to regulate their conduct? How would you answer these questions?
(1) It is common to see use of tobacco, alcohol and drugs at schools and other places. Why are parents so concerned when they hear about such things? (2 Cor. 7:1; Prov. 23:20, 21) (2) Young people have a need for recreation. Why are they advised to avoid many forms of entertainment and sports? (1 Tim. 4:8; Phil. 4:8) (3) Music and dancing have been a part of every culture all the way back to Bible times. Why so much apprehension about what is popular now? (Jas. 1:14, 15; 1 Pet. 1:14-16) (4) They enjoy the company of others their own age. Why are some restrictions made about their association together? (1 Cor. 15:33; Prov. 13:20) (5) Why do you encourage them to have a full share in the activities of the congregation and consider the possibility of taking up the pioneer service?​—Eccl. 12:1; 1 Tim. 6:18, 19.
20 min: God’s Word Can Help You to Make Wise Decisions. (Ps. 19:7) Discussion between elder and group of young people on platform. Group comments on following questions using Scriptural guidelines provided in Youth book: (1) What Bible principles can help determine the kind of dress and grooming that is proper for you? (Chap. 7) (2) What viewpoint will help you to avoid feeling resentment toward parents? (Chap. 10) (3) What are some good reasons for applying yourself in school? (Chap. 11) (4) What advantages are there in delaying plans for marriage beyond the teen-age years? (Chap. 20) (5) How important should money and material things be in your plans for the future? (Chap. 21) (6) How is a knowledge of the truth a big advantage in deciding your goals for the future? (Chap. 23) (7) In what ways will your good conduct eventually be rewarded? (Chap. 24) Mention that some of these points highlighted from Youth book may be helpful when offering this publication in the field this month.
Conclude with warm encouragement, expressing appreciation for youth in our midst. Song 19 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 10
Theme: “Always Have Plenty to Do in the Work of the Lord.’​—1 Cor. 15:58.
10 min: Song 89. Local announcements. Accounts report. Highlights of Branch Letter.
15 min: “‘Always Have Plenty to Do in the Work of the Lord.’” Audience discussion of article. Invite some to express themselves about their busy schedule and what it takes to keep up. Review what can be learned from Paul’s example. Get comments on why much activity serves a useful purpose and how this should affect our attitude toward a busy schedule.
15 min: “Enjoying Organized Service.” Talk by study conductor on article. Briefly review and demonstrate Topic for Conversation.
20 min: “Those ‘Acquiring a Fine Standing.’” A group of ministerial servants on platform discuss this article with an elder. Each one expresses appreciation for having plenty to do and comments on how they as a group can be of greater service to their brothers. Song 7 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 17
Theme: Imitate the “God of All Comfort.”​—2 Cor. 1:3.
12 min: Song 34. Local announcements. Talk on Jehovah’s being a “God of all comfort.” (2 Cor. 1:3) Creation shows he is concerned about well-being of all persons. Also, record of his dealings provides comfort, assuring us that we are not alone or without hope. (Rom. 15:4, 5) Jesus promised comfort to those mourning over wickedness of present system and who acknowledge own sinfulness and seek forgiveness. (Matt. 5:4) Will we imitate Jehovah by comforting others?
28 min: “Keep Comforting One Another.” Audience discussion. All of us can be a comfort to one another. Paul comforted his brothers, aiding them to be faithful. (1 Thess. 2:11, 12) We should do likewise. (1 Thess. 5:11) What would you say or do in these cases?
(1) Sister’s unbelieving husband makes it hard for her to get to meetings or to share in field service. (2) Young person is discouraged over being different from schoolmates. (3) Older Witness has less strength and often is ill. (Heb. 6:10) (4) Brother has become downhearted after being counseled. (Heb. 12:5, 11) (5) Brother is disheartened by pressure on job to ignore his conscience. (Heb. 13:5, 6, 18) (6) Single or widowed person would like to marry but unable to find suitable Christian mate.​—1 Cor. 7:28.
When we see such situations, are we genuinely concerned? When was the last time we sought to comfort and upbuild family member or fellow Witness needing consolation or encouragement? Good to imitate Jehovah in doing so.​—2 Cor. 1:3, 4.
20 min: Comforting Others Brings Fine Results. Talk, with audience comments and perhaps interviews. Christians do not comfort only other Witnesses. Proclaiming good news includes sharing comforting message, as did Jesus. (Isa. 61:2; Luke 4:16-21) Have not many householders mentioned to you troubles or problems they have or their grief over the decline of morals? Here are opportunities to comfort from God’s Word.
What would you do if householder says that family member recently died? Need to be discerning and tactful. Some comforting Bible verses may open the way for a further witness later. (John 11:19, 31) Any experiences of this type? What did you say? What was the response?
Interview some in congregation, or invite audience to relate experiences: (1) How they may have responded to truth because of being given comfort, or how they were aided to make progress by comforting encouragement received. (2) Joy they have had in comforting others (Witnesses or not) and beneficial result of doing so. Song 40 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 24
Theme: Do I Appreciate What Jehovah Is Doing for Me?
10 min: Song 31. Local announcements. Talk. Thoughtful Christians realize that we benefit from what God has done for all mankind. We have life from him. (Acts 17:26-28) He provided earth with much that makes living possible and enjoyable. (lp pp. 10-22) But what about the many things he does for us personally?
20 min: God’s Special Provisions for You. Discussion. Invite audience to comment on and to relate personal experiences regarding: (1) How each of the following is something special that God has done for us. (2) How we can benefit the most from what he is doing.
(1) A purpose and hope​—making life more satisfying. (2) Explanations that resolved questions we had, or Bible counsel that makes life more peaceful and meaningful. (3) Elders as “gifts in men.” (4) Training for more effectiveness and pleasure in field service. (5) Brothers and sisters who will help if we have difficulties.
Appreciation for what God has done aids us to avoid becoming critical, uncooperative or complacent and it draws us closer to him.​—Ps. 92:1, 2.
12 min: Jehovah Helps Us to Develop New Personalities. Interviews. By his spirit and Word, God helps us to change to new personality. (Eph. 4:22-24) We sense need for more progress, yet we probably recognize that we already have come a long way.
Interview some who formerly had old personality traits such as bad temper, tendency to jealousy, being withdrawn, or too pushy. How did they recognize need to work on that weakness? What did they do? Did they meet obstacles difficult to overcome? How do they feel now in looking back on old personality? Contrast present joy and peace with former problems and uncertainties.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Being a Good Listener.” Questions and answers. Conclude with comments about Awake! subscription offer that starts Sunday, encouraging all to apply foregoing suggestions in starting conversations. Ask all to bring October 8 Awake! to next service meeting. Song 43 and prayer.

