‘Always Have Plenty to Do in the Work of the Lord’
1 All of us have plenty to do every day. Each day we are confronted with many responsibilities, all vying for our time. The demands of the family and secular jobs may be enough to keep us occupied. Added to that we would like to reach out for a full share in the activities of the congregation, including meetings, personal study and participation in the disciple-making work. Sometimes we may get discouraged, feeling we are unable to do justice to each responsibility.
2 But, having a very busy schedule is not something new for God’s servants. The apostle Paul implied that he had a very busy schedule when he spoke of anxiety for the congregations that “rushes in on me from day to day.” (2 Cor. 11:28) Yet he always viewed things positively, discerning with appreciation the underlying benefits. That appreciation moved him to admonish his brothers ‘always to have plenty to do in the work of the Lord.’​—1 Cor. 15:58.
3 It is also good for us to view things in a positive way. Being kept busy in Kingdom activity serves as a protection. There is danger in being “unoccupied.” (1 Tim. 5:13) Idleness is a fertile ground for the seeds of complaint and complacency. We are urged to keep our “minds on maintaining fine works.” (Titus 3:8) Individuals busily engaged in worthwhile activities rarely have time to pursue worthless things, harbor resentment, worry about their mistakes, or get involved in wrong conduct.
4 Having plenty to do also protects the congregation. At times, individuals whose motives are not good will associate with the Christian congregation. But anyone who is insincere or has a wrong motive will not tarry long where there is much good work to be done. This safeguards the congregation, helping to assure that those within are wholehearted. It also helps us individually to grow stronger spiritually by exercising and developing our thinking abilities and powers of reason.​—Heb. 5:14.
5 Always having plenty to do teaches us some vital lessons. Assignments to aid others remind us to think of them and their needs ahead of our own. A willingness to accept responsibility and follow direction helps us to learn the meaning of humility. Working side by side with others provides valuable lessons in patience and brotherly love. Sticking with a job to its completion teaches us to be faithful and to appreciate the value of endurance, as well as reminds us that we must exert ourselves “vigorously” if we are to merit Jehovah’s blessing.​—Luke 13:24.
6 Keeping up with all that is expected of us means that we will have to keep “working hard and exerting ourselves.” (1 Tim. 4:10) Nevertheless, there is a great reward in the knowledge that God is well pleased with such efforts. Always having plenty to do in Jehovah’s service can help us to be counted among the faithful servants who “will get many blessings.”​—Prov. 28:20.

