Corcovado—Costa Rica’s Diamond in the Rough
By Awake! writer in Costa Rica
“A DIAMOND in the rough.” That oft-used phrase well describes Corcovado National Park. It is situated on the Osa Peninsula, on the southern Pacific Coast of the Central American country of Costa Rica. The indescribable natural beauty of this virtually undisturbed rain forest, its remote location, and the fact that it is home to an amazing variety of trees, insects, reptiles, and mammals make Corcovado a fascinating place to visit.
While this park is beautiful, however, it is a diamond in the rough. It is situated in one of Central America’s largest tropical rain forests, and here you will not find many restaurants, hotels, or souvenir shops. Aside from some ranger stations and the long hiking trails—which one travel guidebook calls the best trail system of any rain forest park—there is very little to remind you of man’s presence.
From Forest to Park
In the early 1970’s, serious consideration was given to transforming this rain forest into a national park. However, making that transformation would not be an easy task. Considerable manpower and material resources would be needed. During the mid-1970’s, the report was made that settlers were moving into the region. In addition, a lumber company with huge landholdings in the forest had made plans to launch a major logging operation, and large numbers of hunters were using the forest as a source of game.
Nevertheless, scientists and biologists from around the world who recognized the value of preserving this rain forest exerted their influence. On October 31, 1975, the Costa Rican government announced the birth of Corcovado National Park. Since then, large-scale logging operations and hunting have ceased to be threats.
The Different Facets of Corcovado
Corcovado’s 133,000-acre [54,000 hectare] land area contains great diversity. No less than eight habitats, or ecosystems, exist within the borders of the park. Within these ecosystems are at least 500 species of trees. The largest tree in the park is a silk-cotton tree. Measuring over 10 feet [3 m] in diameter, it reaches a height of more than 230 feet [70 m].
Do you enjoy bird-watching? Corcovado’s bird population of nearly 400 species would no doubt keep you busy and happy. The park is home to the largest population of scarlet macaws in the country. As they fly, their magnificent colors, lit by the tropical sun, seem to streak across the sky.
Perhaps, though, you would rather study something a little more down to earth. No problem! Corcovado offers 116 different species of amphibians and reptiles, including the fer-de-lance snake. Don’t examine it too long or too closely, however, because this poisonous snake has a reputation for being uniquely aggressive! Among the amphibians is a species of frog that is transparent—if it is placed on a clear glass surface, you can see its internal organs functioning!
You could also spend time watching some of the 140 mammals that make Corcovado their home. These include jaguars, ocelots, four types of monkey, three species of anteater, two species of sloth, and two kinds of armadillo. The park also contains as many as 10,000 varieties of insects.
Shirley Ramirez Carvajal, biologist and park coordinator for the program of wildlife management in Corcovado, told Awake! of a project for radio-collaring jaguars and other animals. This will help scientists study their eating patterns and the extent of their habitat. The information will then aid park officials in determining if the borders of the park need to be extended to ensure that there is sufficient food for the animal population. Expanding the park could also serve to protect animals from the genetic dangers of inbreeding.
There is more to Corcovado, however, than its abundant wildlife. You may visit the Salsipuedes Cave, famous for housing part of the treasure of the English sailor and explorer Sir Francis Drake. Only a few miles north of Corcovado is Drake Bay, where, it is said, the explorer landed in 1579 during his circumnavigation of the globe.
Gold fever once threatened this “diamond.” Gold nuggets weighing up to two pounds [1 kg] sparked the first wave of fever in the 1930’s. Later, in the 1960’s, another gold rush occurred and then yet another a few years after the park’s establishment. The latter prompted several hundred miners to move there. The government banned miners from Corcovado in 1986.
Like any other place, Corcovado is not without its problems. Awake! talked with Gerardo A. Chaves, subadministrator of Corcovado National Park, who mentioned that along with the ongoing struggle for finances and resources, other concerns include deforestation outside the boundaries of the park and the problem of poaching. If Corcovado is to continue to thrive, no doubt each of these concerns will have to be addressed in the near future.
Surely, Corcovado National Park remains one of the most unspoiled areas on earth. Indeed, just as a literal diamond is loved for its beauty and endurance, Costa Rica’s diamond in the rough will no doubt be appreciated and enjoyed by thousands of visitors in years to come, who value the natural and inherent beauty of the earth. For Christians, the park is a reminder of just how beautiful the entire earth will be when God transforms it into a global paradise!—Luke 23:43.
[Map on page 14]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Corcovado National Park
[Picture on page 15]
Rain forest
[Credit Line]
Steve Pace
[Pictures on page 15]
White fungi and red mushrooms
[Credit Line]
©kevinschafer.com
[Picture on page 16, 17]
The rain forest extends right up to the beach
[Picture on page 16, 17]
Arrow-poison frog
[Picture on page 16, 17]
Hiker beneath a waterfall
[Picture on page 17]
Squirrel monkeys
[Picture on page 17]
Ocelot
[Picture on page 17]
Motmot
[Picture on page 17]
Sloth
[Picture on page 17]
Scarlet macaw
[Picture Credit Lines on page 17]
Beach: Barbara Magnuson/Larry Kimball; frog: © Michael and Patricia Fogden; waterfall: ©kevinschafer.com; all other photos: Steve Pace

