Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
Mankind today is imperiled. How so? Because of the destruction that Almighty God will soon bring upon this system of things and upon all who share in its bloodguilt. To escape being destroyed and to find security, one needs to put one’s trust in Christ’s ransom sacrifice and then to follow closely in the footsteps of Jesus Christ. Only then can one say with the psalmist: “You yourself alone, O Jehovah, make me dwell in security.” (Ps. 4:8) Jehovah’s witnesses want to show imperiled mankind God’s provision for security, and during September they will do this in their ministry by offering one of their latest books for Bible study, and then arranging to provide free home Bible instruction for anyone who wants to understand God’s Word.
THE ANNUAL MEETING IN PITTSBURGH
At ten o’clock in the forenoon of Tuesday, October 1, 1968, the annual meeting of the members of Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will be held at the Society’s office located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. All members of the corporation should be certain that the Secretary’s office has their addresses so that the letters of notice will reach them shortly after September 1.
Along with the notice of the annual meeting, which will be mailed to all the members of the corporation, proxies will be sent. The proxies are to be returned so as to reach the office of the Secretary of the Society not later than September 15. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
CAN YOU TRUST ANYONE?
Would you respect someone who always kept a promise? who never violated his word and who was always seeking your welfare? Would you come to depend on someone who never lied to you, never misrepresented the facts, one who respected his own name and whose integrity could not be successfully challenged? Only the Almighty God could completely fulfill these high standards, though some people today question even his existence. Prove for yourself that God cannot lie and that your life depends upon your reliance upon him. Read “Things in Which It Is Impossible for God to Lie” and Life Everlasting—in Freedom of the Sons of God. Send only $1. Send today and receive two free booklets on timely Bible subjects.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 29: “Whatever a Man Is Sowing, This He Will Also Reap.” Page 521. Songs to Be Used: 75, 15.
October 6: “Let Us Not Give Up in Doing What Is Fine.” Page 527. Songs to Be Used: 85, 99.

