Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points.
● Why is the earth capable of accommodating all the billions of dead persons who will be resurrected?
The earth has over 57 million square miles of land area. Scientists estimate that it can accommodate a population of perhaps fifty billion persons, which is far more than the total number of persons who have ever lived on this earth.—Pp. 260, 261.a
● What did Jesus’ baptism in water symbolize?
Not his dedication, because he was a member of a dedicated nation, but his presentation of himself before Jehovah to do Jehovah’s will for that time. That will included the laying down of his human life in sacrifice.—P. 299.
● After 36 C.E. what did water baptism symbolize for both Jews and non-Jews?
It symbolized the dedication of oneself to God through Jesus Christ.—P. 299.
● Who has instigated the recent persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses in the United Arab Republic?
Christendom’s churches, especially those of the Coptic Patriarchate.—P. 325.
● What family, of what tribe, were to serve as a representative priesthood for the nation of Israel?
Aaron and his family of the tribe of Levi.—Pp. 340, 341.
● What might one of Jehovah’s witnesses do when he is accosted by a robber who demands his money?
He might calmly try to reason with him and identify himself as a Christian minister. If that fails, he would show appreciation of the value of his life if he did not endanger his life in an endeavor to hold onto the money.—Pp. 346, 347.
● Why should a Christian woman resist even to the death an attempted rape?
Because it is an attempt on her virtue, and to consent to it is to consent to fornication. It is a matter of integrity to Jehovah’s laws.—P. 347.
● How did Jehonadab prove that his heart was upright and united with Jehu?
He rode in Jehu’s chariot and showed publicly that he was giving his active support to Jehovah’s anointed one.—P. 358.
● What did the Most Holy and the curtain that divided it off from the Holy in Israel’s tabernacle for worship picture?
The Most Holy represented the heavenly place of God’s presence, and the curtain pictured Christ’s perfect flesh.—P. 367.
● Why is covetousness idolatry?
Because it causes one to make an idol of oneself, and one’s selfish cravings become the uppermost thing in one’s life.—P. 388.
● What evidence is there that Jehovah has shown his approval of the priesthood of Christ and his underpriests?
He has channeled through them a tremendous flow of spiritual provisions. He has also blessed the anointed on earth and protected them in the face of global opposition and hatred.—P. 406.
● What fear do the Scriptures recommend?
The proper and beneficial fear of displeasing Jehovah.—P. 435.
● On what basis will mankind in general be judged during the 1,000-year judgment day?
On the basis of their heart condition, evident in their obedience to God’s will at that time, and not according to whether they previously had an opportunity to learn and do that will or not.—Pp. 453, 454.
● What is zeal?
It is a passionate ardor for a cause, an intense eagerness in promoting some end. It is also referred to as earnestness, enthusiasm, devotion and fervor.—P. 458.
● How can one become zealous for Jehovah?
By regularly studying his Word, keeping close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah and watching one’s associations.—Pp. 468, 469.
● In what three ways does loose conduct harm a person?
It damages his relations with his Creator. It causes friction with his neighbor and it even directly causes emotional and spiritual, if not also physical, injury to himself.—P. 476.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower of 1968.

