Show Imperiled Mankind the Way to Security
MOST persons ignore the greatest threat to security and life that faces mankind today. And what is that?
It is the eternal destruction by God of all who share in the bloodguilt of the nations, and the time of execution is near. As we read at Isaiah 26:21: “Look! Jehovah is coming forth from his place to call to account the error of the inhabitant of the land against him, and the land will certainly expose her bloodshed and will no longer cover over her killed ones.” Thus also at Revelation 19:11-16 the apostle John tells of the Word of God, Jesus Christ, going forth to execute vengeance.
To escape being destroyed forever by Jehovah’s Executioner, what must one do? One must first of all recognize one’s own bloodguilt and repent thereof, and then convert by turning around and following a course of righteousness. One must separate oneself from all bloodguilty organizations, be they political or religious. Further, one must exercise faith in Christ’s blood and dedicate oneself to do God’s will. As the apostle John wrote: “The blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin.” (1 John 1:7) All who have exercised such faith can say with the psalmist: “You yourself alone, O Jehovah, make me dwell in security.”—Ps. 4:8.”a
All Christians who now “dwell in security” have the obligation to show others of imperiled mankind the way to security. How so? In that Christians are obligated to love their neighbors as themselves and to do to others as they would have others do to them. (Mark 12:31; Luke 6:31) Since they were glad that someone showed them the way to security they are obligated by these principles to show other imperiled ones that way. And this they must do now, for there is an urgency about this matter; even as in ancient times the unintentional manslayer had no time to lose to get to the city of refuge if he would escape being slain by the avenger of blood.—Matt. 24:20, 21.
The more earnestly and efficiently Christian ministers go about discharging their obligations to others, the more effective they will be and the more happiness they will experience as they thus help others to get on the way to security.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, August 15, 1967.

