From Our Readers
Love or Infatuation?
As much as I enjoy your articles, I found a point or two that I disagree with in the “Young People Ask . . . “ series, on “Love or Infatuation​—How Do I Know?” You linked romantic feelings with infatuation as one and the same. Not true. True love and romantic feelings have to go hand in hand. Romantic feelings don’t fade away but grow with time. I also think it’s wrong to say that because a person makes me feel good I am self-centered. All my good friends make me feel good and I hope that I make them feel the same way.
E. P., Virginia
We agree that romantic feelings are also present with true love. The point we were trying to make was that mere romantic feelings do not necessarily indicate that there is a basis for true love. The feelings may be the same whether there is true love or infatuation, but the basis is entirely different. True love does not stem from a mere superficial reaction to surface qualities; infatuation does. Also, we agree that just because another person makes you feel good it does not necessarily imply that you are self-centered. It can also be very genuine. But the point is, if, in your association with another person, you are looking only to see if that one makes you “feel good” instead of whether or not that one displays good and upbuilding qualities, then this can be self-centered and deceptive. It is not a basis for true love. Certainly our associating with persons who have good, upbuilding qualities will make us feel good and there is nothing wrong in this.​—ED.
Nazca Lines
I want to thank you for the article about ‘The Nazca Lines.’ I am a grade-school student and we got the assignment of writing a story about the Nazca Lines. I was very perplexed by this, but I was able to write correctly after reading the article.
Y. H., Japan
Helps to Cope With Life
Thank you for the excellent article “You Can Cope With Life.” It has given me the strength to continue. Your articles are very instructive. I see that you are honest when you speak of other religions doing what God disapproves. You tell the truth (I always check) when you speak of other things.
L. N., Italy
High Moral Level
I am not interested in your message but I do like your journal very much because of the high moral level it keeps. Your articles about family life and on subjects like drug abuse and abortion really show wisdom and human insight. Self-sacrifice, humility and a high moral standard are not popular today, but it is good that you do not moderate your views to become popular.
G. W., Denmark
Smoking
I am a new reader and want to congratulate you for such articles as “Is Smoking Here to Stay?” That helped me to break the habit after nineteen years of addiction.
E. M., Brazil

