“Chickens” and “Hawks”
The New Morality​—Harvesting Its Crop
“Just as it occurred in the days of Lot.”​—Luke 17:28
HAWKS swoop down on chickens, and farmers keep loaded shotguns handy to blast the hawks. Today, however, those words can carry a different connotation. The “chickens” are young boys, the “hawks” are adult homosexuals, but the analogy ends there. The farmers are missing. The laws are inadequate, enforcement is poor, the judges are lenient and the “chickens” become victims. This problem is not new. It goes all the way back to Sodom and Gomorrah. But the last decade has seen an increasingly aggressive pursuit of “chickens” by the “hawks.” Their brazenness has scandalized those elements of society still able to be scandalized.
In both New York City and in Los Angeles some claim that boys are more in demand than girls. A Los Angeles police sergeant who works with child vice says: “The figures for this area show that it’s between 70 and 75 percent boys to 25 percent girls.” In Massachusetts a call-boy operation was discovered, where 250 boys were available for sex anywhere in the state for $50 and up. It turned out to be, however, only a branch of a national network headquartered in Houston, Texas. “Hawks” could call there from anywhere in the country and order “chickens” by telephone. Within half an hour a boy would be at the caller’s door, provided the “hawk’s” credit card cleared.
The “hawks” have formed groups and demand respectability. The Rene Guyon organization, based in California, boasts 8,500 members. Their motto is “Sex by eight or it’s too late.” Numerous other man-boy sex organizations exist. Lists are compiled that show where boys can be picked up in every state. One such organization has headquarters in London, with branches in the United States and other countries. The homosexuals are pushing for changing the laws to lower the age of consent and to legalize sex between adults and children. They are fighting for children’s rights, they say, and make themselves out to be crusaders. The Gay Community News said:
“The gay liberation movement is fighting not merely for the rights of adults to engage freely in homoerotic acts, but also for the millions of our society’s children to enjoy a free sexual life . . . and [for] the rights of children to control their own bodies. At a time when abuse of children by their parents is epidemic, it is ironic that it is men who love boys who are made into the ultimate criminal.”
Children’s rights to be abused, prostituted, sodomized? Their proclaimed concern for children’s rights is a cover-up for men whose only interest is gratification of their own sexual perversion. When the children become a little older these “loving” adults dump them back on the streets and pick up new victims. Willing or not, children at these tender ages are unable to understand the choice they are making or to foresee the consequences. They are victims. They are vulnerable. Misguidedly they seek affection from a homosexual and are psychologically devastated when they are cast off. Some are murdered. One homosexual man killed thirty-three boys and buried them under his house. Where has all that supposedly great love gone?
Support for homosexual causes comes from strange sources. The Bible is clear on its view of homosexuality. Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed because of their practice of it. The Mosaic law forbade it, under penalty of death: “When a man lies down with a male the same as one lies down with a woman, both of them have done a detestable thing. They should be put to death without fail. Their own blood is upon them.” The same position is expressed in the Christian Greek Scriptures concerning such men: “God gave them up to disgraceful sexual appetites, for both their females changed the natural use of themselves into one contrary to nature; and likewise even the males left the natural use of the female and became violently inflamed in their lust toward one another, males with males, working what is obscene.”​—Leviticus 20:13; Romans 1:26, 27.
In spite of these Biblical denunciations, many clergymen and churches speak up for the homosexuals. San Francisco, the population of which is 30 percent homosexual, illustrates the point. One news report reads: “Much of the tolerance comes, somewhat surprisingly perhaps, from organized religion​—from the major Protestant, Anglican, Roman Catholic, and Jewish churches and synagogues. . . . Rev. Otto Sommers, the 50-year-old conference minister of Maine’s 250 United Church of Christ congregations, . . . says: ‘Homosexual sex, just like heterosexual sex, is a gift of God to be lived under the ethic of love. We all live under Christ.’”
Notwithstanding the pronouncements of many of today’s religious leaders and their church organizations, Jehovah God’s view of homosexuality has not changed. And, concerning conditions on earth at the time of his second coming, Christ Jesus said: “Just as it occurred in the days of Lot . . . the same way it will be on that day when the Son of man is to be revealed.”​—Luke 17:28-30.
[Box on page 5]
“The men of the city, the men of Sodom, surrounded the house, from boy to old man, all the people in one mob. And they kept calling out to Lot and saying to him: ‘Where are the men who came in to you tonight? Bring them out to us that we may have intercourse with them.’”​—Genesis 19:4, 5

