Marriage in Paradise
“And the Lord God took man, and put him into the paradise of pleasure, to dress it, and to keep it. And the Lord God built the rib which he took from Adam into a woman: and brought her to Adam.”—Gen. 2:15, 22, Dy.
 1. Where did human marriage begin, and where will its purpose be fulfilled?
MARRIAGE of man and woman began in Paradise. When Paradise is restored to this earth under the kingdom of the Lord God, there will be marriage of man and woman, until the divine purpose in such a union is fulfilled.
 2. (a) How should marriage be treated, and why? (b) At God’s stating his decision to create man, what question arose, and why?
2 Rightly, marriage should be treated with honor and respect. Marriage was a paradise privilege for man and woman. It added a touch of beauty and joyfulness to the earthly paradise. Human marriage was from the most honorable and respectable source. Its originator was heavenly, the Most High God, who never does anything wrong, who never sins. He was man’s own Creator. Toward the close of the sixth creative “day” this holy and most lofty Creator took steps to bring into existence his highest earthly creature. “And [in heaven] God went on to say: ‘Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness, and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth and every creeping animal that is creeping upon the earth.’” (Gen 1:26) By saying to his creative agent, his heavenly Son: “Let THEM have in subjection,” God indicated to his creative Son that there were to be two or more, or many, men on the earth having the inferior animal creatures in subjection. How were these men to be produced? God showed his creative Son how.
 3. To create man, where did God turn for his building material, and how does Paul verify the Genesis record about this?
3 To what source did God turn for his building material? In His Book, the Holy Bible, he tells us: “Then Jehovah God proceeded to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man came to be a living soul. Further, Jehovah God planted a garden [a park, a paradise] in Eden, toward the east, and there he put the man whom he had formed.” (Gen. 2:7, 8, and marginal reading) The Christian apostle Paul verifies the inspired authority of that Bible record in the second chapter of Genesis, saying: “It is even so written: ‘The first man Adam became a living soul.’ . . . The first man is out of the earth and made of dust.”—1 Cor. 15:45-47.
 4. Why does man have mental, moral and emotional qualities that monkeys and apes do not have, and why was it proper for the male human to have headship over his earthly companion?
4 To begin with, Jehovah God made just one human creature, but not as an experiment. In whose image did he make man—in the image of a monkey or of an ape? No; but, as God said to his creative Son, “in our image, according to our likeness.” (Gen. 1:26) “And God proceeded to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him.” (Gen. 1:27) This is why the first man, who was a perfect man and a “son of God,” had mental, moral and emotional qualities that the highest of the lower animals does not have. (Luke 3:38) The same apostle Paul confirmed the inspired authority of Genesis, chapter one, from which we quoted, by saying: “A man ought not to have his head veiled, as he is God’s image and glory.” (1 Cor. 11:7) The first man, Adam, headed the human family. Hence he had priority, or precedence in order, over the next human creature that would appear on the earth. God, his Creator and heavenly Father, was interested in his son Adam’s having an earthly companion suitable for him. How did God furnish such a companion?
 5. Why did God not mate man with an ape or monkey, and so how have scientists without faith made themselves ridiculous?
5 God did not pick some big female monkey or ape as the mate for the perfect man Adam. That would have been making his son turn bestial and commit bestiality. The supreme Biologist, Jehovah God, knew that Adam could not be crossed with a female monkey or ape, even to produce a mongrel offspring to fill the earth with descendants. That is why faithless scientists have made themselves ridiculous and have failed in their experimental efforts to breed a man or a woman with a monkey or ape in order to produce offspring and to prove their theory that man is related to the monkey family or to anthropoid apes.—Ex. 22:19; Lev. 18:23-25.
 6. What was the result of Adam’s biological study in Eden, and so how was God’s ability as a creative Father put to the test?
6 As a Father, God desired to please his earthly son Adam. He made Adam acquainted with the beasts and the birds and left to his capable son Adam the task of naming all the beasts and the birds. However, Adam felt not the slightest desire to pair up with a wild beast or a domestic animal or even an ape and commit bestiality with such a subhuman creature. None of them was like the perfect man Adam, “the son of God.” The result of Adam’s biological study of the animals and birds was summed up in this statement, in Genesis 2:20: “But for man there was found no helper as a complement of him.” What was God to do now, inasmuch as he had said: “It is not good for the man to continue by himself. I am going to make a helper for man, as a complement of him”? Would God be able to produce a creature that would please Adam and be desirable to him as a man, although he had never seen this creature before? Like a wise Father, he knew how he could satisfy his son with a real mate.—Gen. 2:18.
 7, 8. (a) How did Jehovah God satisfy his earthly son with a real mate? (b) What were Adam’s reactions to God’s introduction to him of his future Edenic companion? Why?
7 Imagine yourself as a normal man being awakened from a deep, dreamless sleep and being introduced to a perfectly beautiful virgin female of the same human family as yourself, the first one that you had ever seen! That was Adam’s experience. “Hence Jehovah God had a deep sleep fall upon the man and, while he was sleeping, he took one of his ribs and then closed up the flesh over its place. And Jehovah God proceeded to build the rib that he had taken from the man into a woman and to bring her to the man.”—Gen. 2:21, 22.
8 Jehovah God makes no mistakes. As an exact Scientist he commits no errors of judgment. He is no poor matchmaker. What, then, were the reactions of his human son to this introduction? God explained to Adam who this female creature was and how she had come into existence. Thus Adam knew she had no connection or relationship with the animals and birds that he had inspected and named previously. He appreciated that it was his heavenly Father’s will for him to accept this female creature in marriage. He could not and would not refuse one of his own flesh and bone. He was most highly pleased to accept her as his wife and to take her into his home to be his helper and his complementary companion. He was completely satisfied with her, much to his heavenly Father’s happiness. “Then the man [ish] said: “This is at last bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. This one will be called Woman [ish·shahʹ], because from man [ish] this one was taken.”—Gen. 2:23
 9. By what kind of family groups was Eden to be inhabited, and how did Jesus Christ confirm the inspired agreement between the first and second chapters of Genesis?
9 That is how the statement in Genesis 1:27 came about: “Male and female he created them.” Then, to state the theocratic rule that was to control there in the Paradise of Eden, God followed up Adam’s poetic outburst by saying, in Genesis 2:24: “That is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he must stick to his wife and they must become one flesh.” Over four thousand years later, Jesus Christ, God’s heavenly Son, confirmed the inspired genuineness of the first and the second chapter of Genesis. He demonstrated that they were not contradictory but were in agreement with each other by what he said to religious men who invalidated God’s Word by their traditions. Jesus quoted from both chapters and said: “Did you not read that he who created them at the beginning made them male and female and said: ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and will stick to his wife, and the two will be one flesh’? . . . Therefore, what God has yoked together let no man put apart.” (Matt. 19:4-6) Accordingly, the paradise of Eden was to have independent, though related, family groups.
THE FIRST COST OF MARRIAGE
10. (a) How does Paul explain the relationship between man and woman in their relative glory? (b) Why was perfect woman a good thing for perfect man?
10 In order to get a wife, it cost Adam one of his ribs. Because this first woman was created from the first man Adam, who was himself created in God’s image, according to God’s likeness, that woman became man’s glory. The inspired apostle Paul places this meaning upon the relationship of the man and the woman, saying: “He is God’s image and glory; but the woman is man’s glory. For man is not out of woman, but woman out of man; and, what is more, man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man.” (1 Cor. 11:7-9) Because the man was God’s earthly image and likeness, the woman wife had reason to show deep respect to her husband, man. In this way she could best reflect man’s glory, the glory of her husband. She would thus be a good thing for the man Adam. “Has one found a good wife? One has found a good thing and one gets good will from Jehovah,” says Proverbs 18:22. Woman was a good thing from the heavenly Father; for it is written: “Every good gift and every perfect present is from above, for it comes down from the Father of the celestial lights.”—Jas. 1:17.
11. Eden was the place of what kind of marriage, and why is marriage holy?
11 For this reason the paradise of Eden was the place of the perfect marriage, between the perfect man created in God’s image and likeness and the perfect woman who could faithfully reflect man’s perfect glory, to God’s praise. It being from the God of holiness, marriage is holy. It is not sinful in itself, but it can be sinned against.
12, 13. Why could God bless the married human couple, and why was marriage one of all the things that God saw to be good?
12 God the Creator purposed that marriage should be a blessing to man and woman, that they should live together in peace, both of them joining in fulfilling the perfect purpose of Jehovah God. That was why, after the man Adam accepted the woman as his wife, their Creator and heavenly Father could bless them.
13 His blessing and his will for them is stated in these words: “Male and female he created them. Further, God blessed them and God said to them: ‘Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is creeping upon the earth.’” (Gen. 1:27, 28) God could not bless a bad thing any more than he could create a sinful, improper thing. His creating of perfect woman was a good thing, because it was not good for the only man on earth to be alone in his kind; and by himself he could not reproduce his own kind. Likewise, the marriage of perfect man and woman in Paradise was a good thing, because it would serve the blessed purpose of the heavenly Father in comfortably filling earth with perfect human creatures and making the whole earth a paradise for the everlasting home of a perfect human race. The Bible account includes the perfect marriage in Paradise on the sixth creative “day” when it says: “After that God saw everything he had made and, look! it was very good. And there came to be evening and there came to be morning, a sixth day.”—Gen. 1:31.
14. Did God provide for divorce of this couple at any future time, and what was Adam’s attitude toward divorce in Eden?
14 That was the earliest form of marriage on earth, and the leading ethnologists of this twentieth century who are without faith are looking in vain for anything earlier or different. When Jehovah God married the perfect man and woman in Paradise, did God provide for divorce of this young couple at any future time? No; why should he? He set before them the prospect of everlasting union in peace and harmony, with a perfect, happy family of descendants filling a paradise embracing all the earth. On his happy day of marriage Adam had no thought of divorce enter his mind; he had no idea of such a thing. Why should he want to divorce from himself bone of his bones and flesh of his flesh, one who was “one flesh” with him, one whom God had yoked together with him? He as well as his wife was determined to fulfill the sweet purpose of this perfect marriage.
15. Of what was this human marriage an illustration and so what did the taking of a rib from Adam in order to make his wife illustrate?
15 Their indissoluble marriage was a human illustration of the greater marriage, that of their heavenly Father to his heavenly wifelike companion, namely, his invisible heavenly organization of holy spiritual sons. Long before creating man and woman God had created a heavenly organization of sons. From their invisible heavenly point of view they had observed the creation of the earth. Jehovah God referred to these organized sons when he said to God-fearing Job of the land of Uz: “Where did you happen to be when I founded the earth? . . . when the morning stars joyfully cried out together, and all the sons of God began shouting in applause?” (Job 38:4, 7) The fact is that Jehovah God was speaking to the chief one of this heavenly organization of sons when he said: “Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness.” (Gen. 1:26) This entire organization of angelic sons issued forth from Jehovah God in that they are his creation by means of his active force or spirit. This is what was illustrated in the taking of a rib from Adam’s side and building it up into a wife for Adam.
16. (a) How did God refer to his heavenly organization in Eden, and why? (b) Why was it compared to Sarah, in Isaiah 54:1-6?
16 This heavenly angelic organization God united to himself in indissoluble ties like those of marriage, so that He speaks of this universal heavenly organization of holy angels as his wife. He referred to this symbolic heavenly woman when he said to the great Serpent that induced sin in the paradise of Eden: “I shall put enmity between you and the woman and between your seed and her seed. He will bruise you in the head and you will bruise him in the heel.” (Gen. 3:15) After this promise the heavenly angelic organization was a long time in producing this promised Seed, the Christ or Messiah. Hence she was likened to long-barren Sarah, the wife of the patriarch Abraham, who at ninety years of age bore to Abraham their first and only son, Isaac. Speaking to his heavenly organization under the figure of Sarah, Jehovah God prophetically assured his “woman” or “wife” that she would in due time give birth to the promised Seed or Christ. God said: “‘Cry out joyfully, you barren woman that did not give birth! . . . For your grand Maker is your husbandly owner, Jehovah of armies being his name; and the Holy One of Israel is your Repurchaser. The God of the whole earth he will be called. For Jehovah called you as if you were a wife abandoned and hurt in spirit, and as a wife of the time of youth who was then rejected,’ your God has said.”—Isa. 54:1, 5, 6.
17. What is pictured in that Abraham never divorced Sarah, and for what is this a pattern?
17 Abraham never divorced his wife Sarah. She died, still his wife, thirty-seven years after the birth of their only son Isaac. (Gen. 23:1, 2) Jehovah God will never divorce his faithful heavenly organization, his “wife” or “woman” pictured on earth by Sarah. This is the right heavenly pattern for all human marriages, beginning with that of Adam and Eve in the earthly paradise.—Gal. 4:26-28.
18. Why, and how, would marriages in the garden of Eden have been monogamous through continued faithfulness?
18 Adam’s marriage was monogamous, for God gave him only one wife. Had Adam and Eve remained faithful in Paradise and had they brought forth perfect sons and daughters in that Edenic park, they would have followed the divine pattern. They would have given each of their sons only one of their daughters as a wife, each daughter a virgin. These marriages would have been indissoluble. All such married persons continuing faithful to their God, none would have suffered the penalty for sin, which is death. None would have died, and the marriage of none of them would have been dissolved by death. There would have been no marrying of widowers and widows.
19. What kind of experience would childbirth in Eden have been, and to what extent would it have proceeded?
19 All marriages would have been fruitful to the bringing forth of many children in perfection. Childbearing by the wives would have been a wonderful, joyful experience to be looked forward to with pleasure and no fear at all. All this would be with a view to realizing the divine purpose to have this earth filled with perfect human inhabitants, cultivating and taking care of the earth-wide paradise, their everlasting home. When this purpose had been accomplished, the perfect married couples would exercise perfect self-control and refrain from producing further children. According to God’s will and arrangement, their power to reproduce would also reach its limit and would cease functioning. In Paradise, marriage would have meant for the wedded couples no “tribulation in their flesh,” such as the apostle Paul predicted for married couples now.—1 Cor. 7:28.
20. Regardless of the state of human marriage and its dead offspring, what is still God’s purpose, and what does he say to the archenemy of this purpose?
20 God’s purpose of a paradise earth filled with perfect, godly men and women praising the great Creator will yet be achieved, in his appointed time, regardless of the present state of human marriage. Yes, regardless of the fact that the billions of the children of previous but now dissolved marriages lie dead in the dust or slime of the earth. The beautiful purpose regarding this earth that God revealed to Adam and Eve in Paradise is still his today and is not impossible for him. To the archenemy of this purpose He declares: “Jehovah of armies has sworn, saying: ‘Surely just as I have figured, so it must occur; and just as I have counseled, that is what will come true.’ . . . For Jehovah of armies himself has counseled, and who can break it up? And his hand is the one stretched out, and who can turn it back?”—Isa. 14:24-27.
21. How many marriages took place in Paradise, and what would have been spared the human family had all marriages occurred there?
21 Nevertheless, how much marital unhappiness and failure, how much human suffering, how much vilification of God’s holy name and word would have been spared the human family had all marriages of men and women taken place in Paradise, not just that local paradise over in the Middle East but a paradise expanded throughout the whole earth, subdued by obedient, righteous, perfect married couples and their holy children! God had opened up the possibility for all human marriages to take place in the garden of Eden enlarged. As it turned out, there was just one marriage in the earthly paradise of almost six thousand years ago.
22. (a) Why did that marriage in Paradise result in such domestic discord and unhappiness? (b) For what things had Eve been showing proper regard, and why properly so?
22 That blessed union of Adam and Eve in their perfection was begun in their perfect home under God’s blessing. Why did it result in such domestic discord and unhappiness? It was because the man and wife, although perfect, failed to meet their marriage responsibilities and hold fast to their proper relationship to each other when their first test came. A meddler in their private affairs, a marriage disturber and home wrecker, appeared, a person who framed the idea of turning all this divine arrangement to his own selfish advantage. This was an ambitious, self-seeking, rebellious spirit-son of God, who earned for himself the name of Satan the Devil. He did not discuss matters with the married couple together. No; he started talking by means of a serpent when Eve was to herself, away from her marriage head, her husband Adam. Quite properly Eve told the serpent what her husband had told her, that God forbade them to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and bad. She was following her husband’s word and example in not eating of that tree. Her husband stood in the relation of a prophet of Jehovah God to her, and was then a true prophet. So she was showing regard for God’s word as well as for the headship of her husband by whom God’s word was transmitted to her.
IGNORING HEADSHIP IN MARRIAGE
23. What did the serpent now say, and thus what did it accuse Adam and God of being?
23 Now, though, the serpent (or the one invisibly behind it) told Eve that her husband was a false prophet. It said slanderously that Jehovah God was a liar, not all-powerful, not able to enforce the penalty for the violation of his law. “At this the serpent said to the woman: ‘You [both you and your husband] positively will not die. For God knows that in the very day of your eating from [the forbidden tree] your eyes are bound to be opened and you are bound to be like God, knowing good and bad.’”—Gen. 3:4, 5.
24. What breach of her marriage relationship did Eve now commit, and how did she propose to use her supposed wisdom?
24 Eve felt drawn to the idea of being like her heavenly Father, and so she partook of the forbidden fruit. But what a way to become like her Father, by disobeying Him! In this she committed a breach of her theocratic marriage relationship; she did not consult her husband in his capacity as God’s prophet It became with her like with her descendants, the Israelites in their crisis long after: “They have rejected the very word of Jehovah, and what wisdom do they have?” (Jer. 8:9) Worse—now she would exercise her influence over her husband to follow the wisdom that she thought she had!
25. (a) How did Adam come to face his first marriage problem? (b) Could Adam divorce Eve, and what determined that matter?
25 Later Adam rejoined Eve. He did not face the same woman whom he had known before. He faced a woman who thought more highly of herself than she ought to think. He faced a transgressor, a woman disobedient to their God and Father. She offered him the forbidden fruit, in verification of her own sin. Then Adam faced his first marriage problem! God was not there to ask. Yet Adam knew that his wife had seriously sinned and had come under the death penalty announced by God: “In the day you eat from it you will positively die.” (Gen. 2:17) This penalty of death might dissolve Adam’s marriage to beautiful Eve. Adam had no authority to divorce Eve; she was bone of his bones and flesh of his flesh. She was “one flesh” with him, yoked to him by Jehovah God himself.
26, 27. (a) How could Adam have divorced himself from Eve’s transgression, and what responsibility would he thus have exercised? (b) How was the husband’s headship with its power set forth in Israel’s law, and how could Adam have continued to be God’s prophet?
26 However, Adam could have divorced himself from Eve’s transgression then and there by refusing the forbidden fruit at her hand, under her suasion. True, their God and heavenly Father had said: “That is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he must stick to his wife.” But he must not leave his God. Whom did Adam love more, his wife or his God and Life-giver? In order to take the right action toward his wife, Adam did not need to wait till he next “heard the voice of Jehovah God walking in the garden [Paradise] about the breezy part of the day.” He could show theocratic headship in the marriage bond, like an Israelite husband in God’s chosen nation much later. The Israelites came into relationship with God by a formal covenant through the mediator Moses the prophet, whereas Adam and Eve were in direct relationship with God as his own perfect children, needing no mediator.—Gen. 2:24; 3:8.
27 In the case of an Israelite woman God’s law through Moses stated: “In the case of the vow of a widow or a divorced woman, everything that she [without a husband as her head] has bound upon her soul will stand against her. However, if it is in the house of her husband that she has vowed or has bound an abstinence vow upon her soul by an oath, and her husband has heard it and has kept silent toward her, he has not forbidden her and all her vows must stand or any abstinence vow that she has bound upon her soul should stand. But if her husband has totally annulled them on the day of his hearing any expression of her lips as her vows or as an abstinence vow of her soul, they will not stand. Her husband has annulled them and Jehovah will forgive her. Any vow or any oath of an abstinence vow to afflict the soul, her husband should establish it or her husband should annul it. And if he should totally annul them after his hearing them, then he must answer for her iniquity.” (Num. 30:9-13, 15) Had Adam disavowed his wife’s transgression by rejecting the fruit at her lovely hand, he would have continued as Jehovah’s prophet to the human family. He would not have had to feel a guilty conscience and to hide with a loin covering when Jehovah God approached them about the breezy part of the day.
28. Why could Adam not eat with good conscience the fruit offered to him by Eve?
28 In this matter it was not an instance of a wife’s preparing a meal and her husband’s eating what was set before him without asking any questions for conscience’ sake. In Adam conscience began working, because he knew what fruit he was being urged to eat—the fruit forbidden by their God and Maker, the Owner of Paradise.
29. (a) How did Adam fall down respecting his headship? (b) How does Paul show who was the more responsible one in the transgression?
29 It was a time for Adam to exercise theocratic headship in the marriage union. Instead, he let himself be ensnared because of fear at the thought of losing his wife when God enforced the penalty of death. He let his wife teach him disobedience to the supreme law of God. He followed the lead of his sinful wife misled by the crafty, false argument of the serpent. He confirmed her sin by his own eating of the forbidden fruit. He did not live up to his marriage obligation as head of the house for the protection of the family with which he was authorized to fill the earth. Consequently, of the now sinful married couple he, as head of the house, was most responsible. In harmony with this, the apostle Paul wrote: “I do not permit a woman to teach, or to exercise authority over a man, but to be in silence. For Adam was formed first, then Eve. Also Adam was not deceived, but the woman was thoroughly deceived and came to be in transgression.”—1 Tim. 2:12-14.
30. Upon whom did God lay the chief responsibility for ruining this marriage, and with what penalty?
30 When God rendered judgment upon the sinful couple, he laid the chief responsibility for the ruining of this marriage in Paradise upon the invisible, spiritual rebel behind the serpent. God said to the serpent: “You have done this thing.” Then God proceeded to sentence Satan the Devil to future destruction under the heel of the Seed of God’s heavenly “woman” or “wife.”—Gen. 3:14, 15.
31, 32. (a) How is it shown upon whom God laid the heavier responsibility as regards the married couple? (b) How had Eve not shone as “man’s glory,” and what stated penalty did God lay upon her?
31 However, as regards the human married couple, Jehovah God put the heavier responsibility upon the husband. It was the husband, Adam, whom God sentenced to eat the fruit of cursed ground outside Paradise until he died and decomposed to dust of the cursed ground.
32 God’s judgment upon the wife, Eve, merely foretold her pains of childbearing and also her subordination. She had not shone as “man’s glory,” her perfect husband’s glory. She had disregarded the headship of her prophet husband and had ignored his warning from God and had taken the lead into sin under the false inducement of a stranger, a slanderer both of God and of His prophet. Hence now she must be made to know the headship of her husband. In His judgment God said to the wife, Eve: “And your longing will be for your husband, and he will dominate you.” (Gen. 3:16) From then on she endured the domination of a deliberately sinful, imperfect husband who was out of relationship with God, until she died, that is, if Adam overlived her by his dying first when 930 years old.
33. By God’s now taking what measures did married life in Paradise come to an end, and all for what cause?
33 So married life in that peaceful Paradise of Eden came to an end. It was all because of sin, which is the breaking of the sacred law of God. Now God did not want any further eating of the Edenic fruitage to which the now sinful Adam and Eve were not entitled and of which Adam, possibly under the influence and suggestion of his wife, might seek to eat. “And Jehovah God went on to say: ‘Here the man has become like one of us in knowing good and bad, and now in order that he may not put his hand out and actually take fruit also of the tree of life and eat and live forever,—’ With that Jehovah God put him out of the garden [Paradise] of Eden to cultivate the ground from which he had been taken. And so he drove the man out and posted at the east of the garden of Eden the cherubs and the flaming blade of a sword that was turning itself continually to guard the way to the tree of life.”—Gen. 3:22-24.
34. How will marriage in Paradise shortly be realized, and what privilege will married couples then have toward the Originator of marriage?
34 Married life in Paradise ceased thus in such a calamitous way because husband and wife did not maintain the God-ordained relationship between each other. Yet the ideal of marriage in Paradise will shortly be marvelously enjoyed to the praise of the great Originator of marriage. No, this will not be by lovers’ dying and going to heaven to be with each other in celestial wedlock. It will be by surviving the war of Armageddon not far ahead. After that universal war will have destroyed all those who are today ruining the earth, God’s kingdom by means of Christ the Seed of His “woman” will restore Paradise to this earth and extend it all around the planet. Faithful surviving couples will continue their married life after Armageddon directly into the restored Paradise. Single survivors will enjoy the privilege of entering into married life with theocratic partners and will have the happiness of raising children under Paradise conditions, with Satan the Devil bound. All these will have the privilege of vindicating Jehovah God by proving that married life in Paradise can be a blessed success.

