Questions From Readers
● Please answer my question in The Watchtower.—Unsigned.
Among the many readers of The Watchtower who write in for information are some who ask personal questions on which they want a Scriptural answer, but who give no name or address. Others give an address but no name. For the benefit of all, we would like to set out here the policy of the Watch Tower Society in answering questions received.
The Society is glad to be of help to all who sincerely seek answers to questions that call for a Bible answer. First of all, a personal answer is sent by mail to the one who inquires. Then those questions that are of sufficient interest and importance are printed in this Questions from Readers section of The Watchtower. Questions of a personal nature are of concern only to the ones involved, so these are not published. In other cases the questions asked are ones that have been answered in recent issues of The Watchtower; of course, these will not be printed again right away, but a personal answer will be sent and, in many cases, reference will be made to the Watch Tower publications that discussed the point in question.
However, it is the policy of the Watch Tower Society never to answer correspondence that does not bear the name of the inquirer. So let all that wish to avail themselves of the help that the publishers of The Watchtower give in providing Scriptural answers to questions of a personal or a doctrinal nature give their name (not merely initials) and address so that they may be certain to get direct and personal attention.
● Will there be earthquakes in the new world?—D.S., U.S.A.
Today it is held that the majority of earthquakes are caused by slipping of large sections of the earth along faults or cracks in the earth, while others are due to volcanic activity or the collapse of limestone caverns. Among the theories advanced to account for the slippage of faults is the strain caused by contraction due to the cooling of the earth. In view of this natural cause we are not to think that either Jehovah God or Satan the Devil causes the earthquakes of today.
Earthquakes are repeatedly mentioned in the Scriptures. It is apparent that some of these were caused by Jehovah, or timed by him. Among these can be numbered the one that swallowed up the households of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, and the ones that occurred at the time of Jesus’ death and resurrection.—Num. 16:31-33; Matt. 27:51-54; 28:2.
Jesus, who shared in creation, doubtless foresaw the settling of the earth’s crust and the build-up of pressures within that would seek escape. As a Master Worker he may well have known that this time of the end would be the time for an increase in such disturbances.—Matt. 24:7.
However, there is no reason to fear the possibility of such an occurrence in the new world. Jesus Christ, Jehovah’s Master Worker and the one of whom it is said that “all things came into existence through him,” has been enthroned in heaven as the immortal king of the new world. (Prov. 8:30; John 1:3) With loving concern, he will see that no harm comes to his new world subjects from the forces of nature, even as he once calmed the turbulent waters of the Sea of Galilee when a boat was “close to being swamped.” (Mark 4:37-41) Knowing well the structure of the earth, he may see to it that internal pressures find their outlet in unpopulated parts of the earth or under the ocean so as to cause no harm to man, or he may make it possible for men to move out of such areas before any disturbance occurs. Of this we can be certain: no one will be harmed by any such phenomena in the new world. And, no doubt, when the entire earth has been made a paradise, earthquakes will cease.

