Announcements
ASSEMBLIES FOR 1964
For the benefit of all of Jehovah’s witnesses and others who are interested in God’s Word, the Watch Tower Society is pleased to announce that arrangements are being made for a series of assemblies to be held from June through August of this year. Since there will be a large number of assemblies, one should be relatively close to your home. Make plans now to be in attendance.
Each assembly will provide a most beneficial four-day program, beginning Thursday afternoon and concluding Sunday at about 6 p.m. Be sure that you are on hand all four days. Arrangements for immersion are being made at each assembly, either Friday or Saturday, depending on when local facilities are available. In due time information regarding rooming accommodations, assembly sites and other matters will be provided. But the thing to do now is to study the list of assembly cities, decide which one you will attend, and plan your vacation dates to include all four days of the assembly.
UNITED STATES
JUNE 25-28: Atlantic City, N.J.
JULY 2-5: Cicero, Ill.: Little Rock, Ark. (tentative)
JULY 9-12: Corvallis, Oreg.; Jacksonville, Fla.; Owensboro, Ky.; Richmond, Va.
JULY 16-19: El Paso, Tex.; Indianapolis, Ind.; Long Beach, Calif.; Pocatello, Idaho; St. Cloud, Minn.; Syracuse, N.Y.
JULY 23-26: Austin, Tex.; Bismarck, N. Dak.; Charleston, S.C.; Davenport, Iowa; Detroit, Mich.; San Bernardino, Calif.; San Jose, Calif.; West Springfield, Mass.
JULY 30—AUGUST 2: Columbus, Ohio; Topeka, Kans.; Ventura, Calif.
AUGUST 6-9: Brewer, Maine; Grand Rapids, Mich.; Greenville, S.C.; Santa Rosa, Calif.
AUGUST 13-16: Duluth, Minn.; Great Falls, Mont.; Montgomery, Ala.; Tacoma, Wash.
AUGUST 20-23: Yuba City, Calif.
AUGUST 27-30: Cheyenne, Wyo.
Dates not set: Wilkes-Barre, Pa. (tentative)
SPANISH ASSEMBLIES
JULY 23-26: Austin, Tex.; San Bernardino, Calif.
AUGUST 20-23: Philadelphia, Pa.
CANADA
JULY 2-5: Alberni, B.C.; Camrose, Alta.; Portage La Prairie, Man.; Val d’Or, Que. (French)
JULY 9-12: Dawson Creek, B.C. (tentative); St. Catharines, Ont.
JULY 16-19: Cloverdale, B.C.; Cornwall, Ont.; Ft. William, Ont.; Swift Current, Sask.
JULY 23-26: Granby, Que. (French) (tentative); Guelph, Ont.; New Glasgow, N.S.; Selkirk, Man. (tentative)
JULY 30—AUGUST 2: Chilliwack, B.C.; Lindsay, Ont.; North Battleford, Sask.
AUGUST 6-9: Bridgewater, N.S.; Chatham, Ont.; Trail, B.C.; Yorkton, Sask.
AUGUST 13-16: Prince George, B.C.; Red Deer, Alta.; Trenton, Ont.
AUGUST 20-23: Fredericton, N.B.
AUGUST 27-30: New Westminster, B.C.
FIELD MINISTRY
Throughout March Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to conduct themselves in a manner worthy of the good news, not only by leading clean moral lives, but also by sharing the Kingdom message with all they meet. They will be offering to all persons a year’s subscription for the outstanding Bible-study aid, The Watchtower, together with three Bible booklets, on a contribution of $1.
MEMORIAL
“Keep doing this in remembrance of me,” said Jesus Christ as he instituted a simple observance to memorialize his death. This year the date to observe this memorial falls on Saturday, March 28, after 6 p.m., Standard Time. All of Jehovah’s witnesses, whether their hope is to be joint heirs with Christ in the heavenly kingdom or to be earthly heirs of the new system of things, will assemble at their local places of meeting on this occasion. After an appropriate discourse, the Memorial emblems, the bread and the wine, will be passed, separately, after Jehovah’s blessing has been asked upon each. All persons of goodwill toward God are invited and encouraged to attend, and an invitation is extended to all who sincerely desire to serve Jehovah God to avail themselves of provisions made in the congregation to learn how to have a share in disseminating the good news of God’s kingdom to others. If you do not know where the nearest Kingdom Hall is located, write the publishers of this magazine for information.
COULD YOU LIVE WITHOUT YOUR RELIGION?
Do you take your religion seriously? Is it an active part of your life? Do you depend upon it to sustain you? Then note this carefully: The Bible foretells the complete downfall of the religious systems of both Christendom and the pagan world! Furthermore, prophecy warns of the desolate condition of those who have relied upon them. Why would God allow this? What will the outcome be? What must you do to have God’s protection at that time? You need the 704-page book “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules! Send only 75c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 26: Faithful Women Ministers—A Blessing to the New World Society. Page 172.
May 3: The Privileges of the Christian Woman. Page 178.

