R95 : page 1 

VOL. I. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY, 1880. 

NO. 11. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R95 : page 1 



"TO EVERY SEED HIS OWN BODY." 

Paul in 1 Cor. 15 has given us the clearest and most explicit 
account of the resurrection to be found anywhere in scripture. 
He commences with Jesus and His resurrection and shows that 
we have many and reliable witnesses "that Christ died for our 
sins, and that he was buried and was raised the third day, (after 
his death,) &c. He thus proves Christ's resurrection as an 
evidence of the power of God to raise the dead in general, for 
remember this was the general proclamation of the Apostles— 
viz: "They preached through Jesus, (the value of his death as our 
redemption price) the resurrection of the dead;" With close 
argument Paul reaches the conclusions of verses 20-22. 
(Diaglott,) -"But now Christ has been raised from the dead a 
first fruit of those having fallen asleep. For since through a man 
there is death, through a man also there is a resurrection of the 
dead; for as by Adam all die so by the Anointed, also, will all be 
restored to LIFE. " Not merely to the measure of life now 
possessed by men, but gradually to the "perfect" human life as 
illustrated in first Adam before sin and death began their work. 

"But each one in his own rank, Christ, a first fruit. " God has 
time and order for everything, and He has wisely arranged for 
various ranks or orders or companies in the resurrection. All are 
to be raised, but each in his own rank: Christ first, afterward, 
they who are Christ's in (or during) his presence. Only these two 
are specifically mentioned, and yet that the others will be raised 
afterward in their own orders is certain, since it is positively 
stated, (vs. 22,) "All will be restored to life." This work of 
restoring progresses during the millennial age which is called 
"the times of restitution of all things," and when the work of 
restoring to life and all that was lost through sin and death is 
complete, then the end of that age will come. "Then cometh the 
end when he shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the 
Father," Jesus, during that age having put down all enemies. 
"Even death, the last enemy will be rendered powerless." 

This concludes Paul's argument, but he pauses to answer some 
questions, (vs. 35)— "But some one will say: How are the dead 
raised up, and in what body do they come?" Will it be the same 
particles of matter that once constituted their bodies? Hear 
Paul's answer: You have illustrations before you in nature; the 
grain you plant never comes up again; it dies and wastes away, 
but God gives another grain just like it, of the same kind and 
likeness. If you sow wheat you will get wheat; if you sow tares 
you will get tares. God will give "to every seed his own body." 
Now apply this same principle to the resurrection. What body 
you will have depends upon what seed you are of when buried. 
If you are "of the earth, earthy," when you die you will be raised 
up to the standard of the head of your kind -the perfect natural 
man. But if with Jesus you have given up the flesh life, crucified 
the flesh, and through him become a new creature, a "partaker of 



the Divine Nature, you are no longer of the natural seed but of 
the Spiritual." "THE seed of Abraham," (Gal. 3:29.) And if in 
the resurrection God gives "to every seed his own body," then 
all who are of the spiritual seed will get a spiritual body, just as 
surely as the natural seed will have its own body. "Of what kind 
the earthy one, (Adam) such, also, (will be) the earthy ones, 
(when raised) and of what kind the heavenly one, (Christ,) such, 
also, (will be) the heavenly ones" (when raised). ["Diaglott."] 
"There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body," and 
which you will have, depends on which seed you are of when 
buried. 

Vs. 39:— This need not seem strange to you, for though you have 
never seen a spiritual body, yet, you can see this to be 
reasonable, and in harmony with God's dealings generally as 
you see them every day— even of fleshly bodies, there are 
different sorts and grades-the fowl, fish, beasts, &c, different, 
yet all flesh; so God has diversities, and you have no reason to 
dispute, when I, Paul, say that there is a grander body than any 
of these, a spiritual or heavenly. 

Vs. 40:-Man, when restored to the glory of the earthly again, 
brought back to perfection, though he will then be a truly 
glorious being, will yet be far different from a heavenly body. 
Both will have glory, but the glory of the heavenly is one thing, 
and the glory of the earthly is quite another thing, just as the 
glory of a star is beautiful, yet different and less than the glory 
of the sun. When our change takes place, we shall shine forth as 
the sun in the kingdom of our Father. (Matt. 13:43.) 

While it doth not yet appear what we shall be, for we have never 
seen the glory of the heavenly, yet Paul gives us certain general 
characteristics of those who will have part in THE resurrection, 
(the chief or first.) The Greek language has a peculiar way of 
expressing emphasis by the use of the article the. It is used here 
by Paul to distinguish between the resurrection of the "little 
flock," the "blessed and holy" who have part in the "first 
resurrection," and the resurrection of the natural seed. He says, 
(vs. 42-43. Diaglott.)- "Thus is THE resurrection of THE dead: 
It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in 
dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised 
in power; it is sown an animal body, it is raised a spiritual 
body." 

Thus closes Paul's argument regarding the resurrection; but lest 
some should be perplexed and wonder how any could become 
spiritual bodies, if they should be alive when their Lord comes, 
he explains: "Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all 
sleep, but we must all be changed. " 

The overcomers-church of the first born-are represented as 
becoming "dead to sin," "crucifying the flesh," even during the 
present life, and yet though dead to sin, alive toward God 



through Jesus Christ. Here, the figure used represents the body 
dead, but the spirit (will or mind,) alive. Thus every overcoming 
Christian has a germ of spiritual life in a dead body. "I live, yet 
not I, (I am dead,) but Christ liveth in me. " If such an one loses 
the present life, is it his death? No, that took place before. Was it 
the death of the spiritual life within? No, it cannot die. "He that 
believeth on (into) the Son, hath everlasting life. " Such only 
"sleep," but we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in 
a moment," (vs. 53,) and instead of living in this dead body, fast 
decaying away, we shall have it changed, for this corruptible 
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on 
immortality. " Thus our death takes place before we enter the 
grave, and our life begins and grows for a while before we get 
the body which God has designed for us, "like unto Christ's 
glorious body. " 

The succeeding verses, as before considered, show the grand 
work upon which we enter when our seed gets its own body: 
and, the prophecies which will then begin to be fulfilled. 



R95 : page 1 

THE SIN OFFERING. 
Lev. 9. 

As we found in Lev. 16, a detailed account of the work of 
atonement, (March No.) so in chapter 9, we have a brief outline 
of the same which shows some of the features of the work quite 
prominently. Chap. 8, closes with an account of the seven days 
(or complete) consecration of the priests, (Feb. No.) and this 
ninth chapter pictures the work which follows the consecration 
of each individual priest. It began with the Head, and continues 
until it is true of every member of "the body"-i.e. after complete 
consecration comes sacrifice. 

In this scene the entire work of the Gospel Age (the sacrificing,) 
as well as the beginning of the work of 

R95 : page 2 

the Millennial Age (the showing of God's glory) are represented 
as though accomplished in a few hours. 

Let us now consider the sin offering, omitting the Peace and 
Burnt offerings. Vs's. 2 and 3. Moses said unto Aaron: "Take 
thee a calf for a sin offering," and unto the children of Israel, 
"Take ye a kid of the goats for a sin offering." "And Moses said, 
this is the thing which the Lord commanded that ye should do 
and the glory of the Lord shall appear unto you." Ver. 6. That is 
this work of sacrificing, &c, must be done before God can 
reveal himself to you in glory. The sinless pair in Eden could 
and did commune with God, but sin entered and God broke off 



the intercourse of the sinner, and as long as man is thus a sinner 
it cannot be restored, consequently it became necessary to 
introduce the Gospel Age as a "Day of Atonement"-a time 
during which Jesus Christ, by death, is made a propitiation- 
mercy seat-for our sins, and through the death of His thus 
ransomed body (the church), he is a propitiation "also for the 
sins of the whole world. " 

When the sacrifice of Head and body is complete, God will 
recognize the whole world as justified freely, as he now 
recognizes the church, and then as at first, "The glory of the 
Lord shall be revealed and all flesh shall see it together. " When 
the sacrifice for the world is ended, the results of harmony with 
God will flow to them. Just as when the sacrifice of the "head" 
for the church was complete, the Holy Spirit was given to all the 
church at Pentecost, so when the work of "atonement," sacrifice 
for the world is over, they will be similarly blessed, 

R96 : page 2 

as it is written- "After those days I will pour out my spirit upon 
all flesh. Pentecost was merely a first fruit of the Spirit, the 
remainder will be like it, but more general. Pentecost was the 
early rain, but God has promised- "I will give you the early and 
the latter rain. 

The first sacrifice was Aaron's- typical of how Christ's must 
precede all others and his blood must consecrate the altar. Aaron 
therefore went unto the altar and slew the calf of the sin offering 
which was for himself, (Ver. 8.) i.e., which represented himself. 
Our high priest did not offer a calf for himself, but actually 
"offered up himself." Lev. 16. (March No.) showed us that this 
offering of himself was as a sin-offering for himself— the body, 
the little flock— and his house— the Levites, the great company. 
"And the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him and he 
dipped his finger in the blood and put it upon the horns of the 
altar and poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar." (Vs. 
9.) The horns are typical of the power of the altar; their being 
covered with blood, seems to say that none can fully appreciate 
the power of this altar of sacrifice, without first recognizing the 
blood. Thus seen, all the power of the altar was attained only 
through the blood. The horns of the altar reached in every 
direction— north, south, east and west; so God's power to all men 
is unlimited, but he chooses to cover all the power with the 
blood of atonement. And if we understand the type aright, it 
teaches that God's power toward all men to save them, is 
exercised only through the sacrificed life— the death of Jesus 
Christ our Lord, and "I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, 
(that Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man,) for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that 
believeth. " 



The blood poured at the bottom of the altar, shows that there 
was an abundance; it covered the altar and plenty to spare. The 
action of the Priests in bringing the blood, seems to show that all 
who will be priests, will, as an individual matter, recognize the 
value of the blood of Jesus, and personally realize the power of 
God in Christ, (the horns under the blood.) 

The fat and kidneys were not offered upon the altar, probably 
representing the inward and outward affections of Jesus. These 
affections were not things condemned in man, and consequently, 
were not given as a part of the ransom The gall was added, 
possibly, representing some of his bitter experiences in 
connection with the sacrifice; these, God accepts as a Burnt 
offering, or sweet savor, but the flesh and blood, (man's fleshly 
nature and life,) being forfeited by sin, Jesus gave his natural life 
and fleshly nature, upon which sin had no claim, with it to 
redeem from the condemnation of sin, man's natural body and 
life, 

These things, the fleshly nature represented by the flesh and 
hide- were burnt, destroyed— without the camp. All mankind 
was under condemnation of complete destruction of life and 
body, when Jesus came forward and gave his life for ours, and 
his body for ours-the Father giving him another life and body, 
viz: spiritual, when he raised him up. And now we preach 
through His name, that because He thus gave himself a ransom, 
man will be released from the condition of death, and that in 
God's "due time," there will be "a resurrection, both of the just 
and unjust"-and that the merit of his obedience, "even unto 
death," is as far-reaching in its effects upon the human family 
for its release from death, (and all that word means,) and the 
restoration of life, as it was before sin and death were known. 
As far-reaching, we believe, as was the disobedience of Adam to 
destroy that life and produce this death. And as through the 
disobedience of one man, many were constituted sinners, so, 
also, through the obedience of one, many will be constituted 
righteous, i.e., justified. Rom. 5:19, "Diaglott." 

Vs. 15: "And he brought the peoples' offering and took the goat 
which was the sin-offering for the people, and slew it and 
offered it for sin as the first," (the calf.) This goat of the sin 
offering, we think, represents the church, which, by faith and 
obedience even unto the crucifying of the fleshly nature, 
becomes "His body." (See March No.) Vs. 22: "And Aaron 
lifted up his hand toward the people and blessed them, and came 
down from offering of the sin-offering, &c." "And Moses and 
Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation and came out 
and blessed the people. " Jesus, our head, entered the holy of 
holies, 1800 years ago as "our fore-runner," and this word fore- 
runner, indicates that we are to follow him there; that he went in 
first with the blood (evidence of death,) of the bullock and 
sprinkled, then came out and took in the blood of the goat, 



representing our entrance with him, we saw illustrated in Lev. 
16, but the picture we now consider, shows not the separate 
entering of the head and body, but their entrance when united- 
made one. Aaron stands at the altar and slays both bullock and 
goat, and when all sacrifices are ended, (the close of the gospel 
age,) he goes into the tabernacle representing head and body 
complete. When our sacrifices are ended, and head and body are 
complete, we shall come into the presence of our Father, and the 
work being accepted of him, He authorizes us to go forth and 
bless the people- "In thy seed shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed, which seed is Christ, and if ye be Christ's, then are 
ye Abraham's seed and heirs"— of this promise to bless all the 
people. 

Here it is that the Aaronic priesthood ends and the Melchizedek 
priesthood begins, the one typical of our career of suffering and 
death, the other represents our exalted condition as, with Jesus, 
"a King upon His throne," blessing all people. "And the glory of 
the Lord appeared unto all the people. " ("The glory of the Lord 
shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together.") Vs. 24: 
"And there came a fire out from before the Lord and consumed 
upon the altar the burnt offering and the fat, which, when all the 
people saw, they shouted and fell on their faces." A fire from the 
Lord indicates his acceptance and perfect satisfaction with all 
the work of atonement as done, and no wonder all the people 
prostrated themselves before God. We believe it will be so in the 
next age when the world can- 
see what God hath wrought, 
Then they'll praise him, praise him as they ought: 
Looking back we'll praise the way, 
Jesus led us, led us day by day. 

And we will rejoice that we were accounted worthy to suffer 
with him and to be glorified together. 

Moses directs in all the affairs of this type; probably 
representing "the law" which indicates to us, God's will. What in 
the other picture was indicated by the taking in of the blood, is 
here represented by Moses' going in with Aaron. So to speak, 
"The Law" goes into the presence of God with us, declaring: 
The sacrifice is complete, the price paid, the full ransom of the 
world. "The righteousness of The Law is fulfilled in us." It 
would seem further to teach that when the church leaves the 
world and enters the presence of God, (the holy of holies,) law 
and order leave also, which would of necessity produce anarchy 
and confusion, and this part of the type seems to agree with the 
statements elsewhere made of the "time of trouble" and reign of 
terror which will be upon the earth after the Bride leaves it. 
When "the salt of the earth" is removed, the mass become 
greatly corrupted, but when the glory of the Lord shall be 
revealed at the close of this day of wrath— when "He shall 
appear," and "we also appear with him," the blessing will 



commence and with us comes law and order, (as typified by 
Moses, appearing again,) and assists in blessing the people. 

But while thinking of our glorious work of blessing the world in 
the future, we should not forget, nor neglect our present 
privileges in this direction, for remember, Aaron blessed the 
people before he went into the holy place: So all who, as 
members of that body, have crucified themselves, should seek, 
so far as they have ability, to "Do good unto all men, especially 
unto those of the household of faith." Let us bless now, as in the 
future, temporally and spiritually, as we may be able. We can all 
certainly bless some, spiritually. May not "the deep things of 
God" be equally as blessed to others as to you? Be not selfish, 
be not negligent, be not slothful servants. Freely we have 
received, freely let us give. 



R97 : page 2 



WRITE AT ONCE. 



The editor purposes making a trip east from Pittsburgh as far as 
Lynn, Mass. It will afford him pleasure to stop off at different 
points not too far from the main roads and meet with the "two's 
and three's" in a private way; or if deemed advisable, would be 
glad to address public meetings on "Things pertaining to the 
kingdom of God. " 

Our readers are much scattered, some places 2 and 3, and on up 
to 50. Many places they are totally unacquainted with each 
other, and thus lose the sympathy and comfort which our Father 
designed should come to them by "The assembling of 
themselves together as the manner of some is." It is His design 
that we should "Edify one another," and build each other up in 
the most holy faith. The proposed meetings we would hope, 
might conduce to personal acquaintance. 

Those desirous, should address, at once, so that we can lay out 
our route, &c. [No charge made nor money taken.] 



R96 : page 3 



THE TIME OF TROUBLE. 

The time of trouble nears,-"it hasteth greatly;" 
Even now its ripples span the world-wide sea; 
Oh! when its waves are swollen to mountains stately, 
Will the resistless billows sweep o'er me? 

Or, terror-stricken, will I then discover 
A glorious Presence 'twixt the sea and sky, 
Treading the waters!— Earth's Imperial lover, 
His words of cheer,-"Be not afraid,-'tis I!" 

Will a hand, strong, yet tender as mother's, 
From the dark surging billows lift me out? 
With soft rebuke, more loving than a brother's; 
"Of little faith! O, wherefore didst thou doubt?" 

Montrose, Pa. 
A. L. F. 



R97 : page 3 



CHRIST AS A SOWER. 



In the thirteenth chapter of Matthew, are given two parables, in 
which the Son of Man is represented as a sower. The first of 
them is usually called the parable of the sower, and the second 
the parable of the tares and the wheat. These parables are related 
to each other, but should not be confounded. We may learn 
something by comparing them; and in the application of these 
two parables, we have the advantage of the fact that the Savior 
explained them both. We must regard it as a fundamental 
principle in the interpretation of parables, that when the Lord 
explained them they need no further explanation. It is probably 
true that no two parables teach, or illustrate, exactly the same 
thing. So, after having given the parable of the sower, and 
explained it, when the word says, "Another parable put He forth 
unto them" (Ver. 24.), we may safely conclude He had 
something more to communicate— that some additional truths 
were to be illustrated. 

Christ is the sower in both parables. It is stated so of the second 
parable (Ver. 37.), but we learn that He is the sower of the first 
parable by the nature of the seed sown. We think all admit this. 

In the first parable the seed sown is the "word of the kingdom" 
(Ver. 19), and in the second "the good seed are the children of 
the kingdom." (Verse 38.) In the first it is truth, and in the 
second, persons. Some one has called this distinction a foolish 
one, and said that the Son of Man does not sow persons. This 
only proves that such an one does not understand the parables. 
Whoever calls the distinction foolish charges the Savior with 



folly, for it is His own explanation. The reasonableness of the 
distinction between the two kinds of seed will be seen when we 
consider the distinction in the fields. 

In the first parable the field of operation is the heart of each 
individual, who hears the word of the kingdom (Ver. 19.), and in 
the second "The field is the world." (Ver. 38.) 

We, be it remembered, are not responsible for this distinction- 
these are the Lord's own words. The word "world," above 
quoted, is not aion, as in the next verse— "The harvest is the end 
of the world" (aion-age), but it is translated from the Greek 
word, "kosmos. " This word is used when the general order of 
things is meant, as when the "world that then was" (before the 
flood) is referred to. (2 Pet. 3:6.) It is also used when the people 
are meant, as "God so loved the world;" "Behold the Lamb of 
God, that taketh away the sin of the world;" and all similar 
passages. There is another shade of meaning in the word, as 
used in several places, as: "God sent not His Son into the world 
to condemn the world." John 3:17. "Christ Jesus came into the 
world to save sinners. (1 Tim. 1:15.) "Love not the world, 
neither the things that are in the world." 1 John 2:15. Any 
thoughtful reader will readily see the difference between the 
world as a place, as used in these several scriptures, and the 
world of mankind who live in that place, and whom Jesus came 
to save. 

"The field is the world"-that is, Christ planted His church in 
this world to accomplish a certain work which Christ came into 
this world to do, or to set in motion. 

Any one might see that there is a clear difference between 
sowing the word of the kingdom in the hearts of men, which 
work began where the personal ministry of Christ began, and the 
planting of the church in the world, which did not take place 
until the day of Pentecost. As the church of Christ was to be 
composed of converted sinners, it was necessary that the word 
of the kingdom, as a converting power, should be preached, for 
a time, before the founding of the church. For proof that the 
word, understood, is the converting power, see verse 15. The 
sowing of the word, in parables, and the explaining of them to 
some, went on during the ministry of Jesus, but He spoke of the 
building of the church as future. "On this rock I will build my 
church." Matt. 16:18. The foundation was not even laid until 
Christ was risen-a spiritual being. The building is a spiritual 
house, and is built on a spiritual rock. The true church has 
always recognized and worshiped a living spiritual Christ-there 
is no other. Keeping in mind the above facts, we will see that the 
parable of the sower must have begun to be fulfilled three years 
and a half sooner than that of the tares and wheat, and we may 
see why it is never said, "The kingdom of heaven is likened to a 
sower." It is simply, "Behold, a sower went forth to sow." In the 
other parables it is "the kingdom of heaven" that is represented. 



The reason is obvious: there was no church of Christ, or 
kingdom of heaven, until the day of Pentecost. The work of 
sowing the word was to prepare for the establishment of the 
church in its due time, and the "holding forth the word of life, " 
or preaching to the unconverted, has been carried on through the 
whole dispensation, for the purpose of converting them, and so 
preparing them for a place in the kingdom. The relation and 
harmony between the two parables can be seen far more clearly 
by preserving the distinctions made by the Savior, between the 
two kinds of seed, and the two fields, than by confounding them. 
The first parable prepares the way for the other. The first deals 
with the individual; the second, with the church collectively. 
The first parable has only one kind of seed-the world. Three out 
of four classes of hearers brought forth no fruit. In the one class 
that received the word in good ground ("an honest and good 
heart;" Luke 8:15), there is a variety in the amount of fruit- 
"Some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, and some thirty fold." 
Ver. 8. All who bear fruit in any degree, are evidently "the 
children of the kingdom"- the branches, weak or strong, of the 
living Vine, for "Every branch in me [says Jesus] that beareth 
not fruit, He taketh away." John 15:2. 

In the parable of the tares and wheat there are two sowers and 
two kinds of seed, both explained by the Savior. The Son of 
Man sowed the good seed— "the children of the kingdom," as we 
have seen, and the devil sowed the tares- "the children of the 
wicked one. " There is a clear contrast between the "children of 
God" and "the children of the devil." There is, as we have 
admitted, a variety among the children of God— some are babes, 
and some are more fully developed, but the Bible recognizes no 
such absurdity as that the children of the devil are at the same 
time Christians, and it is passing strange that any Christian ever 
should have invented or promulgated such an idea. 

The apostle John speaks of the variety among Christians-little 
children, young men and fathers- (1 John 2:12-13), but makes a 
contrast between the Church and the world. "We know that we 
are of God, but the whole world lieth in wickedness," (literally 
"in the Wicked One"). 1 John 5:19. "In this the children of God 
are manifested, and the children of the devil: whosoever doeth 
not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his 
brother." 1 John 3:10. 

It is true that Paul recognizes the fact that Christians have the 
old man-the flesh-to contend with, and hence the warfare 
spoken of in Rom. 7. But Paul clearly shows that whoever has 
the Spirit of Christ is a son of God, and "if any man have not the 
Spirit of Christ, he is none of His. Rom. 8:9-14. "Ye are not in 
the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in 
you. " Those in whom the good work of the Spirit is ever begun, 
are counted on the living side- "risen with Christ, "-and not on 
the side of death and the devil. This is our encouragement, and 



also makes us debtors, not to live after the flesh but after the 
Spirit. Ver. 12-13. 

When Jesus says, "the tares are the children of the wicked one," 
let no one say, the tares are errors, sown in the hearts of 
Christians, or that the tares are carnal Christians- "babes in 
Christ." If the tares are errors, then the tares are not persons at 
all; so if the wheat be truths, they are not persons at all. But 
again, if the wheat mean truths in the heart and the tares mean 
errors in the same heart, then the harvest is not a separation of 
persons at all, but simply a cleansing of the hearts of Christians 
from error; but this would neither agree with the teachings of 
Jesus nor with the theories of men who make such applications. 
The harvest is a separation of two classes of persons, who were 
permitted to "grow together until the harvest." Ver. 30. But if 
the tares are of the world, are all the world tares? No; only men 
of the world, who get so far out of their place as to profess to be 
Christians, are tares. The tares are the unconverted men in the 
Church— sown among the wheat. Ver. 25. If a farmer sows a 
field with chess, the chess is not then a weed, but it is a weed 
when sown among the wheat. It has always been the duty of 
Christians, to grow in grace and in knowledge, and no person 
can advance in knowledge 

R98 : page 3 

without discarding some error or mistaken ideas. The Apostles 
were constantly exhorting and warning the early Christians 
against errors, and those who advanced them. "Prove all things, 
and hold fast that which is good, " has always been both the duty 
and privilege of Christians. But if wheat be truth, and tares, 
errors then these Apostles contradicted the Savior. How would 
his words sound thus paraphrased: "Shall we root up the error? 
He said nay, lest while ye root up the error, ye root up the truth 
also. Let both truth and error grow together until the harvest, and 
then I will say to the angels, gather ye together first the errors, 
and bind them in bundles to burn them, but gather the truth into 
my barn. " And the errors are to be cast into a furnace of fire, 
where there is wailing and gnashing of teeth. If we would escape 
such absurd conclusions, let us cling to the Savior's own 
explanation of wheat and tares. But, it may be asked, has it not 
always been the duty of the Church to cast out unconverted 
men? I answer, no. Men who committed outrageous sins, could 
be known, and were to be dealt with; but merely for not being 
Christians, they could not be dealt with. An unconverted man, a 
man who loves not our Lord Jesus, might be outwardly 
consistent in conduct, and yet give no real evidence of being 
spiritual. But man is not competent to judge in such cases. 
Hence Paul says: "Therefore judge nothing before the time, until 
the Lord come, who both will bring to light the 

R98 : page 4 



hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the councils 
of the hearts." 1 Cor. 4:5. And yet, in the next chapter, he tells 
them to deal with the fornicator, "To deliver such an one to 
Satan for the destruction of the flesh," &c. Man could deal with 
sinners, but when it was a heart work, a question of motive, they 
could not deal with it. They might make a mistake, and men 
have often made such mistakes. Of such Jesus said: "Nay, lest 
while ye gather up the tares, ye root up the wheat also. Let both 
grow together till the harvest." Then the angels, of superior 
power and wisdom, will do the work of separation. In harmony 
with this, Paul says, "If any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ, 
let him be anathema maranatha," that is: Let him be cut off. The 
Lord cometh. 1 Cor. 16:21. 

This may be an additional proof that the coming or presence of 
the Lord and the angels is due in the time of the harvest. 

As the parable of the sower begins sooner than that of the tares 
and wheat, so it ends sooner. The first does not include the 
harvest work, while the latter does. The harvest of the Jewish 
age was the beginning of the gospel age; so the harvest of the 
Gospel age is the beginning of the Millennium. 

There was a sense in which the Jewish age ended at the Cross, 
and another sense in which it was extended 37 years. So, we 
believe, there is a sense in which the gospel age ended in 1878, 
and another sense in which it is extended 37 years, or until 1914. 

The closing work of the Jewish age included the burning of the 
chaff; Matt. 3:12, and the closing of the gospel includes the 
burning of the tares; Matt. 13:40. In this there is a parallelism, 
but there is one grand event here that had no pattern at the dawn 
of the gospel- that is, the translation of the saints. "Watch ye, 
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to 
escape those things that shall come to pass, and stand before the 
Son of Man. " The saints shall execute the judgments written, as 
did Aaron with Moses. "Then shall the righteous shine forth as 
the Sun." 

J. H. P. 



R98 : page 4 



THE SIGN OF HIS PRESENCE. 

The disciples ask, "What shall be the sign of Thy parousia, 
(presence, Emp. Dia.) and of the end of the world?" (Matt. 
24:3.) The first words of the recorded answer show the need of a 
sign. Take heed, let no man deceive you, for many shall come in 
My name saying, "I am Christ," and shall deceive many, (Vers. 
4-5.) A sign will enable those who obey this injunction to 
discern between the false and the true. 



Again, a sign will be needed because of the obscurity which 
marks the period of his return. His presence is not to be 
accompanied by such physical demonstrations as shall make all 
aware of it. But as the days of Noah were, so shall also the 
presence of the Son of man be. For as in the days that were 
before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and 
giving in marriage, and knew not until the flood came and took 
them all away, so shall also the presence of the Son of man be, 
(Vers. 37-39.) All things will indeed continue as from the 
beginning. How then will the church be aware of His presence, 
except by a sign? 

This sign will not be given to all. Only those can see it who have 
obeyed his commands, and these cannot show it to the 
unfaithful. They are the ones whose hearts are not overcharged 
with surfeiting and the cares of this life. Their hands are clean 
and their hearts pure. Paul calls them "children of the light," and 
says that because they are of the light, that day shall not 
overtake them as a thief. 1 Thess. 5:4. 

We are now prepared to consider the nature of this sign. Christ 
describes it in answer to the question asked by His disciples, 
"What shall be the sign of Thy presence. " He says: "Then if any 
man shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not, 
for there shall arise false Christs and false prophets, and shall 
show great signs and wonders, inasmuch, that if it were possible 
they shall deceive the very elect. Behold, I have told you before, 
wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold, He is in the desert, 
go not forth; behold, He is in the secret chamber, believe it not. 
For as the lightning cometh out of the east and shineth even unto 
the west, so shall also the presence of the Son of man be, (Matt. 
24:23-28). This "lightning" cannot be natural light, else His 
presence would not be likened to the days that were before the 
flood. Spiritual light is divine truth. Hence a great and 
wonderful unfolding of truth is all that the Bible gives us a right 
to expect during the presence of the Son of man, and before 
translation. Some teach that He may appear to us before we are 
made like Him. But we know not where the Bible gives us any 
warrant for such expectation. On the contrary it is written, "It 
doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when He 
shall appear we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is, 
(1 John 3:2). Again, when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, 
then shall we also appear with Him in glory. (Col. 3:4). Hence, 
we urge on those who are "looking for that blessed hope and the 
glorious appearing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ," the 
Savior's command, "Take heed let no man deceive you." The 
light of truth made plain by the Spirit, is the only promised 
guide, while here we wait. And this to us, is far more convincing 
than any physical manifestation could be. 

L. A. A. 



R98 : page 4 



GOD'S PURPOSE. 



It is God's purpose to save a lost world. This work is 
committed into the hands of Jesus Christ, whose work is 
expressive of the wisdom, power and love of God. The end 
gained is the fruit of God's love. An imperfect view of the fruit, 
must cause an imperfect idea of the love itself, and the effect 
must be an injury to us. "A child is known by its doings," and 
"A tree is known by its fruit." The Lord says, "Come let us 
reason together," "are not my ways equal?" An appreciation of 
His ways and doings is akin to sympathy and fellowship. 
Knowledge and love are certainly related to each other;— love 
appreciated, produces love. "We love Him because He first 
loved us," and love makes obedience cheerful. Gratitude and 
love are the springs of successful human life. Oh, that we may 
be in sympathy with God's purpose. That purpose is variously 
expressed. "Her seed shall bruise thy head." Gen. 3:15. This 
threatening of death to the serpent means blessing to mankind. 
He destroys the enemy to deliver the captives. Heb. 2:14-15. 
The opening chapters of Genesis give the entrance of the curse 
of sin and death, and the last chapters of Revelations reveal the 
success of God's plan,- "There shall be no more curse." Rev. 
22:3. "There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things are 
passed away." (21 :4). The history of the past is in harmony with 
human experience, and the hope revealed is in harmony with 
human necessities, and the Bible is thus shown to be in harmony 
with facts and with itself. What was implied in the threatening 
against the serpent, was expressed two thousand years later in 
God's covenant with Abraham: "In thy seed shall all nations- 
'kindreds' --'families'—of the Earth be blessed. " From that time 
dates the promise of God, which the law, given four hundred 
and thirty years after, could not disannul. Gal. 3:17. The divine 
nature or spirit is the basis of the success, and is imparted, not 
by law, which cannot give life (Ver. 21), but by the "exceeding 
great and precious promises." 2 Pet. 1:4. The going forth of the 
word of the Lord, in all ages, or in all stages of its development, 
must have reference to the great end; as when man builds for a 
home and its comforts, he keeps that in mind when the stones 
are being quarried, the timbers hewn, the foundation laid, and 
through all the steps of building. Of His own word the Lord 
says: "It shall not return to me void, but it shall accomplish that 

R99 : page 4 

which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent 
it." Isa. 55:1 1. "When thou shalt make his soul an offering for 
sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the 
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, he shall see the 
travail of his soul and be satisfied." 53:10-1 1, "He shall not fail 



or be discouraged, until he shall have set judgment in the Earth, 
and the isles shall wait for his law. " "He shall not quench the 
smoking flax nor break the bruised reed until He bring forth 
judgment unto victory." "The Lord shall make bare His holy arm 
in the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth shall 
see the salvation of our God. " 52:10. "All the ends of the world 
shall remember and turn to the Lord, and all the kindreds of the 
nations shall worship before Him, for the kingdom is the Lords 
and He is the Governor among the nations." Ps. 22. 

"When Thy judgments are in the Earth the inhabitants of the 
world will learn righteousness." Isa. 26:9. These are but a 
sample of the prophetic utterances dictated by the spirit of 
Christ, and the New Testament takes up the strain and carries it 
forward to the glad climax. "Behold the Lamb of God that taketh 
away the sin of the world." John 1:29. "That was the true light 
that lighteth every man that cometh into the world." "Behold we 
bring unto you glad tidings of great joy which shall be unto all 
people." "Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth peace and 
good will toward men. " 

"He must reign until He hath put all enemies under His feet. The 
last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. " "He gave Himself a 
ransom for all to be testified in due time. " "Because of His 
humiliation and obedience unto death, even the death of the 
cross." "Therefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given 
Him a name which is above every name, that at the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven, in earth, and under the 
earth," &c. Phil. 2:9-10. 

"All nations shall come and worship before Thee, for Thy 
judgments are made manifest." Rev. 15:4. These broad and 
sweeping statements are the common utterances of the Bible, in 
reference to the ultimate result of the work of Christ, and the 
only exception to the final salvation of all, is in the case of those 
who sin willfully after they have come to the knowledge of the 
truth; or who having been begotten of the spirit by the word of 
truth, fail to come to the second birth, and so are not counted. 
All who ever come to perfect spiritual manhood, that is, the 
image of God, will retain it, and when the work is finished sin 
and death will be unknown. 

God's work is one of order as well as love, overlooking which 
the love is obscured. The consummation is to be reached by the 
various steps, called ages, each age having its own 

R99 : page 5 

part of the work to do. No age has been too short for its purpose. 
The succession of ages indicates the progressive character of the 
plan. Before the flood but little law or light was given, and men 
were left to work out the natural life of sinful flesh to its 
legitimate consequence —death. The great fact must be proved 
that "All flesh is as grass." Until man has learned this lesson he 



knows not how truly to lay hold on the arm of the Lord extended 
to help. Sin existed, but was not imputed, nevertheless death 
reigned, even over the irresponsible. Rom. 5:13-14. Sin was not 
properly known, as "exceeding sinful," but was counted as in a 
dormant or "dead state. " The sinner was conceited, until the law 
came. Says Paul: "I had not known sin but by the law, for I had 
not known lust unless the law had said: 'Thou shalt not covet.' 
But sin taking occasion by the commandment wrought in me all 
manner of concupiscence. For without the law sin (existed but) 
was dead. For I was alive, without the law once, but when the 
commandment came, sin revived (lived again) and I died. " Rom. 
7:7-9. 

It is clear that Paul is not speaking of the original entrance of sin 
and death, for sin revived but of the effect of the "law that was 
added because of transgression," to give the "knowledge of sin" 
and show it in its true character as "exceeding sinful." Ver. 13. 

In the Patriarchal age the Promise of a Deliverer was given, and 
in the Jewish age, in addition to the giving of the law, which 
condemns man and cannot save, there was developed by types 
and prophecy much light in reference to the coming Savior. God 
only dealt with the Jewish nation during that age, and they 
gained the impression that He cared little or nothing for the 
other nations. They were as the literal descendants of Abraham 
through Isaac, the "seed according to the flesh." But "the 
children of the flesh," says Paul, "are not the children of God, 
but the children of the promise are counted for the seed;" Rom. 
9:8, and adds: "We, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of 
the promise." Gal. 4:28. From all of which it is evident that the 
church of Christ is the Seed, that the gospel dispensation is the 
period for its development, and therefore the real work of 
bruising the serpent and blessing the nations belongs to an age 
after Christ comes and gathers His church to Himself and to a 
share of His glory. During this gospel dispensation the church 
has quite naturally fallen into a similar error as that of the Jews, 
that their dispensation was final, and that none could be blessed 
beyond. While the truth is that God, in the gospel age, has been 
"taking out a people for His name," for the very purpose of 
sharing with Him in the greater work of saving the world. That 
the church have been objects of His special care and love is true, 
and all the angels of heaven have been to the "heirs of salvation" 
ministers of mercy. Heb. 1. We can, with these facts before us, 
more fully appreciate what it is to be "called according to His 
purpose. " That purpose is to bless the world in the ages to come. 
Eph. 2:7. Here is the High Calling of God in Jesus Christ. And 
to fit us for our work, we are called unto holiness, and called to 
pass through trials and peculiar difficulties, as fire to refine and 
purify us. "These light afflictions work out for us a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory." "And all things shall 
work together for good to them that love God;— to them that are 
the called according to His purpose. " 



In view of the exceeding weight of glory promised, we may 
well, like Paul, count all else loss that we may win Christ and be 
found in Him. 

Oh, that we may forget the things that are behind, and keeping 
the eye on the mark, press on for the heavenly prize. Phil. 3:13- 
14. 

J. H. P. 



R99 : page 5 



LIVING SACRIFICE. 



"I Beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that 
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service." Rom. 12:1. 

This is Paul's exhortation to the church-a comprehensive 
sermon in one verse. They were "brethren" in Christ, having 
been "planted together in the likeness of his death" (6:5), and yet 
had not made a complete sacrifice. They had not yet 
apprehended that for which Christ had apprehended them. Phil. 
3:12. 

That condition is the "mark"— the winning post- "for the prize 
of the high calling," toward which all in Christ are urged to 
"press." 

This is attainable, but a sacrifice is demanded-the crucifixion 
and death of the "sinful affections and lusts." Death by 
crucifixion is a painful process. "They that are Christ's have 
crucified the flesh,"- "the old man," "that the body of sin might 
be destroyed." Rom. 6:6; Gal. 5:24. This is Christ's object in 
reference to us, and we are urged to keep this object ever in 
view. "He that is dead is freed from sin. " Now if we be dead 
with Christ we believe that we shall also live with Him: 

"Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more, 
death hath no more dominion over Him. For in that he died, he 
died unto sin once, but in that He liveth, He liveth unto God. 
Likewise reckon ye yourselves also to be dead indeed unto sin, 
but alive unto God. " 

"Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should 
obey it in the lusts thereof." Rom. 6:7-12. The practical import 
of all this is, that we sin not, keeping the body under subjection 
to the law of the spirit, the new nature in Christ Jesus, and so 
bring forth fruit unto holiness. This kind of dying is indeed a 
painful process, but it is a voluntary sacrifice which is required. 
This is not the curse which was pronounced on Adam: "Dying 
thou shalt die." That death "passed upon all men," "even upon 
those who had not sinned, after the similitude of Adam's 
transgression." Rom. 5:12-14. From that curse reconciliation is 



effected by the death of Christ, who gave Himself a ransom for 
all. Rom. 5:10. It is the voluntary offering of redeemed life 
which God seeks and which is pleasing to Him. He, by the price 
paid, had become rightfully possessor. "Ye are not your own, ye 
are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and 
in your spirit, which are His." He is Lord and Master we are 
called upon to admit his claims, and thus be at agreement with 
God. "Be ye reconciled to God," may be applicable to the 
unconverted, but it was addressed to Christians. See 2 Cor. 5:20. 

It is not to be inferred that because Christ's death is presented as 
an example of voluntary obedience to the will of God, which we 
are to follow, that therefore this was the only feature or object of 
his death. His death is as a ransom, meritorious, but it is none 
the less exemplary on this account. He gave His life, on which 
the law had no claim, to redeem man's life, on which the law 
had a claim, and thus made it possible for man to make a willing 
sacrifice to God, as He Himself had made, 

R100 : page 5 

and hence it is that "if we suffer we shall also reign with Him. " 

The service which the Lord requires is "reasonable," because He 
is Lord. He claims but His own when He asks all. The process of 
mortifying the deeds of the body involves a separation from the 
world. "Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed 
by the renewing of the mind." (Ver. 2). "Though the outward 
man perish, the inward man is renewed day by day. " "Daily 
bread" is provided by the word of God to enable us to grow, and 
to overcome self and the world. The maxims and pleasures of 
the world are not friendly to grace to help us on to God, and the 
command to be separate is not so unimportant as it seems to be 
estimated by many professed followers of Christ. Non- 
conformity is the safeguard against shipwreck of faith. 

The motive to make the sacrifice is "The mercies of God. " There 
is reference by the word "therefore" to the merciful dealing of 
God with Israel, recorded in the eleventh chapter. Oh, that all 
knew something of the plan of the ages, by which God's love 
and mercy is manifested, but now we deal with the principle that 
the goodness of God leadeth to repentance. Rom. 2:4. 

That goodness is revealed in Christ. The plan of ages is the work 
of Christ. He is indeed the Rock of Ages. The Cross of Christ- 
His sacrifice— is central and from it emanates the world's life and 
hope. Hence Paul could say: "God forbid that I should glory 
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. " In referring to the 
mercies, Paul appeals to gratitude and love, and these are the 
springs of true human life. His love shed abroad in our hearts- 
known and appreciated— is the cause of the greatest victories. 

We know only in part, but the little we know is great. What He 
has done for us, is the reason of the call for return. His sacrifice 



is both the reason and the pattern for ours. Both His and ours 
look to God and then to man. His satisfies justice; ours is a 
grateful offering, giving evidence of His success and the power 
of the gospel over us. The object of his, humanward was to save 
mankind. Ours should be the same— He is the Way; while we 
point the way to others. His was complete, no reserve; we must 
withhold nothing. Have we not lived for self long enough. Let 
the time past suffice in that direction. 

Love so amazing so divine, 
Demands my soul, my life, my all. 

The condition of the surrendered heart is: "Lord what wilt Thou 
have me to do?" "Present your bodies"- All powers; talents, 
time and property. We are stewards for the Lord. Where? On the 
altar of God's appointing, and as he may direct. The good 
Samaritan feature of Christ's life may indicate the altar of human 
hearts. God will give the willing worker something to do. The 
spirit of the Gospel both in this age and that to come, is to give 
light and to bless mankind. The spirit of the present should be as 
the spirit of our hope: to save mankind. Here we have but the 
earnest of grace and power. "Then shall the righteous shine. " 
With all consecrated to Christ and exercised in his service we 
may reasonably expect his smile and fellowship. The fellowship 
of Christ is the fellowship of the sons of God. 

J. H P. 



page 5 

PREACHING NOTICE. 

Invitations to hold meetings may be addressed either to the 
editor (mentioning whom you wish to have) or, direct to the 
brethren. 



ORDERS for "Day Dawn" or the "Gospel in type and 
Prophecy," by Bro. J. H. Paton, (paper 50 cents cloth 75 cents,) 
should be addressed to the publisher, Bro. A. D. Jones, 
Pittsburgh, Pa. 



OWING to advance in price of paper the books advertised 
some time since must be advanced in price. Hereafter they can 
be furnished you as follows (postage paid,) 

Emphatic Diaglott, cloth bound.. ..$2.95 
best binding... 3.60 

Tischendorf New Testament 80 

American Bible Union" 70 



R100 : page 6 



THE TABERNACLE. 

The law being a shadow of good things to come, it is 
necessary, if we would grasp the substance, to trace very closely 
the outline there given. While our Father has granted us, as a 
part of his children, a great deal of light we believe there are 
mines of wealth in His precious word, that are, as yet, but little 
known. We think The Law is a whole mining district. Paul has 
opened some large crevices in it, through the letter to the 
Hebrews and in other places, and we can see the gems sparkling 
brightly as he lets the light in upon them; but these are given 
only, it would seem, to lead us on, to incite us to search as men 
search for hidden treasures. 

We wish, at this time, to look at the Tabernacle and its contents, 
and before entering into details, will first glance at its general 
appearance. The outer inclosure was called the court of the 
tabernacle. It was surrounded by posts or pillars, evidently of 
wood, with bases of copper, [incorrectly brass in A.V.] and caps, 
hooks, &c, of silver, from which hung a continuous curtain of 
fine twined linen. Within this was the tent or tabernacle, 
constructed of gold-covered boards on three sides, with posts 
and a curtain on the front or east end. Ex. 26:18-27, covered 
above with curtains of goats' hair, of rams' skins dyed red, and 
uppermost, of badgers' skins. The inside of the tent was hung 
with curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and 
scarlet adorned with cherubim. 

This beautiful curtain evidently formed the ceiling and hung 
down each side within the tabernacle. The tent was divided into 
two compartments by a vail of the same description as the 
curtains. We are not given the position of the vail, but probably, 
as in the temple, [1 Kings, 6:2,17,20,] the holy place was twice 
the size of the most holy. 

Outside the tabernacle, near the door, and apparently directly in 
front of it, stood the altar of burnt offering. Between the altar 
and the door stood the laver of brass, [copper.] 

In the holy place were: the table of show-bread, upon the north 
or right hand side; the golden lampstand opposite on the south, 
and the altar of incense directly in front, close to the separating 
vail. Ex. 40:5-30. Within the vail stood alone the ark of the 
covenant, hidden in the secret place, unseen by the common 
priest, and shrouded in impenetrable darkness. Even when 
approached by the high priest once a year, although then 
probably illuminated with the shekinah of glory, it must still be 
covered from him by a cloud of incense. Lev. 16:12-13. 

THE COURT OF THE TABERNACLE 

was 100 cubits long by 50 cubits wide, with posts 5 cubits high 
and 5 cubits apart; standing, as it were, within reach of each 
other, yet too far apart to lean upon one another. Their only 



connection was the curtain, which, hanging upon each, tied them 
all together. The curtain was apparently without seam for the 
whole length of each side, excepting, perhaps, the front. It was 
made of fine twined linen and symbolized, we believe, the 
righteousness of Christ. Being without seam, it reminds us of the 
seamless linen robe that Jesus wore. John 19:23, 22:25. A robe 
that cannot be put on by inches, and when it covers, covers 
completely. The posts of corruptible wood firmly set in bases of 
incorruptible brass, would seem to symbolize the church, 
composed of weak mortals liable to fall, yet standing by the 
power of God; not built on the sand of the desert, but having a 
sure foundation. Their caps, fillets and hooks were of silver. As 
we are told to search for truth as for silver, and as David likens 
the words of the Lord to silver purified seven times, we 
conclude that truth is symbolized by silver, which thus adorned 
the posts, clothing their heads with beauty, forming the 
ornaments of the body, and being the hook or connection which 
bound them to the curtain of linen, and by it to each other. 

What has been the work of the church in the past ages, what can 
it be in the future, but simply to hold up to the view of the world 
without, the spotless righteousness of Christ? Hidden behind 
that snowy curtain, covered by that seamless robe, standing 
alone by divine power, linked together by the truth, they form a 
long united row, reaching down the stream of time. 

"A glittering host in bright array," or, as Peter says: "A chosen 
generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people," 
living for what purpose? to "show forth the praises of him who 
hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. " Truly, 
as Paul says, we are surrounded by a "cloud of witnesses." 
Within the court there were solemn mysteries transpiring, and 
many beautiful sights which it was not lawful for those without 
to even catch a glimpse of. They must first see and appreciate 
the righteousness of Christ. "For he who cometh to God must 
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those who 
diligently seek him. " 

Being drawn toward Christ by what we have already seen, we 
come to the gate of the court. "And for the gate of the court shall 
be a hanging of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, 
and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework." Ex. 27:16. 

Here we behold Christ as the Door, and as we draw near, we 
find him radiant with beauty. What mean these colors? "A True 
Blue" is the synonym for a faithful one. The blue of the national 
flag of many countries stands for fidelity. We think the symbol 
is of divine origin. In Num. 15:37-41, we find that the Lord 
commanded Moses to make a ribbon of blue on a fringe for their 
garments. They were to look upon it and remember their duty to 
God. It was to inspire their fidelity by recalling his faithfulness. 
Purple is the badge of royalty. The purple robe that the mocking 
soldiers placed on Christ, was an emblem that had its origin in 



very early times. In Judges 8:26, we find the kings of Median 
robed in this color. Scarlet was also worn by kings, but we think 
it spoke of blood when used under the law. Thus the beautiful 
gate of the court pointed to Christ, as the "Faithful and True," as 
the "King of Kings," and as the great "High Priest," the 
"Redeemer" and "Savior" of the world. 

R101 : page 6 

Passing through the door and advancing towards the tabernacle 
we come to 



THE BRAZEN ALTAR. 

The altar of Burnt Offering was made of shittim wood covered 
with plates of brass [copper]. It was a beautiful type of Christ. 
Christ as the man of sorrows, as the Lamb of God. Christ in his 
human nature [corruptible wood] clothed with power divine [the 
copper plates]. The wood alone must have burnt up -Adam fell. 

It was four-sided, presenting a full breadth of side to every 
quarter of the earth. Being square it typified the perfection of 
Christ. It was five cubits long, five wide, and only three cubits 
high. Its dimensions speak chiefly of length and breadth as a 
Savior of all men, who saves to the uttermost. It was 
comparatively low, typifying one easy of access, and a free 
salvation. 

It had four horns to which the victims could be tied that were to 
be sacrificed, and to which persons in danger of being slain 
might flee for safety. Ps. 118:27, 1 Kings 2:28. These evidently 
pointed to Christ as our Refuge, and to his abundance of power 
and grace to all who should come to him. The fire continually 
burning upon it, and never allowed to go out (Lev. 6:13) speaks 
of consecration complete and continuous. 

Fire is used as a symbol of love. Here it would be love 
unceasing and unchangeable. Not that we first loved him, but 
that he first loved us. Not that he loves us because we are good, 
or since we began to be good, but "God commendeth his love 
towards us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for 
us." Oh that not only the world, but the church might understand 
the meaning of the words, "GOD IS LOVE." The words by the 
last prophet ring down through the ages. "For I am Jehovah, I 
change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. " As 
the altar of burnt offering, consuming whatever was laid upon it, 
it points to the absolute devotedness of Christ to his Father's 
will; and also to what is required of his followers who profess to 
lay themselves upon that altar. "Whatsoever toucheth the altar 
shall be holy." "The altar sanctifieth the gift." 

Fire is a purifying agent, but it purifies by destruction. Jesus 
came in a body prepared, and offered himself a whole burnt 
offering. His sacrifice was not the stepping down temporarily 



from a higher to a lower plane. That was necessary as a part of 
the preparation for the sacrifice, as was the presentation of the 
victim to the priest at the door of the tabernacle. Or as Paul says: 
"We see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for 
the suffering of death... that he by the grace of God should taste 
death for every man." Heb. 2:9. "For verily he took not on him 
the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham. " 
2:19. Why? For the simple reason that angels cannot die. Luke 
20:36. "Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh 
and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that 
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, 
that is, the devil, and deliver them, who, through fear of death 
[same kind of death] were all their lifetime subject to bondage." 
The son of Mary— not the pre-incarnate word, as such— was 
called Jesus; not because he had, but because "he shall save his 
people from their sins." Jesus came to die. "He is brought as a 
lamb [dumb] to the slaughter." He made his "soul [life] an 

offering for sin He hath poured out his soul unto death." 

What death? After "being found in fashion as a man, he 
humbled himself, [not humbled himself to be a man] and 
became obedient unto death, EVEN THE DEATH OF THE 
CROSS." Phil. 2:8. We pity those who profess to be Christians 
and despise "the death of the cross." Yes! the altar spoke of 
death; and when the high priest went into the holy of holies he 
did not carry in the restored life of the victim by any means; he 
rather took in the sure proof of its utter destruction; so, "though 
we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know 
we him no more." 

From the golden altar inside the tabernacle, every morning and 
evening there floated heavenward a cloud of sweet incense- 
making acceptable the prayers of the saints- but that altar itself 
was only acceptable because it had been sprinkled with the 
atoning blood taken from the side of the altar of burnt offering. 
In other words, the risen Savior- the golden altar-was only 
acceptable because of the work [obedience unto death] of the 
man Christ Jesus -the altar of wood and brass. " Woe to those 
who despise "a dead Christ" in their prayers. We do pray in the 

R101 : page 7 

name of him who was dead, but now ever liveth to make 
intercession for us. Christ was our forerunner, and we too must 
lay ourselves upon this altar; our old nature is doomed to death; 
while we are separated, delivered from this body of death 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Christ by the pouring out of "his own blood" has redeemed us 
from the condition in which Adam's sin placed us and so a 
resurrection is assured us. "For as in [or through] Adam all die, 
even so in [or through] Christ shall all be made alive. " If any 
would attain to the Divine nature and life, they must take their 
sinning nature-the old man-and bring it to this altar, Jesus, and 



put it to death: crucify it with the affections and lusts. Gal. 5:24. 
"Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy 
nakedness be not discovered thereon." Exod. 20:26. 

We cannot come to Christ by steps. We must come as we are 
and come at once. When we realize our degradation and sin, 
human nature says: do not present yourself in that condition, 
tone up, break off bad habits, try to be good, and after climbing 
up a few steps, come to Christ. Vain resolve! ending only in 
broken vows and bitter disappointment; and as the pure light of 
Heaven streams upon us, we realize our own weakness and 
nakedness and poverty; that our righteousness is but filthy rags, 
and that our great want is the spotless robe of Christ's 
righteousness to cover us completely, that the shame of our 
nakedness do not appear. 

In antitype, the fire of this altar has not yet gone out. We see a 
groaning creation loaded down with sin and sorrow, waiting, 
hoping for a better day. We expect to see the dross all burned 
up, with every vestige of miasma and taint of sin: and to rejoice 
in the joy of a purified world even though purged by "the fire of 
his jealousy," for "our God is a consuming fire." 

W. I. M. 



R101 : page 7 

"THE BAG AND BAGGAGE POLICY." 

The recent elections in England which involve a change in the 
ministry and the removal from office of the world-renowned 
Hebrew, Lord Beaconsfield, might at first sight appear to be a 
hindrance to the restoration of Israel to Palestine. For several 
years have things seemed particularly favorable to the Jew, and 
one of the principal aids in this direction seemed to be the 
interest, statesmanship, and political opportunity afforded by the 
high standing of this celebrated man. Now but a short time after 
he has procured for his race much relief from persecution, &c, 
in Palestine and Turkey, and caused Great Britain to be 
appointed Protector of the Holy Land, and while he seemed in a 
fair way to be more useful to them, he is removed from power. 
At first this may appear disastrous, but perhaps it is not so after 
all. 

Mr. Gladstone, who succeeds Lord Beaconsfield, gave utterance 
some time since to his sentiments regarding Turkey— viz: That if 
the Turks cannot and do not, carry out the reforms demanded by 
the Berlin Treaty, they and their government should be turned 
out of Europe, bag and baggage. Since the probability of his 
coming into power, these sentiments are being discussed 
considerably in diplomatic circles, and it is generally understood 
that he will put the "Bag and baggage policy" into force. The 



simple announcement of the drift of the elections is said to have 
produced almost a panic at Constantinople. While this does not 
bear directly upon the Jew, it may do so indirectly by placing 
Palestine more directly under England's control. We may rest 
assured, however, that God is working all things after the 
counsel of his own will, and 



His purposes will ripen fast, 

Unfolding every hour; 

The bud may have a bitter taste, 



But sweet will be the flower." Not Lord Beaconsfield, but Our 
Lord Jehovah it is who said: "The waste places shall be rebuilt," 
and "Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited. " "Thus saith the Lord 
God....O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches 
and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; for they are at hand 
to come. "..."I scattered them among the heathen and they were 
dispersed through the countries; according to their way and 
according to their doings I judged them.... But I had pity for my 
holy name. Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus saith the 
Lord God: I do not this for your sakes, but for my holy name's 
sake.... I will take you from among the heathen and gather you 
out of all countries, and I will bring you into your own land. 
Then (not before, but after their return,) I will sprinkle clean 
water (truth) upon you and ye shall be clean; a new heart also 
will I give you, and I will put my spirit within you and cause 
you to walk in my statute, and ye shall keep my judgments and 
do them. And ye shall dwell safely in the land that I gave to your 
fathers, and ye shall be my people and I will be your God. " 
(Ezek. 36.) "Moreover, I will make a covenant of peace with 
them, and it (the New covenant,) shall be an everlasting 

R102 : page 7 

covenant with them,... and I will set my sanctuary in the midst of 
them forevermore. " (Ezek. 37:26.) The kingdom of God, (the 
glorified church,) which cometh not with observation, neither 
shall they say lo here, or lo there, shall be in the midst of (or 
among) them. The Spiritual Israel, (Luke 17:20.)- God's 
Sanctuary. 

The restoration comes first; afterward, the Lord will "pour upon 
them the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look 
upon me whom they have pierced, and shall all mourn for their 
sins and turn unto the Lord." "In that day there shall be a 
fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness." (Zech 12:10. and 13.1.) 
Yes, says Paul, (Rom. 11:26.) "There shall come out of Zion the 
Deliverer, (the Christ, head and body,) and shall turn away 
ungodliness from Jacob: For this is my covenant (agreement,) 
unto them when I shall take away their sins." Their sins will not 
be taken away until the gospel age of sacrifice for sin, (Day of 



atonement,) is ended and we with our "head"— Jesus come forth 
to bless the people. 

Then not only shall Israel after the flesh" "obtain mercy by 
YOUR mercy," but all the families of the earth are to be blessed 
through this Seed.- But "to the Jew first and also to the 
Gentile." 



R102:page7 



EXPEDIENT FOR YOU. 



"Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I 
go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto 
you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you." John 16:7. 

The speaker is Jesus. The disciples are addressed. The 
circumstances are peculiar and interesting. They were sad, 
because He had said He was going away. "Little children, yet a 
little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me; and as I said unto 
the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say to you." 
Ch. 13:33. The time for His departure was drawing near. They 
were gathered to eat their last Passover. After the supper, He had 
broken the bread and poured the wine, for them to eat and drink, 
and had said "This is my body;" and "This is my blood;" and 
"Do this in remembrance of me. " True, He had said, "Let not 
your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. " 
He also had said, "I will come again, and receive you unto 
myself; that where I am, there ye may be also." Ch. 14:1-3. But 
while it remained to them an unsolved mystery, is it any wonder 
that sorrow filled their hearts? Ch. 16:6. Until after He had risen, 
they knew not, often as He had told them, what even the rising 
from the dead should mean. How then could they understand 
His going away and His coming again? He sought not 
needlessly to make them mourn, but as the time drew near, He 
sought to prepare them for the ordeal. Not only was He going 
away, but they were to suffer persecution and be put to death. 
Ch. 16:2. This was so much different from what they had 
expected, in a kingdom of earthly glory, no wonder they were 
despondent and silent. Vs. 5-6. "But," He says, "these things 
have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may 
remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not 
unto you at the beginning, because I was with you. " Ver. 4. 
What a blending of tenderness and wisdom, in His dealings with 
them! There were, it will be seen, several very natural reasons 
for their sadness. They were to all human appearance about to 
lose by death, a friend whom they had learned to love. We can 
all, on account of our own experience, sympathize with them in 
this. But their grief was intensified by a terrible disappointment. 
"We trusted that it had been He which should have redeemed 
Israel." Luke 24:21. They expected earthly glory, and instead of 



this, He whom they loved and trusted now spoke to them of 
suffering and death. It was not merely the disappointment, as of 
those who bury their hopes in a premature grave, but there must 
have been coupled with it a terrible fear that He had deceived 
them; that they had loved and trusted an imposter. Most terrible 
of all fears! And while it remained unexplained, the language of 
our text only deepens the mystery. Not only going to die and 
leave us, they might have thought, but He goes so far as to say it 
is all for our good: "It is expedient for you that I go away." The 
Comforter will come. You will have Him, instead of me, says 
Jesus, and it is better for you. He had been their Teacher, and 
thus their Comforter, for He says, "I will pray the Father, and He 
shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide with you 
forever; even the Spirit of truth." John 14:16-17. The Spirit is a 
Comforter, because He is a Teacher, as was Jesus Himself. Ch. 
16:12-15. But Jesus gives them to understand that the other 
Comforter would be better for them than was He, and not 
merely a help, partly to make up their loss. Their loss of His 
presence and teaching was to be their gain. There were doubtless 
other reasons, not here expressed, why He should go away, but 
the reason He gives for its being better for them that He should 
go is: "For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come. " The 
disciples probably did not comprehend this until after the Spirit 
came, and it may not be understood by all yet, but it is only 
using our own words to express His statements, when we say 
that the church is better off under the teachings and comforting 
influences of the Holy Spirit than they could have been under 
the instructions, and enjoying the presence of Jesus in the flesh. 
His going away included the fact of His entrance on the higher 
life. He was put to death in the flesh, and quickened by the 
Spirit, and "That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. " 1 Pet. 
3:18 and John 3:6. The Holy Spirit is the representative of 
Himself and His power in that spiritual 

R102 : page 8 

life. Hence He could say "Lo I am with you always, even unto 
the end of the world." Matt. 28:20. He is absent in body yet 
present in Spirit. 

The work of the Spirit is two-fold neither part of which could 
have been done as well by Jesus in the flesh. The two objects to 
be gained, were the teaching and comforting of the church, and 
the reproving and enlightening of the world. Ch. 16:8-15. 

He was limited, as a man in the flesh, to the ordinary means of 
travel, and could only be in one place at a time, but the Spirit 
can be everywhere, and with any number of people at once. 
However great the seeming loss, and the sorrow of the embryo 
church must have been, when He was taken from them, certainly 
the wants of the church in all succeeding generations have been 
far more fully met by the presence of the Spirit than they could 
have been by His presence in the flesh. Thousands upon 



thousands, all through these centuries, and all over the world, 
have been blessed according to the promise: "Where two or 
three are met in my name, there I am in the midst. " 

It was necessary that Christ, as our great High Priest, (having 
shed His own blood, as represented by the High Priest under the 
law shedding the blood of the beast-the lower nature,) should 
enter into the Holiest in virtue of what He had done, in order to 
secure the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. But this is not the only 
reason that it was expedient that He should go away. What has 
been said above, shows the greater value of the Spirit as Teacher 
and Comforter, than He could have been. Here arises a question: 
If it was expedient that He should go away, on account of the 
superiority of the Spirit as Teacher, Comforter and Guide, would 
the same law of expediency not require that He should remain 
away? This thought, based upon our text, has been urged by 
many against the doctrine of the return of Christ, and against the 
quite popular view, among those looking for the Lord, that He is 
coming the second time in the flesh. We regard the objection as 
unanswerable. Should He so come at Jerusalem, He would not 
be in Europe or in America. He would be limited as before. 
When the work in the Most Holy is done, it is true He comes 
into the Holy place, but not in the flesh. "Yea, though we have 
known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him 
(so) no more." 2 Cor. 5:16. The Sanctuary or holy place, 
represents the church, not in its fleshly phase, but in its spiritual 
state, in which we are counted on account of the Spirit of Christ 
dwelling in us. Rom. 8:9. We are still actually in the flesh, 
however, (and hence the warfare,) and we can only discern the 
presence of Christ in the spiritual body, by faith. The only light 
in the typical holy place, was from the lamp; so we walk in the 
light of the lamp, by faith. This walking by faith must continue 
until we cease to be in the flesh actually, as we are now counted; 
or in other words, until we are changed, and made like Him, and 
then we shall see Him as He is. 1 John 3:2. When He appears to 
the world, we shall appear with Him. 

The prophetic argument based on the 2300 days (years,) of Dan. 
8:14, and the parallelisms of the Two Dispensations, show that 
Christ was due to come from the Most Holy place in 1 844. 
Some tell us when He comes through the inner vail, He will and 
must be visible to men in the flesh, and that He will so appear to 
them that look for Him in 1881. If the supposition that Christ 
will be visible to men in the flesh when He leaves the most Holy 
place be correct, and if the parallelisms are correct, then Christ 
should have 

R103 : page 8 

been visible from 1844. And if the parallelism is not correct, 
then there is certainly no ground for expecting anything in 1881 
more than in any other year. The advocates of the 1881 point 
have never claimed any more in favor of that date than a parallel 



to the last half of the 70th week of Dan. 9. They know as well as 
we that there is no prophetic period that ends in 1881. 

We do not say that the covenant week will not have a parallel 
here. As the gospel began to go to the Gentiles at the end of the 
70th week or three and one-half years after the cross, so the 
advanced truth here may begin to reach Israel in 1881. There 
was no coming of Christ three and one-half years after the cross; 
why should we expect such an event in 1881, admitting the 
force of the parallelism? There was no change in the condition 
of believers three and one-half years after the cross; why then, 
on such ground, expect a change in the condition of believers 
here? The only change we can see as taking place three and one- 
half years after the cross, was in the condition of the nominal 
Jewish church and the gospel turning to the Gentiles. A 
corresponding change in 1881 would affect the condition of the 
nominal Christian church and the gospel turning in some special 
sense to the Jews again. 

To claim that Christ will appear as a man in 1881, on the ground 
of His coming through the vail between the Holy Places, is to 
ignore the prophetic arguments and the parallelism on which the 
claim for 1881 is based. Such claims remind us of the 
illustration of a man using a ladder to reach an important 
eminence, and then, throwing the ladder down, exclaiming: 
"Here I am, and I can now go higher, but no thanks to the 
ladder." 

We are quite well assured that those who wait until they see 
Christ in the flesh, will not be included among the little flock. 
He has already appeared to every one who is able to discern His 
presence, and answer to His knock, and open the door to Him 
To such, the feast has been a great blessing. But did He not 
visibly appear on His way in, i.e., after His resurrection? Yes, 
He did, because He wanted witnesses of His resurrection. We 
believe He could appear visibly now, if there were any such 
reason, but there is no promise that He will. But did He not wash 
His flesh in the Holy place on His way in, and will He, indeed, 
must He not do the same on His way out? We think it remains to 
be proved that there was any place or provision for washing in 
the typical Holy place. The laver was in the court and not in the 
sanctuary. Before Christ died, He said to His disciples: "Now ye 
are clean, through the word which I have spoken unto you. " 
John 15:3. We do not assert that this was the washing of Christ's 
flesh. We would rather leave it to others to make reckless 
assertions. It may be that the washing of the typical high priest's 
flesh was to represent the purity of Him who knew no sin, and 
yet was made sin (a sin-offering) for us. We do not consider it a 
reckless assertion, when we say that Christ will never appear in 
the flesh, for the purpose of completing the education of His 
church. If He should, it would be a contradiction of His own 
promise that the Spirit would guide them into all truth. The 



Spirit's work for us will not be finished until we are born of the 
Spirit, and then we will be Spirit, (John 3:6,) and being like 
Him, we shall see Him as He is. 

Man says we must believe that He will appear as He did in the 
upper chamber, or we are foolish virgins, and will be shut out 
from the High Calling. Jesus says: "If they shall say unto you, 
behold, He is in the desert; go not forth; behold, in the secret 
chamber; believe it not." Matt. 24:26. We being forewarned, 
should not be deceived. We do not expect to see Him until we 
are like Him. 

J. H. P. 



R103 : page 8 

EARLY AND LATTER RAIN. 

We have for some time understood the Scriptures to teach that 
the "early and latter rains" refer to special outpourings of 
abundant blessings of the Spirit upon the church-the early at 
Pentecost and since; "the latter" in the close of the present age. 
This seems to correspond with Peter's remark about the light of 
Divine revelation being shed "on us upon whom the ends of the 
(age) world are come." (The beginning and closing end.) This 
imbuement of the spirit is not upon all professed Christians, but 
upon a "little flock. " While the general church seems to daily 
become more worldly, it has the effect of more perfectly 
separating the few who are deeply earnest. In harmony with this 
thought, we have ever expected increase of light and knowledge 
upon the pathway of the just, and our expectations are 
wonderfully realized. We have also felt that it was possible that 
to some might be given, by the same spirit, gifts of faith and 
miracles. 

Our experience would not lead us to expect "miracles," &c, 
from those who have other gifts of the spirit, such as "teaching," 
&c, for it is said to divide to each. While we would be very 
cautious how we call everything miraculous which is 
uncommon, yet our expectations in this direction lead us to be 
cautious how we call anything a "fraud," or of the devil, which 
might be of God. 

The following item, clipped from a newspaper, seems to bear 
the impress of truth: 

"WYTHEVILLE, VA., April 15. --For some weeks past the 
people of Scott county have been excited over the miracles 
which have been performed by Richard Miller, of that county. 
His fame has extended all over that section of the state, and 
hundreds of the afflicted are daily visiting him. Miller is a 
middle-aged man, employed as the keeper of McMullen's mill, 



near Estellville. He is deeply religious, and claims to have had a 
dream a month ago in which the idea was impressed upon him 
that with God's help he could perform wonderful cures simply 
through faith. He states that the next day, after fervent prayer, he 
healed a sick man by touching him. The intelligence of the 
miracle went all over the country, and the afflicted of all kinds 
came to him and were healed simply by the touch of his hand. 
Yesterday G. N. Wertz, a photographer at Abingdon, visited 
Miller, in company with a paralytic uncle, the seat of paralysis 
being in the mouth, which deprived him of both the power of 
speech and hearing. Miller looked at the afflicted man, and, after 
a short prayer, touched and told him that before he reached 
home he would be well. Last night, as Mr. Wertz entered the 
door of his house on his return his hearing and speech came 
back to him, and to-day he is apparently hale and hearty. Miss 
Irene Newton, of Bristol, Tenn., helpless from rheumatism, was 
brought to Miller last week, and when an attempt was made to 
lift her in the carriage she rose from the sedan chair and said she 
was entirely well. One of the most wonderful miracles of 
Miller's was the cure of Mr. Peter Whitesell, who has been for 
some years afflicted with cancer. The cancer was touched, and 
in three days had disappeared. The miracle- worker is an 
exceedingly modest man, and always declines any compensation 
for his services, alleging that he is but the humble instrument of 
God. He takes no credit to himself for the performance of these 
miracles." 

If true, the above is wonderful, but if the church lost some of the 
"gifts" of the spirit when her candlestick was removed (Rev. 2) 
by her leaving her first love and its simplicity, would it be 
unreasonable to suppose that as the little company of separated 
ones return to primitive simplicity and love, the candlestick may 
be restored, and, as a result, some of the gifts of the spirit? We 
certainly do not have a desire to oppose anything of this nature. 
Neither will we "forbid them because they follow not us." We 
shall expect, however, that all "gifts of the spirit" shall be 
(during this gospel age) poured out upon God's servants and 
handmaids, and prepare the way, so that in the next age the spirit 
may be dispensed to the world, as it is written, "Afterward that I 
will pour out my spirit upon all flesh." (Joel 2:28) 


