Do You Remember?
Have you carefully read the recent issues of The Watchtower? See if you can answer the following questions:
In what sense can Solomon be a warning example for us?
God blessed and used King Solomon. During his rule, however, Solomon deviated from divine counsel. He wed Pharaoh’s pagan daughter, he took many wives, and he allowed pagan women gradually to lead him into false worship. We need to avoid gradually developing wrong attitudes or tendencies. (Deut. 7:1-4; 17:17; 1 Ki. 11:4-8)—12/15, pages 10-12.
Why can we view Sarah as a godly woman and a precious wife?
When God commanded Abraham to leave Ur, it meant leaving family, friends, and a way of life for a destination unknown. Yet Sarah cooperated, trusting that God would bless her. She respected Abraham, displaying beautiful qualities.—1/1, page 8.
Why did Jehovah ask Abraham to sacrifice his beloved son?
It is important to remember that God did not actually allow Abraham to sacrifice Isaac. This drama was a pattern of how God would, at great cost to himself, sacrifice his Son, Jesus.—1/1, page 23.
What indicates that from the first century onward, there have always been some genuine anointed Christians on the earth?
In Jesus’ parable about “the wheat” and “the weeds,” “the fine seed” meant “the sons of the kingdom.” (Matt. 13:24-30, 38) The weeds would grow alongside the wheat until the harvest. Thus, although we cannot say for certain who were of the wheat class, there must always have been some down to our time.—1/15, page 7.
What events will lead directly to Armageddon?
The nations will issue a significant declaration of “Peace and security!” (1 Thess. 5:3) Governments will move against false religion. (Rev. 17:15-18) There will be an assault on true worshippers. Then the end will come.—2/1, page 9.
How can we work to overcome a tendency to envy?
Steps that can help us are as follows: Strive to develop love and brotherly affection, associate with godly people, seek to do good, ‘rejoice with those who rejoice.’ (Rom. 12:15)—2/15, pages 16-17.
Who speak the Nahuatl language, and what is being done for them?
It was the language of the ancient Aztecs, and it is still spoken by 1.5 million people in Mexico. Witnesses are preaching in Nahuatl, and some of our literature is available in it.—3/1, pages 13-14.
When giving advice, what principles should we keep in mind?
Discern the real situation involved. Avoid responding hastily. Humbly apply God’s Word. If possible, make use of a theocratic library. Avoid making decisions for others.—3/15, pages 7-9.
Jesus urged his listeners to go the second mile. (Matt. 5:41) What was his point?
At that time in Israel, the occupying Romans might press a man into service. In urging his listeners to go the second mile, Jesus meant that without resentment they were to perform services that those in authority might legitimately demand.—4/1, page 9.

