Announcements
● Literature offer for April and May: Watchtower subscription for one year for a contribution of $5.00. Awake! subscription may be offered on same basis. Six-month subscriptions and one-year subscriptions to monthly editions are $2.50. June: True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? for a contribution of $1.00. July and August: One of the following magazine-size brochures for a contribution of 30¢: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, and The Government That Will Bring Paradise. Congregations that have the following books on hand may offer two for $1.00: Choosing the Best Way of Life, Commentary on the Letter of James, God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good, and Is the Bible Really the Word of God? (For obtaining credit, elders should refer to the guidelines in the Society’s letter of December 21, 1988.) Additional copies of Commentary on James may be ordered from the Society. Congregations should not order the other three books mentioned, since they are out of stock.
● District convention badge cards for 1989 in English and Spanish will be consigned and included with April literature shipments. It will not be necessary to order these. Based on the size of each congregation, consignments in lots of 25 will be made. The literature account will be billed at the rate of two cents per card. If additional badge cards are needed by the congregation, these should be ordered on a Literature Order form (S-14).
● Where practical, elders should make arrangements for congregation to share in evening witnessing as daylight hours increase.
● New Publications Available:
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Small size)​—Croatian
True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It?​—Fijian, Polish, Swahili
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Maori
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide—​Polish
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Niuean
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Niuean, Rarotongan
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986-1988​—English
Tract No. 13​—Ukrainian
Tract No. 15​—Arabic, Estonian, Ukrainian
Tract No. 16​—Arabic, Estonian, Ukrainian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Hosea through Malachi (set of three cassettes; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—English
Daniel (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—German
Joshua (set of two cassettes; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Italian
Daniel (set of two cassettes; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—Spanish

