Help Honesthearted Ones Escape From Babylon the Great
1 The strong warning recorded at Revelation 18:4 has taken on added urgency in view of our times. Any doubts as to the true identity of Babylon the Great have been dispelled. Clearly she has been exposed as the world empire of false religion used by Satan to fight against the seed of God’s “woman.”
2 Remaining within her makes one a sharer in her sins. However, more is required than just abandoning false religion. No one can remain indifferent with regard to true worship and yet expect to receive Jehovah’s blessings. Those fleeing Babylon must study God’s Word, join in proclaiming the good news, and become dedicated and baptized servants of God.
3 Do all who attended the Memorial on March 22 sense the urgency of getting out of Babylon and becoming wholly dedicated servants of Jehovah? We must help any indecisive ones to take their stand for Jehovah. (Jas. 1:8; 4:8) Make a special effort to get the hard-hitting April and May issues of The Watchtower into their hands. Help them to appreciate that since the time left is reduced, there is a pressing need for them to take their stand now.​—Matt. 12:30.
HELP NEW ONES
4 With the Memorial celebration fresh in our minds, April is a logical time to help new ones to realize that sharing in the field ministry is an excellent means for showing that they rightly esteem Jesus’ sacrifice. Yes, it is a necessary way to demonstrate how much we appreciate what Jehovah and his Son, Jesus, have done for us!
5 Do you conduct home Bible studies with a view to preparing students for the field ministry? They need progressive help and encouragement in order to develop appreciation for this Christian responsibility. Explain to your students the importance of field service, and demonstrate how it is done. You will find the brochure Doing God’s Will helpful in this regard.
MEETING THE REQUIREMENTS
6 When a Bible student has made substantial progress and shows a desire to help fulfill Matthew 24:14, it would be beneficial to review what is stated on pages 98 and 99 of the Our Ministry book. He should be able to qualify as one “handling the word of the truth aright.” (2 Tim. 2:15) Do not invite him to accompany you in the field service for the first time until the elders have authorized his participation. If it appears to you that he meets the Scriptural and organizational requirements, let the presiding overseer know about his progress. If the elders meet with one of your Bible students in April and they authorize his participation in the field service, teach him how to make the Watchtower subscription offer, and start training him in the house-to-house ministry.​—See The Watchtower of November 15, 1988, pages 16-17, paragraphs 7-10.
7 Babylon the Great is headed for absolute destruction! Before that happens, we need to help honesthearted ones to escape her clutches and to come into Jehovah’s organization. Millions have already been helped to do this. If it be Jehovah’s will, many more can be helped to make their flight out of the midst of Babylon as he blesses our zealous effort to find and care for the honesthearted ones in our territory.​—Jer. 50:8.

