Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING APRIL 3
Song 53
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements in Our Kingdom Ministry. Highlight key points in “Prepare for the Written Review.” Encourage all to offer current magazines this Saturday, using hard-hitting message against Babylon the Great. Show the striking covers of issues to be offered and make brief comment on contents. Announce group-witnessing arrangements for Sunday.
15 min: “Help Honesthearted Ones Escape From Babylon the Great.” Question-and-answer coverage by service overseer.
20 min: Assist Both New and Inactive Ones. Elder discusses need to assist inactive ones and others needing encouragement. What can the congregation do to help? Highlight need for all to cooperate closely in encouraging inactive ones and in strengthening others. (Heb. 6:1-3) Essential if we are to share in ‘fully accomplishing our ministry.’ (2 Tim. 4:5) Show how assistance can be given through the Congregation Book Study. Check Index to locate practical suggestions that apply locally.
Song 20 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 10
Song 8
 8 min: Warm welcome to meeting. Local announcements and accounts report. Comment briefly on current magazines being offered this Saturday.
23 min: “Give Close Attention to Personal Organization.” Elder should cover material in insert by audience discussion. He should ask questions of a practical nature that will draw out how the brothers may use the suggestions to improve their own personal organization. Also, ask for observations on what they are doing to use their time effectively.
14 min: “Using Our Defenses to the Full.” Question-and-answer discussion of material with emphasis on how it is being applied in the local congregation.
Song 136 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 17
Song 30
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Demonstrate two appropriate brief magazine presentations publishers can use this Saturday.
15 min: Strengthening Our Faith. Discuss with audience worldwide expansion and experiences from 1989 Yearbook that would particularly strengthen faith of local congregation. See pages 11-13, 42-3, 47, 49, 52-3, 82-3, 121-2, 127-9 as suggestions, though others not featured on Service Meeting for week of January 30 could be used.
20 min: “Renew Zeal by Applying Watchtower Suggestions.” Question-and-answer discussion. In discussing paragraphs 4-6, review the suggestions made on pages 16-20 of the July 15, 1988, Watchtower. Select and highlight one or two of those mentioned in the Watchtower article that would be most helpful in your local territory. Demonstrate the application of a suggestion given in the magazine.
Song 64 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 24
Song 200
10 min: Local announcements. Demonstrate brief presentation of current magazines to be offered this week. Feature articles in each issue that may have the most appeal locally. Encourage sharing in field service this weekend.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Using the Reasoning Book to the Full.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate the introduction featured in paragraph 3 and the suggestion for overcoming the potential conversation stopper mentioned in paragraph 4.
15 min: Local needs. Or talk on “Why Should We Fear God?” based on article in the January 1, 1989, Watchtower, pages 29-30.
Song 193 and concluding prayer.

