Prepare for the Written Review
1 Our Kingdom Ministry for December 1988 took note of the new arrangement for written reviews in the Theocratic Ministry School. These reviews will take place three times a year​—at the end of April, August, and December. Although a little more individual effort will be required, increased benefits will be reaped by those participating. As the previous article mentioned, a printed review sheet with space for filling in the answers will no longer be provided for written reviews. However, printed questions will be included with the April, August, and December issues of Our Kingdom Ministry. Having these sheets early will give each one the opportunity to research specific information so as to be thoroughly prepared.
2 When looking up cited information on which the printed questions are based, do not mark or write on the question sheet, since you will use this sheet of questions for taking the written review. Remember that only the Bible is to be referred to during the written review. Your personal notes or other references are not to be used at that time.
3 During the time allotted for the written review, you will need a separate sheet of paper for writing down your answers to the questions that call for an expression in your own words. Try to give specific information, and be brief. Since you will have prepared in advance, this should not be too difficult. When the answers are given by the school overseer, you will know if the information you have written down is correct.
4 Everyone should prepare well for the Theocratic Ministry School each week. Pay close attention during the meeting, and try to pick out key points as information is presented from the platform. The school overseer will make sure that all points to be considered on the next written review are clearly stated.
5 This new arrangement should give added incentive to everyone to be present and to participate in this feature of the Theocratic Ministry School. The added research involved should help establish key points clearly in our minds. With this new arrangement, the objective of the Theocratic Ministry School will be more fully accomplished. This should be reflected in our being better equipped for the work of the ministry.

