Renew Zeal by Applying Watchtower Suggestions
1 Christ Jesus is the perfect example of a zealous preacher of the good news. His earnest desire to do his Father’s will and his keen interest in people prompted him to show personal concern for others. His ministry was vibrant, and he got results. The ministry refreshed him. He considered it to be “food” that sustained him. (John 4:34) He imparted words of salvation to others while accomplishing the work that his Father commissioned him to do. This gave meaning and purpose to his life.
2 The apostles and other first-century followers of Christ Jesus imitated his zeal for the ministry. Even though severely persecuted at times, their zeal could not be dampened. (Acts 5:28-32; 8:1, 4) The same is true today. The good news is being preached in virtually every corner of the earth by individuals who follow the example of Jesus Christ. As Jehovah’s Witnesses, they are ever “zealous for fine works.”​—Titus 2:14.
3 If we lack zeal, our work becomes perfunctory, and our personal involvement becomes superficial. As a result, we may no longer find joy in our service. If we find ourselves in this position, we need to look for ways to renew our zeal and to accept the challenges the field ministry presents. The July 15, 1988, Watchtower article entitled “Pay Constant Attention to Your Teaching” highlighted practical suggestions to help us to strengthen or renew our zeal in Kingdom service.
CHALLENGES WE FACE
4 In many parts of the world, there is very little new or rarely-worked territory. In metropolitan areas, it is not uncommon for congregations to work their territory once a month or even once a week. This can present a challenge since many householders already know who we are and oftentimes attempt to stop the conversation before we can make a presentation. Perhaps they complain that ‘a Witness was here just last week.’ Many of our neighbors are not at home, or we may find that the people in our territory are apathetic. All these things can be discouraging. But have you applied the suggestions presented in paragraphs 4-7 of the above-mentioned Watchtower article?
5 Millions have already been gathered into the “great crowd” of “other sheep,” and millions more continue to respond to the good news of the Kingdom. (Rev. 7:9; John 10:16) However, presentations that were successful in the past may no longer arouse interest in our territories. We need to be alert to the type, quality, and effectiveness of our presentations and to be ready to make necessary adjustments.
6 Addressing this subject, The Watchtower gave some interesting recommendations on how to improve our ministry. It suggested ways of giving a thorough witness when we have to deal with apathy, with people in often-worked territory, and with householders that complain. Are we applying these suggestions, adapting our presentations to the needs of the territory? Are we taking advantage of the tools available to us to do this? Following the suggestions offered will help us to become more personally involved in the ministry. As we deliberately incorporate what has been outlined, we are stimulated mentally and become absorbed in the ministry. Thus, our zeal is renewed and intensified.
7 In view of present world conditions, it is quite evident that the great tribulation is drawing closer. This underscores the urgency of our message and the need to shine as a ‘light to the world.’ (Matt. 5:14, 16) Let us be diligent in applying the suggestions we have received and thus intensify our zeal for the ministry.

