Using Our Defenses to the Full
1 Satan is attacking families today, doing his best to destroy them. Christians know this only too well. How sad it would be for children to become involved in sexual immorality, drunkenness, drug abuse, or other wrongdoing! Some have actually seen their sons or daughters drift away from Jehovah, being caught up in worldly thinking and desires. (Prov. 10:1; 17:21) At the same time, many young people have stayed clean and have kept themselves busy in Jehovah’s service. Their course of conduct has brought honor to God and joy to their parents and others. (3 John 3, 4) What has made the difference? In many cases it was the determination of parents and children alike to use to the full the defenses provided.
2 At the “Divine Justice” District Convention, attention was given to the defenses parents and youths need today. Some of these were dealt with in the symposium “Disciplining in Righteousness Within the Family Circle” and the talk “Moral Cleanness Is the Beauty of Youth.” Do you remember this information, and have you applied it personally and in your family?
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES
3 An important defense is for fathers to understand fully Jehovah’s requirements for the head of a household and to recognize the need to rely on Jehovah for direction. If a family head is to teach his family Bible principles, he must first know them himself. But just knowing is not enough. Application of these principles must be made if the family is to derive the full benefit from them. A dedicated father should lead the family in a spiritual program of prayer, study, and sacred service. (1 Tim. 5:8) If he is to expect his wife and children to respect his authority, he must demonstrate joyfulness in his obedience to God and His organization. (1 John 5:3) When a father imitates Jehovah by dealing with his family in a warm, loving, and consistent manner, he gains their respect, and they will be more inclined to follow his example. This will bring praise and honor to Jehovah.
4 Do you remember the convention part “Parents​—Adapt Instructions to Reach Your Children”? It included a demonstration showing a family studying an article from the February 15, 1987, issue of The Watchtower. The parents took into consideration each child and the level of his ability to learn. It was not a mechanical question-and-answer routine, but the parents aimed at reaching the hearts of their children with the truth. You sisters may particularly recall how the mother was most supportive of her husband, indicating submissiveness and thus setting a good example for the children.​—Eph. 5:21-24.
CHILDREN​—WHAT DOES JEHOVAH EXPECT OF YOU?
5 Just as your parents are under attack by Satan, so are you. What is your defense? Obedience to Jehovah and to your parents. In the convention talks, fine suggestions were given to help you. Do you recall them? One point you may remember is that you cannot ride into the new world on your parents’ coattails. In other words, you must make the truth your own. Your parents feed and support you. They have been doing so for years. But as you mature, it is expected that you will take on spiritual responsibilities. Jehovah expects you to do what you know is right. (Eccl. 11:9) If you have learned that Jehovah’s way is right, then it is up to you to have the good sense to follow it.
6 As you grow older, the challenge to remain morally clean becomes more persistent. There is a worldwide epidemic of unclean influence, and you are faced with it every day. Your defense lies in loving what is good and hating what is bad. (Ps. 52:3; 97:10) Associate with those who love Jehovah. Read what is upbuilding. Watch what is wholesome. (Phil. 4:8) If tempted, remember the outcome of the young man in want of heart. (Prov. 7:6-27) Be guided by Jehovah in your thoughts and actions, and you will remain safely on his side.
7 Yes, parents and children alike must remain alert to the dangers that surround all of us. By using our defenses to the full, we can come off victorious in the fight and be privileged to praise Jehovah eternally.

