Questions From Readers
● How could there be a reference to “the whole field of the Amalekites” in Abraham’s day, as related in the Bible at Genesis 14:7, before Amalek was even born (Gen. 36:15-19)?​—J. E., U.S.A.
As Genesis 36:12, 15-19 shows, Amalek, a grandson of Esau, was among the fourteen sheiks of Edom. The name “Amalek” also designated his tribal descendants. (Deut. 25:17; Judg. 7:12) The belief of some that the Amalekites were of a much earlier origin and not descendants of Esau’s grandson Amalek is not founded on solid factual ground. For example, some have identified the Amalekites with those living in Melukhkha, a land the name of which appears in cuneiform inscriptions of about 2000 B.C.E. However, archaeological discoveries revealed that the land of Melukhkha was not the Sinai Peninsula and West Arabia as had been supposed, but that it was located in India.
Balaam’s proverbial utterance at Numbers 24:20 is sometimes used to support the belief that the Amalekites predated Amalek: “Amalek was the first one of the nations, but his end afterward will be even his perishing.” This, however, does not support such belief, for Balaam was not speaking of history in general and the origin of nations seven and a half centuries earlier. He was speaking of history only in connection with the Israelites whom he was hired to curse and who were about to enter the Promised Land. Hence, after listing Moab, Edom and Seir as Israel’s opponents, Balaam declared that the Amalekites were actually “the first one of the nations” to rise up in opposition to the Israelites on their march out of Egypt toward the Promised Land, and for this reason, the end of Amalek “will be even his perishing.” As a consequence, Jehovah decreed ultimate extinction for the Amalekites.​—Ex. 17:8-16; Deut. 25:17-19.
But now, what about the words at Genesis 14:7 in connection with Chedorlaomer king of Elam and his allied kings who “turned about and came to En-mishpat, that is, Kadesh, and defeated the whole field of the Amalekites”? Here Moses was relating events of Abraham’s day before Amalek was born, but he was describing the region in terms that were understood by people of Moses’ time, rather than implying that Amalekites predated Amalek. So Genesis 14:7 refers to the land afterward possessed by its well-known inhabitants, the Amalekites.
● Would having some fellow Christians over to one’s own home on New Year’s Eve be wrong?​—G. M., Canada.
It is not wrong to have fellow Christians to one’s home for upbuilding association and relaxation. However, if the occasion coincides exactly with a worldly celebration, there are some matters that the Christian would do well to consider before making a decision to arrange for or attend such a gathering.
Though customs vary from country to country, in many places it is traditional to stay up until midnight on December 31 to “watch the old year out.” This evening is often associated with unrestrained drinking, loose conduct between the sexes, gift giving and the making of promises to reform in the new year. The modern practices in many lands are directly linked with pagan celebrations. The 1966 World Book Encyclopedia, Volume 14, page 237, reports: “In ancient Rome, the first day of the year was given over to honoring Janus, the god of gates and doors and of beginnings and endings. . . . New Year’s Day became a holy day in the Christian Church in A.D. 487, when it was declared the Feast of the Circumcision. At first, parties were not allowed on this day because the pagans had followed that custom. This was gradually changed and celebrations could again be held.” (For more details, see Awake! of January 8, 1957, pages 21 through 23.)
Before bringing their lives into harmony with the Bible, some who are now Christians may have joined in such riotous living. But now they observe the inspired advice: “As in the daytime let us walk decently, not in revelries and drunken bouts, not in illicit intercourse and loose conduct.” (Rom. 13:13) They diligently strive to match Jesus’ description: “They are no part of the world.” (John 17:16) So without question Christians would avoid the New Year’s Eve celebrations related to pagan practices.
But does that mean that Christians have to avoid one another’s company on that day because it is misused by those doing “works belonging to darkness”? (Rom. 13:12) No, they do not have to do that. Some might arrange for a group of Christians to gather together on that day because it is an occasion when they are free from secular work and able to do so. The Christians in Jerusalem after Pentecost of 33 C.E. “took their meals in private homes and partook of food with great rejoicing and sincerity of heart.” (Acts 2:46) The association with fellow Christians and the spiritual discussions engaged in were no doubt very beneficial to those believers. And a gathering of Christians today has a similar effect, if Bible principles govern what is said and done.
If one is arranging a get-together for December 31, or planning to attend one, it would be good for him to examine his motive as well as the situation involved. Is the gathering planned because it is New Year’s Eve, or is there special enthusiasm about it because it falls then? Do the activities engaged in, or the time at which the gathering is over, indicate a copying of what the world does on that day? If so, regardless of what one may say, he is celebrating New Year’s and sharing with the world in its ways. What he is doing is not Christian.
So no “rule” need be established relative to this occasion. If Christians gather together out of the proper motive and if their conduct in every way befits Christians, then they certainly do not need to avoid one another’s company on any day simply because it is a day that the world misuses. Each Christian can take into consideration his own motive, Scriptural principles that apply and the proddings of his Bible-trained conscience. (1 John 2:15-17; Rom. 14:13; 1 Tim. 1:19) Then he can make a personal decision, seeking to set an example of Christian maturity that will have God’s approval. Paul encouraged us: “Keep on making sure of what is acceptable to the Lord.”​—Eph. 5:10.

