Real Security​—Where?
ABOUT three thousand years ago faithful King David of Israel confessed the source of his security. He wrote: “In peace I will both lie down and sleep, for you yourself alone, O Jehovah, make me dwell in security.” (Ps. 4:8) Yet in the years since those words were written, how many people have failed to look to Jehovah as the real source of security! Men, instead, put their hopes in bank accounts, old-age insurance and retirement plans. With the economic situation in the world subject to rapid change, how frail are the hopes of security based entirely upon finances!
With abundant proof that Jehovah is going to reestablish a paradise on the earth within our time, we have all the more reason to look to him for security. This attitude, though, came as a shock to an insurance man in Connecticut who called one evening at the home of one of Jehovah’s witnesses. The Witness relates what happened:
“He asked for a few minutes of my time to explain the highlights of an insurance program which he felt would be of interest and importance to me. Agreeing to a brief discussion, I listened as he outlined a security and retirement program. Though I was deeply impressed by his sincere manner, I couldn’t help smiling at his description of the benefits that would come to my family by the end of the century. Sensing my amusement, he asked, ‘Don’t you agree that a program of this nature is the most sensible approach to real security?’
“I replied, ‘My idea of what constitutes real security and your idea of real security are worlds apart.’ ‘What do you mean by that?’ he asked. Replying, ‘I’m glad you asked that question,’ I picked up my Bible and started to show him what I thought constituted real security.”
The conversation lasted a little over three hours​—five minutes for insurance, three hours for Bible truths. A number of times the insurance man asked, “But how do you know that’s true?” The minister responded, “You will never know or be sure unless you investigate for yourself, carefully, methodically, thoroughly.”
About a month later the minister was pleased to receive a phone call from the insurance man. It seems that he wanted a Bible in modern language, like the one that was used during the discussion. The Witness agreed to deliver one to his office and brought along a copy of a Bible-study aid. Accepting them, the insurance man asked, “What would I gain by studying the Bible as you suggest?” What would you say to that question? The minister answered: “The satisfaction of knowing the truth about God and his purposes for the earth and man. Also, the ability to gain his favor and merit life under the promised new system of things, not to mention finding real and permanent security.”
You can imagine the joy the Witness received to be able to give an affirmative reply to the question, “Could you arrange to have someone hold a weekly Bible discussion with me?” The insurance salesman is now rapidly increasing his knowledge of Bible truths.
How happy can be the lot of all such persons who now take a positive step toward acquiring real security! That security will be of the most dependable type, with Jehovah God as its Source. He assures us that the security of his new order will not be marred by wars or want. (Ps. 72:7, 16) Men will then experience security at Jehovah’s hand, for he promises: “I will make them lie down in security.”​—Hos. 2:18.

