District Convention Sounds a Stirring Call!​—Joyfully Praise Jehovah From Day to Day!
1 “If the trumpet sounds an indistinct call, who will get ready for battle?” asked the apostle Paul. (1 Cor. 14:8) Was the call that went out at the “Joyful Praisers” District Convention loud and clear? Yes, indeed. ‘Praise Jehovah joyfully and daily’ was the rousing message! Was your heart stirred by this call to action? The convention program abounded with powerful reasons for our constantly praising the King of eternity, Jehovah.​—Ps. 35:27, 28.
2 The awesome heavens declare Jehovah’s glory “one day after another day.” (Ps. 19:1-3) If voiceless, inanimate creations constantly give praise to Jehovah, should not we intelligent humans feel moved to lift our voices in praise to him at all times for his incomparable qualities and accomplishments? Who is more deserving of our joyful praise than our magnificent Creator?​—Ps. 145:3, 7.
3 From Day to Day: The inspired psalmist wrote: “From day to day tell the good news of salvation by him. For Jehovah is great and very much to be praised.” (Ps. 96:2, 4) Does this apply only to pioneers? No! Does this mean that all of us should talk to others about Jehovah whenever and wherever we can, even on days we are not engaged in the house-to-house ministry? Yes! The need to praise Jehovah daily and tell others about his means of salvation is urgent. People must know that Jehovah is the King Eternal and that He has given world rulership to His glorified Son, Jesus Christ. Love for Jehovah and for people will keep us talking about this message and about his provisions for salvation wherever people can be found.​—Ps. 71:15.
4 Every day of his earthly ministry, Jesus Christ set the finest example as a forthright praiser of Jehovah. He said: “I publicly praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth.” (Matt. 11:25) True to his word, wherever Jesus was, he publicly praised Jehovah. And wherever crowds would gather​—whether in the synagogues, at the temple in Jerusalem, on a mountaintop, or at the seashore—​he praised Jehovah. If we closely follow Jesus’ footsteps by maintaining daily, consistent activity in publicly exalting Jehovah, we will experience joyful, happy results.
5 Answering the Call: Will you answer the call to praise Jehovah publicly each day? Remember, age is no barrier. Psalm 148:12 invites young men, virgins, old men, and boys to praise Jehovah. Young ones, will you praise Jehovah among schoolmates and teachers during this new school year? Adults, are those you work with at your place of employment hearing about Jehovah and his purposes, when there is an appropriate occasion to talk together? All of us should make talking about Jehovah as much a part of our life as is breathing and eating. Even if apathetic people do not pay attention to what we say, there is One who does, and he will reward us.​—Mal. 3:16.
6 As the system’s end draws near, the call goes out to the ends of the earth: “Praise Jah, you people!” (Ps. 106:1) May our shout of praise grow louder with each passing day so that all will know that the One whose name is Jehovah is the Most High over all the earth.​—Ps. 83:18.

