Do All Things for God’s Glory
1 How refreshing it is to associate with our dear brothers and sisters! (1 Cor. 16:17, 18) We do this at meetings, at assemblies, at conventions, and in the field ministry. We also fellowship on informal occasions, as when we have guests visit in our home. Doing so, we show hospitality and encourage one another. (Rom. 12:13; 1 Pet. 4:9) When arranging wedding receptions, keep in mind the fine counsel in The Watchtower of April 15, 1984.
2 Organized Social Affairs: Whether we are “eating or drinking or doing anything else,” we should “do all things for God’s glory.” (1 Cor. 10:31-33) This counsel is not observed by some, and problems continue to develop because of social gatherings too large to be properly supervised. In some instances, hundreds of people are invited to elaborate functions where worldly entertainment is featured. Sometimes those attending are asked to pay admission or other fees. Such gatherings closely resemble worldly affairs, the spirit of which is out of harmony with decency and Bible principles.​—Rom. 13:13, 14; Eph. 5:15-20.
3 It has been reported that large numbers of Witnesses have gathered at rented facilities where the entertainment is unwholesome and worldly and where proper supervision is lacking. Similar activities advertised as a “Jehovah’s Witness” weekend have been held at hotels or resorts. Because of the difficulty in properly supervising such large groups, problems have developed. Rowdiness, overindulgence in alcoholic beverages, and even immorality have sometimes resulted. (Eph. 5:3, 4) Social gatherings where such conduct occurs do not honor Jehovah. Rather, they bring reproach upon the good name of the congregation and stumble others.​—1 Cor. 10:23, 24, 29.
4 Christians are encouraged to show hospitality, but the emphasis should be focused on the spiritual interchange. (Rom. 1:11, 12) Small get-togethers are usually best. The Our Ministry book says on pages 135-6: “At times, several families may be invited to a home for Christian fellowship. . . . Reasonably, those who are hosts in such cases should feel personally responsible for what takes place. With this in mind, discerning Christians have seen the wisdom of limiting the size of such groups and the duration of the gatherings.” Jesus indicated that nothing elaborate is needed when our goal is to encourage our friends spiritually.​—Luke 10:40-42.
5 It is a fine thing to show hospitality to fellow Christians. However, there is a big difference between a modest gathering in our home and an elaborate affair reflecting a worldly spirit in a rented facility. When you invite others to be your guests, you should be sure that you can assume full responsibility for what takes place.​—See The Watchtower of August 15, 1992, pages 17-20.
6 Truly, Jehovah has blessed us with a brotherhood from which we derive refreshing encouragement that motivates us to continue in fine works. (Matt. 5:16; 1 Pet. 2:12) By displaying modesty and reasonableness in social activities, we will always bring glory to our God and be upbuilding to others.​—Rom. 15:2.

