Examined by Jehovah​—Why Beneficial?
1 Everyone desires good health. It makes life much more enjoyable. Yet, many who enjoy good health still get a checkup occasionally. Why? They seek to detect any developing health problems so that measures can be taken to remedy them. It is even more important to safeguard our spiritual health. Jehovah’s approval depends on our keeping “healthy in the faith.”​—Titus 1:13.
2 Now is an appropriate time to be examined by Jehovah. Why so? Because Jehovah is in his holy temple, and he is examining the hearts of all men. (Ps. 11:4, 5; Prov. 17:3) Like David, we ask Jehovah to give us a thorough examination: “Examine me, O Jehovah, and put me to the test; refine my kidneys and my heart.”​—Ps. 26:2.
3 We must guard against threats to our spiritual health that may come from within us because of our imperfect flesh. Proverbs 4:23 counsels: “More than all else that is to be guarded, safeguard your heart, for out of it are the sources of life.”
4 Our spiritual health can also be threatened by the corrupt, immoral world that surrounds us. If we allow ourselves to get too close to this wicked system, we could begin to think as it does and develop worldly attitudes. Or we might adopt a worldly life-style and be overcome by the spirit of the world.​—Eph. 2:2, 3.
5 Satan may use persecution or direct opposition in an effort to devastate us spiritually. Far more often, however, he craftily uses worldly attractions to seduce us. Peter urges us to ‘keep our senses and be watchful,’ since Satan is “like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.” We are urged to ‘take a stand against him, remaining solid in the faith.’​—1 Pet. 5:8, 9.
6 There is a need to protect our spiritual health, keeping our faith strong by strengthening it each day. The apostle Paul recommends that we test our faith continually. Just as we wisely heed practical advice given to us by a competent doctor, we also listen to Jehovah when His spiritual examination reveals a problem that needs to be corrected. This makes it possible for us “to be readjusted.”​—2 Cor. 13:5, 11.
7 Jehovah is truly the great Examiner. His diagnosis is always accurate. He knows exactly what we need. Through his Word and ‘the faithful slave,’ he prescribes a healthful spiritual diet. (Matt. 24:45; 1 Tim. 4:6) Regular feeding on this diet of nutritious spiritual food at home and at congregation meetings enables us to keep spiritually healthy. Regular spiritual exercise in the ministry and other Christian activity is also beneficial. Therefore, we welcome a regular examination by Jehovah, confident that he will keep us in the best of spiritual health.

