What Goals Have You Set for Your Children?
1 Success in life depends on setting and achieving worthwhile goals. Those who pursue trivial or unrealistic goals end up disappointed and unfulfilled. It takes wisdom to discern which objectives to pursue in order to “get a firm hold on the real life.” (1 Tim. 6:19) How thankful we are that Jehovah, through his Word and organization, shows us exactly which way to go!​—Isa. 30:21.
2 In providing such loving guidance, Jehovah sets a fine example for parents. Instead of leaving it up to their inexperienced children to choose which way is best, wise parents train them in the way that they should go, and when they grow old, they “will not turn aside from it.” (Prov. 22:6) Christian parents know from experience that they cannot trust their own judgment; they must rely on Jehovah. (Prov. 3:5, 6) This need is even greater for children, who are limited in knowledge and experience.
3 Parents can set before their children worthwhile goals that will help them focus on “the more important things.” (Phil. 1:10) They can start with the family study, encouraging the children to appreciate its importance and to learn from it. It is good for children to acquire the habit of studying in advance for congregation meetings and preparing to offer comments in their own words. A regular share in the preaching work is important. Young children can contribute by offering tracts, reading scriptures, or presenting magazines. When they are able to read, enrollment in the Theocratic Ministry School can accelerate their spiritual progress. Qualifying as an unbaptized publisher or being accepted for baptism is a major step forward.
4 As their children approach the teenage years, or even earlier, parents should realistically talk to them about career goals. School counselors and classmates can easily influence them in favor of worldly, materialistic pursuits. Parents should assist their children to choose school courses that provide practical training, equipping them to care for their material needs without sacrificing Kingdom interests. (1 Tim. 6:6-10) They can be encouraged to pursue the “gift” of singleness, and then later, if they decide to marry, they will be in a position to assume the heavy responsibilities of marriage. (Matt. 19:10, 11; 1 Cor. 7:36-38) By speaking in a positive way about pioneering, serving where the need is greater, Bethel service, or missionary activity, parents can instill in children even at an early age a desire to use their lives in a way that pleases Jehovah, benefits others, and brings blessings to themselves.
5 It is not by accident that we have so many young people in the organization today who hold to high Christian values and pursue theocratic goals. Much of their success can be attributed to loving parents. If you are a parent, where do your children seem to be headed? Are they moving ahead progressively toward a life focused on Kingdom interests? Remember, one of the most important things you can do is to inculcate the truth in your children, and speak of it every day. You may be blessed with a household that is faithful in serving Jehovah.​—Deut. 6:6, 7; Josh. 24:15.

