Helping to Meet Some Critical Kingdom Hall Needs
1 The formation of 159 new congregations during the past service year and the continued growth in meeting attendance have resulted in a need for hundreds of new and expanded Kingdom Halls. Although the increased price of property and the ever-increasing cost of building materials have made it impossible for many congregations to build a new hall on their own, our unified efforts in combining contributions from all congregations into the Society’s Kingdom Hall Fund have made it possible for all to share in meeting some of the most critical needs. For example, three congregations were meeting in a building that was to be torn down to make way for a new highway interchange. Another congregation was meeting in the basement room of a brother who had to move.
2 The purpose of the fund is to help congregations that have a pressing need for a Kingdom Hall. If congregations wish to remodel an existing hall just for appearance’ sake or to replace an adequate Kingdom Hall with a more modern one, they should plan on financing their own project without assistance from the Society’s fund. The decision to do that would be made locally by the bodies of elders and the congregations. It is not appropriate for congregations to solicit contributions for Kingdom Halls from other congregations or ask them to provide food for workers on such a project. Of course, some nearby congregations may wish to be of help and volunteer such assistance, but this would be for them to decide.
3 On a local level, congregations contemplating building or remodeling in the future may have a local Building Fund contribution box, in addition to the box for the Society’s Kingdom Hall Fund. This will allow publishers to be of assistance in meeting their own local needs in addition to having a share in helping others.
4 Much still remains to be done. Congregations that have their Kingdom Halls paid for are generously contributing each month, thus helping others enjoy the blessing of having adequate Kingdom Halls, so that more individuals can gather with us, all to Jehovah’s praise.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.

