Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 3
Song 28
 7 min: Local announcements. Encourage magazine activity second Saturday of the month. Suggest presentations of current magazines.
10 min: “Helping to Meet Some Critical Kingdom Hall Needs.” Question-and-answer coverage. Include comments on how local congregation is cooperating with this arrangement and commend brothers for their good support.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Offering Subscriptions on Return Visits.” Question-and-answer coverage. Also demonstrate two of the points covered in paragraphs 2-6, in two separate brief demonstrations. Select the two that would be the most common situations in your territory.
10 min: Subscription experiences. Check ahead of time with the brother handling subscriptions to find out who have obtained subscriptions, and interview some as to how they obtained them. It would be good if some who obtained them in ways outlined in previous part could be included.
Song 181 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 10
Song 72
 8 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry that apply to the congregation.
17 min: “Help Students to Share ‘Healthful Words.’” Question-and-answer coverage. On paragraph 4 have demonstration of how one could progressively inform Bible students of congregation’s meeting program.
20 min: “Teaching on Return Visits.” Audience discussion of article. Demonstrate how one can use questions effectively to stimulate thinking of householder on return visits.
Song 211 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 17
Song 52
 8 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Remind congregation to bring December 15, 1984, Watchtower to next Service Meeting to discuss “Do You Remember?”
12 min: Benefiting From the Daily Text. Group of three or four publishers discuss with elder why and how they have benefited from regularly reading and thinking on the day’s text. Include discussion of text for the day.
10 min: “Studying the Divine Name Brochure.” Study conductor discusses points with a brother from his group who inquires about how it will be handled.
15 min: “Spring​—A Season for Extra Effort.” Question-and-answer coverage. Relate last year’s figures on auxiliary pioneers in local congregation. Briefly interview one or two who served as auxiliary pioneers in the past and who plan to do so this spring.
Song 119 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 24
Song 134
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Experiences from 1985 Yearbook. Two families enthusiastically discuss experiences found on pages 194-7 (from Zimbabwe, “Tie Him to a Tree and Let Him Die” and “Jehovah . . . Is Always With You”); pages 103-5 (from Jamaica, “Cautious as Serpents” and “Neutral Stand Respected”); and pages 238, 248-9 (from Bahamas, “Increase Despite Clergy Reaction” and “Another Contract Worker Learns the Truth”). Discuss benefits one receives by reading experiences and how we can use such to strengthen our family’s faith.
10 min: Use for local needs, or talk on “The Bible​—A Book to Be Read,” from the January 15, 1985, Watchtower, pages 30 and 31.
15 min: Conduct review of “Do You Remember?” in the December 15, 1984, issue of The Watchtower. Give preference to questions that are field oriented. Cover by audience participation.
Song 78 and concluding prayer.

