Spring​—A Season for Extra Effort
1 Most of us look forward to spring. Springtime is a season of refreshing changes. The coldness of winter surrenders to the warm air of spring. We delight to see renewed life and longer days. Yet a greater reason to look forward to spring is that it opens the way for many of us to put forth a greater effort in the ministry.
2 In the past, the months of March, April, and May have been especially good months for many publishers to serve as auxiliary pioneers. This year, those that have full-time secular jobs may find that March, which has five weekends, will be particularly suitable for them to devote 60 hours or more in the ministry. Can you do so? If so, blessings await you.
3 One brother with a full-time job determined that he could auxiliary pioneer by starting to witness in the business section of the territory early in the morning. This brother enjoyed many fine experiences including the starting of a new Bible study that he conducted during the morning before starting his secular work. Another brother who has to work full time decided he would auxiliary pioneer. Having this added motivation, he mustered up courage to do informal witnessing at his place of work. What joy he had in obtaining nine subscriptions from his fellow workers!
SPECIAL ACTIVITY IN APRIL
4 April has proved to be a special month for the auxiliary pioneer service. April 1983 saw 84,285 of us in the auxiliary pioneer work. That was an increase of 8,747 over April 1982. Could we reach that peak again? In April 1984 this peak was surpassed by 9,705 with a total of 93,990 auxiliary pioneers. This means that last April, on the average, each congregation in the United States had over 11 auxiliary pioneers. Also, almost 5.5 million hours in the ministry came from this group alone! What will happen this April?
5 Faith is what makes extraordinary things happen. Hebrews chapter 11 relates what marvelous things God’s servants accomplished because of faith. Without a doubt the “faithful work” of Jehovah’s people in modern times is likewise blessed! (1 Thess. 1:3) Will you too be moved by faith to join in the special effort that will be put forth this April? Of course, if you physically or circumstantially cannot be an auxiliary pioneer, you can demonstrate your faith by doing just as much as you can, and you can likewise expect Jehovah’s approval and blessing.​—Heb. 11:6.
6 Publishers in need of suggestions on how they can work things out in a practical way so as to auxiliary pioneer might talk to the service overseer or another elder. Elders can take the initiative to speak to certain ones they know qualify and who would enjoy this added privilege of service. A few kind words of encouragement or practical suggestions may be just what is needed. (Prov. 25:11) Also, in view of longer days and the increased field activity, it would be well for the elders to make arrangements for evening witnessing.
7 Let us pray for Jehovah’s blessing on our united efforts this spring so that many more thousands of people will come to enjoy “seasons of refreshing” through gaining a good relationship with our Heavenly Father.​—Acts 3:19.

