Evidence of a Creator
TAKE the most powerful telescope, and look into the immensity of the heavens. Peer through a modern microscope into the amazing intricacy of molecules and atoms. And what do we see? This​—that in the stupendously large, as well as in the minutely small, yes, in all the physical universe—​there is order, beauty and design. And where we see design, what do we conclude? Does not the Bible indicate the answer, at Hebrews 3:4?​—“Of course, every house is constructed by someone, but he that constructed all things is God.”
And what about order? It was the God-fearing scientist Sir Isaac Newton who first noted that things in the universe were moving from order to disorder. This led to the conclusion that, unless there is purposeful intervention by some outside force, every physical transformation in the world about us must be accompanied by a loss in design. The original design is breaking down. In the first place, then, Someone must have designed, created and put things in order. Without that Designer’s intervention, order will keep on breaking down.
That an intelligent Designer brought forth the universe is in harmony with what some scientists call the “big-bang” theory of creation. In recent years this theory has gained ascendancy over the “steady-state” theory, which claims that the universe has existed eternally, is without beginning. But we do not have to rely on the shifting sands of modern scientific theory to prove that there is a Creator. For the Creator himself makes clear who and what he is: “This is what Jehovah has said, . . . ‘I myself have made the earth and have created even man upon it. I​—my own hands have stretched out the heavens, and all the army of them I have commanded.’” (Isa. 45:11, 12) The evidence of his creatorship is to be observed and marveled at in so many things that we see around us.
“I . . . HAVE CREATED EVEN MAN”
No doubt, at some time or another, we have all fondled the tiny fingers of an infant​—so delicate, so beautifully formed, so precious—​so much more refined than animal claws! And no doubt we have reflected on how that baby’s small life got started from a mother’s egg the size of a pin point, by union with a father’s sperm far too small to be seen by the unaided eye. Yes, we all had a tiny beginning, in an egg cell that divided and divided, and kept on dividing, till finally the more than 10,000,000,000,000 cells that make up the adult human “knew” when to leave off dividing.
The entire process of conception and selective growth is marvelous beyond our comprehension. But it is not beyond the comprehension of God, for he is its Author. As King David said: “My bones were not hidden from you when I was made in secret. . . . Your eyes saw even the embryo of me, and in your book all its parts were down in writing.” Yes, it is according to the “blueprint” made by a loving Creator that we were formed, given a marvelous body and endowed with moral attributes and qualities designed to keep our lives in balance and to make living a constant delight. So we have every reason to join David in his melodious words uttered 3,000 years ago: “O Jehovah, you have searched through me, and you know me. . . . You kept me screened off in the belly of my mother. I shall laud you because in a fear-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, as my soul is very well aware.”​—Ps. 139:1, 13-16.
There is no end to the wonders built into God’s creation, man. How can some claim that life started by blind chance, and that man evolved from the amoeba by a series of accidents? In the infinitesimal human cell there are the ladderlike DNA molecules, each programmed for that particular individual, the same messages of life being written in each multiplying cell. These tell which cells must go to make up the eyes, the nose, the tongue, the ears, the teeth, the skin, the organs and all other body parts. They make sure that the “kind” is distinctly human, not ape or dog or any other lower animal. They spell out the inheritable characteristics of the individual. The specialized parts that come out of this growth process do indeed bespeak a brilliant Designer!
MAN’S MIND
Unquestionably the most amazing part of God’s earthly creation, man, is the brain, in which is centered the mind. The brain makes rapid growth, reaching three quarters of its adult weight in the first two years of life. No wonder that our toddlers are full of curiosity and questions: ‘Who made the sky? the birds? the cat? the flowers? Who made me?’ Why, even at that early age, the youngster has observed that things about him have makers. He concludes, therefore, that all things had a Maker. Why is it that so many adults have strayed from such logical reasoning?
The brain itself is a marvel of living electronics. Literally thousands of scientists may work for years in producing and programming a computer suited to a particular field. Yet they must concede that, if they produced a computer to match the capacity and versatility of the human brain, they would need a multistory skyscraper to house it all. Yet the three-pound human brain, small enough to hold in one hand, is fully equipped to take care of its own programming, and to handle every field essential to human living. Moreover, as it picks up its messages from the senses of sight, hearing, touch, taste and smell, and triggers the speech and actions of its owner, it serves on a plane that no man-made computer will ever be able to attain. And what computer will ever operate from a heart exercising love, human kindness, thankfulness, appreciation? What computer will ever think, reason, explain, or worship its Maker?
In contemplation of man’s marvelous makeup, and of all the created world about us, concerning God’s visible works, we can say with Job: “Look! These are the fringes of his ways, and what a whisper of a matter has been heard of him!” (Job 26:14) But we do not need to stop at hearing only a whisper concerning our Creator. If we search in his Word, the Bible, we can learn much, not only concerning his creation, but of the grand purpose that lies behind it all.

