





Imprisoned for Their Faith—Singapore


Eight young men who are Jehovah’s Witnesses are imprisoned in Singapore for their conscientious objection to military service. Five of them are serving a second sentence because they refused to change their stance after serving their first prison term. These young men have no legal recourse in Singapore, as the government enforces compulsory military service and does not recognize the right of conscientious objection.
When a young man turns 18 years of age, he is required to enter Singapore’s military. If he refuses for reasons of conscience, he is detained for up to 12 months in a military camp. At the expiration of his term, he is released and then immediately ordered to don a military uniform and participate in military training. If he again declines to do so, he is subject to a second court martial with a term of up to 18 months. Thus, young Witness men who conscientiously object to military service are subjected to two consecutive prison terms, for a total of up to 30 months of imprisonment.
Singapore’s Refusal to Comply with UN Directives
The United Nations has long appealed to member States to “recognize that conscientious objection to military service should be considered a legitimate exercise of the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion recognized by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” Although Singapore has been a member State since 1965, it has expressed its disagreement with the United Nations on this issue. In a letter dated April 24, 2002, addressed to the UN Commission on Human Rights, a Singaporean government official stated that “where individual beliefs or actions run counter [to the right of national defense], the right of a state to preserve national security must prevail.” In no uncertain terms, the official wrote, “We do not recognize the universal applicability of conscientious objection to military service.”
Prisoner of Conscience Profile





Yishuo Lin
Yishuo Lin has two younger brothers. His mother became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses when Yishuo was a young boy. Yishuo has always enjoyed studying the sciences. As he learned more about creation, Yishuo became convinced that God is real and that he is the Creator of all things. As Yishuo grew older, he compared what he had learned from the Bible with the teachings of other religions. This convinced him that he had found the truth.
From a young age, Yishuo was aware of the need for Christians to maintain their neutrality, particularly regarding military service. Through additional research and personal Bible study, Yishuo developed his personal conviction and determination to take a firm stand on this issue.
In-depth Bible study also prepared Yishuo for his eventual imprisonment and helped him to develop Christian qualities, such as love of neighbor and forgiveness. He also made preparations to care for his spiritual health once he was behind bars. Before being imprisoned, Yishuo wrote letters to himself containing Scriptural points and ideas. He then arranged for his mother to periodically send those letters to him in prison.
Yishuo keeps close in mind Psalm 118:6: “Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?” Yishuo says: “This scripture gives me the courage and strength to face whatever challenges come my way.”


To see a list of all of Jehovah’s Witnesses currently imprisoned for their faith in Singapore, click on the link below.
Imprisoned for Their Faith—Singapore (PDF)


Time Line
June 17, 2025
Total of eight of Jehovah’s Witnesses are in prison as conscientious objectors.






April 24, 2002
Government official confirms that Singapore does not recognize the right to conscientious objection.

February 1995
Increased repression and arrests of Singaporean citizens who are Jehovah’s Witnesses.

August 8, 1994
High Court of Singapore dismisses the Witnesses’ appeal.

January 12, 1972
Government of Singapore deregisters Jehovah’s Witnesses.



