





Imprisoned for Their Faith—Eritrea


For many years, the Eritrean government has arrested and imprisoned Jehovah’s Witnesses—including women and the elderly—without trial or formal charges. President Afwerki revoked the Witnesses’ citizenship by a presidential decree dated October 25, 1994, because they did not participate in the 1993 independence referendum and they conscientiously object to military service. Prior to enforcing conscription, the authorities in Eritrea provided for genuine alternative civilian service. Numerous Witnesses took part in this service under different government administrations. The authorities systematically issued “Certificates of Completed National Service” and often praised the participants for their work. On the basis of the presidential decree, however, security forces have imprisoned, tortured, and harassed Jehovah’s Witnesses in an effort to force them to renounce their faith.
At this time, 65 of Jehovah’s Witnesses are in prison (38 males and 27 females). In September 2024, this number rose significantly when security officials forced their way into a peaceful religious gathering being held in a private home and arrested 24 individuals. Two minors were subsequently released. A few days later, an 85-year-old female Witness was arrested. All 23 Witnesses were then transferred to the Mai Serwa Prison. On December 7, 2024, one of the Witnesses, Saron Ghebru, nine months pregnant with her first child, was released, and on January 15, 2025, 82-year-old Mizan Gebreyesus was released.
On November 1, 2024, national security officers again targeted the Witnesses, this time arresting four Witness students, ages 16 to 18. They were interrogated and immediately taken to the Mai Serwa Prison. On November 22, the officers took Almaz Gebrehiwot’s young daughter from her school to the police station. When Almaz went to the police station to retrieve her daughter, officials released her daughter but detained her instead. Almaz is currently being held in the 5th Police Station in Asmara.
Thankfully, two other female prisoners were recently released. Mikal Taddesse was released from the Mai Serwa Prison on February 25, 2025, and Berekti Gebretatyos was released from the Adi Abeto Prison on March 12, 2025.
Severe Prison Conditions
The Witnesses suffer extremely harsh conditions in Mai Serwa and other prison camps. Prisoners are tightly crowded into small cells where there is not enough space to lie flat, and they must sleep on their side squeezed against one another. Sanitation facilities are nonexistent. Men and women alike are allowed to relieve themselves only at fixed times—twice a day—while being watched by the soldiers. There is inadequate medical care, and an inadequate supply of food and water.
These harsh conditions have led to the death of four Witnesses imprisoned in Eritrea, and three elderly Witnesses have died after their release from prison because of the severe conditions they experienced while detained.
  In 2011 and 2012, two Witnesses died because of the inhumane treatment in the Meitir Prison Camp. Misghina Gebretinsae, aged 62, died in July 2011 as a result of the extreme heat he experienced in a punishment area described as the “underground.” Yohannes Haile, aged 68, died on August 16, 2012, after almost four years of imprisonment under similar conditions. 

  Three elderly Witnesses, Kahsai Mekonnen, Goitom Gebrekristos, and Tsehaye Tesfamariam, died after their release as a result of the conditions they endured while in custody in the Meitir Camp.

  In 2018, two Witnesses died after their transfer to the Mai Serwa Prison. Habtemichael Tesfamariam died at age 76 on January 3, and Habtemichael Mekonnen died at age 77 on March 6. Eritrean authorities had imprisoned both men in 2008 without charges.


Indefinite Prison Sentences
Most of the imprisoned Witnesses are incarcerated indefinitely, with no hope of release until they die or are near death. Since there are no effective domestic legal procedures or remedies available to them, their imprisonment amounts to a de facto life sentence.
Prisoner of Conscience Profile





Wintana Shewaseged
Born in Eritrea in 1989, Wintana Shewaseged was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses on August 5, 2007. Her commitment to her faith led to her imprisonment on April 27, 2014, when she was arrested during a religious meeting. Since then, she has remained in prison, enduring significant hardships because of her religious beliefs.
Wintana comes from a single-parent family. Her father is deceased, and her mother left the country due to religious persecution. Before her imprisonment, Wintana worked in the family business, where she designed, sold, and sewed clothes. She also studied accounting. Her creativity and generosity are well-known, as she often made gifts for others and enjoyed various handicrafts, including painting.
In addition, Wintana is known for her strong faith. Despite the challenges she faces, she remains hopeful and spiritually strong. Her love for the Bible has been a cornerstone of her life, providing her with the strength to endure her imprisonment. One of the passages that has particularly helped her is 2 Corinthians 4:7-9: “However, we have this treasure in earthen vessels, so that the power beyond what is normal may be God’s and not from us. We are hard-pressed in every way, but not cramped beyond movement; we are perplexed, but not absolutely with no way out; we are persecuted, but not abandoned; we are knocked down, but not destroyed.”


Recommendations by Preeminent Human Rights Bodies Ignored
Eritrea persists in disregarding international human rights standards. Major human rights bodies have condemned the violations of basic rights and continue urging Eritrea to rectify the situation.
  In 2016, the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in Eritrea determined that Eritrean authorities have committed a “crime against humanity” because of their “persecution on both religious and ethnic grounds” of Jehovah’s Witnesses and others.

  In 2017, the African Committee of Experts on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (ACERWC) expressed its concern that despite the existence of legal protections, “children who belong to the Jehovah Witnesses” are not able to enjoy the benefits of this right and face harsh treatment. The ACERWC recommended that Eritrea “recognise and fully implement a child’s Freedom of Thought, Conscience and Religion with no discrimination.”

  In 2018, the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights recommended that Eritrea “take urgent measures to address the denial of basic rights of all detained persons, including . . . members of the Jehovah Witness faith” and called for an investigation of the reported deaths of Witnesses in detention. The commission emphasized the need for Eritrea to ensure that Jehovah’s Witnesses “retain their citizenship rights.”

  In May 2019, the UN Human Rights Committee (CCPR) urged Eritrea to guarantee the effective exercise of freedom of religion and belief and to “release all persons arrested or detained for exercising their freedom of religion, including Jehovah’s Witnesses.” The CCPR also requested that Eritrea “ensure the legal recognition of conscientious objection to military service and provide for alternative service of a civilian nature for conscientious objectors.”

  In a report to the UN Human Rights Council dated May 7, 2024, the UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Eritrea stated: “Jehovah’s Witnesses face severe and specific forms of persecution, including through arbitrary detention and the denial of citizenship, documents and the attached rights and services.” The report called on the Eritrea government to “release immediately and unconditionally all those unlawfully and arbitrarily detained” and to “put an end to the practice of arrests and detention carried out without legal basis.”




To see a list of all of Jehovah’s Witnesses currently imprisoned for their faith in Eritrea, click on the link below.
Imprisoned for Their Faith—Eritrea (PDF)


Time Line
June 17, 2025
Total of 65 Witnesses imprisoned.






November 22, 2024
Almaz Gebrehiwot arrested for refusing to join the country’s political party.

November 1, 2024
Four Witness students arrested and transferred to the Mai Serwa Prison.

September 27, 2024
Twenty-three Witnesses arrested and transferred to the Mai Serwa Prison; two are subsequently released.

February 1, 2021
Three Witnesses released from prison.

January 29, 2021
One Witness released from prison.

December 4, 2020
Twenty-eight Witnesses released from prison.

March 6, 2018
Death of Habtemichael Mekonnen, aged 77, after his transfer to the Mai Serwa Prison.

January 3, 2018
Death of Habtemichael Tesfamariam, aged 76, after his transfer to the Mai Serwa Prison.

July 2017
All Witnesses detained in the Meitir Camp transferred to the Mai Serwa Prison outside of Asmara.

July 25, 2014
Most of those arrested on April 14 are released, but 20 of those arrested on April 27 remain detained.

April 27, 2014
Thirty-one Witnesses arrested during a Bible study meeting.

April 14, 2014
More than 90 Witnesses arrested during the annual observance of the Memorial of Christ’s death.

August 16, 2012
Death of Yohannes Haile, aged 68, while imprisoned under extreme conditions.

July 2011
Death of Misghina Gebretinsae, aged 62, while imprisoned under extreme conditions.

June 28, 2009
Authorities raid a Witness home during a religious service and arrest all 23 Witnesses present, ages 2 to 80.

April 28, 2009
Authorities transfer all but one of Jehovah’s Witnesses jailed in police stations to the Meitir Prison Camp.

July 8, 2008
Authorities begin raids of homes and places of work to arrest 24 Witnesses, most of them breadwinners of their families.

May 2002
Government closes down all religious groups not operating under the four government-approved faiths.

October 25, 1994
Presidential decree strips Jehovah’s Witnesses of citizenship and basic civil rights.

September 17, 1994
Paulos Eyassu, Isaac Mogos, and Negede Teklemariam imprisoned without charge or trial.

1950’s
First communities of Jehovah’s Witnesses established in Eritrea.



