





Imprisoned for Their Faith—South Korea


On October 26, 2020, for the first time in history, conscientious objectors to military service in South Korea were given the opportunity to perform alternative civilian service. However, human rights authorities have branded South Korea’s alternative service system as punitive and discriminatory, both in its duration and severity. The 36-month alternative service is twice the length of active military service, which is contrary to international standards. According to these standards, alternative service should not exceed one and a half times the length of military service, unless there are reasonable and objective reasons. A few South Korean Witness men have declined to accept this alternative service program. Some have filed complaints to the courts. On May 30, 2024, South Korea’s Constitutional Court dismissed all complaints to alternative service in a 5-4 decision. However, in its dissenting opinion, the court highlighted the punitive nature of alternative service: “Such alternative service would be nothing more than another form of punishment that violates the freedom of conscience of conscientious objectors.”
Woo-jin Byeon, a 29-year-old married man, is the first conscientious objector in South Korea to be imprisoned for objecting to the alternative service. He made a personal decision to respectfully decline alternative service. Although he expressed his willingness to accept a nonpunitive alternative service should it become available, on July 24, 2024, the court sentenced him to one year and six months in prison.
To date, 14 Witness men have objected to serve in the alternative service system, including Mr. Byeon, and 11 men are currently on trial. Depending on the outcome of their trials, they too face criminal punishment and imprisonment. Meanwhile, the majority of conscientious objectors have decided to perform alternative service despite its punitive nature.
Prisoner of Conscience Profile





Woo-jin Byeon
Woo-jin Byeon was born in October 1995 in Seoul, South Korea, to Witness parents, and he was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in 2012. He studied dental technology and later worked in various jobs, including at a car wash company and in telemarketing.
In September 2019, Woo-jin married Joo-yeon Shin. He is known for his outgoing personality and enjoys sports and outdoor activities, particularly tennis and running.
Woo-jin is the first conscientious objector in South Korea to be imprisoned for refusing alternative service. He personally decided to reject alternative service, arguing that it is punitive in nature and infringes on his constitutionally protected rights. Although he has expressed a willingness to accept nonpunitive alternative service, the court sentenced him to 18 months in prison.


To see a list of Jehovah’s Witnesses currently imprisoned for their faith in South Korea, click on the link below.
Imprisoned for Their Faith—South Korea (PDF)


Time Line
July 24, 2024
Woo-jin Byeon sentenced to 18 months in prison for his refusal of alternative service.

November 10, 2022
After receiving a notice of enlistment, Woo-jin Byeon sends a letter to the Military Manpower Administration objecting to military service and alternative service for reasons of conscience.

October 26, 2020
The South Korean government initiates alternative service for conscientious objectors.

November 1, 2018
South Korea’s Supreme Court decides in a 9-4 decision that conscientious objection does not constitute a crime.

June 28, 2018
South Korea’s Constitutional Court declares a section of the Military Service Act unconstitutional, as it does not provide alternative service for conscientious objectors.

October 18, 2016
Gwangju Appellate Court renders the first not-guilty decisions on appeal by three conscientious objectors.

August 30, 2011
Constitutional Court again upholds law punishing conscientious objectors.

August 26, 2004
Constitutional Court upholds the constitutionality of law punishing conscientious objectors.

1975
Government institutes coercive military conscription requiring 100 percent participation.

1973
Government begins torture of imprisoned Witnesses that persists into the mid-1990’s.

1953
Government imprisons first Witness conscientious objector.



