





Imprisoned for Their Faith—Russia


The history of Jehovah’s Witnesses in modern-day Russia is an account of oppression and persecution. For much of the 20th century, Russian authorities abused and mistreated the Witnesses, although they were known to be peaceful, law-abiding citizens. The aim of the government of the Soviet Union was to coerce them into accepting Soviet ideology. They were forbidden to possess Bibles or religious literature. They were under constant surveillance and had to hold their religious meetings in secret. If discovered, they were subjected to beatings and long prison sentences. The government exiled thousands to Siberia.
That began to change in 1991, when the Russian government granted legal recognition to Jehovah’s Witnesses and allowed freedom of worship without interference from the authorities. However, that period of peace did not last long.
In 2009, opposition and restrictions began to escalate when the Russian Supreme Court upheld the decision of a lower court to label a congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses as “extremist.” After years of legal battles, in April 2017 the Russian Supreme Court ruled to liquidate the Witnesses’ legal entities for alleged extremist activity. Immediately, the Russian authorities took steps to confiscate their property, close down their places of worship, and declare their religious literature to be “extremist material.”
Not stopping with their attack against the Witnesses’ legal entities, Russian authorities have chosen to target Jehovah’s Witnesses individually. Overreaching, they associate private worship of individual Witnesses with the banned organization. Police raids of the Witnesses’ homes bring abusive treatment and harsh interrogations. Both male and female Witnesses of all ages have been arrested, placed under house arrest or in pretrial detention, convicted, and sentenced to prison.
Since the April 2017 ban, hundreds of Witnesses have been sentenced to pretrial detention or imprisonment under the charge of extremism. As of June 17, 2025, a total of 160 Witnesses are imprisoned.
Outcries Against Russia’s Harsh Treatment of Jehovah’s Witnesses
Russian authorities continue to convict Witnesses of extremist activity despite an international outcry for Russia to stop its relentless persecution. Informed observers and courts outside of Russia have censured the Russian government for its unyielding oppression of Jehovah’s Witnesses.

European Court of Human Rights: On June 7, 2022, the European Court of Human Rights released a landmark judgment against Russia, condemning their persecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses (Taganrog LRO and Others v. Russia, nos. 32401/10 and 19 others). The Court declared that it was unlawful for Russia to ban Jehovah’s Witnesses in 2017. Russia was ordered to “take all necessary measures to secure the discontinuation of all pending criminal proceedings against Jehovah’s Witnesses . . . and release . . . [imprisoned] Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Further, it was ordered to return all confiscated properties or pay over 60 million dollars in compensation and to pay the applicants over 3 million dollars in nonpecuniary damages.
Letter from the Secretary General of the Council of Europe: In a letter dated December 9, 2022, addressed to the Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Marija Pejčinović Burić stated: “In the cases of Jehovah’s Witnesses of Moscow and Others and Krupko and Others, concerning the dissolution of the applicant religious community entailing a ban on its activities, dispersal of a peaceful religious ceremony and the subsequent deprivation of liberty of some of its participants, the Committee strongly urged the authorities to reverse the ban imposed on the activities of all Jehovah’s Witnesses organisations and to discontinue all criminal proceedings against them.”
Decision of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe: At their September 2023 meeting, the Committee of Ministers [CoM] noted “with the gravest concern that the [European Court of Human Rights’] unequivocal indications under Article 46 of the Convention and in the operative part of the judgment Taganrog LRO and Others were fully and deliberately ignored by the Russian authorities, particularly as regards . . . releasing the imprisoned Jehovah’s Witnesses.” In view of Russia’s noncompliance, the CoM “decided to bring this group of cases to the attention of the United Nations Human Rights Committee, the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention of the UN Human Rights Council, and other relevant international bodies dealing with the problem of persecution of the Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Russian Federation, with the aim of ensuring compliance with the requirements of the judgments concerned.”

Examples of Recent Harsh Judgments
  On March 27, 2025, the Konakovo City Court of the Tver Region convicted four Witness men: Oleg Katamov, Aleksey Kuznetsov, Aleksandr Shchetinin, and Aleksandr Starikov. Their crime? Discussing the Bible with their neighbors and conducting peaceful religious meetings. The four men were each given a prison sentence of six years and were taken into custody from the courtroom.

  On April 3, 2025, the Sovetskiy District Court of the City of Chelyabinsk convicted Maksim Khamatshin and sentenced him to six years in prison. Maksim was charged with conducting religious meetings; he was taken into custody from the courtroom.

  On May 30, 2025, the Leninskiy District Court of Tambov sentenced 60-year-old Oleg Sirotkin to six years in a penal colony. Oleg is married to Nataliya and has two daughters. His ordeal began in September 2021 when law enforcement officers searched their home in Tambov. Oleg was accused of organizing and participating in religious meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses, which authorities consider tantamount to continuing the activities of an extremist organization. He was taken into custody from the courtroom.


Continued Efforts to End Unjust Imprisonments
Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide are greatly distressed by Russia’s harsh treatment of their fellow believers. Millions of Witnesses all over the world have sent letters to Russian government officials, appealing to them in behalf of imprisoned Witnesses. Attorneys for imprisoned Witnesses have filed appeals at every level of Russian courts and scores of applications to the European Court of Human Rights. Jehovah’s Witnesses have also submitted complaints to the UN Human Rights Committee and the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention and have provided reports to international organizations that monitor human rights abuses. Jehovah’s Witnesses will continue to pursue all avenues to raise awareness of the plight of their fellow believers in Russia in order to end this grave religious persecution.
Prisoner of Conscience Profile





Anatoliy Marunov
In October 2021, one of Jehovah’s Witnesses from Moscow, a peaceful and exemplary family man who has been married for almost half a century, suddenly found himself accused of organizing the activities of an extremist organization.
Anatoliy was born in November 1953 in the city of Izmail (Ukraine) and is an only child. During his school years, he built model ships and also studied at a music school. His family lived for several years in Tallinn (Estonia).
After serving in the army, Anatoliy moved from Tallinn to Moscow to further his education. After studying for three years, he was forced to leave university to take care of his family. Anatoliy worked for almost 40 years for Krasnaya Zvezda, the official newspaper of the Ministry of Defense. Anatoliy’s responsibilities included prepress, that is, typesetting and layout of text and processing of illustrations. He is now retired. In his spare time, he likes to work on cars.
While attending school in Moscow, Anatoliy met Alevtina. They married in 1975 and raised two sons. Alevtina had always been interested in religion and soon started to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. She was baptized in 1994, and Anatoliy was baptized in 1999. He was impressed by the Bible’s consistency as well as by fulfilled prophecy.
The criminal prosecution completely changed the life of the Marunov family. Anatoliy is now serving a six-and-a-half-year prison sentence and is due to be released in July 2028.


To see a list of all of Jehovah’s Witnesses currently imprisoned for their faith in Russia, click on the link below.
Imprisoned for Their Faith—Russia (PDF)


Time Line
June 17, 2025
Total of 160 Witnesses imprisoned.






March 6, 2025
The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) releases a judgment in the case of Loginov and Others v. Russia, concluding that Russia violated the rights of nine Witness men who were unlawfully detained (seven of whom were tortured) following a raid of their homes in Surgut on February 15, 2019.

October 24, 2023
The UN Human Rights Committee (CCPR) releases two Views involving the Elista and Abinsk Local Religious Organizations. In both cases, the CCPR concluded that Russia violated the Witnesses’ rights under Articles 18.1 (“right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion”) and 22.1 (“right to freedom of association”) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The decisions confirm that there is nothing in their religious literature that incites hatred or violence.

June 7, 2022
The ECHR releases landmark judgment, Taganrog LRO and Others v. Russia, condemning Russia for its mistreatment of Jehovah’s Witnesses.

January 12, 2022
The Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation adds the JW Library application to the Federal List of Extremist Materials. This is the first and only app to be banned in Russia as extremist.

September 27, 2021
The Saint Petersburg City Court rejects the appeal against the decision of March 31, 2021, which declared the JW Library app extremist and banned its use throughout the Russian Federation and Crimea. The court’s original decision goes into effect immediately.

April 26, 2019
The UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention finds that the rights of Dmitriy Mikhailov have been violated and denounces Russia’s persecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses.

April 20, 2017
The Supreme Court of the Russian Federation rules to liquidate the national office of Jehovah’s Witnesses and 395 Local Religious Organizations.



