





Imprisoned for Their Faith—Ukraine


For almost three decades, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Ukraine have benefited from a law granting conscientious objectors the right to perform alternative civilian service. Performing such service allows them to engage in various forms of public service and maintain their conscientious position.
However, the beginning of the war in Ukraine on February 24, 2022, revealed the absence of a legal mechanism for alternative civilian service during mobilization, leading to the criminal prosecution of hundreds of conscientious objectors. This situation fails to acknowledge the deeply held beliefs that motivate their uncompromising stance and does not respect their right to act according to their conscience. Such treatment is inconsistent with the principles of human rights and the Constitution of Ukraine, which states: “In the event that the performance of military duty is contrary to the religious beliefs of a citizen, the performance of this duty shall be replaced by alternative (nonmilitary) service.”
As of June 17, 2025, a total of four Witness men are in prison for conscientious objection and are serving sentences of 36 months. An additional three Witness men are currently in pretrial detention, awaiting sentencing.
Concerns of International Bodies
Observing these trends, three UN Special Rapporteurs have raised concerns about the absence of alternative civilian service in Ukraine. In their communication to the government of Ukraine, dated November 8, 2023, they stated: “We are also concerned about the prosecution of persons who refuse to perform the compulsory military service based on reasons of conscientious objections, including those who are involved in advocating the right to conscientious objection to military service.”
Prisoner of Conscience Profile





Andrii Khomenko
Andrii Khomenko was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in 2002. He and his wife, Iryna, are raising two boys. As a family, they regularly study the Bible and share thoughts of comfort and hope from the Bible with people in their community. Immediately after the war began in 2022, Andrii volunteered to help displaced individuals find accommodations and get medications for elderly people.
Motivated by his sincere religious beliefs, Andrii requested alternative civilian service when he was drafted into the army in March 2024. His request was rejected, and a criminal prosecution was initiated. As a result, on July 26, 2024, the Okhtyrka District Court convicted Andrii of evading military service and sentenced him to three years in prison. He appealed the conviction, but the decision was upheld by the Sumy Court of Appeal on December 23, 2024. On February 3, 2025, Andrii was imprisoned.


To see a list of all of Jehovah’s Witnesses currently imprisoned for their faith in Ukraine, click on the link below.
Imprisoned for Their Faith—Ukraine (PDF)


Time Line
June 17, 2025
Total of seven Witnesses imprisoned.

February 24, 2022
Martial law introduced, and full mobilization begins.

June 23, 2015
High Court of Ukraine upholds right to conscientious objection during military mobilization in the case of Vitaliy Shalaiko.

December 1991
Law on Alternative (Nonmilitary) Service adopted.

February 28, 1991
Jehovah’s Witnesses officially registered in Ukraine.



