Announcements
● Literature offer for October: Subscription for either Awake! or The Watchtower, or both, for a contribution of $4.00 for each one-year subscription. November: New World Translation and True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? The contribution is $4.50. December: My Book of Bible Stories for contribution of $2.50. New “Look!” brochure will be used as alternate offer for 30¢. January and February: Any of the following books for a contribution of 50¢: Choosing, Commentary on James, Evolution (old edition), Holy Spirit, Life Does Have a Purpose, Peace and Security (old edition), This Life, World Government. Congregations may request credit for all books obtained by publishers and pioneers. The pioneer rate for the pocket-size books for this campaign is 30¢ each for regular and special pioneers. Supplies of Choosing, Commentary on James, and Holy Spirit may be ordered from Brooklyn.
● With this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, we are including the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1987. This will enable school overseers to become familiar with the instructions and make assignments well in advance. All should become familiar with the instructions so as to prepare and present assignments properly.
● New Publications Available:
Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? (Small size)​—English, Spanish
True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It?​—Tagalog
Aid to Bible Understanding
(Volume 38, Qua-Ret)​—Italian
(Volume 39, Ret-Rut)​—Italian
(Volume 40, Rut-San)​—Italian
(Volume 41, San-Sco)​—Italian
(Volume 42, Ser-Sim)​—Italian
(Volume 43, Sin-Spi)​—Italian
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Sepedi
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1983​—Italian
Kingdom News No. 31​—Japanese
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Genesis (set of four; congregation and public: $6.00; pioneers: $5.00)​—German
Exodus (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—German
Leviticus (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—German
Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—German
● Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1987: Publishers and pioneers, please order your Examining the Scriptures booklets through the congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these booklets now. Then on October 1, 1986, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). Examining the Scriptures booklets in other languages should be listed under “Other Language Publications,” showing the quantity for each language separately as well as the year 1987. The Examining the Scriptures booklets will be available in Arabic, Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Samoan, Spanish, and Swedish. Until the Examining the Scriptures booklets are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices. The Examining the Scriptures booklets are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at 30¢ each, which is the publisher rate. Regular and special pioneers on the list before July 1, 1986, may receive one free copy and obtain additional copies at 20¢ each. A separate entry should be made on the monthly remittance (S-20) showing free copies to pioneers. (See the 1986 Cost List, pars. 23-25.)
● The following publications are now available in grade-two English Braille:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Genesis through Judges; bound in durable vinyl, set of four volumes: $32.00, or $8.00 per volume, arranged as follows: Volume 1, Genesis through Exodus chapter 11; Volume 2, Exodus chapter 12 through Leviticus; Volume 3, Numbers through Deuteronomy chapter 22; Volume 4, Deuteronomy chapter 23 through Judges.)
True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? (Four volumes. May be requested on a loan basis or purchased for $5.00.)
Examining the Scriptures Daily​—1987 (Four volumes: $5.00)
Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1987 (Free upon request.)
To obtain Braille publications, send separate order, including remittance if purchased, and name and address of the person that will use them. Mark order: ATTENTION: BRAILLE DESK.

