Convention Releases Equip Us to Do God’s Will
1 The apostle Paul expressed the desire that “the God of peace” equip his servants “with every good thing to do his will.” (Heb. 13:20, 21) That is the desire of “the faithful and discreet slave” today and it prompts the providing of what is needed. (Matt. 24:45) Was that not evident at the “Divine Peace” District Convention, especially with regard to the new literature releases? We should not put off using these ‘good things’ provided to strengthen and equip us to accomplish our God-assigned work.
2 On the first day of the convention, we were happy to receive the 32-page brochure “Look! I Am Making All Things New.” The new brochure has large, easy-to-read type and numerous teaching illustrations. Using the “Look!” brochure to start new home Bible studies will undoubtedly help many to get started on the way to life.
3 The second release of the convention was another magazine-size, four-color brochure entitled Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide. The use of this brochure is discussed on page 7.
4 Following an absorbing talk on the fulfillment and modern-day application of the prophecies found at Isaiah chapters 7 to 9, we were delighted to receive the new pocket-size book entitled Worldwide Security Under the “Prince of Peace.” This publication was especially prepared for the encouragement of Jehovah’s people. If you have not yet done so, we urge you to read it carefully. You will be well rewarded. Your appreciation for Jehovah’s service will increase as you consider the modern-day fulfillment of two of Jesus’ parables recorded at Matthew 25:1-30. As you read about the tremendous work and privileges in Jehovah’s new system of things, it will build up your anticipation for what is in store for Armageddon survivors. The explanation of how Christ Jesus becomes an “Eternal Father” to redeemed members of the human family will draw you closer to Jehovah God and his “Prince of Peace.” (Isa. 9:6) The descriptions of Jehovah’s coming war against the nations are thrilling. Many spiritual treasures are waiting to be discovered in the pages of our new Worldwide Security book. Are you searching them out?
5 We were delighted on Sunday morning to hear an excerpt from the new cassette tape Kingdom Melodies No. 7. Many are already enjoying its refreshing musical arrangements.
6 As a happy surprise at the close of the “Divine Peace” District Convention, we learned that the Society has prepared a single-volume Watch Tower Publications Index for 1930-1985. It will surely be an aid for research and a stimulus to our personal study!
7 These valuable gifts through Jehovah’s organization demonstrate once again that Jehovah knows what things we need in order to do his will. (Matt. 6:8) Through the faithful slave he has fully equipped us for the work ahead. May we show our support and deep appreciation by putting these fine provisions to good use.

