Make Effective Use of New Brochure
1 A highlight of last summer’s “Divine Peace” District Convention was the release of the brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide. This new brochure was produced with the object of helping our Bible students to become acquainted with the only visible organization Jehovah is using today to accomplish his will.
2 For many years the Society has been suggesting that at the conclusion of each Bible study we take a few minutes to discuss at least one feature or aspect of the modern theocratic organization. In this way newly interested people can more readily appreciate the significance and value of the Bible truths they are learning. The new brochure, with its many color illustrations, should prove to be most valuable in conducting these instructive discussions.
HOW TO USE IT
3 The brochure features 15 headings, from “We Want to Be of Help” to “United in Doing God’s Will.” There is enough information under some of the headings for several discussions. Take time to read all the cited scriptures with the Bible student. You will find several review questions at the conclusion of most of the sections. These can be used to good advantage in highlighting the main points. Remember, though, the discussions should be brief and should not overshadow the material considered in the Bible study itself.
4 You will want to become familiar with the brochure as soon as possible. Carry your personal copy with you in the field ministry. There may be opportunities to use it in the door-to-door work. Sincere people we meet may have heard false statements about Jehovah’s Witnesses, and the brochure can be used to help correct their mistaken views of our work and beliefs. The most important use of the brochure, however, will be as a basis for discussions about the organization at the conclusion of a Bible study.
5 One section of the brochure deals with “Meetings for Inciting to Love and Fine Works.” You can use this information to emphasize the importance of Christian meetings and encourage the student to attend regularly. When talking about the Congregation Book Study, you can explain how it is conducted and show the student the publication currently being studied. Especially now you can highlight the timeliness of the information in the True Peace book. Since the Congregation Book Studies are conducted at a pace that allows for reading all the cited scriptures, it should be easy for even beginning students to follow along and participate in the study by reading scriptures and commenting if they wish to do so. The small groups give opportunity for all to share and to get acquainted with one another.
6 How favored we are to be alive at this time of the end when Jehovah has restored true worship among his chosen ones here on earth. Millions are recognizing the lead of the spirit-anointed followers of Christ and are beginning to say: “We will go with you people, for we have heard that God is with you people.” (Zech. 8:23) The new brochure is yet another timely instrument that we can use to help these newly interested ones continue their progress as they grow in appreciation of Jehovah’s modern-day theocratic organization. Let us use it to good advantage in directing newly interested persons to Jehovah’s organization.

