Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 28
Song 192
10 min: Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry that apply locally, local announcements, and Theocratic News. Animated discussion between two brothers. Do not just read. Emphasize fact that November has five full weekends and so would present a fine opportunity to auxiliary pioneer. Can request application from presiding overseer. Encourage all to share in field ministry the first Sunday of October.
20 min: “Jesus’ Life and Ministry.” Lively family discussion on how much they have benefited from material since it first appeared in April 1, 1985, Watchtower. Father asks specific questions of children on how they have personally benefited from recent articles in this series. Highlight Jesus’ devotion to true worship and importance of his ministry.​—John 4:34, 35.
15 min: Do You Prepare for the Field Ministry? Talk by service overseer stressing importance of being prepared before starting in service. Need to be familiar with contents of literature being offered and have Topic for Conversation well rehearsed. Not use Sunday for magazine witnessing if congregation features magazines on another day. Have publisher or pioneer demonstrate current Topic for Conversation and offer subscription. Keep presentation simple. Service overseer can also point out highlights of October 1 and 8 magazines: “Daniel’s Prophecy​—Dreams That Affect You” and “Cancer—​Can You Beat It?”
Song 156 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 5
Song 211
10 min: Local announcements. Call attention to article “Awake! Also in Full Color,” suggesting that publishers consider their need for additional copies. Encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday. Suggest talking points in current magazines for use in local territory.
17 min: “Let Anyone Hearing Say: ‘Come!’” Questions and answers. Arrange in advance local experiences of new ones witnessing to others.
18 min: Christian Youths Offer Themselves Willingly. Elder in informal setting has friendly conversation with two teenage publishers. Asks about school. They mention efforts to involve them in extracurricular activity in and away from school. Elder kindly gets their thoughts on such matters. Discusses Psalm 110:2, 3 and symbolic “horses” of Revelation 9:14-19. Includes points from March 1, 1981, Watchtower, pp. 18-22. Concludes conversation by encouraging magazine activity and arranges to work with them second Saturday of month.
Song 157 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 12
Song 180
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly discuss talking points in October 15 Watchtower and October 22 Awake! magazines: “The Global Power Struggle​—Who Will Win?” and “How Safe Are the Banks?”
18 min: “Convention Releases Equip Us to Do God’s Will.” Question-and-answer discussion by elder. Ask for comments from audience on benefits gained already from use of convention releases.
17 min: “Developing the Art of Teaching.” Talk based on study 10 in Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook. Review instructions in Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1987.
Song 78 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 19
Song 106
12 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Include report of any contributions sent by congregation to Society for Kingdom work or for Society Kingdom Hall Fund as noted on September literature statement or other statements from Society. Encourage all to share in magazine activity on fourth Saturday. Have well-qualified publishers demonstrate two 30- to 60-second presentations. Remind publishers to be prepared for subscription offer by having subscription blanks with them. Review reasons for making out subscription slip in triplicate.​—See S-11 form, “How to Handle Subscriptions Properly.”
13 min: Continue Actively Praising Jehovah. Review with congregation what has been accomplished in recent months in congregation’s field activity. Selected experiences may be shared, having these related by prepared publishers. As winter approaches, be alert to take advantage of all opportunities to preach. Where evening witnessing is practical, encourage brothers to continue this work. Regular arrangements to call on not-at-homes or to make return visits can be productive.
20 min: “Make Effective Use of New Brochure.” Question-and-answer coverage. Feature two demonstrations by qualified publishers discussing material with Bible student. Use “Meetings for Inciting to Love and Fine Works” in first demonstration and “Persecuted for Righteousness’ Sake” in second. Encourage all to pick up a supply of the brochure if congregation has received shipment.
Song 172 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 26
Song 32
12 min: Local announcements. Discuss new offer for November: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures along with True Peace book. Have demonstration adapting Topic for Conversation to Bible and book offer. Encourage all to share in field service on first Sunday of November.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News​—On Return Visits.” Question-and-answer coverage. In paragraph 3, demonstrate preparation for return visit, using subject of “Government” on page 152 of the Reasoning book.
15 min: Local needs or talk on “What Career Will You Choose?” from April 15, 1986, Watchtower. Make encouraging local application.
Song 8 and concluding prayer.

