Presenting the Good News​—On Return Visits
1 As ministers of the good news, we are commanded to make disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Making return visits, therefore, is a vital part of our disciple-making work. When making return visits, we are calling on people who have shown interest in the Kingdom message. They are in need of additional spiritual nourishment in order to make advancement in the truth. They need to be made more keenly aware of their spiritual need. (1 Pet. 2:2; Matt. 5:3) Return visits afford us the opportunity to fill this need as we help people to gain wisdom from God’s Word.
2 Plan ahead. Set aside time for return visits. Many arrange to make return visits after they do house-to-house work. In addition, other arrangements can be made each week for this activity. Some find that by returning in the early evening they are more likely to find people at home and in a relaxed frame of mind, willing to listen. Can you make time for return visits in your schedule? With persistence on your part, your prospects for starting a home Bible study will be greatly increased.
MEETING THE CHALLENGE
3 Making return visits may present a challenge for some, causing them to feel apprehensive. Is this true in your case? If so, advance preparation may be the remedy. Since we are calling on those who have shown some interest, we already have a basis to start a conversation. Keeping an accurate record of what you talked about on the initial call is important. It is easier to renew interest by referring to your previous conversation and then building on it. Take note of anything they say that will provide clues as to their interests and goals in life. Then, with the help of the Reasoning book, prepare additional information. Bring up these points when you call again and share what you have prepared. This will show the householders that you are genuinely interested in them, encouraging them to respond to the message of hope.
4 For others, the challenge is finding the interested person at home again. A sister left magazines with a man but for the next two years was unable to find him home. When she finally did find him, he told her he enjoyed the magazines and would like to continue receiving them. But his work schedule still made it very difficult to find him. Finally, after many attempts to make contact, the sister again found him home and ready to talk. He greeted her by asking: “What must I do to become a Witness?” He studied and is now serving as an elder. Finding such people brings real joy. It makes all our effort worthwhile. Jehovah blessed this sister’s hard work. (Eccl. 11:1) He will also take notice of ours. We can enjoy similar blessings. But where can further help and encouragement be found?
5 Service overseers can give assistance and set a fine lead in making return visits. When visiting the book study groups, they can give a talk on the importance of return visits. They can demonstrate how to start Bible studies. When working with a group in field service, they can personally help publishers make return visits and start Bible studies. If you need help in this feature of the ministry, ask your service overseer for assistance.
OUR FRUITAGE
6 Each one who dedicates himself to Jehovah should feel a responsibility to share in the disciple-making work. If we prepare well and regularly make effective return visits, we will reap fruitage that will bring rich blessings both to ourselves ‘and to those who listen to us.’​—1 Tim. 4:16.

