“Let Anyone Hearing Say: ‘Come!’”
1 During his earthly ministry, Jesus Christ extended to thirsty sheeplike ones the warm invitation to come to him for spiritual refreshment. (John 7:37) In our generation, the Fine Shepherd lovingly continues to use the bride class to invite “a great crowd” of other sheep to drink freely of God’s provisions for everlasting life.​—Rev. 7:9, 17; 22:17.
2 The anointed remnant, impelled by God’s spirit and Word, have ‘kept on saying: “Come!”’ More than three million of the other sheep have responded to this invitation and are having their thirst quenched. It is also their privilege to obey the command: “Let anyone hearing say: ‘Come!’”
DIRECT TO GOD’S ORGANIZATION
3 When saying “Come,” we do not direct others to ourselves, as though we individually were the source of “life’s water.” Rather, we properly direct people to Jehovah and to his theocratic organization. When someone manifests a sincere interest in learning more, do not hesitate to say to that one: Come to our Christian meetings. There is where true spiritual refreshment is to be found.​—Ps. 133:1-3.
4 Another fine way to introduce people to God’s organization is through The Watchtower and Awake! A reader can learn that there truly is an international brotherhood of Christians living and working in unity. (Isa. 2:2-4; Zech. 8:23) This unity is observed in their ministry, at conventions, when building places of worship or helping one another in times of disaster, and so forth. Our magazines invite millions of readers to visit the local Kingdom Hall and share in the spiritual banquet God’s people enjoy. With appreciation for God’s organization and a love for the truth that we have learned through the pages of the Awake! and The Watchtower, we will enthusiastically offer subscriptions for both of these fine publications during October.
LET NEW ONES SAY “COME”
5 Bible students who have gotten the sense of the good news in their hearts can be encouraged to share what they know with friends, relatives, business associates, and others. (Compare John 1:46, 47; 4:28-30.) They should realize that not all will readily accept the truth, but there may be some who will appreciate the good news and respond to a warm invitation to “come.”
6 Last October, an appreciative Bible student was moved to offer Watchtower and Awake! subscriptions to his many acquaintances. He went to factories in his area and spoke to the workers during their lunch hour. He told them simply: “You all know how I used to be; I did many bad things like everyone else, but I changed. These magazines helped me to change. They can also help you because they deal with every problem that a person may encounter.” In that one month he obtained 62 subscriptions!
7 It is a privilege for the “other sheep” to work closely with the remaining ones of Christ’s “bride” in saying to everyone everywhere: “Come.” If it is Jehovah’s will, may millions more drink “life’s water” and be numbered among the sheeplike ones who will hear the King say: ‘Come and share the blessings in the paradisaic earthly realm of God’s Kingdom.’​—Matt. 25:34.

