R997 : page 1 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., JANUARY, 1888. 

NO. 5. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. C. 
T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :-FIFTY CENTS A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., paper 
bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," four 
shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "-ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

NEW POSTAL RULINGS require that our lists shall be 
composed of bona fide [actual] subscribers. We are obliged to 
be more strict than formerly, and all who wish to continue 
receiving the TOWER must send at least a request for it. 



WE OMIT a "View" this month to give space to what seems 
more needful for many, especially new readers. 



EXTRA COPIES of this number will be sent to subscribers 
FREE, for their friends. Or you may send us the addresses of 
any you think would be interested, for sample copies. 



WE WISH you each and all, A Very Happy New Year, 1888. 
May it be a year of great growth in grace, knowledge, and love, 
to each of us, and of great activity in the Master's service. The 
condition of our supply of light is, that we let our light shine to 
glorify our Father in heaven. 



page 1 



THE TOWER FOR 1888. 



REMEMBER that last month's paper closed the subscriptions 
of many. We hope to hear from all such who wish to continue 
on our books, at once-during the present month. Otherwise do 
not be surprised that your paper stops coming. 

R1001 : page 1 

THERE IS NO EXCUSE for any one who wants it being 
without the TOWER regularly. The price brings it within the 
reach of nearly all, and those aged dependent ones, and widows, 
and sick, and all who for any reason are unable to pay, are 
welcome to it free on the LORD'S POOR LIST, upon the 
condition that each December or January they send a letter or 
postal card, stating the fact. Let such accept it as of the Lord. 



R997 : page 1 

NOT A SINFUL LIKENESS. 

Briefly notice first some of the inconsistencies of this passage 
as it stands in the common version- "In the likeness of sinful 
flesh." Looked at one way the term "sinful flesh" would cast a 
reflection upon the Creator by intimating that humanity is sinful 
by nature, created so; whereas the Scriptures everywhere hold 
out the thought that man's nature was good, and that he is now 
bound by Sin's power or dominion, and that when man is set 
free from Sin and Death-restored to original perfection-he will 
again be "very good," as at first pronounced. 

But suppose it were claimed that this passage refers to flesh 
(humanity) that had gotten into a state of sin, and suppose for 
argument's sake we admitted this to be its significance [which 
we really cannot admit except for the argument], still it would 
not prove what the no-ransom advocates want to have proved. 
Because for our Lord to take the likeness of flesh which has 
become sinful would still leave it an open question whether the 
likeness before it had become sinful was meant, or the likeness 
after it had become sinful. Surely none will deny that the 
likeness of mankind to-day is the human likeness, nor that Adam 
had the same,— human likeness. If the depraved race wanted to 
point out its likeness to-day, the finest, least depraved and least 
degraded specimen would be selected as a sample of human 
nature, as a sample of the nature which sinners are of. And, if 
the best living sample of our race would be selected to represent 
it, why should not the race (now sinful) look back to its first 
parent, Adam, who before sinning was perfect, and claim his 
likeness as its real likeness, which had since been marred by sin 
and death? In thinking of the real likeness of human nature, to 
which nature human sinners belong, we should think of a 
likeness to properly represent our nature, no matter how 
degraded and fallen from that model, many, yea all of the race 
have now become. Thus indeed our Lord was made in the 
likeness [nature] of sinful flesh— the nature which the sinful race 
is of— human nature. He partook of that nature perfectly which in 
the sinners had become contaminated, imperfect, sinful. 

Those who urge that our Lord was only like the race after it was 
sinful, and chiefly like it in respect to the imperfections, should 
consider that Adam's form and flesh did not undergo so great a 
change in the moment of disobedience, that the original likeness 
before sin, could be disclaimed for him. Hence, when first Adam 
became a sinner by disobedience, before sentence was 
pronounced upon him, and before he began in the slightest 
degree to be imperfect, there was one example of flesh under 
control of the great enemy Sin, which was perfect flesh and the 
best example of humanity, whose likeness our Lord took: in fact 
the only example and true representative of manhood. 



But note another absurdity the false theory would involve: 
Though the flesh or nature is all one, and has one standard of 
perfection, or one likeness, the sinfulness varies in degree; some 
of the race being more degraded and depraved by sin than 
others. Now will those who want this passage to read that our 
Lord was made in a sinful likeness of flesh, please tell us just 
how sinful, how imperfect he was, seeing that if we are looking 
at the sinful likeness of flesh [of humanity] there is such an 
infinite variety of gradation? 

Bold as many seem to be on this subject, few probably would 
have the temerity to say that our Redeemer was like the most 
sinful, like the most debased and degraded in mind and body; 
and yet this they must claim, else their theory falls. Because any 
argument or theory that would require that our Lord should be a 
sinner at all, would require that he be as depraved and degraded 
as the most sin-polluted. For, denying his ransom work, and 
therefore ignoring the necessity for him to be as sinless as the 
one for whom he became the substitute was before sin entered, 
and ignoring the fact that he is a pattern and example, not to 
sinners, but to justified believers, and that it is not like unto 
sinners, but "like unto his brethren" that he was tempted: 
ignoring all this, we say, they must claim that our Lord had an 
experience like that of every fallen wretch in every particular, 
and that the only work he did while here was to get that kind of 
experience; hence as shown in July and August TOWERS they 
are forced to claim that our Lord underwent all the depraved 
feelings and thoughts of all libertines, drunkards, thieves and 
thugs, or else their theory falls. How preposterous, absurd and 
almost blasphemous is such a view. 

And how inconsistent to claim that one who "knew no sin," and 
who, even before he was anointed, from earliest childhood 
showed no sign of evil, and who was miraculously born so as to 
be separate from the race of sinners, and who was referred to 
before his birth as "that holy thing" (Luke 1 :35), how 
unreasonable to claim that this being had the worst and most 
depraved disposition of any member of the human race ever 
born into the world. 

If our Lord did no sin, he certainly lacked that sinful likeness 
common to sinners, but he could be without sin and have in its 
perfection that human likeness or nature which all sinners share, 
though in a degraded state. Could one be said to be like sinners, 
who never sinned? No, our Lord was unlike sinners in respect to 
sin, imperfection, etc., but like them in the sense of having their 
same nature or flesh, he having it in its perfection, they in 
various degrees of imperfection through sin. 

In the following article we will show that whatever support was 
thought to be given by this mistranslated text, to the idea that 
our Lord was imperfect, a sinner, is removed by a proper 
translation of the passage. 



"IN THE LIKENESS OF SINFUL FLESH. " 

ROMANS 8:3. 

We note with regret that the above text as it stands is favorable 
to the "no ransom views," and is being used to prove that our 
Lord, when he became a man, had a body full of sinful 
weakness and imperfections, or as they hold it to mean, just like 
sinful, fallen, depraved humanity. This suits the ideas of the no- 
ransom theorists exactly; for if he were imperfect, he could not 
be a ransom or corresponding price for the first perfect man 

R998 : page 1 

who sinned, and was condemned, and we in him. But those who 
thus claim that our Lord was imperfect, i.e., had sinful flesh, 
overlook the fact that if their claim were true, our Lord could not 
keep the Law, under which he was born, and by which he was 
proved perfect and worthy of the high exaltation to the divine 
nature. They seem to forget that the Law was the full measure of 
a perfect man's ability, and that if he had been in the least degree 
imperfect, our Lord could not have kept it, could not have been 
justified to life under and by it. Hence if our Lord had sinful 
flesh, his coming into the world was useless; for under such 
circumstances he could neither have set a perfect example, nor 
could he have redeemed the condemned sinners. 

But the no-ransom theorists would perhaps claim that he did not 
need to be free from sin, nor to give a ransom (a corresponding 
price) for the first perfect man who had sinned; and that his 
example was perfect, they cannot deny. When we ask them, 
How could sinful flesh obey the perfect Law of God fully and 
set an example to others, they would perhaps answer: Oh! he 
had divine help; he had the indwelling of the holy spirit to help 
him, and to enable him to overcome his sinful flesh. 

But we reply, that takes away all the virtue or honor of our Lord 
as an overcomer. If his flesh was sinful and sin-disposed as that 
of other men, and he overcame the world by outside help 
merely, then he has no honor whatever; and justice would 
suggest that he should not have been highly exalted and honored 
above angels, for what he did not do, but for what was merely 
done in him by God's overmastering power. Indeed, if this 
theory be true, we see neither merit on the part of our Lord Jesus 
to be rewarded, nor any necessity for his coming into the world 
at all. For surely if God merely took possession of the sinful 
flesh and worked out results totally different from what sinful 
flesh itself was capable of, there was no need of specially 
bringing that sinful flesh into the world where there was too 
much of that sort already. 

R998 : page 2 

And it would have been far more like the divine economy to 
have used and acted upon some other sinful flesh as a pattern 



and example. Indeed, if this were God's object and plan, we 
cannot question that the example of some man who had lived for 
a time in sin, and thus proved that he had sinful flesh, would 
have been far more powerful as an illustration of how God could 
change and force a man to do his will. So, then, if another sinful 
flesh could have done as well or better, where was the necessity 
for our Lord's coming in the flesh at all? 

But further, while we do not claim that God could not so force 
any man, but merely that he does not and never has so forced 
any— and challenge proof to the contrary— yet we ask, If it is a 
question only of an indwelling divine power, forcing sinful flesh 
into harmony with the divine will, where was the necessity for 
specially making an example of it, either in our Lord Jesus, or in 
any other one? Why not rather let the holy power force ALL 
sinful flesh at once? 

But further examination of these errors on this line we trust is 
unnecessary. We now proceed to show that opposers of the 
Bible doctrine that our Lord was holy and free from sin, and 
separate from sinners, and gave his holy, perfect manhood a 
sacrificial ransom (corresponding price) for the perfect Adam 
(whose sin involves his race), are mistaken when they use this 
text ("In the likeness of sinful flesh") for the support of their 
theory. 

We are surprised that some whose knowledge of the Greek 
should protect them from falling into such an error, have not 
more carefully and critically noted this passage. A failure to note 
the fact that the apostle throughout this entire discourse treats of 
sin as a personality, [This we showed at length in May '87 
TOWER, article, "The body of sin to be destroyed."] is the 
cause of this error, but this cannot excuse critical students of the 
Greek text, which is most explicit. 

The Greek word here rendered sinful is hamartia. It occurs 174 
times in the New Testament, yet is only this once improperly 
translated by our English adjective sinful. The Greek word 
hamartia should always be translated as a substantive, SIN, not 
as an adjective, SINFUL; and it is so treated by the translators in 
every instance of its 174 occurrences, except this one text. 

The Greek has another word to represent our adjective sinful, 
namely, hamartolos and every other occurrence of the word 
sinful in the New Testament except the one above noted (Rom. 
8:3), which is a mistranslation, comes from the word 
hamartolos. 

As instances of hamartolos properly translated by the adjective 
sinful, see Mark 8:38, Luke 5:8; 24:7 and Rom. 7:13. The last 
instance shows conclusively that the apostle knew what he was 
about when using those two words, and did not misuse the one 
for the other; and be it noted that in the one verse he there uses 
hamartia three times as a substantive SIN, and hamartolos once 



as an adjective, SINFUL. We quote- "But sin [hamartia] that it 
might be shown to be sin [hamartia,] by working death to me by 
that which is good;— that through the commandment, sin 
[hamartia] might become exceeding sinful [hamartolos"]. 
(Rom. 7:13.) Surely this illustration makes the subject clear to 
even an ordinary English student, and should convince all that 
the translation of hamartia by the adjective sinful in Rom. 8:3 is 
wholly wrong and inexcusable; it should be there as elsewhere 
translated as a substantive, sin. 

So, then, though the translators erred grievously in this case, and 
have furnished the only (apparent) prop to the theory that Christ 
was a sinner, yet, God duly provides the needed helps, so that no 
member of the true body need stumble, showing us clearly the 
error of the translators as above. The Lord promises that none 
shall be tempted above that they are able to bear, and that if the 
test of faith were too weighty for us, he would provide a way of 
escape. And surely those who have misrepresented this text, owe 
a duty to God, to the truth, and to any whom they have 
mistaught, concerning the text in question. 

But some unfamiliar with the rules of grammar may not see the 
importance of the change from sinful to sin in the above text. To 
such the changed phraseology may imply little, and they may 
read, "In the likeness of flesh of sin," the proper translation,* 
and think of it as meaning the same as "In the likeness of sinful 
flesh. " Let us therefore help them to distinguish. The common 
and erroneous translation, "sinful flesh," implies that human 
nature [flesh] is a sinful nature, which is not true; for human 
nature [flesh] as God created it was perfect, and was pronounced 
by the Creator "very good;" and over it sin had no control. 
Human nature [flesh] came under the influence, control, or 
dominion of sin, which Paul in this and the three preceding 
chapters personifies as a tyrant, reigning over, and ruling in all 
flesh. He speaks of this tyrant Sin's law and the captivity in 
which he (the tyrant Sin) now holds all flesh as slaves: he tells 
of how we who were once the slaves of this great tyrant, have 
been made free from his control, and from respect to his law, 
penalty, etc., and have enlisted as slaves or bond-servants under 
God's Son, our Redeemer and new Captain, and are now 
voluntarily under his law and pledged to fight against and lay 
down even life itself in this conflict against our former enslaver 
and tyrant, Sin. In Rom. 7:23 to 8:3 the Apostle is telling how 
our deliverance from this tyrant, Sin, was accomplished. The 
Law given to Israel failed to deliver them, and could no more 
deliver us, from this tyrant who had gotten such a hold upon us 
that the flesh [human nature] was too weak to resist it. Hence 
when the Law Covenant pointed out to Israel a road back to 
harmony with God and to the service of righteousness, they 
found themselves so weak as to be unable to resist the "law of 
Sin," their captor, so that the best they could do was to mentally 
acknowledge God's dominion, and show the loyalty of their 



wills toward God by resisting as much as possible, which was 
but little, the law of the tyrant, Sin. 

Then the Apostle thanks God that though not accomplished by 
the Law, given at Sinai, yet our release is otherwise and 
effectually accomplished through Jesus Christ our Lord. What 
the Law was powerless to accomplish for us, because our flesh 
was too weak to withstand the tyranny of Sin, God 
accomplished for us, by sending his Son in the likeness of the 
flesh of Sin [i.e., in the likeness of humanity, which the tyrant 
Sin possessed control of] and because of Sin [sin's power over 
us]. [Thus God] condemned Sin [our tyrant, not humanity] 
through [or in] the flesh [Christ's flesh, given as our ransom]. 

But how, in what sense, did God through Christ's flesh condemn 
the tyrant Sin? 

We answer, man, as originally created, was a free agent, and 
voluntarily rendered himself Sin's servant, and was soon 
enslaved to Sin. God had arranged before the fall that man might 
serve either of two masters, Righteousness or Sin, and that he 
should surely receive the wages of whichever one he served. So 
long as he did serve Righteousness the pay was life, which 
would have continued, had he continued in its service. But 
when, in disobedience, he became the servant of Sin, its wages, 
death, were also sure. And though he did not like the wages, and 
would have fled to the former master, Righteousness, Sin held 
him, and had power to hold him until the wages (death) should 
be fully paid. And since the wages 

R999 : page 2 

cost man his life, he was hopelessly bound both for time and 
eternity. 

This slavery to Sin and his servant Death, was the wretched 
condition of all humanity when God sentenced or condemned to 
overthrow, the tyrant Sin, as having no longer legal right to 
reign over the redeemed flesh-mankind, which is officially 
declared to be emancipated, freed from his dominion. 

But in what way did God do this? And why did he for thousands 
of years permit Sin and Death to rule and ruin the race, if he 
could justly condemn and remove them from dominion over 
mankind? If they had a recognized right to hold and oppress 
man (their voluntary slave) for four thousand years, how can 
God justly set aside their authority now? 

Ah yes ! Sin and Death did reign from Adam to Moses, when the 
Law came apparently to help mankind. And as it helped none, 
Sin and Death still reigned as high handed as ever, until God 
sent his Son in the likeness of the flesh (humanity) which Sin 
had captivated; in the likeness of Adam, the very one who 
voluntarily became Sin's servant and involved his posterity as 
those born in slavery. And it was through this one who himself 



"knew no sin," but who by willingly receiving the penalty or 
wages of sin on behalf of the enslaved and sentenced race, as 
their ransom, proclaimed liberty to the captives and sentenced 
the dominion of Sin and death to an overthrow. The wages being 
paid, Sin and Death no longer have authority over the redeemed, 
ransomed race. 

Let go the prisoner from the pit, [the tomb] for I have found a 
ransom, is the sentence or condemnation of God against the rule 
of this personified power, Sin. The word "condemned" in Rom. 
8:3 is katakrino, and is the same used in Heb. 1 1:7 with 
reference to the overthrow of the world of Antediluvians; and it 
is the same word that Peter uses (2 Pet. 2:6) when speaking of 
Sodom, "Condemned with an overthrow." So Sin and Death 
were condemned or sentenced to overthrow, by reason of the 
ransom given for the slaves over whom they reign. 

God's due time for condemning Sin by redeeming its captives, 
was nearly two thousand years ago; and the due time for putting 
the sentence into execution, dethroning this tyrant, and breaking 
up his prison house, is now just at hand-the Millennial age. 
Right speedily he who redeemed all, and whose right it 
consequently is to release all, will take his great power and 
reign, enforcing the liberation of all captives, and granting to all 
a new opportunity to become again the servants of 
Righteousness, and receive its reward of life. 

Though Sin still reigns over and holds in slavery our race, those 
who believe in Christ's ransom know that it no longer has a right 
to reign, that its authority is cancelled now, that it is 
CONDEMNED and is now only a usurper without real 
authority; that its slaves have been officially emancipated and 
soon will be actually released by the great Deliverer. The 
Apostle urges that we no longer recognize this tyrant from 
whose dominion God through Christ hath set us free. Let not Sin 
therefore have dominion over you, but as you once obeyed it 
now obey Christ, your new Ruler, who promises to fully deliver 
you back to your original master Righteousness whose wages is 
life. 

So, then, our Lord who was made flesh when he partook of the 
flesh nature— human nature-partook not of imperfect flesh, 
partook not of fallen flesh, but was holy and separate from 
sinners, yet took the likeness of the flesh lorded over and 
enslaved by sin (humanity), and was not like any of the 
imperfect or depraved specimens of that race, but like the 
original and only proper perfect specimen of it- Adam, as he 
was when he first became Sin's slave. To have been less than 
that first perfect slave through whom Sin first gained control of 
all, would have prevented our Redeemer from redeeming "those 
captives, by giving the ransom [corresponding price] for all." (1 
Tim. 2:4-6). By the way, the no-ransom teachers have never 
attempted to analyze nor to disprove or twist this or the other 



texts which tell of our ransom: Nor can it be shown that any 
other than a perfect man could be a corresponding price for 
Adam, through whom came condemnation and death. 



*See Diaglott also, which all of our readers should surely have 
for critical study of the Word. Also see marginal reading of 
Revised version. 



R999 : page 2 

ADVICE TO THE SAINTS. 

"Keep in touch with Christ.-Avoid the spirit of fault-finding, 
criticism, uncharitableness, and anything inconsistent with His 
perfect love. Go where He is most likely to be found, either 
where two or three of His children are gathered, or where the 
lost sheep is straying. Ask Him to wake you morning by 
morning for communion and Bible-study. Make other times in 
the day, especially in the still hour of evening twilight, between 
the work of the day and the avocations of the evening, when you 
shall get alone with Him, telling Him all things, and reviewing 
the past under the gentle light that streams from His eyes." 

"Tell God that you are Willing to be made Willing about All. -A 
lady was once in great difficulties about certain things which she 
felt eager to keep under her own control. Her friend, wishful to 
pass her into the better life of consecration, placed before her a 
blank sheet of paper, and pressed her to write her name at the 
foot, and then to lay it before God in prayer. She did so and at 
once entered this blessed life. Are you willing to do this? Are 
you prepared to sign your name to a blank sheet of paper and 
then hand it over to God, for Him to fill in as He pleases? If not, 
ask Him to make you willing and able to do this and all things 
else. You will never be happy until you let the Lord Jesus keep 
the house of your nature, closely scrutinizing every visitor and 
admitting only His friends. He must reign. He must have all or 
none. He must have the key of every closet, of every cupboard, 
and of every room. Do not try to make them fit for Him. Simply 
give Him the key. And He will cleanse and renovate and make 
beautiful. "—Selected. 



Though disappointments are our lot, 
Grieving the soul to tears; 
Though tender friendships seem forgot, 
And hopes give place to fears; 
Though on life's tempest-sea we toss, 
Still may we humbly bear our cross." 



R999 : page 3 



NEW YEAR'S HYMN. 

BY FRANCIS R. HAVERGAL. 

Standing at the portal of the opening year, 
Words of comfort meet us, hushing every fear; 
Spoken through the silence, by our Father's voice, 
Tender, strong and faithful, making us rejoice. 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the day; 
For His word shall never, never pass away. 

I, the Lord, am with thee, be thou not afraid; 
I will help and strengthen, be thou not dismayed. 
Yes, I will uphold thee with my own right hand; 
Thou art called and chosen in my sight to stand. 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the day; 
For His word shall never, never pass away. 

For the year before us, Oh, what rich supplies! 
For the poor and needy, living streams shall rise; 
For the sad and sinful, shall His grace abound; 
For the faint and feeble perfect strength be found. 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the day; 
For His word shall never, never pass away. 

He will never fail us, He will not forsake; 
His eternal covenant He will never break; 
Resting on His promise, what have we to fear? 
God is all sufficient for the coming year. 
Onward, then, and fear not, children of the day; 
For His word shall never, never pass away. 



R1000 : page 3 



ABOUT HELL. 



"I don't care to think about the awful place," says one, "for I 
don't expect to go there— I have no interest in it." Yet, if the 
"orthodox" view of it be true, that all except the saints of God go 
there,- that it is the penalty for Adam's sin, that all of Adam's 
posterity are under that penalty except those few faithful 
believers in Christ who escape it, then it follows that you, and I, 
and all, ought to be deeply interested in finding out all we can 
about that which is represented as the surest and most awful, and 
most general calamity to which our poor race is exposed. If you 
and I do expect to escape, we should be anxious on behalf of the 
others; for in proportion to the world's population even in this 
enlightened day, the faithful believers in Christ are but as one 
out of a thousand. Nor will it do to excuse one's self with the 
idea that "My friends and relations will all escape. " You know 



that many, yea most of your friends and relatives are not faithful 
believers; and as you look back over the pages of history, it is 
not a great way back that you find your great-great-grandparents 
were heathen idolaters who knew not of the Redeemer, and 
hence could not have been justified by faith in him. Besides, are 
not all mankind our relatives? and are not all brethren?-children 
of one common father— Adam? 

Subjects like slavery, intemperance, pestilence, or epidemics 
affecting only a part of the human family, we would and should, 
as we do, see hundreds, yes thousands, of men and women 
spending time and talent and money in examining, and 
arranging for the relief and safety of their fellows. Yet there is 
no comparison between human slavery, etc., and everlasting 
torture in misery and anguish, which human tongue, we are told, 
cannot describe. The most terrible human sufferings of the 
present, which soon end life and thus bring relief, are really 
pleasurable moments in comparison to what we are told of hell, 
which besides will never end while the years of eternity roll. 

Now what is being done about this monstrous evil before which 
all others combined pale into insignificance- anything? 

Oh yes, there are thousands of clergymen who are supposed to 
have studied all about this awful subject, who weekly meet with 
about two millions of the fourteen hundred millions of the 
earth's present population, to consider this very subject which 
they claim is all-important. They meet in comfortable and 
elegant buildings, expensively attired, and are entertained by 
music and oratory, and if the subject they claim as the all- 
important cause of their assembling is mentioned AT ALL, it is 
to assure the hearts of those present that they have nothing to 
fear; for though God will deal most awfully with others, he will 
deal kindly with them, and instead of delighting to torture them 
to all eternity, God will be glad to have such genteel people as 
attend their entertaining church services and participate in the 
usual suppers, fairs, etc., to adorn heaven. Why will God thus 
favor them? Not because of good works, they admit; nor 
because of great faith, we would claim, for they know little of 
God or his Word, and hence cannot believe much or firmly. 
Their hopes must therefore be built mainly upon their morality, 
because they are refined and not vulgar, and specially because 
they have joined a sect and assented to a creed which they do 
not know, nor understand, nor believe— in a word because they 
are thus acting a lie with a form of godliness without the real 
power thereof. Do these people really believe 

THIS A WFUL DOCTRINE 

concerning hell? Surely not! To us their actions speak, louder 
than words. They even count the Salvation Army people fools 
and fanatics, because they, poor creatures, less intelligent, less 



learned, BELIEVE the story of the clergy about this awful place 
they describe hell to be, and honestly act out their belief. 

Of all the people in the world to-day who profess to believe this 
awful doctrine of eternal torment, the "Salvation Army" alone 
acts reasonably and consistently. And their wildest freaks and 
fancies are tame compared with what might be expected if they 
were fully convinced of the truth of the doctrine. The men and 
women who have ever fully believed the doctrine, are 
undoubtedly those hundreds who have gone insane from 
sympathy with their fellows; the effort to save others from 
everlasting torture unbalanced their reason. We cannot imagine 
any sincere believer of this terrible doctrine going from day to 
day about the ordinary affairs of life, or meeting quietly in 
elegance every Sunday to hear an essay from some of the 
peculiar servants of the truth on the peculiar subjects often 
advertised, really believing all the time that at the rate of one 
hundred a minute fellow mortals are dying, and entering 

That lone land of deep despair, where 
No God regards their bitter prayer. 

They could not complacently sit there and think of those 
hurrying every moment into that awful state described by the 
good, well-meaning, but terribly deluded man John Watts 
(whose own heart was infinitely warmer and larger than that he 
ascribed to the great Jehovah), when he wrote that sweet hymn, 
which, thank God, sensible people have ceased to love and 
almost ceased to sing:— 

Tempests of angry fire shall roll 
To blast the rebel worm, 
And beat upon the naked soul 
In one eternal storm. 

Surely men and women believing thus would rush frantically to 
the heathen and to all unbelievers everywhere, and would 
describe hell and make people join their churches or set them 
crazy with fear, or both. Mothers, fathers, and children have 
become insane from anguish, when their loved ones have been 
caught in a burning building, though they knew that their pain 
would endure but a few minutes, yet they pretend to believe that 
God is less loving than they, and that He can look with 
indifference, if not with delight, at the billions of his creatures 
enduring an eternity of torture far more terrible, which he 
prepares for them and prevents any escape from, forever. Not 
only so, but they expect they will get literally into Abraham's 
bosom, and will then look across the gulf and see and hear the 
agonies of the multitudes some of whom they now love and 
weep over and will be so changed (become so like their present 
idea of God), so hardened against all pity and so barren of love 
and sympathy that they will delight in God and in this plan. 



It is wonderful that otherwise sensible looking and acting men 
and women, who love their fellows, establish hospitals, 
orphanages, asylums and societies for the prevention of cruelty 
to even the brute creation, are so unbalanced mentally that they 
can believe and subscribe to such a doctrine, and yet be so 
indifferent about investigating the subject of "everlasting 
torture. " 

Only one exception can we think of, -those who hold the ultra- 
Calvinistic doctrine; who believe that God has decreed it thus, 
and that all the efforts they could put forth could not alter the 
result with a single person, and that all the prayers they could 
offer would not change that awful plan they believe God has 
marked out for His and their eternal pleasure. These indeed 
could sit still, so far as effort for their fellows is concerned, but 
why sing the praises of such a God and such a plan? These who 
hold this view of their own unconditional and unalterable 
election, could surely afford to be honest, since they think that 
they could not be rejected. Why should not these, instead of 
singing the praises of such a plan and keeping quiet, hide their 
faces in shame for their God, and express their true heart- 
sympathy for the people, and instead of singing, weep and 
lament. It would be far more creditable to their faith and their 
hearts;-would it not? 

Why not rather begin to doubt the self-exalted clergy, and to 
wonder whether this "doctrine of devils," this blasphemy against 
the great God, was not hatched in the "dark ages," when a crafty 
priesthood thought it godly to do evil, that good might result? 
The doctrine of eternal torment was introduced by Papacy to 
compel pagans to join her system and support her priesthood. It 
flourished at the same time that "bull fighting" and gladiatorial 
contests were the public amusement most enjoyed, when the 
Crusades were called "holy wars," and when men and women 
were called "heretics" and slaughtered, for thinking or speaking 
contrary to the teachings of Papacy; at a time when the sun of 
gospel truth was obscure, when the Word of God had fallen into 
disuse and was prohibited to be read by any but the clergy, 
whose love of their neighbors was often shown in torturing 
heretics to induce them to recant and deny their faith and their 
Bibles— to save them if possible, they explained, from the more 
awful future of heretics, eternal torture. They did not borrow this 
doctrine from the heathens, for no heathen people in the world 
have a doctrine half so terrible, cruel, fiendish and unjust. Find 
it, whoever can, and show it up in all its blackness, that if 
possible it may be shown that the essence of barbarism, malice, 
hate and ungodliness, has not been exclusively appropriated by 
those whom God has most highly favored with light from every 
quarter, to whom God has committed the holy oracle— His Word. 
Oh! the shame and confusion of face that will cover many even 
good men (who verily thought that they did God service while 
propagating this misrepresentation of the devil) when they 



awake in the resurrection to learn of the love and justice of God, 
and when they shall come to know that the Bible for which 
some of them would lay down their lives, does not teach this 
God-dishonoring, love-extinguishing, truth-beclouding, saint- 
hindering, sinner-hardening, damnable heresy. 

But we repeat that in the light and moral development of this 
day, sensible people do not believe this doctrine. However, since 
they think that the Bible teaches it, every step they progress in 
real intelligence and godlikeness of mind, which hinders such 
belief, is in most cases a step away from God's Word which they 
falsely accuse of this teaching. Hence this second crop of evil 
fruit, which the devil's engraftment of this error is producing. 
The intelligent, honest thinkers are thus driven from the Bible 
into vain philosophies and sciences, falsely so-called, and into 
skepticism. Nor do the "worldly" really believe this doctrine. It 
does not restrain from crime: theft, murder, suicide, immorality 
and drunkenness are more common by far in the countries where 
this doctrine is taught, than in other lands. Mohammedan and 
Buddhist countries are much more moral than those misnamed 
"Christendom. " True, some instances are known, where 
murderers nearing death's door under pressure of fear or 
sickness confess a faith under the teaching that to doubt it is to 
make sure the getting of it. But their lives of disregard, as well 
as their profanity, show that if this doctrine ever restrained men, 
it does not now. 

But, did the error not do real good? Have not many been brought 
into the churches by the preaching of this doctrine in the past? 

No error, we answer, ever did real good, but always harm. Those 
whom error brings into a church, and whom the truth would not 
move, are an injury to the church. The thousands which this 
doctrine forced into Papacy, terrorized, but not at heart 
converted, which swelled her numbers and her wealth, diluted 
what little truth was held before, and mingled it with their 
unholy and ignorant sentiments, so that to meet the changed 
condition of things, the "clergy" found it needful to add error to 
error, and to resort to methods, forms, etc., not taught in the 
Scriptures and useless to the truly converted whom the truth 
controls. Among these were pictures, images, beads, vestments, 
candles, grand cathedrals, altars, etc., to help the unconverted 
heathen to a form of godliness more nearly corresponding to his 
former heathen worship. 

The heathen were not benefited, for they were still heathen in 
God's sight, deluded into aping what they did not understand or 
do from the heart. They were tares to choke the wheat without 
being profited thereby themselves. 

The same is true of those brought under the name Christian to- 
day, who are not really at heart converted by the truth, but 
merely frightened by the error, or allured by promised earthly 



advantages of a social or business kind. Such add nothing to the 
true church; by their ideas and manners they become stumbling 
blocks to the truly consecrated, and by their numbers and their 
inability to digest the truth, the real food of the saints, they lead 
even the few true pastors to defraud the true sheep in order to 
satisfy the demands of these goats for something pleasing to 
their unconverted tastes. No, in no way has this error 
accomplished good, but in every way harm. Let us now inquire:- 

R1000:page4 

WHAT SAITH THE BIBLE ABOUT HELL? 

Seeing then the unreasonableness of man's view, let us leave 
human creeds and dogmas and come to the oracle of God, that 
we may hear his own word on this subject, convinced fully that:- 

Blind prejudice is sure to err 
And scan his word in vain; 
God is his own interpreter 
And he will make it plain. " 

In the first place, let none forget that the Bible was not inspired 
in the English language, that the inspired Scriptures which "holy 
men wrote and spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit" 
were written -the Old Testament in the Hebrew and the New 
Testament in the Greek language. We know further, that the 
translators were not inspired of God so as to prevent mistakes 
creeping in; for all scholars recognize some mistakes in the 
English translations. 

Now, admitting that the translators were honest men who 
reverently desired to serve God and the church by giving 
English readers a faithful translation from the original, yet all 
who have a knowledge of more than one language, and who 
have ever tried translating from one to another, well know they 
had a difficult task, the range of both languages making it often 
possible to translate a word by any one of several words, all 
having slightly different shades of meaning; besides which the 
idiomatic differences, the peculiarities in the construction of 
sentences in both languages, must be taken into account. This 
makes it necessary for a translator to frequently use his 
judgment both in deciding which of several words he had best 
use, and also as to their arrangement to faithfully reproduce the 
original thought. And, if the translators have certain false ideas 
fixed in their minds, they are almost sure at times to color their 
renderings, without wrong intention. 

Now, no matter how little hell is talked, or thought, or sung 
about to-day, there is no other point of doctrine more firmly held 
by Christian people, who feel sure that to deny hell would be to 
deny the Bible, and yet who know little about what the Bible 



says about hell. So, in coming to the English Bible to examine 
the subject, do not forget to exercise charity toward the 
translators when we show that their translation has helped 
forward the wrong ideas generally held. You will be far more 
justifiable in feeling unthankful toward the "pastors" and 
"shepherds," whom you have for years helped to support and 
educate, who [the educated] know of the errors of the 
translators, and who yet deliberately cover and hide those errors 
from the people who are paying them for the information. They 
have kept back the truth about hell for several reasons: First, 
there is a sort of understanding, or etiquette among them, as 
among physicians, that if they wish to maintain their standing in 
the "profession" they "must not tell tales out of school"-must 
not divulge professional secrets to the "common people"-the 
"laity." Secondly, they all fear that to let it be known that they 
had been teaching an unscriptural doctrine for years, would 
bring disgrace and disreverence upon the "clergy," and unsettle 
the confidence of the laity in their wisdom-and O how much 
depends upon confidence and reverence for men, when God's 
Word is so generally ignored. Thirdly, they know that many of 
the members of their sects are not constrained by "the love of 
Christ," (2 Cor. 5:14), but merely by the fear of hell, and they 
see clearly therefore that to let the truth be known, would soon 
cut loose the names and the dollars of many in their flocks; and 
this, to those who desire to make a fair show in the flesh (Gal. 
6:12), would be terrible in the extreme. 

Nevertheless, it has for some years been seen that knowledge is 
increasing among the people (Dan. 12:4), and the "Revised 
English Version" of the Bible was gotten out-in great part to 
patch up this hell doctrine. But they had not the courage to come 
out and give a correct translation: that, as we have shown, would 
be too serious a matter to be thought of; so they merely refused 
to translate the word at all, and put the Greek word hades into 
the English text. They well knew that the English reader would 
know little difference between hell and hades and would soon 
come to use them as synonymous. And this is the case. They 
feel, however, that they have justified themselves before men, 
by their course, though they never explain the meaning of the 
Greek word hades; but by their use of the word, without saying 
so directly, they give their confiding flocks to understand that it 
means a place of torture, a lake of fire. But what will be the 
judgment of the Great Jehovah whose character and plan are 
traduced by the blasphemous doctrine which this mistranslated 
word helps to support? Will he commend them? Will he justify 
their course? Will the Chief Shepherd call these his beloved 
"friends"? Will he make known unto them his further plans 
(John 15:14), that they may misrepresent them also, to preserve 
their own dignity and reverence? Will he continue to send forth 
"things new and old," "meat in due season" to the household of 
faith, by the hand of these unfaithful servants? Nay, such shall 



not continue to be his mouthpieces: he will spew them out of his 
mouth. (Rev. 3:16.) He will choose instead, as at the first 
advent, from among the laity- "the common people" - 
mouthpieces, and will give them words which none of the chief 
priests shall be able to gainsay or resist. (Luke 21:15.) And as 
foretold, "the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the 
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." -Isa. 29:9-19. 

Consider first then:- 

HELL IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

The word hell occurs thirty-one times in the Old Testament, and 
in every instance it is sheol in the Hebrew. It does not mean a 
lake of fire and brimstone, nor anything at all resembling that 
thought: not in the slightest degree! Quite the reverse: instead of 
a place of blazing fire it is described in the context as a state of 
"darkness;" instead of being a place where shrieks and groans 
are heard, it is described in the context as a place of "silence;" 
instead of representing in any sense pain and suffering, or 
remorse, the context describes it as one of forgetfulness, where 
there is no "knowledge" or "work" or "remembrance." 

The meaning of sheol is, THE HIDDEN STATE, as applied to 
man's condition in death; in and beyond which all is hidden, 
except to the eye of faith: hence by proper and close association 
the word was often used in the sense of the grave— the tomb, the 
hidden place, or place beyond which only those who have the 
enlightened eye of the understanding can see resurrection, 
restitution of being. And be it particularly noted, that this very 
same word sheol, is translated pit and grave thirty-four times in 
our common version by the same translators*— more times than 
it is translated hell; and twice where it is translated hell it 
seemed so absurd, according to the at present accepted meaning 
of the word hell, that in modern Bibles the publishers explain in 
the margin that it means grave. See Isa. 14:9 and Jonah 2:2. In 
the latter case, the HIDDEN STATE, or grave, was the belly of 
the fish in which Jonah was buried alive, and from which he 
cried to God. 

ALL PLACES WHERE SHEOL 
IS TRANSLATED HELL. 

(1) Amos 9:2.-"Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine 
hand take them. " [A figurative expression; but certainly pits of 
the earth are the only hells men can dig into.] 

(2) Psa. 16:10. -"Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither 
wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. " [This refers 
to our Lord's three days in the tomb. See Acts 2:31; 3:15.] 



(3) Psa. 18:5 and 2 Sam. 22: 6. -Margin -"The cords of hell 
compassed me about. " [A figure in which trouble is represented 
as hastening one to the tomb.] 

(4) Psa. 55:15. -"Let them go down quick into hell"— margin, 
"the grave. " 

(5) Psa. 9: 17. -"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the 
nations that forget God. " [This text is treated at length in the 
TOWER for Oct. '86. We there show that it should read, "The 
wicked shall be returned into hell"-into the state of death; and 
that it refers to the "second death." See that paper.] 

(6) Psa. 86:13.— "Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest 
hell" -margin, "grave." 

(7) Psa. 116:3.— "The sorrows of death compassed me, and the 
pains of hell gat hold upon me. " [Sickness and trouble are the 
figurative hands of the grave to grasp us.] 

(8) Psa. 139:8.-"If I make my bed in hell behold thou art there." 
[God's power is unlimited, even those in the tomb he can and 
will control and bring forth.] 

(9) Deut. 32:22.-"For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall 
burn unto the lowest hell. " [A figurative representation of the 
destruction, the utter ruin of Israel as a nation-"wrath to the 
uttermost," as the Apostle called it; God's anger burning that 
nation to the "lowest deep," as Leeser translates the word sheol 
here.] 

(10) Job 11:8. -"It [God's wisdom] is as high as heaven; what 
canst thou do? deeper than hell; [than any pit] what canst thou 
know?" 

(11) Job 26:6. -"Hell [the tomb] is naked before him; and 
destruction hath no covering. " 

(12) Prov. 5:5. -"Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold 
on hell"-[i.e., lead to the grave]. 

(13) Prov. 7:27. -"Her house is the way to hell [the grave] going 
down to chambers of death. " 

(14) Prov. 9: 18. -"He knoweth not that the dead are there, and 
that her guests are in the depths of hell. " Here the harlot's guests 
are represented as dead, diseased or dying, and many of the 
victims of sensuality in premature graves from diseases which 
hurry off their posterity also to the tomb. 

(15) Prov. 15:1 1. -"Hell and destruction are before the Lord." 
[Here the grave is associated with destruction and not with a life 
of torment.] 

(16) Prov. 15:24.-"The path of life (leadeth) upward for the 
wise, that he may depart from hell beneath. " [The hope of 
resurrection from the tomb.] 



(17) Prov. 23:14.-"Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shall 
deliver his soul from hell." [i.e. wise corrections will save a 
child from vicious ways which lead to premature death, and may 
possibly prepare him to escape the "second death" also.] 

(18) Prov. 27: 10. -"Hell [the grave] and destruction are never 
full: so the eyes of man are never satisfied. " 

(19) Isa. 5:14.-"Therefore hell hath enlarged herself and opened 
her mouth without measure." [Here a symbol of destruction.] 

(20) Isa. 14:9. -"Hell [margin grave] from beneath is moved for 
thee, to meet thee at thy coming. "-Ver. 15. "Thou shalt be 
brought down to hell" [the grave; so rendered in verse 11.] 

(21) Isa. 57:9. -"And didst debase thyself even unto hell." [Here 
figurative of deep degradation.] 

(22) Ezek. 31:15-17. -"In the day when he went down to the 
grave... I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when 
I cast him down to hell with them that descend into the pit."— 
Ver. 17 -"They also went down into hell with him, unto them 
that be slain with the sword. " [Figurative and prophetic 
description of the fall of Babylon into destruction, silence, the 
grave.] 

(23) Ezek. 32:21. -"The strong among the mighty shall speak to 
him out of the midst of hell with them that help him. " [A 
continuation of the same figure representing Egypt's overthrow 
as a nation to join Babylon in destruction.] 

(24) Ver. 27. -"And they shall not lie with the mighty that are 
fallen of the uncircumcised which are gone down to hell with 
their weapons of war: And they have laid their swords under 
their heads; but their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though 
they were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living. " [The 
grave is the only hell where fallen ones are buried and lie with 
their weapons of war under their heads.] 

(25) Hab. 2:5. -"Who enlargeth his desire as hell [the grave] and 
as death, and cannot be satisfied. " 

(26) Jonah 2:l,2.-"Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God, 
out of the fish's belly, and said, I cried by reason of mine 
afflictions unto the Lord, and he heard me: Out of the belly of 
hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice. " [The belly of the fish 
was for a time his grave.] 

(27) Isa. 28:15-18.-"Because ye have 

R1000 : page 5 

said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell [grave] 
are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass 
through, it shall not come unto us, for we have made lies our 
refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves: Therefore, 
saith the Lord... Your covenant with death shall be dis-annulled, 



and your agreement with hell [grave] shall not stand. " [God thus 
declares that the present prevalent idea, by which death and the 
grave are represented as friends rather than enemies, shall cease; 
and men shall learn that death is the wages of sin and that it is in 
Satan's power now, (Rom. 6:23 and Heb. 2:14) and not an angel 
sent of God.] 



*To the credit of the translators of the Common Version (the 
King James Version) it should be stated that the English word 
hell has gradually come to have a very different meaning from 
what it once had, and that when used by them in the sixteenth 
century, the word hell still retained much of its original meaning 
which made it a fair equivalent for the Greek and Hebrew words 
they used it to translate. There is no such excuse, however, for 
modern translators and teachers, for the original meaning has 
entirely passed from the word, except as found occasionally in 
old books, giving place to the "hellfire" idea. 

The word hell is Anglo Saxon, and in old English usage meant 
the place of concealment— the hidden, or secret, or covered 
place. Its transitive verb was hele or hill meaning to hide, to 
conceal, to cover, to roof. In old English books you will find 
numerous instances of the use of this word, in connection with 
roofing of houses, planting, hilling, hiding, etc. To hele a house 
did not mean to burn it, or torture it, but to cover or thatch it; to 
hele their potatoes did not mean to burn them, but to conceal 
them in a pit; and so likewise when men were heled there was 
no thought of fire, torture and pain, but of covering, concealing, 
etc. Both good and bad were thus heled or buried. 

Conceal is the corresponding word from the Latin. See 
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, under hell, hele, hill and 
conceal. From this it will be seen that the use of the word hell by 
the translators of the King James' Version, was at a time when 
the word hell had not so utterly changed its meaning as at 
present. Yet modern translators and ministers, who well know 
that the word hell, as now used, does not cover the thought of 
hades of the Greek, or sheol of the Hebrew, refuse to enlighten 
their credulous flocks. 

ALL OTHER PLACES WHERE SHEOL OCCURS - 
RENDERED GRA VE AND PIT. 

Gen. 37:35. -"I will go down into the grave unto my son." 

Gen. 42:38. -"Then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with 
sorrow to the grave."— See also the same expression in 44:29,31. 

1 Sam. 2:6. -"The Lord killeth and maketh alive: he bringeth 
down to the grave, and bringeth up. " 

1 Kings 2:6,9. -"Let not his hoar head go down to the grave in 
peace. " "His hoar head bring down to the grave with blood. " 



Job 7:9. -"He that goeth down to the grave." 

Job 14:13. — "O that thou wouldst hide me in the grave, that thou 
wouldst keep me secret until thy wrath is past, that thou wouldst 
appoint me a set time and remember me"— resurrect me. 

Job 17:13.— "If I wait, the grave is mine house: I have made my 
bed in the darkness." Job waits for resurrection— "in the 
morning. " 

Job 21:13. -"They spend their days in mirth, and in a moment go 
down to the grave. " 

Job 24: 19, 20. -"Drought and heat consume the snow waters; so 
doth the grave those which have sinned."— All have sinned, 
hence "Death has passed upon all" and all go down to the grave. 
But all have been redeemed, hence all shall be awakened and 
come forth again in God's due time- "In the morning." 

Psa. 6:5. -"In death there is no remembrance of thee: in the 
grave who shall give thee thanks?" 

Psa. 30:3. — "O Lord, thou hast brought up my soul from the 
grave: thou hast kept me alive that I should not go down to the 
pit"— recovery from danger of death. 

Psa. 31:17. -"Let the wicked be ashamed; let them be silent in 
the grave." 

Psa. 49:14,15-margin.-"Like sheep they are laid in the grave, 
death shall feed on them; and the upright [the saints- Dan. 7:27] 
shall have dominion over them in the morning [the Millennial 
morning]; and their beauty shall consume, the grave being an 
habitation to every one of them. But God will redeem my soul 
from the power of the grave. " 

Psa. 88:3. -"My life draweth nigh unto the grave." 

Psa. 89:48. -"Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the 
grave?" 

Psa. 141:7. -"Our bones are scattered at the grave's mouth." 

Prov. 1:12.— "Let us swallow them up alive as the grave; and 
whole as those that go down into the pit," [i.e. as of an 
earthquake as in Num. 16:30-33.] 

Prov. 30:15, 16. -"Four things say not, It is enough: the grave," 
etc. 

Eccl. 9: 10. -"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy 
might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest. " 

Job 17:16. -"They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our 
rest together is in the dust. " 

Song of Sol. 8: 6. -"Jealousy is cruel as the grave." 

Isa. 14:1 1. -"Thy pomp is brought down to the grave." 



Isa. 38: 10. -"I shall go to the gates of the grave; I am deprived 
of the residue of my years." 

Isa. 38: 18. -"The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot 
celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy 
truth." 

Num. 16:31-33. -"The ground clave asunder that was under 
them, and the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, 
and their houses, and all men that appertained unto Korah, and 
all their goods. They and all that appertained to them went down 
alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they 
perished from among the congregation. " 

Ezek. 31:15.— "In the day when he went down to the grave." 

Hosea 13:14.-"I will ransom them from the power of the grave; 
I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O 
grave, I will be thy destruction: Repentance shall be hid from 
mine eyes." [The Lord did not ransom any from a place of fire 
and torment, for there is no such place; but he did ransom all 
mankind from the grave, from death, the penalty brought upon 
all by Adam's sin, as this verse declares.] And shortly now we 
trust he will destroy death and the grave, and every vestige of 
Adam's penalty, as is also declared in this verse. This sheol, hell 
or grave shall be destroyed, that all may come to a full 
knowledge of the truth, and if they then will, [by obedience] 
they may live forever. 

The above list includes every instance of the use of the English 
word hell and the Hebrew word sheol. From this examination it 
must be evident to all readers, that the Old Testament, covering 
God's revelation for four thousand years, contains not a single 
hint of hell, as the word is now understood. In our next issue we 
will consider all the places in the New Testament where this 
word hell occurs. 



R1000:page5 

THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS. 

This parable, recorded in Luke 16:19-31, is generally regarded 
as being the utterance of our Lord (though nothing is said of his 
having uttered it), and we so regard it. 

The great difficulty with many is, that though they call it a 
parable, they reason on it, and draw conclusions from it, as 
though it were a literal statement and not a parable. To think of 
it as a literal statement involves quite a number of absurdities: 
for instance, that the rich man went to hell because he had 
enjoyed many earthly blessings and gave nothing but crumbs to 
Lazarus. Not a word is said about his wickedness. Again, 
Lazarus is blessed, not because he is a sincere child of God, full 



of faith and trust— not because he was good, but simply because 
he was poor and sick. If this be understood literally, the only 
logical lesson to be drawn from it is, that unless you are a poor 
beggar, full of sores, you will never enter into future bliss, and if 
now you wear any "fine linen" and "purple" and have plenty to 
eat every day, you are sure to go to hades. Again, the place of 
bliss is "Abraham's bosom," and if the whole statement is literal, 
the bosom must be literal and would not hold very many of 
earth's millions of sick and poor. But why consider the 
absurdities? All unprejudiced minds recognize it as a parable. 

As a parable, how shall we understand it? We answer, that a 
parable is one thing said, another thing meant; we know this 
from some of the parables explained by Jesus: for instance, the 
parable of the "Wheat and Tares." From his explanation we 
learn that when in that parable he said wheat, he meant "children 
of the kingdom;" when he said tares, he meant (to those who 
would understand the parable) "the children of the devil;" when 
he said reapers, angels were to be understood, etc. (See Matt. 
13). So you will find it in every parable explained by our Lord; 
the thing said is never the thing meant; consequently in this 
parable "a rich man" means something else. Lazarus and 
Abraham's bosom are not literal, but represent some class or 
condition. In attempting to expound a parable such as this, an 
explanation of which the Lord does not furnish us, modesty in 
expressing our opinion regarding it is certainly appropriate. We 
therefore offer the following explanation without any attempt to 
force our views upon the reader, except so far as his own truth- 
enlightened judgment may commend them, as in accord with 
God's Word and plan. To our understanding the "rich man" 
represented the Jewish nation. At the time of the utterance of the 
parable, and for a long time previous, they had "fared 
sumptuously every day" —being the especial recipients of God's 
favors. As Paul says: "What advantage then hath the Jew? Much 
every way; chiefly, because to them was committed the oracles 
of God. "-[Law and Prophecy.] The promises to Abraham and 
David invested the people with royalty, as represented by the 
rich man's "purple. " The ritual and (typical) sacrifices of the 
Law constituted them, in a typical sense, a holy nation- 
righteous- represented by the rich man's "fine linen. "-Fine 
linen is a symbol of righteousness. —Rev. 19:8. 

Lazarus represented the Gentiles-all nations of the world aside 
from the Israelites. These, at the time of the utterance of this 
parable, were entirely destitute of those blessings which Israel 
enjoyed; they lay at the gate of the rich man. No rich promises 
of royalty were theirs; not even typically were they cleansed; but 
in moral sickness, pollution, and sin they were companions of 
"dogs." Dogs were regarded as detestable creatures in those 
days, and the typically clean Jew called the outsiders "heathen" 
and "dogs," and would never eat with them, nor marry nor have 
any dealings with them. -John 4:9. As to the "eating the crumbs 



(of favor) which fell from the rich man's table" of bounties, 
Jesus' words to the Syro-Phoenician woman give us a key. He 
said to this Gentile woman- "It is not meet (proper) to take the 
children's (Israelites) bread and give it to the dogs" (Gentiles); 
and she answered, "Truth, Lord, but the dogs eat of the crumbs 
that fall from their masters' table. "-Matt. 15:27. Jesus healed 
her daughter, thus giving the desired crumb of favor. But there 
came a time when the typical righteousness ceased— when the 
promise of royalty ceased to be theirs, and the kingdom was 
taken from them to be given to a nation bringing forth the fruits 
thereof. -Matt. 21:43. The rich man died to all these special 
advantages and soon he (the Jewish nation) found himself in 
"gehenna fire"-a cast-off condition, in trouble, tribulation and 
affliction, in which they have suffered from that day to this. 

Lazarus also died: the condition of the Gentiles underwent a 
change, and from the Gentiles many were carried by the angels 
(messengers, apostles, etc.) to Abraham's bosom. Abraham is 
represented as the father of the faithful, and receives to his 
bosom all the children of faith, who thus are recognized as the 
heirs to all the promises made to Abraham. For the children of 
the flesh, these are not the children of God, but the "children of 
the promise are counted for the seed" (children of Abraham) 
"which seed is Christ, "-and "if ye be Christ's then are ye 
(believers) Abraham's seed (children) and heirs according to the 
(Abrahamic) promise. "-Gal. 3:29. Yes, the condition of things 
then existing terminated by death- at the death of Jesus -"for if 
one died for all, then were all dead. " There the Jew was cast off 
and has since been shown "no favor," and the poor Gentiles who 
before had been "aliens from the commonwealth (the promises) 
of Israel and without God and having no hope in the world, " 
were then "made nigh by the blood of Christ" and "reconciled to 
God."— Eph. 2:13. If the two tribes living in Judea (Judah and 
Benjamin) were represented by one rich man, would it not be in 
harmony to suppose that the five brethren represented the 
remaining ten tribes, who had "Moses and the Prophets" as their 
instructors? The question relative to them was doubtless 
introduced to show that all special favor of God ceased to the 
ten tribes, as well as to the two directly addressed. It seems to us 
evident, that Israel only was meant, for none other nation than 
Israel had "Moses and the prophets" as instructors. 

In a word, this parable seems to teach precisely what Paul 
explained in Rom. 11:19-31, how that because of unbelief, the 
natural branches were broken off, and the wild branches grafted 
into the Abrahamic promises. In the parable, Jesus leaves them 
in trouble, and does not refer to their final restoration to favor, 
doubtless because it was not pertinent to the feature of the 
subject treated; but Paul assures us, that when the fullness of the 
Gentiles-the Bride-be come in, "they (the Israelites) shall 
obtain mercy through your (the Church's) mercy." He assures us 
that this is God's covenant with fleshly Israel (who lost the 



higher— spiritual -promises, but are still the possessors of 
certain earthly promises), to become the chief nation of earth, 
etc. In proof of this statement, he quotes the Prophets, saying: 
"The deliverer shall come out of Zion, (the glorified church,) 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob," (the fleshly seed). 
"As concerning the Gospel, (high calling) they are enemies, 
(cast off) for your sakes: but as touching the election, they are 
beloved for the fathers' sakes." "For God hath concluded them 
all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. O the depths 
of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!" - 
Rom. 11:30-32. 



R1003:page5 

"I HAVE been reading about holiness," said one to me the other 
day: "I do wish I could find it." 

"Find IT?" I said, "you mean find HIM. Holiness is in Jesus. As 
many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the 
sons of God. " 

A week after my friend came to me with a radiant face: "I have 
found it in HIM." 

We think and talk of holiness as if it were getting into the King's 
garden, climbing over a wall by a tremendous effort, or getting 
in as a great favor, and plucking a flower which we wear in its 
fragrance for a day, then keep it pressed and treasured, a faded 
remembrance of the King's grace. No, holiness is ours only 
when we open the door of our heart 

R1003 : page 6 

unto the King that He Himself may come in and make this 
barren place the garden of the Lord, a very paradise wherein He 
may walk and talk with His child.-Sel. 



R1000 : page 6 

WAILING AND GNASHING OF TEETH. 

"So shall it be at the end of the world [age]: the angels 
[messengers] shall come forth and sever the wicked from among 
the just, and shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall 
be wailing and gnashing of teeth."— Matt. 13:49,50. 

These words follow one of our Lord's parables which 
represented the kingdom of heaven as it exists in its incipient 
and imperfected stage in this age— which in its widest sense is 
the nominal Christian church-as a net cast into the sea (the 
world) which gathered fish of every kind; which, when it was 
full, they drew to shore, and sat down and gathered the good 
into vessels, but cast the bad away. In harmony also with this 



parable are those words of our Lord to the fishermen of Galilee, 
"Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." (Matt. 4:19). 

This net was first cast into the sea at the beginning of the Gospel 
Age when the Christian Church was first established. It has been 
out during the entire age; and now in the time of harvest it is 
drawn to shore, and the most desirable fish for the purpose for 
which God is making the present selection, are being gathered 
out and the rest cast away. 

The great Fisherman has no special use for any more or other 
than the one kind of fish now, though by and by in his own good 
time, "the abundance of the sea shall be converted."— Isa. 60:5. 

It should also be noticed, that when the net is drawn to shore, the 
work of the fishermen is not to dive into the sea either with a net 
or with hook and line to gather more fish: enough have been 
gathered for the present purpose; the net which the Lord sent out 
at the beginning of the age is full, and the present work, as 
indicated by the parable, is to sort and separate the fish already 
gathered. Let those in the sea remain there for the present, and 
any in the net not suitable for the present purpose (the "high 
calling") will be rejected and cast one side as unfit for present 
purposes. This is another figure of the harvest work, and how 
clearly it indicates and marks out the exact work of the present 
hour. When he had finished the parable Jesus said to his 
disciples, "Have ye understood all these things?" and they 
answered "Yea, Lord." "Then said he unto them, Therefore 
every scribe which is instructed into the kingdom of heaven, is 
like unto a man that is a householder, which bringeth forth out 
of his treasure, things new and old"-thus implying that those 
who understand the parable and the plan of God as indicated by 
it, and who are instructed from the Scriptures with reference to 
the kingdom of heaven, will be able to see the new features of 
his work as well as the old, whenever the new features become 
due. And therefore they will not reject the new features because 
they are new, but will be ready promptly, both to work by and 
teach the new unfoldings of God's plans. They will not insist on 
keeping the net out to catch more, but under the Master's eye 
will be ready to attend to the new work of separating. 

So-in a manner similar to that indicated in the parable-shall it 
be in the end or harvest of this age. And as we are now living in 
the very time indicated, we see this very separating work going 
on in our midst. Truly the great net, the nominal gospel church, 
has gathered in fish of all kinds, and multitudes of them. And 
now the angels, the messengers of God— the saints who are 
acquainted with his word and plan, go forth commissioned of 
God through his Word, and by the presentation of his unfolding 
truth they are now accomplishing the great work of separation in 
the church nominal-of good and bad fish, of wheat and tares, of 
loyal and consecrated saints and lukewarm and hypocritical 
professors. Those in the net who are not really of the kingdom of 



heaven, and who therefore should not be in the net, but should 
still be in the sea (the world) where they actually belong, shall 
be subjected to rough handling in this time of separating, as 
illustrated in the parable of the tares being cast into the furnace 
of fire— the great trouble which shall undermine, overthrow, and 
finally completely destroy the nominal systems— the nominal 
churches and the nominal kingdoms of Christ. We say, the 
nominal kingdoms of Christ; for all the civilized governments 
claim to be kingdoms of Christ, as moral societies generally 
claim to be churches of Christ, while really our Lord recognizes 
only one church, and one kingdom not yet set up in power and 
authority over the world. 

In that great time of trouble there shall be wailing and gnashing 
of teeth-bitter disappointment, great chagrin. The gnashing or 
gritting of teeth symbolically expresses the vexation and anger 
of those in whom the truth only awakens a spirit of opposition 
and hatred against the Lord's messengers and against his plans 
which run counter to their prejudices, pride and plans. Those 
who have not the spirit of truth, will not, and do not meet the 
truth with candor and an earnest effort to prove what is truth and 
what is error. The truth they do not want, and even so much of it 
as they see, they endeavor to cover and hide; and their 
reasonings against it partake more of the nature of sarcasm, 
sophistry and enmity, than of sound scriptural reasonings. In 
their fruitless efforts to substantiate errors which they have come 
to reverence and love, they will contradict each other's 
arguments, as well as the arguments of their predecessors who 
helped to found or establish the errors. This, in the symbolic 
language of Revelation, is called "gnawing their tongues in 
pain. " All such opposition to the truth is the gnashing of teeth 
predicted; and we may expect to see more and more of it as the 
harvest work continues. 

Not only will those merely professors in the nominal church be 
thus rejected in this "harvest" separation, but some of the true 
children of God will also be rejected and get into the wailing 
and gnashing of teeth condition, because they have assimilated 
with the worldly minded and have become imbued with the 
"spirit of the world"— plans, ideas, aims, etc., which are worldly; 
for instance, the upbuilding of the various sects in numbers, 
wealth, or both, rather than the service of the TRUTH, and of 
the true "body of Christ. " These fish are not "good" in the sense 
of the parable; i.e., they are not fit for the purpose of the present 
selection. They are undeveloped— not overcomers of the world, 
but are overcome by the world— by the spirit, ideas and 
disposition of the worldly minded. Their case is mentioned by 
our Lord in Matt. 24:51. He says: He will cut him assunder, 
[separate him from the real "body"] and appoint him his portion 
with the hypocrites-with the tares in the trouble, though only an 
unripe grain of wheat. 



It should be clearly recognized by all that our Lord's parables 
nearly all relate to the Church only. In every instance where they 
refer to "the Kingdom of heaven," it is the Church, not the world 
surely, except when the worldly are shown as improperly getting 
into and identified with the church nominal. Thus in these two 
parables now briefly considered, wheat and tares, as well as 
good and bad fish, represent classes and mixtures IN THE 
CHURCH, and have no reference whatever to the non- 
professing "world," which in the one parable is represented by 
the sea, and in the other by the field. So then the great bundles 
of tares which daily are being bound tighter and tighter- 
organized more and more thoroughly and systematically, are all 
parts of the nominal Church of Christ. The great Reaper comes 
to harvest his wheat, and separates from his own FREE ones 
(Matt. 13:30,41) all those bound in bundles by human traditions 
and by a worldly spirit. And the symbolic burning of these, 
represents the trouble coming upon so-called Christendom 
[Christ's nominal Kingdom.] This imposing worldly structure 
with its many divisions, or sects, will entirely consume: that is, 
it will cease to be. The people will not perish, but the systems 
will perish, and the imitation saints (tares) will cease to be such 
imitations, and will pass for what they really are— members of 
the "world" and not of the select church- some of them moral, 
benevolent, kind, good people, but not of the class recognized in 
Scripture as the "overcomers," the bride and joint-heirs with 
Christ, to whom alone God has promised and will give the 
Kingdom. This is the scene in which God will gather out of his 
Kingdom all things that offend [that are not acceptable to him as 
joint-heirs with Christ]. None of the sects can claim to be this 
one true church which God has all along recognized, which 
already contains all the wheat. The true Church of God 
throughout the Gospel Age has always consisted only of those 
wholly consecrated believers "whose names are written in 
heaven;" none of them have ever been missed from their Father's 
sight and care though often the world did not at all recognize 
this true "body of Christ," being attracted to look rather at the 
many churches of men whose names were written on earth, 
whose outward show and pomp and ceremonies and titles 
correspond more to the world's ideas. But now in the "harvest," 
it is the Father's plan and the Chief Reaper's work to disabuse 
the world of its wrong ideas on this and other subjects; and He 
will show forth soon the living members of the REAL 
CHURCH as a sample of those he has been choosing all along 
during the age. 

As in the harvest at the close of the Jewish Age, so in this 
harvest, the "remnant" which the Lord will own as his, will 
contain few of the Chief Priests, Scribes, Pharisees-few of the 
Clergy or great ones, many more of the "laity" or "common 
people," those reckoned publicans and sinners in comparison 
with the "holier than thou" ministers and priests. So our Lord 



plainly indicated when in his prayer he said: "I thank thee, O 
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things 
from the [worldly] wise and prudent, and hast revealed them 
unto babes. Even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." 
Luke 10:21. See also 1 Cor. 1:26-31. 

The fact then that not many of earth's wise and great receive and 
preach these "harvest" truths, is not an argument against them. 
Remember that among the Apostles, only Paul was before a 
theologian-a Pharisee. How hardly shall they that have riches 
[earthly honors and wealth— of talents, of respect, etc., as well as 
of gold] enter into the Kingdom of God. God chooses such a 
method in selecting the "little flock" as will cost each the loss of 
these to obtain the prize he offers. Thus God selects and proves 
the "overcomers." None are so poor that fidelity to the truth will 
not cost them something— even all they have. 

Let us, dearly beloved, make our calling and election to this 
great prize sure, by doing as did the Apostles, following the 
Lord, one of whom wrote, "I count all things but loss for the 
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom 
I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but 
dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him ...: that I may 
know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship 
of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; if by 
any means I might attain unto THE resurrection of THE dead."- 
Phil. 3:8-11. 

Not many rich or noble called 

Not many great or wise; 

They whom God makes His kings and priests 

Are poor in human eyes." 



R1000 : page 6 

AN ACCUSER SILENCED. 

Two fellow-travellers were seated together in a railway carriage 
engaged in earnest conversation. It was of a religious nature, and 
one of them, a skeptic, was evidently seeking to excuse his 
skepticism by expatiating on the various evils which afflict 
Christendom. He was detailing, with manifest pleasure, the 
hypocrisy and the craft and the covetousness and the divisions 
found in the professing Church, and then he pointed to some of 
the leaders, as the most markedly corrupt of the whole. 

In front of them sat a Christian who was compelled to hear all 
this. Had he felt the accusations to be false, he might have 
suffered them all, as a part of the hatred the world bears toward 
Christ, and been truly happy in so suffering; but he knew them 
to be true— too true to be concealed from the most charitable 



mind, so all he could do was to bow his head and bear the 
deserved reproach. 

Soon, however, the accuser, anxious to extend the circle of his 
audience, addressed this fellow passenger in front of him. 

"I see you are quick to detect evil," answered the Christian, "and 
you read character pretty well. You have been uncovering here 
the abominable things which have turned Christendom into a 
wreck, and are fast ripening it for the judgment of God. You 
have spared none but given all a good measure. Now I am a 
Christian, and I love the Lord Jesus and his people. Not a word 
shall I offer in defense, but I here solemnly challenge you to 
speak the first word against the Lord Jesus Christ Himself. " 

The skeptic was surprised. He seemed almost frightened, and 
sheepishly replied, "Well, no; I couldn't find fault with Him. He 
was perfect. " 

"Just so," said the Christian; "and therefore was my heart 
attracted to Him; and the more I look at Him, the more I found I 
wasn't like Him at all, but only a poor, sinful, guilty man. But 
tell me yourself if I haven't a right to be happy and to love Him 
when I found out that He had died for me; that on the cross He 
had fully paid all my debt, and thus cleared me of all guilt? Ever 
since then I truly love Him, and all the evil which professed 
followers of His may do, cannot turn me away from Him. My 
salvation hangs on what He has done, and not on what they are 
doing. "-Horatius Bonar. 



R1000:page7 



THE THIEF. 



"He said to Jesus, Remember me when thou comest in thy 
kingdom. And he [Jesus] said to him, Indeed I say to thee this 
day thou shalt be with me in Paradise."— Luke 23:42,43.- 
Diaglott. 

Those who consider salvation to be an escape from everlasting 
torture to a paradise of pleasure, and dependent only on 
accidental circumstances of favor, see in this narration the 
doctrine of election exemplified —Jesus, being pleased by the 
consoling words of the one thief, elected him to heaven, and 
equally elected that the other should roast to all eternity, 
unpitied, unrelieved. Truly if God has made salvation such a 
lottery, such a chance thing, those who believe it to be such 
should have little to say against church lotteries, and less against 
worldly ones. 

But this is not the case. The scripture has evidently been much 
misunderstood. To get its true import, let us take in the 
surroundings and connections. 



Jesus had just been condemned, and was now being executed on 
the charge of treason to Caesar's government, in saying that He 
was a king: though he had told them that his kingdom was "not 
of this world. " There, upon the cross above his head, was the 
inscription of his charged crime, written in three languages: 
THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS. " All knew of his claims 
and derided him, except one of the thieves crucified with him. 
Doubtless he had heard of Jesus and of his wonderful character, 
and said in his heart: This is truly a strange and wonderful man; 
who can know that there is no foundation to his claims? He 
certainly lives close to God: I will speak to him in sympathy; it 
can do no harm. Then he rebuked his companion, mentioning 
the innocence of Jesus, and, turning to Jesus, the conversation 
noted above took place. 

We cannot suppose that this thief had any correct or definite 
idea of Jesus— nothing more than a mere feeling that he was 
about to die, and a straw of hope was better than nothing. To 
give him credit for more would be to place him in faith ahead of 
all Apostles and followers of Jesus, who at this time had left him 
and fled, and who three days after, said: "We [had] trusted that it 
had been he which should have redeemed Israel. " 

We can have no doubt as to the import of his petition; he meant 
that whenever Jesus reached his kingdom power, he desired 
favor. Now, note Jesus' answer. He does not say that he has no 
kingdom, but on the contrary, by his response he indicates that 
the thief s request was proper. The word translated "verily," or 
"indeed," is the Greek word "amen," and signifies "so be it," as 
you have asked: "I say to thee this day, [this dark day, when it 
seems as though I am an imposter and about to die as a felon,] 
thou shalt be with me in Paradise. " 

Now the substance of this is, that when the Lord has established 
his kingdom, the thief will be remembered and be in Paradise. 
Notice that we have changed the comma from before to after to- 
day. This makes it perfectly clear and reasonable. Jesus might 
have told the thief more if he had chosen. He might have told 
him that the reason he should be privileged to come to Paradise 
was because he was paying his ransom then and there —dying 
for his sins. He might have told him further that he was dying 
for and ransoming also the other thief, as well as the whole 
gaping and deriding multitude before him; as well as the 
millions yet unborn and millions then entombed. We know this, 
because we know that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted 
death for every man," and that as in Adam, or on his account, all 
die, even so in Christ, or on his account, shall all be made alive 
and be privileged to come back to that Edenic condition 
forfeited by the first maris sin, and redeemed for men by Christ's 
righteous sacrifice. 

As already shown, the garden of Eden was but an illustration of 
the perfect and beautiful earth when fully released from the 



curse. The word Paradise is of Arabic origin, not Greek-it 
signifies a garden. The Septuagint renders Gen. 2:8 thus: "God 
planted a paradise in Eden. " When Jesus has established his 
kingdom, bound evil, etc., this earth will become a paradise, and 
the two thieves and all that are in their graves shall come into it. 
And by becoming obedient to its laws they may live forever in 
it. We doubt not, however, that the kind words spoken in that 
dark hour to the Lord of glory, will no more lose a suitable 
reward than the gift of a cup of cold water, or other small 
kindnesses done to those whom this King is "not ashamed to call 
his brethren. " 

But have we the right to change the comma? Certainly: the 
punctuation of the Bible is not inspired. The writers of the Bible 
used no punctuation. It was invented about four hundred years 
ago. It is merely a modern convenience, and should be so used 
as to bring out sense and harmony with all other Scriptures. This 
harmony and sense is obtained only by the punctuation we have 
given above. To read it as usually punctuated, it would teach 
that Jesus and the thief went away somewhere that day, which is 
contrary to the following Scriptures, which read carefully: Luke 
24:46; John 20:17; John 3:13. In the latter text note that the 
words, "which is in heaven," are an interpolation as shown by 
the oldest MSS. 



R1001 : page 7 



THE IRON WOLF. 



"I conducted, two months ago," said a clergyman, "the funeral 
services of one of my parishioners. He had been a farmer. Forty 
years ago he had commenced work with one hundred acres of 
land, and he ended with one hundred. He was a skillful, 
industrious working-man, but he had laid by no money in the 
bank. I understood the reason as I listened to the comments of 
his friends and neighbors. 

'"It was always a warm, hospitable house,' said one. 'The poor 
man was never turned away from that door. His sons and 
daughters all received the best education which his means could 
command. One is a clergyman, one a civil engineer, two are 
teachers— all lead useful and happy lives.' 

"Said another: 'Those children sitting there weeping are the 
orphans of a friend. He gave them a home. That crippled girl is 
his wife's niece. She lived with them for years. That young 
fellow who is also weeping so bitterly, was a waif that he 
rescued from the slums of the city.' 

"And so the story went on— not of a miser who had heaped dollar 
upon dollar, but of a servant of God who helped many lives, and 



had lifted many of them out of misery and ignorance into life 
and joy. 

"On my way home from the funeral I stopped at the farm of 
another parishioner, who said to me in a shrill, rasping tone: 

'"So poor Gould is dead! He left a poor account-not a penny 
more than he got from his father. Now I started with nothing; 
and look here,' pointing to his broad fields. 'I own down to the 
creek. D'ye know why? When I started to keep house I brought 
this into it the first thing,' taking an iron savings-bank in the 
shape of a wolf out of the closet. 'Every penny I could save went 
into its jaws. It is surprising how many pennies you can save 
when you've a purpose. My purpose was to die worth $100,000. 
Other folks ate meat; we ate molasses. Other folks dressed their 
wives in merino; mine wore calico. Other men wasted money on 
schooling; my boys and girls learned to work early and keep it 
up late. I wasted no money on churches, sick people, paupers, 
and books. And,' he concluded triumphantly, 'now I own to the 
creek; and that land with the fields yonder, and the stock in the 
barns, are worth $100,000. Do you see it?' 

"And on the thin, hard lips was a wretched attempt to laugh. The 
house was bare and comfortless; his wife, worn out with work, 
had long ago gone to her grave. Of his children, taught only to 
make money a god, one daughter, starved in body and mind, 
was still drudging in the kitchen; one son had taken to drink, 
having no other resource, and died in prison. The other, a harder 
miser than his father, remained at home to fight with him over 
every penny wrung out of their fertile fields. 

"Yesterday I buried this man," continued the clergyman. 
"Neither neighbor nor friend, son nor daughter, shed a tear over 
him. His children were eager to begin the quarrel for the ground 
he had sacrificed his life to earn. Of it all he had now only 
enough to cover his decaying body. Economy for a noble 
purpose is a virtue; but in the house of some it is avarice, and 
like a wolf, devours intelligence, religion, hope and life itself. " - 
-Friendly Companion. 



R1001 : page 7 

THE KING AND THE POPE. 

The King of Italy and the Pope are not on anything like the 
distant terms which the popular idea ascribes to them. The 
"prisoner of the Vatican," as the Church likes to call the Pope, is 
no prisoner at all in any true sense. Neither is the King the 
obdurate enemy of the Church he is sometimes represented. In 
simpler terms, there is masking in Rome on both sides, a fact 
with which Catholics even, throughout the world, it is probable 
are not perfectly familiar. 



We are assured from Rome that there is a secret understanding 
between the King and the Pope, and that it will not be long when 
the settlement will be made that will end forever all 
misunderstandings, -at least such is said to be the intention. 

Some time ago it was alleged that the Pope had extensive plans 
for regaining temporal power and that the prospect was good for 
his plans. Whether what is now on foot has this realization in 
view, nothing certain is known. It is certain, however, that the 
Italian Government has made important concessions with 
mutual benefits in view. 

Italy is ambitious of a place among nations as nearly the head as 
possible, and of late, the Pope- who is nothing if not a diplomat- 
-has shown a growing desire to mix himself up with the world's 
affairs something after the fashion of years ago, when the 
Church was more nearly omnipotent than now. 

Late accounts from Rome declare that at the recent 
Parliamentary elections throughout the country, in every case 
the names of the Government candidates were identical with 
those put forward and supported by the Papal party. In nothing 
does the Italian Government seem to have changed its policy. 
Nothing on the surface shows what the understanding is, though 
that there is one is shown in a number of ways. -Pitts. Times, 
Nov. 1. 



R1001 : page 7 

CHRISTIAN LIBERTY. 

"The true doctrine is not our right to think for ourselves, but the 
right of the other man to think for himself. " 

The impression very widely prevails that the battle for Christian 
liberty has been fought and won. So far as regards precaution of 
the more active kind, this is the case in the larger part of the 
civilized world. The right of the minority to free speech and free 
action in the line of conscientious conviction, is, in theory at 
least, conceded. 

But it is a mistake to assume that because harsh laws have been 
softened, human nature has been radically changed. The grosser 
forms of persecution have disappeared, but subtler forms 
remain. The intolerant spirit has survived the death of many 
institutions by which intolerance was once manifested. Christian 
liberty is still, in a considerable degree, conceded only in theory. 
Men still endeavor to punish those who have the temerity to 
differ from them. 

There is no cause for astonishment at this manifestation of 
inconsistency. It is one of the curious things in human history to 
see how generally the persecuted have become in turn the 



persecutors the moment the power was lodged in their hands. 
And why? Because the true principle of Christian liberty had not 
been grasped, and is to this day apprehended by only a few. The 
right of any body of men to differ from others has always been 
claimed by them; there is no novelty in that. From the 
beginning, every Christian sect that has arisen has vehemently 
contended for its right to differ from others. It has protested 
against persecution— that is to say, the persecution of itself by 
others. But in few cases has any sect conceded the right of 
others to differ from it, or forborne to persecute when it had the 
power. And in our own day each man is prompt to claim and 
assert the right to think for himself, but how loth most are to 
concede the equal right of all other men to think for themselves. 
Every one resents any attempt to coerce him into the avowal of 
anything that he does not honestly believe, but how few fail to 
attempt to coerce others. 

The true doctrine of Christian liberty is not our right to think for 
ourselves, but the right of the other man to think for himself. 
There is no danger now that our right will not be insisted upon 
and enforced, particularly if our thinking happens to fall in with 
that of the majority. It is the other man's liberty that is in danger, 
particularly if he is in the minority. It is his liberty that demands 
defense at all hazards; for, if liberty is denied him, how long will 
it be conceded to us? 

To demand liberty for the other man, even when he differs from 
us, is not to admit that truth and error are essentially one, or to 
deny that it is of great consequence what the other man believes 
and teaches. It may be our duty to oppose with all our might 
what he teaches, to denounce it as a deadly error. But this may 
be done without identifying the man with what he teaches, and 
without the display of the spirit of intolerance and persecution. 
We need not try to make the man odious because his opinion is 
odious to us. To be loyal to the truth, and yet faithfully to 
recognize the equal rights of all men to free thought and free 
speech, is not always an easy task. The two may, however, be 
combined. And nothing can be more certain than that the 
preservation of Christian liberty for any, is conditioned on the 
concession of that liberty for all.-N.Y. Examiner. 



R1001 : page 8 

CHRIST THE CENTER. 

As the sun is the center of our solar system, so Christ is the 
Christian's sun and center of desire. As gravitation holds the 
planets in their proper orbits, so love holds the trusting heart in 
the pathway of willing obedience. As in completing the solar 
circuit, the earth receives the pleasing variety of seasons adapted 
to beauty and health, and to promote all organic life, so in our 



loving service of Christ, there is a pleasing and useful variety of 
gracious and profitable experiences. Sometimes fierce storms 
sweep across our pathway to drive us into the shelter of his 
promised grace. Sometimes the cold repulsiveness of the world's 
unbelief and sin chills us like a winter's blast, driving us to the 
central, steady sunlight of a Savior's constant love, causing 
springtime to burst forth in the Christian's heart, and bursting 
buds of developing faith and love to expand into the fruits of 
Christian grace. But there is no winter in the sun. And he who 
has the Sun of Righteousness in his heart will have constantly 
the springtime of his abiding love. 



R1001 : page 8 

IMMORTALITY AND INCORRUPTION. 

The following, in answer to a correspondent's question, may be 
of general interest to our readers:- 

The Greek word aphtharsia is rendered immortality in Rom. 2:7 
and 2 Tim. 1:10. The same word is rendered sincerity in Eph. 
6:24 and Titus 2:7; and incorruption in 1 Cor. 15:42,50,53,54. 

The Greek word aphthartos is rendered immortal in 1 Tim 1:17; 
and incorruptible in Rom. 1:23, 1 Cor. 9:25 and 15:52, and 1 
Pet. 1:4,23 and 3:4. 

These are the only occurrences of this word. The Greek word 
athanasia is translated immortality, but three times— 1 Cor. 
15:53,54 and 1 Tim. 6:16. 

Both these words are given the sense of immortal, by 
lexicographers. Liddell and Scott, standard authorities, give it 
thus. Plutarch uses aphthartos as incorruptible, immortal. And it 
seems to be the exact word corresponding to our words, 
incorruptible [not liable to corrupt, or to be corrupted], and 
immortal [not mortal- not subject or liable to death]. 

Athanasia, while it is properly translated immortal according to 
usage, does not so much have the sense of not liable to die, as 
that of unchangeability. Hence aphthartos is the word which 
most closely corresponds to our word immortal, i.e., not mortal, 
not perishable, not corruptible. This is shown by the relationship 
between corruptible and incorruptible in 1 Cor. 15:53 and 54, 
which in the Greek as in the English stand related, of the same 
root, the Greek being phthartos and aphthartos. Not so, 
however, the words mortal and immortal in the same verses. In 
the English these words are closely related, but the Greek uses 
words totally distinct and not related— thnetos and athanasia, the 
sense being, "This mortal [dying condition] shall put on [or 
assume] immortality" [a lasting or unchangeable condition]. 



So, then, the attempt of some to make out that incorruptible 
refers to one state, and immortality to another, is without 
foundation, and probably the result of lack of thoroughness in 
the examination of the subject. Prof. Young, Liddell and Scott, 
and all translators are right in using the two English words 
immortal and incorruptible interchangeably. As above 
suggested, however, we would have preferred it had athanasia 
been translated unchangeability in the three cases where it 
occurs, although our word immortality covers the idea of 
unchangeability. 

With this change 1 Cor. 15:53,54 would read thus:— "The 
[special] dead [i.e., the saints] will be raised incorruptible [i.e., 
immortal, not liable to corrupt, decay, or perish] and we [of the 
same special class] shall be changed. " "For of necessity this 
corruptible [diseased, perishable condition] must be invested 
with incorruptibility [imperishable quality] and this mortal 
[dying condition] must be invested with immortality" 
[unchangeability]. "And when this corruptible [perishable 
condition] shall be invested with incorruptibility [imperishable 
quality] and this mortal [dying condition] shall be clothed with 
unchangeability [immortality], then will that prophetic promise 
be fulfilled [which says] Death will be swallowed up in victory. " 
That is to say: when this special class, the dead and we, the 
overcomers, the saints, are changed to undying, changeless 
conditions, then will that prophecy of Isaiah 25:8 begin to be 
fulfilled to the world-the Millennial work of abolishing death 
and restoring life will then go on successfully. 



R1001 : page 8 



DEATH NOT LIFE. 



I think we are not warranted in concluding (as some have done), 
so positively concerning this question, as to make it a point of 
Christian faith to interpret figuratively, and not literally, the 
"death" and the "destruction" spoken of in Scripture as the doom 
of the condemned: and to insist on the belief that they are kept 
alive forever. 

"Life," as applied to their condition, [the condition of the 
righteous] is usually understood to mean "happy life. " And that 
theirs will be a happy life, we are indeed plainly taught; but I do 
not think we are anywhere taught that the word "life" does of 
itself necessarily imply happiness. If so indeed, it would be a 
mere tautology to speak of a "happy life;" and a contradiction to 
speak of a "miserable life;" which we know is not the case, 
according to the usage of any language. In all ages and 
countries, "life," and the words answering to it in their 
languages, have always been applied, in ordinary discourse, to a 
wretched life, no less properly than to a happy one. 



Life, therefore, in the received sense of the word would apply 
equally to the condition of the blest and the condemned, 
supposing these last to be destined to continue forever living in a 
state of misery. And yet, to their condition the words "life" and 
"immortality" never are applied in Scripture. If, therefore, we 
suppose the hearers of Jesus and his Apostles to have 
understood, as nearly as possible, in the ordinary sense, the 
words employed, they must naturally have conceived them to 
mean (if they were taught nothing to the contrary) that the 
condemned were really and literally to be "destroyed," and cease 
to exist: not that they were to exist forever in a state of 
wretchedness. For they are never spoken of as being kept alive, 
but as forfeiting life; as for instance: "Ye will not come unto me 
that ye may have life; "-"He that hath the Son hath life; and he 
that hath not the Son of God hath not life. " And again, 
"perdition," "death," "destruction," are employed in numerous 
passages to express the doom of the condemned. All which 
expressions would, as I have said, be naturally taken in their 
usual and obvious sense, if nothing were taught to the contrary. - 
- Archbishop Whately. 



page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Canton, O., Nov. 11th, '87. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I present as a brief report of work 
done in the two weeks in Canton, the following: 500 DAWNS 
piled up in our room and nearly all engaged, beside nearly 100 
copies already gone out to subscribers. In addition they call for a 
full course of lectures. We truly have great favor and a season of 
peace, speaking comparatively. 

The ever welcome TOWER at hand, and if I can see my way 
clear, will have Ohio drenched with "Arp Slips." I have on some 
occasions given "slips" to refusers of DAWN, who afterward 
ran after me to subscribe or buy. Its influence seems to be 
always GOOD. Please send me more of the Arp slips. 

I enclose Ten dollars for the Tract Fund, but if you think best 
send the timely "Arp Slips" into Ohio to the value of the sum 
mentioned, and some brother or sister may add sufficient to 
supply the state fully. 

You may get ready 250 DAWNS for Massilon, O. The 1000 for 
Columbus may wait until Christmas or Dec. 20th at least. 
Expect another opening to preach at Salem, O., and have fully 
announced the lectures here. Canton is aroused. In Christ, 

J. B. ADAMSON. 



R1001 : page 8 



Peekville, Pa., Nov. 15th, '87. 

DEAR SIR:-I lately got hold of your book, "Millennial Dawn," 
and the outside cover had just enough left to give your address. 
Now if I can get the books and paper, and especially Vol. II, 
please let me know at once, and I will send money for them for 
myself and for a friend. 

I have been a member of the M.E. church for a number of years, 
but have often felt that we did not get all of the gospel. Your 
book has opened the holy Scriptures to my view in a new and 
wonderful light, and I am anxious to be further instructed in this 
way. I have always been taught from infancy until now— and I 
am over 40 years old-that this life is the only probation, and 
that at death our eternal destiny was unalterably fixed, and it 
nearly took my breath away when I found that no such assertion 
was made either in the Old or New Testament, and I am familiar 
with the Bible from Genesis to Revelation. 

This book has opened my eyes to some of the most blessed 
truths, and its perusal has filled my heart anew with the love of 
our God, and for the last few days I have felt like a newly 
converted man. I hoped all along until the last page was reached 
that I might find something about the rich man and Lazarus. I 
felt sadly disappointed when I did not find anything. Well, God 
bless you, Yours truly, 

H. S. 

page 8 



Millard, Neb., Nov. 14th, 87. 

MY DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:-Four Dawns sent last week are 
sold. People ask for them. 

I asked God to take care of this work and he is doing it. Mr. R. is 
very much interested in it too. He tells me at once when he sells 
one for me, as he knows it does me so much real good. 

Train men and travelling men are all eager for it. They read Bill 
Arp's comments and then want the book. I have them pinned up 
in the waiting room. I would like some more of them for sending 
away in letters. 

I had a letter from my cousin to whom you wrote, telling me that 
her son, a young man of twenty, had given up all and gone out 
to sell Dawns. May God bless him and his efforts. 

With love to you and Bro. R. May God bless you and forward 
the work while it is yet day. Yours in the faith, 

MRS. L. E. R. 



R1001 : page 8 

Northumberland Co., Pa., Nov. 11th, '87. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Please send me ten more paper 
covered Dawns for which you will find enclosed $2.50, and also 
send the "TOWER" to the following address -for one year, and 
find amt. enclosed. 

Brother C. has been converted from infidelity by reading 
DAWN. His own words are, "I am a changed man. " His only 
Bible for five years past has been Thomas Paine's "Age of 
Reason. " Another skeptic whom I presented with a copy says, I 
would not take $5.00 for my DAWN if I could not get another. I 
accept the Bible now, but have rejected it because I thought it 
taught the doctrine of eternal torment. 

The most honest people I have found are among skeptics. O! I 
wish I could do more to spread the truth. Never have I received 
such blessings, as since I have consecrated myself to the 
Master's service in the spread of the truth. I had thought I could 
send you a list of preachers' names this time, to be supplied with 
DAWNS, but I find that it is impossible at this time as so many 
others are beginning to inquire for the truth. Praying for you and 
the TOWER work, I remain yours in Christ. 

LEWIS L. EVARTS. 

[Some time ago Brother Evarts started to send DAWN to all the 
ministers in Penna., sending us lists from time to time as he 
found himself able to afford it. While commending his plan, and 
especially his zeal, we advised him that he would probably find 
a larger proportion of honest Bible students out of the pulpits of 
the nominal churches than in them. It seems from the above that 
his experience is the same as ours. How like is the present 
"harvest" to that at the first advent, its prototype or shadow. See 
Matt. 23:13; Luke 13:52. The word "lawyers" in this last text 
corresponds in meaning to the present title of D.D. Doctors of 
the Law, they were then called, but now Doctors of Divinity.- 
EDITOR.] 

page 8 

DEAR BROTHER: When I became a reader of the TOWER 
and M. DAWN, I was preparing to enter the ministry of the 
Baptist faith. I have had a hard, long struggle with friends and 
creeds, but now I know I can go joyfully to work with whatever 
ability I possess circulating DAWN for the truth's sake. I 
enclose money. Please send me 500 "Arp's Joy," and 100 
DAWNS. Your Bro. in Christ, 

Becca, S.C. 

S. J. H 



R1002 : page 1 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., FEBRUARY, 1888. 

NO. 6. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDrfOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :-FIFTY CENTS A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., paper 
bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," four 
shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "-ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

WE HAVE PLENTY of the "Missionary Envelopes" now. 
Every letter you send out should bear this much of the gospel 
upon the outside, beside what you may think proper to write 
within. 



R1003 : page 1 

WE SEND THIS TOWER to many who have not renewed 
their subscription, nor indicated in any way their desire to have 
it come during 1888; because we want all to read the series of 
articles commencing "Who are Sons of God. " Those whose 
paper stops with this number, have themselves to blame. You do 
not appreciate the spiritual food, if you will not "ask, that ye 
may receive, that your joy may be full"— and we are quite sure 
none of you are so poor that you cannot purchase a Postal Card. 

page 1 

Remember, too, that though moneys sent at any time are 
credited on our books, requests to have the TOWER continued 
free, hold good only for that year. So, if you wrote only last 
October it will not serve for 1888;-none prior to December 
count for 1888. Even if you have at sometime written that you 
"want the TOWER as long as you live," that is not sufficient, as 
we cannot tell but you may have died or changed your mind. We 
want to hear from you all once a year. Write a good letter or at 
least a card. 

Again, while we will gladly send sample TOWERS to all the 
addresses you send us, we enter none for the year but such as are 
paid for or have sufficient interest to write and ask it for 
themselves. 



R1003 : page 1 



MORE ARP SLIPS. 



We were out of Arp Slips "for free distribution" for a while, but 
have plenty now. Order all you can use. Put one into every letter 
you write; wrap one in every bundle you send away, and if 



possible arrange to engage help and distribute them to every 
church in your town. 

As noticed in previous TOWERS, several friends paid for 
printing slips for free circulation in Ohio, Pennsylvania, W. 
Virginia and Maryland. Now we can announce to you that it is 
decided to use receipts of the TOWER TRACT FUND to further 
this cause. Seeing the good results from the slips already 
distributed, it is proposed to deluge the country with them. 
Order all you can use. Labor while it is called day, for the night 
cometh wherein no man can work. 



R1002 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The events of the past month show that the time is hastening 
rapidly when the Papacy will say, "I sit a queen and am no 
widow." The present Pope, Leo XIII., has just celebrated his 
fiftieth year in the priesthood, calling it a Jubilee. It has been 
made the occasion of the grandest gifts and ovations to the 
Papacy on the part of the civilized world, witnessed in centuries. 
Engrossed memorial letters and costly presents came from every 
quarter— from kings, queens, princes, bishops, mayors, clubs, 
churches and societies, aggregating in value ($15,000,000) 
fifteen millions of dollars. 

The day of the celebration in Rome was a wonderful one, which 
can only be appreciated by those who realize what the Papacy 
really claims to be. It claims to be nothing less than the glorious 
millennial kingdom of Christ established in dignity and power to 
rule over the kingdoms of earth, the fulfillment of our Lord's 
prayer -"THY KINGDOM COME, thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven. " The papal hierarchy consisting of the 
bishops, cardinals, etc., with the pope as their head, claims to be 
the Kingdom of God in power, the pope being instead of Christ 
or the "vicar" of Christ, and the bishops, etc., instead of the 
apostles, in fulfillment of the Lord's promise, "It is the Father's 
good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. " It must be 
remembered that the papacy claims [falsely] that the time of 
suffering with Christ is in the long ago past, and that the time of 
the Millennial reign and rule began long ago, when Papacy 
obtained the control of the Roman Empire. Papacy claims that 
the Protestant movement, the "Reformation," led up to the 
events of 1799, from which time to 1870 was accomplished the 
gradual destruction of her political power, and this period since 
1799 she considers the "little season" of Rev. 20:3, in which the 
devil is loosed. Papacy thus ignorantly fulfills the predictions of 
God's word, by establishing a counterfeit kingdom, and 
instituting an unauthorized reign over the world under a 
counterfeit head, (the popes), thus constituting the anti-Christ 



kingdom so prominent in prophecy. Those only who see clearly 
the coming hierarchy or kingdom of the true kingly priesthood - 
the true church-under the true head, the Lord Jesus, can 
appreciate how great is the counterfeit deception by which 
papacy has blinded, and is still blinding herself and the world. 

How great then is papacy's triumph at the present hour, as she 
seems to see what she considers the little season of Satan's 
power drawing to a close; and herself rising again to glory and 
power. But her fall will come all the more severely when it does 
come. In proportion as she has glorified herself, she shall have 
trouble and sorrow. The present uplifting in influence is but the 
lifting of the great millstone to make its casting down the more 
violent-See Rev. 17:6,18, and 18:7,8,21. 

Papacy's "King of Glory," the pope, wearing the Prussian 
Emperor's present, the triple crown, covered with a thousand 
costly pearls, was carried about from place to place during the 
ceremonies of the celebration, and offered mass, etc. He 
received the homage of the forty-eight cardinals, two hundred 
and thirty-eight arch-bishops, and an audience of thirty thousand 
in the great cathedral known as St. Peters. [It will be 
remembered that it was the public sale of "Indulgences," to raise 
money to finish this immense cathedral, that opened the eyes of 
Luther and others, and led them to search and finally locate 
Papacy as the "Mystery of Iniquity," photographed in Daniel 
and Revelation.] But, poor man, as if to show that he was not the 
real, but only an imitation "King of glory" (Psa. 24:7,9), he 
fainted twice during the ceremonies. 

Everything was done on the princely, or rather the kingly scale 
befitting to the claim that the pope is Christ on earth. The 
feeding of a hungry multitude on five loaves and two small 
fishes was not imitated, though thousands of the so-called 
children of the papacy are declared to be in a starving condition 
in Ireland; but on the contrary "Peter's pence," given out of their 
penury by the wretchedly poor the world over, to help the poor 
pope, was squandered lavishly by this (would be, if he could 
be,) "king of nations," (Rev. 15:3.) He began the day with a 
breakfast costing several thousand dollars,— over eighty dollars 
each, for all the bishops, cardinals, etc., (princes of the church) 
who partook of his hospitality. And by the way, it must be 
remembered that this was not extravagant on the part of the 
pope; he can well afford to do it. His poor predecessor, it will be 
remembered, left over twenty millions of dollars in the treasury 
on his decease— safely and wisely invested with the Rothschilds, 
the Jewish bankers. This sum with interest and additions is 
probably not less than thirty millions now, as his regular income 
is put at a million and a half per year. Evidently the popes are 
unlike the apostles whom they claim to succeed. They are rich 
by making others poor, while the apostles were "poor while 
making others rich. "-2 Cor. 6:10. 



It should not surprise us to learn that Catholics did homage and 
sent gifts to their king, but how shall we interpret it when we 
learn that Protestants in places of representative influence did 
the same? It inclines us to think that Protestants themselves are 
beginning to see that they have gradually swung around so 
much, that they now see the foolishness of calling themselves 
protestants while they do not protest at all, but flatter and do 
homage to the system and the doctrines against which their 
fathers protested even to the stake, the rack and the dungeon. 

The Queen of England, (the nation which claims to be the chief 
protestant against Papacy)-the head of the Church of England 
sent a very costly gift consisting of plate— ewer basin, etc.,— 
which was used by the pope in celebrating his Jubilee Mass. 
These are of gold and probably the most elegant and costly of 
any ever used in that most blasphemous of all the errors of 
Papacy-the Mass, -noted in the prophetic Scriptures as "the 
abomination" greater than all others.* 

Next in religious influence among the sovereigns of the earth is 
Emperor William, of Germany. The Emperor being himself a 
member of the Lutheran church, and Germany the home of 
Luther and his notable work, any recognition of Papacy's claims 
on his part must not be overlooked. Did he send a present? Yes, 
and one of the greatest significance as indicating the German 
government's attitude toward the restoration of temporal power 
to Papacy. He sent as a present a new triple crown such as has 
been worn by the popes since the time of Benedict XIII. This 
crown is the distinctive badge of civil authority. It said in figure, 
Germany recognizes you as a civil ruler, though at present you 
are dispossessed of your territory; just as the present of the head 
of the Church of England said in symbol, Protestant England has 
changed her views on the subject and no longer recognizes your 
system as that of Anti-Christ, but upholds your communion. 

The Duke of Norfolk was the Queen's envoy in this matter and 
approached the pope kneeling three times, and as the Catholic 
Times, of Liverpool, pointedly notes, is the only envoy sent by 
an English sovereign for over two hundred years. 

These are so many additional straws, pointing the direction of 
public sentiment -pointing as we have heretofore noted to the 
grand confederation of the great religious systems— a union 
which to the many will seem a grand achievement, 

R1002 : page 2 

a token of Millennial harmony, but which, to the extent that it is 
successful, will be as oppressive to the true church as it will be 
advantageous to the human systems called churches. For when 
the power of organization is once felt, it will soon be used to 
frown down and hinder all growth in grace and knowledge, and 
to suppress all teaching and teachers not in harmony with the 
errors and bondage of said unions. The only union and bondage 



which God has ever authorized in his children, is the union 
between each individual and Christ the head; and the union 
between the members of the church if in any way more than, or 
different from that prompted by love and the spirit of the head, 
is of the devil, no matter how honorable and moral the agents he 
may employ, or the arguments he may cause to be advanced to 
secure the bondage of God's children under the name of 
Christian Union. There can be no union between truth and error 
to last, and every attempt to secure it is an attempt to fetter the 
truth. We are in the "harvest" of this age, and the errors must fall 
before the "sharp sickle" of truth, which the Lord is now 
thrusting in. (Rev. 14:15,16.) Hence the doings of those who say 
"a confederacy" (a union) must not discourage us, for though 
they will succeed and cause a night to come, wherein no man 
can work except those who worship the beast or his image, 
(John 9:4 and Rev. 13:16,17,) yet the truth will eventually 
triumph, as well as all faithful to it, under the true pope, the true 
"King of glory," the High priest of our profession, Christ Jesus. 

Some further showing of the Roman anti-Christ system as "a 
great Christian camp" by leading protestant ministers, blinded 
by long cherished errors and wrong expectations concerning the 
church's 

R1003 : page 2 

present work and the promised kingdom under the whole 
heavens, we have been obliged to leave for another number of 
the TOWER; but they are truly surprising to those who see, but 
unnoticed by the majority, whom, as always, the god of this 
world blinds to the truth. 

Meanwhile, as a proof that some eyes are getting open while 
others are being closed, we print below a brief report of a 
discourse delivered in New York by the ex-priest, now well 
known as Dr. McGlynn, as reported in the public press. 

NEW YORK, Dec. 8. -The announcement that Dr. McGlynn 
would speak tonight on the Pope's right to interfere in politics 
drew an even larger audience than usual to the anti-poverty 
meeting at the Academy of Music. The address was a protest 
against a recent statement by Monsignor Preston, that Catholics 
are bound to vote as the Pope advises. Dr. McGlynn handled the 
subject boldly, declaring that wherever papal influence had been 
felt in politics it had been a curse to the country where it was 
exercised. Christ, the founder of the Church, had refrained from 
mixing religion with politics, but some of his vice-gerents had 
thought themselves wiser. 

The speaker declared that even in religious matters Popes had 
often shown themselves far from infallible. It was the shameless 
abuse of the Papal power that led to the disruption of the Church 
in the sixteenth century. At the time when a flaxen haired 
German boy, named Martin Luther, was playing around his 



mother's knee, Pope Alexander VI. was installing his 
illegitimate children in his papal residence. Many Popes had 
been guilty of egregious blunders and crimes. It had been said 
that Catholics must take their religion and not their politics from 
Rome. But even in matters of religion they were not bound to 
blindly submit to dictation. Every man's conscience is to be the 
final arbiter for him how far he is obliged to obey the Pope. 



*We have heretofore shown the error of the principles involved 
in the Mass, and when Vol. II. of DAWN is ready it will contain 
a full explanation of it, in connection with the prophecies which 
foretold its institution, and Papacy's rise and fall. 



R1003 : page 2 

THE DAWN IN GERMAN 

We are glad to announce to you that the German translation of 
Millennial Dawn Vol. I. is complete. It will be on the press 
shortly, and the first edition of 1000 copies, cloth bound, will be 
ready for mailing very soon. Orders may now be sent in; they 
will be served in order as received. 

As the German language requires more words than the English 
to express the thoughts, this volume will contain over 400 pages. 
The price will be one dollar. We cannot promise a paper covered 
50 ct. edition at present, as there will probably not be a 
sufficient interest to justify it. It is only by getting out large 
editions that paper bound books can be made to pay expenses. 

We are confident the translation is excellent: it is the work of 
Bro. Zech, a German by birth, whose education in the language, 
as well as his growth in the knowledge of the truth, the spirit of 
which he seems to have drunk into deeply, has well qualified 
him for the work. We are confident, therefore, that his work is 
so complete that the German reader can catch the spirit and 
intent of "The Plan of the Ages." For this blessing to our 
German brethren, we on their behalf thank God especially, and 
secondarily we thank Bro. Zech, who in this work has been 
God's honored instrument. 

To the interested readers of the TOWER, let us say: The work is 
in your hands now; now is your opportunity to engage in the 
service of the truth and in the service of your fellow-Germans. 
God made the plan and revealed it in His Word, and is therefore 
the real Author of the "Plan of the Ages;" the writer of it 
endeavored to do his part as best he could in the English 
language, and now Bro. Zech as translator has spent precious 
months of labor in preparing it for you in German. Now it is 
your turn to spend your consecrated time and talent in using this 



which is thus by others made ready for your use. How many of 
you will prove faithful to so great privileges as are here laid 
before you? How much sleep will you lose in trying to put the 
plan into the hands, heads and hearts of others? Probably few of 
you will lose as much sleep as we are sure Bro. Zech lost in his 
part of the work. How many will feel it a pleasure to deny 
themselves some comforts and pleasures, earthly, in order to 
carry to others the comforts and pleasures mental and heavenly, 
which a knowledge of God's plan only can give? 

The TOWER Publishing Co. promises that as soon as the 
brethren and sisters shall order 2000 copies of paper bound 50 
ct. Dawn in German (or send pledges that they will order as 
soon as the books are announced as ready) they will get out an 
edition of 10,000 copies. Now dear friends use your privileges 
and opportunities faithfully, so that the Master at the reckoning 
may say, "Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into 
the joys of thy Lord. " 



R1003 : page 2 

THE GERMAN TOWER. 

The German TOWER has been stopped for some months to 
permit Bro. Zech's time to go to the preparation of Dawn. That 
work being now done, the regular issues of the German TOWER 
were resumed, commencing January, 1888. 

As a reward for the patience of the German readers obliged to 
wait during the preparation of German Dawn, it is proposed that 
such of them as order cloth bound GERMAN DAWN shall be 
presented free with the next year's GERMAN TOWER. 
Therefore such in ordering DAWN should mention the fact that 
they wish the GERMAN TOWER renewed as per this promise. 



R1004 : page 2 



CHAS. H. SPURGEON'S POSITION. 

In our December '87 issue we referred to this celebrated 
minister of London, as having left the Baptist denomination. We 
were promptly contradicted by some who felt loath to 
acknowledge the loss to Babylon of so able a man. Fuller reports 
show that we were entirely correct. Mr. Spurgeon's withdrawal 
was from the Baptist Denomination— the "Baptist Union." 

Many do not know that the "Baptists," "Disciples," 
"Congregationalists," and some others, are not organized into 
one body throughout the world, in the same manner as are 
Roman Catholics, Episcopalians, and E. Methodists, but each 
congregation maintains the right to control its own affairs and its 



own faith independently of other congregations. [This is well, 
but the same principle should extend to each individual in each 
congregation. Each should be asked if he accepts the Lord by 
the only name, Savior, and the Bible as God's divinely inspired 
communication to man; and beyond this, each should be left to 
believe all that he can find in God's revelation, each ready to 
assist and be assisted by the other, to grow in grace and 
knowledge and in the love of God.] But those independent 
congregations, imitating the various sects, have formed 
"Unions" by which the majority of such churches attempt to fix 
the faith and affairs of the others, much the same as Conferences 
do for the Methodists, and the Presbyteries and Synods and 
General Assemblies of the Presbyterians, and the Convocations 
Councils and generally the hierarchies of the Protestant 
Episcopal and Roman Catholic churches. 

We did not say that Mr. Spurgeon withdrew as pastor of the 
congregation he serves. If they as a people are free from 
denominational shackles, free from the control of others, and 
meet to study God's Word and to offer Him worship they are a 
church in the original form, such as the congregations in the 
days of the apostles were. And this is just where Mr. Spurgeon 
and the congregation he ministers to stand: They have 
withdrawn from the "Baptist Union" and stand independent. For 
this others blame Brother Spurgeon, while we commend his 
steps. He does not see all the truth as we see it yet, but now that 
he is free and has taken a bold stand, if he follows on, he will 
soon see more and more light— until the perfect day. That we 
correctly state Mr. Spurgeon will we think be apparent from the 
following abstract from the Sword and Trowel, a paper which he 
publishes. 

In it he has written: "The case is mournful. Certain ministers are 
making infidels. Avowed infidels are not a tenth as dangerous as 
those preachers who scatter doubt, and stab at faith. " In these 
remarks Mr. Spurgeon evidently refers to the same class in its 
many forms so often reproved (Eph. 5:1 1) in the TOWER, who 
reject the inspiration of the Bible, laugh at the stories of the 
flood and of Balaam's speaking ass, and Jonah and the fish, etc.; 
who declare with great show of worldly wisdom that Adam's fall 
must have been upward, and who, denying the original sin and 
its penalty, see no reason to believe in a redemption from that 
fall by the precious blood of Christ, and who consequently deny 
the ransom, and claim that our Lord was merely a good 
example, and that the whole world in God's order is being 
evolved from lower to higher conditions, and that all will finally 
be saved irrespective of faith and obedience to a "historic 
Christ. " This error, as we have shown, is spreading into all the 
pulpits and pews of "Christendom" rapidly, being helped along 
by the false views hitherto held concerning the wages of sin and 
the character of our Lord's ransom-sacrifice. That Mr. Spurgeon 



is opposing this same class, is evident from the following 
quotations from his paper. 

He says: "It is only too evident to all who are zealous for God 
and his truth, that on one side there is a perilous growth of 
superstition and sacerdotalism, and on the other of unbelief and 
indifference to vital religion. The substitutionary sacrifice of our 
Lord and Savior is lightly esteemed and even repudiated by 
some prominent teachers-the plenary inspiration of the Holy 
Scriptures, with other verities of the faith of Christ, are 
explained away, in many instances." 

"A new religion has been initiated, which is no more 
Christianity than chalk is cheese; and this religion, being 
destitute of moral honesty, palms itself off as, the old faith, with 
slight improvements. The atonement is scouted,... the 
punishment of sin is turned into fiction, and the resurrection into 
a myth; and yet these enemies of our faith expect us to call them 
'Brethren' and maintain a confederacy with them. 

"The results of this erroneous teaching and perversion of the 
gospel are apparent; worldliness, sensuality, and luxury... 
abound, and Christian liberty has become license in the walk 
and conversation of many of the professed disciples of Christ. " 

In closing Mr. Spurgeon asks- "What shall we do?" and 
answers, "We retire at once and distinctly from the 'Baptist 
Union.'" 

To the supposed inquiry whether he would attempt to head a 
new denomination, he answers, No; and declares [what we 
declare] that denominations are unnecessary among Independent 
congregations. 



R1004 : page 2 

THE TRUTH IN CHINA. 

Shanghai, China, 

DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:-The Dawns reached me on the 23d 
of September, for which many thanks. Three of the books are 
now in Shanghai. The good and thoroughly orthodox Methodist 
sister, to whom I gave one, said, "The restitution theology is 
very interesting, and I am glad you have found such rest and 
peace in believing it." I am sure she will read the book carefully, 
and be benefited by it. Another book has gone into a Baptist 
family. And the third I gave to Rev. Dr. W., who believes in the 
Millennial coming of Christ, and is, I think, somewhat prepared 
for Dawn. One book has gone to Ching-chew-fu into the Eng. 
Bap. Mission. The others I shall send— one to Peking, one to 
Amoy, one to Tang-chon, etc. The papers also arrived in due 
time and will soon be scattered over China. The books ordered 



came by last mail, received two or three days since. Since 
writing the above, the Concordance and Diaglott came. I cannot 
thank you enough for the kind letter received at the same time. I 
am using my Dawn, and the others and the papers are being 
scattered broadcast over the land. The Rev. Bp. S. has a Dawn. 
You may be sure I lose no opportunity to tell the glad tidings. 

Your sister in Christ, 

C. B. D. 



R1003 : page 2 

OUR PASSOVER ANNIVERSARY.-Sunday night, March 
25th next, will be the anniversary of our Lord's last night with 
the disciples in the flesh. As usual, the church will 
commemorate it. So many as can meet with us here will be 
welcomed. 



R1004 : page 3 

"THE FATHER HIMSELF LOVETH YOU." 

John 16:27. 

Be still, my soul, Jehovah loveth thee! 
Fret not, nor murmur at thy weary lot; 
Though dark and lone thy journey seems to be, 
Be sure that thou art ne'er by Him forgot: 
He ever loves; then trust Him, trust Him still; 
Let all thy care be this-the doing of his will. 

Thy hand in his, like fondest, happiest child, 
Place thou, nor draw it for a moment thence; 
Walk thou with Him, a Father reconciled, 
Till in his own good time He calls thee hence. 
Walk with him now: so shall thy way be bright, 
And all thy soul be filled with his most glorious light. 

Take courage, faint not, though the foe be strong; 
Christ is thy strength! He fighteth on thy side. 
Swift be thy race; remember 'tis not long, 
The goal is near; the prize He will provide. 
And then from earthly toil thou restest ever, 
Never again to toil, or fight, or fear-oh never! 

He comes, with his reward; 'tis just at hand; 

He comes in glory to his promised throne; 

My soul rejoice! ere long thy feet shall stand 

Within the City of the blessed One- 

Thy perils past, thy heritage secure, 

Thy tears all wiped away, thy joy forever sure. 



-Horatius Bonar. 



R1005 : page 3 

WHO ARE SONS OF GOD? 

Few seem to get a clear idea of the meaning of the words son 
and father. The word father, signifies producer, generator, life- 
giver, the word son correspondingly signifying one produced, 
generated, one who receives life from a father. 

Applying these definitions, we find that in a general way 
Jehovah God might be said to be the father, producer or creator 
of every living creature, from the crawling worm to the great 
arch-angel. But a restriction is placed about the word son, by its 
use in Scripture, which shows us that God uses the expression 
"sons of God" with reference only to those of his creatures 
whom he created more or less in his own likeness; i.e., with 
mental and moral qualities in harmony with his, and capable of 
understanding his laws and arrangements. This cuts off from the 
honorable name of sons the lower, the brute creation, but still 
leaves sons of various natures— angelic sons, human sons, and 
sons of divine nature. 

Angels are called "sons of God" in parable, in Job 1:6 and 2:1. 
They are again represented as "morning stars," i.e., early bright 
ones, rejoicing together at the creation of this earth, when they 
as "the sons of God shouted for joy."- Job 38:7. As shown in 
the TOWER of December '87, those angels which kept not their 
first estate are referred to as "sons of God" up to the time of 
their fall into sin. -Gen. 6:2,4. 

Among men, Adam of course was a son of God, i.e., God's 
creation. God was his Life-giver, Creator, Producer or Father, 
and hence he was a "son of God" and is so designated, Luke 
3:38. Be it noted, however, that none of Adam's children are 
called "sons of God" down to the time that our Lord Jesus gave 
himself a ransom for all. Those who, by wilful sin, forfeit and 
lose the likeness of God, the perfection in which he created 
them, are reckoned as unworthy of the honorable title of sons of 
God-as the brute creation which never had and never lost this 
likeness; and such are to be treated as "natural brute beasts, 
made to be destroyed." (2 Pet. 2:12; Eccl. 3:18.) In the case of 
man (Adam), he was sentenced to death at once, as unworthy of 
life and the various privileges God had prepared for his sons. 
Having misused his grand superiority to the beasts, he was no 
longer worthy of the honors prepared for sons. From the 
moment of sin onward, Adam was not recognized as a son of 
God; and if he was fallen and degraded from sonship, it is 
manifest that he could in turn give life to none better or more 
worthy of divine sonship than he himself was. And so for four 



thousand years— until our Redeemer's coming— there were no 
sons of God, none whom God would recognize as such, except 
our Lord and those angels who kept their first estate of purity 
and sonship. Even Abraham, and Moses, and Elijah, and the 
prophets, were not called sons of God. "Friend of God" and 
"faithful servant" were the dearest names then possible (Heb. 
3:5,6. Gal. 4:4-7); because no matter how good their intentions 
they were all imperfect, fallen from the likeness and liberties of 
sons of God, and had not yet been redeemed from that great 
calamity. 

Next in order let us consider our Lord Jesus :-- 



GOD'S ONL Y BEGOTTEN SON. 

The question at once arises, How can there be more than one 
son of God, since that one is called the only begotten Son? We 
answer: both statements are true. God has "many sons," and one 
"only begotten Son." Our Lord before he became a man, was a 
spirit being, as "God is a spirit," and angels are spirits; and he 
was the "first born of every creature," or "born before all 
creation," as some translate it— the beginning of Jehovah God's 
creative work. -Rev. 1:8; 3:14. 

And since he is both the first and the last, the beginning and 
ending of Jehovah's direct creative work, it is very evident that 
he was the ONLY Son of God thus directly begotten of the 
Father. And since it is clearly stated that "all things were made 
by him, and without him was not anything made that was made 
(John 1:3), it becomes the more evident to every reasoning mind 
that His creation was more directly and specially the Father's 
work than that of any other creature, or Son of God-man or 
angel; for though it was the Father's power and vitality that was 
given to angels, to men, to beasts, and birds, and creeping 
things, yet with none of these was the begetting a direct work of 
Jehovah, as in the case of the one Son distinguished forever 
among the sons of God by the title, "only begotten Son." And 
though God calls angels sons, mark the pointedness of the 
apostle's question, and how it points out our Lord's superiority, 
when he asks, "Unto which of the angels said he at any time, 
"Thou art my [special] son, this day have I begotten thee.'"- 
Heb. 1:5; 5:5. 

Our Lord did not lose his right to the title "Only Begotten Son," 
by becoming a man; for the life was not laid down in death, 
when his nature was changed and he was made flesh. That 
change was only a transfer of existence from a higher nature to a 
lower nature, from spiritual nature to human nature; for, or in 
order to the suffering of death by him as a just man for the 
unjust; as the corresponding price for Adam's sin-penalty. Even 
as a man, then, our Lord retained his title "only begotten Son of 
God." As John says, "We beheld his glory [dignity, perfection], 



the glory [perfection and grandeur] as of the only begotten of the 
Father, full of favor and truth."- John 1:14. 

But when our Lord in obedience to the Father's purpose would 
redeem mankind, nothing but his death could accomplish the 
work. That was the penalty imposed upon Adam and the race 
which lost life in him— and that he must suffer if he would 
redeem Adam's life (and ours lost in him); so then the "Only 
Begotten" died, ceased to be, and remained so until the third 
day. Now, question: Did our Lord cease to be the only begotten 
Son of God when he laid down his life a ransom for many? Yes, 
truly. When his existence terminated in death the only begotten 
Son had ceased to exist— was dead. But in his resurrection, his 
re-creation, he was again the only begotten Son of God, for no 
agency was called into service to accomplish his resurrection, 
but, as when first created, he was the direct workmanship of 
Jehovah, who so arranged that not even this distinctive title and 
honor of "only begotten" should be lost by his obedient Son. 
Hence no agency of man, nor even of the angel Gabriel, was 
permitted in the work of our Lord's resurrection: no agencies 
great or small were employed, but it is written "Whom God hath 
raised from the dead"— "God hath both raised up the Lord, and 
will also raise up us by his own power. "-Acts 2:24; 3:15; 4:10; 
Rom. 4:24; 6:4; 8:11; 1 Cor. 6:14; 15:15; Col. 2:12; 1 Thes. 
1:10; 1 Pet. 1:21. And since his resurrection was a re-creation of 
the same being or individuality first created, it can still be said 
of him that he is the first and the last, the beginning and the 
ending of the creation of God, the Only Begotten of the Father. - 
See Rev. 1:18. 

POWER TO BECOME SONS OF GOD. 

Coming now to the Gospel age, consider the import of the 
words, "To as many as received him, to them gave he power 
[i.e., liberty] to become the sons of God, even to them that 
believe in his name," (John 1:12) and "Beloved, now are we the 
sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we 
know that when He shall appear we shall be like him; for we 
shall see him as he is." -1 John 3:2. 

As already noted, all the human race from Adam down came 
under condemnation through his wilful sin (1 Tim. 2:14), and all 
lost recognition as the sons of God, as well as the likeness 
because of which they had been so recognized above the brute 
creation. Indeed since their minds ceased to be godly, and 
became carnal and devilish, they might be said to have been 
reconstructed by the tyrant Sin to bear much of the image of 
God's adversary; and hence they might in this sinful state be 
called sons of the devil, bearing his moral likeness. And so our 
Lord declared even to the Jews, "Ye must be born again"-"Ye 
are of your father the devil." (John 8:44.) And since the same 
apostle also records, (1 John 5:19) that "The whole world lieth 



in wickedness," it is evident that the standing of all in God's 
sight is that of children of the devil. 

The question then arises, Since only those possessing the perfect 
likeness of God, are worthy to be called sons of God, and since 
God himself refuses to call any others by that honorable title, 
how can we be called "sons of God" who are confessedly 
imperfect, and who at most bear but a slight likeness to the holy 
God? The answer is, that our Lord Jesus gave power or liberty to 
become sons of God, -"to them that believe on his name." Mark 
well, he did not make us sons, but simply gave us the liberty or 
privilege to become sons. It follows then, that the patriarch and 
prophets of the preceding four thousand years could not become 
sons, because they were not given that privilege or liberty. 

What did our Lord do for us to secure us this great boon, this 
liberty or privilege? Something must have been done, for 
Jehovah changes not (Mai. 3:6.) He did not once declare Adam 
and his children cut off from sonship and subject to destruction 
in death, as brute beasts, and then change that decree. Nor could, 
nor would our Lord Jesus set aside the divine decision to 
reinstate the sinners to the dignity of sons and to worthiness of 
life. No; he came not to oppose the Father's will, but to obey it. 
"I delight to do thy will, O God," was the sentiment expressed in 
his every act and word. "Not my will but thine be done," was his 
constant prayer. Hence we say, he must have done something 
for us, by which he lifted from us the embargo of sin, to give us 
liberty to again become sons of God. What did he do for us? 

Ah yes ! he did a great work for us; he gave himself a ransom for 
us, he redeemed 

R1006 : page 3 

us from all iniquity and from all the condemnation and loss 
attaching to it. Giving thus the price of Adam's guilt he thereby 
purchased the dead and dying race, with full right to do what he 
wills to them and for them. He wills to give during this Gospel 
age, liberty to become sons of God to all that believe on his 
name. His name was called Jesus, which signifies Savior or 
Liberator. -(Matt. 1:21.) "Thou shalt call his name Jesus; for he 
shall save his people from their sins. " Hence we see that it is to 
them that receive him in the sense of believing in him as their 
Savior or Liberator, that he gives now the liberty of becoming 
sons of God-none others. Believing that such a person lived at 
such a time is not the kind of belief which brings the liberty: 
believing that he was a fine man who taught many excellent 
precepts, is not the kind of belief necessary: believing that he set 
a good example, and that all should try to follow it as best they 
can, is not the belief demanded here: No, it is a different belief, 
a belief in and recognition of his name Savior: the recognition 
and acceptance of him as the one who saves his people from 
their sins. No one who rejects the Bible account of the fall and 



condemnation of all in Adam, and the utter loss of sonship and 
all its privileges (life, etc.), can possibly receive and "believe" in 
this SAVIOR or Liberator, who by redeeming them grants them 
liberty or privilege to become sons of God. 

But is it only to "believers" in his name that our Lord grants this 
privilege? Only these; belief in no other person will do, nor will 
the acceptance of our Lord by any other name than the one 
which acknowledges his ransom-sacrifice avail— he must be 
recognized as Savior, and not merely as Lord and Guide. He 
saves his people from their sins that are past as well as teaches 
and guides them to abhor and avoid sin for the future. 

Next let us examine the liberty which proper believers obtain 
through the Savior. What does the expression liberty signify as 
here used? It simply means that our Savior, having paid the 
penalty of Adam's sin, offers to all who accept of his finished 
work, and who desire to return to the likeness of God and to 
sonship, a clear receipt of exoneration from the sin which 
brought condemnation upon all six thousand years ago, and that 
he will throw about such the robe of his own righteousness to 
cover all their present imperfections and unavoidable 
weaknesses, so that they may at once go to God and thus find 
acceptance and grace to help, until having proved by their 
obedience in the present life, the sincerity of their consecration 
to God's will and service, they shall ultimately be delivered from 
all the present weaknesses into the grand, perfect spiritual 
bodies like unto our Lord's. This is the promise to such 
overcomers, who thus will be received into final and complete 

R1006 : page 4 

sonship, as heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their 
Lord and Savior. 

This is what the apostle means when he says: "Beloved now are 
we the sons of God-and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; 
but we know that when He shall appear we shall be like him. " 
The "we" here does not refer to the world of mankind, but to the 
saints, the truly consecrated, who believe in the only name 
[Jesus— Savior] whereby we must be saved. As already shown 
God really has no imperfect sons, such as we now are, hence in 
the full sense we will not be sons until in the end of this age, the 
selection and trial of these probationary sons being complete, 
they shall be received to the full perfect likeness of God-like 
unto their Redeemer and King. But now we may reckon 
ourselves Sons of God by faith. Grasping by faith the anticipated 
end of our high calling, we may and do speak of the things 
which are not yet fully accomplished, as though they were 
completed. In saying, Now are we the sons of God, and grasping 
it as a reality, we fasten to it by the threefold cord of faith, the 
three parts of which are first, faith in the perfect sacrifice, and 
finished work of him who gave us liberty or privilege to become 



sons; second, faith or confidence in promises made us of grace 
to help us overcome and quench all the fiery darts of our 
opponents; third, faith or confidence in our consciousness that 
our consecration is full, complete, and that our desire is to know 
and do the Father's will under any and all conditions. This 
threefold cord of faith, firmly fastened upon our promised 
inheritance and sonship, to be verified to us when we are tried 
and made perfect, will indeed be "an anchor to the soul both 
sure and steadfast," which will enable us to say and feel that 
even now (by faith) we are the Sons of God, though not yet 
clothed upon with our perfect bodies. 

WILL LIBERTY TO BECOME SONS OF GOD 
BE GIVEN TO ALL MEN? 

Do not answer this question hastily— give it due consideration. 
At first you may be inclined to differ from our view when we 
answer that it will not. To us it seems clear that this liberty is 
connected with the special high-calling of this Gospel age, and 
ceases with it. 

Call to mind again what we saw above to be the meaning of the 
words father and son: father-life-giver or creator; son- 
offspring, one who receives life from a father. Now consider 
man as represented in Adam. At first he was God's son, but 
afterward because of sin he forfeited all, and ceased to be, as 
God's son. Now if brought back to life and perfection, whoever 
is his life-giver will be his father. Since man's life was forfeited 
totally, it follows that his resurrection will virtually be his re- 
creation, and he who re-creates will be the father of the re- 
created being, in the same sense that Jehovah God was Father to 
the being destroyed by sin. 

While all things which our Lord Jesus did, were done according 
to the will and plan of the Father, yet the Scriptures are 
particular to keep separate the work of Christ Jesus in man's 
redemption. Our Lord Jesus "bought" the world; he gave the 
"corresponding price" for all; and the earth and all belonging 
thereto are called his "purchased possession. " (Eph. 1:14.) 
Having thus become possessed of sin- wrecked, dead humanity, 
it is the purchaser's privilege and design to begin the work of 
restoring all things-of giving life to the dead world, which he 
purchased eighteen hundred years ago. He delays the 
commencement of this life-giving work until the "little flock" to 
whom he gives liberty to become sons of God is complete. "He 
is not ashamed to call them BRETHREN," and they shall be his 
joint-heirs in the purchased possession, and his co-workers in 
restoring the redeemed race to life. 

Since it is from death that man is saved, the Savior is evidently 
the life-giver. In fact the Syriac MS. of the New Testament gives 
the name LIFE-GIVER in every instance where we have the 



name Savior in our common translation. The special work of the 
Millennial age will be to awaken the dead, and by gradual 
process give to them the life secured for them by their Redeemer 
as they shall believe and accept of it upon the conditions 
(obedience, etc.) which the Life-giver, as judge of all, shall 
require. This being the case, it must be evident to all that 
(separating the works of the Father and the Son- John 5:17,) the 
life-privileges which come to the world, come directly from the 
Son-our Lord Jesus: He BOUGHT them with his own precious 
blood, and He it is that will restore all who will comply with the 
conditions, to full perfect LIFE at His appearing and kingdom of 
a thousand years. He therefore is the one and only direct life- 
giver to whom the world must look; and as life-giver is the true 
meaning of father, He is properly declared in prophecy to be to 
mankind "The everlasting Father," as well as the "Prince of 
Peace" and the "Mighty God" [ruler]. 

Hence it is, that though Abraham and David, etc., are spoken of 
as fathers of Jesus, -"of whom according to the flesh Christ 
came"-yet it is also declared that "Instead of thy fathers shall be 
thy children," (Psa. 45:16,) meaning, instead of the fathers 
continuing as such, they shall, by the fact that our Lord becomes 
their LIFE-GIVER in resurrecting them, thus become his 
children— his sons. 

As heretofore shown, the process of life-giving while it will 
begin with the awakening from the tomb, the giving of a 
measure of life such probably as men now generally possess, (as 
illustrated in the awakening of Lazarus from the tomb,) and such 
only as "obey that prophet," will reach completeness, in full 
restoration to all that was lost-human perfection-LIFE in the 
full sense of the word. That only such as "hear [obey] shall live" 
in this perfect sense of attaining life, see John 5:25. All others 
awakened and granted a knowledge and full opportunity of 
gaining this perfect and lasting life, who will reject it by 
rejecting its conditions, -conformity to God's perfect law-will 
be "cut off" in the second death. They will not become sons of 
Christ, because of refusal under full opportunity to receive his 
image. Those refusing the likeness of Christ or the proffered 
terms of the age of Restitution will be treated as Jehovah treated 
Adam when he chose disobedience; only, that the experience 
being greater there will be no preparation for another 
redemption. Such as die the second death are not sons as above 
shown, but as those who having the opportunity yet despise the 
likeness of the Life-giver they will be treated "as brute beasts- 
destroyed."-^ Pet. 2:12; Eccls. 3:18-20. 

The question may occur to some, How comes it that our Lord 
who redeems or purchases all, is not the LIFE-GIVER to the 
"little flock" of the Gospel age as well as to the world in 
general?— Where and how comes the distinction between us as 



the "Sons of God" and "brethren" of Christ, and the world as 
children of Christ? 

We answer: He who redeemed all, did not actually give or 
restore to us the perfect human life as he will to the world in the 
next age, but instead he threw over us the mantle of his merit, of 
his imputed 

R1007 : page 4 

righteousness, and thus introduces us directly to the Father, to be 
begotten BY HIM as "new creatures," "partakers of the divine 
nature" (not restored human nature, grand as that will be), and 
joint-heirs with our Lord and Redeemer. 

The liberty [freedom from condemnation, -otherwise known as 
justification through his blood] which our Redeemer grants us is 
FREE; we can do nothing to purchase or merit it; it must be 
accepted as a free gift of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, or 
not at all. But there the free part stops. Having obtained the 
privilege or liberty to become Sons of God, the matter thereafter 
rests with us, and to profit by this great privilege or liberty, we 
must work out our salvation, with fear and trembling. 
Appreciating the grandeur of the privilege put within our grasp, 
we must act soberly, wisely, earnestly, not as them who idly 
play and beat the air, but as true soldiers we must fight a good 
fight. We must overcome our former master, Sin; and let not Sin 
reign and rule in us, but throwing all our (at most) little 
influence on the side of our new Captain, Leader, and Fore- 
runner Christ Jesus, we must overcome the world, that with him 
we may be sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a wicked 
and perverse generation, among whom we are to shine as lights. 
(Phil. 2:15) If thus we prove our earnestness, and love and zeal 
for God and his truth, we shall be accounted "meet to be 
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light." (Col. 1:12.) 
Faithfulness in our warfare implies that we will be continually 
losing mental and moral likeness to the world, and be more and 
more conformed to the image of God's dear Son, who is a 
perfect likeness for us to copy after.-Rom. 8:29; 1 Pet. 2:21. 

But if the liberty or privilege granted to us of becoming sons of 
God consisted only of a covering of the sins that are past, if it in 
no way continued to cover our imperfections, it would avail us 
nothing; for cleansed in the morning and presented to the Father 
as candidates for sonship, we would through inherited 
weaknesses and imperfections be defiled and worthy of 
condemnation again before night; hence, as the apostle declares, 
it would be a fearful thing for us in our present condition to have 
to deal direct with the perfect laws of the Father; and we are 
glad that he has graciously provided that we shall have our 
standing before him as yet, not as individuals, but as body 
members of the perfect one whose robe of righteousness covers 
fully our every deformity and weakness, whose sacrifice made 



full atonement for every result of inherited depravity to which 
our shattered depraved "earthen vessels" are subject. 

So then we are safe so long as we abide in him— under the cover 
of his merit; while in him, we are "accepted in the beloved" by 
the Father, as sons. But having been admitted to this privilege, 
having tasted that the Lord is gracious, having learned the 
necessity of abiding in him, we must do the abiding— we must 
not ignore the precious blood through the merit of which this 
access into sonship and joint-heirship was obtained; we must not 
ignore our Redeemer, and attempt to offer our own imperfect 
works as meritorious and acceptable (See the type of this Lev. 
10:1-4. Num. 3:3,4), else we shall come to nought. If any branch 
abide not in the vine it is cast forth, and destroyed. (John 
15:5,6.) So then the liberty which our Lord grants to all who 
come unto the Father by him and in him, (John 14:6.) is full and 
complete; and the assistance rendered such as draw nigh to God 
with their whole heart is sufficient, that they may come off 
conquerors through [in] him who loved them and gave himself 
for them. This sufficiency of grace to help in every time of need 
is supplied mainly through God's Word, the exceeding great and 
precious promises of which are given us that thereby we may 
overcome self and the world, and become partakers of the divine 
nature. -2 Pet. 1:4. 

It is thus that the Father deals with those to whom, through the 
Son, liberty to become sons is now granted, viz., by the word of 
his grace— the Scriptures. Granted the privilege, or liberty, or 
ability, to do so through their Redeemer's merit, these are then 
"begotten by the word of truth that they should become a kind of 
first fruits of God's creatures." -James 1:18. 

The apostle Peter clearly tells the whole story saying: "The God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.. .hath begotten us. ..to an 
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away, 
reserved in heaven for us, who are kept by the power of God 
[his exceeding great and precious promises and providences 
upon which we lay hold] through faith unto salvation, ready to 
be revealed in the last time" [-in the end of this age when the 
body, the "Royal Priesthood," the little flock of Sons of the 
"divine nature" shall be completed and glorified] "Wherein ye 
rejoice greatly though now for a season if need be ye are in 
heaviness through manifold temptations, that the trial of your 
faith... might be found unto [or result in] praise and honor and 
glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ... Of which [special] 
salvation the prophets have enquired and searched diligently, 
who prophesied of the grace [peculiar favor] that should come 
unto you."- 1 Pet. 1:2-10. 

Since the overcomers of the Gospel age —those who use their 
ransomed privilege or liberty and become sons of God on the 
divine plane of sonship-are to be so closely identified with their 
Lord and Head Christ Jesus, as to be called "members of his 



body," his "bride" and his joint-heirs, it is evident that they with 
him, and by virtue of the ransom which he gave, are to be 
members in particular of that great Prophet and Life-giver 
Christ, and will share in the work of life-giving, restoring the 
dead and dying world to perfection; hence the term Everlasting 
Father, as well as every other title of the Head, is to be shared by 
his joint-heirs and co-workers. In harmony with this, note the 
Apostle's words in Heb. 1 1 :39-40. Here speaking of even the 
overcomers of the past he contrasts their position [sons of 
Christ] with our position as sons of God in Christ saying: These 
all, having obtained a good [record] through faith received not 
the promise [made to them], God having provided some 
BETTER THING FOR US, that they without us should not be 
made perfect. "-Heb. 11:40. 

Since in God's plan they are to be the children of Christ instead 
of the fathers, it follows that they could not get their life— be 
perfected-until the Christ (head and body) their Everlasting 
Father (or father of their everlasting life) shall first be made 
perfect on the higher plane -Sons of God of the divine nature. 

Then, dearly beloved, appreciate more fully than ever before 
your privilege as a Son of God and understand the Apostle's 
words, "Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access 

R1007:page5 

(by faith) in to THIS GRACE [special favor] wherein we stand, - 
-rejoicing in hope of the glory of God" [as sons, as joint-heirs 
with our Redeemer in his great work of reconciling the world, 
whom he has already redeemed.] And from this standpoint of 
hope and grand anticipation, knowing that we must be tested and 
tried, "we glory in tribulations also," knowing that it is by such 
means, with his promises, that the Father would develop in us 
patience, experience, and hope, as well as the love of God shed 
abroad in our hearts by the holy spirit of the truth imparted to us 
from the truth. -See Rom. 5:1-5. 

Be strong then, acquit yourselves like earnest, sober men, 
receiving now by faith (trust) the grace [special favor] to be 
brought unto you at the coming of our Lord Jesus, for HE that 
raised up Christ from the dead will raise up US also, by Jesus 
who will present us before him, unblamable and unreprovable in 
love.-See 2 Cor. 4:14-18. 

LIBERTY OF THE SONS OF GOD. 

"For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in 
pain together until now. " "For the earnest expectation of the 
creature waiteth for the manifestation of the SONS OF GOD." 
"Because the creature itself shall be delivered from the bondage 
of corruption [death and dying] into the glorious liberty of the 
children of God."-Rom. 8:2. 



Though the race in general will not become sons of God, it is 
here expressly shown that they may obtain, through the Sons of 
God, the liberty or freedom from death, pain, etc., the common 
heritage of all sons of God. The children of the Christ-all who 
receive the redemption life— will stand as dear and as close to the 
Father Jehovah, as sons, even as in the earthly family the 
grandsons are as dearly loved and as kindly treated. And they 
shall be treated as sons, having full release from all corruption 
and from all condemnation. But here again it is shown that "they 
without US [the sons and heirs] cannot be made perfect;" they 
cannot receive the life provided for them until all the sons of 
God are selected and glorified. "The manifestation of the Sons 
of God" is therefore the great event for which the whole creation 
waits and hopes and groans, even though in ignorance their 
hopes and expectations of the future are not clear and fixed, but 
only a vague longing for "a golden age" a "good time coming by 
and by." 

ONL Y THE CONSECRATED ARE SONS. 

The liberty to become Sons of God not only did not extend to 
those men who lived before the Redeemer came and purchased 
the world, but it has extended to only a comparatively few 
during this Gospel age; the great mass of mankind even in the 
present day know nothing about our Lord Jesus, and how could 
they believe on him "of whom they have not 

R1008 : page 5 

heard?" (Rom. 10:14.) And of those who have even heard that 
there was such a person, how few comparatively believe in or 
recognize the meaning of his name Savior; yet none but these 
have even the liberty or privilege of becoming Sons of God. 

Look again, and see among the comparatively few, even of 
those who do recognize him as the Redeemer, the Savior, and 
who therefore were all granted this privilege, liberty, favor, and 
note how few have availed themselves of the great privileged- 
how few have become Sons of God. To see clearly just what 
class of believers constitutes the Sons of God, let us now 
examine the process by which those who "believed in his name" 
were granted and accepted the proffered liberty and became 
Sons of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord. 

We have said that all such are covered by the robe of Christ's 
righteousness imputed to them, because of which they find 
acceptance with the Father. But to whom does the Lord give his 
robe for this purpose? Not to all believers; for though all have 
the liberty to wear the robe and obtain "access," all do not 
choose to use it by fulfilling the conditions. The robes are 
provided for the BODY OF CHRIST, and to come under those 
robes we must get into that consecrated company, into that 
select class, known as those whose names are written in the 



book of life-and as branches in the Vine. This is the class to 
which the Master said, "Abide in me and I in you. As the branch 
cannot bear fruit of itself except it abide in the vine, no more can 
ye except ye abide in me... If a man abide not in me, he is cast 
forth as a branch. " To the same class the apostle John wrote, 
"Abide in him." The apostle Paul wrote that God "hath chosen 
us in him" and exhorts "so walk ye in him"— "rooted and built up 
in him, " for "ye are complete in him. " And of his own aims he 
says, "That I may win Christ and [abiding in him to the end] be 
found in him" complete at last. -See John 15:4,6; 1 Cor. 8:6; 2 
Cor. 5:21; Eph 1:4; Phil. 3:9; Col. 2:6,7,9; 1 John 2:5,6,28. 

The way in which we get into Christ,- counted in as members 
of his body, and therefore under the robes of his righteousness, - 
-is fully explained by the Apostle in Rom. 6:3-5. He there shows 
that such members are immersed or buried into Christ, i.e., their 
wills, plans, etc., are completely buried; such having thereafter 
no will of their own; instead, the will of Christ reigns in and 
rules over them, controlling their acts, and words, and looks and 
thoughts. Being dead to self, to their own wills, plans, etc., for 
them to live is for Christ to live; and in them Christ is still 
present in the flesh, they being his representatives before men. 
(Phil. 1:21.) These share the reproaches of Jesus their Head and 
Lord now and have fellowship as members of his body, in the 
sufferings of Christ; and in due time, if they continue faithful 
unto the end, they are promised membership in the church or 
body to be glorified-joint-heirship in the glory and dominion 
and work of their Lord when the sufferings are past.- Rom. 
8:17. 

These are represented in the Jewish types by the priesthood and 
its head, the High-Priest. The high-priest of our profession, or 
order, is Jesus; and all the under priests together with him 
constitute the Royal Priesthood, as Peter says. As the under 
priests were all represented in the person of the High Priest, by 
his head and members, so in our priesthood; while we are each 
severally priests, we are all represented in our High Priest as 
body members in particular. (1 Cor. 12:27.) Our Lord the head 
of the body is not covered with any covering, for he was perfect; 
"in him was no sin;" but we all need the covering of his white 
robes of justification, else we never could have found access 
into the "holies" and "into this grace wherein we stand rejoicing 
in hope of the glory of God" soon to be revealed in us as Sons 
and heirs- joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 

So then we see that only those who after believing in the only 
name, Savior, followed on and consecrated themselves, took up 
the cross and sufferings of Christ and shared them, -only such 
were accepting of the liberty to become Sons; and only such 
coming into his "body" and under his robes are presented before 
the Father, or accepted as Sons. In these only, can we see a 



begetting of the truth and a desire to be conformed to the image 
of God's only begotten Son. 

But are not all believers under Christ's robes? even those who do 
not consecrate themselves? No; only the consecrated. In fact the 
others have no need for those presentation robes [robes in which 
to be acceptably presented to the Father as candidates for 
Sonship and heirship] because they do not wish to occupy the 
positions of sons, after they find that its distinguishing features 
in the present time are trials and sufferings, etc., in the "narrow 
way." (Heb. 12:6.) To be a Son implies both special favor and 
special endurance, and since the only benefit of the "robe" 
consists in making the wearers presentable to the Father, and 
since these do not desire to thus present themselves living 
sacrifices to God, holy and acceptable [as sons and heirs] 
through [in] Jesus Christ, it is manifest that to cover such with a 
robe would be useless. 

The question then occurs: Do believers in Christ who have not 
consecrated, but merely practiced benevolence and moral 
reforms,— who endeavor to live moderately, soberly, honestly, 
truthfully, etc., influenced to such a life by their faith in 
Scripture and in our Lord,-have these no blessing as a result of 
their faith, etc.? We answer, Yes; every one who lives 
moderately, morally and temperately, has a reward daily and 
hourly,-in his health and true pleasure; and his every deed of 
kindness and generosity done from unselfish motives always 
brings a blessing to the doer in the present life, and is sure of a 
suitable recognition by the Master in the Kingdom, after the 
resurrection and exaltation of the "Body" class. (See Luke 
14:14.) These too may have quite a measure of joy and peace 
through believing in the Savior. They can see in Christ, dimly 
the Redeemer and realize (even though vaguely) that he is the 
one through whom God has arranged to save all who shall be 
accounted worthy of the gift of life. Thus all believers have 
much advantage over the ignorant and blindfolded even in the 
present life; and present progress in righteous living will be a 
step of progress beneficial to such in the "times of restitution" 
under the Kingdom soon to be set up in power. 

So then all who have consecrated, and only they, have the 
"robe" which assures to them access to God and to sonship. 
Question- Will all the consecrated become sons of God? Many 
have consecrated (i.e., resolved on complete submission to the 
will of Christ at any cost) who do not fulfil their consecration, 
who do not follow the Lamb through evil as well as good report, 
but instead are drawn away into half-hearted service, dividing 
their services between God and Mammon. Only a "little flock" 
of "overcomers" are represented as attaining to joint-heirship 
with Christ their head, only such constitute his "body" as finally 
glorified. Now the question is concerning the great number who 



do not fully and freely fulfill their covenant- will they be sons of 
God? 

In our opinion, yes; their heart intentions were good, and their 
"robe" was good, and if they do not cast away the robe of 
Christ's righteousness and deny his name Savior, and do not 
willfully violate their covenant, they stand in the position 
mentioned by the apostle: their works shall suffer loss, but 
themselves shall be saved so as by fire [severe discipline 
destroying what such do not sacrifice]. Such are building on the 
rock, though it be with wood, hay and stubble, and though they 
will suffer the great loss of the prize— the kingdom and the joint- 
heirship with Christ-yet they themselves, under the Master's 
discipline, will be saved, brought to perfection, because their 
hearts were longing for better things even when they fainted by 
the way, and got their "robes" contaminated with the affairs of 
this world. They did not keep their garments unspotted from the 
world, and hence they are represented as washing away such 
defilements of their "robe" in the Lamb's merit, but with great 
tribulation to themselves. We read of this "great multitude" that 
they came up "through great tribulation and washed their robes 
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb." "Therefore are 
they before the throne and serve." (Rev. 7:15.) They suffered 
great loss by reason of their failure to go forward boldly in self- 
sacrifice for the Lord and his truth -the loss of the crown, and 
the loss of positions in the throne, and suffered more tribulation 
than if they had been faithful, but holding to their "robes" they 
were finally brought off victors of the second grade with palms 
of victory, though not with the crowns of glory to which they 
were invited, and to obtain which their robes gave them liberty 
or privilege. 

Beloved, "Abide in Him;" let the mind of Christ dwell in you 
richly, let his spirit control your mortal bodies and present them 
living sacrifices, partakers of his sufferings and death, that you 
may be glorified with him also in due time and crowned sons of 
glory. 

R1009:page5 

STRANGE CHILDREN. 

"For they have begotten strange children." -Hosea 5:7. 

"They are not all Israelites that are of Israel." -Rom. 9:6. 

Since the true "church of the first born whose names are written 
in heaven," are all of this consecrated class, begotten by the 
word of truth, sons of God possessing the "mind of Christ," it 
follows that many of the nominal church are what might well be 
called "strange children," begotten not of the truth, but begotten 
of error; partaking not of the spirit or mind of Christ our head, 
but of the spirit or disposition of the world. These, God does not 
acknowledge as his sons. Many of them are well meaning, i.e., 



honest and kind, lovers of peace and plenty more than lovers of 
the truth with the tribulations, and persecutions, and self denials, 
which faithfulness to the truth always brings, things which every 
son of God begotten of the spirit of the truth appreciates as the 
foretold witnesses of the spirit to their faithfulness. (2 Tim. 
3:12.) These are as really the "children of this world" as were 
the popular religionists of the nominal typical church, Israel 
after the flesh. In the next age such may become children of 
Christ by faith, and obedience to his just requirements, but they 
do not become "Sons of God" now, because of one of two 
reasons: either because, being blinded by the delusions of the 
god of this world they cannot discern even fundamental truths, 
or else because though seeing the fundamentals they do not 
appreciate the privilege or liberty afforded them of becoming 
sons, preferring rather lives of ease to lives of self-sacrifice with 
Christ, preferring the pleasures and ambitions of the present 
world (age) to what they can see of the honor and glory 
promised to those who shall become sons. 

As the true sons, begotten of the truth, 

R1009 : page 6 

are the "wheat" described in our Lord's parable, so those 
nominal children of God, "strange children," developed by fear 
and error and by false ideas and theories, are the "tares," and the 
"field is the world" which makes no profession of Christ, 
containing elements which in the next age under the rule of the 
great Master and King will be accepted and used of him, but 
which at present unfilled brings forth noxious weeds. 

In the time of separation (the "harvest") the wheat and tares so 
long permitted to grow together are to be separated. The "tares," 
which constitute the majority in the nominal church or kingdom, 
will be separated from the true sons of God, the consecrated, 
who as joint-heirs with their Lord of the kingdom, will be 
established, "set up" in power and great glory. The "tares" on the 
contrary will be consumed as "tares" (as imitations of the true) 
and will be resolved into the elements of the field again. "He 
that hath an ear to hear let him hear!" The gathering together of 
the elect to receive the kingdom is in progress— they are being 
gathered, not into one place, but into one condition of heart and 
mind. Those who love the friendship and companionship and 
communion of the worldly minded, tares, shall suffer loss, and 
have their portion with them, partaking of their "plagues" in the 
trouble already beginning. Think not that the "harvest" time is a 
time of peace and quiet. Nay! the Jewish harvest proves to the 
contrary that it is a time of commotion and unsettling, a time for 
breaking up of old associations, for bundling tighter the bundles 
of the tare classes, and for the gathering of the true wheat into 
the barn. All this is a part of the test put upon the true wheat, to 
prove the "overcomers. " 



For the joy and refreshment of such, let us suggest here a Bible 
reading, pointing out our high calling now, our acceptance in the 
Beloved, our final exaltation and joint-heirship with him, and 
our glorious work of blessing the world in the coming age. 
These promises are indeed a great power of God unto salvation 
to all them that believe and obey them. 

Take your Emphatic Diaglott and read- Col. 1:9 to 28; next 
read 1 Pet. 1:2 to 23; next Eph. 1:3 to 14 and finally, Acts 20:32. 



R1008 : page 6 

ABOUT HELL-CONTINUED. 



HELL IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

In the New Testament, written in Greek, hades corresponds 
exactly to the Hebrew word sheol. As proof see the quotations 
by the Apostles from the Hebrew, in which they render it hades. 
For instance Acts 2:27-"Thou wilt not leave my soul in hades" 
is a quotation of Psa. 16:10 "Thou wilt not leave my soul in 
sheol." And 1 Cor. 13:55-"Deathis swallowed up in victory. "O 
death, where is thy sting? O hades [grave], where is thy 
victory?" is an allusion to Isa. 25:8-"He will swallow up death 
in victory," and Hos. 13:14-"0 death, I will be thy plagues: O 
sheol, I will be thy destruction. " 

HELL IN THE FOLLOWING CASES IS FROM THE 
GREEK WORD, HADES. 

Matt. 1 1:23. -"And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto 
heaven, shalt be brought down to hell. "-Luke 10:15— "Shalt be 
thrust down to hell." [In privileges, etc., the city was highly 
favored, or figuratively, exalted to heaven, but because of 
misuse of God's favors would be debased, or figuratively, cast 
down to hades, overthrown, destroyed. It is so thoroughly buried 
in oblivion that even the site where it stood is a matter of 
dispute. Capernaum is certainly destroyed, thrust down to 
hades.] 

Luke 16:23. -"In hell he lifted up his eyes being in torments. "— 
A parabolic figure: See article— "The Rich Man and Lazarus" in 
January TOWER. 

Rev. 6:8. -"And behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on 
him was Death, and Hell followed with him. [Symbol for 
destruction or the grave.] 

Matt. 16:18. -"Upon this rock I will build my church; and the 
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. " [Here the tomb is 



represented as a great prison with strong doors. The Lord's 
assurance is that though his church may seem to be forever 
locked up in the tomb, yet its strong gates will not hold the 
church when the due time shall come and her Lord shall break 
the bars and set at liberty the captives by his resurrection power, 
the result of the ransom which he gave once for all. Compare 
Luke 4:18, Isa. 61:1.] 

CHRIST IN HELL [HADES] AND 

RESURRECTED FROM HELL. 

ACTS 2:1,14,22. 

"And when the day of Pentecost was fully come... Peter... lifted 
up his voice and said... Ye men of Israel, hear these words:— 
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you,. ..being 
delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God 
["He was delivered for our offenses"] ye have taken and by 
wicked hands have crucified and slain: whom God hath raised 
up, having loosed the pains [or bands] of death, because it was 
not possible that he should be holden of it [for the Word of 
Jehovah had previously declared his resurrection, as saith the 
prophet David]; for David speaketh concerning him 
[personating, or speaking for him], 'I [Christ] foresaw the Lord 
[Jehovah] always before my face; for he is on my right hand, 
that I should not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice and 
my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope, 
because thou wilt not LEAVE my soul in hell [hades] neither 
wilt thou suffer thine holy One to see corruption. Thou 
[Jehovah] hast made known to me [Christ] the ways of life" [thy 
plan]. Here our Lord, as personified by the prophet David, 
expresses his faith in Jehovah's promise of a resurrection, and in 
the full and glorious accomplishment of Jehovah's plan through 
him, and rejoices in the prospect. 

Peter then proceeds saying- "Men and brethren, let me freely 
speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and 
buried and his sepulcher is with us unto this day [so that this 
prophecy could not have referred to himself personally; for his 
soul was left in hell, [hades,] and his flesh did see corruption]: 
Therefore, being a prophet and knowing that God had sworn 
with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to the 
flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; he, seeing 
this before [prophetically] spake of the resurrection [of Christ 
out of hell— hades— to which he must go for our offences] that 
his soul was NOT LEFT in hell, [hades-the death state] neither 
his flesh did see corruption. " Thus Peter presents a strong 
logical argument based on the words of the prophet David 
showing first, that Christ who was delivered by God for our 
offences, went to hell, the grave, the condition of death, 
destruction (Psa. 16:10); and secondly, that according to 
promise he had been delivered from hell, the grave, death, 



destruction, BY A RESURRECTION-a raising up to life, 
created again, the same identical being, yet more glorious and 
exalted, even to the express image of the Father's person. (Heb. 
1:3) And now "this same Jesus" (Acts 2:36) in his subsequent 
revelation to the church, declares- 

Rev. 1:18 — "I am he that liveth, and was dead, and behold I am 
alive forevermore. Amen: and have the keys of hell [hades, the 
grave] and of death." Amen! Amen! our hearts respond; for in 
his resurrection we see the glorious outcome of the whole plan 
of Jehovah to be accomplished through the power of the 
resurrected one who now holds the keys of hell and of death, 
and in due time will release all the prisoners- "prisoners of 
hope" therefore. -Zech. 9:12. No craft or cunning can by any 
possible device wrest these scriptures entire and pervert them to 
the support of that monstrous and blasphemous papal tradition 
of eternal torment. Had that been our penalty, Christ, to be our 
vicarious sacrifice, must still and to all eternity endure it, which 
is not the case as these scriptures affirm. But death was our 
penalty and "he died for our sins" and "also for the sins of the 
whole world." Rev. 20:13,14 -"And the sea gave up the dead 
which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which 
were in them: And they were judged, every man, according to 
their works. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: 
this is the second death. " The lake of fire is the symbol of final 
and everlasting destruction. See TOWER Oct. '86. The utter 
destruction of everything cast into it, is implied. "Death and the 
grave cast into it" signifies in the language of symbols,— the utter 
destruction of Adamic death, hence it signifies the resurrection 
of all from the death penalty as we now know it, which passed 
upon all through Adam, but from which all men were redeemed 
by Christ. (Rom. 5:12,17,19.) 

The texts containing the Greek word gehenna, will be examined 
in our next issue. 



R1009 : page 6 

SPIRITUALISM, RITUALISM, THEOSOPHY. 

All this is hard to say, for one who prefers the charity which 
covers a multitude of faults to the criticism which lays them 
bare. And in dwelling on this subject we are not insensible to the 
perversions of another kind which have crept into our non- 
liturgical bodies. For, so far as we know, the liturgical churches, 
have not fallen into the cooking stove apostasy, which is turning 
so many of our church basements into a place of feasting; nor 
have they been ensnared with the entertainment heresy, which 
sets up all sorts of shows and exhibitions for amusing the 
unchurched masses into an interest in the gospel. We deplore 
these things and here and now lift our warning against them as 



another device of the enemy for corrupting and enervating the 
church of God. 

But while considering ourselves lest we also be tempted we 
must none the less warn our neighbors against the fatal 
infatuation of ritualism. We take the Trinity church catechism of 
Dr. Dix and find it streaked through and through with the tinge 
of the scarlet woman— baptismal regeneration, eucharistic 
sacrifice, apostolic succession, prayer for the dead, intercession 
of departed souls, when we find its eminent author so enamored 
of the Papacy that he draws away from all Protestant bodies and 
embraces her, declaring that the three chief branches of the holy 
Catholic church are the church at Rome, the Greek church, and 
the Anglican church, and that the body thus formed is the true 
church catholic "because she endures throughout all the ages, 
teaches all nations, and maintains all truth." When we find 
Protestant ecclesiastics so smitten with what reformers used to 
call "the trinkets of anti-Christ," as to allow themselves little by 
little to be reinvested with the cast-off clothing of Babylon 
Papacy, so that a recent writer describes the Bishop of Lincoln 
as "adorned with miter and cloth of gold, his orpheys so lavishly 
decorated with amethysts, pearls, topazes and chrysolites set in 
silver as fairly to dazzle the beholder;" when we see all these we 
are moved to repeat with solemn earnestness the warning of 
Bradford, the Smithfield martyr, "O England, beware of anti- 
Christ; take heed that he doth not fool thee." 

Theosophy, is the latest religion of transcendentalists. In it the 
attenuated unbelief of our times is seeking to find relief from the 
ennui of denial. How to describe that which takes for itself the 
name of "Occultism;" how to give an idea of doctrines which 
claim to be hidden from all but the initiated we do not know. It 
is enough to say that substantially it is Buddhism seeking 
conquests in Christian lands; "the light of Asia," offering itself 
to those who have been turned away from "the light of Christ. " 
It has its circles in many of our great cities, where its occult 
philosophy is diligently studied; though its following is small 
compared with that of spiritualism, it being the religion of the 
literary elite, as the other is of common people. If we question it 
in regard to its doctrines, it tells us that they are the same as 
those of "the sacred mysteries of antiquity. " It inculcates a very 
attenuated philosophy of evolution; it teaches the pre-existence 
and the transmigration of souls, and instructs its disciples how 
by a rigid asceticism they may cultivate what is called "the 
intuitioned memory" by which they can enter into profound 
recollection of what they knew in far distant ages. In a couplet 
which it is fond of repeating, it declares that- 
Descending spirits have conversed with man 
And told him secrets of the world unknown. 

And those words give the most remarkable hint of its origin. For 
its creed is "the doctrines of demons" from beginning to end. No 



personal devil, that which is mystically called the Devil being 
but the negative and opposite of God. No atonement except 
man's "unification" with himself; no forgiveness of sin, souls 
being required to wear away their guilt by self-expiation, 
miracles, mysteries, ultimate deification— these are specimen 
articles of the delusive creed. Its whole character and contents so 
far as we can comprehend them as yet is another phase of 
Satanic delusion. Now if we compare these three systems, 
counting ritualism as incipient Popery, we find them agreeing 
remarkably to fill up the outlines of the predicted apostasy. The 
"forbidding to marry" realized in the celibacy of Romanism, the 
enforced continence of theosophy and the anti-marriage 
doctrines of spiritualism; the "commanding to abstain from 
meat" appearing in the superstitious fasts of ritualism, and the 
rigid abstinence from flesh enjoined on the initials of esoteric 
Buddhism; the doctrines of demons manifested in the magic 
idolatry which ritualism substitutes for the chaste and simple 
doctrines of the ordinances of Christ, and which in many 
particulars hold a common ancestry with those of theosophy and 
spiritualism, and the fantastic miracle-working which 
characterizes them all. All three of these delusions give a 
practical denial of Christ's second advent-that doctrine at which 
demons fear and tremble-spiritualism and theosophy declaring 
that in them the promised Epiphany of Christ is taking 

R1009 : page 7 

place; while ritualism by its doctrine of transubstantiation makes 
the communion 

R1010:page7 

declare the "real presence of Christ" in flesh and blood, when 
the Lord ordained it to declare his real absence "till he come"-I 
mean, of course, bodily absence. 

What now is the prophetic significance of all that we have said? 
Thus it seems to me, that according to the predictions of 
Scripture we are witnessing an irruption of evil spirits who are 
again working powerfully along their favorite lines-ritualism, 
superstition and "philosophy. " 

We hear much said about infidelity and communism "heading 
up" in a personal anti-Christ. Believing as I do, that anti-Christ 
came long ago, and that he was crowned a few years since in St. 
Peter's at Rome as the deified man infallible and supreme, I see 
in the present aspect of affairs his final dodging forth, rather 
than his ultimate heading up. As in the case of Christ, so in the 
case of "the man of sin," the head is revealed first, and the body 
gathered throughout the generations grows up in all things into 
him who is the Lord. For the career of anti-Christ, the exact 
parody and evil counterpart of that of Christ, if you say "the 
anti-Christ must be an individual as certain as Christ is," I 
remind you that the word Christ does not always stand for a 



single individual in description, for in 1 Cor. 12, the apostle 
describes the body or beloved, gathered to the Lord through all 
time with its divine gifts and administrations, and this corporate 
whole with its many members, but "all baptized by one spirit 
into one body," he names Oxpiotos -the Christ. So that evil 
system with its various offices and administrations, yet baptized 
into unity by "the spirit which now worketh in the children of 
disobedience," is the anti-Christ. The one is the head of the 
ecclesia, and the other is the head of apostasia; but the head and 
body are so identical that they bear the same personal name. 

"But he is called 'the man of sin,'" you say, "and therefore must 
be an individual. " Not of necessity. For the line of believers is 
declared by the apostles to be taken out from the Jews and 
Gentiles to "make of twain one new man." 

I cannot believe that "the mystery of iniquity," which Paul 
declared to be already working in his day, has been toiling on 
for nearly two thousand years in order to bring forth a single 
short-lived man, and he so omnipotently wicked that the pope 
anti-Christ, with the blood of fifty millions of martyrs on his 
skirts, is too insignificant a sinner to be mentioned in 
comparison. And now then, the objections coming thick and 
fast. "But is he not an open infidel since he is said 'to deny the 
Father and the Son?'" Search your concordances for the meaning 
of the word "deny," and observe how constantly it signifies the 
denial of apostasy and false profession. But is he not the 
incarnation of Satan since he is called "the son of perdition?" 
Yes, Judas was named "the son of perdition; " and "Satan entered 
into Judas Iscariot;" but so far from atheistically denying Christ 
he openly professed him, saying, "Hail, Master," and then 
betraying him with a kiss. But is he not a godless blasphemer, 
since he is declared to have "a mouth speaking great things and 
blasphemies?" The counterfeit of Christ again, for Christ was 
twice falsely accused of blasphemy, because he made himself 
equal with God, and because he presumed to forgive. 

The pope is justly accused of blasphemy on both these grounds, 
for he profanely calls himself God, and assumes to forgive sins. 
Said Alexander VI., "Caesar was a man; Alexander is a God." 
But must he not be a Jew established in Jerusalem, since it is 
said that he sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he 
is God?" No. The particular phrase "temple of God," is never in 
a single instance in the New Testament applied to the temple at 
Jerusalem, but always to the church, the body of Christ, to its 
head or to its members in heaven or on earth. But could the Holy 
Ghost call that "the temple of God" which has become apostate? 
Just as possibly as Christ could call the apostate Laodiceans 
whom he spat out of his mouth "the church at Laodicea." 

"But does not this view commit one to the year-day 
interpretation, since the career of anti-Christ in three years and a 
half and the papal system extends through centuries?" Yes, for 



the one instance of prophetic time which has by unanimous 
consent been fulfilled, the seventy weeks of Daniel, is 
demonstrated to have been upon this scale. Since the period was 
actually only 490 years— a day for a year —this may be taken as a 
clue to the prophetic time of Revelation. But if the Holy Spirit 
meant years in the Apocalypse why did he not say years? you 
reply. Why, when he meant churches and ministers, and 
kingdoms and kings, and epoch, did he say candle-sticks, and 
stars, and beasts, and horns, and trumpets? Yet, having used 
these miniature symbols of greater things, how fitting that the 
accompanying time should also be in miniature! To use literal 
dates would distort the imagery— as though you should put a life- 
sized eye in a small-sized physiognomy. 

I have said that anti-Christ is the evil counterpart of Christ. 
When Satan offered Christ all the kingdoms of the world if he 
would fall down and worship him he refused, accepting present 
rejection and crucifixion, and waiting the Father's time for the 
kingdoms of the world to become the kingdoms of our Lord and 
of his Christ. The Papal anti-Christ accepted the kingdoms of 
this world when the temptation was presented him, and 
proceeded to announce himself the "king of kings" and that the 
kingdom had come, and that in himself was fulfilled the 
Scripture. "He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from 
river to river, unto the ends of the earth. " 

The bride of Christ, the church, was left in the world to share the 
Lord's rejection and cross, enduring present suffering and 
widowhood, and waiting for the return of the bridegroom. But 
the harlot bride of anti-Christ accepts an earthly throne and a 
present glory, boastfully saying, "I sit a queen and am no 
widow, and shall see no sorrow. " Do we not see that it was this 
usurpation of the headship of the church by the man of sin, this 
premature grasping of the kingdom, and the setting up of a mock 
millennium under rules of a pseudo-Christ, that destroys the 
millennial life of the church, and has infected all, generation 
after generation, with the delusion of a present reign and a 
present kingdom, while Christ is yet absent in person from his 
flock? But this enemy of God and his saints must soon come to 
an end. In Daniel and Thessalonians this end is predicted in two 
stages, the gradual and the sudden and complete. "They shall 
take away his dominion to consume and destroy unto the end," 
says Daniel. "Whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of 
his mouth and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming, " 
says Paul in Thessalonians. The consuming process has been 
going on mightily in our generation by the breath of the Lord's 
mouth, in the world-wide diffusion of the inspired Scriptures. 
"And now the devil is come down with great wrath because he 
knoweth that he hath but a short time. " He is putting forth the 
energy of despair. He is sending his legions to work along 
various lines, which all center, visibly or invisibly, in one head. 
On the line of sacerdotalism he is seeking to thwart the work of 



the Reformation by again insinuating popish worship into its 
churches; on the line of superstition he is aiming to bewitch the 
godless and curious multitudes through the energy of unclean 
spirits; on the line of culture he is moving to foist upon the 
literary elite a diluted Paganism as an extra fine religion. But 
these things cheer us rather than sadden us, for all the shadows 
point to the dawn. The church's salvation means anti-Christ's 
destruction, and the same Scripture which speaks to us so 
powerfully to-day in the light of passing evils, "Yet a little while 
and he that shall come will come and will not tarry," says also, 
"And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet 
shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen. " 
All this which I have set forth, I have declared with unutterable 
sorrow. All this I can think of only with weeping and crying "O 
bride of Christ, how are they increased who would rob thee of 
thy chastity. " 

I need not remind you that one of the first tasks which the 
ritualistic leaders fifty years ago felt called upon to undertake 
was that of getting rid of the Protestant interpretation of anti- 
Christ as the pope of Rome. How desperately they wrought at 
this task will be apparent to those who read Newman's essay on 
"The Man of Sin," and observed especially his earnest wrestling 
with the ominous saying of Gregory the Great, that, "Whosoever 
adopts or desires the title of universal bishop is the forerunner of 
anti-Christ." 

If I must take sides between parties on this question my 
sympathies will be with Latimer and Cranmer and Bradford, 
whose vision was clarified by the fires of martyrdom, who 
recognized their persecutor, and called him by name, rather than 
with Manning and Newman, whose eyes are holden by the 
charm of mediaevalism. 

I speak rather of the book than of any human books, and avow 
my conviction that the papal "Man of Sin" was accurately 
photographed on the camera of prophecy thousands of years 
ago; that no detective searching for him to-day would need any 
other description of him than that which is found on the pages of 
the Bible. Taking these photographs of Daniel and John and 
Paul, searching the world upside down for their originals, I am 
confident that this same detective would stop at the Vatican, and 
after gazing a few moments at the Pontiff, who sits there 
gnawing the bone of infallibility, which he acquired in 1870, 
and clutching for that other bone of temporal sovereignty which 
he lost the very same year, he would lay his hand on him and 
say: "You are wanted in the court of the Most 

R1011 : page 7 

High to answer to the indictment of certain souls beneath the 
altar, who were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony 
which they bore," and who are crying, "How long, O Lord, holy 



and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that 
dwell upon the earth?" 

My brethren, let us search the Scriptures anew, and let us be 
sure that they do not require it of us before we silence our 
testimony against the man of Rome as anti-Christ. —A. J. 
Gordon. 



page 7 

"THERE is one mediator between God and men, the man Christ 
Jesus." 



R1011 : page 7 

STAR OF BETHLEHEM. 

What it was or how it appeared eighteen hundred years ago is 
unknown; the conjectures are various. 

Some who claim that it was a star of peculiar course or orbit, 
sometime approaching close to the earth and becoming quite 
prominent, and sometimes receding far away into invisibility, 
claim that it has regular periods for appearing, centuries apart. 
These claim, that this star has appeared since our Lord's birth, 
and is due to appear shortly now. 

From this it is evident that no special importance could attach to 
the star's appearance, except at the one time, when our Lord was 
born and when the "wise men of the east" were directed by it. 
For if it has the peculiar orbit claimed, which brings it into view 
of the earth every few centuries only, it is certain that it 
appeared centuries before as well as centuries since the time it 
was used of God to mark our Lord's birth. Hence, if this theory 
be true, the miracle would not be in the star's appearance, but in 
the directing of the wise men by it. 

But as we said at first, this is merely a theory, and has nothing 
specially to recommend it. We know no more about it than 
others, but favor, as most reasonable, the idea that it was a bright 
luminous appearance which during these five months' journey 
guided the wise men to Judea, and finally to Bethlehem, and to 
the place where the young child was. We cannot conceive of a 
distant star in the sky being a guide by which a house or even a 
city could be found. Try it some starry night. 

But a luminous appearance, a speck of light travelling through 
the air would not be a star says some one. No, not as the English 
word star is used to-day, when by that name we refer to far off 
suns and planets; nor can we conceive of planets many times 
larger than the earth coming close down so as to mark the stable 
where our Lord lay. But the Greek word here translated star has 



the meaning of brightness or shining whether of a planet or a 
candle or other shining, and hence it as a word would fit well to 
our opinion of this miracle. 

So then we have no reason as yet for expecting anything from 
the promised reappearance of the star which some suppose to be 
the star of Bethlehem, but which we think improbable. For even 
if it were the star supposed, its re-appearance would no more 
prove a second coming of the babe of Bethlehem, than the 
recurrence 

R1012:page7 

of Washington's birthday proves that Washington comes again. 
On far better evidence than this, do we look for the Lord-not 
again a babe in the flesh, but a spirit being, in power and great 
majesty. 

But to find the Lord now, as then, it will be necessary to see his 
star and to follow its leadings. First to the fully consecrated, 
waiting, watching ones, and finally to all "who look for him, he 
will appear. " Those who find him first will be the truly wise; 
and the star which will guide them will be the "Day-star" (2 Pet. 
1:19), the light of truth which will arise within their hearts, 
giving them understanding as to where, how, and what to seek 
and expect. This light of knowledge, in our hearts, is the star of 
importance now, without which the Lord's second advent cannot 
be properly discerned. 



R1004:page7 



Not science, fiction, poetry or art 
Our services engages. 'Tis our part,— 
Guided by gentle fingers, and a mind 
That loves to praise the Savior of mankind, - 
To tell his wondrous deeds, his Bride to seek; 
Ever "to preach good tidings to the meek. " 

—Selected. 



page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Ontario, Canada. 

BROTHER RUSSELL, DEAR SIR:-A few months ago I was 
called to do some mechanical engineer work in the back woods 
of Canada. Being detained there over Sunday, and stopping at 
one of the lumbermen's homes, our conversation on Sunday took 
a religious turn. Creeds were pulled over the coals and dissected; 



the bright as well as the dark side was brought forth to show 
which was right and who was in the narrow way. I myself was 
born and brought up in the Roman Church, and three of my 
children were christened therein, we complying to all of her 
rules until within a few years, when we cast off the Roman yoke 
and began to search the Scriptures. 

We joined the Presbyterian church, hungering and thirsting for 
more light and truth in the way of holiness. I attended regularly, 
Sunday after Sunday, also prayer meeting on Wednesday 
evenings; and I am sorry to say that I did not feel as though it 
did me any good. I with my family were thrust away in a back 
seat up in the gallery, where we could hear but little that was 
said, while we had a good view of the dress circle below, where 
the seats were upholstered and the floor was carpeted. I once 
tried to get a sitting down there where we could hear what was 
said, but in vain. Trustees said all seats were taken, but I might 
be able to arrange with some of the pew holders. I approached 
one for the purpose, who alone occupied a pew with sitting for 
eight persons. No, was his answer, I have a great many friends 
and visitors and I want the whole seat. I took note of the 
member for a while who sat in that pew, but for a dozen 
Sundays he alone occupied it, and for as many more no one at 
all; and in that same church there are a hundred pews as the 
above described, but I could get no sitting. I went in and out of 
this church for five years, was spoken to by four different 
members at different times in that five years— never spoken to or 
as much as looked at in the prayer meetings by any one; and I 
began to feel I had got in the wrong place. Finally there crept in 
a discontent in the congregation, and the knowing ones got 
dissatisfied with the pastor, and the upshot of it was the minister 
was dismissed, and I must say that I feel he was a true follower 
of the Lord in every respect. I began to feel that grace was far 
from that little party, and I gave up going, but never for a day 
forgetting my God and praying for more light and grace to battle 
the evil of this wicked world. This frame of mind found me in 
the lumberman's home on Sunday, a seeker after light. I was 
handed a little book, and upon a glance I saw "why evil was 
permitted. " I perused it till nearly Monday morning, alone with 
my God; and I felt the next day as though I had been wearing 
some dark glasses and they had fallen from my eyes. 

Completing my labors, and upon going to take the train, my 
friend placed in my hand another book and a few papers, telling 
me to read them at my leisure. Upon opening the package it 
contained some papers headed ZION'S WATCH TOWER and 
Herald of Christ's Presence, with the Millennial Dawn. I have 
read, studied, re-read, and have been comparing it with the 
Scriptures, to make sure, and I am led to exclaim "In the Lord I 
will put my trust. I will bless the Lord who hath given me 
counsel. " The TOWER has come to my home since my visit to 
the back woods, and it must be through the kindness of my new 



found friend, the lumberman, although I have not had the 
pleasure of seeing or hearing from him since my return. To- 
night the Dawn and TOWER are being perused by some seekers 
after light, and I hope in a few days to forward you some 
subscribers for both. I have the money for two subscribers now. 

I hope to spread the glad tidings of great joy to all people in this 
locality, in the workshop and the highway. 

Since the above writing I have received a few more applicants 
and hope a week from to-day to send $10.00. 

I hope to do better than at first expected for there are a lot of 
Romans here. 

Yours respectfully, J. S. 

R1011 : page 8 

[The following letter is from the Brother mentioned as "A 
Missionary Free" in the Dec. '87 TOWER, page 1. We know 
that you all will be glad to hear from him and to know of his 
zeal in spreading the truth on the "Dark Continent. " 

Is it not remarkable that without the means to carry on 
"missions" ourselves or even to reach with the truth the truth- 
seekers among the missionaries and converts in far off lands, 
God is laying hold of faithful servants there, and using them to 
pass the truth from one to another? Thus, as we have heretofore 
shown by letters published, the truth has its missionaries or 
ambassadors in India, Turkey, China, Hayti, South America, and 
now in Africa. We can only say, "It is marvellous in our eyes." 
We pray for these and all the dear "home missionaries" (which 
includes all of you who are doing with your might what your 
hands find to do),-0 Lord, grant us according to the word of thy 
prophet of old. May it be fulfilled to each of us, as it is written: 
"Strengthen the feeble hands and confirm the feeble knees. Say 
to them of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God 
will come with vengeance even God with a recompense; he will 
come and save you. Then the eyes of the blind shall be 
opened. "-EDITOR.] 



Liberia, Africa. 

CHAS. T. RUSSELL, DEAR BRO:-Your favor of the 2nd ult. 
has duly come to hand on the 10th inst., with the following 
publications: 20 copies Millennial Dawn, 2 copies Food and 25 
copies Z.W. TOWER. 

I am glad to inform you that we, viz: Hon. J. T. G., the 
superintendent of our county, C. T. B., George H. C, and myself 
-met at Brother G.'s residence on the first inst., and duly 
recognized ourselves as part of the Church of Christ, after 
reading the article "The Ecclesia," published in Z.W.T. of Sept. 
1884. 



On the 3rd I addressed a letter to Bishop F. of the P.E. Mission 
here, advising him that I had severed my connection with his 
church, and gave my reasons for the same. My course so 
displeased him that he issued a leaflet entitled "A Warning," in 
which he bitterly denounced us and the cause we espoused. 

Notwithstanding this state of things, and the Bishop's strong 
effort to prevent his people from hearing the heresy that we were 
teaching, on the 4th Sunday afternoon, Bro. G.'s commodious 
parlor was full to overflowing with an anxious audience. We 
now have weekly Bible readings, and preaching three times at 
three different places on the Lord's day. I believe we have the 
presence of the Lord with us. 

I hope you will send me some extra copies of Z. W. TOWER for 
gratuitous distribution among the Lord's poor here, who are 
many. 

As I expect to leave here shortly for Monrovia, and as we hear 
one of Messrs. Y. & P.'s vessels will leave U.S.A. for Liberia, 
please send me 2 dozen copies M. Dawn, cloth bound; 4 dozen 
copies M. Dawn, paper bound, in care of Hon. W. M. D., 
Monrovia, Liberia. Send also some specimens of Z.W.T., to 
induce the people there to become subscribers. 

Please pray for me and others here. Your Brother in Christ. 

S. W. S. 

P.S. -Enclosed find a copy of my letter to Bishop Ferguson. 

The following is the letter mentioned. 

S. D. FERGUSON, D.D., 

DEAR BROTHER:-I am compelled to discharge the painful 
duty of acquainting you with the fact that I have this afternoon 
severed my connection with the Prot. Episcopal church, of 
which you are the representative in Liberia. My reason for so 
doing, in the first place, is that I believe the Protestant churches 
have departed from the pure word of God, as taught by Jesus 
Christ and His Apostles, and have adopted human dogmas and 
traditions of the elders which make void the word of God (Mark 
7:13); on account of which Jesus denounced woe upon the 
Pharisees and others who were guilty of the same thing in His 
day- Matt. 23:1-33; 15:2,3,9; Mark 7:2,3,5. Not only was Jesus 
displeased with the observance of the traditions of men, but the 
Apostle to the Gentiles strongly warned his converts to beware 
of the same, among other injurious things.- Col. 2:8, Gal. 1:14.- 
-The nominal church-Papal mother and Protestant daughters-I 
believe is called Babylon (confusion) by reason of opposing and 
jarring creeds; and discord prevails among them. I firmly 
believe God calls you and me, as well as all His people, to come 
out of her; for her punishment for her sin is due. -Revelation 
18:2,4,5,6. 



My second reason for leaving the Prot. Episcopal church is, I 
desire to preach the pure word of God under the sole authority 
and commission of none but Jesus, whom I recognize as the 
only Head of His church. 

Having my eyes once anointed with the eye salve (Rev. 3:18) of 
the pure word of God, I dare not remain longer to dabble in the 
human teachings, which are the prolific sources of discord and 
wrangling in the Protestant churches. 

You may ask, Where are you going, my brother? I answer, I am 
not going back to heathenism, where I once was; but I have 
already united myself with the Church of Christ-the church 
which Christ and His apostles organized, and which is 
characterized by the preaching of the pure word of God, and by 
primitive simplicity in all things appertaining to the same 
church. You are hereby assured that I will ever stretch out the 
right-hand of fellowship to welcome you, and all my friends and 
brethren whom I have left behind in the bondage of Babylon. 

I shall ever endeavor to win you all to Christ and into His 
church. May our brotherly love continue! -Farewell! 

With fraternal regards, your friend and brother in Christ, 

SAM'L W. S. 

page 8 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR BRO.:-Enclosed is $1.50 for ten 
copies of Dawn received last week. A few blocks from my home 
resides a pastor of the Evangelical Association. I went there a 
few days before I received my last Dawns, and he being from 
home, his wife gave me an order for a copy of the book. 
Yesterday, when I went to deliver it, I found him in the parlor, 
the wife being engaged. I told him that I had brought the book 

that Mrs. had ordered. He took it in his hand, looked 

at the title, then turned to the back cover and read, "Zion's 
Watch Tower," then asked, "Is this book published by ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER?" "It is," I answered. Then he said, "O sister, 
you have got hold of the most dreadful, hurtful doctrines and 
heresies. I have seen some of their papers" etc. "Well," I said, 
"you have not fully examined the matter. I wish to call your 
attention to what Solomon said, 'He that answereth a matter 
before he heareth it, it is folly and shame unto him.'" (Prov. 
18:13.) Then I said, Paul in one of his journeys came to 
Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews, but they 
would not hear him, and drove him away. Then he went to 
Berea unto another synagogue of the Jews, and it is related of 
them, "These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in 
that they searched the Scriptures daily, whether these things 
were so. " Then he began to preach to me eternal punishment, 
because of the very laws of retribution in the nature of all wrong 
doing. He would not think of reading the book, nor of having his 



family exposed to reading it. (His oldest child is five years old, 
and so safe from heresy for some years to come.) Then the Lord 
opened my mouth and filled my heart, and brought scripture to 
my lips which I had not thought myself capable of repeating 
with such fluency. I showed him that Israel's promises related to 
the land and restoration to favor and forgiveness, while the 
promise to the church is the high calling that she shall be 
glorified, and that from her, and not from Israel, shall go forth 
the law, and that God loved Zion more than all the dwellings of 
Jacob. I showed him our mission to the world as kings, priests, 
etc. In the meantime I had put up my book, but at last he said 
"Give me the book again, I will buy it for my own satisfaction. " 
If I had strength to canvass for Dawn I could sell them well, but 
I have not as yet found just what the Lord's will is for me in this 
work. He has, however, given me work in corresponding with 
my brothers and sisters. One sister, a Seventh Day Adventist, 
wrote me a letter a few days ago, saying, "O sister, believe the 
blessed book when it speaks so plainly." I answered, "Yes, I 
believe every word of it, and I call upon you to do the same. " I 
told her that God expected Abraham to believe in the fullness of 
his promises, and that he expected us to believe as fully in the 
promises as in the threatenings, for he was able to make them all 
good. I referred her to such promises as in Psa. 82:8; Rom. 86:9, 
and Jesus' own declaration, "If I be lifted up from the earth, I 
will draw all men unto me. " 

I sometimes wonder if it does not worry you to get so many, and 
long letters from day to day. But our hearts, and lips, and pens, 
overflow almost without volition; and as you seem to make a 
sort of a center for the communion of the little flock, we can 
hardly send you a little bit of money without telling you a long 
story of our experience in the work. In love, yours, 

MRS. M. G. ATCHESON. 

Fillmore Co., Minn. 

DEAR SIR:-Enclosed you will find a money order for five 
dollars, which I wish to give to the Tract Society with the 
exception of enough to pay for two Dawns, paper covers, to lend 
to friends. I am very anxious to have all who will read and think, 
have access to those wonderful books. Those ordered came all 
right and were soon delivered. If circumstances will permit I 
shall take more orders. O, that I could only convince my own 
family that it is time to look into such matters. They are not 
opposed, but think it is not necessary. I am all alone, but none 
the less determined to be faithful to the end. 

MRS. S. L L. 



"AS ALL the water that is upon the hills runs into the valleys, 
so all grace goes to the humble." 



R1012:pagel 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., MARCH, 1888. 

NO. 7. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. C. 
T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :-FIFTY CENTS A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., paper 
bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," four 
shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "-ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

PLEASE NOTE that our address is ALLEGHENY, PA. Do not 
address letters for us, to Pittsburgh, Pa. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. I. in German soon ready-order 
now. Cloth bound one dollar. 



ARP'S JOY TRACTS in plenty. Order all you can and will use, 
free. State quantity desired. 



ARE YOU using the Missionary Envelopes as extensively as 
possible? All can preach thus. Do what you can. Price 35 cents 
per hundred, 300 for $1.00, including postage on them to you. 



DAWN VOL. II. will not be ready for several months. It will be 
duly mentioned in these columns. We hope that at least one 
hundred thousand copies of Vol. I. will be in the hands of the 
people by the time Vol. II. is ready. 



BUSINESS ORDERS should be separate from balance of your 
letter. Write very plainly and give full address in each letter. By 
wording your orders very exactly our time is saved from hunting 
and guessing, and thus the general cause is forwarded by such 
care. 



PRAY without ceasing— in every thing give thanks! 



R1012:pagel 



DAWN IN ITS SEVENTIETH THOUSAND. 

You will be pleased to learn that the seventieth thousand is now 
in the binder's hands. The sixty thousand already in circulation 
are nearly all out as the result of personal efforts on the part of 
those who love the truth and delight to serve it. The influence of 



many is exerted to hinder and oppose the book, and is sufficient 
to keep it out of book stores generally. As always, such are 
"grieved that we teach the people. " Thus, and in every 
conceivable way, professed servants of truth oppose and hinder 
its spread and endeavor to keep the truth hungry of the flock 
from the green pastures, from the "meat in due season. " But 
praise God, it is shining more and more; and every consecrated 
one who sees the light lets it shine as the Chief-Shepherd 
instructed. Each seems to realize himself a minister (servant) of 
the truth, and each looks up his Christian friends, writes to them, 
and sends them DAWN and TOWERS. And thus God is having 
the truth, the "good tidings," preached to every "Israelite indeed 
in whom is no guile," notwithstanding the opposition of the 
clergy, who, from their office and profession, should be the very 
ones to sound the Jubilee trump to our dear brethren and sisters. 
God's blessing is with you; greater is he that is on our side than 
all that be against us. The Chief Reaper in this harvest is with us, 
and every true grain of wheat will soon be separated from the 
chaff and tares- then all the faithful shall shine forth as the Sun 
in the Kingdom of our Father (Matt. 13:43), and the great work 
of blessing and healing and enlightening the world will begin. 
That will be our glorious triumph, for which we can well afford 
to wait and to endure hardness now as good soldiers. It will 
consist in blessing and informing many who now oppose us and 
the truth. 



R1012:pagel 

A WORD FROM BROTHER TACKABURY. 

The following at our request is from our dear Brother 
Tackabury, whom old readers of the TOWER remember as 
formerly a Methodist minister, who was made free from 
sectarian bondage by the blessed harvest truth. Subsequently he 
was engaged with us in the important, though personally 
obscure field of labor of Z.W.T., where he did efficient service 
in preaching the blessed gospel by letter and otherwise to many 
of the scattered saints, holding up Christ as the one altogether 
lovely while self was kept in the background. 

While we sympathize with our dear Brother in his present 
affliction, we rejoice with him in the prospect of an early 
fruition of our glorious hope. 

TO THE FAITHFUL IN CHRIST JESUS. 

Dear Brethren and Sisters-readers of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER:-It has been my privilege to enjoy Christian 
fellowship with some of you by personal association, and I 
believe that to all of you I am united by that tie (love) that binds 
together the children of God everywhere, in one family. 



I am comforted with the thought that many of you with whom I 
have personal acquaintance, show your sympathy and interest by 
making inquiry after my welfare. 

To know that my dear brethren and sisters thus kindly think of 
me alleviates my sufferings and enables me the more cheerfully 
to endure affliction. It is now more than two years since I was 
attacked with a difficulty of the throat and lungs, and though I 
was quite thorough in its treatment, none of the remedies used 
gave more than temporary relief; and from the first, my 
physicians held out but little hope for my recovery. 

At times during this period I have been very much prostrated, 
and it seemed that my change could not be far off, but to the 
surprise of all who know my condition, I have as often rallied 
and nearly recovered the strength in which the attack found me. 

At present I am comfortable except the severe spells of 
coughing which, however, are only occasional. 

During the whole of may sickness the Lord has been present to 
sustain me, and I have been enabled at all times to say from the 
heart, "Thy will, not mine, be done. " At times the thought of 
being "forever with the Lord," makes me long for the end of the 
warfare and the union with Jesus our head, and all the "elect" - 
members of his body. 

How glorious thus to be permitted to enter on the work for 
which he has called and is perfecting his Church! On the other 
hand, when I know that error is being preached so persistently 
from almost every pulpit in this land, and throughout 
Christendom, and that great efforts are being made to spread 
these errors among the heathen nations, I long for strength to 
raise my voice for the truth. But the decree has gone forth that 
the darkness of error shall give place to the light of truth, and 
whoever may fail, the work will go on till all God's promises 
shall be fulfilled. 

That each one of the saints may be faithful and lay hold on the 
grace that is sufficient, is the prayer of your fellow-traveler in 
the narrow way. 

S. T. TACKABURY. 



R993 : page 1 



POOR SLAVE! 



It is surprising in this day of comparatively independent 
thought, how willingly and stupidly some submit themselves to 
the yokes of sectarian bondage. But the following is a sample of 
how some do so. Had the apostles and early disciples acted so, 
they could not have believed or followed Christ. No more can 
such follow him to-day. The blind, and the leaders of the blind, 



shall together fall into the ditch, into the "great tribulation" 
shortly to overtake them. 

The harvest of the age is upon us; but the blind guides of 
Babylon are utterly indifferent, even when their attention is 
called to it, and the stupid indifference of those whom they have 
effectually rocked to sleep is utterly unworthy of the knowledge. 
Surely the thunder-bolts of His wrath will be necessary to 
awaken them. 



Augusta, Ga. 

DEAR FRIEND:-It is now some months since you were kind 
enough to forward to my address the Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., 
Plan of the Ages. Immediately on its receipt I placed it in the 
hands of my spiritual adviser, Rev. T. M. Lowry, (I am a 
Presbyterian in faith.) to know if I could place it in the hands of 
my wife and children. He only returned it to me yesterday, and 
advised me not to do so. Consequently I now return it to you, 
with many thanks. Very truly yours, 

J. G. B. 

How strongly in contrast with the above is the following, which 
came in the same mail. It reminds us forcibly of Acts 17:11,12 - 
"These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they 
received the word with all readiness of mind and searched the 
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Therefore many 
of them believed." (Compare with verses 2-6 and 13.) 



Osceola, Mo. 

DEAR FRIEND:-I have not yet fully read the entire volume 
(Millennial Dawn Vol. I.) but the spiritual benefit already 
received is untellable. The gates of the eternal kingdom have 
been opened wide to me, whereas before, the gates were but 
"ajar." I shall feel blessed indeed, if I have no other mission than 
utilizing the columns of my magazine to spread abroad the "glad 
tidings" of this "new revelation," and "Plan of the Ages." With 
deep respect, Yours fraternally, 

V. B. W. 



page 1 

BROTHER ADAMSON'S PLEDGE. 

FOUR HUNDRED GERMAN DAWN. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Being busy all good weather have 
not had time to read "Sons of God," but only the letters and the 
forcible View in the February TOWER. 



The thought of the height of Babylon's self-exaltation adding 
force to the fall is borne out by Rev. 18:7- "How much she hath 
glorified herself and lived deliciously so much torment and 
sorrow give her, for she saith in her heart I sit a queen and am 
no widow and shall see no sorrow" (such as we see predicted 
and threatened here and elsewhere). I think all should read Isa. 
45, 46 and 47, and Jer. 50 and 51, with Rev. 17th and 18th 
chapters. 

A word about German DAWN. I think it right to pledge myself 
for 400 copies, or one fifth of the 2000 needing to be pledged 
and one twenty-fifth of the whole 10,000. 1 do not know how 
soon I can pay for the 400, but not before last of March and you 
must store them and send as I order. Hope I shall sell thousands 
of German DAWN. 

In the Master's name I most heartily thank Bro. Zech for his 
patient toil of a consecrated spirit shown in his persevering labor 
on DAWN translating it into German. "My reward is with me," 
shows that Christ's reward to our dear brother is not only sure 
but will follow speedily. 

The interesting letters of this month's TOWER much refreshed 
the saints here as elsewhere no doubt. J. B. ADAMSON. 



page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Farrville, Indiana. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Your letter in answer to "Physical 
Functions," at hand. 

I must thank you for your kindness and promptness in helping 
me out of a difficulty. 

Now I don't want to bother you, but I have completely "faced 
about" in the last year, and I want to tell you how it happened. 
Eight years ago, I began to practice medicine, and the study of 
medicine I believe has a tendency to infidelity, if the study of 
the Bible be neglected. I depended on the preachers for spiritual 
food, and they mixed it up so, it disgusted me, and I came near 
starving, and presume I would, if my wife had not come to the 
rescue. All through the "dark nights," my wife was on her knees, 
begging for bread for me. My confidence in my wife as a true 
and noble woman is replete, and biting my lips, I would yield to 
her request, and go down on my knees with her, sympathizing 
with, and pitying her delusion. But the crisis came. Hypocrisy in 
the churches, clashing of creeds, etc., all claiming a Bible basis, 
"boiled me over," and I said, what I pleased, even to the 
detriment of my profession. I affirmed this question in a debate, 



"That man is the author of God, and a spiritual future. " But you 
know what I want to tell, so I will not bother relating all. I 
commenced the study of the Bible last October a year ago. First 
dismissing all creeds and notions of men, as well as prejudice, 
and with my wife on her knees asking divine guidance, I 
commenced the study of the New Testament. When I finished, 
the result was: I admired the pluck and tact and intelligence of 
Paul; but when I went to Genesis, all was dark, and like the 
"sow and dog, " I was about to return, when I struck the 
prophets. This gave me a key to the whole thing. It was the hind 
site on the gospel gun, the New was the fore site, and Christ the 
mark, and before winter closed, I looked upon the Bible as a 
great store-house-an ocean, the springs of which are hid in the 
mountains of God's eternal love. I came to this conclusion: If I 
want to build a house, I take the tree and use it as I find it, for if 
I should wait to learn the origin of the first oak, or acorn, I might 
freeze before I build my house. So, with the Bible, I accept the 
material at hand, and use it. 

After I was convinced, I wanted to be about my father's 
business, but not being willing to take passage on any of the 
boats, concluded I would swim over, and have been swimming 
around, doing all the good I can. 

The "Dawn" came into my library just when I needed it. Since 
then I am giving to my patrons the "Plan of the Ages;" but I am 
not as popular as when I was an infidel, for they will not endure 
sound doctrine. I don't belong to any church, therefore could not 
get a hearing, if I undertake to preach, nor a house either, but I 
am going to lecture at a schoolhouse, and continue Christian 
work. But I must say it is a great comfort to know my Methodist 
wife who has suffered and agonized for me at a throne of mercy, 
joins heart and hand in helping me to promulgate the "Plan of 
the Ages." 

LATER. -I have just been telling the good news to a 
Universalist, who wants DAWN. He is anxious to know more. 

I rejoice to know that there is a thirst for knowledge, and the 
world is clamoring for more light. I sometimes feel like 
launching out in the world, giving up my profession, and doing 
my little in lifting from the slough and cesspool of ignorance 
those over whom I have an influence. I never was an enthusiast 
in anything, and always aimed to take a stand, after reaching it 
by intelligence. But all the faculties of my soul are enlisted in 
this enterprise. I never experienced such a longing to go forth 
and "gather in the sheaves." 

I was an orphan thrown upon a cold world early in life, and have 
fought the battles of life alone, but God has blessed me, and I 
am coming out on the tidal wave all right, I hope. 



If I can hold up a beacon of light, or point to some friendly star 
that will guide some poor shipwrecked soul safely to shore, 
gladly will I do it. 

Excuse me for writing so much. I have unbosomed myself to 
you in a way that my pride almost condemns, but I can write to 
you feeling that our hearts beat in unison. May God bless and 
prosper you in all your efforts to do good. 

Your brother, 

G. P. M. 

Milwaukee, Wis. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL. DEAR BRO.:- I write to inform you, I 
have not yet received this January number of the TOWER, but 
as I did not send the number of my residence, that may account 
for it. I find it so precious, I can not afford to lose one number. 

I have been a member of M.E. church for nearly a quarter of a 
century, sometimes rejoicing, but more of the time doubting. 
But blessed be the name of Christ, I have received some of the 
light that will erelong, I trust, shine to the perfect day. Through 
the kindness of Bro. P., I received a copy of Millennial Dawn, 
and I treasure it more than I ever did my Bible before receiving 
it, and my Bible is now more precious than ever before. May the 
blessed Father help you to spread the glad tidings, is my prayer. 

S.T. B. 

R1012 : page 2 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Recent experiences have made 
exceedingly precious the word of the Lord through Peter- 
"Rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings... [and] if ye be reproached for the name of Christ, 
happy are ye, for the spirit of glory resteth on you. " 

On last Sunday forenoon I took my stand in front of Grace M.E. 
church, Harrisburg, Pa., and proceeded at once to give out the 
Arp tracts. This had the effect of making the rulers of the high 
places angry, two of them going so far as to threaten to have me 
arrested, and when I would not obey and go away, one caught 
me by the collar to hustle me off. Whereupon I told him to take 
his hand off me, or I could have him arrested. Then he stood 
between me and the people and told them not to take them, but 
they took them anyhow. His next move was to send in hot haste 
to the mayor's office for a policeman to arrest a man who, he 
said, was hindering the people from going into church. The 
officer came, and on their charge arrested me and brought me to 
the mayor's office, but by this time I had the entire congregation 
supplied with slips. Without any hearing or trial they were 
preparing, they said, to send me to jail; when I told them, I was 
well known by a number of prominent business men in their 
city, with whom I had done business as a traveling man for a 



New York house for years, and requested them to send for one 
gentleman near by who, I thought, would go my bail. They did 
so and the gentleman soon made his appearance and with a look 
of astonishment shook hands with me in the prisoners' box, 
inquiring, Why, how is this? The matter was soon explained and 
he immediately became my bail for $100. 

At the hearing next day, they appeared against me. They well 
knew, however, that to charge me with giving out tracts that 
taught the people that an orthodox hell was a delusion, and that 
there was hope for all mankind, would be regarded as bigotry. 
That this was their real grievance, there can be no doubt. But 
they trumped up another charge that would take better and not 
expose them to ridicule, charging me with advertising a book 
and hindering the people from going into church. 

The strange decision was, that I was the offending party, but 
should go free this time, upon paying the costs, which amounted 

R1013 : page 2 

to $1.50. Of course such a decision on such pretences could 
soon be proven unjust if brought into court, and I could claim 
heavy damages as against my personal rights and business 
interests, for being escorted through the streets as a common 
criminal, when I was violating no law of either God or man; but 
being a traveling man I have no time to attend to it. How it 
reminds me of the experience of Peter and John recorded in Acts 
4:1-21. And how like them we feel like relating these 
experiences to each other for mutual sympathy, as we thus have 
fellowship with Christ in his sufferings -yet "light afflictions" 
indeed in consideration of the glory to follow. (See verses 
23,29.) I expect to see you soon and tell you more, and how I 
expect this circumstance will redound to the glory of God. 
Blessed be God. My joy is indeed great in the Lord, and I realize 
my oneness with Christ as partaker of his suffering. 

I remain yours in the one hope in Christ, 

S. O. BLUNDEN. 

P.S. In consequence of this affair, I have had a number of 
opportunities which I could not otherwise have had, for 
explaining my position and preaching the glad tidings to 
interested hearers— in the mayor's office, several newspaper 
offices, and among business men of my acquaintance. And it has 
created quite a little stir and talk both among these and members 
of that church, some saying they must get that book and learn 
further of this matter. The Lord be praised. 

page 2 



Columbiana, Ala. 

DEAR FRIEND:-I have read the book Millennial Dawn. It is 
grandly beautiful, yet so different from the interpretations of the 
various churches, to which I have been so long accustomed, that 
it almost frightens me to think of accepting it as God's 
interpretation of his own word, notwithstanding the fact that it 
does present a perfect chain of evidence more in harmony with 
the divine character than anything I ever read before. 

I say to myself, What if this should be one of those "teaching 
new and strange doctrines?" But then, I reflect, it comes hand in 
hand with the Word, and is fighting against the errors that have 
crept into the church, and not against God. 

From early childhood I have been a Bible reader, and often 
wondered that ministers of the gospel almost entirely ignored 
the prophecies of both Testaments relating to the Millennial age, 
and confined their remarks to the doctrines of repentance, 
baptisms, etc., when it seemed so plain to me that such did not 
cover the whole ground of prophecy. The doctrine of Christ 
embraces so much more than they attempted to explain. I never 
could bear the idea of setting the Old Testament aside just as 
though it had already performed all its part in the great plan, 
seeing, as I thought, so many grand prophecies pointing to a 
time beyond the Gospel Age. I could not tell when, where, nor 
how they would be fulfilled; but still clung to the belief that they 
must come in somewhere, because of the divine declaration that 
God's word shall not return unto him void, but shall accomplish 
all that he hath purposed. But, as I now begin to see, what more 
fitting time than the Millennial Age could there be for finishing 
all things pertaining to the Plan of the Ages? Now, the words of 
the prophets and apostles seem to stand out, like real living 
things. By faith I can see holiness to the Lord written upon the 
bells of the horses, the desert blossoming as the rose, the Lamb 
that was slain opening the sealed book, and everything that hath 
breath praising the Lord. I can see it all as if in a grand 
panorama passing before my eyes. 

Please send a copy to my sister, and oblige Your sincere friend, 
M. F. L. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Please send me 120 copies paper bound 
Dawn, and find enclosed money order for eighteen dollars- 
amount less ten cents each expense allowance. 

About three weeks ago, I distributed a few of the "Arp Tracts," 
in a car bound for Chicago. A man of Buchanan found one of 
them, while on his way to Chicago, and it so interested him in 
DAWN, that he inquired at nearly all the book stores there, and 
also at "Y.M.C.A." headquarters, without success. On his return 
home, not finding any trace of the book, he sent to you for two 
copies. 



On Friday I sold about 40 copies of Dawn, in Buchanan, 
Michigan, a village near here, where a great many isms are 
doing their evil work. Yours, 

S. D. RODGERS. 

[Brother Rodgers is doing a great work in the vineyard. You 
will recognize him as an able minister (servant) of the truth, 
when you learn that during January he sold 620 copies of 
DAWN. Reckon each chapter of DAWN a sermon, and suppose 
that each book will be read by at least two persons, and you will 
see that his is a noble service to our Redeemer and King. 

While we all rejoice at the success of those who have many 
talents, and do great exploits in the battle for truth, let none of 
the humble, less talented, feel discouraged. The measure of 
every man's approval before the Lord, is in proportion as he hath 
DONE what he could. Some whose opportunities permit less 
service and less success, will be just as sure to hear the Master's 
"Well done, good and faithful servant," if they do with their 
might, what their hands find to do. The grace and blessing of our 
Lord Jesus be upon all the faithful in Christ.- EDITOR.] 



Loogootee, Ind. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-An hour ago I took from P.O. 
box a copy of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and within the past 
month having finished reading the "Millennial Dawn," and 
having become so completely engulfed by its wonderful but 
simplified explanation of the Bible with its hitherto (to me) dark 
sayings, I had but to glance over the pages of the WATCH 
TOWER to become at once fascinated with its peculiar beauty. I 
herewith hand you the sum required for a subscription. Send it 
along. I may well add that my feet had well nigh slipped into 
infidelity, but I now thank God that I feel quite free, and well 
assured of the plan; and I attribute my conclusions to reading 
your book. It occupies, in my estimation, a position on the apex 
of all Christian literature, and I hope and trust that its interesting 
and valuable pages will be carefully and thoughtfully read by 
additional thousands. Wishing you and your co-workers in the 
Master's cause abundant success, I will ask to be remembered as 
your true, though stranger friend, 

C. M. M. 

R1013 : page 2 



Joliet Prison, 111. 

DEAR FRIEND:-I do not know but that you will be a little 
surprised at receiving another letter from me, yet I thought it 
would be proper for me to write to you again, if only to 
acknowledge your kindness in sending me the book, Millennial 



Dawn, as I requested. I must confess that I was not quite sure 
that you would pay any attention to my first letter, as I imagined 
that most people on the outside would be apt to regard with 
doubt and suspicion any pretension on the part of a man in such 
a place as this, to being interested in religious matters, or 
desiring information or light on such subjects. You may be sure 
it gave me much pleasure to find that you were not of that way 
of thinking. 

Several other men besides myself and cell-mate are interested, 
and pretty much to the same extent. I can honestly assure you 
that no book that I have ever read has impressed me so much, or 
caused me to do so much serious thinking as Millennial Dawn. 
It is altogether different in its treatment of the subject of 
religion, and in the view it gives of the Bible and its 
interpretation, from anything I have ever read. 

However unfavorable my early surroundings, and however evil 
my early associations, I think I have cause for thankfulness that 
I have at last reached a point where I can see the right way 
ahead, and turn my back on the dark and wretched past. I am 
determined to pursue that way for the remainder of my life. I 
have been five years in this place, and have still three years and 
three months to serve. For the last four years I have honestly 
tried to improve my mind and prepare myself, as far as what 
facilities I have had would permit, to lead an honest and useful 
life when I get out. I wish to acknowledge the receipt of two 
copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and the pleasure and 
instruction the reading of them has given. I am much interested 
in them as well as the "Plan of the Ages," and nothing would 
give me more pleasure than to have an opportunity to follow up 
a course of reading, the beginning of which, has been of so 
much real benefit to me. Hoping that you will not be annoyed at 
my having written so much, and again thanking you earnestly 
for your kindness, I remain, 

Yours gratefully, 



R1013:page3 



WHOM WILL YE SERVE? 

"If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend; whosoever 
maketh himself a king, speaketh against Caesar. When Pilate 
therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth. "-John 
19:12,13. 

"Ye are My friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. "-John 
15:14. 



CAESAR'S friends? or friends of Jesus? 
Solemn question for to-day! 
Friends of Caesar! Friends of Jesus! 
Take your sides without delay. 

If ye pause for man's forbidding, 
Caesar's friendship ye secure; 
If ye do the Father's bidding, 
Scorn, reproach, ye shall endure. 

Friends of Caesar! Friends of Jesus! 
Stand revealed! your choice declare! 
Who in truth two masters pleases? 
Who may rival banners bear? 

Jesus' friends account Him precious, 
Lose for Him all other gain: 
Dearer far the smile of Jesus 
Than the praise of worldly men. 

Free from Caesar, friends of Jesus! 
Stand in phalanx! never fear! 
Love, severely tried, increases; 
Courage yet! the Lord is near! 

Onward still, His name confessing, 
Weaving crowns to grace His brow; 
Lo ! His hands are full of blessing, 
Lifted for your succor now. 

Caesar's friends were we, but Jesus 
Owns us for His friends to-day! 
What! shall rival friendship please us, 
While the Bridegroom is away? 

No ! through grace would we surrender 
Caesar's things to Caesar's care, 
Whilst to God, our God, we render 
Filial homage, praise, and prayer. 



-Sel. 



R1013:page3 

"THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME." 

"Then came the day of unleavened bread when the Passover 
[lamb] must be killed... and the chief priests and the scribes 
sought how they might kill him. ...And Jesus sent Peter and 
John, saying, Go and prepare us the Passover that we may 
eat... And when the hour was come he sat down, and the twelve 
apostles with him. And he said unto them, With desire I have 
desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer: for I say 
unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in 



the kingdom of God. And he took the cup and gave thanks, and 
said, Take this and divide it among yourselves: for I say unto 
you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of 
God shall come. And he took the bread and gave thanks, and 
brake it and gave unto them, saying, This is my body which is 
given for you: this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also the 
cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new testament in my 
blood which is shed for you. "--Luke 21:7,2,8-20. 

Such is the simple account of the institution of the Lord's 
Supper, as recorded by Luke; and again as the appointed time 
draws near we call to mind the words, "This do in remembrance 
of me. " And in compliance with that request, we will again 
commemorate our Passover by the repetition of the simple 
ceremony thus instituted by our Lord. 

Monday afternoon, March 26th, 1888, will be the anniversary of 
our Lord's death at Calvary-the 14th day of the first month, 
Jewish time, which begins at sunset of the previous evening. 
Sunday evening, March 25th, will therefore be the anniversary 
of our Lord's Supper, instituted in commemoration of his death, 
as the antitypical paschal lamb- "the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world. " 

On that occasion the church at this place will meet at our usual 
upper room, No. 101, Federal street, Allegheny, (side entrance), 
at 7:30 o'clock, P.M., and we most cordially invite to meet with 
us all who love our Redeemer, and who appreciate the ransom 
sacrifice which we meet to celebrate. Provision will be made for 
the entertainment of those from a distance. Let as many as can, 
meet with us. A number of meetings will be arranged for several 
days following which will afford a favorable opportunity for 
inquiry regarding the plan of the ages. Since all the consecrated 
are ministers of the truth, it behooves all who can to avail 
themselves of the opportunities which these conferences afford, 
for the more thoroughly equipping themselves for their 
respective fields of usefulness. 

But we are aware of the fact that only a few can assemble here: 
nevertheless, let all the faithful in Christ Jesus, in every place, 
"Do this in remembrance" of God's Lamb who redeemed us by 
the sacrifice of himself. Such, in every place should assemble 
together, even if there RIO 14 : page 3 

be but two or three of like precious faith. And even the solitary 
ones may break the bread and partake of the wine, in heart 
communion with the Lord and with the scattered fellow 
members of the one body yet in the flesh. 

Christians in this matter, as on many other points, have left the 
teachings of the Word and the example of the early church, and 
follow various customs as to the time of its observance. Few 
observe it as a "supper" at all, Protestants in general selecting 
for convenience the noon hour instead of the evening. Some 



commemorate the Lord's death every Sunday, some once a 
month, and some once in three months. They seem to regard the 
time and frequency as a matter of indifference, and they might 
reason, If it is a good thing to do, why not do it often— even 
daily. To this, others would reply, and truly: It would lose much 
of its solemnity and force. And so it does as they now celebrate 
it. Those who celebrate every Sunday, mistake the record in 
Acts 2:42,46 and 20:7,11. They surely err in supposing these 
occasions to be the Lord's Supper. They undoubtedly refer to a 
common usage in the early church, of eating a plain meal 
together when they gathered every first day of the week from 
distant places, just as it is the custom now in country places, 
except that they all ate together, and made it more of a "love 
feast." These "feasts of charity," or love feasts, are referred to by 
Jude (verse 12), in which he shows that all who partook were 
not brethren indeed. The institution of these love-feasts was not 
by any command of our Lord, or of the apostles, but like the 
celebration of the first day of the week, seems to have been the 
spontaneous prompting of grateful hearts. The early church thus 
celebrated the resurrection of our Lord (not his death) every 
week, and the breaking of bread in their love-feast was probably 
a pleasant reminder of the fact that the Lord was made known to 
the disciples at Emmaus and on other occasions after his 
resurrection in the breaking of bread— at their ordinary lunch. 
(Luke 24:29,30,42; John 21:12,13.) They thus celebrated both 
his resurrection and the opening of their eyes to know him. But 
they neither used wine (no less important than the bread in the 
celebration of the Lord's Supper), nor did they call it the Lord's 
Supper, nor observe it with special solemnity, but rather with 
thankfulness and joy. "They did eat their meat with gladness and 
singleness of heart" "breaking bread from house to house," (Acts 
2:46,) and, for a time, daily. 

Those who celebrate the "supper" at noon on Sunday once a 
month, or once a quarter, have no plea for their custom except 
that St. Paul said, "As oft as ye do this," etc. (1 Cor. 11:23,25), 
which they think gives liberty for doing it when they please. On 
the contrary the apostle uses the word "As oft," in the sense of 
whenever. "Whenever ye do this," carries the mind to the 
context to see what is referred to. We find Paul in the context 
referring to the "same night in which he [our Lord] was 
betrayed," and the bread and wine there and then instituted by 
our Lord as his remembrancers, to take the place of the typical 
Passover eaten by the Jews. Paul wrote to those who well knew 
the Jewish custom and how often it was celebrated, so that "as 
oft," or whenever, to them signified each time, each anniversary. 

The Lord's Supper was designed to supplant the annual 
commemoration of the typical passing over of Israel's first-born, 
whose lives were saved through the blood of the typical lamb. 
Such an event could only be properly celebrated on its 
anniversary, which our Lord and his disciples and all the Jews 



strictly observed. They no more thought of celebrating it at any 
other time, than Americans think of celebrating the signing of 
their Declaration of Independence on any other day than the 
fourth of July. 

It was the custom of the early church to celebrate it, as we do, 
on the fourteenth day of the first month, Jewish time, as the 
Lord indicated; and though there was a great falling away from 
the original purity of faith, which commenced even in the days 
of the Apostles, this custom was still retained by some 
Christians down to the fourth century, when it was peremptorily 
abolished by the Council of Nice, when the great falling-away, 
predicted by the Apostles, had partially developed the great 
system of error afterward known as the Papacy. 

On this point we quote the following from Mosheim's Church 
History (see page 523). He says, "There arose toward the close 
of this [the second] century, between the Christians of Asia 
Minor and those of other parts, particularly such as were of the 
Roman church, a violent contention. ...The Asiatic Christians 
were accustomed to celebrate... the institution of the Lord's 
Supper and the subsequent death of the Redeemer, on the 
fourteenth day of the first Jewish month. ...This custom they 
stated themselves to have derived from the Apostles Philip and 
John." 

But let no one misunderstand us to teach, that those who have 
commemorated the Redeemer's death at inappropriate seasons 
are therefore condemned of our Lord. No, thank God, the 
Gospel church is not placed under Law, but under grace, in this 
as in every matter. And those who in heart sincerity have so 
partaken of the emblems of our Lord's body and blood, while 
they may suffer loss in the sense that the occasion by its too 
frequent remembrance has lost some of the power it was 
designed to have on their hearts, have nevertheless not been 
spurned by him whose sacrifice for sins they thus confessed. But 
surely, when the intent of our Lord's words is grasped, all the 
fully consecrated will gladly comply with his arrangement, 
assured that it is best and most appropriate; as well as most 
acceptable to him of whom it is a remembrancer. 

THE SYMBOLS CONSIDERED. 

Not only has the proper time been lost sight of, but the true 
meaning of the symbols, wine and unleavened bread, has also 
been obscured by the spiritual darkness of the "dark ages." 
Trinitarian errors, which in the third century were introduced 
into Christianity from heathen philosophy, have done much to 
warp and twist the minds of God's children, and to hinder clear 
views of the sacrifice which our Redeemer gave as our ransom 
price. (See Nov. '87 TOWER, on this point.) 



The typical lamb by which the Children of Israel foreshadowed 
Christ and the coming deliverance, (except the blood which was 
sprinkled upon the house as a protection,— an atonement) was 
eaten by all. So with the emblems by which we are instructed to 
remember the real lamb. The bread is to be eaten by all; the 
wine may only be partaken of by a few. The bread and wine 
symbolize the body and blood of our Lord. Our Lord as a man 
was the living bread [literally, bread of life] which came down 
from heaven to give life to the world. The illustration is perfect: 
Mankind is dying for want of life and needs some food so full of 
life-producing quality that it will arrest the wasting of death, and 
repair and restore to the original perfection lost in Adam. Men 
have sought panaceas, elixirs, life restorers, in every quarter,— in 
animal and vegetable food, in minerals, and in chemistry; but all 
in vain; no such "bread of life" has ever been found. But when 
men had for four thousand years sought in vain, the true bread of 
life came from heaven, of which, if a man eat (partake or 
appropriate to his use, as it is his privilege to do) he shall live 
forever. That is, If by faith in the means which God has 
provided to accomplish his redemption, he accepts the favor of 
life, he can have it on those terms, and those only. This our Lord 
symbolically termed eating his flesh. 

Notice how perfect is the illustration. The Son of God as a 
heavenly or spiritual being, as he was at first, was not bread for 
man, and had he given his spiritual body as bread, we of a 
different nature (human), could not have appropriated it, just as 
that which would nourish and perfect a tree (viz., air, moisture, 
and earth) would not perfect men because of a different nature. 
Man is of human or flesh nature; hence if the spiritual Son of 
God would give to dying men the bread of life, it must be flesh, 
full of life-giving nutriment. 

The preparation for this was the change of the Son of God from 
spirit to flesh. To this end he humbled himself, when he was 
"made flesh and dwelt among us." (John 1:14.) The flesh was to 
be the life-giving bread; and since he who had been in the 
heavenly or spirit state had become earthly or human, being 
made flesh, it is truly said that this bread came down from 
heaven, from the heavenly or spirit condition to the earthly or 
human nature. This is the bread of life of which a man may eat 
and not die.— John 6:50. 

We have now found the bread of life, but how shall we eat him? 
We cannot eat anything that is alive, nor would anything that 
dieth of itself [by disease] be fit for food. So if our Lord had 
died what is called a natural* death, it would have proved that 
he was a sinner like other men; for death is the penalty of sin, 
and hence to partake of him would have given no new life. So 
then we see that there was no way to give us this life-food or 
"bread of life" except by the sacrifice of the man Christ Jesus, 
who did not die because his life, like 



R1014:page4 

ours, was forfeited, but who gave himself a ransom, a 
corresponding price, a substitute for all- for Adam and all who 
lost 

R1015 : page 4 

life through him. His life in the flesh— his example and counsel, 
teachings, etc., could not give life any more than music would 
keep alive a starving man. We may study and try to follow his 
perfect example, but we cannot do it perfectly because we are 
dying and lack strength. We need life, life-producing food, and 
he became flesh, for the very purpose of providing us this life 
supply which we could get in no other way. 

So when speaking on the subject to his disciples, he told them 
that the killing of the lamb was needful, so that they could eat of 
him, saying, "It behooveth the son of man to suffer. " Had he 
remained with them in the flesh, their teacher, they would 
indeed have been greatly blessed, but could never have gotten 
life. Hence he said, "The Son of man goeth as it is written of 
him," and "It is expedient FOR YOU;" "for if I go not away (If I 
remain flesh, if I do not submit myself in sacrifice and thus carry 
out the Father's plan for your redemption), the Comforter will 
not come. " You cannot in any other way than by my sacrifice, 
and by partaking of me, escape from condemnation and come 
into harmony and acceptance with God, so as to be recognized 
of him as sons, and as such be granted life. 

So, then, it is a mistake to suppose that truth is the bread of life, 
and that the eating of truth will justify us, or give us a right to 
life. It is a mistake to suppose that to believe the sermon on the 
mount and other of our Lord's sayings would give life. Truths 
they were, and good for food after and with the Lamb, but 
INDIGESTIBLE without it. Those very truths were indigestible 
to many, and acted as emetics rather than as nourishing food, 
and "many went back and walked no more with the Lord." Even 
the twelve got little nourishment from our Lord's teachings until 
after the Lamb was slain, and they by faith had eaten of that life- 
giving food. Then, under the strength and vigor of the life, they 
were able to find sweetness and strength in all things whatsoever 
the Master had spoken unto them. The eating of the Lamb, by 
the new life which it brought, restored them again to fellowship 
with God; and receiving the adoption and spirit of sonship, they 
were thereby enabled to appreciate and appropriate to their 
strengthening, truths in general, as "meat in due season. " 

Our Lamb was slain for us, on our behalf, because he was the 
bread of which all must eat, to have life, and because we could 
not eat him until he gave himself. Now, what did he give, and 
what do we eat? We answer, his flesh. But what is meant by 
this, his flesh? We showed above, that he "became flesh," (John 
1:14) i.e., he became human. So then, to give his flesh, means to 



give himself, at that time a human being. Whatever he possessed 
therefore in the way of human rights and privileges, under God's 
law, he there resigned in our interest— that the human family 
which has no rights or privileges, having lost all those in Adam 
its representative, might receive back all of these rights and 
privileges and liberties. Adam's family was all in him when he 
sinned and lost life, and every right and privilege of sonship, and 
so we all are sharers in that one loss. So now corresponding full 
and sufficient rights belong to the new man, "the man Christ 
Jesus," who as a perfect and uncondemned being exchanged his 
higher rights for men's lower rights which Adam had forfeited. 
And when this one then gives himself and lays down all that he 
has (Matt. 13:44) in the interest and for the use of the 
condemned race, we see that the giving of his flesh for the life 
of the world (John 6:5 1) means the handing back to dying men 
of the life, liberties, and privileges lost. And the eating of his 
flesh would consequently mean, the appropriating to his own 
use by the eater, of all the rights, liberties, and life which the 
perfect sinless "man Christ Jesus" possessed,-no more, and no 
less. 

What he gave up when he died, is ours- it is free to every child 
of Adam. But it will give life, etc., only to such as eat, i.e., by 
faith appropriate, those rights and privileges, freely given unto 
us of God, through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. 

If a man becomes leprous, not only he, but all in him, i.e., all his 
unborn posterity are affected. So it was with Adam and his 
children: we were "born in sin" and under its penalty, death, as 
the natural law of our being. Now consider that if a medicine or 
bread of life, a sure cure for leprosy were provided, to do good, 
it must be received into the system and appropriated, else no 
cure would result. So it is with Christ and the condemned and 
dying sinner. Not only must the bread contain the elements he 
needs, and be made accessible to him, but he must eat, or by 
faith appropriate it, if he would be freed from his malady of sin 
and its curse of condemnation to death. And as each child born a 
leper would need to eat for himself, and the family could not all 
be cured by any one of them taking the medicine or life food, so 
it is with sinners, each must eat for himself of the life-giving 
flesh of the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the 
world. It is for every man; hence every sinner must have an 
opportunity to eat and live, and none can be cured and brought 
to life (perfection) without eating this bread of life. None can eat 
it ignorantly (though many eat its symbol ignorantly); hence 
none of the heathen have yet had a chance to eat and live, and 
since all must come to the knowledge of this truth, this of itself 
would be a proof of the judgment (trial) to come, in the great 
Millennial Day; for it must be testified to all IN DUE TIME (1 
Tim. 2:4-6) in order that all, if they will, may eat and live 
forever. Since only the few come to even an imperfect 
knowledge of the truth, in this age, it is evident that God's "due 



time" for spreading this great feast before the world, is "in the 
morning," in the Age of Restitution, the Millennium, when the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth. -Hab. 2:14; Isa. 
25:6. 

In the Millennial age, men as they shall accept of Christ as 
God's lamb and their ransom price, will be permitted to partake 
of his perfections, physical, mental and moral; and as they do so, 
and conform to his teachings, they will gradually return to 
perfection, to all that was lost in Adam, attaining full perfection 
at the close of that age, or else for willful disobedience be 
entirely and forever cut off from life in the second death, for 
which there is no antidote, no bread of life, no cure. 

We, the church, who receive this bread of life now, and eat or 
appropriate it, do not experience a gradual restitution of our 
human powers to perfection, nor in any measure our restitution 
to human rights and privileges, etc. Ours is only reckoned, and 
not actual. By faith only, we can and do eat of the flesh of our 
Redeemer, accepting by faith (contrary to sight) human rights 
and liberties and life from the sacrifice made by our Lord. 
Mankind who will live in the next age will have sight as an aid 
to their faith; for they will feel their gradual physical 
improvement as they take the steps of faith and obedience. But 
none can walk by sight now, hence fewer and most select is the 
"little flock" now being chosen out from the world, to be the 
Bride and joint-heir of Christ in the Kingship and Priesthood of 
the age to come. To eat the Lamb we must realize his purity, his 
perfection, his spotlessness, and his RIGHT to all God's favors 
prepared for man. We must see, too, that he has sacrificed, 
surrendered up, all these human rights and privileges in order 
that all these blessings might be restored to the fallen and 
condemned race, and thus permit all to come back to a standing 
and fellowship with God, which he does not grant to condemned 
creatures. 

But why should any be permitted to eat thus of his flesh (his 
human perfections, rights, etc.) beforehand-before the general 
time for spreading the feast for all? Ah! there is a very precious 
truth there; there lies covered from view of the world "the 
exceeding riches of his grace, toward us who are in Christ 
Jesus." Let us look at it. 

The blood, symbolized by the wine, represents death; "the blood 
is the life" of anything; and when it is "shed," or taken from it, it 
implies the death of the creature. So the shed blood of Christ 
signifies the death of Christ-the life given up for the sins of the 
world. In the typical Passover, the Lamb was eaten, but the 
blood was not. No Israelite was allowed to eat blood. This was 
symbolic of how all are to eat the flesh of the Son of man but all 
are not to drink or partake of his death. Those to whom our Lord 
gave the wine as representative of his blood, were invited to 
partake of and share in his death, which was proper, because 



they were to be members of his body; and not only he, the Head, 
should taste death for every man, but we his body should be 
"made conformable to his death" (Phil. 3:10), and become dead 
with him. (Rom. 6:8.) The "cup" then is the symbol of death-by 
partaking of it (intelligently) we pledge our lives even unto 
death in the service of our Lord and Redeemer. Whether or not 
we shall be found worthy of restitution and lasting life depends 
on our eating (accepting and appropriating) his flesh; but 
whether we shall be found acceptable as members of his body, 
his bride and joint-heir, depends upon whether after eating his 
flesh by faith in the present age, we shall drink of his "cup," 
consecrate ourselves entirely to his service— unto death. 

This being true, how appropriate that the giving of the wine was 
after the eating of the bread, and to those only who had eaten it. 
This teaches, in harmony with all the Scriptures, that only those 
who are justified from all sin by faith in the merit and sacrifice 
of the Lamb of God (and no others) are invited to crucify their 
(justified) humanity and share in the afflictions of Christ in this 
age, and in his glory which shall follow in the 

R1016:page4 

Millennial age and the eternity beyond. 

Only those who both eat his flesh (appropriate his merits- 
justification) and drink his blood (share with him in his sacrifice 
by rendering their justified humanity a sacrifice to his service) 
dwell in him, as members of the one "body of Christ," as 
members of the "true vine." (John 6:56) Only such (verse 53) 
can have inherent life: that is, life independent of all conditions- 
Immortality. (See MILL. DAWN, VOL. I., Chap. X.) 

The balance of mankind, by eating (appropriating) the sacrificed 
rights of the "man Christ Jesus," obtain a dependent life, which 
will be supplied to the willing and obedient everlastingly. 

These must all be first brought to a knowledge of the Lord, of 
the sacrifice which he gave, and of the justification and 
restitution provided in it, and may then partake of it freely and 
live. Of such, it is written, "He that eateth of this bread (without 
sharing "the cup") shall live for ever," and "He that eateth me, 
even he shall live by me"-a dependent life, supplied to all who 
rely upon Christ, the life-giver, for it. The distinction is, that the 
Gospel church now being selected -the body of Christ-will, 
with the Head, have immortality, inherent life, and will be the 
source of supply to the world, who will come to this fountain for 
life, and live thereby. 

We notice also the statement of the apostle that "He that eateth 
and drinketh unworthily-not discerning the Lord's body-eateth 
and drinketh condemnation to himself." (1 Cor. 11:27-29.) The 
import of this is, that to all who fail to recognize Christ's 
sacrifice for their sins, the eating of those emblems implies their 



guilt as his murderers, in the same sense that the Jews cried out, 
"His blood be upon us and on our children. " As the Jews made 
themselves guilty of innocent blood (death), so do all who now 
by eating the emblems say, his blood is upon us— unless they 
discern the Lord's body and blood as their ransom. To all who 
do not recognize it as their ransom— it signifies condemnation as 
sharers of the guilt of the breaking of his body and shedding of 
his blood, seeing that to them it speaks no forgiveness— no 
remission of sins. 

The common translation improperly renders the above 
damnation, whereas it should be condemnation. Yet to the great 
mass of those who ignorantly do this unworthily, i.e., without 
properly recognizing the meaning of the emblems and the value 
of the Lord's death which they symbolize, there is no actual 
blood-guiltiness but merely a symbolic guilt. In symbol or figure 
they break the Lord's body and take his blood upon them. The 
symbol rightly understood speaks peace and forgiveness of sins, 
and fellowship with the Lamb, but not understood it could only 
be interpreted, under the Law, as a symbolic confession of 
murder. But as it is all symbolic, the condemnation could only 
be symbolic condemnation. Only such as come first to a 
knowledge of the ransom effected by the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world, can really come under the 
actual condemnation which the improper use of this symbol 
signifies. 

The drinking of the cup of suffering and death, for his sake-the 
sacrificing-must all be done in the present age. When the age of 
glory opens, all the sufferings of Christ will be in the past, both 
those of the Head and those of every member of his body. When 
the prophets spake of the sufferings of Christ and the glory that 
should follow (1 Pet. 1:11), they spake truly, of the entire Christ 
including the smallest and last member. When the glory ushers 
in, the drinking of the blood will be at an end, as well as all 
opportunity to share in that "high calling" as joint-heirs with 
Christ. Then the entire Christ of which our Lord is head, and we 
the members in particular, will have been broken and sacrificed, 
and the feeding of the multitude of earth will begin to be an 
actual fact. Restitution will then begin to be realized by 
mankind. We now have it imputed to us by faith, in order that in 

R1016:page5 

this time for sacrificing we may do so; for none can give himself 
a sacrifice with Christ, who has no right to life to surrender. 
Therefore we are first granted to partake of Christ's merits by 
faith, and by faith to find access to the Father, and acceptance in 
the Beloved, in order that we might receive the "high calling"; 
an invitation to become joint-sacrificers with Christ, and to 
drink of his cup, that we may also be joint-heirs of the glory to 
be revealed when the "body" is completed and the sacrificing 
over. 



To the consecrated, therefore, the emblems (bread and wine) are 
not only remembrancers of the Lord's sacrifice, but also of their 
own covenant to share the sacrifice with him, if by any means 
they might fulfill the conditions and be accounted worthy to be 
"made partakers of the divine nature," and to be with our Lord 
and Redeemer, his "joint-heirs" and co-workers in blessing all 
people. 

Paul calls our attention to this feature of the commemoration, 
saying: "The loaf which we break, is it not the communion 
[fellowship] of the body of Christ [the "little flock," the Church, 
of which our Lord is the head]? The cup of blessing which we 
bless, is it not the communion [fellowship] of the blood of 
Christ [the entire anointed company]? For we, though many 
[members], are one loaf and one body, for we all share in that 
one loaf."- 1 Cor. 10:15-17. 

All must eat of the flesh of our Lord Jesus: i.e., they must 
partake of those human rights and privileges which his sacrifice 
secured for all, either in this age by faith, or in the next age 
actually, else they will have no life-rights, either to make 
sacrifice of now, or to enjoy (without the privilege of sacrificing 
them) hereafter. So then we urge all believers to "DO THIS"; 
and to do it intelligently. While using the emblems, accept and 
apply and appropriate fully the justification from all sin and the 
right to life which God holds out through the Lamb of God, and 
in no other name or way. And especially let all believers who 
have been immersed with Christ into his death, and thus into 
membership in his "body" (Rom. 6:3,4), do this, remembering 
their justification through his blood and renewing their covenant 
to be dead with him as partakers of the new, the divine nature. 

So far as possible meet with such as you can recognize as 
fellow-members of the same body, and exclude no believer in 
the ransom. Arrange for the meeting long enough beforehand. It 
matters not which of your number shall pass the emblems, even 
Judas may have assisted at the first celebration. Remember that 
"all ye are brethren" and privileged to serve one another in any 
matter as you have ability and opportunity. In honor prefer one 
another; but do not allow false modesty to prefer tares above 
wheat among you. 

The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you all. May the occasion 
be one of great blessing and profit. 



*Really there is no such thing as natural death. In God's 
arrangement life is the natural condition and death comes as a 
violation of natural life,— as a consequence or penalty for 
disobedience, sin. However, natural death, may be considered an 
allowable expression when referring to the fallen, condemned 
race, because it is the natural result of sin, common to all human 
sinners. So our Lord could not have died by disease, etc., unless 



he had sinned, in which case his flesh would have been far from 
life-giving. Nor could his life be taken, except as he chose to 
give it as our ransom price, and that his flesh might impart life 
to us. 



R1020:page5 

"OUR lives should be like the days, more beautiful in the 
evening; or like the seasons, aglow with promise, and the 
autumn rich with golden sheaves, where good words and deeds 
have ripened on the field." 



R1020:page5 



As some rare perfume in a vase of clay 

Pervades it with a fragrance not its own, 

So when Thou dwellest in a mortal soul, 

All heaven's own sweetness seems around it thrown. 

The soul alone, like a neglected harp, 
Grows out of tune, and needs the hand Divine; 
Dwell Thou within it, tune and touch its chords, 
Till every note and string shall answer Thine. 

-Harriet Beecher Stowe. 



R1016:page5 

ABOUT HELL-CONTINUED. 



HELL IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

Having in our two previous issues examined the word sheol, the 
original and only word for hell in the Old Testament, and the 
word hades, most frequently rendered hell in the New 
Testament, we now complete this study by noticing every 
remaining instance in Scripture where the English word hell 
occurs. There are but two other words than hades, rendered hell 
in the New Testament, namely gehenna and tartaroo, which we 
will now consider in the order named. 

GEHENNA. 

This word occurs twelve times. It is the Grecian mode of 
spelling the Hebrew words which are translated "the valley of 
Hinnom. " This valley lay just outside the city of Jerusalem, and 
served the purposes of sewer and garbage burner to that city. 



The offal, garbage, etc., were emptied there and fires were kept 
continually burning there to consume utterly all things deposited 
therein, brimstone being added to assist combustion and insure 
complete destruction. But a living thing was never allowed to be 
cast into gehenna. The Jews were not permitted to torture any 
creature. 

When we consider that in the people Israel, God was giving us 
object lessons illustrating his dealings and plans, present and 
future, we should expect that this valley of Hinnom, or gehenna, 
would play its part, too in illustrating things future. We know 
that Israel's priesthood and temple illustrated the Royal 
Priesthood— the Christian church as it will be, the true temple of 
God— and we know that their city was a figure of the New 
Jerusalem, the seat of kingdom power, and center of authority— 
the city [government] of the Great King, Immanuel. We 
remember, too, that Christ's government is represented in the 
book of Revelation (Rev. 21:24-27), under the figure of a city- 
The New Jerusalem. There, after describing the class permitted 
to enter the privileges and blessings of that kingdom —the 
honorable and glorious, and all who have right to the trees of 
life,- we find it also declared that there shall not enter into it 
anything that defileth, or that worketh abomination, or lies; but 
only such as the Lamb shall write as worthy of life. This city 
full, representing the redeemed world in the end of the 
Millennium, was typified or represented in the earthly city, and 
the defiling, and abominable, etc., the class unworthy of life, 
which do not enter in, are represented by the refuse and the 
filthy lifeless carcasses cast into gehenna outside Jerusalem for 
utter destruction. Accordingly, we find it stated that those not 
found worthy of life, are to be cast into the fire (Rev. 20:15), fire 
here, as everywhere, being used as a symbol of destruction. 

Thus we see that while gehenna served a useful purpose to the 
city of Jerusalem as a place of garbage burning, it, like the city, 
illustrated the future dealing of God, when the refuse and impure 
elements will be forever destroyed and prevented from 
contaminating the holy and pure, after that age of judgment, or 
trial, has proved which are sheep and which are goats. 

Gehenna then was a type or illustration of the SECOND 
DEATH-final and complete destruction. Strictly speaking, none 
could be in any danger of the second death while as yet under 
the first, or Adamic death, and while as yet no ransom from it 
had been given. Consequently no one could have been liable to 
the second death before the coming of our Lord, who brought to 
light the plan of God (to be accomplished through Christ,) for 
the resurrection of all from the first death, and a second trial of 
all men individually for the eternal continuance of that life, by 
obedience to the law of Christ, the penalty of failure to comply 
with those just and righteous conditions being the second death- 
condemnation a second time to death, for failure the second 



time, and this time individually. Nor is the world in general now 
liable to this penalty: none but consecrated believers could 
possibly incur it yet; because no others have escaped (even 
reckonedly) the condemnation that is on the world-the first 
death, for Adam's sin. The consecrated have escaped it 
reckonedly, the sin of Adam being no longer imputed to them. 
(Rom. 8:1; 4:6-8.) 

But remember that Israel, though they were not, and could not 
be actually ahead of other men in this matter, yet for the purpose 
of being used as types of the future of God's dealing, they were 
treated typically as though the ransom had been given before 
they left Egypt, though only a typical lamb had been slain. 
When Jerusalem was built, and the temple, representative of the 
true temple, the church, and the true kingdom as it will be 
established by Christ in the Millennium, that people typified the 
world in the next age. Their priests represented the glorified 
Royal Priesthood, and their Law and its demands of perfect 
obedience, represented the Law and conditions under the New 
Covenant, to be brought into operation for the blessing of all the 
obedient, and for the condemnation of all who, when granted 
fullest opportunity, will not submit to the righteous ruling and 
laws of the Great King. 

Seeing then that Israel's condition, etc., was a figure of the 
world's condition in the coming age, how appropriate that we 
should find the valley or abyss, gehenna, a figure of the second 
death, the utter destruction during the coming age of all that is 
unworthy of preservation, and how aptly, too, is the symbol, 
"lake of fire burning with brimstone," (Rev. 19:20) drawn from 
this same gehenna, or valley of Hinnom, burning continually 
with brimstone, the deadliness of brimstone adding to the force 
of the symbol fire, to express the utter and irrevocable 
destruction of the second death. How reasonable, too, to expect 
that Israel would have courts and judges resembling or 
prefiguring such courts and judges in the next age; and that the 
sentences of those (figurative) courts of that (figurative) people 
under those (figurative) laws, to that (figurative) abyss, outside 
that (figurative) city, would largely correspond to the real 
sentences of the real courts and judges in the next age. If these 
points are kept in mind, they will greatly assist us in 
understanding the words of our Lord in reference to gehenna; 
for though the literal valley just at hand was named and referred 
to, yet his words carry with them lessons concerning the future 
age, and the antitypical gehenna— the second death. 

MATT. 5:21, 22. 

"Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, 'Thou shalt 
not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be amenable to the 
judges:' but I say unto you, that whosoever is ANGRY with his 
brother [without a cause] shall [future-under the regulations of 



the real kingdom] be amenable to the judges: and whosoever 
shall say to his brother Raca [villain] shall be in danger of the 
High Council: but whosoever shall say 'Thou fool' shall be in 
danger of hell [gehenna] fire. " 

To understand these references to council and judges and 
gehenna, all should know something of Jewish regulations. The 
"Court of Judges" consisted of seven men [or twenty-three, -the 
number is in dispute] which had power to judge for some classes 
of crimes. The High Council, or Sanhedrin, consisted of 
seventy-one men of presumed learning and ability. This 
constituted the highest court of the Jews, and its supervision was 
over the gravest offences. The most serious punishment was 
death, but certain very obnoxious criminals were subjected to an 
indignity after death, being refused burial and cast with the 
carcasses of dogs, the city refuse, etc., into gehenna, to be 
consumed there. The object of this burning in gehenna was to 
make the crime and the criminal detestable in the eyes of the 
people, and signified that the culprit was a hopeless case. It must 
be remembered that Israel hoped for a resurrection from the 
tomb, and hence they were particular in caring for the corpses of 
their dead. Not realizing the fullness of God's power, they 
thought he needed their assistance to that extent. (Exod. 13:19; 
Heb. 11:22; Acts 7:15,16.) Hence the destruction of the body in 
gehenna after death implied to them the loss of hope of future 
life by a resurrection. Thus it represented the second death in the 
same figurative way that they as a people represented, or 
illustrated, a future order of things under the new covenant. 

Now notice that our Lord in the above words pointed out to 
them, that their construction of the Law, severe though it was, 
was far below the real import of that Law, as it "shall be" 
interpreted under the real kingdom and judges which theirs only 
typified. He shows that the command of their Law, "Thou shalt 
not kill," reached much farther than they supposed, and that 
malicious anger and vituperation "shall be" considered a 
violation of that Law, under the "new covenant," and that such 
as under the favorable conditions of that new age shall not 
reform so thoroughly as to fully observe this law, would be 
counted worthy of that which the gehenna near them typified, - 
the second death. However, the force and severity of that Law 
will be enforced only in proportion as the discipline, advantages, 
and assistance of that age shall enable each to comply with it. 

The same thought is continued in 

MATT. 5:27-30. 

Here again the operation of the Law under the New Covenant is 
contrasted with its operation under the old, or Jewish covenant, 
and the lesson of self-control is urged by the statement that it is 
far more profitable that men should refuse to gratify depraved 
desires (though they were dear to us as a right eye, and as 



convenient and almost indispensable as a right hand,) than that 
they should gratify these, and lose, in the second death, the 
future life provided through the atonement, for all who will 
return to perfection, holiness, and God. 

These expressions of our Lord not only serve to show us the 
perfection (Rom. 7:12,) of the Law, and how fully it will be 
enforced and defined in the Millennium, but they served as a 
lesson also to the Jews, who previously saw, through Moses' 
commands, only the crude exterior of the law of God. If they 
had found it difficult in their fallen state to keep inviolate even 
the surface significance of the Law, they must now see the 
impossibility of their keeping the finer meaning of the Law, 
revealed by Christ. Had they understood and received his 
teaching fully, they would have cried out, Alas ! if God judges us 
thus, by the very thoughts and intents of the heart, we are all 
unclean, 

R1016 : page 6 

all undone, and can hope for naught but condemnation to 
gehenna (to utter destruction, as brute beasts). They would have 
cried, Show us a greater priesthood than that of Aaron, a priest 
and teacher able to fully appreciate the Law, and fully able to 
appreciate and sympathize with our fallen state and inherited 
weaknesses, and let Him offer for us "better sacrifices," and 
apply to us the needed greater forgiveness of sin, and let him as 
a great physician heal us and restore us, so that we can obey the 
perfect Law of God from our hearts. Then they would have 
found all their needs in Christ. 

But this lesson they did not learn, for the ears of their 
understanding were "dull of hearing;" hence they knew not that 
God had already prepared the very priest, and sacrifice, and 
teacher, and physician they needed,— who in due time redeemed 
those under the typical law, as well as all not under it, and who 
also "in due time," shortly, will begin his restoring work - 
restoring sight to the blind eyes of their understanding, and 
hearing to their deaf ears. Then the "vail shall be taken away"- 
that vail of ignorance, pride and human wisdom, which Satan 
now uses to blind the world to God's true law and true plan of 
salvation in Christ. 

And not only did our Lord's teaching here show the Law of the 
new covenant, and teach the Jew a lesson, but it is of benefit to 
the Gospel church, his body, also. For though we are not under 
the Law as a covenant (as the Jews were typically, and as the 
world in the next age will be actually,) but under grace [special 
favor], yet our favor is more clearly seen by reason of our Lord's 
words here. In proportion as we learn the exactness of God's 
Law, and what would constitute perfection under its 
requirements, we see that our Redeemer was perfect, and that 
we, totally unable to commend ourselves to God as keepers of 



that law, can find acceptance with the Father only under the 
merit of our Redeemer, while none can be of that "body," 
covered by the robes of his righteousness, except the 
consecrated who endeavor to do only those things well pleasing 
to God, which includes the avoiding of sin to the extent of 
ability. Yet their acceptability with God rests not on their 
perfection, but upon the perfection of Christ, so long as they 
abide in him. These, nevertheless, are benefited by a clear 
insight into the perfect law of God, even though they are not 
dependent on the perfect keeping of it. They delight to do God's 
will to the extent of their ability, and the better they know his 
perfect law, the better they are able to rule and conform 
themselves in harmony with it. So, then, to us also the Lord's 
words have a lesson of value. 

The point, however, to be noticed clearly, is the mistake 
commonly made, of supposing the gehenna which the Jews 
knew, and of which our Lord spoke to them, to be a lake of fire 
to be kept burning to all eternity, into which all would be cast 
who get "angry with a brother" and call him a fool, or who "look 
upon a woman to lust. " Nay, the point is that "gehenna" 
symbolizes the second death —utter, complete and everlasting 
destruction. This is clearly shown by its being contrasted with 
life as its opposite. "It is better for thee to enter into life, halt, or 
maimed, than otherwise be cast into gehenna. " It is better that 
you should deny yourself sinful gratifications, than that you 
should completely lose all future life, and perish in the second 
death. 

MATT. 10:28, AND LUKE 12:5. 

"Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the 
soul: but rather fear him which is able to DESTROY both soul 
and body in hell" [gehenna]. See also another account of the 
same discourse by Luke— 12:4,5. 

Here our Lord points out to his followers the great cause they 
have for bravery and courage under the most trying 
circumstances. They were to expect persecution, and to have all 
manner of evil spoken against them falsely, for his sake, and the 
sake of the "good tidings" of which he made them the ministers 
and heralds; yea, the time would come, that whosoever would 
kill them would think that he did God a service. Their 
consolation and reward for this, was to come not in the present 
life, but in a life to come. They were assured, and they believed, 
that he had come to give his life a ransom for many, and that all 
in their graves must in consequence, in due time, hear the 
Deliverer's voice and come forth, either to reward, if their trial 
was passed in this life successfully, or to trial, as it must be, to 
the great majority who had not yet come to the necessary 
knowledge and opportunity constituting the new trial, secured 
for all by the ransom-sacrifice. 



Our Lord here speaks of the present life and the life to come 
(which he was about to secure for all by the ransom-sacrifice he 
was giving); he calls that future condition the real soul or being 
[soul signifies being], while the present life [which is really a 
dying, rather than a living state,] he designates or indicates by 
the word "body." His bidding then, is, fear not them which can 
terminate the present [dying] life in these poor dying bodies, 
which, full of frailties and weaknesses and aches, you got from 
dying Adam. Care little for it, its food, its clothing, its pleasures, 
in comparison with that future existence or being which God has 
provided for you, and which, if secured, may be your portion 
forever. Fear not the threats, or looks, or acts of men, whose 
power can extend no farther than the present being, who can 
harm and kill these bodies, but can do no more. Rather have 
respect and deference to God, with whom are the issues of life 
everlasting— fear him who is able to DESTROY both the present 
dying existence and the future everlasting existence, in gehenna- 
-the second death. 

Here it is conclusively shown that gehenna, as a figure, 
represented the second death— the utter destruction which must 
ensue in the case of all who, after having received fully the 
opportunities of a future being or existence through our Lord's 
sacrifice, prove themselves unworthy of God's gift, and refuse to 
accept it, by refusing obedience to God's just requirements. For 
it does not say that God will preserve soul or body in gehenna, 
but that he can and will destroy both in it. Thus we are taught 
that any who are condemned to the second death, are hopelessly 
and forever blotted out of existence. 

MATT. 18:9; MARK 9:43-47. 

[Since these two refer to the same discourse, we quote from 
Mark; remarking that verses 44, and 46, and part of 45 are not 
found in the oldest Greek MSS. though verse 48, which reads 
the same, is in all manuscripts. We quote only what is in the 
ancient MS.] "If thy hand offend thee cut it off: it is better for 
thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into 
gehenna, into the fire that never shall be quenched. And if thy 
foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter halt into 
life than having two feet to be cast into gehenna. And if thine 
eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into the 
kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast 
into gehenna, where the worm dies not and the fire is not 
quenched. " 

All must agree with the prophet, after reading the above, that our 
Lord opened his mouth in figures and obscure sayings. (Psa. 
78:2; Matt. 13:35.) No one for a moment supposes that our Lord 
advised the people to mutilate their bodies by cutting off their 
limbs, or gouging out their eyes. Nor does he mean us to 
understand that the injuries and disfigurements of the present 



life will continue beyond the grave, when we shall "enter into 
life. " The Jews whom he addressed must have understood him 
better than many to-day; because at that time the Jews had no 
conception of a place of everlasting torment, and knew the word 
gehenna to refer to the valley outside their city, which was not a 
place of torment, (nor a place where any living thing was cast,) 
but a place for the utter destruction of whatever might be cast 
into it; so that when they saw the Lord's expression regarding 
limbs and eyes to be figurative, they knew that the gehenna 
mentioned was not their valley of destruction, but a destruction 
which it prefigured or illustrated. 

The Lord meant simply this: The future life which God has 
provided for sin-cursed, defiled and condemned man, is of 
inestimable value. It will richly pay you to make any sacrifice to 
receive and enjoy that life. Should it even cost an eye, a hand or 
a foot, so that to all eternity you should be obliged to endure the 
loss of these, yet it would be cheap at even that great cost. That 
would be better far than to retain your members and lose all in 
gehenna. Doubtless, too, the hearers drew the lesson as 
applicable to all the affairs of life, and understood the Master to 
mean that it would richly repay them to deny themselves many 
comforts and pleasures and tastes, dear as a right hand, precious 
as an eye, and serviceable as a foot, rather than by gratification 
to forfeit the life to come and be utterly destroyed in gehenna- 
the second death. 

But now what about the worms and unquenchable fire? 

We answer, In the literal gehenna, which is the basis of our 
Lord's illustration, the bodies of animals, etc., frequently fell 
upon ledges of rocks and not into the fire kept burning below; 
thus exposed, these would breed worms and be destroyed, as 
completely and as surely as those which burned. No one was 
allowed to disturb this valley's contents, hence the worm and the 
fire between them completed the work of destruction-the fire 
was not quenched and the worms died not. This would not imply 
a never-ending fire, nor immortal worms-the thought is that the 
worms do not die off and leave the carcasses there, but continue 
and complete the work of destruction. So with the fire also-if 
not quenched, it will burn on until all is consumed, just as we 
might say if a house were on fire which could not be controlled 
or quenched, but burned until the building was destroyed -it 
would be an "unquenchable fire. " 

Our Lord wished to impress the thought of the completeness and 
finality of the second death. All who go into the second death 
will be thoroughly and completely and forever destroyed; no 
ransom will ever be given again; there will be no occasion for 
any, for none worthy of life will be cast therein-but only those 
who love unrighteousness after coming to the knowledge of the 
truth. 



Not only in the above instances is the second death pointedly 
illustrated by gehenna, but it is evident that the same Teacher 
used the same figure to represent the same thing, in the symbols 
of Revelation, though there it is not called gehenna, but a "lake 
of fire." Its use in Revelation shows that the time when the 
destruction, or second death, symbolized by the fire, will 
"consume the adversaries," will be during the Millennial age, 
and chiefly toward its close, when the sheep [the meek and good 
class,] will be separated from the goats [the froward and 
intractable class of mankind]. Then the goat class- with their 
"father, the devil," whose image of sin, pride and rebellion they 
retain and love, in spite of every favor and knowledge and 
opportunity granted them- will be cast into the "lake of fire"- 
the "second death," "everlasting destruction," the reality 
prefigured in gehenna. 

The same valley was once before used as the basis of a 
discourse, by the Prophet Isaiah (Isa. 66:24). Though he gives it 
no name, he describes it, and all should notice that he speaks, 
not as some with false ideas might expect, of billions in flames 
and torture, but of the carcasses of those who transgressed 
against the Lord, who are thus represented as utterly destroyed 
in the second death. 

The two verses preceding show the time, and it is in perfect 
harmony with the symbols of Revelation: it is in the new 
dispensation of the Millennium, in the "new heavens and new 
earth" condition of things. 

GEHENNA OCCURS BUT ONCE MORE 

-JAMES 3:6. 

"So [important] is the tongue among our members, that it 
defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course of nature 
when it is set on fire of gehenna. " 

Here, in strong symbolic language, the apostle points out the 
great and bad influence of an evil tongue— a tongue set on fire 
[figuratively] by gehenna [figurative]. For a tongue to be set on 
fire of gehenna, signifies that a tongue may be set going in evil 
by a perverse disposition, self-willed, selfish, hateful, malicious, 
the sort of dispositions which, in spite of knowledge and 
opportunity, are like those which, unless controlled and 
reformed, will be counted worthy to be destroyed— the class for 
whom "second death," the real "lake of fire," the real "gehenna," 
is intended. One in that attitude may by his tongue kindle a great 
fire, a destructive disturbance, which, wherever it has contact, 
will work evil in the entire course of nature. 



TARTAROO RENDERED HELL. 

The Greek word tartaroo occurs but once in the New 
Testament, and is translated hell. It is found in 2 Pet. 2:4, which 
reads thus:— 

"God spared not the angels who sinned, but cast [them] down to 
hell [tartaroo] and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be 
reserved unto judgement. " 

Having examined every other word rendered hell in the Bible, 
and all the texts in which they occur, we conclude the subject 
with this, which is the only instance in which the word tartaroo 
occurs in the Scriptures. In the above text, all the words shown 
in italic type are translated from the one Greek word tartaroo. 
Evidently the translators were at a loss how to translate the 
word, but concluded they knew all about where the evil angels 
must be, according to "orthodoxy," and so they made bold to put 
them into hell, though it took six words to twist the idea into the 
shape they had predetermined it must take. 

The word tartaroo, used by Peter, very closely resembles 
tartarus, a word used in Grecian mythology as the name for a 
dark abyss or prison. But the word tartaroo 

R1016:page7 

seems to refer more to an act, than to a place. The fall of the 
angels which sinned was from honor and dignity, into 
condemnation and dishonor. Hence we prefer to translate the 
sentence thus: "God spared not the angels who sinned but 
degraded them and delivered them into chains of darkness. "—2 
Pet. 2:4. 

This certainly agrees with the facts known to us through the 
Scriptures; for these fallen spirits frequented the earth in the 
days of our Lord and the apostles at least. Hence they were not 
down in some place, but down in the sense of being degraded 
from former honor and liberty, and restrained under darkness, as 
by a chain. Whenever these fallen spirits, in spiritualistic 
seances, manifest their powers through Mediums, pretending to 
be dead human beings whom they simulate, they must always do 
their work in the dark, because darkness is the chain by which 
they are bound UNTIL the great Millennial day of judgment. 
Whether this implies that in the immediate future they shall be 
able to materialize, etc., in daylight, is difficult to determine. If 
so, it would greatly increase Satan's power to blind and deceive 
for a short season-until the Sun of Righteousness has fully 
risen. 

Thus we close our investigation of the Bible's use of the word 
hell. Thank God, we find no such place of everlasting torture as 
the creeds and hymn45ooks, and many pulpits, erroneously 
teach. Yet we have found a hell, sheol, hades, to which all were 
condemned through Adam's sin, and from which all are 



redeemed by our Lord's death; and that hell is the tomb-the 
death condition. And we find another hell [gehenna-the second 
death— utter destruction] brought to our attention as the final 
penalty upon all, who after being redeemed and brought to the 
full knowledge of the truth, and to full ability to obey it, shall 
yet choose death by choosing a course of opposition to God and 
righteousness. And our hearts say Amen. 

True and righteous are thy ways, thou King of nations. Who 
shall not venerate thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou 
art entirely holy. And all nations shall come and worship before 
thee, because thy righteous dealings are made manifest. 



R1016:page7 



HOW SHALL WE BURY OUR DEAD? 

DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:-I hope you will find time to look 
over and answer this suggestion which mother and I have been 
talking over. My mother is old, will be 80 years of age in 
February, is feeble, and is liable to be taken from us any time. 
God seems to have spared her all these years to be called out of 
Babylon, and to see his glorious light shine. It was so plain to 
her, when the truth was presented to her; it was of a truth meat 
in due season. 

All of our kinsmen are strictly orthodox, and at my mother's 
funeral they will have some one of the shepherds of Babylon, to 
preach her funeral sermon, and I will not have it that way, if I 
can get you to comply with my mother's wish. I want to have 
this all fixed while my mother is here with me. I want you to 
write her funeral sermon, just as if she had written it herself. 

We would write it ourselves, but we are only babes in Christ. I 
know if you will do it, it will be all right. So when the preacher 
comes I will present this written sermon to him, and request him 
to read this— my mother's request, and to have no other services. 

I do not want to delay having it done, for mother wishes to see 
and read it, and to sign it with her own hand. Will you comply 
with this my wish and mother's? Although there are but few of 
the nominal church people who come to see us of late— for they 
think we are crazy or something worse— nevertheless they will 
come to mother's funeral, and I think by so doing I will let them 
know what my mother did believe and also give them some truth 
they never heard before. I leave it to you to select the text. 
Hoping you will not deny us this favor, I close with love from 
mother and self. 

R1017:page7 

In reply to this letter and other inquiries of a similar character 
we submit the following suggestions. 



Death, under whatever circumstances it makes its approach, is a 
grim monster from which we instinctively shrink. Yet to those 
instructed out of the word of God, it loses much of its terror. The 
nominal church, and the world under its influence, have one 
common hope and fear concerning death. They dread it, not only 
because it is the severing of cherished earthly ties, but because 
of their fear of eternal misery, which they have been taught to 
believe may follow it. But while they believe that eternal 
torment is the portion of the large majority of mankind, in 
almost every individual case their human sympathies and 
reasonings get the better of their theology and their fears, and a 
little ray of hope is kindled, based not upon the knowledge of 
our Heavenly Father's gracious provisions for all, but merely 
upon their own human sympathies. 

Yet such a hope is so uncertain that often great distress of mind 
is experienced. They have really no hope, as a sure, steadfast 
anchor to the soul in such an hour. 

But with those who know our Father's plans, how different is the 
feeling with which they look upon the faces of their dead! There 
is, of course, the pang of severed ties, which leaves the 
heartache and wrings our tears, even though we know, like 
Martha, that they shall rise again; and the sympathizing tears of 
Jesus on that occasion show that such grief is not to be 
condemned. But at such times we sorrow not as those who have 
no hope, nor even as those whose hope is vague and indefinite. 
We know that already we are in the early hours of the glorious 
day which is shortly to bring release to the groaning creation; 
that the Life-Giver is already present; and that preparations are 
now being made to bring the dead ones back under more 
favorable conditions. And we would not, if we could, have them 
brought back one day sooner than our Father sees best. 

We see that natural men who die are simply being hidden in the 
grave until the wrath upon the nations be overpast (Job 14:13), 
that they are waiting for the dawn of the great Lord's Day-the 
Millennium, and that the saints who now die in the Lord do not 
sleep for a moment, but are changed instantly, to the likeness of 
their Lord, and made ready for the great work of restitution just 
before them. Surely then WE should not sorrow as others who 
have no such assurance. We may rejoice even in the midst of 
tribulation, and in everything give thanks. 

How shall we bury our dead? is a question asked by some who 
have come out of the various sects, and who feel that the old 
ceremonies on such occasions are not consistent with God's 
truth. 

As to how the dead body shall be disposed of, is a matter of no 
consequence to the dead, but the proper disposal of the remains 
of our departed friends is a mark of our respect and affection. 
The prevailing customs among various people have much to do 



with individual ideas of propriety on such occasions; and these 
are largely influenced by the prevailing religious beliefs and the 
hopes which they inspire for the future. 

The modern Jews believe that the resurrection will take place in 
Canaan, and hence the desire of many of them is to die there, 
and often some of the sacred soil is strewn about the body of the 
deceased. The Romanist, believing in purgatory, and in the 
power of the Priest to ameliorate the condition of the dead, 
thought to be conscious in purgatory, thinks it necessary to have 
masses for the dead, to have the dead body sprinkled with holy 
water, and to bury in consecrated ground. And Protestants, 
believing as they do in the doctrine of eternal torment for all 
who are not Christians, look anxiously to Protestant clergymen 
to console them with the thought that there is some hope in the 
case of their departed friends, whether or not their faithfulness to 
God appeared in their lives. And even the world, under the 
influence of these teachings, would not consider their friends 
decently buried if a minister did not come to preach a funeral 
sermon, and to give the idea to those assembled, that the virtues 
of the deceased would sufficiently overbalance his sins, so as to 
secure for him an escape from eternal woe, especially if his 
name happened to be on a church roll. 

The church nominal has a strong hold upon the people, in this 
and other public sentiments, created by the claims of the class 
which styles itself The Clergy. Many say, if we leave the sects 
to which we now are joined and recognize only the one, true 
church, "whose names are written in heaven," who will bury our 
dead? who will administer the ordinances of baptism? who will 
administer the elements of the Lord's Supper? etc. 

To such we would say, that the clergy of the nominal church is a 
self-appointed class, claiming authority and power not 
scripturally vested in them more than in all the saints. The 
commission to preach the gospel is given to every consecrated 
child of God. -See Isaiah 61:1. The humblest are preachers 
divinely authorized now, as in the early church. No priest is 
needed to do for the brethren those simple offices which any one 
of them may perform for another. We have shown through the 
TOWER that their services are not needed either in the case of 
Baptism, or the celebrating of the Lord's Supper. Neither are 
they necessary for the burial of our dead. Nowhere in the 
writings of the apostles is there the least intimation that any of 
these services must or should be performed by a "clerical" class. 
On the contrary, "all ye are brethren" and may serve one 
another, except in marrying, which by civil law is taken out of 
your hands. Why, we ask, should any of those who recognize 
the errors of Babylon, call in her self-constituted "clergy" to 
serve them, when a brother or sister can be had to serve them 
better. Especially in the burying of your dead, how inconsistent 
and foolish it would be to call in those who are strangers to our 



grander hopes, to offer to us at such an hour the poor 
consolations of ignorance, or at least of doubt and uncertainty, 
or the vague fancies of their own imaginations? Rather be 
guided in such matters by reason, in view of the teaching of 
God's Word. 

Remembering that the dead are past our doing for them, let such 
opportunities as funeral occasions furnish be improved for the 
advantage of the living. Friends come together on such 
occasions to express their sympathy with the bereaved, and to 
show their respect for the dead, and they are generally in a more 
impressible frame of mind than usual. Here is a most favorable 
opportunity to impress the truth, an opportunity which should 
never be lost where we have the privilege of controlling or 
influencing the arrangements. 

We would suggest here a simple line of thought which any 
brother or sister might present on such an occasion. From 
whatever standpoint we speak, the object should be to briefly 
make clear, First-the reality of death— that it is not life in any 
sense, but the cessation of life; and that it is not a blessing, but a 
curse pronounced against the race, as the penalty for sin; 
Secondly-that the only hope of the race is in a resurrection, in 
being created again, by the same power that first called us into 
existence; Thirdly— that an awakening from death, and an 
individual opportunity of retaining life, is secured for every 
human being by the death of Christ; Fourthly-that the restored 
life may be eternal, on the original conditions of perfect 
obedience, when perfect obedience is made possible to all. 

And if the deceased is one of the consecrated, whom you have 
reason to believe has been "faithful unto death," it may be 
shown that such are now— since 1878— promised an immediate 
entrance into the reward of our high calling, since it is written, 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from 
HENCEFORTH." 

For example, let us take for the text of such a discourse, which 
must necessarily be brief, the story of Lazarus' death and 
resurrection. 

Read John 11:1-14 slowly, giving special emphasis to verses 11- 
14. Then comment somewhat as follows: Here we have the 
unmistakable fact of death, and our Lord's authority for calling it 
a sleep. It is actually death, but it was likened to a sleep in view 
of the resurrection. But what is actual death? Let Job tell us. He 
says, "Now shall I sleep in the dust, and thou shalt seek me in 
the morning [The Millennial morning when the night of death 
and weeping is past] and I shall not be;" that is, I shall not exist, 
having been destroyed. (Job 7:21.) Nevertheless, although he 
thus realized death to be destruction, he expresses his hope of a 
resurrection, saying, "All the days of my appointed time will I 



wait till my change come. Thou shalt call and I will answer thee. 
Thou wilt have a desire to the work of thine hands. "-14:14-15. 

If Job is not in existence, yet answers to the Lord's call, the call 
must signify a re-creation— a call into being again— a 
resurrection. No other meaning could reasonably attach to such 
language. The Psalmist adds his testimony to the same thought, 
saying, "Thou turnest man to destruction [to death] and sayest, 
Return, ye children of men. For a thousand years in thy sight are 
but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night. 
[The lapse of time between death and the awakening is nothing 
to the dead when it is past, since they are entirely unconscious of 
it.] Thou earnest them away as with a flood; they are as asleep. 
In the morning they are like grass which groweth up. In the 
evening it is cut down and withered." (Psa. 90:3-6.) So brief is 
his present existence. Thus Job and David agree: the one says, 
when dead, "I shall 

R1018:page7 

not be:" the other says death is "destruction:" and both, like 
Jesus, liken it to a sleep, because there is to be an awakening, a 
resurrection. 

God meant no pleasant, agreeable thing when he pronounced 
death as a curse, a penalty for sin. The Scriptures, throughout, 
represent it as an enemy (1 Cor. 15:26.) but, thank God, as an 
enemy from which there is at an appointed time to be a grand 
release, a resurrection, accomplished by him who redeemed us. 

The faith of some seems to stagger at this promise of God when 
they come to view death in its true character. If death 

R1018:page8 

means non-existence, destruction, as the Scriptures affirm, then 
how, say they, is a resurrection possible? But Paul asks, "Why 
should it be thought a thing incredible with you that God should 
raise the dead?" (Acts 26:8). And he shows clearly that he 
understood death to be destruction, saying, that if there were no 
resurrection those who had fallen asleep in Christ were perished, 
and the hope of the church was vain.-l Cor. 15:15-18. 

When God makes a promise there is no room for doubt. And 
those who have the faith of John (Matt. 3:9), who believed that 
God could of the stones raise up children unto Abraham, are 
also able to believe that he can resurrect, or create again, that 
which was once destroyed. 

A single thoughtful glance at the plan of redemption assures us 
beyond a doubt of a resurrection- "both of the just and the 
unjust," as our Lord declared. (Acts 24:15; John 5:28,29.) For 
we read that "As in Adam all die, even so in [or, by] Christ shall 
all be made alive," (1 Cor. 15:22,) and He "gave himself a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time. " 



But when will this due time come? Peter answers (Acts 3:21,) 
that it will be at the second advent of Christ- "whom the heaven 
must receive UNTIL the times of restitution of all things." The 
restitution, or restoring of all things, is the object of his coming. 
While in God's arrangement it will require a thousand years to 
restore the race to its original perfection, the awakening from 
death is necessarily a first part of this restitution work. 

Although the race was redeemed nearly nineteen centuries ago, 
and Christ has not yet taken his purchased possession, this does 
not argue against the promise; for it is to be fulfilled at the time 
appointed -when Christ takes his great power and begins his 
reign, and the present powers of earth have passed away. 

Job says, "O that thou wouldst hide me in the grave, that thou 
wouldst keep me secret until thy wrath be past, that thou 
wouldst appoint me a set time and remember me. " And again he 
says, "So man lieth down and riseth not till the heavens be no 
more: They shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep." 
(14:12.) The present order of things, or dominion of earth, is 
symbolically termed the heavens. The order of things that now 
obtains in the world must give place to the kingdom of Christ, 
the "new heavens." And under the glorious privileges and 
opportunities of the Millennial reign of Christ, the dead shall be 
awakened and brought forth to share its advantages, which, if 
properly improved, will lead to life eternal. The restored life will 
be eternal on the original condition of perfect obedience to God. 
And perfect obedience will be possible to all when fully 
restored. 



If we have reason to believe that the deceased was one of the 
"elect," "little flock," we might refer to his hopes and their 
realization somewhat as follows: 

But we are taught, also, that there are to be various orders in the 
resurrection— a first or chief resurrection, as well as a general 
resurrection. And it is written, "Blessed and holy is he that hath 
part in the first resurrection. " Such are those believers only, who 
are entirely consecrated to God, and faithful unto death. Such 
are to be joint-heirs with Christ, kings and priests unto God, and 
shall reign with Christ a thousand years, sharing with him in the 
great work of restoring all things. The resurrection of this class 
is first, not only in point of time, but also in point of importance. 
Such was the hope for which our (brother or sister) lived for the 
last-years and such the hope in which he died. 

It is no vain thing to serve the Lord with the whole heart. Such 
shall reap a glorious reward with which the light afflictions of 
the present time are not worthy of comparison. Lukewarm 
service is an abomination in the sight of Him who readeth the 
heart; while even the imperfect service of those whose hearts are 
fully set to do his will, is well pleasing unto God. And the Lord, 



who discerneth the thoughts and intents of the heart, will make 
no mistake, nor will he be slack concerning his promises. 
Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it. (1 Thes. 
5:24.) Let each lay well to heart the solemn lessons of God's 
Word and rest in implicit faith in its sure fulfillment. 



It would be appropriate also, if the circumstances should 
warrant it, to refer briefly to the general lesson taught by such an 
occasion to all. How that this life is the time in which our love 
for God, for his truth, and for our fellow men, can take an active 
form and display itself in deeds of self-sacrifice, whose sweet 
incense will endure when life is gone and precede us into the life 
to come. Appropriate words of sympathy for the bereaved ones, 
reminding them of God's care and love and protection, will 
suggest themselves according to the varying circumstances. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R1018:page8 

DYING TESTIMONIES. 

Some have inquired if we know of any of the saints now dying 
in hope of an immediate awakening in our Lord's likeness. 

In reply we would say yes, though it has not been our habit to 
make any special point of such cases, for the reason that too 
much stress is generally laid upon a dying testimony. It should 
be remembered that though the instant of death is now the 
instant of change to those accounted worthy of the first 
resurrection, the change is not to be realized until that instant, 
and consequently, no testimony of the fact could be given. The 
dying testimony of the saints, therefore, can be nothing beyond 
their life testimony-a testimony of their full assurance of faith 
in the sure promises of God, based upon his approval or 
disapproval of their walk since the time of their consecration. 

In proportion as the covenant of consecration has been 
scrupulously kept, may the final assurance of acceptance be 
strong. And as in Paul's case, it may amount to positive 
assurance, because of positive and continuous faithfulness. He 
declared "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, 
and henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness 
which the Lord the righteous judge will give me at that day; and 
not to me only but unto all them also who love his appearing. " 
But had Paul given no such expression of his latest confidence 
that he had run successfully, his faithful course was a sufficient 
proof of it. This testimony of Paul however was not a dying 
testimony, but the expression of his confidence in view of the 
fact that he was about to be offered. 



We have no account in Scripture of any visions of any of the 
saints when dying. What is generally regarded as a dying vision 
of Stephen (Acts 7:55,56,) was not a dying vision; for it was 
because of his statement, that he saw the heavens opened etc., 
that they ran upon him with one accord and cast him out of the 
city, and stoned him to death. And there is nothing in this 
expression of Stephen, which leads us to believe that he saw this 
vision otherwise than by the eye of faith- "being full of faith and 
the holy Spirit." 

Consider the few accounts of the death of saints mentioned in 
the Scriptures- Jesus, Paul, Stephen, also the Prophets. None 
gave any dying message concerning that which is beyond. No 
favor of this kind is granted in dying. The dying words of our 
Lord— My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?— if uttered 
by any of the saints now, would awaken doubts and fears for 
their future well-being, because of the general belief in ecstatic 
visions granted to the faithful in dying. But the fact is, all the 
saints who share in the sufferings of the sin-bearer must do so 
unto the very end, and like him must be left to die as parts of the 
sin-sacrifice. It is only when this sacrifice is accomplished, 
when the dissolution is complete, that the blessedness of the 
dead can be realized. In this blessed time of his presence it shall 
be instantly realized by this faithful class- "in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye. " 

How then shall we regard the dying words of some of our 
friends who thought they were going to heaven at once, and that, 
before this specially favored time ("from henceforth")? We must 
regard their mistaken dying expressions in precisely the same 
way that we regard their erroneous views previous to their dying 
hours, remembering that those errors influenced them to the end. 
The fact that the powers of mind and body are failing and almost 
exhausted, is certainly no reasonable guarantee that in that hour 
they possess any increased knowledge, or that they are granted 
any supernatural insight into the future. Such things are nowhere 
promised in the Scriptures, and are nowhere recorded in the 
Scriptures of the dying saints, nor even of the Lord. God does 
not communicate with the living through the saints either after 
their death, or in their dying. His method of communicating his 
truth to them is through his Word; and those who would follow 
his leading must walk by faith in that Word, down to the very 
end of the dark valley of death. 

Methodists place great stress upon the dying words of one of 
their bishops- "I am sweeping through the gates of the New 
Jerusalem, washed in the blood of the Lamb. " This, we can only 
regard as the outgrowth of his erroneous theology. The New 
Jerusalem was not yet in existence, but in due time he will be 
awakened when it will be gloriously established. Other 
Christians of the various denominations have similar ideas, and 
often base their hopes on similar errors, while passing by the 



sure and only foundation of hope given in the Scriptures. The 
truth gives a confidence in God which cannot be shaken, and 
which is an anchor to the soul both sure and steadfast, even amid 
the surges of Jordan. MRS. C. T. R. 



R1020 : page 8 

A SINGULAR COINCIDENCE. 

In the course of conversation with the Rev. W. C. Van Meter, 
who is now on a visit to this country, in a brief interval of his 
mission work in Italy, he informed us that he had been enabled 
to print a large number of copies of the Gospel according to 
John in Italian for use in the Sunday Schools of Rome. The 
children there are following the International Course, the 
subjects of which just now are in that gospel. A singular 
coincidence, which shows the changes which God has worked, 
is that the gospel was actually printed in the room formerly used 
as the torture-chamber of the Inquisition. The printer who had 
undertaken the work was obliged to leave his former business 
premises, and looking around for a new location, selected rooms 
in an ancient edifice that appeared suitable. There he set up his 
presses and compositors' cases. A strange-looking iron ring in 
the ceiling arrested his attention, and on making inquiries about 
it he learned that he was actually in the old Inquisition, and that 
the room he occupied had served as a torture-chamber. There 
within the walls that have resounded with the cries of men and 
women suffering for conscience' sake, he set up and printed the 
gospel of John. -Dawn of Morning. 



R962 : page 8 



THE LARGER HOPE." 



Scene at the rooms of the American Board of Foreign Missions. 
Application by a missionary to go abroad and preach the gospel 
of the Son of God. Examination follows: 

Dr. Alden-"What is your name?" 

Paul- "My name is Paul." 

Dr. Alden-"How old are you?" 

Paul-" About 1887 years old." 

Dr. Alden— "Your age is in your favor, but what do you believe 
about the future state of the heathen?" 

Paul-"As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made 
alive." 



Dr. Alden— "I am sorry to say, sir, that, though you may be a 
good man and a good preacher, you are afflicted with too much 
hope to be a suitable missionary for the American Board. "-- 
Christian Register. 



R1020 : page 8 

THE zeal and enthusiasm of sinners in the service of the devil 
should put to shame the indifference and sloth of Christians in 
the service of God. 



R1020 : page 1 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., APRIL, 1888. 

NO. 8. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :-FIFTY CENTS A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., paper 
bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," four 
shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "-ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

TELL ANY, who do not get the TOWER because too poor, that 
it is their own fault. They should read the TERMS above. God 
has thus provided food, for all his children. 



DEAR FRIENDS :-The general work is great, and as at present 
situated, it is impossible to answer your welcome letters. Please 
accept our good wishes and the TOWERS and DAWN as your 
answers, just as when you pray to God you accept the answers 
already given you in the Bible. 



MANY inquiries come for our reason for regarding 1878 as the 
turning point from which it is henceforth, blessed for the dead 
who die in the Lord. (Rev. 14:13.) This will be made clear in 
DAWN VOL. II. How soon it will be ready we cannot yet say 
definitely. Please wait as patiently as possible. 



R1021 : page 1 



TILL HE COME. 



Because Paul, referring to the Lord's Supper, says that we do 
thus "show forth the Lord's death till he come," some regard that 
as a limitation. Consider, however, that in the Jewish age the 
typical lamb was slain and eaten every year, until our Lord, the 
true or antitypical lamb, came. But when John the Baptist 
introduced our Lord as present, and said "Behold the Lamb of 
God," the killing and eating of the typical lamb did not at once 
cease to be proper; for our Lord himself observed it up to the 
same night in which he was betrayed. The commemoration of 
the typical lamb only ceased to be proper, when the antitypical 
lamb was slain on Calvary. 

So now, our Lord, the true Lamb of God, gave us the bread and 
wine as emblems of his flesh and blood, given for us— for our 
passing over or sparing. And we are to commemorate his death 
with these emblems until he comes, and until the last member of 
his body shall have been passed over— into the fullness of 
salvation, with him and like him. Then the symbol shall cease, 



the antitype having fully come in our being thus passed over. 
Until this grand consummation of our hopes, it is proper for us 
to show it forth by commemorating his broken body and shed 
blood by which it shall be secured. 



R1020 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

A very precious season of communion of saints was the four 
days meeting held by the church at Allegheny, commencing 
Sunday, March 25th, and closing Wednesday night, March 29th. 
Though the weather was unfavorable the attendance was good, 
and it might be said that it was four days of continuous meeting, 
broken only by intermissions for rest and food. 

The number from abroad was about as usual, and though some 
of the faces were new we were already acquainted by letter. The 
greater number of these were from Ohio, West Virginia, 
Maryland, Virginia, New York, and of course Pennsylvania; 
while some came from far off Minnesota and Wisconsin. 

Our first meeting at half past ten o'clock Sunday morning was of 
a social character, and we need not tell you that the testimonies 
as to the Lord's dealings, and the preciousness of the truth, and 
its spread in different localities were warm, heart-cheering, 
stimulating and encouraging in the extreme. Our hearts burned 
within us, as for two and a half hours we communed together, 
and then adjourned almost from necessity, while as many more 
were yet unheard from, though the testimonies still continued in 
a less formal way during the hour for our noon lunch as well as 
during the intermissions of the days following. 

It was a ministerial conference in the truest sense; yet not 
composed of ministers of sectarianism, nor such as would be 
generally called ministers by men to-day, but ministers 
(servants) of Christ, in the Scriptural use of that word, all of 
them or with few exceptions. The report of each consisted 
mainly of a brief statement of his service of the Lord and his 
truth, and the blessing and strength he himself had enjoyed 
while endeavoring to dispense the words of life to others. One 
brother with tears in his eyes told how the truth filled his heart 
and overflowed in desire and effort to bless his neighbors, how 
he had been misunderstood by some, and misrepresented by 
others; of how he had gotten a brother of our Allegheny church 
to come up and preach eight public discourses in eight days, and 
how some had been blessed by this means and his distribution of 
Arp tracts and loaning of Dawns. Brother Adamson told of his 
field which at present is in central Ohio. He is doing a great 
work, putting Dawn into the hands of thousands, besides holding 
meetings with the interested and writing articles for secular 



journals to thus draw the attention of the masses to the truth and 
its beauty as compared with the errors and distortions so far 
from the "glad tidings," yet commonly dispensed under the 
name of "gospel." Among the many other testimonies, all of 
which were cheering, was that of Brother Wright, of Wisconsin, 
and Brother Page, of Minnesota. These two were insurance 
agents until a short time ago; now they are preachers of the glad 
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. Not that they 
have left the insurance business, but that now it is secondary to 
the preaching of the cross of Christ and the restitution, and 
kingdom which now is the first, the chief business of life: The 
insurance business stands related to their present work as tent- 
making did to Paul's ministry (Acts 18:3)— as a necessary means 
to the 

R1021 : page 1 

one grand work and end in view. And thus it is with all the 
consecrated when they come to see the privileges of the present 
high calling. With all such to whom as ambassadors of God this 
ministry of reconciliation has been committed, (2 Cor. 5:20) the 
service in the "Royal Priesthood" is superior to all else. 

Brother Wright who will be remembered as the defender of 
Episcopalian church views in the TOWER of last October 
related how a copy of Dawn loaned to him, had under God's 
blessing been instrumental in opening his eyes to see wonderful 
things in the Bible, and a beauty and fullness in God's character 
and plan, which lifted him out of the rut of churchly formalism, 
into heart fellowship and communion with the Heavenly Father 
and with our Lord who redeemed us. Long ago consecrated and 
earnestly desirous of doing the will of God, he had been misled 
by the low standard prevailing in the nominal churches. The 
traditions and customs of the churches had fettered and dwarfed 
him, but when the truth entered it proved his heart to have been 
warm, consecrated, "good ground" by the vigorous growth so 
soon attained. Though not one year has passed since DAWN 
was first loaned him, he has come to see the truth clearly for 
himself,— so clearly and strongly as to leave the Episcopal 
church and trust only in his membership with us and all the 
consecrated in THE CHURCH "whose names are written in 
heaven," and to outwardly symbolize, by immersion in water, 
his consecration long ago made, to be faithful even unto death in 
the service of God. 

In that short time, too, Bro. W. has sent to friends and 
acquaintances whom he trusted might have "an ear to hear" 
these glad tidings, nearly one hundred copies of DAWN, many 
of them accompanied by letters urging careful and prayerful 
readings. Some good fruit has already resulted among his 
insurance acquaintance: Brother Page who came over nine 
hundred miles to feast and commune being one of these. 



Bro. Page told us of joy, peace and renewed love toward our 
God within the last six months; how he had been an earnest 
consecrated child of God, but that as he began to use his God- 
given reason upon the plan presented by the churches, as the 
plan of God— to save a few and torment the great majority of his 
creatures to all eternity, he had become skeptical and worldly, 
though he still kept seeking after truth. He told us of how 
Spiritism, Swedenborgism, and other counterfeits, found him 
hungry and led him to study them, and that DAWN reached him 
just in time, as a helping hand stretched out by our great Head 
for his aid. Yet, when DAWN came to him through the mail 
(sent by our Lord through Bro. Wright), he glanced at it, and 
supposing it to be an "Adventist" publication, was about to put it 
into the waste basket, when another glance led him to take it 
home and read it. Bro. P.'s every word and tone witnessed to the 
fact that he had found the Lord again— found him more beautiful 
and lovable than he had ever before realized. Christ is reinstalled 
the Master of his heart, his tongue, his moments and his all. He, 
too, has been planted in the likeness of Christ's death-immersed 
in water in symbolization of his death with him. You will know 
of Brother Page's zeal for the Master and his honor, when we 
tell you that within the past six weeks we have sent him nearly 
one hundred copies of DAWN for loaning and mailing to his 
friends. We give these last two cases somewhat in detail, 
knowing how greatly you will appreciate their promptness and 
earnestness. Our prayers are with them and with all who are 
serving the truth and using whatever talents they possess. 

The afternoon discourse was upon Baptism, the substance of 
which may be presented in next month's TOWER: It was 
followed by the immersion of thirteen in water, in symbolization 
of their burial into Christ. -Rom. 6:3-5. 

The evening service was a precious season, as with simplicity 
we partook of the emblems of our Lord's broken body and shed 
blood, after considering their import as presented in the March 
TOWER. While rejoicing together and realizing that it was good 
to be there, the loved and scattered members of the one body of 
Christ were not forgotten, but were borne upon our hearts and 
lips before the throne of grace. 

The subsequent meetings were every one precious, and were 
devoted to the examination of various doctrines and topics as 
requested by those present. We trust that the sweet memories of 
those hours of communion, and those precious lessons and 
unfoldings of the word of truth learned at the Master's feet may 
comfort and cheer not only those present, but many others 
through them. 

A letter from Brother Tackabury came, just as the meeting was 
closing, telling us that he is sinking rapidly. The company 
unanimously desired that their love and sympathy be 
communicated to him. 



Letters since received from various quarters tell of a very 
general commemoration and of precious seasons. 

page 2 

A sister who has been loaning and selling DAWNS, hands us 
the following letter received by her lately:— 



Washington Co., Ohio. 

DEAR FRIEND:-You will remember me as one to whom, 
some months ago, you loaned Millennial Dawn Vol. I. After 
reading it once, I wrote to you, stating some difficulty in 
understanding some part, and that I wished to read it again. A 
friend also wanted to read it, so we concluded to buy it. I have 
read the book through a second time, and some parts of it many 
times over. I cannot tell you how I felt when reading "The Plan 
of the Ages" the first time. It was so new and startling, so 
different from what I had always believed the Bible taught, and 
yet so beautiful, it filled me with wonder and awe. And the more 
I read and studied the more beautiful it appeared. 

I have received several copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
and think they must contain the "meat in due season," they are 
so satisfying. It makes all other reading seem stale. I shall wait 
with impatience for Vol. H 

I would like to spend all my time selling "Millennial Dawn," if I 
had strength to do so, but I am not able. I have, however, made 
some effort, and have sold some. Hope I will be able to do more 
in future. Yours in spirit, MISS M. P. 

R1021 : page 2 



Washington, D.C. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-While out with Dawns I met 
and sold a copy to a young man, aged about eighteen years, 
whose father was very angry, and made some threats, that if I 
sold his boy a book I would be sorry for it, but as the book was 
delivered and paid for, I simply offered to refund the money if 
not satisfactory. The young man refused, saying he wanted the 
book. I left his store, thinking I would not care to ever enter it 
again, but after I had related to my wife what had transpired, we 
concluded the better plan would be to continue dealing with 
them as usual, unconcerned as though nothing had happened. 
Two weeks later the father apologized, saying that my actions 
surprised him, as he never expected me to come into his store 
again. But because I came back and spoke to him as though 
nothing unpleasant had ever occurred, he concluded to read the 
book, and did so, and was surprised to find it the grandest book 
he ever saw. He had decided to commit it to the flames, and had 
I followed my first inclination, he doubtless would have done 



so. He has since read the book and recommended it to others, 
and sold one for me, and last night ordered a cloth bound book, 
saying he would give the one he had to some poor person who 
was unable to purchase a copy. So please send me a copy of 
Dawn, cloth bound, at your earliest convenience. 

Yours in hope, C. A. H. 

page 2 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Please use this gold $5.00 for 
the Lord's poor in sending the TOWER to those too old and poor 
to pay for it, or in any way you see best. It has been treasured; 
but now I make it a small New Year's offering to the dear Lord, 
who has given me so much light and knowledge. Yours for the 
truth. 

A FRIEND. 



Bellmont, 111. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER:-We have reason to rejoice that our 
labor in the Lord has not been in vain. About two weeks ago a 
brother from Indiana, formerly of the Christian Church, stopped 
at my house to sell medicine, and on seeing the chart on the wall 
at my reading table, he said to wife, do you read what belongs to 
that chart? She answered, Yes, and understand it. He said he 
also was a reader of the TOWER. The tears of joy fell thick and 
fast. He enquired for me, and when we met I cannot describe my 
joy; he was the first one of this faith that we had met, and we 
had a feast of love for about one week. Send on the TOWER, 
also the balance of this five dollars in Millennial Dawn with 
some Arp Slips. 

The people are beginning to ask for this Bible teaching. Our 
hearts desire is to meet with you next March, to celebrate the 
Lord's Supper. If we cannot we will celebrate the Passover at 
home. 

Yours, 

W. M. Y. 



R1021 : page 2 



CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCE. 

"What is your experience, brother? Tell us what the Lord has 
done for you." These are expressions with which the majority of 
professing Christians are familiar; and the responses to such a 
call from the leader of a meeting are generally a narration of the 
feelings or sensations experienced; some very thrilling, and 
others exceedingly common place: in short- Christian 



Experience from a prayer-meeting stand-point has become 
largely a matter of sensation. A man or woman may have known 
the Holy Scriptures from a child and taken them as a guide, may 
have followed the Savior and lived soberly, righteously and 
godly in this world, and yet, if he or she cannot relate an 
"Experience" after the approved order, they are almost 
unchristianized by some. 

Do not misunderstand me. I would not belittle anything by 
which a believer has been brought into communion with his 
God, or any sensation that may be the legitimate outgrowth of 
such communion. 

I do believe, however, that this religion of sensation has been 
fostered and encouraged until it has reached an abnormal 
growth. Turning to the Word for light, we find that the term, in 
the sense in which 

R1022 : page 2 

it is now used, is unknown. The method in conversion as well as 
in practice has been completely revolutionized since the days of 
the Apostles. 

What is Experience? According to Webster it is "wisdom gained 
from practice;" and this definition is very appropriate for 
Christian as well as worldly Experience. In Rom. 5:3,4 we read, 
"We glory in tribulations also; knowing that tribulation worketh 
patience; and patience experience; and experience, hope. " 
Christian Experience is not merely sitting down quietly and 
letting the Spirit of God work in our hearts-it is eminently 
practical, and it is impossible to divorce experimental from 
practical Christianity. He who would relate an Experience of 
what the Lord has done for him must at the same time narrate 
what he has done for the Lord. It may do while we are nestlings 
to open our mouths with the incessant cry, Give! Give! but a 
time comes when we must put away childish things, and meet 
the stern realities of the new life. It is not sufficient to pray 
"Lord, what will thou have me to do?" unless, when the service 
is shown us we immediately perform the duty, and thus become 
doers of the word. 

Christian Experience is not the exaltation of feeling, or ecstacy 
that finds expression only when inspired by the ardent songs, 
prayers and exhortations of Christian fellowship; and he who is 
dependent upon such "means of grace" for his vitality, is but an 
infant in experience. 

Christian Experience is "putting off the old man with his deeds, 
and putting on the new man which is renewed in knowledge 
after the image of him that created him. " 

Christian Experience is growth- "To grow in grace and in the 
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ;" to be rooted 



and grounded in Love, and grow up in all things like unto Him 
who is our Head. 

Christian Experience is to build up a character, "adding to faith 
virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; 
and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to 
godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity." 

Christian Experience is to be laborers in the Lord's vineyard, 
workers together with God; and it is to be soldiers of the Cross 
armed cap-a-pie with the whole armor of God, following the 
Captain of our salvation. 

Christian Experience is visiting the widow and fatherless in their 
affliction, and keeping ourselves unspotted from the world. As 
an example of true Christian experience the reader is referred to 
the experience of Paul as recorded in 2 Cor. 1 1 and 12. 

It is in such schools as these that the Christians gain Experience; 
and this is the true Experience that worketh hope that maketh 
not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our 
hearts. -Word of Truth. 



R1022 : page 2 

ROMANISM AND THE SCHOOLS. 

The Christian Herald says:- 

"An attack on the Public School System is reported from the 
Northwest. The Roman Catholics are endeavoring to so curtail 
the efficiency and development of the public schools as to fill 
sectarian schools with the children for whom the public schools 
have no provision. The Evening Post mentions several 
movements of this character. At Barton, Wis., the Roman 
Catholics attended the annual meeting in force, and passed a 
resolution that no public school should be maintained for a year. 
At Melrose, Minn., the priests succeeded in getting the public 
school year shortened, thus giving the parents the option of 
letting the children remain idle or sending them to the Romanist 
schools. And in Stearns county, Minn., the Romanist catechism 
is openly taught in the schools in defiance of the law, while 
religious instruction is given by the priests either at the opening 
or closing of the schools." 

An English writer of some note, H. G. Guinness, writes thus:- 

"Fifty years ago there were not 500 Roman priests in Great 
Britain; now there are 2,600. Fifty years ago there were not 500 
chapels, now there are 1,575. Fifty years ago there were no 
monasteries at all in Great Britain; now there are 225. There 
were even then sixteen convents, but now there are over 400 of 
these barred and bolted and impenetrable prisons, in which 
15,000 English women are kept prisoners at the mercy of a 



celibate clergy, who have power unless their bequests are 
obeyed, to inflict on these hapless and helpless victims torture 
under the name of penance. Fifty years ago there were but two 
colleges in Great Britain for the training of Roman Catholic 
priests- i.e. of men bound by oath to act in England as the 
agents of a foreign power, the one great object of which is 
avowed to be the dismemberment of our empire and the ruin of 
our influence in the world; now there are twenty-nine such 
schools. And, strangest of all, England, which once abolished 
monasteries, and appropriated to national use the ill-gotten gains 
of Rome, is now actually endowing Romanism in her empire to 
the extent of over five million dollars per annum. " (The exact 
amount is L. 1,052,657.) 

The chief result of Home Rule is to be the extirpation of 
Protestantism in Ireland. Catholic Progress says: "The woes of 
Ireland are due to one single cause— the existence of 
Protestantism in Ireland. The remedy can only be found in the 
removal of that which causes the evil. Would that every 
Protestant meeting-house were swept from the land! Then would 
Ireland recover himself, and outrages be unknown. " 

That this attempt would be made is not to be questioned. 
Cardinal Manning insists that it is a sin, and even "insanity," to 
hold that men have an inalienable right to liberty of conscience 
and of worship, or to deny that Rome has the right to repress by 
force all religious observances save her own, or teach that 
Protestants in a Catholic country should be allowed the exercise 
of their religion. "Catholicism," says a Roman magazine, "is the 
most intolerant of creeds; it is intolerance itself. The impiety of 
religious liberty is only equaled by its absurdity. " 

A most important point to be borne in mind in consideration of 
this question is, that Romanism is not a religion merely, but a 
political system. We are of course bound to allow to Roman 
Catholics the liberty of conscience which we claim for 
ourselves; but we are not bound by any law, human or divine, to 
allow them the right of conspiring for the overthrow of our 
liberties, government, and empire. Adam Smith well says: "The 
constitution of the Church of Rome may be considered the most 
formidable combination that was ever formed against the 
authority and security of civil government, as well as against the 
liberty, reason, and happiness of mankind. " 



R1022 : page 2 



JEWISH AWAKENING IN SIBERIA. 

The awakening among God's ancient people, like the stirring of 
the dry bones in Ezekiel's valley of vision, cannot fail to 
command the attention of thoughtful Christians. It has been 



rather customary among some religious teachers, wherever they 
could find a curse in the Bible, to hand it over to the Jews, 
while, when they came across a blessing there, they would 
coolly appropriate it to the Gentiles. But the Lord usually has his 
own way, and fulfills his own word, and as his threatenings have 
been fulfilled, so no good thing which he has really promised 
will fail to be accomplished in due time. Hence, while we guard 
against one-sidedness and prejudice in all directions, we may 
watch with interest and hail with joy every token of blessing 
upon the long scattered and afflicted sons of Jacob, "of whom, 
as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all blessed for 
evermore. " 

The Presbyterian Witness says: "News comes from ice-bound 
Siberia of a gospel movement essentially the same as that of 
Rabinowitz. The leader is Jacob Scheinmann, a Polish Jew, who 
twenty years ago, through independent thought, came to the 
conclusion that the Messiah, the Son of David, was the true 
Savior. The strict Talmudic Jews got him transported to Siberia, 
where for fifteen years he labored, almost unheeded, to awaken 
faith in his fellow-exiles. Among the uncalled-for mail matter 
which he found at Tomsk, where he was engaged in business, 
was a pamphlet by Rabinowitz, with whom he at once 
communicated. He has been busy disseminating his views 
through pamphlets called 'The Voice of One Crying in the 
Wilderness.' Delitzsch's Hebrew translation of the New 
Testament is being eagerly read and studied by the Siberian 
Jews. It is said that fully 36,000 copies have been thus used."- 
Armory. 



R1022 : page 2 

"THE man whose honor cannot be trusted in a business 
transaction is an infidel, though he superintends a dozen 
evangelical Sunday-schools, presides at the noonday prayer- 
meetings, and is accounted the most polished pillar of the 
church. " 



R1027 : page 2 



A THOUGHT. 

To-day I seem to understand 
That pain and struggle, grief and care, 
Are chisels in an unseen Hand 
That round us into statues fair. 



-A. P. Miller. 



R1023 : page 3 



UNFINISHED MUSIC. 

I sat alone at the organ, 
At the close of a troubled day, 
When the sunset's crimson embers 
On the western altar lay. 

I was weary with vain endeavor, 
My heart was ill at ease, 
And I sought to soothe my sadness 
With the voice of the sweet toned keys. 

My hands were weak and trembling, 
My fingers all unskilled, 
To render the grand old anthem 
With which my soul was filled. 

Through the long day's cares and worries, 
I had dreamed of that glorious strain, 
And I longed to hear the organ 
Repeat it to me again. 

It fell from my untaught fingers 
Discordant and incomplete. 
I knew not how to express it, 
Or to make the discord sweet; 

So I toiled with patient labor 
Till the last bright gleams were gone, 
And the evening's purple shadows 
Were gathering one by one. 

Then a Master stood beside me, 
And touched the noisy keys, 
And lo ! the discord vanished 
And melted in perfect peace. 

I heard the great organ pealing 
My tune that I could not play, 
The strains of the glorious anthem 
That had filled my soul all day. 

Down through the dim cathedral 
The tide of music swept, 
And through the shadowy arches 
The lingering echoes crept; 

And I stood in the purple twilight 
And heard my tune again, 
Not my feeble, untaught rendering, 
But the Master's perfect strain. 

So I think, perchance, the Master, 
At the close of life's weary day, 
Will take from our trembling fingers 
The tune that we cannot play; 



He will hear through the jarring discord 
The strain, although half expressed; 
He will blend it in perfect music, 
And add to it all the rest. 



-M. E. Kinney. 



R1023 : page 3 



SHALL ACCOMPLISH 
THAT WHICH I PLEASE. 

"For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways 
my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the 
earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts 
than your thoughts. For as the rain cometh down, and the snow 
from heaven, and returneth not thither but watereth the earth, 
and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the 
sower and bread to the eater: so shall my word be that goeth 
forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it 
shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the 
thing whereto I sent it. For ye shall go out with joy and be led 
forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth 
before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap 
their hands. Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and 
instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be 
to the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign, that shall not be 
cut off. "-Isa. 55:9-13. 

It will be observed by reference to the preceding verses of this 
chapter that the world, and not the saints, are here addressed. 
Their ways and thoughts are not as God's ways and thoughts. 
But it is the privilege of the saints, the meek and fully 
consecrated children of God, who have laid aside their own 
ways and their own thoughts, to both know and walk in God's 
ways, and by thus knowing and coming into sympathy and 
harmony with him, and viewing all things from his standpoint, 
to thus think his thoughts. Thus it is written (Psa. 25:9) "The 
meek will he guide in judgment; and the meek will he teach his 
way. " 

Some accept this text as unquestionable proof of the Calvinistic, 
or rather fatalistic doctrine of unconditional election, claiming it 
to be a part of God's plan that the eternal destiny of each 
individual was unalterably fixed, long before any of them were 
brought into existence. Those who hold this opinion differ to 
some extent as to what that destiny may be; but this is no part of 
the question under consideration. 

Those who so confidently quote the above words— My word 
shall not return unto me void, but shall accomplish that which I 
please, etc., should very carefully study God's purpose and see 



what it is that God designs or pleases to accomplish by sending 
forth his word. Though the assertion is true of God's purpose or 
plan as a whole, the part of his purpose to which particular 
reference is made in this connection, is clearly shown by the 
following verses to be the great restitution— "For ye shall go out 
with joy and be led forth with peace, etc." No special reference 
is here made to his purpose for the church, since the world, and 
not the church, is here addressed through its type, the nation of 
Israel. As surely as the Lord hath spoken it, his word shall not 
return unto him void, but shall accomplish his purpose in 
sending it. God nowhere says that he sends his word to 
individuals with a determined purpose to accomplish their 
conversion to him; and that because he sent it for that purpose, 
the conversion of those individuals is sure to follow sooner or 
later. Nor does he say that he sent it to some other individuals 
with a determined purpose to accomplish their eternal ruin. Read 
the parable of the sower: The seed was sown abundantly, and for 
a particular purpose; but that which fell by the wayside and was 
quickly devoured by the fowls, did no injury to the wayside: it 
left it just as it found it. That which fell on stony ground, where 
because it had not much depth of earth it withered away, did no 
injury to the stony ground. And that which fell among thorns 
and was choked by them, did no injury. Neither did the seed 
sown do any good in such places. It simply left them as it found 
them. But the sower should spend no special effort to sow the 
seed in such hopeless places. As the parable indicates, he should 
be sowing it in prepared ground so far as he is able to judge. 
Otherwise, his first efforts should be to help to prepare the 
ground preparatory to the sowing of seed, and this should be 
done in the seasons most favorable— while most impressible. 

But though the seed did no harm where it brought forth no fruit, 
the good and prepared ground which received it was richly 
blessed with an abundant and glorious harvest; and in this, the 
purpose and only expectation of the husbandman was fully 
accomplished. He did not expect a harvest from the rocks, 
among the thorns, or on the wayside. Nor was the seed of truth 
so scarce that he needed to order the sower to sow with such 
scrupulous care that not a grain of it should fall in such places— 
"There is that scattereth and yet increaseth, and there is that 
withholdeth more than is meet, and it tendeth to poverty. The 
liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that watereth shall be 
watered also himself." (Prov. 11:24,25.) So then neither the seed 
nor the sower has anything to lose by the scattering broadcast: 
nor is the unfilled ground injured. And this applies to the sower 
of truth, as well as in the figure to the sower of grain. We know 
that the truth will bring forth good fruit only in good hearts, yet 
we are to preach the good tidings to all who are willing to hear. 

"Do not cast your pearls before swine," one quotes. No, of 
course not: Do not give the precious pearls of deep spiritual 
truth which none can receive save the consecrated, for whom it 



was designed, to those who love to wallow in the mire of sin, 
and root after that which will satisfy the cravings of their fallen 
nature. To do so is only useless, and they will turn and rend you. 

God's word shall not return unto him void. It shall accomplish 
that whereto it was sent in this age, viz., the gathering out from 
among the mass of mankind a peculiar people— the meek of the 
earth, a little flock begotten by the word of truth, that they 
should be a kind of first fruits of God's creatures. (Jas. 1:18.) By 
the sending out of his truth during the prevailing darkness and 
opposition with which it meets on every hand, God seeks out, 
develops, tests and separates this peculiar class, which is to be a 
peculiar treasure unto him above any fruit which shall be 
gathered in any other harvests. They are his jewels, the chaste 
virgin of Christ, and soon shall become his glorious bride. And 
this purpose shall be fully accomplished within the appointed 

R1024 : page 3 

time, in the end of the Gospel age; for it was the work mapped 
out for this age only. 

But this age is not the only sowing and reaping time: another 
plowing with the plow of trouble, and harrowing with the 
harrow of affliction and pain, has during our time of 
development been making the world ready for a grand sowing 
and growing during the Millennial Age, with a great and good 
harvest of ripe and fully developed human fruitage in the close 
of that age. Just as surely as the mouth of the Lord hath spoken 
that his word shall not return unto him void, but shall 
accomplish that whereto it was sent, so surely shall that harvest 
yield abundant fruit. Has He not said as forcibly and as clearly 
that "The knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, as the 
waters cover the sea," that "All the families of the earth shall be 
blessed" through the Christ, and that "all nations shall come and 
worship before him;" as that during the Gospel age his purpose 
has been to "take out" of the world a peculiar people— a little 
flock? Can one part of his word fail more than another? Surely 
His word shall not return void, but shall accomplish all his 
glorious purposes. 

In the great and unparalleled time of trouble by which the 
Millennial age is introduced, the whole field, "the world" (Matt. 
13:38), will receive its final and most effective harrowing, after 
which will follow the sunshine— for the Sun of righteousness 
shall rise with healing in his wings-and the refreshing showers 
of divine grace upon penitent and contrite hearts. Thus prepared, 
the whole world will be good and hopeful soil. That will be the 
grandest sowing time the world has ever seen, and as a 
consequence, the world will soon be filled with the knowledge 
of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. Mankind shall spring 
forth and grow up in restitution from death to life; they shall go 
out with joy and be led forth with peace by the "Prince of Life, " 



the "Prince of Peace. " Redeemed of the Lord, they shall return, 
and come to Zion [The Church-the Kingdom] with songs and 
everlasting joy upon their heads-they shall obtain joy and 
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shalt flee away. In coming 
they shall say: "Come! let us go up to the mountain [kingdom] 
of the Lord, and he will teach us his ways and we will walk in 
his paths." (Isa. 2:3.) They shall be led forth from sin, 
condemnation and death, with peace, from grace to grace, and 
from victory unto victory, along the grand highway to 
perfection, to the glorious inheritance redeemed for them by the 
precious blood of Christ. 

The mountains and the hills [the ruling powers] shall break forth 
into singing; and all the trees of the field [the people] shall clap 
their hands. (Isa. 55:12.) The accomplishment of this glorious 
purpose of the restitution of a fallen race to perfection, and 
crowning them with eternal glory, "shall be to the Lord for a 
name, and for an everlasting sign" of his justice, wisdom, love 
and power, which shall not be cut off. 

Throughout all the intricate workings of this divine plan, not a 
single principle of the divine character, nor of human free 
agency, has been or will be violated. Herein consists the glory of 
that plan. Had God designed to ignore human free agency, it 
would have been much wiser to have done so in the very first 
instance -in preventing man's fall into sin. Or had he designed 
to let his love override his justice, it would have been better had 
he excused the sin at once, without a redeemer and the long six 
thousand years of human suffering and death, and begun the 
work of restitution at once. 

But such was not God's purpose, and the glory of his plan 
consists in the vindication of his righteous character, the display 
to all his creatures of the harmony of his various attributes and 
of the firmness of those principles of justice, and righteousness, 
and love, and power, in which all his willing creatures may 
eternally rest; and in the joy and blessing of all creation and 
their establishment in righteousness for the eternal ages to 
follow. 

Let praise and honor and glory and power and dominion be unto 
our God forever and ever. His thoughts are not as men's 
thoughts, nor his ways as men's ways; but thanks be unto God 
who hath brought us to his own glorious standpoint of 
observation, and is teaching us his ways. 



R1024 : page 3 



MOTHER EVE'S TEMPTATION. 

There is a lesson in our mother Eve's transgression which we 
presume few have carefully considered and profited by. In a 



recent number of the TOWER (March '87) attention was called 
to the manner in which the serpent beguiled Eve by his 
sophistry, and also to Paul's warning to the Church, the 
prospective bride of the Second Adam, lest she be beguiled in a 
similar manner. Further thought upon the subject leads naturally 
to the question, Where did the tempter's power over Eve begin? 
and did God leave her subject to such a deceptive, ensnaring 
temptation, without sufficient knowledge to show her at once 
the absurdity and falsity of the arguments used? 

The adversary chose a deceptive and attractive form in which to 
present the temptation, and Eve was young, innocent and 
inexperienced. She had never been deceived, nor had any 
experience with evil. The tempter came unbidden, and with 
malicious design. Whether he believed that God was able to 
inflict the death penalty or not; or whether he questioned God's 
firmness, thinking his love for his glorious creature would be 
strong enough to cause him to ignore the penalty of his broken 
law, there is room to question. 

The tempter first suggested the question to his unsuspecting 
victim— "Hath God indeed said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of 
the garden?" "And the woman said, We may eat of the fruit of 
the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree which is in the 
midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it; neither 
shall ye touch it, lest ye die. " 

"And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye will surely not die; 
for God doth know that on the day ye eat thereof, 

R1024 : page 4 

your eyes will be opened and ye will be as God, knowing good 
and evil. " 

"And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and 
that it was pleasant to the eyes, and the tree was desirable to 
make one wise, she took of its fruit and did eat, and gave to her 
husband and he did eat. " 

Now where did the danger of Eve begin? True the argument 
looked plausible. Satan first stated that, if she should partake of 
the forbidden fruit, she would not die, and then suggested that 
God was depriving them of privileges which they ought to be 
enjoying, treating them ungenerously and as though they were 
dependent upon him and under his authority. This calumny upon 
God's goodness, Eve failed to resent, as she should have done. 
She should have replied at once, that God had been so good to 
them, and had so abundantly showered his blessings upon them, 
that it would be base ingratitude to harbor such a thought of him 
even for an instant, and that she had no reason whatever to doubt 
his truthfulness; that he never had deceived them and therefore 
they had no reason to believe he ever would, and that his 
authority was rightful, since he was their Creator and generous 



benefactor; that such authority was an evidence of his love 
exercised over them for their good, his wisdom and knowledge 
and experience being most necessary for their protection and 
continuous welfare. And with this repulse she should have 
utterly refused to hear or heed one whose suggestions were so 
disloyal. 

Had she thus repulsed the very first suggestion of evil, instead of 
harboring a suspicion for which there was no cause, further 
suggestions would have been warded off. She should have 
obeyed the impulse of benevolence, promptly refusing to harbor 
suspicion of evil from a source whence nothing but goodness 
had flowed. Continued and unchanged manifestations of love 
and justice and goodness leave no room for reasonable suspicion 
of evil. And such suspicion whenever and by whomsoever 
harbored is wrong and leads to evil. There, then, Eve's danger 
began -in consenting to harbor suspicion as to the truthfulness 
of God. God's command had been so explicit and positive that 
there was no mistaking his meaning: They were neither to eat of 
the tree, nor to touch it. It was most plainly labeled, HANDS 
OFF. And any suggestion to the contrary should not have been 
entertained for a moment. The penalty for violation of this 
command was to be death— a most just penalty; for if, after all 
God's goodness and favor in giving them existence and every 
blessing, they would not gladly obey his just and loving 
authority exercised for their protection and well-being, they 
were surely unworthy of continued existence. And God wisely 
and justly deprived them of it, when they had so disobeyed. 

Since, the apostle Paul has forewarned the church of an effort of 
the very same adversary, to beguile the second Eve, the 
prospective bride of the second Adam, in a very similar manner; 
and that the temptation would assume its most deceptive and 
ensnaring form in the last days of the Gospel age, when the 
church is nearest to the glorious consummation of her hope, it 
behooves all the consecrated therefore to be on guard, awake 
and watchful. We need not for a moment be in doubt as to what 
is the present counterpart of Eve's temptation. It is as Paul 
suggests (2 Cor. 1 1 :3), a temptation to depart from the 
simplicity of the doctrine of Christ, and to accept the theories of 
"the enemies of the cross of Christ," whom Satan seduced into 
his service, who "transform themselves as angels of light" 

R1025 : page 4 

(2 Cor. 11:14,15), who represent themselves as messengers of 
truth, wresting the Scriptures and perverting them to establish 
another gospel, which indeed is not another.-Gal. 1:8. 

It has been the constant effort of the TOWER, since its first 
observance of this special effort of the adversary to undermine 
the foundation, and then overthrow the faith of the saints, to 
assist the church in putting on the whole armor of God that they 



might be able to withstand the sophistry of error, and to thus 
stand approved of God, firmly established upon the only 
foundation of the gospel-Redemption through the precious 
blood of Christ-rooted and grounded in the faith. Indeed, this 
was the very cause in the interest of which the TOWER was 
started. 

Let the consecrated ones apply the lesson of Eve's temptation 
and fall, as Paul suggests, that they may not be overcome as she 
was by the art and sophistry of the tempter, even though his 
messengers appear as messengers of light (truth). 

Led, like Eve, mainly by curiosity, many have given valuable 
time and attention to following up these no-ransom theories, 
until they are lost in a labyrinth of confusion, uncertain as to 
what they believe on any subject. This is most plainly noticeable 
in the confusion of those journals which advocate these various 
theories. Driven by the queries of their correspondents and their 
endeavor to make their theories appear plausible, and to twist 
and distort the Scriptures into an appearance of conformity with 
their theories, they are continually involving themselves deeper 
and deeper in the labyrinths of error, and shutting and barring 
themselves in to their false conclusions by pride and self-will. 
And those who are following them, giving time and attention to 
their false and foolish imaginings, as they attempt to build upon 
premises known at the outstart to be false, are step by step 
drifting away from all truth, when they should be growing in the 
knowledge of the truth, if the same time and effort were spent 
not in seeing how many ideas can be built upon no foundation, 
but in building wisely and carefully upon the only foundation 
for faith, "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for 
all." 

Many will say, Well, I cannot understand their teaching exactly, 
but I am not afraid to read anything. I will read and hold on to 
what is good in their teaching and let the rest go. It cannot hurt 
me. But they forget that it can and does hurt them. It is with 
them as with mother Eve; the power of the temptation is in their 
inexperience. Those perfect in experience, as well as perfect in 
mental powers, can doubtless fully meet and repulse the tempter, 
no matter by whom represented or how deceptive the arguments, 
but for all others the sure way and the only way to escape is to 
say: Get thee behind me Satan, because thou savorest not of the 
things that be of God, but of men. 

But how can investigation of anything injure the honest 
searcher? In the first place, it consumes the time which might 
otherwise be spent in gaining a more thorough acquaintance 
with the real plan of God, in building up themselves and others 
in the truth. And while they are pursuing these false theories, 
they are losing sight of and forgetting the true plan. And the 
mind thus filled with false doctrines, and set to work in a vain 
endeavor to understand them and to see how they can be made 



to appear consistent, even with themselves, cannot at the same 
time be occupied in meditation upon God's truth. Such therefore 
must measurably cease to be guided by the spirit of truth into 
more and more truth, and strengthened and confirmed in the 
truth already gained; and thus they are constantly losing both the 
truth and the spirit of it, while imbibing error and the spirit of 
error. Yes, they have confidence in themselves, that they can 
discern and will accept only the truth, advanced by false 
teachers, and reject the error; and this is much of their difficulty- 
-they have too much self-confidence and not enough of the 
meek, child-like spirit which listens for the Father's voice and 
trusts his plan and not its own philosophising. Very soon they 
find themselves befogged and bewildered in the maze of 
confusion and they have forgotten, "let slip" (Heb. 2:1), so much 
of the truth with which they should be armed, that they seem 
utterly incapable of reasoning, or of rightly applying the 
Scriptures on the most simple subjects; so distorted and colored 
do the plain teachings of the Scriptures become under a false 
light. 

But need we seek for truth in such polluted channels? Does God 
anywhere tell us that, if we would find the pure waters of truth, 
we must wallow in every miserable gutter, because there is a 
little water in it; or that we should try to filter the polluted mass 
to get the little bit of good Satan permits to remain in it as a bait 
for the unwary? No, never! You will find a fragment of good in 
every false system under the sun. But God never gave you the 
hopeless task of filtering all or any of those muddy streams to 
find the truth. He sends you to the pure, unmixed fountain of 
truth-his Word; and though among his consecrated children he 
has appointed some apostles, and some prophets, and some 
evangelists; and some pastors, and teachers, for the perfecting of 
the saints for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the 
body of Christ... that we might be no more children tossed to and 
fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight 
of men and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to 
deceive" (Eph 4:1 l-14)-he would have us test all their 
teachings by his Word. We must diligently and faithfully prove 
all things for ourselves, as our attention is called to them by 
faithful teachers. As heretofore stated in the TOWER, (See 
March '85 No.-"Theories True and False") the mission of the 
faithful teacher is to stand as an index finger helping the 
household of faith to trace for themselves, on the sacred page, 
the great principles, as well as the minor details, of the divine 
plan. And no faithful student thus assisted, and guided by the 
spirit of truth, which is meekness and true holiness-a desire to 
know the truth that he may obey it and work in harmony with 
the divine plan-can fail to recognize the truth, and to be 
convinced of and established in it. And those thus guided to the 
end are the elect, whom it is "impossible to deceive." 



Why impossible? Because their spirit of meek obedience and 
fidelity to God will not permit them to give heed to seducing 
spirits and doctrines. They first look well to the foundation upon 
which any teachings claiming to be the gospel rest, and if the 
foundation be any other foundation than that which the 
Scriptures have laid so broad and deep, viz. : Redemption 
through the precious blood of Christ (1 Cor. 15:3; Eph 1:7), 
they have no further interest in it, except to point it out to others 
as a snare and trap of the great enemy. 

Let all the dear household of faith take heed, lest as the serpent 
beguiled Eve by his subtilty, so your minds be corrupted from 
the simplicity of the doctrine of Christ. God had plainly said 
they should not eat of that tree; neither should they touch it, lest 
they die. Therefore those who fall are without excuse. Had they 
remained obedient to God, they would never have had anything 
to do with that tree, except to warn their children against 
partaking of or touching it, and to inform them of the prescribed 
penalty in case of violation of that command. So the saints 
should give no heed to those who invite them to build their hope 
of salvation upon any other than the true foundation, nor handle 
their pernicious doctrines in an attempt to build up another plan 
in opposition to the plan of Jehovah. Those full of the spirit of 
obedience will refuse to take these steps and will never fall. The 
Word of God to Eve was clear and explicit, and so now it is to 
the prospective bride of the second Adam. It clearly tells her that 
the death of Christ was the "propitiation" [satisfaction] for her 
sins, that "he died for our sins," "the just for the unjust," and that 
"by his stripes we are healed," "being justified freely by his 
blood:" that "by him we have redemption, even the forgiveness 
of sins." It repeats this testimony in hundreds of forms, and 
shows her how it was illustrated for centuries in the thousands of 
Israel's sacrifices, and bids her beware of false philosophies 
which would pervert this gospel and lead her into error "as the 
serpent beguiled Eve," and it points out that the willful rejection 
of the precious blood leads to the second death. 

It should be the Christian's rule to give no heed to any theory 
built upon any other foundation than that laid down in the 
Scriptures. And that foundation is so simply and clearly laid 
down therein, and so oft repeated-being mentioned, and 
emphasized, and referred to, on every page and in every possible 
instance, from Genesis to Revelation— that none could fail to 
recognize it, save those led captive under the blinding influence 
of the great enemy. If any teacher, no matter how good or wise 
he may seem— yea, if an angel from heaven (Gal. 1:8.) should 
present a theory of salvation ever so plausible, and quote ever so 
many scriptures to make it appear so, yet built upon any other 
foundation than that laid down in the Scriptures- "Redemption 
through the precious blood of Chrisf'-reject it promptly. Resent 
the insult against your faithful God, and give no heed to the 



seducing spirit of error, though it come to you as a messenger of 
light. 

Another notable feature of the temptation of Eve which has its 
counterpart here was her deception as to the penalty in case of 
her violation of God's command -"Thou shalt surely not die." 
So all these false teachers who deny the ransom, loudly proclaim 
this same lie— "Thou shalt surely not die." They talk loudly of 
the love of God, but have little to say of his justice, and boldly 
teach that the second death which God has warned all to shun, is 
the greatest blessing that men could desire. 

"Take heed: " let Eve's tampering with the evil one, and 
harkening to, and heeding his suggestions, and her lack of faith 
in the Word of God, be a lasting lesson to the church. "Let him 
that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall. " Beware of the 
first encroachments of the enemy. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



"To HIM that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life."— 
Rev. 2:7. 



R1026:page5 

SPURGEON'S INCONSISTENCY. 

Further information from London confirms the fact that Mr. 
Spurgeon has withdrawn from the Baptist Union, and now 
stands free and independent, directly associated only with the 
congregation to which he ministers. But these advices prove also 
that though Mr. Spurgeon is with us in defence of the Bible 
doctrine of atonement only through the precious blood of Christ; 
and that with us he expects the kingdom of God at our Lord's 
second advent, as the fifth and universal empire of earth and 
though he has made a long and good step into personal liberty, 
yet he is still bound by that dark and terrible error of Babylon, 
that everlasting torture is the provision which God premeditated 
and designed before the foundation of the world, as the 
everlasting state of all his human creatures except the small 
handful chosen in Christ and called out from the masses during 
this Gospel age. 

We very much regret that one free in many respects is still 
bounden by this, the meanest, most God-dishonoring and 
blasphemous error to which the "dark ages" gave birth. He will 
search in vain for this doctrine in the writings of the apostles, 
and find that the passages supposed to favor it are among the 
parables and dark sayings of our Lord and the symbols of 
Revelation, and that the apostles never expounded any of these 
as they are commonly misinterpreted to-day. 



Mr. Spurgeon's view of the atonement is utterly inconsistent 
with his view of the everlasting torment of all except the church. 

Mr. Spurgeon, we are happy to see, still acknowledges that our 
Lord was our substitute, and bore in our room and stead the 
penalty for sin, which was against us. Should he not then see 
that if the penalty against us had been everlasting torment, our 
Lord to have been our substitute, ransom or corresponding price, 
would of necessity have to suffer eternal torment for us? But we 
know that he did not, does not, and will not suffer this for us, 
hence we could thus know, if not otherwise, that everlasting 
torment is not the penalty to which we were condemned. 

Again, if we find what penalty our substitute paid, we can surely 
know what the penalty was from which believers escape, and to 
which unbelievers are still condemned. Our Lord became a man, 
was "made flesh," and "gave himself a ransom for all." But he 
did not give himself to live in torment, he "died on our behalf- 
he "died for our sins," he "died for the ungodly," etc., are Bible 
expressions. 

As the gentleman well knows, we could multiply citations 
proving that our Lord died for us, but not one passage could be 
produced from Scriptures to prove that he either should or did 
go into everlasting torment for our sin. "He bore our sins in his 
own body on the tree," but not to all eternity in a lake of fire. 
Though Episcopalians recite that our Lord "descended into hell," 
it is surely well known to Mr. Spurgeon, and all men of 
education, that hades does not signify a lake of fire, but signifies 
the state of death, and is the Greek synonym for the Hebrew 
word sheol (grave) of the Old Testament. 

This penalty which our Lord underwent as our substitute, 
ransom or corresponding price, was exactly what the Bible 
everywhere represents as the wages of man's sin. See Rom. 
5:12-"By one man [Adam] sin entered into the world, and 
DEATH by [or, as the penalty of] sin. " If life in torment were 
the penalty, would the apostle be justified in making such a 
statement? In speaking of what was the result of sin he could do 
no less than mention the worst results. So everywhere the 
penalty of sin is described as destruction. "The soul that sinneth, 
it shall DIE"— not live at all. "The wages [or penalty] of sin is 
DEATH." Thus saith the Scriptures, which alone are competent 
authority with us. We must not accept the twistings and turnings 
of these plain Scriptures by a self-constituted "clergy" of the 
dark ages, nor permit their vaporings about death meaning life, 
to influence us in any degree, but must take God's Word in its 
reasonable and obvious sense. To do otherwise is not only to 
make the Word of God a lie, but to represent our gracious 
Creator as a most terrible fiend- worse than any human friend 
that ever lived, and more detestable and inexcusable because 
man fallen and depraved is to some extent excusable. 



We hope that Mr. Spurgeon will use his liberty and search well 
the Scriptures on this subject and not permit previous inferences 
to hinder full investigation. We are in the "time of the end," 
wherein it was promised that knowledge should be increased. 
The light is shining more and more clearly on all subjects than 
ever before and the Word of God is reflecting upon itself its own 
glorious light by means of Concordances, and thus, much of the 
gloom and error of the "dark ages" is being dispelled. When the 
issue is squarely met, all must see that either the doctrine of 
atonement for sins by the precious blood of Christ, or the 
doctrine of eternal torment-one or the other-must be false. 
Take your Concordance and by its aid search the Word, and you 
will find atonement by the blood everywhere,— as some one has 
said, It is upon every page of the Bible. It runs through the entire 
Bible as a stream, growing broader and deeper from Abel's 
sacrifice down to "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain," in 
Revelation. It is the basis of every argument by every apostle, 
and the foundation of every promise from the one to Abraham 
down to the last promises of the Lamb, who says, "I am he that 
liveth and was dead. " Note, too, that all these references to the 
blood and death of our Redeemer, in no sense refer to, or 
symbolize everlasting torment, but all fit perfectly when applied 
to his death-once for all. 

Let the same Concordance then be consulted to see how many 
times everlasting torment is mentioned, and it will not once be 
found. The nearest approach to it is the term "everlasting 
punishment." (Matt. 25:46.) This is in connection with a parable 
which relates to the next age, and shows the final outcome to 
willful sinners. It does not here say what the nature of the 
punishment will be. But it is elsewhere stated that "The wages 
[punishment] of sin is death. " These scriptures throw light upon 
each other, and do not contradict each other. God does not 
change the wages of sin, and though he provided through our 
Lord Jesus a recovery from the penalty pronounced against all in 
Adam, yet such as shall willfully reject the favor, will die again- 
-the second DEATH. So far from premeditating and 
foreordaining his creatures to everlasting torture, our gracious 
Creator declares of those who will suffer the second death even, 
that he willeth not the death of him that dieth, but would [prefer] 
that all should turn unto him and live.-Ezek. 19:32. 

Of course, for these truths to be firmly held and publicly 
proclaimed, requires great grace, and implies great humility, as 
well as great boldness. Mr. Spurgeon's boldness and courage 
have been attested to a considerable extent by his general 
ministry, and now by his recent firm stand against error, and in 
defense of the doctrine of the ransom; by his withdrawal from 
the Baptist Union. His humility as a minister of Christ has 
shown itself by his refusal to apply to himself the title of 
Reverend, and his failure to seek and obtain the further title of 
Doctor of Divinity, both of which are so "highly esteemed 



among men," but ill-fitted and disapproved in the sight of our 
truly Reverend Lord, who declares to all saints- "All ye are 
brethren," and "One is your Master." Grace "sufficient" is 
promised each of us for every step, as we walk in the path of the 
just which shines more and more UNTO THE PERFECT DAY; 
but we may be assured that those steps will lead us down from 
any pinnacle of earthly glory we may once have occupied. Thus 
it was with our Lord and with the apostles, and thus it must be 
with us- "Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of 
God, and he may exalt you in due time. " 

Of course, being prominent, like Saul of Tarsus, a bold stand for 
this truth of the ransom in the face of the worldly-wise, who are 
now rapidly rejecting it, will forfeit their esteem, and bring their 
opposition and scorn-this Mr. Spurgeon has already 
experienced. The rejection of everlasting torture would cut off 
from him the sympathy and praise, and bring instead the 
denunciation and contempt, of that other large class of Christian 
people, who do not yet see the inconsistency of their position 
and are trying to believe that the wages of sin is everlasting 
torture and yet that the death of our Redeemer paid our 
corresponding price— that, 

Jesus died and paid it all 
Yes, all the debt I owed. 

The cost from a human standpoint is great-to be scorned by 
both Pharisees and Sadducees. Yet like Paul, every truly earnest 
soul may have supplies of grace, whereby each can rejoice to 
count all such things but "as loss and dross for the 
EXCELLENCY OF THE KNOWLEDGE of Christ" -that we 
may suffer rejection, contempt, etc., with the Master, if by any 
[such] means we might be accounted worthy of a part in the 
First Resurrection-among the overcomers the joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom. 

As the eyes of our understanding more clearly recognize the 
King in his beauty -the true greatness and grandeur of his 
character— as we become more and more intimate with his plans 
as revealed in His Word, we are prepared to see in many 
passages of the Bible a fulness of love and mercy which the 
smoke of Babylon's errors has long obscured. "This is the true 
light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world" -can 
no longer be understood to mean, one in ten thousand, but as it 
says, "every man." "He is the propitiation [satisfaction] for our 
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world." (1 John 2:2.) -This, too, is seen to mean just what it 
says, when no longer nullified by the 

R1027 : page 5 

theory of everlasting torture. "One mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all — 
TO BE TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME." (1 Tim. 2:6.)-This 



passage, too, comes to have a full glorious meaning to all who 
see it: that the ransom covers all, and must be a benefit to ALL; 
and to benefit all, must be testified to ALL, and in such a time 
and manner that ALL can and shall "come to a knowledge of the 
truth." 

This general opening of blind eyes, and general testimony of the 
ransom belongs to the next age; the work of the age now closing 
is to select the Church, the Bride, the members of the Body of 
the Christ, who with their Head and Lord shall be exalted, 
glorified and empowered to bless (restore and teach) all the 
families of the earth, thus testifying and making available to all 
in God's due time-the precious Blood of the Lamb which taketh 
away the sin of the world. 

A hope so much divine 
May trials well endure. 



R1027:page5 

FOSSIL THEOLOGY. 

A lump of coal showing on its surface, in delicate tracery, the 
form of a fern or fish, is prized by the geologist as a specimen of 
the vegetation or fauna of a very remote period in the day of 
creation. Such a fossil is valuable as a connecting link between 
the dead past and living present, possessing no other value 
except to be burned. 

In the world of theology we find many such relics of bygone 
ages fossilized in the form of liturgies, creeds, confessions of 
faith, etc., many of them originating in the Carboniferous period 
of religious knowledge, the "dark ages," which, apart from their 
value as antiquities, representing the mind and practice of the 
religious systems of their day, are of no use whatever, except as 
fuel. 

For what so fiercely burns 

As a dry creed that nothing ever learns? 

It is remarkable that in this age of progress and development, 
men of education and intelligence should shape their thoughts 
and teachings after the pattern of these Theological Fossils, 
which are as devoid of life as the petrifications that we find in 
the museum duly classified and labeled. 

In the advanced light of medical science of to-day, the physician 
who would follow the old system of bleeding, pilling and 
blistering, and confine his patient in a dark, illy- ventilated room, 
would be denounced not only as an "old fogy," but as a fool, 
since medical colleges are continually experimenting and 
opening up new avenues of knowledge as to the causes and cure 
of disease. In strong contrast with this, sectarian theology has 



learned nothing, neither can it learn anything so long as the 
minds of its teachers are moulded and shaped by the petrified 
dogmas of their ancestors. He who receives his credentials as a 
denominational teacher is not a free man. He is bound to accept 
as the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, the 
complications of doctrines as handed down to him from the 
"fathers" of his denomination. What those men, hundreds of 
years ago, with minds perhaps befogged with superstition, 
declared to be truth is truth, to which nothing can be added, and 
from which nothing can be taken away. No matter what light 
advanced scholarship may have thrown upon the inspired Word; 
no matter what science may have revealed; no matter what new 
truths the servants of God may have brought forth from the 
store-house: the religious instructor of to-day must shut his eyes 
to the light, and stop his ears from hearing strange or new 
sounds, and submissively bow to the teachings of antiquated 
theologians, priests, prelates and parsons, as though their voice 
were the voice of God. There is no idolatry that has more 
submissive devotees than has this worship of the stocks and 
stones of Fossil Theology; there is no tyranny more oppressive 
than is the tyranny of creed. 

How is this accounted for? Very easily. Denominations are 
formed about the teachings of some man or set of men. These 
teachings are accepted as the quintessence of truth; preachers are 
instructed in these doctrines, and ordained to teach them; 

R1027 : page 6 

colleges are endowed to perpetuate them, and the graduates 
from these schools, before being authorized to preach, must 
subscribe to the system of practice and doctrine taught, and 
agree to teach the same. He is not a free man. He dare not turn 
either to the right or to the left under penalty of losing his 
commission, and with it the means of gaining a livelihood. 
Instead of building upon the foundation of the prophets and 
apostles, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief corner-stone, the 
foundation is human; and the divine injunction applies with 
terrific force: "In vain do they worship Me, teaching for 
doctrines the commandments of men. " 

Witness the recent trial of the professors of Andover College as 
an illustration of the despotic power of creed. It was not a 
question, Did these men teach truth? The only question 
considered by the judges was, did they teach contrary to the 
Confession of Faith, and established traditions of the 
denomination. And in a score of instances that might be cited of 
ministers brought before ecclesiastical tribunals, they are always 
tried by the same antiquated law, and required to pronounce the 
sectarian Shibboleth. 

There is little wonder that spiritual deadness is characteristic of 
the churches everywhere, with fussy Uzzas reaching out their 



hands to steady the ark of the Lord; with inquisitorial 
ecclesiastics snuffing out the light of truth as soon as it shows its 
first feeble rays, and then compelling those who hunger and 
thirst after righteousness and truth to accept their dead forms 
and creeds, or else look elsewhere to have their cravings 
satisfied. Thank God that His truth is not committed to such 
hands, but is free as the water of life to all who will go to the 
fountain and drink. Divine truth is not in dead forms and 
compiled dogmas, but it is liberty and life in Christ Jesus. - 
Words of Truth. 



R1027 : page 6 

THE PAPAL POWER. 

The Catholic says: 

"Protestant religious sheets inform us that Blaine is in Rome 
coquetting with the Pope. The secular press asserts that 
Gladstone is guilty of the same misdemeanor, but denies it in the 
next breath. They all agree that Salisbury is guilty of the most 
pronounced coquetry with the Papal Power. This is certainly a 
strong straw. It discloses the current of modern thought on a 
question which is undoubtedly wedging its way to the front of 
political questions in European circles. The dormant potency of 
the third ring in the Papal Tiara [third crown in the Pope's hat] 
breeds unrest, and well founded fear, in the hearts of kings and 
Kaisers. 

"The spirit of the world, and emperors and kings, have battled 
against temporal power, because they understand from history 
that the Papal Power is the strongest menace against lustful 
brutality, and violent oppression and tyranny. It has humbled 
kings, it has disgraced emperors, it has throttled tyranny, and it 
has earned the everlasting enmity of the world for its civilizing 
influence. The world bends to the powers that smote it in the 
past, and disfigured its fair face with rapine and pillage, and 
ravishings and blood waste, and fears the universal sovereign 
who cemented the discordant elements of paganism and 
barbarism into one grand, unitive civilization. 

"The Papacy will regain its temporal sovereignty, because it is 
useful and convenient to the Church. It gives the head executive 
of the church a fuller liberty, and a fuller sway. The Pope can be 
no king's subject long. It is not in keeping with the divine office 
to be so. It cramps him and narrows his influence for good. 
Europe has acknowledged this influence, and will be forced to 
bow to it in greater times of need than this. Social upheavals, 
and the red hand of anarchy, will yet crown Leo or his successor 
with the reality of power which the third circle symbolizes, and 
which was once recognized universally. " 



R1028 : page 6 

RECONCILED BY HIS DEATH 
AND SAVED BY HIS LIFE. 

"If then, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by 
the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be 
saved by his life. "-Rom. 5:10. 

That we were actually enemies, and yet at the same time 
reconciled to God, seems at first sight a contradictory statement. 
But remembering that the whole race were reckoned and treated 
as enemies —condemned to death because represented in the 
transgression of their father Adam— we can see how the death of 
Christ, who as Adam's substitute took his place in death, 
reconciled thereby not only Adam but all his race to God. The 
penalty of sin was death- "In the day thou eatest thereof, dying 
thou shalt die"-a most just penalty! It is not eternal torture and 
misery of any kind, but simply the taking away of the abused 
privilege of living. And since in life man failed to show himself 
worthy of life, it is evident that when dead, destroyed, he could 
do nothing to recover himself. 

But when the Son of God became partaker of our nature, and 
then as a man took Adam's place in death never again to rise as a 
man, the man Adam could justly be released, his life being thus 
redeemed or purchased. And as all his posterity lost life through 
his fall, so they all regain life through his redemption by the man 
Christ Jesus, who thus gave himself a ransom— a corresponding 
price-a substitute for all. 

The great majority of the race who are yet living are still in 
opposition to God; and the vast majority of those who are dead, 
died without being converted (turned) to God. But nevertheless 
they are all reconciled to God by the death of his Son, as the 
above text asserts. 

And if reconciled to God by the death of his Son WHILE THEY 
WERE YET ENEMIES, it was obvious that they were not 
reconciled to God by being converted to God, else they would 
have ceased to be enemies, and the death of his Son would have 
nothing to do with it. It is evident also that they were not 
reconciled to God by the good example of his Son; for Adam 
and millions of his posterity were dead before his Son came, and 
millions since have died without knowing of or heeding his 
example, and yet all were reconciled to God by the DEATH of 
his Son; and therefore, "as through Adam all die, EVEN SO, 
through Christ shall all be made alive"-having been reconciled 
to God, having regained the privilege of living, through Christ 
who redeemed them by his death, by substituting himself for 
Adam in death. 



But let us consider further the doctrine which Paul proceeds to 
build upon this foundation, which he accepts as sure. He adds: 
"Much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. " 
Seeing that the plan of our reconciliation by the death of his 
Son, while we were enemies, is affirmed by Jehovah by the 
mouth of all his Apostles and Prophets, and that it is reasonable 
and just, and in perfect harmony with the righteous character of 
our God, it is even "much more" evident that in his own due 
time we shall be saved. How? "By his life." But how saved by 
his life, if he became our substitute in death? 

Thus it was his life as a man that he sacrificed on our behalf 
forever; but since that sacrifice was made in obedience to the 
Father's will, it pleased the Father to resurrect, or re-create our 
Savior. And since he could not resurrect him as a man without 
undoing the ransom, he raised him to another nature. Without 
interfering with our ransom, God could have raised him to any 
other nature, either higher or lower than human; but as a reward 
for his obedience and humiliation, God "highly exalted" him, 
even to the divine nature. Had our Lord like Adam forfeited his 
right to life by sinning, he could not have been raised to any 
nature, but having in loyal obedience sacrificed his life as a man 
(which was all the life he possessed) God could and did raise 
him to another nature. And now he ever liveth as a divine being, 
with all power and authority in heaven and in earth to 
accomplish the remainder of the plan of our Father, who so 
loved us, even while condemned sinners, as to give his only 
begotten Son to die for us-"the just for the unjust." 

And if the Son so loved us as to die for us while we were yet 
enemies, will he not in the Father's appointed time use his great 
power to awaken from death the millions whom he purchased 
with his own precious blood? And will he not exercise his 
authority and power as a wise father [life-giver] for the training 
of those awakened millions, leading them step by step, by wise 
and wholesome discipline and instruction, gradually up, up, up 
to perfection? And only those who refuse to take the steps will 
fail to reach perfection and everlasting life. The boon of eternal 
life in perfection and glory will be forced upon none, but, 
"Whosoever will may take the water of life freely, " while those 
who will not, shall die the second death, from which there shall 
be no redemption and no resurrection. 

After such affirmations and evidences of Jehovah's benevolent 
designs, and our Lord's obedient and benevolent execution of 
them, have we not the fullest assurance that all the redeemed 
race shall be "saved by his life"? and that only those who will 
not obediently hear (heed) that Prophet-Jehovah's Anointed- 
shall be cut off from the blessed privilege of eternal life-die the 
second death? (Acts 3:22,23.) Surely, Just and true are thy ways, 
Lord God Almighty: Thy love is fathomless; thy wisdom is as 
deep and broad as thy love; thy justice is firm as thine eternal 



throne. Haste the blessed time when all shall know thee from the 
least to the greatest, and when thy love, fully comprehended, 
shall call forth a loving response from every worthy heart; when 
the willful evil doer shall cease, and when every creature in 
heaven and in earth shall with united voice ascribe "blessing, 
and honor, and glory, and power unto him that sitteth upon the 
throne, and unto the lamb forever and ever. " 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1028 : page 6 

'"GIVE me neither poverty nor riches,' said Agur; and this will 
ever be the prayer of the wise. Our income should be like our 
shoes, if too small they will gall and pinch us, but if too large 
they will cause us to stumble and to trip. Wealth, after all, is a 
relative thing, since he that has little and wants less, is richer 
than he that has much and wants more. True contentment 
depends not upon what we have; a tub was large enough for 
Diogenes, but a world was too small for Alexander." 



R1028 : page 6 

THE TITHING CUSTOM. 

In God's dealing with "Israel after the flesh," a part of their law 
was that for collecting tithes. A tithe signifies a tenth, and all 
Israelites were thus taxed one tenth of their yearly income for 
the support of their religious government, etc. 

Seeing the immense and constant flow of wealth which such a 
system of taxation secures, has led to various imitations of this 
Jewish custom among later religionists. In all countries where 
the Roman Catholic church holds political control, she exacts 
tithes; for instance, in France she collected tithes until the 
Revolution of 1790: and in some parts of Italy they continued to 
be collected until a few months ago, when they were abolished 
by the present king (who, however, provided for the living 
expenses of the Catholic clergy, whose income from private 
estates is insufficient, out of the national taxes). Against this 
abolition of tithes, Catholic journals here, whose publishers are 
not obligated by it, protest loudly, yet it is doubtful whether it is 
not a part of an understood arrangement between the king and 
the pope. Doubtless the growing civilization of the Italians 
makes these tithes yearly more meagre and more difficult of 
collection, and the shrewd Leo, foreseeing the end of this 
income, has preferred to see its collection taken from him, while 
at the same time the civil rule, by appointing for the 
maintenance of the clergy out of the general tax, has made its 



income more certain and reliable, both for the present and 
future. 

Various denominations of Protestants, while not insisting on the 
one tenth, nevertheless often refer to the Jewish tithes, and 
without saying that the same Law is binding upon their faithful, 
they certainly often give that impression to their hearers. 

Tithing is probably the secret of the success of the Mormons and 
"Seventh-day Adventists." The constant flow of money into 
their treasuries— one-tenth the earnings of all their people- 
permits the prosecution of their proselyting work far and near, 
pays the salaries and traveling expenses of many missionaries, 
and engages talent in writing and publishing which otherwise 
would lie dormant. 

But what-Are we under this law of tithes? Nay, verily! "Ye are 
not under the law, but under grace." (Rom. 6:14.) The tithing, 
like all other features of the Law, was given, not to the "new 
creatures in Christ Jesus" of this Gospel age, but to the Jews, 
who as minor children were under arbitrary, fixed laws, and not 
under grace. (See Gal. 4:1-7.) But what does it signify to be 
under grace in this matter of our giving to the Lord's work? It 
does not mean that there is less need of money than formerly, 
nor that the grace of God will provide the money in some other 
and miraculous manner. It merely means, You are no longer 
bound or obligated by command to give one-tenth of your 
income, but are left free in this regard that your grateful hearts 
may find opportunity for manifesting their love and gratitude to 
the Lord by liberality even when at the cost 

R1029 : page 6 

of self-denial. This is the grace or liberty bestowed upon us as 
matured children of God, over and above the servant or 
childhood estate of the previous dispensation. 

Is this, our liberty, a reason for devoting less than one-tenth to 
the Lord's service, because he does not command it of us, but 
leaves us free to act for ourselves under the influence of love for 
the truth? Would not the command generally be the very least 
that would be reasonable? and indicate that proportion of our 
income as 

R1029 : page 7 

the Jew was privileged to give as much more than a tithe as he 
pleased. 

In this as in all the features of the Law given to Israel, we find 
that the letter of it, as they understood it, is less than what would 
be our reasonable service under grace. When Bro. Adamson met 
us, after seeing some features of the truth and getting 
acquainted, we were pressing home upon his attention the Bible 
doctrine of full consecration, and he, supposing us to refer to 



money matters, at once replied, "For years I have given a tithe, a 
tenth of my earnings to the Lord's service. " We admired and 
loved the earnestness which this indicated, and told him so, but 
at the same time pointed out that one-tenth was only the measure 
or limit placed upon God's people under the law in the servant 
age. Bro. A. was surprised that any one thought one-tenth too 
little, well knowing, as we all do, that few give one-fourth of a 
tenth of their income. When, however, we pointed out that full 
consecration means ten-tenths, the whole, he saw it at once and 
began to do that. Now he sees with us that entire consecration of 
all we possess— time, talents, money, all,— is our 
"REASONABLE SERVICE." From that time on, he has been 
considering all that he has as fully and forever given up to the 
Lord, and he himself appointed of God the steward or executor 
to use all, according to his ability, to the glory and honor of him 
who called us out of darkness into this marvelous light. Brother 
Adamson, as you all know, considers that he can best use his 
time and talents to God's glory by selling DAWN, and he is 
doing with his might what his hands find to do. 

So, it is for each one who has presented himself fully and 
entirely to God, "a living sacrifice," to consider how he can most 
fully and efficiently use his all in the great service to which he 
has consecrated it. Such, therefore, cannot decide their course by 
their likes and dislikes, their fears, preferences, or conveniences; 
it is their own preferences that they agreed to give up, their own 
wills that they agreed to ignore, and reckon as dead,— this was 
the "living sacrifice" (Rom. 12:1), which all the truly 
consecrated laid upon God's altar, to be consumed in the service 
of God, a sacrifice of sweet savor. It is well that the consecrated 
should each carefully scrutinize his own heart, and consider well 
whether he serves himself or God, whether he is a living 
sacrifice to God, or to business, to family, to society, or worst of 
all to selfishness and indolence. 

Even aside from our covenant of entire consecration to the 
Lord's service, we should gladly and of willing hearts do if 
possible ten-fold more in the service of the truth, from love, than 
we ever did from fear, in the service of error. Nay, more; 
looking back and remembering what we have unwittingly done 
in past years to spread error, to bind and blind God's children, 
and to dishonor and misrepresent our Heavenly Father's plan 
and character, we should, remembering that "the time is short," 
strain every effort to at least undo the mischief we helped to 
work, that perchance in the reckoning time when we give our 
account we may be able to see, as our works pass in review, that 
we have not more dishonored than honored our Lord. 

His servants ye are to whom ye render service, is an evident 
truth. So we see that for a long time we, though like Paul honest, 
and verily thinking that we did God service, were really in a 
measure servants of the devil, forwarding error, ignorantly 



opposing truth, and dishonoring God and his Word. Oh! how 
glad we should be that we did not die while ignorantly fighting 
against God and blaspheming his holy name (by misrepresenting 
his character and plan), and helping to teach others to thus 
blaspheme. God knows that in ignorance we did it, and would 
have accepted of us through our dear Redeemer; but oh! what 
shame and confusion would have been ours, to find that life had 
been more than wasted, in opposing him whom we loved and 
sought to serve. See 1 Cor. 3:14,15. 

But thanks be to God, though "the time is short" it is very 
favorable to us, that we may not only undo much of our past 
misdoings, but, besides, do more— do something to honor the 
Lord, do some good and acceptable work upon the good 
foundation, work which will abide and which our Lord will 
acknowledge and reward, saying "Well done, good and faithful 
servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." Yes, now is the 
most favored time, and this should encourage us. In the past, our 
efforts and expenditures of time and money in the service of 
error yielded but slight returns compared with what the same 
time, talent, and money used now, backed by the truth and the 
love of it, will do. 

This should encourage us all, and time and talent and money 
should be spent as never before in the spread of the truth- in 
letter writing, in talking, in preparing, translating, printing, 
loaning, selling, etc., reading matter; and in every way lifting up 
the truth, the standard of the Lord before the people-Isa. 62:10. 

We are glad to note the sentiments of some of the brethren and 
sisters that 1888 A.D. shall be one of greater effort in the 
Master's service, in the service of the truth, than any before. We 
say, Amen! and trust it will be the sentiment of all the saints, the 
consecrated. We pray that God will grant us each the needed 
grace whereby to overcome the selfishness and smallness of our 
"earthen vessels," that our ambitions, hopes and affections may 
be lifted from the groveling, earthly things, to the heavenly 
things promised to such as are faithful to the end of life's race. 
How many will appreciate the privilege of laying up honors and 
treasures in heaven, at the cost of treasures and comforts and 
honors earthly? Some— the "overcomers," who delight to do 
God's will, and who count all things earthly but as loss and dross 
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. 

Ask yourselves, you who have tasted "the good word of God," 
How much better is it than the error which once beclouded love 
and hope with fear, and which, instead of real faith, gave 
ignorant, unreasoning, unsatisfying, blind credulity? How much 
(trying to put a money value on that which is more precious than 
rubies— yea, than much fine gold)— how much more is the truth 
worth than the error you formerly held? You paid liberally for 
the error, we all know. If you did not give hours of time and 
thought in preparing for and attending upon the fairs, suppers, 



socials, treats and what not, of some sect, you at least gave time 
to hearing the preaching of error, and money to pay for that 
preaching at home as well as in foreign lands. It is safe to 
estimate that if you were a member of any of the sects of 
"Christendom, " in good and regular standing, it cost you not less 
than five hours of time (including time for dressing, etc.) and 
from fifteen cents to one dollar in money each week. (In this we 
include the usual collection taken at every Sunday service, 
besides the special collections for Home and Foreign Missions, 
and for Bible and Tract Societies; also pew rent and 
expenditures in connection with fairs and socials.) This 
calculation is very moderate, many giving five times as many 
hours, and ten times as much money, yet this, our moderate 
estimate, shows that error and blindness and fear cost you, in 
fifty-two weeks of each year, 260 hours of time and from $7.80 
to $52.00 per year in money. 

Now ask and answer to yourself the questions-How much more 
is the truth worth than the error? and How much more time and 
money am I spending in spreading the truth in my own heart, 
and in the hearts of others? If you are not satisfied with your 
course in view of your own calculation, begin at once to show 
the Lord, yourself, and your family, how highly you appreciate 
the truth above error. Act at once, for "the time is short. "-See 
Feb. '87 TOWER. 

We are taking for granted, of course, that you have stopped your 
contribution of time, talent and money formerly given cheerfully 
to the spread of what you now see to be error, but which at the 
time, Paul- like, you "verily thought to be God's service." No 
doubt God accepted your good intention while blinded by error, 
but now you see, and now you are responsible as a steward of 
God's blessings -time, talent, money, etc. -and can neither 
waste them upon yourself, nor use them to spread error, without 
having in due time to plead guilty, as unfaithful servants. We 
have great light, and should remember that "Where much is 
given much will be required. " 

Instead, therefore, of being willing to transfer merely the same 
amount of money, and time and influence from the spread of 
error to the spread of truth, we all should feel as we sometimes 
sing- 

Truth-how precious is the treasure! 
Teach us, Lord, its worth to know. 



R1030:page7 



JUSTIFICATION. 



To justify is either to make just and right that which is wrong, 
or to prove and show to be just that which is free from blame. 



"Justification by faith" is well known to be a Scriptural doctrine, 
yet we think its real meaning and scope are not fully understood 
by many who profess to have been so justified. 

The tendency of the times is toward a still more unscriptural 
idea, and while we doubt not many have been saved in the past 
who did not understand it, in this age and land it becomes more 
than ever our duty to "grow in the grace and knowledge of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. "--2 Pet. 3:18. 

Paul's statement of the case is as follows:— In the first two 
chapters of Romans he shows that all mankind are sinners; that 
the natural tendency is downwards; that neither the Gentiles 
with the light of nature, nor the Jews with the light and law of 
Moses, are able to free themselves from sin and sinful 
tendencies. When he reaches Rom. 3:21, he thus explains God's 
simple yet wonderful provision for the race. "But now apart 
from law a righteousness [justness] of God hath been 
manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets; even 
the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ unto all 
them that believe; for there is no distinction: for all have sinned, 
and fall short of the glory of God; being justified freely by his 
grace through the REDEMPTION that is in Christ Jesus: whom 
God set forth to be a mercy-seat through faith in his blood, to 
show his righteousness in passing by the sins formerly 
committed, during the forbearance of God: and to a showing of 
his righteousness in the present time, in order that he may be 
righteous [just] while justifying him who hath faith in Jesus." 

Mark the following points :— 

1. All have sinned, are unjust, therefore need justifying— that is, 
to be made just or right. 

2. Neither Nature nor Law can justify the sinner. 

3. God remains strictly just himself, while justifying the sinner. 

4. God's method of justification has been witnessed [attested] by 
the Law and the Prophets. 

5. It is granted us through redemption made by Christ Jesus. 

6. It is attained through faith in his blood. 

7. It accomplishes the passing by (so canceling or crossing off) 
of former sins, and the restoration of the sinner to favor. 

Statement No. 1 is admitted by the class we wish to talk to; 
those who do not believe it are out of our present reach, but will 
be reached effectually by the judgments of the coming age. 

No. 2. As to the light of nature. The ante-diluvians had that light 
with evidently better physical and mental natures than we to 
work with, but they developed characters that even Noah's flood 
could not wash out and leave them living. Sodom and Gomorrah 
and the cities about them had this light, but a fiercer flame 



overtook them. The Amorites and other nations of Canaan had 
this light, but it led them to destruction. (Deut. 18:9-12; Gen. 
15:16; 2 Kings 17:29-41.) And it has been true all down the ages 
that "The dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of 
cruelty. " 

As to the Jew, if the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, 
and the giving of the law, and the service, and the promises 
(Rom. 9:3-5), and all the light of Sinai could not save them, how 
say some among you that the heathen may be saved by the light 
of nature? That there have been remarkably noble specimens of 
humanity among the heathen-considering their surroundings- 
there is no doubt; and through the plan of mercy God has 
provided, such will have a reward: even the giving of a cup of 
cold water will not be forgotten. (Mark 9:38-41.) Some even to 
this day retain more of the original Adamic nature or character 
than others. We see this both in civilized and barbarous lands. 
Lingerings of the original noble, generous nature that God 
created in Adam (His own likeness) reassert themselves, and 
come up, sometimes in families, and sometimes in individuals, 
and sometimes under circumstances that least favor such a 
character. 

But such a character could not, and can not now save a man 
whose life is already forfeited. Can any little kindness done to 
his fellow-prisoners by a man under sentence of death, and 
waiting the day of his execution, legally save his life? So the 
human race who have been under the dominion of death ever 
since the day of Adam's transgression, whatever good they may 
do, are powerless to save themselves from the penalty. 

Paul in Rom. 3:9-20 first states clearly this helpless condition of 
both Jew and Gentile, and then points out the plan of 
justification that the God of Love has provided. 

No. 3. But this plan cannot interfere with God's justice and 
integrity. He cannot, as some claim, withdraw his sentence, and 
by a sovereign will to do as he pleases, forgive whom he will, or 
even those who seek his forgiveness. Having enacted a law and 
pronounced its penalty 

R1030 : page 8 

upon a race who had been brought under its condemnation, He 
cannot eat his own words, speaking humanly, and reverse his 
decree. His justice, his holiness, his unchangeableness of 
character (Mai. 3:6,) must remain perfect. 

In that beautiful 55th chapter of Isaiah we read: "As the heavens 
are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, 
and my thoughts than your thoughts. For as the rain cometh 
down and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither [in 
vain], but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, 
and giveth seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; so shall my 



word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return 
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it 
shall prosper in the thing whereunto I sent it. " 

Our loving Father, then, had a wise purpose in making his 
decree which brought such condemnation; and when it has 
accomplished his will, we will see that his LOVE is equal to his 
JUSTICE, that his WISDOM devised the plan, and that his 
infinite POWER was nowise taxed to carry out his purpose 
without confusion or clash. Let us study His "way" in the light 
of our next point: 

No. 4. What did the Law witness in reference to justification? 
Emphatically that "without shedding of blood there is no 
remission." (Heb. 9:22.) Every sacrifice, day by day, and year 
by year, proved this. 

But why blood? Some people seem to have a terrible horror of 
coupling blood with salvation. Any subject, perhaps, may be 
made a tiresome hobby, but the allwise God has seen fit to use 
blood as a symbol and as an instrumentality, and we may not 
instruct HIM. 

"Through one man sin entered into the world, and death through 
sin: and so death passed unto all men, for that all sinned: "-being 
of the Adamic nature. Life being forfeited, life only could 
redeem; so the Lord tells us, "The life of the flesh is in the 
blood: and I have given it to you upon the altar to make 
atonement by reason of [being] the life."- Lev. 17:11,14; Gen. 
9:4; Deut. 12:23. 

Did these sacrifices day by day make the Jews perfect? No, says 
Paul (Heb. 10:1-4), else having been cleansed once for all, they 
might have ceased their offerings. But he says "In those 
sacrifices there is a remembrance made of sins year by year." 
What were they then, and what for? Inspiration answers "a 
shadow of the good things to come, not the substance of the 
things themselves."— Syriac. But the shadow must be a true 
outline of the substance, so they pointed to the complete and 
perfect justification from sin by the "better sacrifice," the "body" 
that the Father himself prepared; offered once for all [time].- 
Heb. 10:5,10. 

The Prophets [Ps. 22, Isa. 52, 53, 63, etc.,] testified to the same 
truths. Both describe a vicarious or substitutionary justification; 
that is, the guilty one is freed by an act done, or a price or 
penalty paid by some one else. 

But why some one else, why not the one really guilty? Because, 
as before shown, the penalty being death, i.e., his right to life, he 
had no equivalent to redeem it with. Having lost his all, what 
had he left to buy it back with? But as we have seen, a "body" 
has been prepared, a sacrifice well pleasing to God has been 
made, a Redeemer is found. 



No. 5. John the Baptist was the divinely appointed herald of this 
divinely appointed Redeemer, and his words of introduction 
were:- "Behold the LAMB of God, which taketh away the sins 
of the world." (John 1 :29.) How could those Jews understand 
such a declaration only as referring to one who was to be in 
some way offered up, as a sacrifice in the place of some one else 
who had sinned. 

A new school of wise (?) men have arisen who say: "Away with 
this talk of Christ's death atoning for us, and of his blood being 
required to satisfy the Father, as if the Father was a Shylock 
demanding his pound of flesh. It was not his death, but his life 
that was efficacious; his pure self-denying life; giving us an 
example that we should follow in his steps." 

No doubt this sounds very sensible to some extremely esthetic 
religionists of today; but it is sophistry, nevertheless. 

We appreciate that spotless life. We believe that short as it was, 
it was without a parallel in nobility, wisdom and blessing; we 
believe too that only those who make it their pattern, and that 
glorious 

R1031 : page 8 

character their highest ambition, will be privileged to become 
members of that Divine body of which he will be the Head. 

There was a grand purpose in his life; there was one— even more 
necessary— in his death. 

Imagine an athlete finely developed and bounding with life, 
coming to a dying man whose every power was hopelessly 
shattered, who could at most live but a few hours, saying to him: 
"Look at me, see what I am; my system of exercise not only 
keeps me in full health but I believe will add years to my life. " 

Would not this be mockery? Have we not seen that the whole 
race passed under the dominion of death when Adam fell? Rom. 
5:12. "Death reigned from Adam to Moses." The law was given, 
but it only revealed man's weakness; so death continued to 
reign. Jesus came. His body was a miraculous fornication of the 
Father in the womb of Mary. (Heb. 10:5.) His life came directly 
from heaven (Heb. 1:5, Luke 1:35,) and he was therefore, 
though human, yet free, both from Adamic sin and its penalty, 
death. 

He was the second man, perfect, sinless, in the likeness of God. 
The first one, Adam, had failed in the test, and falling carried the 
race (yet in his loins) with him. 

The second one, Jesus, had come to REDEEM this lost and 
ruined race. He must first stand the test to show to angels and to 
men that he was the peer, the equal of the first Adam then, not 
before, he paid the redemption price,-a life for a life. Having 
first redeemed Adam, and all the race in him, his example, his 



character, became available to them as a pattern of the way of 
obedience; the reward of which is eternal life. 

But eternal or any measure of life could not come to those under 
the dominion of death, i.e., these whom death had a claim 
against, until they are first released from this claim;— redeemed, 
as had been clearly shadowed forth in the types of the Jewish 
covenant. 

Redemption under the law could be made only by an estimated 
equivalent value. In some cases (Lev. 25:25-31; 27:14-34; Num. 
3:44-51) it might be made with money; in most cases, and where 
sin was involved, only blood could atone, or justify. (Heb. 9:22.) 
Peter refers to this and clearly shows what justified us. 
"Knowing that ye were redeemed not with corruptible things, 
with silver or gold;. ..but with the precious blood of Christ; as of 
a lamb without blemish and without spot; who was foreknown 
indeed before the foundation of the world, but was manifested at 
the end of the times for your sake."-l Pet. 1:18-20. 

No. 6. This justification [salvation] is attained by faith in his 
blood. "O yes," says some one, "blood again, always blood. Do 
not the Scriptures clearly teach that we are saved by grace, that 
is favor? How then by blood, and by a purchase? Is it a favor to 
receive that which is bought and paid for?" 

If we were without means and starving or freezing and a 
passerby should find us, and go and get food and help and 
rescue us, it might or might not be a favor to him, it would 
certainly would be a great favor to us. But because it is of favor, 
it is not less "by faith; " nor because by faith is it less "through 
blood. " It is all three- by faith in the blood ransom provided by 
the favor of God, who "was in Christ reconciling the world unto 
himself." 

In turning away from the distorted view of the sacrifice 
presented in some hymnbook theology, let us be careful that we 
do not turn away from the Scriptures of truth. If our theories do 
not agree with the words of inspiration, we had better search the 
Word for a more harmonious theory; better void the theology 
than avoid the Scripture. 

No. 7. How are these sins passed by? Suppose as was once 
possible a man got badly in debt and could not pay. Having 
nothing, he himself is sold and afterward put in prison. A friend 
discovers him and asks to be shown his account. It is brought 
and the friend says, "Here is the amount, mark that paid. Now, 
turn over a new leaf— so passing the old account by. Write my 
name at the top, he is my slave, whatever he needs give him and 
charge it to me. " Having done this the friend makes him free, 
but the man filled with gratitude, while rejoicing in his freedom, 
gladly yields willing obedience and service to his new and kind 
master. 



Thus to the world, whose millions have been enslaved to Satan 
and his minions, the picture illustrates Sin's tyranny and 
degradation, and God's love and deliverance and favor as 
perhaps nothing else would. 

The Law, with its sacrifices and typical justification; its jubilee 
cycles, enslavement and purchased redemption (Lev. 25:8-28.) 
etc., were all given as pictures, as object lessons to illustrate 
God's wonderful plan of salvation. A blind Church has neglected 
God's pictures, (failing to see them clearly herself) but under the 
restored Levitical priesthood, in the coming age, enlightened by 
that of the order of Melchisedec, these illuminations will be 
powerful instrumentalities in the accomplishment of the work 
they were really intended for: great index fingers pointing 
unerringly to the justification and redemption and 
RESTORATION of the race of slaves (of Sin and Satan), by 
Jehovah's way— through the blood of the world's Redeemer and 
Master, Jesus Christ our Lord. 

W. I. MANN. 



R1031 : page 8 

C. H. SPURGEON in a sermon on Rev. 5:10 said: "Do you 
know I am a fifth monarchy man? In Cromwell's time some said 
there had been four monarchies and the fifth would come and 
overturn every other. Well, I never wish to do as they did; but I 
believe with them that a fifth monarchy shall come. There have 
been four;-and there never shall be another until Christ shall 
come.... I am afraid we cannot hope for much better times until 
the Lord Jesus Christ comes a second time. Often do I cheer 
myself with the thought of His coming.... For that day do I look: 
it is to the bright horizon of that second coming that I turn my 
eyes." 

THE Protestant Churchman says: "What is the view we are to 
take, and the duty to which we are called?... To take the view of 
earth which the Lord's word suggests, Till the glorious coming 
of the Saviour we may anticipate nothing but successive 
overturnings of men and earthly things... The history of men, in 
the closing period of the times of the Gentiles, is a history of 
warfare and revolution, until the Saviour appears in the power 
and majesty of His coming. Thus are we to look at the coming 
state of the world and men, till He appear to take the kingdom. " 

"WE are living in the very age towards which all eyes have 
been directed as those of the closing days of the church's 
conflict, as long ago as the time of Luther. "-Samuel Garratt. 



R1031 : page 8 



"A VERY unpleasant complication has arisen in a wealthy and 
fashionable church in Cincinnati. For some time past a woman 
of previously doubtful reputation has been a constant attendant 
at the services of this church. She has frequently been affected 
to tears by the sermons, and in other ways manifested a great 
interest in religion. The prominent members of the church, 
however, and especially the ladies, are indignant at her for 
venturing to sit among respectable people, and the pastor has 
been requested to inform her that she is not wanted. Thus far he 
does not appear to have done this, and a number of people talk 
of leaving the church, unless this woman is made to do so. 
Wonder if these ladies ever read the eighth chapter of John, 
from the third to the eleventh verses. Probably not, or if they 
have, it is very likely they don't believe in any such spirit as that 
shown by Jesus the Christ. "~Sel. 

WHOSE is this fastidious? "Church;" Whose spirit has it? 
Surely the church founded by Christ included Mary Magdalene. 
The great fashionable congregations of the worldly have its 
spirit, which is against (contrary to) Christ's spirit. -W. M. 
WRIGHT. 



R1033 : page 1 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., MAY, 1888. 

NO. 9. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. C. 
T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals.. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION 

TERMS :-FIFTY CENTS A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., paper 
bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," four 
shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "-ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



R1033 : page 1 

NO. VOL. II. OF M. DAWN is not yet ready and will not be for 
several months. Due notice will be given in these columns. We 
are doing what we can to hasten it. Assist us by being very 
particular in all orders and in giving addresses carefully. About 
one letter a day lacks either a signature or address, which causes 
us trouble as well as you. 



WE HAVE a good supply of the January '88 issue of the 
TOWER containing articles upon Hell, etc. Thirty thousand 
have already gone out, and we will supply all you can use 
judiciously, free. These however, are not for general distribution 
(use the Arp tracts thus), but for use among your friends or such 
as you think might be specially interested. You may if you 
choose send us the full addresses of such, and we will mail them 
as sample copies. 



IN ORDERING "Arp Tracts" say about how many you can 
distribute. Order freely— we make no charge. Quite a few saints 
have been found by this agency. Some whose feet had well nigh 
slipped into Infidelity and Spiritism got these, then got 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, and are now praising God, discerning 
His "Plan of the Ages." They should be distributed to every 
congregation of Christian worshippers everywhere, and we are 
prepared to supply them to all who will thus use them. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. -We are now having another lot 
of 20,000 printed. For convenience we put them up in lots of 
100, for 35cts. and 300 for $1.00— this pays the carrying charges 
to you. 

To introduce these to all our readers we have concluded to put 
up some of them in smaller packages— 25 envelopes for lOcts. 
This will give the opportunity of doing this sort of mission 
work, for the truth, to all-even those who write but few letters. 
If each of our ten thousand readers used these envelopes always, 
it would be a great additional power constantly and quietly at 
work without effort or expense-telling the good tidings, 
preaching where you could not preach otherwise. 



IF YOU meet any friends of the TOWER who say they have 
not been getting it lately, just ask them whether they subscribed 
for it for 1888, or asked for it free on "The Lord's Poor List." 
We cannot state our terms more explicitly than we do at the 
head of first column. We do not wish to send the TOWER to 
those who are able to pay the small price of fifty cents per year, 
but are not sufficiently interested to do so. Nor do we wish a 
single interested one to be without its regular visits because 
unable to pay. All such interested ones are as welcome to it as 
those who pay. But do not mistake us to mean that we want to 
send the TOWER to all poor people, and do not send us lists of 
the poor of your neighborhood. We offer it to the interested poor 
only, and expect such to show their interest by writing for it 
themselves, stating their willingness but inability to pay. 



R1031 : page 1 

THE GERMAN DAWN. 

The German translation of Millennial Dawn is issued as yet 
only in cloth binding -414 pages, price $1.00 per copy. When 
orders for 2000 copies in paper binding are pledged we will get 
out an edition of 5000 such. As yet only about 500 have been 
pledged. Many of our readers have friends and relatives who are 
Germans and should, as far as possible, use this agency for their 
benefit. 

We propose, to those unable to purchase, that we will loan them 
a copy of this book and pay the postage to them, if they will 
promise to read it carefully and to return it, and to pay return 
postage. The same proposition, to loan, we apply also to the 
English edition,-though at the low price of 25cts. in paper 
covers, there are few who cannot purchase, if they so desire. 



R1031 : page 1 

"A CHRISTIAN pays a very poor compliment to the Bible, and 
to his own faith in it, when he starts out with the assumption that 
SCIENCE is the fixed point of certainty, and that the BIBLE is 
the variable point of uncertainty, and that if there be seeming 
conflict between the two, the Bible must yield to the supreme 
authority of science. " 



R1032 : page 1 



VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

THE BISHOP OF LONDON ARRAIGNS THE CHURCH FOR 

UNFAITHFULNESS TO THE CAUSE OF LABOR, AND 

VOLUNTARILY GIVING UP HIS BISHOPRIC, HIS 

PALACE, HIS SEAT IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS, AND AN 

ANNUAL SALARY OF 10,000 POUNDS, HE PROPOSES 

HENCEFORTH TO DEVOTE HIMSELF TO THE CAUSE OF 

SUFFERING HUMANITY. 

TEXT. -"Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your 
miseries that shall come upon you. Behold the hire of the 
laborers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept 
back by fraud, crieth; and the cries of them which have reaped 
are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. Ye have lived in 
pleasure on the earth and been wanton; ye have nourished your 
hearts as in a day of slaughter. Ye have condemned and killed 
the just, and he doth not resist you."- James 5:1,4,5,6. 

Fellow Citizens— The text which I have just read you, and from 
which I shall preach the last sermon as bishop that I shall ever 
deliver from this pulpit, is one which is probably as unfamiliar 
to you comfortable well-to-do people as it is familiar to all those 
who since it was originally penned, have toiled and suffered for 
humanity. Although it is read sometimes in the ordinary course 
of our church service, yet judging by your conduct, your ears 
have been deaf to its terrible denunciations. From the days when 
I was an humble curate until now, I have had a large and varied 
experience of cathedrals, churches, preachers and sermons, but I 
have never yet heard a discourse based on these words, and I 
cannot learn from any of my brother bishops or priests that they 
have used them, or heard them so used. 

I can see by your uneasy demeanor that you are asking 
yourselves why, on this Christmas day, when, in accordance 
with custom, I should be preaching smooth things to you, I 
should be mad enough to offend your delicate susceptibilities by 
quoting the saying of one of the common people— words written 
eighteen centuries ago— which might have done very well then, 
but which cannot possibly be applied to you and your class to- 
day; you who come here, clad in purple and fine linen, who, 
some of you, live in king's houses, who fare delicately every 
day, and who consider that you have fulfilled every moral 
obligation when you have dropped a coin into the collection 
box, before you step into your carriages to be driven to your 
luxurious home. It is because I believe that not only James, but 
Jesus Christ himself, if he could stand in my place to-day, would 
hurl these words at you with a force and a passion of which we, 
in the nineteenth century, have but little conception. Not as a 
bishop, but as a man, I repeat them to you, hardly hoping that 
they may touch your hearts, but more as a justification for my 
new and strange position. 



For years I have been one of you. My home has been not where 
Christ's home was, with the masses, but with the classes. I have 
an abundance of this world's goods. I have been a dignitary of a 
church which is the church of the rich, and not the church of the 
poor. Without a protest I have mixed in society with men and 
women whom Christ would have denounced as bitterly as he 
denounced the scribes and Pharisees. In the house of lords, I 
have sat silently side by side with whoremongers and adulterers, 
and silently have I welcomed as my personal friends, high-born 
women— some of whom I see before me to-day— with whom no 
decent working man would allow his wife or daughter to 
associate. 

I have seen among you, spreading like a canker, the lust of the 
flesh and the pride of life, and instead of reproving you, as 
Christ would have done, I have taken refuge in generalities, and 
have not dared to denounce your individual sins. All this time 
there has been going on around me, in this huge city and 
throughout the land, the surging, toiling life of humanity -the 
sorrow, the suffering, the poverty, the disease, the sin and the 
shame which I realized but dimly, as something altogether apart 
from my own existence, but for which, I at last see clearly, you 
and I have been up to the present time mostly to blame. We and 
our class have kept back by fraud the hire of the laborers who 
have reaped our fields, we have lived in pleasure on the earth 
and been wanton, we have nourished our own hearts while we 
have starved the bodies of those to whom we owe the very bread 
we eat and the clothes we wear, and now we are condemning 
and killing at our own very gates the people whose inarticulate 
cry is entering into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, whose 
faithful servants we pretend to be. 

My fellow citizens, I know not how it may be with you, but for 
me this careless, selfish life is ended. Little by little I have 
awakened to the fact that all my days I have entirely neglected 
my real duty to my fellow men, and at last I have come to know 
that my proper place is not here, as a well paid bishop of a 
church which, in its present condition is utterly opposed to every 
thing which Christ taught, but among the poor, to whom he 
declared that the gospel should be preached; among the laborers 
whose hire we have kept back by fraud. 

Too long have I neglected the miserable social facts of our so- 
called Christian civilization. Too long have I spoken to you 
smooth things and cried peace when there was no peace. I have 
known by repute that there was misery among our people, 
starvation in our midst, and prostitution on our streets. But 
hitherto I have taken these as something for which you and I 
were not responsible, but which were really due to the inherent 
wickedness of nature. 

But now I have learned that our pleasures and our wantonness 
have been built upon this hideous foundation, and having 



learned this— as you may also learn if you will— I have resolved 
that from this Christmas 

R1032 : page 2 

day my new life shall begin. To-day I lay down my robes, I give 
up my bishoprick, my palace and my income; I give up my seat 
in the house of lords; I give up my pleasures of society and of 
the world, and at last I take my place as a MAN among MEN. 

It is, I know, a bold step that I have taken, but I have fully 
counted the cost. Resolved no longer to live on the labors of 
others, I shall probably have to join the great army of the 
unemployed. Tomorrow I shall attempt to preach my first 
sermon to them in Trafalgar square, from the same text that I 
have used here to-day, and it is likely that I shall pass tomorrow 
night in a police cell. But there I shall be no worse off than Jesus 
Christ would be, if he attempted to enter this abbey 
(Westminster) now, for he would be arrested and locked up as a 
vagabond without visible means of subsistence. To you and your 
class he would simply be a laborer whose subsistence you have 
kept by fraud. To the abolition of that fraud, and of the misery 
and degradation which result from it, I shall henceforth devote 
my life. It will be no easy task, not near so easy as being Bishop 
of London, but the reward of a good conscience and of noble 
work well done, is better far than a palace and ten thousand 
pounds ($48,000) a year. 

In this place I shall probably never speak again. But when 
freedom shall have opened out her arms and gathered all men 
into her wide embrace, when justice and truth shall have taken 
the place of oppression and fraud, some man of the people shall 
stand in this temple of the dead, and inspired by the best 
traditions of past, the noble aspirations of the present, and the 
ideal hopes of the future, shall send ringing through these lofty 
aisles that living Christmas message which, till then can never 
have its full significance— "Peace on Earth, and Good Will to 
Men."— From London Justice. 



The above clipping sent us by one of the brethren came just too 
late for our April issue. It is rather remarkable that an event of 
so great moment, should have been kept quiet so long. 

So far as we can learn, at this great distance, the above discourse 
gives only too true a picture not only of the state of society in 
Great Britain, but throughout the old world. Even the moral and 
conscientiously disposed of the Aristocratic Class, live often in 
idleness as well as luxury upon the labors of the middle and 
lower classes,— including the trades-people, small 
manufacturers, mechanics and day- laborers; all of whom are 
indirectly forced to supply this extravagant luxury, waste and 
idleness, out of their unceasing toil and often pitiful wages. 



The aristocratic class referred to are really social parasites, who 
as a rule never have given any equivalent for the extravagant 
favors they enjoy, and never intend to do so; nor to permit the 
favors which they regard as their lawful rights to slip from their 
grasp. The incomes of this class, amounting often to millions of 
dollars yearly, are generally derived as rentals for the lands held 
by them for centuries. If it could be shown that the parents of the 
present owners ever gave an equivalent of any sort for these 
lands, and that their tenants or their parents once had as 

R1033 : page 2 

good a chance of owning their natural proportion of the soil, but 
had wasted their time and energies in idleness, foolishness, or 
dissipation, then the case would be different; though that would 
not make proper the everlasting perpetuity of a land-lord system, 
found to be grievously oppressive to all except the very few. 

But except in a very few cases there is not the slightest show of 
equity. The parents of present land-lord aristocrats in the remote 
past obtained control of the land by force, without giving any 
equivalent. And, of keener intellects than the masses, they 
framed laws which recognize their titles thus obtained. These 
laws the common people have heretofore consented to, being for 
most part ignorant of their own rights, and easily swayed by the 
plausible arguments or liberal patronage of those whose mental 
superiority to many of them they recognize— especially when 
among these aristocrats stood the highest representatives of the 
church, teaching by word and example that this arrangement, as 
it stands, is the will of God. 

No doubt many of the royal and aristocratic families, and many 
of the bishop-princes of Great Britain, at heart are really 
benevolent, and have never thought of this matter in its true 
light,-that instead of being very merciful and benevolent, they 
are not even just; that they owe much to those who for years 
they have deprived of the rights and privileges which God 
provided for them equally. We believe the bishop above quoted, 
is one of the few among the aristocratic class, whose eyes have 
been opened to see these matters in their true light. But, under 
the enlightening influences of the new age now dawning, the 
eyes of the "common people" are opening much more rapidly. 
Self-interest tends to open the eyes of the one class, as it tends to 
close those of the other. By reason of the inventions, etc., of this 
"Day of preparation" the common people have gotten a taste of 
education and of the comforts and luxuries of life, which the 
aristocratic class could not have prevented if they would. Now 
the thinking process has begun; knowledge is being increased, 
and they are beginning to see that it is not by God's decree that 
the land which he provided for humanity as a whole, has been 
unjustly seized by the few to the lasting injury of the vast 
majority. 



What is the remedy? It is the recognition of the wrong, and the 
righting of it. Because few of the aristocracy will allow 
themselves to see the right, or to in any measure release their 
hold upon their assumed rights, therefore the remedy, which 
must come, will come from the common people demanding and 
taking their rights. They are not fully awake yet, but it will not 
be long until they are. And the danger will be, that in the frenzy 
of the revolution which must come, (the great "time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation"), many of them will 
ungenerously exact a fearful interest— such as was illustrated in 
the French Revolution. 

In the United States, though we have no such inequitable land- 
lord system as that of the old world, while there are still millions 
of acres of public domain held for actual settlers, yet we see 
nevertheless, in the sale of large bodies of the public lands to 
individuals and corporations, the beginning of a system which in 
the end would work injury to the masses. The people of to-day 
have no right to dispose of public lands to speculators, which 
their own and their neighbors' children will sooner or later need 
for use. Yet this is what they are doing through their 
governmental representatives. We see here too, a principle at 
work which is contrary to God's design-that the earth should be 
for the people, each in proportion as he can and will use the 
same; not to be made a matter of speculation whereby one 
person or family may in the future collect a toll or rent from 
others for the use of God's gift— the land. Improvements, 
representing labor, are proper investments; but land, 
representing God's generous gift to all, should not be 
appropriated by the few to be held from the many,-not even by 
common consent. 

It would be wise for all possessing large holdings of land to 
dispose of the surplus speedily; and not only in this but in every 
matter let us see to it that our lives and deeds conform to 
righteousness-justice. This should be the action of the 
righteous, from principle and from a desire to conform their 
lives in all things to the will of God. It might well be followed 
by others who care only for self-interest; for we are coming into 
the days of retribution when every deed shall receive a just 
recompense, whether it be good or evil. 



R1033 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

The following letter is from the Editor's beloved father, who has 
past his threescore and ten: it shows his deep interest in the 
truth, and though neither a public speaker or writer, he is a 
minister and ambassador for the Lord, seeking continually to be 



used to the Master's honor, by letting his light so shine as to 
glorify our Father in heaven. 



Manitee Co., Fla. C. T. RUSSELL, 

MY DEAR SON:-Your kind and welcome letter came duly, 
and I infer from its tenor that you are all well. However much I 
like to hear from you often, I am satisfied that you have not 
much time to give to writing letters and therefore will excuse 
you, when you do the best you can. We are in comfortable 
health at present, though I am far from rugged or strong. I feel 
that the Lord is dealing very graciously with us in all things, and 
that we have great reason to be very humble and thankful for his 
mercies, and I do feel thankful and contented. The world and the 
things of the world do not trouble me as they used to do. I take 
great pleasure in thinking of the goodness of our Heavenly 
Father in giving us the light of His glorious plan of salvation, 
and of establishing our faith in Christ Jesus our Lord as the only 
way to obtain eternal life. This hope and this trust in Jesus alone 
for salvation, is daily strengthened in me, the more I see of the 
various dogmas of conflicting creeds. The most regret I have, 
and the only thing which makes me feel dissatisfied with myself 
is, that I cannot do more than I am doing for the cause of truth, 
and to communicate to others the blessed truths we so much 
enjoy. We had a precious season here on the anniversary of the 
death of "Christ our Passover," though there were but three of 
us. We remembered the gathering at Allegheny, as well as all 
the scattered sheep, and knew even before 

R1034 : page 2 

the April TOWER told us, that you would have a precious 
season and remember us at the throne of grace. 

I am glad to know that Bro. Zech has concluded the translation 
of DAWN into the German language. Tell him I compliment 
him on having accomplished his work in so short a time, 
considering other work. You are all doing a great work, and I 
pray that you may be very successful in your undertakings in the 
future, as you have been in the past. Send me 300 missionary 
envelopes. I have some of the "Arp Tracts" yet. Please send me 
about five or six more February TOWERS. I will state to you 
that if you find any one wanting to buy wild land near Pinellas, I 
want to donate 10 acres to the WATCH TOWER TRACT 
SOCIETY, but I am unable to find a purchaser here at present. 

We here, all join in sending love to you all. Your loving father. 

J. L RUSSELL. 

page 2 



Graham Mines, West Va. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:— It is some time since I learned of your 
valuable paper Z.W.T. It was in the Jan. and Febr. Nos., I saw 
the complete Bible Denunciation of the Orthodox view of Hell. I 
shall try to work for the "TOWER" what time I can spare from 
my farm this summer. From what I have seen of your 
publications, you are certainly doing a grand, and it must be an 
appointed work; and may the good Lord stand by you on Zion's 
wall to proclaim what the signs of promise are. Yours in hope. 

J. J. B. 

Neshannock, Pa. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-The Arp slips have been scattered 
broadcast throughout this locality, and also the few Dawns that 
Bro. Wise and myself have been able to sell and give away, 
have caused a grand confusion. The nominal churches are 
denouncing us, and specially warning their congregations to not 
even allow a scrap of paper of any kind we may send out to 
come into their homes, and warning their children not to read 
anything of the kind. But thank God though the Devil may use 
all the forces he can command, it is only stimulating us to 
greater efforts, and we can already see some fruits of our labor. 
God is not an idle spectator of what is going on. He is not 
allowing the devil to have all his own way. He, as we believe, 
has plucked one soul as a brand from the burning [out of the 
confusion and distress of Babylon-into the joys of truth]. Glory 
be to His name, for he is worthy of all praise. 

Your poor unworthy brother rejoices that his name is cast out as 
evil, and that the finger of scorn is pointed at him; having the 
blessed privilege of suffering it for the Master's sake. Pray for 
me that my faith may wax stronger in the Lord. God bless you 
and yours, and all the faithful ones is my earnest prayer. Yours 
in fellowship and love. 

I. W. M . 

Macon, N.C. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We want the TOWER, but as yet we 
are unable to send any money. It seems strange to us, but it is 
true, that before we saw the true light and tried to walk therein, 
we could pay for publications, but because of this truth many 
around us, (in sectarian churches,) make it as hard on us as 
possible, and then ascribe it to "Providence" because we are 
wrong. But we do not see it so. We see in this, that we are on the 
right road. In this age we are not promised riches, but 
tribulation; and we prefer to be poor now and rich hereafter, 
dishonored now, and honored in the coming age. We know our 
Father knoweth what things we need. We will continue to work 
and do the best we can and send you some money when we can. 



Send us some Arp slips if you can for circulation. May God 
bless you with grace, more wisdom and knowledge in the truth, 
and means to sustain you. 

Yours in the hope of eternal glory. 

J. W. P 



Sharon, Wis. 

EDITOR TOWER, DEAR BROTHER:-Last issue of TOWER 
at hand some time since and eagerly read, and next issue longed 
for. I have been a follower of Christ for four years or more and 
have been a close student of His Word, but never saw the truth 
as I now do on reading Dawn. It has been my purpose to enter 
college and prepare for the ministry, but on account of 
circumstances the way has never been opened, and I now 
believe God has restrained me to take up this work in a different 
way— not to become bound to the traditions of men or sects. 

I am loaning Dawn. The M.E. minister here is studying it now, 
and being a bold preacher, if he could be brought into the light, I 
am sure he would be a power. 

Hoping to receive some suggestions on best manner of going to 
work, I am, 

Yours in Christ. 

C. H. D . 

Garvanzo, Cal. 

DEAR SIR:-With this request for four "Dawns," I must say a 
word. I have only lately heard these "Glad tidings of Great Joy." 
I have only just begun to follow after this glorious blessed truth. 
Would that I had heard of it years ago; but now by His help and 
guidance I mean to press forward, and spread the truth as set 
forth by the "TOWER. " May God abundantly bless and prosper 
you in this work. Please send me 300 or 400 of the Arp slips, 
and I will distribute them to best advantage in my office, and 
send four of the 25ct. edition of "Dawn" for distribution also. I 
expect to send for more soon. 

Yours most sincerely. 

R. L. B . 



R1034 : page 3 



THE HARVESTER'S PRAYER. 

Earths harvest great is ripe indeed, 
But laborers true, seem few; 
Ah! help me Lord, my heart doth plead, 
Some needful part to do. 



Wise as the serpent let me be 
In laboring for thy truth; 
Let it absorb my every thought 
And to my love give proof. 

With cunning let me overtake 
Some stranger, and by me 
Thy love reveal, Thy truth impart, 
And charm them Lord for Thee. 

And, gentle as a dove I'd be, 
Infused with love and power; 
Go forth to win all hearts to Thee 
Until my latest hour. 

Help me Thy wisdom and Thy power 
To show forth with Thy love; 
Thy Justice, too, make clear to view 
And lead their thoughts above. 

And while the members of the Bride 
Part from each other here, 
May it my blessed privilege be 
To comfort some and cheer. 

By Thy example may we each 
Be strengthened, not in vain 
To sacrifice earth's present things, 
The promised prize to gain. 



--Mrs. M. M. Land. 



R1034 : page 3 

BAPTISM AND ITS IMPORT. 

That our Lord and his apostles practiced and enjoined upon all 
followers-"even to the end of the world," or present 
dispensation, an outward rite called baptism, in which water was 
used in some manner, cannot reasonably be questioned. This 
was not only the case during our Lord's ministry in the end of 
the Jewish age, but also under the Spirit dispensation after 
Pentecost, as is abundantly proved by the Scriptural record. * 

Nor will it answer to assume, as some do, that baptism belonged 
among the ceremonies of the Jewish Law, and that with all other 
features of that Law it ended at the cross— where our Lord "made 
an end of the Law nailing it to his cross;" for, baptism was not a 
part of the Jewish Law. The washings enjoined in the Law, 
performed at the laver in the court of the tabernacle, were 
neither immersions, nor sprinklings, but simply cleansings, and 
were not practiced upon the people. The one tribe of Levi alone 
had access to that washing. 



Nor will it do to say, as some do, that the apostles coming out of 
Judaism erred for a while. They failed to discern at first (say 
these teachers) that the real baptism was that of the holy Spirit at 
Pentecost, and so improperly kept up the water baptism after the 
Jewish age to which it belonged. In this as in the matter of not 
eating with the uncircumcised, they claim Peter erred, and others 
of the apostles with him to some extent. They claim too, that 
Paul confesses to an error when in 1 Cor. 1:14-16 he says, "I 
thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and 
Gaius...and the household of Stephanas:" also, when he says 
(Col. 2:20,21), "Why, as though living in the world, are ye 
subject to ordinances-touch not, taste not, handle not." 

Thus an apparently strong argument is built up, which is quite 
beyond the ability of many to see through-including those who 
make such arguments. This is the result of a too superficial 
examination of the subject, and a jumping at conclusions from 
certain texts whose connections have not been thoroughly 
studied or understood. 

As already shown "baptism" was not a feature of the Law 
Covenant: hence it was not at all a part of that which our Lord 
ended and cancelled at the cross. It is a great mistake to class 
baptism, which is a symbol of the New Covenant, with the 
"ordinances" of the Jewish Law Covenant mentioned by the 
Apostle, Col. 2:20,23. In verse 14, he shows that he refers to 
ordinances that were against, i.e., unfavorable, disadvantageous 
to the Jew. Can any one say this of baptism? In what sense is it 
against any one? 

What Paul does refer to as the Law "ordinances" contrary to or 
against the Jew, were those ceremonies, and fastings, those 
celebrations of new moons and Sabbaths (verse 16), and 
particularities about the eating of clean and unclean animals, and 
wearing of clothing made of linen and wool mixed, etc., etc. 
These "ordinances" had their origin in the Law Covenant 
instituted by Moses, and had been added to by the Scribes and 
Pharisees who sat "in Moses' seat" (Matt. 23:2), until they had 
become a mass of forms and ceremonies so complex and 
bewildering that those who attempted a strict observance of 
them found them extremely burdensome,— a yoke of bondage. 
Our Lord referred to the same bondage and weariness (Matt. 
23:4); and again (Matt. 1 1:28) to the same class he held out 
grace instead of the Law, as the only way of life, saying, "Come 
unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden [with the Law's 
unprofitable and multitudinous ordinances -which, because of 
your weak, fallen condition cannot profit but only annoy and 
weary you, and are therefore "against" you], and I will give you 
rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn of me; for I am meek 
and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my 
yoke is easy, and my burden is light. " 



It is furthermore evident, that baptism is not one of the 
ordinances referred to in verse 14, when we read to the contrary 
in verse 12, that we who are buried with Christ in baptism, ARE 
THEREFORE (even if Jews formerly under the Law Covenant) 
not liable or subject to the ordinances of verse 14. Thus baptism 
is placed in contrast with the ceremonies of the Law. 

The idea that baptism does not belong to the Gospel age and 
ended at the cross is again proved erroneous, when we 
remember that it was after his crucifixion, during the forty days 
before his ascension that our Lord while giving special 
instruction concerning the new dispensation, or Gospel age, 
specially mentioned baptism as the outward symbol by which 
believers were to confess him— "even to the consummation of 
the age" then just begun.- See Matt. 28:18-20. 

And those who claim that proper baptism is that of the holy 
Spirit only, and that water baptism is therefore wrong, should be 
effectually silenced and converted from their error by the 
Master's commission to his church to preach and baptize to the 
end of the age. For, how could the disciples baptize any with the 
holy Spirit? Surely that is God's part. On the other hand, the 
Lord's words could not have meant that his followers should 
teach all nations, and that those who believed would be baptized 
with the holy spirit by God, for then why would he give 
particular directions to the disciples as to how it should be 
done,- "In the name [or by the authority] of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the holy Spirit"-? It is evident that our Lord's 
directions refer to the symbol, to water baptism only; because 
we can do no more for others than teach them and symbolically 
baptize them: we cannot believe for them, nor make them 
believe; neither can we consecrate for them, nor make them 
consecrate. But we can teach them, and when they believe for 
themselves and consecrate for themselves, we can baptize them 
in water. And by this act they confess their faith in Christ's death 
and resurrection, and their own consecration to be dead to the 
world and alive toward God, that in due time they may share in 
Christ's resurrection. 

Furthermore, God specially recognized water baptism under the 
Spirit dispensation by in some cases withholding certain gifts 
[miraculous manifestations conferred upon believers in the 
beginning of this age, for the purpose of manifesting God's 
approval of the new teachings of the gospel], until the water 
baptism had been properly performed (Acts 19:3-6); as in 
another case the gifts were bestowed first, to teach Peter that 
water baptism and every other feature of the gospel favor was 
open to the Gentiles.-Acts 10:44-48. 

That Paul's expression of thankfulness that he had been 
prevented from baptizing many of the Corinthian church, was 
not because he saw that the ordinance had passed away, but for 
an entirely different reason, will be seen by a careful 



examination of the context. A serious affection of the eyes 
which rendered him almost blind was undoubtedly the reason 
why Paul did not baptize more of his converts but left this 
ordinance to others to perform. The great Apostle has been 
ignominiously styled "The blear-eyed Jew," and there is little 
room for doubt that after he was struck down in the way to 
Damascus (Acts 9:4,8), he never fully recovered his sight. This 
"thorn" (figurative) he besought the Lord thrice to remove, but it 
was left as a reminder of previous error and hence served to 
keep Paul humble in the service of that Master whom he once 
had persecuted. (2 Cor. 12:7.) It was probably because of this 
difficulty that he did not recognize the High-priest, when on trial 
(Acts 23:5); and for the same reason all of his epistles were 
written by some one else, except one, and that one of the 
shortest of them; and it closes with a statement which indicated 
that he could write only with difficulty and that his readers could 
appreciate this, knowing his disadvantages. He says: "Ye see 
how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand. " 
(Gal. 6:1 1.) Again, when wishing to mention their love for him, 
and their willingness to do for him the most useful thing, had it 
been possible, he says to them (Gal. 4:15), "I bear you record 
that, if possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes and 
have given them to me. " 

It evidently was for this same reason that Paul never baptized 
any of his converts where he could avoid it— where others were 
present who could see to the service better than he. 

When he thanked God that of the Corinthian church he had 
baptized only a few (1 Cor. 1:11-17), he was not assuming that 
he had become wiser than to do so— wiser than the Master who 
said, teach and baptize unto the close of the age, but for totally 
different reasons; reasons which only those who read the epistle 
to the Corinthians connectedly, as a whole, can recognize. He 
had heard that the church at Corinth was split into factions, 
divisions [literally sects]; some were Paulites, others 
Apollosites, others Peterites, and others Christians. He was sure 
he had in no way aided such sectarianism, and was glad he could 
say, I never authorized you to call yourselves by my name. Were 
you baptized into the name of Paul, or into the name of Christ? 
Since the majority were Paulites, and since Paul had founded the 
church at Corinth, it might appear to some that he had been 
seeking to make converts to himself, Paulites instead of 
Christians; and as it turned out thus he was glad to have it to say, 
that very few of those calling themselves Paulites had been 
baptized by him, as he said,- "Lest any should say, I baptized in 
mine own name. " 

Even had Paul's sight been good, the fact that he was an abler 
preacher than others and that many could baptize as well as he, 
would have been a sufficient reason for his course; for it was 
thus with the Master: We read (John 4:1,2), "Jesus made and 



baptized more disciples than John; though Jesus himself 
baptized not but his disciples." Judging from his unfitness for 
performing baptisms, and his talent for teaching, Paul concluded 
that preaching, and not baptizing, was his special mission ( 1 
Cor. 1:17), though his own record shows that he did not allow 
even his own unfitness to hinder or prevent this obedience to the 
Master's precept and example, when occasion required and no 
one else was convenient to render the service. 

WHO WERE TO BE BAPTIZED? 

Our Lord authorized teaching first, and then the baptism of such 
as believed in him as the Redeemer, and accepted the gospel call 
to become followers of him. The apostles followed this rule, and 
we have no testimony anywhere that they baptized others— 
neither unbelievers, nor infants, nor idiots. True, it is recorded 
that several "households" were baptized, and from this it is 
argued that probably there were infants in some of those 
families, and that therefore it is probable that infants were 
baptized, though none are mentioned. But, we answer, some 
families contain idiots, and some families number one or more 
unbelievers, shall we therefore conclude without other evidence 
that the apostles disregarded our Lord's command and baptized 
unbelievers? Nay, verily! It is far more reasonable to conclude 
that in the few cases where households are mentioned they 
consisted only of adult believers; or that, since the custom or 
general usage would prevent misunderstanding, it was proper 
enough to say "household," even if there were in them children 
too young to be "believers," and who therefore would be 
understood as not included. 

THE FORM OF BAPTISM. 

The Greek language is remarkable for its clear and definite 
expression of thought, and therefore was well fitted to give 
expression to divine truth. Its flexibility is well illustrated in the 
following words, each expressing a different shade of thought, 
yet all having a similar significance. Thus cheo signifies to pour; 
raino, to sprinkle; louo, to wash or bathe; nipto, to wash a part of 
the person; bathizo, (from bathos the bottom), to immerse or 
plunge deep; rantizo, (from raino), to sprinkle or shed forth; 
bapto, to dip or dye; baptizo, to dip, immerse or cover. 

This last word baptizo (rendered baptize in the common version 
Bible), is used by our Lord and his apostles when referring to an 
ordinance which they practised, as well as enjoined upon all 
followers of the Lamb. It is a deeply significant ordinance in 
reality, though very simple in the outward symbol. From the 
word selected out from among so many others of various shades 
of meaning, it is clear that a sprinkling or even a washing of a 
part of the person was not the thought, but an immersion or 
covering of the whole being,-whatever that action or thought 



implies. Immersed is the correct translation; baptized as 
rendered in our common English Bibles is not a translation at 
all, but a mere carrying over of the Greek word into the English 
without translating 

R1034 : page 4 

it at all. Immersed, is the English word which corresponds in 
meaning to baptizo. 

Not only does the Greek word signify to bury, immerse, or 
cover, but the connected Scripture narrative of itself, without the 
particular strictness of the Greek word used, would imply that 
the baptism was one of immersion and not sprinkling. The 
Greek as well as the English shows that our Lord went down 
into the water and came up out of the water. And the Apostle 
Paul frequently speaks of baptism as a burial which would be a 
very inappropriate figure with any other form than that of 
immersion. 

It has been suggested by some, that in the case of the jailor who 
believed and was baptized straightway (Acts 16:33), that it 
could not have been by immersion, because he and the prisoners 
could not have left the jail for the purpose; but on the contrary, it 
has been shown that at that time the jails were provided with 
bathing reservoirs, most suitable for the immersions. And 
furthermore, it is to be remembered that of John the baptizer, it 
is written, "John was baptizing at Enon near to Salim, because 
there was much water there." (John 3:23.) No one can for a 
moment suppose that if John sprinkled his converts, the 
largeness of the water supply could be a consideration. It was 
probably at a pool in the Jordan river. 

It is generally admitted by scholars that immersion was the 
common practice of the early church, but with the beginning of 
the third century came great confusion on this as on other 
subjects; on the one hand some placed all the value upon the 
form, insisting even on three immersions, because our Lord had 
said in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy 
Spirit, not seeing that in the name of simply signifies in 
recognition of; others claimed that as our Lord's head bowed 
forward in dying on the cross so they should be immersed, not 
as in a burial, but face downward; others insisted that the 
baptized must be nearly naked as our Lord died thus; and still 
others went to an opposite extreme, and while holding that a 
form was all important, claimed that the exact form was 
unimportant, and for convenience substituted sprinkling. 

This latter finally became the standard mode in the Church of 
Rome, from whom it reached Protestants. Immersion however is 
still the recognized form in the oriental churches. As we shall 
show presently, all these errors as to form, resulted from losing 
sight of the real significance of baptism. A claim frequently 
made, but not generally appreciated by those who make it, is 



that the Greek word baptizo, though it generally is used in 
referring to some thing or process (as the dying of cloth) which 
requires dipping, has been found in classical Greek writings 
used in places where the evident thought was that of washing 
without dipping. To this we answer that the word baptizo is not 
limited to a certain form of action, but rather carries the broad 
idea, to cover. And, so far as the word goes, the entire person is 
baptized if the entire person is wet, or in any manner covered 
with water. * But if the entire person to be baptized should be 
wet, or covered with water, who will claim that dipping was not 
the original as well as the easiest method of doing this? 

WHO MAY IMMERSE. 

There is no limitation placed in Scripture as to who shall 
perform this ceremony of baptizing believers in water, except 
that only the church was ever commissioned, either to teach or 
to baptize. The faith and knowledge of the one performing the 
ceremony does not count, but the faith and knowledge of the one 
immersed. Sometimes the one performing the ceremony may be 
far inferior every way to the one from whom it is performed 
(John 3:14) and might even, if necessary, be a believer not of the 
kingdom or church class. (Matt. 11:11.) Certainly all who are 
authorized to teach, are equally authorized to baptize; and that 
includes every true follower of Christ -"even unto the end of 
the age," according to the general call to the ministry, 
commission, and ordination of Matt. 28:19,20 and John 17:14- 
18-23. And this commission evidently does not exclude from 
this service the females of the "body of Christ" (Gal. 3:28), only 
that modesty, convenience, etc., indicate that they should avoid 
such public services except in rare necessary cases. 

THE SIGNIFICA TION OF IMMERSION. 

In considering the signification of immersion, the change from 
the Jewish to the Gospel dispensation must be recognized. The 
Jews, by their covenant, the Law, occupied a relationship toward 
God very different from Gentiles, -who were without hope. 
(Eph. 2:12.) Israelites by God's arrangement were recognized 
and treated under the provisions of the typical sacrifices, as 
though they were justified from Adamic guilt and penalty, and 
were as a nation consecrated to God and treated as though they 
were to be made the Bride of Christ. The provision, too, was that 
when the true Lamb of God should come, those truly 
consecrated among them, "Israelites indeed," might, by 
accepting of the true Lamb and true sin-sacrifice and atonement, 
enter upon actual justification, and carry with them their former 
consecration. In other words, an Israelite, consecrated indeed, 
living at the close of the Jewish age, when the real sacrifice for 
sins was made by our Lord, would be treated as though he had 



always had the reality, whereas really he had only a typical 
justification up to that time. 

Therefore in the opening of the Gospel age, Jews were not 
preached to in the same manner as Gentiles. The latter were 
told,— Ye who were once aliens and strangers have been brought 
nigh and may now have access to God and enter into covenant 
relations with him. Therefore, come to God by Christ who hath 
abolished distinctions between Jews and Gentiles, not by taking 
favors from the Jews, but by ushering believers, whether Jews or 
Gentiles, into the blessings and favors of the New Covenant, 
which the Law Covenant merely typified. (Eph 2:13-19.) The 
Jews were told the opposite: "Ye are the children of the prophets 
and of the covenant which God made with our fathers,... unto 
you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless 
you, in turning away each of you from his iniquities." "Repent 
and be baptized each one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for 
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the holy Spirit: For 
the promise is unto you [belongs to you] and to your children, 
etc. "-Acts 3:25,26 and 2:38-41. 

The point, to be noticed, is, that Israelites were already 
consecrated, and heirs according to the Law Covenant, and the 
only reason they as a nation had not been merged right at once 
out of the Jewish typical state into the Gospel realities and holy 
Spirit acceptance with God, as the apostles and other individuals 
had been, was, that they were not living up to their covenant 
relationship. Hence they were told to repent, or turn back into 
the true covenant relationship with God, and to enjoy their 
privileges as children of the covenant. They had sinned in not 
living up to what they could of their covenant, and they were to 
show that they renounced their previous state of sin by 
immersion, —washing away their transgressions in symbol, after 
praying in the name of Christ. (See Acts 22:16.) In like manner 
baptism by John and by Christ's disciples was confined to the 
Israelites, and signified repentance for covenant violations, and 
a return to covenant relationship, and was intended as a 
preparatory work: for those who fully received John's testimony 
and reformed and became Israelites indeed, did receive Christ, 
and did pass into the higher favors of the Gospel age. 

To these, already children of the covenant and already heirs of 
the promised blessings, water baptism meant a renouncing of 
previous sins of unfaithfulness, and it meant more: it meant their 
renunciation of the national sin of crucifying Christ- for the 
rulers representing that nation had said, "His blood be upon us 
and upon our children, "-and hence Peter exhorted saying, "Let 
all the house of Israel know that this Jesus whom you crucified, 
God hath made both Lord and Messiah. " And when in view of 
this national sin which each shared, they inquired, "Brethren! 
What shall we do?" Peter answered, "Reform and be immersed, 
each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness 



of your sins [and specially your share in this national sin of 
crucifying Messiah] and ye shall receive the gift of the holy 
Spirit. " To those who accepted it meant not only a renunciation 
of their national error of crucifying Christ, but a stepping out 
from the dispensation and control of Moses into that of Christ. 
Because in acknowledging Jesus to be the true Messiah, they 
were acknowledging him to be the long promised Saviour, 
Lawgiver and Teacher greater than Moses. 

But, baptism could not mean repentance in either of these senses 
to the Gentiles who had never been under the Jewish Covenant, 
and who had no direct responsibility for the death of Christ. 
Hence after the "elect remnant" of Israel had been received, and 
the Gospel message went to the Gentiles, to select out of them 
the number necessary to complete the body of Christ,-in the 
epistles to the Gentile churches we hear no further exhortation to 
be baptized as a sign of repentance, or as a symbol of washing 
away of sins. And since we by nature are not Jews, but are of the 
Gentiles whose fathers previously were aliens, and foreigners so 
far as God's covenants and promises were concerned, therefore, 
we should not apply to ourselves that idea of baptism which was 
Jewish, but that idea which the Apostle unfolds in Rom. 6:3-5; 
Col. 2:12. 

The full import of baptism, the reality of which the immersion in 
water commanded by our Lord is the symbol, is clearly shown 
by the Apostle in the above cited passages. "Know ye not that as 
many of us as were immersed into Jesus Christ were immersed 
into HIS DEATH?" Those who know this fully and thoroughly, 
and they alone, truly appreciate the water immersion 
commanded, and its weighty and appropriate significance. 

"Immersed into Jesus Christ. "-Those who see the "high calling" 
of this Gospel age— to joint-heirship with Christ Jesus our Lord, 
as members in particular of the "body of Christ" of which the 
Redeemer is Head and Lord, know that our attainment of that 
high honor depends upon our acceptableness as members in that 
body of Christ. (Rom. 12:1; 8:17,18.) Such also know that no 
one is "called," or invited into this "body of Christ,"- "the 
church of the firstborn," except those who already are believers, 
such only as own Christ as their Redeemer or Justifier, such 
therefore as are justified freely from all things by faith in his 
blood. Such, are not sinners, are invited to become joint- 
sacrificers and joint-heirs with Christ. The blemished of the 
flock were not acceptable on the Lord's altar under the Law, as a 
type of God's rejection during this age of all imperfect offerings. 
Our Lord was the actually spotless, unblemished, perfect Lamb 
of God, sacrificed for our sins; and in inviting some to join him 
in sacrifice and afterward in glory and honor, the Father accepts 
only such as are first made "whiter than snow,"— who because of 
faith in, and acceptance of the redemption which is in Christ 



Jesus, are reckoned perfect and hence are acceptable with God 
as joint-sacrificers. 

"Were immersed into his death."- This is given by the Apostle 
as the significance of water immersion— the real baptism 
therefore is this immersion into a sacrificial death with Christ; 
and the water immersion, though a beautiful figure which 
graphically illustrates the real one, is only its figure or symbol. 

But, how much is meant by the expression, "Immersed into his 
death?" In what way was our Lord's death different from that of 
other men? 

His death was different from that of other men in that theirs is a 
penalty for sin, while his was a sacrifice for the sins of others, to 
release others from their penalty -death. We with all others of 
Adam's family involuntarily share Adam's death —the wages of 
sin. And we, with all the Adamic family, were redeemed by 
Christ's death and granted a right to live again, and a restoration 
of all the human rights and privileges which Adam lost for us. 
We who believe this good news, accept of and begin (by faith) 
to enjoy those redeemed rights and privileges even now, 
believing that what Christ died to secure and has promised to 
give, is as sure as though already possessed. We have joy and 
peace in believing this "good tidings of great joy which shall be 
unto all people, " and by faith already reckon ourselves as in 
possession of those good things which are to be brought unto all 
who hate sin and love righteousness, at the second coming of 
our Lord Jesus. 

It is when we are in this justified condition, repossessed of the 
human rights lost through Adam, but redeemed by Christ, that 
the call or invitation is extended to us to become something far 
higher and far grander than perfect men fully restored to the 
likeness of God in flesh, (though that is so grand that few 
appreciate it)- to become joined with the Redeemer in the 
glories and dignities of the divine nature (2 Pet. 1:4), and co- 
workers with him in the great work of the Millennial age, -the 
work of restoring the redeemed race of Adam to perfection and 
all "that which was lost" in the fall. 

But the invitation to share this great dignity, "far above angels" 
(Eph 1:21; 1 Cor. 6:3), is accompanied by certain conditions 
and limitations. This prize is not given because of works, for no 
works which could be conceived of could purchase, or earn, so 
high an exaltation as that offered. The offer is a favor, unmerited 
by anything which we have done, or can do; and yet the 
conditions may be 

R1034 : page 5 

said to be the price, or cost to us, of the prize offered us. It is not 
however an equivalent or corresponding price. The price to us is 
a mere pittance in comparison to the value received, and "not 



worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in 
us." And when we consider that we had nothing to give, until 
first purchased by the precious blood of Christ, it will be clearly 
seen that the high honors to which we are called are not of 
works of our own, but of grace, through Christ. For even our 
pittance was forfeited by sin and had first to be redeemed, 
before it could be accepted. 

The requirements or conditions attached to the invitation to 
share with Christ the coming glories and dignities, are plainly 
stated:— Such must share his death, be immersed or buried into 
his death; if they would be of that "little flock" of joint-heirs, the 
"body of Christ, "-otherwise called "the Bride the Lamb's wife." 
To be sharers in his death, means that as our Redeemer spent his 
life, not in self-gratification (even lawful), but consumed it in 
the interest of truth and righteousness, in opposing sin and doing 
the work and executing the plan of the Father, so we must use 
our time, talents, energies, rights, and privileges. Redeemed by 
him and given to us, we not only consecrate these all to the 
Father's service, but we must use them faithfully even unto 
death— as he hath set us the example— walking in his footsteps as 
nearly as possible. If thus we be dead with him, we shall in due 
time live with him (Rom. 6:8); if thus we suffer with him, and in 
the present life endure afflictions even unto death (whether the 
death of the cross or some other form) for righteousness sake, 
we are counted as sharers of his death: and all who share "his 
death" will also share "his resurrection." -See Phil. 3:8-11. 

As "his death" differs from the Adamic death, so "his 
resurrection" differs from the RESTORATION resurrection 
which he has secured and will effect for all men. His 
resurrection is in Scripture pointed out as different from that of 
the world redeemed by him. It is emphasized in the Greek-"the 
resurrection," and also designated the "first [chief] resurrection." 
His resurrection was to the divine or immortal nature, a spiritual 
body. And so many of us as shall be immersed into Jesus Christ- 
-immersed into his death-shall also obtain a share in "his 
resurrection" -"the resurrection," as described in 1 Cor. 15:42- 
53. We who have borne the image of the earthly father Adam 
who also lost it for us, have been redeemed to it again by 
Christ's sacrifice, and have surrendered that again with him as 
joint-sacrificers of human nature. Thus we become partakers of 
a new nature, and shall bear the image of that new divine nature 
in the resurrection. -Verse 49. 

Note how pointedly the same writer mentions this too, in the 
passage under consideration. (Rom. 6:4-5.) "Therefore we are 
buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was 
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we 
also should walk in a new life. [Our new natures are reckoned as 
begun now, and are to be perfected at our resurrection in the 
Lord's likeness.] For if we have been planted together in the 



likeness of his death, [then] we shall be also [sharers] in the 
likeness of His resurrection." -Rom. 6:5. 

It is evident then, that baptism in water is the symbol of a 
complete, and to those who would be joint-heirs, an 
indispensable self-sacrifice; an immersion with our Lord into his 
death— an immersion which began and is counted from the 
moment the justified believer consecrated himself and 
surrendered his will to God,-though to secure the prize 
promised it must continue until the close of the earthly life. It 
was from this standpoint that our Lord spoke, when he said, "I 
have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened 
till it be accomplished." (Luke 12:50.) He had already 
performed the symbol at Jordan, but he was now referring to the 
consummation of his baptism into death. His will, surrendered to 
the Father's will and plan, was already buried; but as the dark 
hour of Gethsemane and Calvary drew near he longed to finish 
his sacrifice. It was from this same standpoint that he spoke of 
baptism to the two disciples who asked to sit, the one at his right 
hand and the other at his left in the kingdom. "He answered and 
said unto them, Ye know not what ye ask— Are ye able to drink 
of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the 
baptism that I am baptized with?" (Matt. 20:22.) He referred 
here to the baptism into death, and shows that none need expect 
to share the kingdom except those who share this baptism of 
death with him. Thus our Lord's explanation of the symbol 
exactly concurs with that of the Apostle. 

These are not two baptisms-one of water and the other into 
Christ's death- but one. The immersion into water is the symbol 
or shadow of the immersion into death. If there is a shadow, 
there must be a substance; and a clear strong light falling upon a 
substance produces a shadow of it. It is for the instructed child 
of God to distinguish between the substance and the shadow, 
and by recognizing their relationship to see in the two parts "one 
baptism. " Since the two parts were recognized as one baptism 
by the Apostle, it is doubtful if any one fully appreciates the 
ONE TRUE BAPTISM without seeing both the substance and 
the shadow. 

Recognizing the true import of baptism we see, that next to faith 
in Christ, it is the one important and essential step by which the 
Church glorified shall be entered: for only such as are 
conformed to, and have fellowship in our Lord's death will, as 
"members of his body," share the first or chief resurrection, to 
be with and like the head. It is not surprising that some have 
mistaken the shadow or symbol for the real, and made it a test of 
membership in the church upon earth; this is but a natural 
mistake. All who see the real immersion, as well as the symbol, 
yet ignore the latter, should carefully examine themselves to see 
that their wills in this matter are really dead and buried in the 
will of Christ. And if they refuse obedience to the Lord's word 



and example in this, they should make unquestionably sure to 
themselves the strength and validity of any arguments to the 
contrary, by which they set these aside. 

But some inquire, Is it necessary for me to be immersed in 
water, if I am confident that I am fully consecrated— immersed 
into Christ? Would the Lord reject me for so small a matter as a 
failure to go through a form? 

Do not forget that the present age is not one of commands and 
compulsions. God does not command and compel the obedience 
of his Church. This is a time in which, as a great favor, believers 
are privileged to offer their wills and their all in self-sacrifice to 
God. It is "the acceptable year of the Lord" -the time in which 
God is pleased to accept of our sacrifices (through Christ) and to 
give us certain exceeding great rewards promised to those who 
surrender their little all, and thus become followers in the 
footsteps of the High Priest of our order. 

Such as see this clearly will know that the Body of Christ is not 
given a law of commandments, nor dealt with as were the Jews; 
for "Ye are not under law but under favor. " Theirs was the house 
of servants and it is proper to command servants; but we belong 
to the "house of sons" (Heb. 3:5,6), if we are new creatures in 
Christ; and God dealeth with us as a true Father with true sons. 
True sons, and the only ones whom he will acknowledge as 
such, possess the spirit of adoption, and the spirit of obedience, 
the spirit of sons, and need not be commanded and threatened; 
for such both by word and deed, and in matters both small and 
great declare, "I delight to do thy will, O my God. " For such, no 
self-denial is too great, and no act of respect and obedience too 
small; and ignoring pride and all human philosophies and 
expediencies as unworthy to be weighed at all in opposition to 
the Father's wisdom, these learn that to obey is the best of 
sacrifice. 

No, God will not compel you to be immersed, either really or 
symbolically. These opportunities to sacrifice convenience, 
worldly opinion, etc., are privileges which we should highly 
esteem and covet, because by these we are able to show the Lord 
the depth and sincerity of our love and the reality of our 
consecration. It is on the basis of this and hundreds of other little 
things that we are being tried now,— to see if we are as earnest as 
we have professed to be. If we are ashamed to confess Christ 
before men by the very simple way which he arranged, we may 
well expect that he would be ashamed to call us overcomers and 
joint-heirs, and to confess us as faithful followers. He could not 
do so honestly and truthfully, and hence we may be sure he 
would not do so. And if after we see how much our Lord has 
done for us— first in our redemption and secondly in the great 
offer of the crown and divine nature, -we allow a trifling 
sacrifice of contemptible pride to hinder us from a small act of 
obedience which our Redeemer and benefactor requested, our 



own self-contempt and shame, should prevent our taking crowns 
and places (even if offered them) with the little band of faithful 
overcomers who valiantly sacrificed much, and thus proved that 
they loved much. 

While therefore we do not say that none will be of the "little 
flock" except those who have been immersed in water, as well 
as in the death of Christ, which it so beautifully symbolizes, we 
do say, that we do not expect to find in that "little flock" a single 
one who has seen water immersion to be the will of God, and 
who has refused to obey. Let us remember that obedience in a 
small matter may be a closer test than in a large one. Had Satan 
attempted to get Eve into the sin of blaspheming the Creator, he 
would have failed; had he attempted to get her to murder Adam 
he would have failed; hence the test of obedience in a very small 
matter, was a much more crucial test. So now God tests our 
professions of love and devotion and obedience most thoroughly 
by some of the smallest matters, of which the symbolic 
immersion is one. God's decision is, He that is faithful in that 
which is least, will be faithful also in that which is greater. 

Though "Baptists" do not generally grasp the full import of 
immersion, and look at the water rather than the death which it 
symbolizes, yet the holding of the symbol has been valuable, 
and shows the Lord's wisdom in choosing the symbol; for the 
truth with reference to the symbol even, has been unpopular ever 
since its rejection by Anti-christ centuries ago, and in very many 
cases has it required the true consecration, the true burial of the 
will into Christ's will, before the believer was willing to brave 
the scorn of the world by obedience to an unpopular ceremony. 

Even those who practice sprinkling and that upon unintelligent 
(and hence unbelieving) babes, hold that baptism is the door into 
the Church of Christ, and none of the sects receive into 
membership others than those who have gone through some 
ceremony called "baptism. " They receive infants thus into their 
Churches, on the ground that only church members will be 
saved from everlasting torment. True, this like other doctrines is 
little taught in our day, and is losing its influence over the 
people, yet millions of parents to-day believe that their children 
would be consigned to everlasting torment if they should die 
without being sprinkled with water in the name of the Father, 
Son, and Holy Spirit. Especially do Romanists, Episcopalians 
and Lutherans, fear an omission of this sort, and some 
Presbyterians and Methodists no less so. 

An illustration of this, and one which shows the power these 
errors put into the hands of the priestly or clerical class, came 
under our observation here in Allegheny about four years ago. 
The parents of the infant were Lutherans, but had a 
disagreement with the pastor of the congregation about non- 
payment of church dues and non-attendance at meetings. The 
child grew seriously ill and the father and mother by turn went 



many times to implore the cold hearted, error teaching, hireling 
shepherd to come and sprinkle their babe and save it from the 
eternal damnation he had taught them would otherwise be its 
portion. But he refused to come, telling them that they deserved 
the punishment. After further effort they got some one "just in 
time" to allay their groundless fears. 

Thus, it is evident, that no matter how careless they may be as to 
the exact form all the principal sects view baptism as the door 
into the church, the door of salvation, the door into the body of 
Christ, as truly as do Baptists. We, on the contrary, hold that 
neither the sprinkling with water, nor the immersion in water is 
the door into the "body of Christ," now being elected or chosen 
out of the world; but that the immersion into Christ's death, 
which begins in full consecration, is the door by which justified 
men become members of the Body of Christ which is the 
Church. We insist, that all who thus become members of "THE 
CHURCH whose names are written in heaven," as soon as the 
precept and example of the Lord and the apostles, and the 
appropriateness of the symbol are seen, should make haste to 
show their obedience and consecration before men. 

BAPTISM AND THE TABERNACLE. 

The true baptism is illustrated in the Jewish Tabernacle, but not 
by the Laver which stood in the Court full of water, at which the 
priests washed their hands and feet. No, that is a symbol of the 
cleansing effect of the truth upon the outward conduct of 
believers in general. It symbolizes the putting aside of filthy 
practices-lying, stealing, etc., and the putting away of filthy 
communications out of our mouths,— slanders, envy, strife, 
back-biting, etc.,- a cleansing as proper for the natural man as 
for the consecrated saints. 

The vail at the door of the Tabernacle represented the same 
thought as baptism, namely death. When the priest passed the 
first vail, it represented him as passing 

R1034 : page 6 

out of sight, buried from the outward things; and his shut in 
condition enlightened only by the lamp and supplied by the 
shewbread, represented the spiritual nourishment and 
enlightenment granted all such as are immersed into Christ- 
which the world knoweth not of. 

The second vail represented the end of the reckoned death in 
actual death; and the Most Holy represented the full fruition of 
all the exceeding great and precious promises made to those 
who become new creatures in Christ Jesus by sharing his death 
and also his resurrection. In the Most Holy comes the full 
realization of what the Holy gave but a foretaste of. Thus we see 
that a complete immersion or burial from sight was necessary to 
reach the Most Holy. And as the Tabernacle had but the one 



entrance, it clearly teaches that none can attain that state or 
condition which it typified (the divine nature), without first 
passing through the first vail, representing consecration or death 
to the world, which baptism in water most beautifully illustrates 
also. 

WHO MA Y BE IMMERSED. 

In John's baptism of the Jews unto reformation, he demanded of 
some that they should first show by their lives that they had 
reformed, before they went through the symbol of reformation. 
In the use of baptism after Pentecost, however, the only 
condition imposed was faith in Christ. It seems to have been 
taken for granted that none but true, sincere persons would thus 
profess faith in and allegiance to so unpopular a Leader, as the 
crucified Christ. But the water immersion, though it was a 
public profession of Christ by the one immersed, was not 
necessarily an endorsement of such by the apostles and the 
church. The church could not and did not decide whether the 
one they immersed symbolically had been really immersed into 
Christ. The symbol indicated this, and they explained the 
symbol and urged all that had consecrated in symbol to see that 
they were really dead to the world and its plans and aims, and 
alive toward God and his plan. 

This is evident from some instances, as that of Ananias and 
Sapphira and Simon Magus (Acts 5:1-10 and 8:13,20-23). To 
the latter, though he had been baptised, the apostle declares, 
"Thou art in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity. " 
So now, we do not need to decide for others who may wish to 
thus confess Christ, (except it be very evident that they do it as 
an intended mockery); it is their act alone and represents their 
conscience toward God; and the opinions and faith of the one 
performing the symbol, cannot affect the matter either favorably 
or unfavorably. The real baptism is that which cannot be seen, 
except in its influence upon the conduct; and the real church 
which is joined is the church whose names are written in heaven 
whose members cannot be known positively until the close of 
this age, when they shall be glorified with the Head. 

THE MANNER OF THE SYMBOL. 

The immersion since it symbolizes a burial should be 
backwards, in water sufficient for the purpose, and convenient 
as circumstances will permit. It should not be done with secrecy, 
as it is intended as a public confession of faith, and the only 
form of such public confession used by the early church, of 
which we have any record. Yet its publicity should be to fellow- 
believers rather than to the world. Hence, while it should in no 
way be kept secret from the world, it is unnecessary to give 
public notice except to the fellow-believers of the church. In 
fact, so solemn is the occasion to the church who realize its deep 



significance, that the presence of the worldly, unless they be 
seekers after God and therefore more than mere curiosity 
seekers, is not desirable. Such public notice we gather from the 
record, was the custom in the early church. 

Some think that because John the Immerser and the Lord's 
disciples baptized publicly in the river Jordan, therefore all 
should be immersed in public view in a river. But let it be 
remembered that the whole Jewish nation was the church 
according to their Law Covenant, therefore public view was 
public to the professed church of that time. As for the river 
Jordan, John and the disciples evidently used it as the most 
convenient place at their service. If the river was an important 
factor, why not the same river Jordan? 

It should be noted that when the Eunuch believed and was 
immersed, only Philip was present; when the jailer believed and 
was immersed (Acts 16:33), it was not in a river, but in a bath or 
some convenient arrangement in the prison. And we know that 
the ruins of the church buildings of the first two centuries show 
that they had special annexed buildings prepared for the 
convenience of immersions. 

The form of words used by the apostles and early church is not 
given, which shows that the form of words used is much less 
important than the act, and the meaning which it expresses. We 
may gather however from Acts 2:38, 8:16, Rom. 6:3, Gal. 3:27 
and 1 Cor. 1:13, that baptism "into Christ" into the name of the 
Lord Jesus was the thought; and that it was expressed in words. 
We may also presume that our Lord's words "Baptizing them in 
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit," 
were not disregarded, but expressed somehow on such 
occasions. The thought is, that believers by immersion into 
Christ's death, are joined to Christ as members of the little flock 
which is "his body;" and that their right or privilege to be thus 
accepted in the Beloved, is in the name or by the authority of the 
Father, through the merit of the Son and by the impartation to 
such of the holy Spirit of truth. We now give the form of words 
which it is our custom to use on such occasions, and our general 
procedure, for the convenience and satisfaction of those who 
may have occasion to use the suggestion. 

We first have, privately, some assurance on the part of all who 
are about to be immersed, that they recognize the death of Christ 
as their ransom price, and that they are already consecrated 
wholly to his service, and desire to now confess all this in the 
symbol which Christ enjoined. Then, the announcement having 
been publicly made before the congregation, we meet at an 
appointed time and place* for the service; and there, after briefly 
explaining the real immersion and its water symbol, and after 
offering thanks to God for the privilege of thus following in our 
Lord's footsteps, and expressing our trust in his promises to give 
grace and strength sufficient to enable those who have 



consecrated all to his service, to be dead indeed to the world and 
its aims and ambitions, and alive only to God's service and the 
study and carrying out of his plans; and after specially 
requesting a blessing upon those about to symbolize their 
covenant, we receive the candidates in the water. Then (in the 
usual manner, with one hand in front at the throat, and the other 
at the back of the neck) we say, if the name of the candidate be 
John,- "John, in the name of the Father and of the Son and of 
the holy Spirit-by this authority,-I baptize thee into the name 
of "Christ." We then let them down backward (as a corpse) until 
immersed, covered completely; then raise them to their feet. 
After again changing our clothing in the provided rooms, we 
meet in the presence of the congregation (who meantime 
worship God in prayer, songs of praise, etc.) and with 
convenient words we extend to the newly immersed ones the 
right-hand of fellowship in the name of the great Head of the 
Church, and on behalf of the entire church whose names are 
written in heaven; exhorting that they walk worthy of the name 
of Christ which they have confessed and taken; and that they run 
earnestly in the race for the prize of the high calling which they 
have publicly entered. 

It is evident that all through the Gospel age baptism into Christ 
has symbolized union with him and membership in the one 
body-the bride. But now in the harvest or lapping of the Gospel 
and Millennial ages, a new question arises, viz., While it is still 
appropriate for all of this class who have not done so, to confess 
Christ by this symbol, what about others, of the restitution class, 
who shall now confess Christ and desire to consecrate 
themselves, -to relinquish their wills and have the will of Christ 
only? Seeing that such will sooner or later apply for baptism as a 
symbol, and that it would be a proper symbol of consecration for 
others as well as for the body of Christ, and that it is not 
incumbent upon us to decide to which class those belong who 
apply to us for immersion, —the question arises, Would the same 
form of words be appropriate for both? 

Yes, we answer; for though the class referred to will not be of 
the bride of Christ, they will be of the Christ family,- children 
of the Christ; and it is proper for the children to bear their 
father's name. Christ is to be the "Everlasting Father" or life- 
giver to the restored human race; and hence it will not be 
improper for them also to take his name. Therefore as we now 
view it, it will be proper to baptize such into the name of Christ; 
and we doubt not that all of the world who shall come into 
harmony and receive the gift of life from the Life-giver in the 
next age, will be known also as Christians. As before pointed 
out, however, the words of the immerser cannot affect favorably 
or unfavorably the interests of the immersed; the importance 
rests in the obedience of the act and what it signifies of 
consecration to the one immersed. 



BAPTISM OF THE HOL Y SPIRIT AND OF FIRE. 

We need not examine this subject at length here, since it was 
discussed in our issue of November '87. We merely remark now 
that the immersion in holy Spirit which began at Pentecost, is 
not symbolized by water baptism: it follows, but is totally 
different from an immersion into Christ's death, which the water 
immersion does symbolize so perfectly. The immersion of the 
holy Spirit is bestowed as a consequence of full consecration 
and immersion into Christ's death, and is a pledge or earnest of 
our full acceptance to the divine nature with Christ, when we 
shall have fully accomplished our sacrifice with him. The 
baptism into Christ's death and its water symbol are matters for 
us to attend to. The immersion of the holy Spirit is God's work 
entirely. None are immersed in holy Spirit except such as have 
voluntarily consecrated, or immersed themselves into Christ's 
death. And such as have experienced these two have no will of 
their own to oppose to the water symbol, enjoined by the word 
and example of the Head, and practiced and taught by the 
stalwart members of the Royal Priesthood. 

The baptism of fire signifies destruction and accompanying 
distress. Thus, as already shown, the Jewish nation, except the 
Israelites indeed worthy of the Pentecostal baptism, was 
immersed in tribulation and national destruction. This was John 
the immerser's prediction. Luke 3:16,17. 

BAPTIZED FOR THE DEAD. 

"Else what shall they do which are baptizing for the dead, if the 
dead rise not at all? Why then are they baptized on behalf 
thereof? "+ 

This has been considered a very obscure passage, because the 
real meaning of immersion (as symbolic of death) has been 
generally lost sight of. Some have been led to the absurd 
conclusion that early Christians were immersed in the interest of 
their dead unbelieving friends and relatives, -supposing that 
Paul here referred to and commended so senseless a thing. On 
the contrary, the Apostle here refers to the fact, then well 
understood, that each one of those who had been immersed, had 
symbolized his own death— had cast his lot among those dead 
with Christ, to share his sacrificial death (which was on behalf 
of the dead and dying world), in prospect of a glorious 
resurrection to share with the Redeemer the work of blessing 
and restoring the world. 

Paul is combatting and disproving the theories of some who 
were teaching that there would be no resurrection. He appeals to 
various arguments to prove the falsity of such teaching. He 
proves that the dead can be raised by divine power by the fact of 
Christ's resurrection (verses 12 to 18); and then, in the verse 
under consideration, he shows how absurd it is for those who by 



immersion have symbolized their consecration to death, to 
disbelieve in a future life. He asks such doubters of a 
resurrection, Why then were you baptized for the dead, if you 
hope for nothing beyond? Wiser and better far it would be, if 
there is to be no resurrection of the dead, that we should make 
the most of the present life, enjoying all its pleasures, instead of 
consecrating ourselves to death in baptism, and then living a life 
of self-sacrifice which is a daily dying. 

But, in this as in all things, the beauty and harmony only appears 
from the true standpoint. Those who regard sprinkling as 
baptism can see no meaning in this passage; neither can those 
who deny water baptism interpret it without making out, that 
this great inspired apostle was foolish. Neither can those who 
see the symbolic water immersion only, appreciate the passage. 
Its beauty and force are only discernible from the standpoint 
herein set forth, viz., a recognition of the death with Christ to 
self-will, to the world, and all worldly interests, and also of the 
water immersion as its proper, appropriate and provided symbol. 
In conclusion we quote the inspired record. er said: "Can any 
man forbid water?" (Acts 10:47.) Paul said: "So many of you as 
were immersed into Jesus Christ, were immersed into his 
death... 

R1034 : page 7 

For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, 
we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection." (Rom. 6:3- 
5.) "Then they that gladly received his word were 
immersed,. ..and they continued steadfastly in the apostles' 
doctrine and fellowship. "-Acts 2:41,42. 



*See, Acts 2:41; 8:12,36,38; 9:18; 10:47,48; 16:15,33; 18:8; 
19:3-5; 22:16. 



*An illustration of this use of the word is found in 1 Cor. 
10:1,2. The Apostle declares that all Israel were baptized 
(immersed) unto Moses, and gives as the form, that they were 
covered with water (though not wet); the walls of the sea being 
on either hand and the clouds of water over head. 



*We are kindly made welcome to the use of three different 
baptistries here, and presume could by asking, obtain the 
privilege of all. Our "Baptist" and "Christian" friends 
hereabouts, though they do not see this subject and others from 
the same standpoint as we, nevertheless are courteous, 
respectful, and willing to fellowship as far as they can see.— 
Would to God they were less self-satisfied and would examine 



again the full import of the symbol to which they both so 
earnestly and so steadfastly adhere. 

+sinaitic MS reading. 



R1034:page7 

ANOTHER INFALLIBLE CHURCH. 

The Church of Rome is not the only one which acts upon the 
assumption that its annunciations of several centuries ago are 
infallible and unalterable. The Presbyterian Church takes the 
same stand, though she does not speak so loudly as her "Mother 
Church"-nor can she claim that her infallible decisions 
regarding what is truth and what is error, are as venerable with 
age. 

Our readers will recall an article in our issue of Oct. '87, entitled 
"Reasons for Expecting Toleration in the Presbyterian Church. " 
We therein referred to the case of Brother Baker, who after 
being for years a minister in the Presbyterian Church, became 
convinced by his common sense as well as his Bible study of the 
error of his sect, in holding that everlasting torment is the future 
lot of all except the elect little flock of the present age. Brother 
Baker soon discovered that a majority of the members as well as 
of the ministers of the Presbyterian Church disbelieve this point 
of their Confession of Faith. He saw, too, that he and all such 
were acting a lie in professing publicly, to believe a doctrine 
which they denied privately, and concerning which they made 
mental and private reservations. 

As an honest man Bro. Baker could not follow others in the 
footsteps of Ananias, misrepresenting and keeping back part of 
the truth, —he could not afford to misrepresent himself, and could 
not conscientiously continue to misrepresent God's character 
and Word. Consequently he decided to let his light shine, 
confident at first that he would be joined by others in the same 
sect, solicitous for the truth rather than careful to preserve 
inviolate a Confession of Faith, with some of whose tenets they 
disagreed decidedly. 

To bring the matter to an issue, Bro. Baker introduced to the 
Presbytery of West Jersey of which he was a member, a 
resolution providing for a revision of the Standards of doctrine 
as set forth in the Presbyterian Confession of Faith on the 
subject of the everlasting torture of all except the elect little 
flock, —the Gospel Church. 

Brother Baker argued well his points, and tried hard to carry 
Presbyterianism into an acknowledgment of the Bible as the 
ONLY STANDARD of faith; and to show that the well 
intentioned men who in A.D. 1646 framed the "Westminster 



Confession of Faith" were not infallible, but merely did as well 
as they could on coming out of the extreme darkness of the 
"dark ages" preceding them. 

In the article above referred to, we pointed out to Bro. Baker 
that his well-meant scheme would fail; that the majority love 
their sect and its infallibility (?) and its honors and rewards more 
than they love the truth, and the honor which cometh from God 
only. We rejoice that Bro. Baker has manifested his love for the 
truth by boldly advocating it in the face of opposition. In this he 
is demonstrating himself to be an "overcomer." Our prayer for 
him is, that he may continue to be faithful in all his stewardship 
of the mysteries of God; that thus he may make his calling and 
election sure and receive the reward of an "overcomer." (See 
Rev. 3:21.) Brother Baker's example in withdrawing, should be 
followed by every honest person, who, reading over his own 
public Confession of Faith, finds that it does not present his real 
faith. And this should be done by each, no matter which 
denomination has bound him or which Confession of Faith now 
misrepresents his views to fellow Christians and to the world. It 
is useless to try as Bro. Baker has done, to bring about a reform. 
Sect- worshippers would rather act a lie and thus stultify 
themselves before God and each other, than to honestly and 
publicly confess that their sect is not infallible,- that they have 
erred in some things. 

A careful examination we believe will convince any one that 
only the ignorant members and ministers of any of the leading 
Christian denominations believe this dogma which all so 
publicly confess, -that all except the elect and holy Church will 
suffer everlasting torment. 

That our predictions relative to the action of the Presbytery have 
been verified to the letter, is witnessed by the following 
clipping: 

MEETING OF THE PRESBYTERY OF WEST JERSEY, AT 
ATLANTIC CITY. SEVENTY-FIVE CLERGYMEN AND 
ELDERS PRESENT. REV. L. C. BAKER'S CASE. 

The committee to whom the questions were referred brought in 
a report advising withdrawal. This part of the report came up for 
action. 

Mr. Baker presented the case from his point of view. He had, he 
said, deemed it his duty to call the attention of the Church to its 
false position in holding on tenaciously to certain doctrinal 
statements in its standards, which had ceased to be a fair and 
honest expression of its views. It was as a necessary 
consequence of this position, that he should introduce into the 
Presbytery an overture requesting the General Assembly to 
inquire into the matter, and that he should claim the right to 
discuss the points involved and to show 



R1035 : page 7 

from Scripture just where the standards erred. Some of the 
brethren had thought that in opposing the teaching of the Church 
at an important point he was violating his ordination vows. He 
had interpreted those vows as binding him to seek the purity of 
the Church and to be loyal above all else to the Word of God. At 
the sacrifice of his own personal feelings he would, he said, 
have been willing to submit to a long church trial, if any of the 
brethren chose to bring it to that issue, provided the questions of 
Scripture interpretation he had raised could be decided in the 
court of Scripture. But heretofore the Church had insisted that 
the standards alone must be the tests. 

He had therefore determined to go on in the course adopted a 
year ago, and to now put the case in the hands of the Presbytery. 
If, with any degree of unanimity, they advised him that his 
action was inconsistent with his remaining as an accredited 
minister of this Church, he should at once place his resignation 
in their hands. 

Mr. Baker then reviewed the case in some of its wider bearings 
upon the Church. It involved, first, the correctness of that 
interpretation of Scripture put into the Standards, which 
represents God as having no other end in view in raising to 
another life the immense mass of the human race, consigned to 
death and hell for their sins, except to judge and sentence them 
again to a deeper death and hell, to suffer "most grievous and 
unspeakable torments, without intermission, with the devil and 
his angels in hell fire forever. " The point he had raised against 
this teaching is that it strips resurrection, confessedly due to the 
redeeming work of Christ, of every redemptive and beneficial 
feature, and converts this provision of another life into an 
unutterable curse to all but the elect. 

The question also, he said, was no less important in its bearings 
upon the constitution of the Church and the right of private 
judgment. Upon this point he said: "So far as I am aware, this is 
the first time in the history of our Church that one of its 
ministers has openly called in question its authoritative 
statements upon an important point of doctrine, and connected 
therewith an effort to induce the Church to revise them. Other 
instances of difference have occurred in which the dissentient 
has assumed that the rule of the system is inexorable— that no 
change in it is possible-and so has withdrawn from it. In other 
cases the effort has been to prove that the standards are flexible 
enough to admit the variation. In this case there is no such 
attempt. There is the open affirmation that the framers of our 
standards at this point erred, and that it is our duty to correct 
them. And this duty is the more strongly urged, because the 
Church tacitly admits that they erred, in as much as these 
statements are seldom avowed in her pulpits, nor is the 
impression made upon her hearers that she earnestly believes 



them. The question, therefore, which you are now asked to 
decide is unique in our history. You, brethren, have the rare 
opportunity and the solemn responsibility to decide whether this 
Presbyterian Church must go on forever in its present lines, or 
whether it shall hold itself open in an honest way to the larger 
illuminations of truth which God is giving in our day, and so 
grow up to its place in that larger unity of the future for which 
our Lord prayed. If it shall do this, there must be room made for 
the discussion and amendment of its standards. There must be 
no slavish suppression of honest differences, no rod of terror 
held over the head of honest dissentients, and no such dishonor 
of the Holy Spirit in the Church as is involved in the 
unwillingness to trust Him to correct the disorders and 
contradict the errors which may arise in the exercise of His own 
principle of liberty. Better a hundredfold that some heresies 
should be propounded, than that the healthy life of the Church 
should be repressed by the denial of that liberty of conscience 
and of utterance wherewith Christ hath made us free. " 

The discussion was continued at the afternoon and evening 
sessions on the report of the committee, which recommended 
that Mr. Baker withdraw from the Presbytery. A vote was taken 
on the recommendation, which resulted in 55 yeas and 5 nays, 
and the report of the committee was then adopted as a whole. 
Mr. Baker then tendered to the Presbytery his resignation, which 
was accepted. 



In view of such an open confession of unwillingness to re- 
examine or in any way change or modify their creed, even 
though tacitly admitting it to be erroneous; and in view of such 
refusal to test and prove this and other points of doctrine by the 
Bible; what can be expected of the ministers of this Presbytery? 
Does it not seem evident that love of the honor of men, love of 
sect, a desire to be considered staunch, "dyed-in-the-wool" 
Presbyterians, and above all the desire to maintain their dignity, 
and bread and butter, and titles, and white cravats, rather than 
the love of the truth, holds and governs these professed leaders 
and teachers? Possibly all the "wheat" has already been, like 
Bro. Baker, selected and separated from this Presbytery. As we 
are now in the "harvest" time, we must expect such separation to 
be thorough. We should expect too, that it be first completed 
among the ministers who, by reason of time for study and 
advantages of education, should be most ready for the greater 
light of the dawn of the Millennial Day, and who should if 
Israelites indeed be first and quickest, to receive and to walk and 
to rejoice in the greater light now shining upon God's Word. We 
should expect of all others than the guileless, just what we see,— 
that they would "hate the light, neither come to the light, lest 
their deeds should be made manifest" [lest they should thus be 
obliged to confess that for years they had been teaching errors 



which His Word does not authorize, in the name of the Lord]. 
For this reason it is, that they cling to the creeds of the "dark 
ages," yea, and love darkness rather than light. "But he that 
doeth truth, cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made 
manifest, that they are wrought in God."— John 3:19-21. 

Note this likeness of many of the Priests and Pharisees of to-day 
to those at the time of the first advent, of whom our Lord 
declared that they received not the truth themselves, but really, 
though professing to be teachers, hindered the people from 
receiving the truth (Matt. 23:13 and 21:23-31). Let us as our 
Lord and the Apostles did, spend less time and effort, upon self- 
serving, dignity-puffed, and sectarian-blinded ministers, and the 
more upon the weary and heavy laden "common people," among 
whom are still some Israelites indeed, who without guile really 
desire the truth. 

May our dear Bro. Baker and all such as he, stand fast in the 
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not again 
entangled with any yoke of bondage, or entrapped in any of the 
many snares which are being spread in this evil day, by our 
adversary Satan, who as soon as we escape one, fain would 
entrap us in another error. We may not lay our armor down or 
think the victory won until we have received our crown, and 
entered fully into the joys of our Lord. Since each must either 
advance or retreat, let us go on unto perfection, growing in grace 
and knowledge and love. 



R1035 : page 7 

THE KISHENEV MOVEMENT. 

Concerning the wonderful movement toward Christ on the part 
of the Jews of Siberia, which is now attracting the attention of 
the civilized world, Harper's Weekly says:- 

"Ever and anon reports reach western Europe and America of a 
remarkable movement among the Jewish people of southeastern 
Europe and Siberia. In these vague and often conflicting 
accounts so much can be recognized as the substratum of truth 
that we have in this agitation a unique movement, looking to the 
acceptance of the principles of Evangelical Christianity, and of 
Western culture and civilization, not by individual members of 
this strangest of historic peoples, but by the Jews as a nation. It 
is only now that a fair and correct view of the genesis, character, 
and development of the agitation can be gained. 

The movement, whose beginnings date back almost four years, 
is yet in its formative stage. But its development during this 
period has been such that it can confidently be pronounced no 
longer a mere experiment with doubtful chances of permanent 
existence. It has manifested a remarkable vitality; its growth has 



been steady and healthy, positive in character, yet avoiding all 
unnatural haste and dangerous extremes. Having been 
recognized 

R1035 : page 8 

by the Russian authorities as a religio licita, it now has a legal 
existence and legal rights. Its character stamps it as one of the 
most unique phenomena in the variegated kaleidoscope of 
national, social, and religious interests that divide the hearts and 
minds of the Czar's one hundred and sixteen millions of 
subjects. 

"The view generally entertained that the Kishenev movement is 
entirely religious in character is both correct and incorrect. It is 
correct in this, that at least for the present the new spirit that 
controls the new communion finds its most pronounced 
expression in the acceptance of the tenets of Christianity. On the 
other hand, it is incorrect also, because neither the inception nor 
the ultimate end and aim of this people is Christianity as such. 
The latter is rather a means to an end, and not the end itself. The 
ideal that fills the souls of Rabinowitch and his followers is the 
improvement and growth of the highest and best interests of his 
people. In his 

R1036 : page 8 

search for the best means to attain this end, he, after years of 
study and research, has reached the conclusion that this can only 
be accomplished through a moral regeneration of the people, 
which, in turn, can be effected only through the religion of the 
New Testament as the completion and fulfillment of the Old. 
The movement is thus, strictly speaking, not religious at all, at 
least not primarily, but is national, and in the interests of 
progress and civilization in the best sense of the word. It is in no 
sense or manner the result of Christian missionary activity. It is 
an independent agitation springing up entirely out of Jewish soil. 
Its intrinsically non-religious character is attested by the further 
fact that Rabinowitch was not a Jewish rabbi; he is not ordained 
to the present day. Indeed, among all the participants and 
leading men of the movement there is not one who is or has 
been a clergyman of any sect or creed. Whatever influence 
Christian workers may have now in those regions on the Jewish 
people is independent of the Kishenev society, and was no 
decisive factor in its formation or development. 

"Rabinowitch was a merchant, and later a lawyer. Energetic in 
character and ambitious in self -improvement and the 
advancement, politically, socially and morally, of his people, he 
years ago became known as a zealous friend of reform among 
the Eastern Jews. With an education and enterprise far beyond 
his brethren, he set about to devise ways and means to attain his 
ideals and ends. He did what he could to secure for them better 
political rights, but was unable to protect them against the fierce 



persecutions that five years ago set in against the unfortunate 
Israelites in Russia, Roumania, and neighboring countries. He 
acquainted himself with the advanced philosophical thought of 
the West, in the hope that its adoption by his people would 
elevate them to a higher spiritual plane, and thus secure for them 
higher ideals and nobler ends. But he soon learned to doubt both 
the efficiency of the means and the possibility of applying them 
to a people whom centuries of persecution and ultra 
conservatism had been hardening to principles so at variance 
with their traditional ideas. He again attempted to win them 
away from their greed for gain, which, next to their formalistic 
religious exercises, is the all-controlling and all-degrading factor 
in the mind and life of the Oriental Jew. But his endeavors to 
establish agricultural colonies for them, both at home and in the 
Holy Land, proved abortive. While in Palestine the conviction 
ripened in him, through an independent study of the New 
Testament in its relations to the Old, that Israel had made the 
mistake of its national life, and had become untrue to its historic 
mission, by the rejection of Christ. 

"This conviction concerning Christ, not as the Savior of the 
world, but as the embodiment and fulfillment of the prophecies 
of old, and of the ideals and aims of Israel as a nation, is the 
central thought around which the whole movement circles. The 
principles enunciated by the humble Nazarene are recognized as 
those which alone can accomplish the destinies of the people, 
and enable them to attain the end for which they were set apart 
as a chosen people. It is thus regarded as a serious break in the 
normal and historical development of Israel, that eighteen 
hundred years ago this people as a nation refused to accept those 
tenets and principles which are regarded by all Christians, and 
now also by Rabinowitch and his followers, as the legitimate 
and only correct outcome of the whole previous historical 
development of Israel. To heal this breach is the ideal aim of the 
Kishenev reformers, by setting in anew there where first the 
chosen people entered upon an erroneous path of national 
development. 

"These ideas explain why the Kishenev communion by no 
means desire to join any of the existing Christian 
denominations. Their object is to secure the recognition of 
Christianity, and the morality, culture, and civilization that have 
grown out of Christianity, as the genuine and legitimate 
development of Old Testament Judaism, and as the only means 
of securing the national prosperity of the Jews as such. For this 
reason they do not think of ceasing to be Jews. Whatever is 
characteristic of Judaism is a national idea, and is not religious 
in character, and has not been superseded by the Christian phase 
of revelation, they retain. They still keep the seventh day; they 
still practice circumcision; they still celebrate the Passab feast as 
a memorial of the deliverance from Egypt— because all these are 
national characteristics distinguishing them from the Germans, 



from the English, from other peoples, as separate nations, each 
with its own peculiarities. 

"The genesis and development of such clear-cut ideals is all the 
more remarkable when we remember the manner of men in the 
midst of whom they have sprung up. Those who are accustomed 
to see only the Western Jew, with few characteristics differing 
from his Christian neighbor, can form no idea of his Oriental 
brother. He is still the outcast his Western brother was during 
the Middle Ages. His religion is Talmudic to the core. It is a 
petrified formalism, traditional legalism, and religionism 
hardened through centuries of conservatism and reverence for 
the faith of the fathers. He is the modern representative of that 
stern Pharisaism which we find depicted on the pages of the 
New Testament. From that day to this there has essentially been 
no progress, no development in his religion, except that line has 
been added to line and precept to precept. 

"And yet it is just this characteristic of the Oriental Jew that 
enables us psychologically to understand the rise of the 
Kishenev movement. Among the Western Jews, whose religious 
tenets have been seriously modified by their constant intercourse 
with Western thought, and whose faith or unfaith is now to a 
great extent the result of compromises with modern thought, 
such an agitation would be unthinkable. The philosophy of 
history could not explain it. The factors could not produce it. 
But the Eastern Jew, as a man of positive convictions, will 
exchange these only for other positive convictions." 



It is true, as above shown, that the Jew has held and still holds 
too rigidly the national idea,-that God's plan for ruling and 
blessing the world centers in the national exaltation of the seed 
of Abraham; but it is also true that nominal Christians have not 
held that idea sufficiently. Both extremes are disadvantageous 
and blinding. The Jew fancies his nation necessary to God's 
purpose, and hence is proud and boastful and unready for God's 
real plan. The Gentiles losing sight of all blessing through any 
particular people, theorize that God is now trying to draw the 
world to himself, and are perplexed at the small results of the 
past eighteen centuries. 

The truth lies between the two positions. God will use a nation 
to bless the world in general, and that nation must first be 
exalted to universal dominion before through it "all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed. " But God is not bound by his 
covenant with Abraham to take his literal children according to 
the flesh for this nation which he shall exalt to bless all others. 
On the contrary Abraham, who was faithful to God's promises, 
is reckoned as the father of the faithful one-Our Lord Jesus; and 
he is the only heir of the covenant made with Abraham. And he 
selects others who under the cover of his perfection and united 



to him as his bride, are counted with him-the Seed of Abraham, 
a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation. And in this nation, when 
complete and glorified, which we believe will be very shortly, 
all the families or nations of earth shall be blessed. Israel first 
shall be blessed, and become the earthly agency for blessing 
others of the earthly family.- EDITOR. 



R1036 : page 8 

DR. ABBOTT ON 
"CONDITIONAL IMMORTALITY." 

Dr. Lyman Abbott, the well-known editor of the Christian 
Union, [and now successor to Henry Ward Beecher, as pastor of 
Plymouth Congregational Church, Brooklyn,] in an editorial in a 
recent number of that paper, announces his belief in the 
probability of conditional immortality. After mentioning the 
final triumph of Christ over all things, and the consummated 
glory of the redeemed, he says: "In the New Testament picture 
of this hour of triumph I see no shadow of scowling faces, of 
angered and unrepentant rebels; in the New Testament echo of 
this song of the redeemed I hear no interrupting of wail or wrath 
from any far-off prison-house of despair. After the last enemy is 
destroyed, shall sin, worst of all enemies, still live, and work his 
ruin eternally? When God hath put all enemies under Christ's 
feet, shall this worst of all enemies still rule in triumph over 
some remote, reserved corner of creation?... The more I study my 
Bible, the more unscriptural seems to me the conception of 
endless sin; the nearer I come into fellowship with God my 
Father, my Saviour, my Comforter, the more intolerable grows 
the thought of it to me. And I thank God for the good hope in 
His word, which permits me to look forward to and haste toward 
the day, when this terrible tragedy of sin and pain will come to 
an end. If I believe in the hopeless doom of incorrigible sin, and 
also in the undimmed glory of a perfected kingdom of love, I 
must believe in the annihilation of the incorrigibly wicked.... Fire 
in the Bible is generally an emblem of destruction, not of 
torment. The chaff, the tares, the fruitless tree, are thrown into 
unquenchable fire, not to be tortured, but to be destroyed. The 
hell-fire of the New Testament is the fire of Gehenna, kept 
burning outside the walls of Jerusalem, to destroy the offal of 
the city; here was the worm that dieth not and the fire that is 
unquenched; emblems of destruction, not of torment.... I find 
nothing in the New Testament to warrant the terrible opinion 
that God sustains the life of His creatures throughout eternity, 
only that they may continue in sin and misery. That immortality 
is the gift of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, that man is 
mortal and must put on immortality, that only he can put it on 
who becomes a partaker of the divine nature, and so an inheritor 
of Him 'who only hath immortality,' that eternal life is life 



eternal, and eternal death is death eternal, and everlasting 
destruction is destruction without remedy— this is the most 
natural, as it is the simplest, reading of the New Testament. " 



R1029 : page 8 

"TWO SPANIARDS, both Protestants, lately met in the streets 
of Madrid a Catholic priest carrying the viaticum to a dying 
parishioner. The priest, perceiving that the Protestants did not 
kneel or take off their hats, sternly upbraided them and gave 
them into custody. The municipal judge condemned them to six 
days' imprisonment and to a fine of 25 pesetas and the costs." 



R1037 : page 1 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., JUNE, 1888. 

NO. 10. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :-FIFTY CENTS A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., paper 
bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," four 
shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "-ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

PLENTY of Missionary Envelopes now: 25 for lOcts. or 100 
for 35cts. or 300 for $1.00. "Tell the whole world the blessed 
tidings." 



R1037 : page 1 

"ARP TRACTS" FREE, in any quantity, postage paid by us, to 
those who will promise a proper distribution of them. In 
ordering say what quantity you can judiciously use. 



R1037 : page 1 

THE CHURCH at Allegheny City, still meets every Lords-day 
in the "upper room" No. 101 Federal St. We have a general class 
for Bible study at 2:30 P.M. and preaching at 3:30 P.M. Brother 
Zech addresses the German friends in the same place at 10:30 
A.M. Friends of the cause are always very welcome and are 
requested to make themselves known before or after service. 



R1037 : page 1 

DAWN TO COLPORTEURS. 

By the name Colporteurs, we designate those noble Brethren 
and Sisters, who leaving other pursuits, and other forms of 
ministry, are devoting all their time to spreading the truth, in that 
form which has been most successful— namely selling the paper 
bound edition of MILLENNIAL DAWN Vol. I. To enable this 
work to go on largely, it was found necessary to reduce the price 
of the book to the popular price of 25cts. per copy—for any 
quantity. 

In order to provide for the expenses of these Colporteurs an 
allowance of lOcts. per copy was made to them as "expense 
money" from the TOWER TRACT FUND. (A general fund 
consisting of voluntary donations of those who have themselves 
been blessed by the truth, for the spread of the same in any and 
every way). And this allowance or discount of lOcts. for 
expense was afterward extended to others who do not and 



cannot give all their time to this kind of preaching but who give 
some one day each week or an hour or so each day; and also to 
some whose special opportunities are favorable to loaning and 
giving away the books, but not for selling. 

Experience has proved that many of those who give all their 
time to the work and depend on the expense money entirely, 
cannot make it meet all their expenses of travel, lodging, 
clothing, food, etc. Some, very desirous of rendering this service 
of the truth and who tried it, have been obliged, in order to 
"provide things honest in the sight of all," to go at other work on 
this account and give but the fragments of their time, instead of 
all, to the work with which their hearts are filled. For this reason 
the TRACT SOCIETY has decided to hereafter allow all those 
Colporteurs (who are devoting all of their time to the work) to 
have 12-l/2cts. per copy, but others not devoting all their time, 
15cts. per copy. These special terms are however restricted to 
such persons as are subscribers to Z.W. TOWER, as it costs us 
extra postage to all who are not subscribers. 

We trust that this arrangement will enable a larger number than 
ever to give all their time in the work. The harvest is truly great, 
but the laborers are comparatively few. While praying the Lord 
of the harvest for more laborers, let us all do with our might 
what our hands find to do. 



R1037 : page 1 



ABOUT TRACTS. 



We receive many suggestions about tracts. Many readers wish 
that they had something that in few words would state clearly 
the truth on all subjects. We attempt no such brief statement of 
so large a subject, knowing it would be unwise. Because with 
the many errors and prejudices filling the hearts and minds of 
God's children, such condensed food would be too strong. So 
long as prejudice remains the truth seems ungainly and 
unreasonable, and only a gradual meeting of the objections and a 
gradual showing of the beauty and reasonableness of the truth, 
can bring conviction and overthrow the power of prejudices 
favoring papal errors received in early training and supported by 
popular sentiment. 

For this reason we purposely avoid all such condensed 
statements, knowing from experience that they never convert 
any from error to the truth. They would appear strong and 
incontrovertible and convincing to you, because your eyes are 
opened, but to others whose eyes are closed they would merely 
seem to be another creed— your opinion added to the general 
confusion already existing. 



We believe, and to us experience proves, that the plan we do 
pursue is the best; namely to treat God's Plan of the Ages 
comprehensively and connectedly, as for instance in DAWN 
VOL. I., and to use something brief and pointed like the 'Arp 
Tracts," which implies much but does not attempt to present the 
proofs, to call attention to and introduce DAWN to such as have 
an ear to hear. 

Those whose interest is not awakened by reading this little tract, 
are too fast asleep to do anything with at present— the political, 
financial and ecclesiastical thunderings of the "day of wrath" 
and the crashing and falling of Great Babylon will awaken them 
and liberate them by and by,-then they will be interested. 

Those whose interest is sufficiently awakened and who are 
honest enough to concede the inconsistency of their own and 
other so-called "orthodox" views, will get DAWN and read it 
and be blessed and comforted, and truly turned from the 
darkness of error to God's light of truth. The dishonest, who like 
the Pharisees of old, say that they see, when in their hearts they 
know that they are "blind, and cannot see afar off" and can 
neither understand nor apologize for the character and plan of 
God which they profess to believe and call great and grand, - 
these are not now worthy of the truth which is only for the truth- 
hungry. By and by they will get honest enough to receive the 
truth or else be cut off in the second death as those who make 
and love a lie.-Rev. 21:27; 22:15. 

In this matter of tracts, as well as in all things, our zeal should 
be according to knowledge, and we should as our Lord said, be 
wise as serpents and harmless as doves. Wise in our doing of 
good, as the serpent is crafty for evil. 

For similar reasons we prefer to use special numbers of the 
TOWER, and thus introduce the reader to several phases of 
truth, rather than publish special articles as tracts as some 
occasionally suggest. 



R1037 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

Some of our readers may have felt that the View in last month's 
TOWER was too severe an arraignment of the land- lord system 
of the old world, that we should not have intimated that the 
majority at least of the present aristocratic land-holding class are 
the descendants of robbers who took the land from the people. 

We feel however that we did not draw too dark a picture of the 
injustice; and in fact that the truth on the subject is rarely stated 
for fear of offending those high in influence, or their friends. It 
may be claimed by some that the peasantry were more happy 



years ago when they were without educational advantages, 
ignorant, etc., and virtually bought and sold with the land. This 
may be true in many instances, and so too, no doubt, many of 
the Negroes once slaves in the United States were happier and 
better provided for in slavery, than now that they are their own 
masters. But the principle involved is that the freedom is needful 
to the development of the human mind and of self-control and 
progress in general toward the true ends of human existence. 

We were reasoning of righteousness, not of temporary 
expediency as viewed by narrow minds from a selfish 
standpoint. We reasoned too, of "judgment to come, " and that 
speedily now, for we are in the beginning of the great Day of 
Judgment -the Millennial age, in which judgment shall be laid 
to the line, and righteousness to the plummet (Isa. 28:17); in 
which, too, the unjust shall receive a just recompense there-for. 
Though it may be claimed for the masses, that "ignorance was 
bliss," it can be claimed no longer. Soon this and similar wrongs 
will bring the great time of trouble foretold in Scripture. Let all 
the saints scrutinize closely, every act of dealing and 
relationship with each other and with the world; let us make 
certain that justice prevails in every instance-that we do to 
others not differently from what we would wish them to do to us 
if our places were changed— making sure to err, if at all, on the 
side of benevolence. And if we are among those suffering 
injustice, we, above all others, must be patient and forbearing, 
not seeking to recompense evil for evil, but call to mind the 
words of the Apostle —Avenge not yourselves dearly beloved 
but rather let your wrath give place to sympathy and pity, 
remembering that it is written, "Vengeance is mine I will repay 
saith the Lord. " Our condition is far different from that of the 
poor world. If we suffer losses or injustice in earthly matters, let 
us remember that to us those things are already counted "loss 
and dross." (Phil. 3:8.) We have our real 

R1038 : page 1 

heart-treasures, grand and precious reserved in heaven for us; 
we have the comfort of the Scriptures, while they have naught 
but earthly joys and comforts in the present life, and often few 
of them (and often fears for the everlasting future) and no 
wonder if they cling to their little all, and sometimes try and get 
yours and feel restless. We can well afford to be patient indeed. 
And patience in earthly matters on the part of the consecrated, 
will go far toward impressing the hearts and watering the seeds 
of truth concerning God's glorious Plan of the Ages, which from 
time to time we may be able to drop into aching hearts. 

Our statement of last month that the few hold the titles to the 
lands of the old world is amply borne out, by an exhaustive and 
able article entitled "Landed Income and Landed Estate," in the 
London 



R1038 : page 2 

Quarterly Review. It gives very full statistics relative to the 
ownership of the soil of Great Britain and Ireland, showing that 
three-fourths of the land is owned by 58, 170 persons, showing 
an average of 6,576 acres to each person. These figures include 
none with a less acreage than 380 acres, and twelve thousand of 
them average over 16,000 acres each. And from such facts the 
writer draws the sensible conclusion:- "It is of importance to the 
country, and of pressing importance to landlords, if they wish to 
be secure from confiscation and pillage in the future, that the 
land-owning class should be increased. " 

We print below a clipping from the Pittsburgh Times, referring 
to the eviction of some of the poor of Scotland, which is 
valuable, as showing that worldly men no less than ourselves see 
these wrongs and are bold enough to speak the truth on the 
subject. Alas! that self-interest should close the eyes and mouths 
of so many. 

R1038 : page 2 

MEN WHO HA VE NO RIGHTS. 

"Twenty- five families of honest Scotch people, escorted by 
Highland pipers, playing funeral dirges, to the ships which were 
to take them into exile! That was a picture presented at a port in 
the Hebrides, and is a striking example of the workings of the 
British land system. These people were not sent into exile for 
any crime, but simply because they could not pay the rent 
demanded for the land stolen from their ancestors. 

"In the Scotch Highlands we see the system of a landed 
aristocracy in its worst forms. Under the old clan system the 
land belonged to the tribe and was divided afresh at the 
accession of each new chief, the chief taking his share like the 
other members, but exacting nothing from his subjects but civil 
obedience and military service. After the second Jacobite 
rebellion in 1745 the process of dissolution of the old clans, 
which had already begun, was completed. The chief was 
transformed into the landlord, the land of the clan into his 
property, and the members of the clan into his tenants. Under the 
old system a man who was disabled from personal service in 
war paid for exemption in cash or in kind. These payments 
under the new system became the rule and were called rent. 
Thus the landlord system was established. 

"The old independent chieftains, living in simplicity with their 
clans as with a big family, were now transformed into bewigged 
autocrats, fluttering around the court in London and only going 
to their Scotch estates to hunt in the autumn. Those estates were 
left in charge of stewards, whose fidelity was measured by the 
amount of rent they could grind out of the tenants. As the rage 
for hunting increased the landlords came to consider their 



Scotch estates valuable only as shooting preserves, and they 
frequently leased their shooting rights to rich Englishmen. 

"Then began the "clearing" of these estates, in which the Duke 
of Sutherland was the first. Wide valleys and hillsides dotted 
with the dwellings of the humble crofters were cleared of their 
human habitations and again made into a wilderness whose only 
inhabitants were deer and grouse, pheasants and foxes. The most 
productive use to which the land was put was sheep raising. The 
human inhabitants were driven off to America and the colonies, 
or to the sea-port towns, where they gained a miserable 
subsistence by fishing. Some refused to leave the homes where 
their ancestors had dwelt for centuries. Their dwellings were 
burned from over their heads and the bailiff drove them out. 
Thus, while the American backwoodsman was clearing away the 
forest from the fertile plains and bringing them under the 
domain of man, the British landlord was clearing away the 
human inhabitants of the Highland valleys and making them 
again a howling wilderness, where only the wild beasts roamed. 

"Of late years the growth of population has created such a 
demand for the small patches of lands which the lords still left 
their tenants to live on, that their rents have steadily risen until 
the crofters could not force a subsistence from the soil. Then 
they refused to pay the rent, resisted those who came to exact 
payment and were only dragooned into submission by military 
force. But popular sympathy had been aroused on their behalf 
throughout the British Empire, and their few champions in 
Parliament demanded that the law should be changed so that 
such abominations might cease. The Tory Government said it 
could not do this, but admitted that the case of the crofters was a 
hard one and made an appropriation to enable them to emigrate 
to Manitoba. Those twenty-five families who left the Hebrides 
to the mournful music of the bag-pipes were the first of the 
exiles. They leave the homes of their ancestors to carve out new 
homes in the wilderness and leave the land, which, according to 
their old laws belongs to them, in possession of the robbers 
whom the English Government protects. 

"What feelings towards the English Government will these 
people carry into exile? Will their hearts be burning with loyalty 
to Queen Victoria because her Government paid their expenses, 
or will they be burning with hatred against the country which 
exiles the poor and industrious to feed the vices of the rich and 
lazy?" 



R1038 : page 2 



EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Macedonia European Turkey. 

MY DEAR BRO. IN CHRIST:-My hands are filled with work. 
Many here are interested in the truth. Am preaching now in 
Bulgarian, which is a Turkish language. During the three weeks 
that passed, I had from 150 to 200 hearers, and many others 
came while there was no room to receive them. I rented a larger 
house for meetings and I expect to have three more houses 
where I can preach the truth. 

Turks, Jews, Bulgarians and Macedonians are much interested 
in the truth. Pray for us in Macedonia. 

From Bulgaria I had calls to go and preach the "one faith," with 
the "one hope." In Sophia, the Capital city of Bulgaria, I have 
baptized two. 

Love to all far and near. With Christian salutation and greeting 
to you and your wife, I am yours in Christ. 

Basil Stephanoff. 

Reynolds Co., Mo. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-Please indulge me, a little. I had a 
copy of "ZION'S WATCH TOWER" (Oct. 1886) handed me the 
other day by Mr. Cobb. I am wonderfully well pleased with it. It 
has brought certain strange things to my eyes, that I have been 
for years desiring to look into. I have toiled many long years as 
a minister under the Baptist banner. The more I study the 
Scriptures, and the better I understand Baptist Theology and 
discipline, the less I esteem them. 

For years I have fought the palpable, absurd and inconsistent 
doctrine of eternal punishment. I am now 7 1 years old and 
unable to work; but thank God, I can talk yet, if I can't work; 
and when I speak, I wish to speak the truth; but feel confident I 
cannot do it under my confused conditions. I need a kind hand to 
lead me out. If you please send me the TOWER, I will use it to 
the best of my ability, and will undertake to pay you for it 
during the year. 

I am fraternally yours in hope of eternal life. 

D. M. Lee. 

page 2 

Wayne, Ind. 

DEAR BRO. IN CHRIST:-I have long desired to write to you, 
and I can no longer refrain, feeling assured that you will be glad 
to hear from those who have participated in the celebration of 
the Passover of the Lamb. There were only three of us— and 
three others were present. 



A solemn awe seemed to pervade every soul present, and the 
intervals of silence seemed audible with the words— God is here. 
I never felt before how deep the significance of this ordinance. 
One gentleman, who was present, afterwards remarked he had 
never witnessed such an impressive service of the Lord's supper. 
I am told, he seems awakening to a knowledge of the Truth. 

I have absented myself from the Christian church of which I am 
a member, for many months, and shall soon ask that my name 
be erased from its books. The "FOOD" and "TOWERS" 
supplied me by my friend, Mrs. Foster, and the "DAWN" 
presented me by Mrs. Turner, came to a hungry, thirsty, and 
deeply bereaved soul. I had already turned from the world, from 
whence all I loved best, seemed to have been rudely taken away. 
I was reaching out in the darkness, trying to trust in the terrible 
God which Orthodoxy had presented; and I think I did trust. But 
these precious books discovered to me such perfect harmony in 
the sacred Record, such beauty in God's great Plan, such 
boundless love for all his creatures, having actually planned to 
bring every soul into the full light of the Gospel-if not in this 
age, then in the next, when Christ and his saints will come in 
power and glory to "perfect" them. My poor father, clinging to 
human traditions, is much perplexed, when I ask him, to whom 
the call is given? and why God made the promise to Abraham, 
that "in his seed, all the families of the earth should be blessed, " 
without making any exception or qualification? 

He makes much ado about my "fatal mistakes," but he will not 
always be thus blind, and I can wait, feeling sure it will not now 
be long, 

When the shadows, weary shadows, 
Shall forever pass away. 

In renewed strength and hope, praying for heaven's blessing 
upon your labors, I remain, Yours sincerely, 

MRS. S. C. H . 

Bristol, Fla. 

BRO. RUSSELL:-Please send 80 DAWNS as soon as 
convenient. Send all the Arp slips you can spare. I inclose 
twelve dollars ($12.00). I have sold 73 of the 120 sent. Among 
the buyers are three men who represent their counties in the state 
capital, two M.D.'s, two Lawyers, three or four Infidels, one 
General and Ex-Governor, two Baptist ministers, two Methodist 
ministers and one Presbyterian minister. One of the Methodist 
preachers told me he would not part with his book for fifty 
dollars and be forced to do without. Although he has read from 
his boyhood days until he is a white haired man, he never saw or 
read a book so full of information. Some of the Infidels have 
said, that it is the clearest and most powerful reasoning they ever 
saw. They have been close readers and had been for a time close 



students of Ingersol's lectures. I take each name and address 
carefully so that I may know who to visit specially when VOL. 
II. is ready. The Lord bless you my brother. 

J. C. G . 

R1038 : page 2 

Brooklyn. 

C. T. RUSSELL. DEAR SIR:-A year has passed since I had the 
joy of reading the first No. of the Z.W. TOWER, and ever since 
I have desired to write you a few lines, and more so after 
reading "MILLENNIAL DAWN." I was born in Iceland, but 
came to Copenhagen [Denmark] when a boy [1869], and to 
America 1880. 1 was brought up a Lutheran, but was converted 
in 1884, and ever since I have been an honest seeker of the truth. 
I prayed the dear Lord to send me light, that I might know his 
way; and I thank God, my eyes have been opened, to behold his 
wondrous truth. All the glory and praise be to him. I am not able 
to pen the feelings of my heart, but I am glad to say that I am at 
the Master's feet learning from him. 

I had the pleasure of being at two of Bro. Blundin's meetings in 
Brooklyn. It was a feast to my soul. I feel that God wants me to 
tell the "good tidings of great joy" to all whom I know, but so 
few will 

R1039 : page 2 

accept of it. 

I would be glad to have some "Arp Slips" to distribute. I am, Sir, 
Yours at Jesus' feet. 

T. B . 



[It refreshes our hearts to get such letters of rejoicing in the 
light of truth. How surely the truth is reaching the truth-hungry 
of every nationality! The Master's words (Matt. 5:6) are proved 
true by almost every mail. We cannot tell you how much we 
should enjoy answering every such letter, if time and the general 
welfare of the Lord's work permitted. We are glad to read your 
letters, though we cannot answer each separately. Accept the 
TOWER articles as our answers to your welcome letters please. - 
-EDITOR.] 

page 2 



Oceana Co., Mich. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have just finished the canvass of the 
village of Hart, and I write this to let you know the result. I sold 
32 copies of paper bound MILL. DAWN. I am not proud of my 
success as a canvasser. I expected to make a better showing, but 
at the same time I am thankful to be able to do something, be it 



ever so little, for the Master. I am in hopes it may be the means 
of bringing into the field some more laborers who will be more 
and better fitted than I am to perform harvest work. I have been 
greatly cheered while going from house to house, by realizing 
more clearly that in this way I am privileged to preach the glad 
tidings to the meek, "to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim 
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that 
are bound," etc. 

Glory to Jesus, this is indeed the everlasting Gospel that is to be 
preached under the whole heaven. 

At Hart I discovered that another laborer had been in the field 
before me. I learned that he was a peddler by trade. He had only 
a cloth bound sample with him, and took some orders to be 
delivered in June. When I got back to M. I met him and 
introduced myself, and the acquaintance was pleasurable to us 
both. He told me that he had got the book from a friend in New 
Buffalo, and becoming convinced of its truth, he, in connection 
with his regular business, takes what orders he can. He 
apologized for working on my territory, but I assured him I was 
glad to know that the Lord had sent another laborer in this part 
of the field, and wished him God speed in his labors. He 
impressed me as being a true brother in Christ. He has his book 
well marked and underlined, and says it is worth its weight in 
gold. I advised him to procure some of the paper bound DAWN, 
and I hope he will. 

Praise the Lord his work is bound to increase and multiply. 
When a man becomes filled with the true spirit of the Gospel, he 
cannot keep still about it, but wherever he goes he tells the grand 
old story. I enclose order for $4.50 for 30 more books less 
expense money. 

Your Brother in Christ. T. B . 



Day, Md. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.-Gentlemen: For a quarter of a 
century I have looked with no very limited degree of 
apprehension to the coming of the present social troubles, as the 
inevitable result of cause and effect; and have long believed that 
this turmoil and strife would be the birth-throes of the good time 
coming. With an anxious desire to look into these things, I have 
threaded the meanderings of various not well defined theories, 
broken here and there by the inconsistent and absurd; but the 
labyrinthian mysteries of God's plan in its beauty of conception, 
wisdom of design, harmony of operation, and grandeur of 
results, are followed and mapped out in the "Plan of the Ages," 
as set forth in "MILLENNIAL DAWN," more in accord with 
the inspired writings, and more consistent with that plan's 
component parts, than in any work I have read. 



I would say to all, read the book and think; and he that hath an 
ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit saith. 

D 



R1039 : page 3 

THE CHURCH OF GOD. 



Zion, arise, break forth in songs 
Of everlasting joy; 
To God eternal praise belongs, 
Who doth thy foes destroy. 

Thou Church of God, awake, awake, 
For light beams from on high; 
From earth and dust thy garments shake, 
The glory's drawing nigh. 

To raise thee high above the earth, 
God will his power employ; 
He'll turn thy mourning into mirth, 
Thy sorrow into joy. 

In shining robes thyself array, 
Put on thy garments pure; 
Thy king shall lead thee in the way, 
That's holy, safe and sure. 

In thee, the Lord shall place his name, 
And make thee his delight, 
And place on thee a diadem, 
Divinely fair and bright; 

And thou shalt be the dwelling place 
Of him that reigns above. 
Yes, thou shalt be adorn'd with grace 
And everlasting love. 

The joy of nations thou shalt be; 
A bright and shining light; 
For God is in the midst of thee, 
To keep thee day and night. 

He'll bring thy wandering children home, 
And gather those without; 
And with a wall of jasper stone, 
Will guard thee round about. 

Arise, O Zion, praise thy King, 
And make his name thy trust; 
With joy and triumph loudly sing; 
For he is true and just. 



O Zion, sing with truthful voice, 
Thy great Redeemer's praise; 
In his almighty power, rejoice 
Throughout eternal days." 



R1039 : page 3 

EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. 

One who has read, evidently with care, the articles "About 
Hell" which appeared in the Jan., Feb. and March TOWERS of 
this year, and who seems convinced of the falsity of the ideas 
generally attached to the translations where the word hell occurs 
in our common versions of the Bible, writes to us thus:— 

Suppose that you are right in all that you say about the meaning 
of the original Greek and Hebrew words translated hell in our 
English Bibles; suppose that, as you show, those original words 
never meant, nor were intended to convey the idea of a place of 
everlasting torment, is there not proof of such a punishment for 
the wicked in other Scriptures aside from this word hell 
entirely? For instance, consider the statement of our Lord in 
Matt. 25:41 and 46. Even if we shall admit that, as you claim, 
that parable of the Sheep and Goats applies to the Millennial 
age, "when the Son of man shall come in his glory and sit upon 
the throne of his glory," and even though we admit your claim, 
that the separating between the sheep and goats is a gradual 
work which progresses throughout that thousand-year-day of 
Judgment, or trial; after admitting all that, as we must, does it 
not seem evident from verses 41 and 46 that the finally 
incorrigible will be tormented forever, some place? No matter 
how much our finer sensibilities might revolt at the thought, 
must we not in candor admit that our Lord taught this in these 
verses, and also in Rev. 20:10? 

I am acquainted with the Greek, and know that the words 
rendered "everlasting" and "eternal" in Matt. 25:41,46 are from 
the Greek root aion, and I admit that it does not always mean 
never ending like our English word everlasting, but rather has 
the meaning of lasting without the ever: but, in this case, verse 
46 shows the lasting life of the righteous or sheep class in 
contrast with the lasting punishment of the wicked or goat class; 
and the contrast seems to teach that the punishment of the one 
class will be as long lasting as the reward of the other. If I fail to 
reason correctly in this, I pray you in God's name help me: for I 
desire the truth and the truth only, and fain would if I could, see 
that everlasting torture is no part of the divine plan and that it is 
not taught in the Word of God. Your articles on hell are 
powerful and almost convincing; and if this my last objection, 
can be cleared away thoroughly, I shall praise God and worship 
Him as never before. 



OUR REPLY. 

It affords great pleasure to answer one so evidently honest; and 
seeing you are hungering and thirsting after truth, we make no 
doubt that the answer to your questions will be satisfactory and 
conclusive, God helping us. 

We are glad to note that the Brother has the correct 
understanding of the Greek word aionios, that it means lasting; 
but we shall take no advantage of this and for arguments sake 
shall treat it as meaning everlasting,-unending punishment to 
the one class and unending life to the other. 

The everlastingness of the punishment being thus quickly 
disposed of, it leaves only one point open for discussion, 
namely, of what sort or kind will the punishment be? Take your 
Concordance and search out what saith the great Judge 
regarding the punishment of willful sinners who despise and 
reject all his blessed provisions for them through Christ? What 
do you find? Does God there say,-All sinners shall live in 
torture forever? We do not find a single text where life in any 
condition is promised to that class, but on the contrary, we do 
find scores of passages which in so many words declare that the 
punishment of this class will consist in the blotting out of their 
existence in the second death. Those who, after the full 
opportunities of the Millennial Kingdom, fail to conform 
themselves to the law of the spirit of life, cannot have life at all. 
God's declarations assure us that he will have a clean universe, 
free from the blight of sin and sinners, when the plan of 
redemption has separated the sheep from the goats. 

But while we do not find one verse of the Bible to say that this 
class can have life in torment or in any other condition, we do 
find hosts of passages teaching the reverse. Of these we merely 
give a few as samples— "The wages of sin is death." (Rom. 
6:23.) "The soul that sinneth it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) "All 
the wicked will God destroy." (Psa. 145:20.) The wicked shall 
"perish," shall be as though they had not been, etc. (Psa. 37:20; 
Job 10:19.) Thus God has told us plainly of what sort the 
everlasting punishment of the wicked shall be-that it will be 
death, destruction; and He never said one word about a life of 
punishment. 

The false ideas of God's plan of dealing with the incorrigible 
taught us from our cradles, ever since the great "falling away" 
came, which culminated in Papacy, is alone responsible for the 
view generally held, that the punishment provided for willful 
sinners is a life of torture, in the face of the many clear 
statements of God's word that their punishment is to be death. 
Hear Paul state very explicitly what the punishment is to be. 
Speaking of the same Millennial Day, and of the same class, 
who despite all the favorable opportunities and the fullness of 
knowledge then, will not come into harmony with Christ, and 
hence will know not God and obey not, He says- "Who shall be 



R1040 : page 3 

punished. " Ah yes ! but how punished? pray tell us Paul. And 
Paul does tell us how: They "shall be punished with everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of 
his power." —2 Thes. 1:9. 

Thus the meaning and reasonableness of this statement 
concerning everlasting punishment, is readily seen when we 
look at it from the correct standpoint. The fire of the parable by 
which the punishment [destruction] is to be accomplished, will 
not be literal fire, for it is as much a symbol as the sheep and the 
goats are symbols. Fire here as elsewhere symbolizes 
destruction, and never in any sense preservation. 

We might well leave this subject here and consider that we have 
fully shown that the everlasting punishment of the goat class 
will be destruction; but we must not fail to direct attention to 
one other point which clinches the truth upon this subject. We 
refer to the Greek word kolasin translated "punishment" in verse 
46; its signification is, -to cut off, or prune, or lop off, as in the 
pruning of trees, and a secondary meaning is-to restrain. 
Illustrations of the use of kolasin can easily be had from Greek 
classical writings. The Greek word for torment is basinos, a 
word totally unrelated to the word kolasin used in this case. 

Kolasin the form of the word used in Matt. 25:47, occurs but 
one other place in the Bible, viz., 1 John 4:18, where it is 
improperly rendered torment in the common version, whereas it 
should read, "Fear hath restraint. " Those who possess a copy of 
Prof. Young's Analytical Concordance will see from it that he [a 
ripe scholar and a Presbyterian] gives as the definition of the 
word kolasis (page 995) "pruning, restraining, restraint." And 
the author of the Emphatic Diaglott, that valuable translation of 
the New Testament, after in Matt. 25 :46 translating kolasin by 
the words "cutting off," says in a foot note: "The common 
version and many modern ones render kolasin aionioon, 
EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT, conveying the idea as 
generally interpreted of basinos, torment. Kolasin in its various 
forms only occurs in three other places in the New Testament- 
Acts 4:21; 2 Pet. 2:9; 1 John 4:18. It is derived from kolazoo 
which signifies, 1. To cut off; as lopping off branches of trees, to 
prune. 2. To restrain, to repress. The Greeks write,-"The 
charioteer (kalazei) restrains his fiery steeds." 3. To chastise, to 
punish. To cut off an individual from life, or from society, or 
even to restrain, is esteemed as a punishment; hence has arisen 
this third or metaphorical use of the word. 

Now consider carefully the text, and note the antithesis or 
contrast shown between the reward of the sheep and that of the 
goats, which the correct idea of kolasin shows;— the one class 
goes into everlasting life while the other is everlastingly cut off 
from life-forever restrained in death. And this exactly agrees 



with what the Scriptures everywhere else declare concerning the 
wages or penalty of willful sin. 

Consider for a moment the words of verse 41 : "Depart from me 
ye cursed [redeemed by Christ from the Adamic curse or 
condemnation to death once, but now condemned or cursed, as 
worthy of second death, by the one who redeemed them from 
the first curse]-into everlasting fire [symbol of perpetual 
destruction] prepared for the devil and his messengers" 
[servants]. This "everlasting fire" is shown in Rev. 20:14 to be 
the second death, destruction. 

Remember that this is the final sentence at the close of the final 
trial-at the close of the Millennium. And none will then be 
servants of Satan ignorantly or unwillingly, as so many now are; 
for the great Deliverer, Christ, grants a Jubilee, and sets all free 
from the weaknesses and besetments within and without, which 
now prevail as a result of Adam's fall,— from which he has 
redeemed all by his own precious blood. These "goats" who love 
evil and serve Satan, are the messengers ["angels"] of Satan, for 
whom with him, and for no others, God has prepared the 
everlasting destruction— the second death, here symbolized by 
fire. 

Turn next to Rev. 20:8-10. This is another symbolic presentation 
of the same cutting off from life mentioned above; it applies to 
the same class of willfully wicked, at the close of the thousand 
years of instruction and restitution under Christ's government 
while evil is bound. At the close of that reign of righteousness 
evil will be permitted to again break loose in the world in some 
form, to test* the multitudinous population of that time and to 
lead into outward opposition all who at heart are rebellious 
toward God. The fate of these is clearly shown in verse 9: —Fire 
will come from God out of heaven and consume them. 
Consuming fire and devouring fire all can appreciate, except 
their eyes be holden by false doctrine and prejudice; and no one 
ever knew of a preserving fire; and as fire never preserves but 
always consumes, God so uses it here as a symbol of utter 
destruction, the second death. 

Verse 9 settles the matter concerning the goat class: they will 
not be preserved, but devoured or consumed in fire. This being 
the case, verse 10 cannot refer to these human beings. Hence the 
question narrows down to this, Will Satan and a false prophet 
and a beast be tortured forever? and does this verse teach this? 

We answer in God's own words, "All the wicked will He 
destroy." Concerning Satan, the arch enemy of God and men, 
God expressly advises us that he will be destroyed, and not 
preserved in any sense or condition.-See Heb. 2:14. 

About this wonderful Beast, and the False Prophet which 
wrought miracles before him, the account of whose doings is so 
prominent in this book of symbols, (Rev. 19:20; 16:13,14; 



13:11-18 and 20:14.) we can now only say that they are 
symbols, and not really a beast and a man. 

The Beast and Prophet are symbols of false systems, which 
during the Gospel age have deceived and led astray. These 
systems will be cast into a great consuming trouble in the close 
of this Gospel age. The torment of those systems will be aionoin 
i.e. LASTING. It will continue as long as they last, until they are 
utterly consumed. So at the end of the Millennial age the system 
of error which will then manifest and lead to destruction the 
"goats" will also be consumed. That deceiving system, (not 
specified as to kind, but merely called Satan, after its instigator), 
will be cast into the same sort of trouble and destruction in the 
end of the Millennial age, as the Beast and False Prophet 
systems are now being cast into, in the end of the Gospel age. 

We hope at some time to present the interpretation of these 
symbols of Revelation so that all may see clearly that the 
systems represented by the Beast and False 



*The statement of verse 8 should be understood to apply to the 
testing of all. How many will follow, as servants of Satan, we 
are not informed, but we may presume they will be 
comparatively few. 

R1040 : page 4 

Prophet, are now going into the fire of trouble which shall 
torment and ultimately destroy them. But, meantime let us say to 
those who cavil, that it illy becomes them, after the whole Bible 
is shown to be against them, to attempt to support the doctrine of 
everlasting torture by a few words in a verse, the remainder of 
which they do not pretend to understand, and in a chapter whose 
other verses are confessedly dark to them, and in a book of 
symbols, which they claim is so sealed by God, that they cannot 
understand it. 

Our Brother does not mention Rev. 14:9-1 1, but concerning it 
we here incidentally remark, that all will at once concede that if 
a literal worshipping of a beast and his image are meant in verse 
9, then few if any in civilized lands are liable to the penalty of 
verse 1 1 ; and if the beast and image, and worship, and wine, and 
cup are symbols, so also are the torments, and smoke, and fire, 
and brimstone. 

Permit us to express the hope that our Brother may be freed 
from the bondage of fear, and more fully acquainted with the 
gracious designs of our Heavenly Father as portrayed in his Plan 
of the Ages: and that he may not only be brought into closer 
fellowship and sympathy and love, but also quickened and 
energized as an ambassador for him, realizing the grandeur of 
the "ministry of reconciliation" which he hath committed unto 
us.-2 Cor. 5:18,19. 



R1040:page4 



FIGHT THE GOOD FIGHT. 

"Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life whereunto 
thou art also called. "— 1 Tim. 6:12. 

If we are naturally combative, we may see, or think we see 
cause for a continual warfare from the cradle to the grave, and a 
little warping of sound judgment may give this disposition a 
seeming religious turn and deceive such a one into the idea that 
he is fighting the good fight above referred to, when in reality he 
is only cultivating a quarrelsome disposition, out of harmony 
with that spirit of meekness and temperance which is a most 
essential feature of the Christian character. Again, many of an 
opposite disposition are inclined to ignore the fact that the 
Christian life is to be a warfare, and to regard only those 
scriptures which counsel meekness, forbearance, patience, 
gentleness, etc. 

Here are two extremes, both of which must be guarded against; 
and in order to help us to rightly judge and balance ourselves, 

R1041 : page 4 

the Apostle recommends us to mark, to observe closely, those 
who walk circumspectly, according to the rules laid down in the 
Scriptures, and counsels us to beware of the influence of those 
who do not so walk: "For," he says, "many walk of whom I have 
told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are 
enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose 
God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, who mind 
earthly things," which they covenanted to sacrifice.— Phil. 3:17- 
19. 

Let us then mark some worthy examples that we may see how 
they ran for the prize and notice if there is any indication that 
they ran successfully. First, we mark the perfect example of our 
Lord, our leader and forerunner, in whose footprints we are 
invited to follow. We notice that his course in the "narrow way" 
of sacrifice, began with an entire consecration of himself to the 
will of God. His consecration was made with simplicity and 
sincerity, and included all that he had-"Lo I come to do thy will 
O God." (Heb. 10:7.) 

He did not say, Father, I will give thee a tithe of my time, my 
service, and my means, and retain the remainder for myself and 
for the pursuit of my own ambitions and plans. He did not say, 
Father, I have chosen this or that special work, and I trust thy 
blessing will attend it. He did not say, As far as I understand thy 
will, Father, I am willing to do it- with the implication that if the 
Father should ever ask anything too severe, or seemingly 



unreasonable, he might change his mind. No, his consecration 
was simply to the doing of the Father's will, whatever that will 
might prove to be. And then he earnestly applied himself to the 
study of the Law and the Prophets, that he might know the will 
of God concerning him. When tempted to change his course he 
replied, "How then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it 
must be". .."The cup which my Father hath given me to drink 
shall I not drink it?" (Matt. 26:54; John 18:1 1.) He laid aside his 
own will and carried out the will of God, though it cost him 
privation at every step and finally a death most painful and 
ignominious. From this course of sacrifice he never wavered 
even for a moment. 

That was a grand character for our imitation. Yes, but, says one, 
Our Lord was perfect and therefore could do the Father's will 
perfectly. Very true; we are thankful and rejoice in this, for had 
he not been perfect he could never have redeemed us; yet we 
needed also just such an example; for however imperfectly we, 
like school children, may succeed in imitating the copy, we need 
to have a perfect copy. 

But while Christ was much more to us than a perfect example 
for our imitation, which under our present infirmities we cannot 
fully duplicate, we have other examples furnished among 
brethren of similar infirmities with ourselves. Let us mark them, 
and see how they followed the Master. There was Peter with his 
quick impulsive nature, always loving, yet so vacillating— now 
defending his Master at his own peril, and again disclaiming and 
denying him; now boldly contending for the faith, and again 
compromising with Jewish prejudices, calling forth and justly 
meriting Paul's faithful reproof. Yet rightly exercised by reproof 
and discipline, and endeavoring to rule himself, his Christian 
character ripened and beautified from year to year as evidenced 
by his grand and noble epistles to the church, written by 
inspiration and handed down from generation to generation for 
nineteen centuries; and he had many evident marks of the Lord's 
loving approval. Before he had time to express in words his 
regret of his denial of the Lord, he was assured of his acceptance 
with him and of the continued favor of feeding his sheep; for the 
Lord knew the sincerity of his love and that through weakness 
and fear he had sinned. Mark too, Peter's affection for his 
"beloved brother Paul" (2 Pet. 3:15,16) who had so plainly 
reproved and rebuked him; and for the Lord, who had said "Get 
thee behind me Satan (adversary): thou art an offence unto me; 
for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but of men. 
(Matt. 16:23.) Poor Peter; it was an up-hill road for him, but he 
seemed to consider and appreciate his own weakness and to put 
his shoulder to the wheel in a more determined effort to 
overcome the propensities of his old nature, and to cultivate the 
graces of the Christian character. 



But did he finally overcome? and was he accepted as one of that 
glorious company which shall constitute the Bride of Christ? 
Yes truly; for the risen Lord himself declared that his name is 
written with the others of the twelve apostles in the very 
foundations of the heavenly city, the New Jerusalem, the 
Kingdom of God. (Rev. 21:14.) See what poor weak Peter 
gained by his meekness and patience under painful discipline. 

Paul was a stronger character by nature. He had evidently made 
a life-business of ruling himself, though he was naturally 
positive and firm; and when the truth reached Paul he had a 
great advantage at once, both in his natural disposition, and in 
his early culture, so that he could walk more firmly and steadily; 
and using all his energy in this direction he furnishes a noble 
example for our imitation of steadfastness and endurance, of 
untiring zeal and sincerest devotion. See and ponder well, 2 Cor. 
11:23-33 and 12:10,15. 

John was loving, gentle, and meek naturally and that very 
disposition would make it difficult for him to sever the many 
ties of human friendship which such dispositions always draw 
about them. Yet John was faithful to his Master regardless of the 
human ties. He was a patient faithful teacher of the doctrines of 
Christ, and willingly suffered banishment to the lonely isle of 
Patmos for his faithful witnessing to the truth. 

And similar was the course of all the apostles: they were bold 
faithful advocates of the truth, and examples of its power to 
sanctify them wholly, as they gradually grew in grace 
submitting themselves to its transforming influence. They were 
men of similar and varied dispositions like ourselves. Mark 
those who so run and do likewise. Our Lord marked these, and 
kept a careful record of their course judging them by their 
motives and endeavors; and he shows us that their course thus 
judged, all their imperfections being covered by the imputed 
righteousness of their Leader, was acceptable to him. They left 
all and followed Christ. Their all was not so very much, not any 
more in many cases than we have to leave, but it was their all, 
and so was acceptable. Peter had left his fishing business, and 
his friends, to travel with the Master and learn and teach the 
truth; he had thus given up his own will and present interests to 
do the will of God. And when he said to the Lord "Lo we have 
left all and have followed thee," the Lord did not say his little all 
was not worth mentioning, but he recognized it and encouraged 
Peter to continue to sacrifice all, with the assurance that in due 
time he would be rewarded. (Mark 10:28-30.) And so shall we 
all be, if we faint not; for faithful is he that hath called us, who 
also will exalt us in due time. 

As we thus mark the course of the faithful ones, we see that their 
warfare was one largely with themselves. It was their endeavor 
to keep their own human wills down while they carried out the 
divine will. And even in the one case of our Lord, where the 



human will was perfect, it was a hard thing to do, as evidenced 
by his words, "Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. 
Nevertheless not my will, but thine be done. " 

But there is another side of this warfare which we have not yet 
considered, and which we dare not overlook if we would be 
faithful overcomers. The truth has its enemies now, as well as in 
the days of the Apostles, and we are set for the defence of the 
truth; hence the forces against which we must contend are not 
only those within, but also those without. To be listless and 
indifferent under such circumstances as surround us, is certainly 
no evidence that we are fighting the good fight of faith. 

To fight the good fight of faith, implies, first, that we have a 
faith to fight for. No man can fight this good fight therefore who 
has not come to some knowledge of the truth— a knowledge 
sufficient to awaken his sympathies and enlist his energies in its 
propagation and defence. 

Now look at the warfare on this side and see how the faithful 
soldiers of the cross from the beginning of the age to the present 
time have contended for the faith delivered to the saints. Did 
they calmly and comfortably rest in luxurious ease, enjoy what 
they knew of the truth themselves, and say nothing about it 
where it would cause a ripple of opposition, and then flatter 
themselves with the idea that their lazy do-nothing tranquility 
was an evidence of their growth in grace? By no means. They 
endured hardness as good soldiers for the truth's sake. They 
proclaimed it boldly, and took the consequences of public scorn 
and contempt, the loss of earthly friends, the sacrifice of 
business interests and earthly prospects, together with stripes, 
imprisonments, and perils to life on every hand, and met violent 
deaths in many cases. They not only enjoyed the glorious 
prospect of future blessedness, but they became active to the 
extent of their ability in carrying out God's plan for securing that 
end. Had they done otherwise they would have been proving 
themselves unworthy of the high honors to which they were 
called. And so it has been throughout the entire age, and is still. 

When the great Mystery of Iniquity, or Papal system had 
reached the height of its power and the very depths of its 
corruption, and the eyes of a few faithful children of God were 
opened to see its 

R1042 : page 4 

true character, noble reformers stepped out and boldly declared 
their convictions in the face of most violent persecution. And 
many other noble souls encouraged by their example, braved the 
same dangers and endured great hardships while contending for 
the truth, and gave evidence of their zeal and consecration by 
their faithfulness even unto death by violent hands, and unto 
persecution and torture of the most revolting and fiendish 
character. 



It is well that we should consider frequently such examples, that 
they may serve to spur our own zeal, and that we may the more 
lightly esteem the comparatively light afflictions which we are 
now called upon to endure, in our efforts to disseminate and 
defend the truth to-day. We have now no bloody persecutions, 
though it is still true that they who will live Godly shall suffer 
persecution. To live Godly however, implies earnestness and 
consequent activity in God's service. 

Remember too, that the Apostle refers to these last days of the 
age as the most perilous times of all. Why? Because the errors 
and temptations of this day come in more subtle forms than 
heretofore. This is emphatically the age of reason; an age of 
advancement in almost every direction; many are running to and 
fro and knowledge is increasing on every hand. And yet, human 
conceit and presumption is running vastly ahead of knowledge; 
and reason, unguided by the Divine Revelation, is falling into 
many foolish and hurtful errors, which are passing current 
among those who profess to be the children of God, who are 
deceived by these errors and are falling away from the faith once 
delivered to the saints. And though the great Babylon system is 
crumbling into decay, multitudinous errors, far more injurious 
than the formalism and slumber of Babylon, are at work, to 
build upon its ruins other systems of iniquity in which even the 
foundation principles of Christianity find no place whatever. 

These errors must be met by the faithful 

R1042 : page 5 

few who are armed with the truth,- others cannot detect or 
defeat them. It is for these armed with the Sword of the Spirit, 
which is the word of God, to show by its profound reasonings 
the difference between truth and error, and that God's plan in 
God's way is superior to all the plans and ways of human 
arrangement. To escape falling into these errors, and being 
deceived by their subtle sophistries, and by the professions of 
loyalty to God on the part of the deceived deceivers who 
advance them, the children of God must keep close to their 
Father's Word, and be filled with his spirit; and when they see 
the truth they must be bold and fearless in its defence regardless 
of all consequences. 

This is fighting the good fight of faith whether you are severely 
wounded in the conflict or not. And those who, sacrificing home 
comforts, etc., to scatter the truth, which read and pondered over 
by those who receive it, gives light and scatters darkness, are 
just as surely fighting the good fight of faith as if by word of 
mouth they were arguing with those they meet. They do it thus, 
much more effectually often. And such shall just as surely 
receive their reward and lay hold on eternal life as will Peter and 
Paul and other faithful soldiers of the cross,-if they faint not. 



This little army of faithful soldiers, all told, is but a handful, "a 
little flock;" but though in numbers they are so insignificant that 
the hosts of the opposers of the truth fear little from their efforts, 
the final victory shall be theirs; and God's power will be 
glorified and manifested in them proportionately more. Like 
Gideon's three hundred picked men who feared not to face the 
hosts of Midian because the Lord was with them, these have but 
to go forth likewise, strong in faith, sounding the trumpet of 
truth and breaking their earthen vessels (sacrificing their human 
nature) that the blessed light of God's spirit may shine out; and 
at the appointed hour the hosts of the enemy shall take the alarm 
and flee. Systems of error new and old shall be turned to 
destruction, and, as in the case of the Midianites, each shall turn 
upon the other to accomplish the work of their destruction. 

To have the privilege of fighting this good fight of faith and of 
being the Lord's chosen ones for the great work now to be done, 
God's children, like Gideon's army, must first be proved-tested. 
At first there was a host of thirty thousand with Gideon; and 
when all that were fearful were told to return to their homes, 
only ten thousand remained, and when God further tested these, 
only three hundred remained; a little insignificant company truly 
they must have appeared, not only to the Midianites, but also to 
themselves. Yet, God's power was made the more manifest by 
their smallness and weakness. 

Just so it is now. No one is compelled or urged into this service. 
All who are fearful, whose faith in God's ability and intention to 
carry out his plan is not strong enough to make them bold and 
courageous, and in haste to go forth, anxious to sound the 
trumpet tones of truth, and willing to break their earthen vessels 
(to sacrifice themselves) in the service, have the privilege of 
retiring from the scene: but of course such shall have no part in 
the honors of the victory with the greater Captain than Gideon. 

Previous to Paul's exhortation to the faithful few, to fight the 
good fight of faith, he gives the very wholesome advice that we 
lay entirely aside from us the weights of our former earthly cares 
etc., -pride, ambition, discontent, money-loving, etc. We cannot 
grasp or hold the treasures of this life, and at the same time run 
successfully for the heavenly prize— "Ye cannot serve God and 
Mammon," and "A double minded man is unstable in all his 
ways. Let us then take Paul's counsel— flee these earthly things, 
and following after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, 
patience, meekness, fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold on 
eternal life as joint-heirs with Christ in the glory of victory 
shortly to be granted. If after we have consecrated our all to 
God, we turn to mind and seek earthly things, and glory in their 
possession, we are really glorying in our shame; and the end of 
such glory if pursued to the end, is destruction. See that ye walk 
circumspectly, not minding earthly but heavenly things, and not 
yielding to the temptations of those who walk otherwise. Thus 



we also shall be setting an example to others worthy of their 
imitation. 



R1042:page5 

THE GULF AND TORMENT. 

A Brother who read the exposition of the parable of the Rich 
Man and Lazarus in January. TOWER, would like to have an 
explanation of the statement, "In hell he lifted up his eyes being 
in torment: " also of the meaning of the gulf between them. 

We thought the explanation full enough to cover these points, 
but perhaps it was not sufficient. We therefore answer this query 
publicly. 

Please read the explanation given in January TOWER again 
very carefully. Then note that the gulf is the wide difference 
between the Gospel church and the Jew; the former enjoying 
free grace, joy, comfort and peace, as true sons of God,— and the 
latter holding to the Law, which condemns and torments him. 
Prejudice, pride and error, from the Jewish side form the 
bulwarks of this gulf which hinders the Jew from coming into 
the condition of true sons of God by accepting of Christ and the 
gospel of his grace. The bulwark of this gulf which hinders true 
sons of God from going into the bondage with the Jew-the 
Law— is their knowledge, that by the deeds of the Law none can 
be justified before God, and that if any man keep the law (put 
himself under it to try to commend himself to God by reason of 
obedience to the Law) Christ shall profit him nothing. (Gal. 5:2- 
4.) So then we who are of the Lazarus class will not attempt to 
mix law and gospel, knowing they cannot be mixed and that we 
can do no good to those who still cling to the Law and reject the 
sacrifice for sins given by our Lord. And they, not seeing the 
change of dispensation which took place, argue, that to deny the 
Law as the power to save, would be to deny all the past history 
of their race, and to deny all of God's special dealings with the 
"fathers" (promises and dealings which through pride and 
selfishness they failed to rightly apprehend and use), hence they 
cannot come over to the bosom of Abraham into the true rest 
and peace- the portion of all the true children of faith. -John 
8:39; Rom. 4:16 and Gal. 3:29. 

True, a few Jews probably came into the Christian faith all the 
way down the Gospel age, but so few as to be ignored in a 
parable which represented the Jewish people as a whole. With 
the end of the Gospel age, comes the end of this parable. It is 
now ending, and the Jew therefore is getting out of the 
TORMENT in which he has been for eighteen-hundred years. 
The torment has not only been as above described,-the torment 
of a law which none of them ever did, or ever could keep 



perfectly (except the one perfect man), but they are getting out 
of another kind of torment, viz., persecution. The Jew has been 
bitterly persecuted by Pagans, Mohammedans and professed 
Christians for centuries, but is now-rising to political freedom 
and influence gradually. And as a people they will be very 
prominent among the nations in the beginning of the 
Millennium. The vail of prejudice is being taken away as the 

R1043 : page 5 

light of the Millennial morning gradually dawns, and we hear of 
great awakenings among the Jews, and many coming to 
acknowledge Christ. They are thus leaving their hadean state of 
torment and coming, the first of the nations, to be blessed by the 
true seed of Abraham which is Christ. Their bulwark of race- 
prejudice and pride is falling in some places and the humble, the 
poor in spirit are beginning already to look unto him whom they 
pierced, and to inquire, Is this not the Christ? And as they look 
the Lord pours upon them the spirit of favor and supplication. - 
Zech 12:10. 

We are thus enabled to look beyond the limits of this parable 
and to read the future as foretold by the prophets, the apostles 
and by our Lord himself. Therefore, "Speak ye comfortably to 
Jerusalem and cry unto her that her appointed time is 
accomplished."— Isa. 40:1,2, marginal reading. 



R1043:page5 

LETTERS TO OUR CHILDREN.--NO. 1. 

BY W. I. M. 

DEAR PAPA:-We have for next Sunday's lesson "The Ten 
Talents." One of the questions is, "Will those be saved who die 
in childhood, before they know good and evil?" The answer 
given is, "They will, for Jesus said, 'Of such is the kingdom of 
heaven.'" It doesn't seem to me that this is what Jesus meant; 
please explain this as soon as you have time. 

MARION. 

MY DEAR MARION:-When you have read Millennial Dawn 
through carefully you will understand God's plan of salvation 
for both young and old, better than I can explain it in letters, but 
if you will follow me closely, I will try to make your question 
plain to you. 

If the whole world were now-in this life— being tried for their 
own sins, and were not affected by the sin of Adam, and if they 
came into the world with a pure nature, then babies and lunatics 
and very ignorant people (heathen, etc.,) not being responsible 
for their actions, -therefore not sinners strictly-would not be 



condemned; and so might, in God's loving kindness be saved. If 
this were God's plan then heaven (as the popular idea is 
expressed) would be filled with babies and idiots and the most 
ignorant people of the world; while the other place (if orthodoxy 
were true) would receive nearly all the intelligent people, and all 
who were simply good, moral and kind hearted, but not 
Christians. Do you think God, who is infinitely wise and 
intelligent, and who made man originally in his own likeness as 
to intelligence, wants to have all the knownothings, and to give 
all the wise to Satan? In this age very few of the wise (as to the 
world's wisdom) are converted to God. The simplicity of the 
Gospel is foolishness to them It was so intended. Paul said 
"Behold your calling, brethren, how that not many wise after the 
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called; but God 
chose the foolish things of the world, that he might put to shame 
the things that are strong, -that no flesh should glory before 
God." Read 1 Cor. 1:18-31; 2:1-10,13,14. 

God intends also to save the wise, and will in the coming age 
reveal to them his saving plan in all the richness of its wisdom 
and glory. But in this Gospel age, he has a special message 
adapted to the simple and CHILDLIKE, (the teachable, 
believing, trusting ones) "Of such [not babies] is the kingdom of 
heaven" -now. God's children are those who love, obey and trust 
their Heavenly Father, as good, loving girls and boys do a 
faithful earthly father. Through God's plan these simple, faithful 
children of our Father, who learn his truth now, and search and 
study his wonderful "Plan of Salvation" will in the age to come 
be the teachers of "all men;" (1 Tim. 2:4-6; 4:6-10) the "Royal 
Priesthood" (1 Pet. 2:5) who will be God's instruments in filling 
the earth with the knowledge of God as the waters fill the depths 
ofthesea.-Habak. 2:14. 

Perhaps you are ready to ask Why do you call the way of 
salvation a plan? Because it is a systematic arrangement; a 
design prepared beforehand, and followed out to the end for a 
certain result, also seen and intended from the beginning. 

Briefly, God's plan is this: Adam-a perfect man- was created 
and placed on trial in Eden as the representative of the whole 
race of mankind, who were to follow. He sinned and the penalty 
of sin— death-passed upon him, and through him upon all his 
descendants. He had a perfect mind-being a perfect man. He 
was capable of being taught wonderful things, but was really 
untaught, being without experience. God foresaw the Fall and 
had the remedy also provided. In due time He sent Jesus our 
Lord to earth to become a man; (a perfect one,) just like Adam— 
so he is called the Second Adam, (1 Cor. 15:45) to preach, and 
to show us an example, and then to die, TO GIVE HIS LIFE 
FOR THAT OF THE FIRST ADAM, and all those who had 
been represented in Adam- ALL HIS DESCENDANTS. 



Suppose you were at a party where they had parlor games. One 
game had forfeits. That is if you failed to pass some test agreed 
on, your penalty was either to pay ten cents or go to jail— jail 
being a corner or another room. Now if you failed and had no 
money you would be put in jail. But suppose some one wanted 
you out to help them play, they might pay the ten cents for you, 
and you would go free. 

So God, to show that finally only the good and obedient would 
be permitted to live, told Adam he would lose his life if he failed 
to obey. He failed and God sent him away from the tree of life 
so that his life would not be sustained by it, and he began to die 
that day, and finally reached death. Jesus came, and after 
proving himself a perfect man, gave his life as the forfeit for 
Adam's, thus PURCHASING for Adam (and for us in Adam) a 
resurrection back to life again. Jesus left his human nature 
(which was like Adam's) in the tomb. His Father took him out of 
death as a different being— that is a DIVINE, a spiritual being. 

Now read carefully Rom. 5:12-21. This shows how by the SIN 
of one man— Adam— death came upon all; and also how by the 
OBEDIENCE of one man-Jesus -all were redeemed, justified 
again. 

For this reason (Christ's redemption) all will have a resurrection. 
(Acts 24:15.) You may ask "If ALL have been redeemed by 
Christ, will not ALL be saved?" So Universalists think, and they 
quote 1 Cor. 15:22, but the verse before tells us that the 
resurrection is what is referred to. All are brought up again in a 
resurrection by Christ Jesus, but all do not live forever, unless 
they submit themselves to him. If they remain willful after the 
opportunities of that glorious day, they die for their own 

R1043 : page 6 

sins. We do not die now for our own sins, else Christians would 
not die— having been forgiven. All-good and bad-die "in 
Adam," because we are sharers in his fallen nature. Or to be 
more exact, because we were in him— in the sense that he was 
the father of the whole human family -when he sinned and was 
put under the dominion of death. 

When we have been freed from Adam's penalty (death) by the 
resurrection, we will be ready to be tried for ourselves. Now see 
the advantage the world will have in their trial, over Adam in 
his. I now say "the world" because "we" of the Gospel church 
"are not of the world" (John 17:16), and we are an exception to 
the rule. Adam when tried having had no previous experience 
with sin, did not know how dangerous, how exceedingly sinful 
sin was. The world having had a life experience (longer or 
shorter) with sin will after their resurrection, and under Christ's 
righteous rule (for he will reign then) be PREPARED, by 
experience, to go on trial for themselves. And this is God's 
plan,-that all mankind (except the exception, the Gospel 



Church), should first experience the bitterness of sin and death, 
and after that rise to be put on trial for themselves; after they 
have found out how strong sin is; how weak they are; and how 
much they need a Saviour to redeem and lead them out of sin 
and death. Out of death he has already ransomed them and will 
lift them, and then stand ready with a "Whosoever will," (Rev. 
22:17) the call of the Bride (the Gospel church AFTER the 
marriage with Christ), from the New Jerusalem to all the nations 
of earth. Then, in the Millennial age, ALL babies, little and big; 
the foolish, both by nature and by false teaching and reasoning; 
the blind, both naturally and spiritually; the lame and dumb and 
the deaf shall all be restored and brought to a knowledge of the 
truth. It is a foundation doctrine of the Bible that there is "no 
other name under heaven, given among men, whereby we may 
be saved." (Acts 4:12.) Neither innocence nor ignorance, nor 
any other natural condition will save. Jesus is "the WAY, the 
truth, and the LIFE." Again, "without FAITH it is 
IMPOSSIBLE to please God." (Heb. 1 1:6.) So neither babies, 
nor the ignorant can be saved until they learn the way of faith- 
to Christ. This will all be done in God's "due time. " He is not in 
such a hurry as we sometimes are. 

Let us not remain "Babes in Christ," for there are such; (1 Cor. 
3:1) but while always retaining the childlike- trusting-spirit, let 
us grow in the favor and knowledge of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ (2 Pet. 3:18), "unto a full grown man, unto the 
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: that we may be 
no longer children, tossed to and fro and carried about with 
every wind of doctrine, ...but speaking truth in love, may grow 
up in all things into... Christ."-Eph. 4:13-15. Papa. 



page 6 



THE HEBREWS IN GERMANY. 



It is reported that when the Emperor Frederick of Germany 
drops off, a crusade against the Jews will begin. In the respite 
which they are at present enjoying the leading Hebrews of 
Germany are consulting with their brethren in England and 
France concerning the best course to pursue in the event of the 
succession to power of their enemies. Of course, the interests of 
the great majority are so identified with the land which is their 
home that they cannot leave it without making ruinous sacrifices 
of their business, and others are too proud to fly before the 
threatening storm, but it has been determined to assist those who 
wish to emigrate, and who are qualified to earn their living in 
other countries. -Selected. 



R1044 : page 6 



CHICAGOANS IN JERUSALEM. 

CHANGES THAT HAVE TAKEN PLACE IN SIX YEARS- 
A GREAT DAY COMING. 

A letter from Jerusalem dated Nov. 23d, published in a Chicago 
paper, bears remarkable testimony to the gradual progress of 
restitution in that land and God's preparation for promised future 
blessing upon it and its people. By the time the "little flock," the 
Body of Christ, is fully completed and perfected, Jerusalem and 
the fleshly house will be ready for the great things foretold 
concerning them. Indications of both are multiplying. The 
following is an extract from said letter:— 

I am very glad to tell you of the glorious things that we have 
been witnesses of during the six years we have lived here. When 
we arrived here, six years ago, the 26th of September, we 
numbered fourteen adults and five children. As we drove up 
from Jaffa we were deeply impressed with the desolation of the 
land. Not a spear of green could be seen anywhere; the olive 
trees and vines were so covered with the gray dust of a hot, dry 
summer, that you never could imagine there could be any green 
underneath, and the whole earth seemed dried to its foundations. 
We realized to the full, that it was a land under the curse of God 
still, for sin. But we have never seen it look like that since that 
time. Every year it looks greener and greener, and now, so many 
of those barren hill-sides are covered with vineyards, and olive 
yards, quite changing the appearance of everything. 

You will ask, what is the cause of this great change? God has 
promised that like as He brought all this evil upon this land, so 
He will bring great blessings unto it, and it has evidently begun 
by God's sending more rain than for many thousand years. He 
sends beautiful showers and heavy dews, where there used not 
to be any, and He sends clouds in summer, which were never 
known even twenty years ago. This tempers the heat, so that it 
does not dry up the ground so. Five years ago He sent, in July 
and August (months in which it never used to rain), three hours 
of rain in Jaffa, and sixteen hours in Damascus, and much all 
around, so that the American papers remarked upon it as a proof 
that the climate of Palestine is changing. Also, when we came 
here, there were very few Jews coming back to this land, but the 
persecutions in Russia and Germany and other places began to 
drive them out, and, in spite of the edicts of the Sultan, they 
began returning to this land, buying land, planting and building, 
and getting possession of the trade of the city; and so to-day 
there are many thousands more than when we came. 

Jerusalem is in reality now in the hands of the Jews, so far as 
trade is concerned, and the Jew is no longer under the heel of the 
Mohammedan as he once was. They are also rapidly building up 
a new city, exactly on the line of the description in Jer. 31 :38-40 
and 32:43-44, so that even the Turks, who are in power, are 



taking notice of it, and are saying one to the other, 'It is God, 
and what can we do?' And, dear friend, what can we say to all 
this, but that God is rapidly fulfilling in our day His word and 
the covenant He made with Abraham, and we are witnesses of 
these things." 

AMELIA GOULD. 

In this connection let us remember the prophecies which read:— 

"The Lord hath comforted Zion; he hath comforted all her waste 
places, and hath made her wilderness like Eden, and her desert 
like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found 
therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody. Break forth into 
joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem, for the Lord 
hath comforted his people. He hath redeemed Jerusalem. And 
they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former 
desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations 
of many generations. At that time they shall call Jerusalem the 
throne of the Lord; and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, 
to the name of the Lord, to Jerusalem: neither shall they walk 
any more after the stubbornness of their evil heart. "-Isaiah 51:3; 
52:9; 61:4; Jeremiah 3:17- Revised Version. 



R1044 : page 6 

A HINDU CHRISTIAN'S CREED. 

The following, indicates that some of the long darkened heathen 
minds, grasp the principles of Christianity much more clearly 
and truthfully than many born in civilized lands and educated in 
colleges and theological seminaries. 

"Pundita Ramabai, who visited Boston, and who has more 
recently been with Miss Willard, at Evanston, 111., and who is 
preparing to return to India to engage in teaching high caste 
Indian women, does not find it easy here to tell what 
denomination she belongs to. A reporter asked the question, and 
she answered: "I belong to the universal Church of Christ. I 
meet good Baptists, Methodists, Episcopalians and 
Presbyterians, and each one tells me something different about 
the Bible. So it seems to me better to go there myself and find 
the best I can. And there I find Christ the Saviour of the world, 
and to him I give my heart. I was baptized when in England, and 
I commune with all Christian people who will allow me to do 
so. I do not profess to be of any particular denomination, for I 
would go back to India simply as a Christian. To my mind it 
appears that the New Testament, and especially the words of our 
Savior, are a sufficiently elaborate creed. I believe as the Savior 
has told us, and His message through John has come to us, that 
God is a Spirit, is light and love; in his threefold nature He 



creates, illuminates and pervades the universe; that Jesus His 
Son and Servant, the Apostle of our faith, was sent by Him to be 
the Savior and leader of His children; that as many as believe on 
Him have the right to be the sons of God; and that the Holy 
Spirit is our guide and comforter, the great gift of God through 
Christ; that there is but one Church, and that all who 
acknowledge Jesus as their Savior are members of that Church. I 
believe that whatever is needed for my salvation will be given 
me, and I pray earnestly that God may grant me the grace to be a 
seeker and follower of truth and a doer of His will. In Boston 
they said I was a Unitarian; I told them I was not. Neither am I a 
Trinitarian. I do not understand those modern inventions at all. I 
am simply a Christian, and the New Testament teaches me my 
religion. " 



In the Chautauquan Miss Frances E. Willard writes 
interestingly of this young Hindu woman, from which we quote 
the following incident: 

"When she spoke in our Sunday gospel meeting of the W.C.T.U. 
at Evanston, I asked her what hymn she preferred, and in her 
clear, earnest voice she instantly replied- 

I heard the voice of Jesus say 
Come unto me and rest. 

But the regulation missionary hymn was given out, "From 
Greenland's Icy Mountains." Standing beside her I wrote the 
words, "Take notice, this is none of my selecting." Just then the 
audience was rolling forth, "Where every prospect pleases and 
only man is vile"— a comment not specially delightful to one 
whose relatives were "heathens." Volumes were spoken in her 
swift, half-indignant, half -pathetic smile. 

In the speech she made that day she responded to my earnest 
persuasion that she should "tell us of herself." She spoke in 
glowing language of her parents, saying, "If any one wishes to 
say my father, so eager to learn of God, and my mother so 
tender and sweet, have gone to hell because no Christian ever 
reached them with the glad tidings of Christ, I have only to tell 
you: Never say so in my presence, for I will not hear it." 



R1044 : page 6 



AN EXAMPLE FROM JAPAN. 

A missionary of one of the Evangelical denominations writes 
from Japan as follows, to a friend:— 

"One of the things which most of all pains and torments these 
Japanese is that we teach them the prison of hell is irrevocably 
shut, so that there is no egress. They grieve over the fate of their 



departed children, parents and relatives, and often show their 
grief by tears. They ask us if there is any hope; any way to free 
them by prayer from that eternal misery, and I am obliged to 
answer there is absolutely none. Their grief at this, affects and 
torments them wonderfully; they almost pine away with sorrow. 
They often ask if God cannot take their father out of hell? and 
why their punishment must never be at an end? They do not 
cease to grieve and I can hardly restrain my tears at seeing men 
so dear to my heart suffer such intense pain. Such thoughts have, 
I imagine, risen in the hearts of missionary teachers of all 
churches. Again and again, I and my brother missionaries were 
questioned by people about their dead parents and fore-fathers 
who had not heard the gospel. These distressed hearts ask if they 
could pray for their ancestors. I have had most painful scenes, 
and I think many American church missionaries have had. " 

This is the same old experience coming to the front again in a 
new place. Over and over again have we presented examples of 
these same sad results of preaching the orthodox (?) doctrine of 
irrevocable punishment. The Evangelical missionary world is 
receiving constant notifications that the religion of Christ, as 
interpreted by their standards, is not a welcome message 

R1045 : page 6 

even to the pagan world. It is not good news, or the gospel, for 
the heathen to be informed that their ancestors who died without 
the light, so called, have sunk into an eternal abyss of suffering 
in the future world; that the condition of the vast multitudes of 
the dead of their race is irrevocably fixed in despair when they 
pass out of this life. The missionary experiences of "Orthodoxy" 
are undoubtedly more full of testimony in this respect than has 
been heretofore made known. Much has been told, but more 
undoubtedly has been concealed. From the instances in which 
we are permitted by correspondence to get glimpses of the 
unrest of the heathen under the teaching of this faith, we may 
well conclude that there is a larger amount of the same kind 

R1045 : page 7 

of suffering which is not allowed to pass into current missionary 
history. 

It is remarkable with such instances as above constantly brought 
to attention, that the American Board cannot see the propriety of 
sending out ministers who cherish the larger hope and who 
could conscientiously carry to the pagan world a Gospel that 
would give comfort and satisfaction to those anxious and 
suffering souls. But instead of this they refuse to send out such 
ministers, and insist that only those who believe the repellant 
doctrines are fit for the foreign field. The time is coming, and 
rapidly coming, when this action will be reversed; when 
missionaries will be authorized to carry their own enlarged faith 



and hope to those who are waiting anxiously for the comfort and 
blessing of a true gospel.— Selected. 



R1045 : page 7 

ONE TENTH OR ALL? 

One who believes that every dollar belongs to God, and is to be 
used for Him, will not imagine that he has discharged all 
obligation by "giving a tenth to the Lord." One who talks about 
the "Lord's tenth," probably thinks about "his own" nine-tenths. 
The question is not what proportion belongs to God, but having 
given all to Him, what proportion will best honor Him by being 
applied to the uses of myself and family, and what proportion 
will best honor Him by being applied to benevolent uses. 
Because necessities differ, this proportion will differ. One man 
has a small income and a large family; another has a large 
income and no family at all. Manifestly, the proportion which 
will best honor God by being applied to benevolence is much 
larger in the one case than in the other. If men's needs varied 
directly as their incomes, it might, perhaps, be practicable and 
reasonable to fix on some definite proportion as due from all to 
Christian and benevolent work. But while men's wants are quite 
apt to grow with their income, their needs do not. When John 
Wesley's income was L.30, he lived on L.28, and gave two; and 
when his income rose to L.60, and afterwards to L. 120, he still 
lived on L.28 and gave all the remainder. 

There are multitudes in the land who, after having given one- 
tenth of their increase, might fare sumptuously every day, 
gratifying every whim, and live with the most lavish 
expenditure. Would that fulfill the law of Christ?-self sacrifice. 

There is always a tendency to substitute form for spirit, rules for 
principles. It is so much easier to conform the conduct to a rule 
than to make a principle inform the whole life. Moses prescribed 
rules; Christ inculcated principles— rules are for children, 
principles for men. 

The law of tithes was given when the race was in its childhood, 
and the relations of money to the kingdom of God were radically 
different from what they are now. Money had no such spiritual 
equivalents then as now. The Jew was required simply to make 
provision for his own worship; and this might appropriately be 
met by levying upon a certain portion of his increase. But, under 
the Christian dispensation, the world is our country, and the race 
our kindred. The needs of the world to-day are boundless; 
hence, every man's obligation to supply that need is the full 
measure of his ability; not one tenth or any other fraction of it. 

The principle that every dollar is to be used in the way that will 
best honor God is as applicable to capital as to increase or 



income, and in many cases requires that a portion of capital be 
applied directly to benevolent uses. "But," says one, "I must not 
give of my capital, because that would impair my ability to give 
in the future. I must not kill the goose that lays the golden egg." 
The objection is of weight, especially in ordinary times; but 
these are times wholly extraordinary; and this is the world's 
emergency. It may be quite true that giving one dollar now out 
of your capital would prevent your giving five dollars fifteen 
years hence. But one dollar now may be worth ten dollars fifteen 
years later. 

Money, like corn, has a two-fold power -that of ministering to 
want, and that of reproduction. If there were a famine in the 
land, no matter how sore it might be, it would be folly to grind 
up all the seed-corn for food. But, on the other hand, suppose, in 
the midst of the famine, after feeding their families and doling 
out a handful in charity, the farmers were to put all the increase 
back into the ground, and do it year after year, while the world 
was starving ! That would be worse than foolish. It would be 
criminal. Yet that is what multitudes of men are doing. Instead 
of applying the power in money to the end for which it was 
intrusted to them, they use it almost wholly to accumulate more 
power. A miller might as well spend his life building his dam 
higher and higher, and never turn the water on to his wheel. 

Bishop Butler said to his secretary: "I should be ashamed of 
myself, if I could leave ten thousand pounds behind me. " Many 
professed Christians die "disgracefully and wickedly rich. " The 
shame and sin, however, lie not in the fact that the power was 
gathered, but that it was unwielded. 

It is every man's duty to wield the widest possible power for 
righteousness. But let a man beware! This power in money is 
something awful. It is more dangerous than dynamite. The 
victims of "saint-seducing gold" are numberless. If a Christian 
grows rich, it should be with fear and trembling, lest the 
"deceitfulness of riches" undo him; for Christ spoke of the 
salvation of a rich man as something miraculous.— Luke 18:24- 
27. 

Let no man deceive himself by saying: "I will give when I have 
amassed wealth. I desire money that I may do good with it; but I 
will not give now, that I may give the more largely in the 
future. " That is the pit into which many have fallen. If a man is 
growing large in wealth, nothing but constant and generous 
giving can save him from growing small in soul. In determining 
the amount of his gifts, and the question whether he should 
impair the capital, or to what extent, a man should never lose 
sight of a distinct and intelligent aim to do the greatest possible 
good in a life-time. Each must decide for himself what is the 
wisest, the highest use of money; and we need often to remind 
ourselves of the constant tendency of human nature to 
selfishness and self-deception. —Selected. 



R1046:page7 

AN APPRECIATIVE EDITOR. 

The editor of a Missouri newspaper received and read 
Millennial Dawn Vol. I., and then published in his journal a 
reprint of the "Arp Tract" with the following additional 
comment:— 

"I could add many words to the above, and have attempted to 
write them, but none satisfy me because the effect of "Millennial 
Dawn" upon my inner nature is beyond words. I have read, and 
have found that light which for years I had been reaching out 
after. No longer are the "gates ajar" but the "portals are wide 
open. " Professing Christians of any denomination will receive it 
almost in the light of a "new revelation," and yet 'tis nothing but 
the "same old truth" made plain. Honest skeptics and so-called 
infidels will treat it with respect, and as their minds become 
illuminated with new light they will "Praise God from Whom all 
Blessings Flow." I feel it my duty to become a medium for its 
distribution among all classes and if the "Home Seeker and 
Farmer" has no other mission than to put it into the hands of but 
one seeker after truth, whose soul has been narrowed by the 
Orthodoxy of generations, I shall feel that it has not been in 
vain." 

VAN B. WISKER. 



R1045 : page 7 

AMBASSADORS FOR CHRIST. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL. 

Thinking our Master might use the enclosed, though it is but a 
feeble and halting effort, I enclose it to you for such use as the 
Spirit guides you to make of it. 

There are some awakenings occurring out here; just enough now 
to show that the seed is sprouting-here and there a little blade 
thrusting itself up. How blessed the assurance is that in every 
such case, "His word shall accomplish that for which it is sent. 

Just received May Tower and am reading it with much 
edification. Oh! that all God's truly consecrated children might 
see these new things coming so richly from the store house. In 
His good time (then due time) they will, and my greatest desire 
is, to be an instrument in His hands in leading some to the "True 
Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world. " 



What a hero the Bishop of London proved. Surely our God is 
abundantly blessing him in all good things. His example will 
encourage all of the saints, sure. 

May God bless you and yours more and more. Hurriedly, but 
earnestly in the work. 

Yours, W. E. PAGE. 

"Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did 
beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye 
reconciled to God. "-2 Cor. 5:20. 

We who are consciously receiving "Meat in due season" are 
especially called to proclaim the Glad Tidings of reconciliation, 
and the necessarily consequent "restitution of all things." The 
translation in the Diaglott emphasizes the meaning of this verse, 
so that it is worth while in this connection to repeat it, "On 
behalf of Christ, therefore, we are ambassadors; as if God were 
inviting through us, we entreat on behalf of Christ, be you 
reconciled to God. " As we realize, the apostolic writings were to 
the saints, and their true meaning "is veiled to those that are 
perishing: to those unbelievers whose minds the God of this age 
blinded, in 

R1046 : page 7 

order that they might not see clearly the effulgence of the Glad 
Tidings of the Glory of the Anointed one, who is in the likeness 
of God." (2 Cor. 4:3-4, Diaglott.) Realizing this and having the 
"ministry of reconciliation" entrusted to us, we must eagerly, "in 
season and out of season," proclaim it; relying on our God for 
wisdom and strength. We must bear in mind that, with Paul, we 
"can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth us;" and 
as we see more and more clearly that "the day of the Lord is at 
hand," and realize that "it shall come as a day of destruction 
from the Almighty," let us make haste to publish the more the 
sure mercies of our God, through Christ. 

We must be on the alert to use every opportunity presented, not 
only as messengers to call forth from Babylon the consecrated 
children who are "Heirs of Glory, " but also to proclaim the fact 
that "God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not 
imputing their trespasses unto them" (2 Cor. 5:19), to all who 
will hear. If we are thus enabled to lead some to a knowledge of 
God now, and thus help them to prepare for the time that shall 
be "a day of destruction from the Almighty," what joy and 
comfort will be ours! ! Though we "sow in tears, we shall reap in 
joy. " We may often wonder why God does not with his spirit 
give us more freedom from our bodily infirmities, not only of 
health, but of mind and will. It is his pleasure "that we have this 
treasure in earthen vessels, in order that the excellence of the 
power may be of God, and not from us." (2 Cor. 4:6 and 7, 
Diaglott.) We can thus rejoice that our infirmities will cause 



God's power to shine forth the more brightly; we realize fully 
now that our ability "to will and to do of his good pleasure" is 
from his favor, (Phil. 2:13). And hereafter it will be equally 
apparent to all people. 

With the favors of knowledge and love given us now, we have 
only ourselves and the enemy to blame if we remain long cast 
down. We can "come boldly to the throne of Grace" at all times. 
We must not expect to see the fruit of our labor to any extent 
now, only let us, in Christ, "add to our faith virtue, to virtue 
knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, 
to patience Godliness, to Godliness, brotherly kindness, and to 
brotherly kindness charity," knowing "that if these things be in 
you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren 
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ (2 Pet. 
1:5-8). Our forerunner did not see of the "travail of His soul," 
until he entered within the second veil. So shall we then "know, 
even as we are known. " 

Some of us who have come into light during this eleventh hour, 
may be inclined to worry and wonder about our destiny; whether 
we shall be "crown wearers," or "palm bearers." We can cast all 
this anxiety on Christ. He will do for us "even more abundantly 
than we can think or ask. " He will be all in all, and we shall be 
satisfied. Until then let us "Be not anxious about anything; but in 
everything let our petitions be made known to God, by prayer 
and supplication with thanksgiving: and that peace of God 
which surpasses all conception shall guard your hearts and 
minds by Christ Jesus (Phil. 4:6 and 7, Diaglott. Also read John 
14:27). The peace of God keeping guard over our hearts and 
minds. Think of it! 

W. E. P. 

[For our encouragement we should remember, that the only 
"call" yet made is to membership in the little flock. We are all 
called in one hope of our calling. (Eph. 4:4.) God has not during 
the Gospel age called some to the human plane and others to the 
"little flock of crown wearers," and others to the second class or 
"great company of palm bearers." 

Only to the one class were any of us called, and all who have 
seen the prize, and accepted the invitation can, if they will, make 
their calling and election sure, by obedience to the conditions- 
full, complete self-sacrifice in the service of the Lord and under 
his direction. Those who shall compose the "great company" of 
palm bearers are those who have not done what they could— who 
after having consecrated all, even while they love righteousness 
and desire to see the truth prosper, are unwilling to sacrifice 
present comforts and interests by an open warfare on behalf of 
the truth and against error. These, while they love the Lord and 
the truth, do not love ardently enough to be acknowledged and 
crowned as overcoming soldiers of the cross. Surely our 



R1046 : page 8 

actions speak as loudly as our words, and it is in vain that any 
profess great love, if when the Master and the truth are assailed 
and misrepresented, they specially recognized agents and 
ambassadors shall keep quiet and fail to protest against the error 
for fear of some earthly disadvantage resulting. 

Whoever then is begotten of the Spirit, and therefore able to 
appreciate and run for the prize of the "high calling" of the 
Gospel age, may know that he is called by the only call yet 
issued: and if willingly he shall sacrifice his all, he may be as 
sure of the prize as any other one running the same race. Such a 
disposition is an evidence of a timely consecration and 
acceptance and therefore of a begetting of the Spirit. Press nobly 
on, then, dear fellow- laborers, whether you have entered the 
harvest field recently or earlier: we serve the one Lord, in the 
one Faith, and by the one Baptism into his death; and for all 
such he has the crown of life reserved. "Hold fast that which 
thou hast, let no man take thy crown." Be strong in the Lord; be 
valiant; yea, be also of good courage.— EDITOR.] 



R1046 : page 8 

THE FOUR GOSPELS. 



In the attempt to unify by harmonies, much of the true scope of 
the Gospels is lost sight of. The evangelists differ, but do not 
disagree. Dean Stanley says that few persons have any idea of 
the distinct features of any one of these four records. The 
opinions of some men are that these differences are to be 
accounted for by the apostles' copying from one another, by 
each one's supplying the omission of the preceding writers, or 
by the fertility of their memories, or the fact that accounts were 
obtained at second hand. But these opinions entirely deny the 
divinity of the Gospels. 

In the beginning we must rest on the foundation that God is their 
author. They stand in their right order, in the right relation to 
each other, beginning the canon of the New Testament. 
Matthew, Mark, and Luke give the outward and earthly work of 
Christ, and John his inward and heavenly works. The four great 
countries of that time, Palestine, Italy, Greece, and Asia Minor, 
were the places where the Gospels were written. Matthew is the 
Jewish Gospel, connecting the Old Testament with the New 
Testament, and is written to prove the Messiahship of Christ. 
Mark is written to the Gentiles, and its theme is Christ's 
ministry, his works. Luke applies universally to both Jew and 
Gentile, and brings out Christ's humanity; while John's is an 
essentially spiritual Gospel, dealing wholly with the divinity of 
our Lord. 



The first speaks of Christ as the Son of David, hence his 
genealogy is complete (1 : 1-16); in Mark there is no genealogy, 
for there he is spoken of not as a son at all, but as a servant. 
Luke calls Christ the Son of man, and gives so comprehensive 
an account of his birth as to defer the genealogy to chapter 3:23- 
38, while John begins with it and calls Christ the Son of God. In 
Matthew he is said to have been born king of the Jews; in Luke 
the good tidings are of a birth of a Saviour, and John proclaims 
him pre-existent. The key to each Gospel, giving its theme, may 
be found in Matthew 1:1, Mark 10:44,45, Luke 19:10, Jno. 
20:31. In the first Gospel, Christ is described as a king, in the 
second as a worker, and in the other two as a philanthropist and 
as God manifested, respectively. 

The central truth emphasized in Matthew is righteousness, in 
Mark power, in Luke sympathy, and in John divine glories. 

R1047 : page 8 

The great discourse of Matthew is the Sermon on the Mount, 
and that of Luke is the sermon on the plain, and that of John the 
gospel in the upper room, which extends through chapters 13- 
17. This very fact shows the inspiration of the Scriptures. All 
four evangelists heard this discourse, but it was left to John to 
describe it. The great subjects of the Gospels are respectively 
law, labor, love, and life. Matthew always introduces a quotation 
with "that it might be fulfilled;" Mark, with "as it is written;" 
and John, with "as said Esaias." Luke seldom makes any 
introductory references. 

Matthew prefaces the parables with reference to the kingdom of 
heaven; Mark, to the kingdom of God; Luke makes it 
impersonal by beginning, "A certain man;" while John 
emphasizes their importance by saying, "Verily, verily, I say 
unto you. " The parables are grouped in Matthew, and given in 
order in Luke. In Mark only two are recorded, and in John new 
parables not mentioned by the others are recorded. The character 
of Matthew as a writer is topical, that of Mark is chronological, 
of Luke biographical, and of John metaphorical. The ministries 
of Matthew and Mark were Galilean; that of John, Judean; and 
that of Luke partook of the characteristics of both. Christ is said 
to have come to save the lost sheep of the house of Israel in 
Matthew; in Luke, it is "all flesh," and in John, "whosoever 
will." 

The most important of all is the conclusion. Here is seen the 
development in the Gospels as they are arranged in the New 
Testament. Matthew announces that Jesus is risen; Mark, that he 
is risen and ascended; but Luke goes further and adds the 
promise of the Holy Spirit; while John is beyond them all in 
declaring Christ's promise to come again.- W. W. Clark. 



R1047 : page 8 



WISE STEWARDS. 



Our stewardship is over what we have and not at all over what 
we have not. Many failing to see this clearly let talents they do 
possess lie idle, while they make unprofitable endeavors to 
create and use others not given them by the Master, only to find 
in the end that they have been unwise stewards. 

Quite a great many, seeing the necessity for money in carrying 
forward the work, ignore many opportunities (talents) and 
abilities (talents) for using time, hands, feet, and tongues to 
serve the truth, and endeavor to make money, generously saying 
that when they once get a good start, then, the truth will be 
liberally provided for, and in fact that the needs of the truth and 
not ambition or selfishness are the motives which prompt them 
to attempt money making. Alas, unwise stewards! Nearly all 
such efforts are failures, snares by which the adversary gets your 
hands and heads so full that all other talents are choked. And the 
very few who do "get a good start" financially are so injured by 
the greedy strife for gold, that they never use it as they honestly 
thought they would. 

If when you consecrated yourself to God you had wealth— the 
money talent, then it should be your delight to use that talent 
with whatever others you possess, but never think of burying in 
a napkin the talent you have, to seek one you have not got. The 
talents which were added in the parable were the increase from 
the use of the talents first given the stewards. 

The talents of oratory and sermonizing are evidently possessed 
by few, and hence we may well reason that sermons are not the 
things the Lord most wants. He is well able to give such talents 
when and where he sees their exercise needful, and it is the 
height of presumption for a steward to seek to use talents which 
the Master has not given him to use. Note carefully the 
exhortation of Rom. 12:1-3-9. 

It is our old, not our new natures that would lead us to ignore 
little, humble matters which we can do, to waste our time in 
trying to do something "great" and "grand" which we as well as 
others know we have not the talents for. Let us not forget that if 
we were great, grand, influential orators, we would probably not 
be fit for the Master's use, for it is not the great he is now 
seeking, but the humble. If you have an eloquent tongue or other 
such gift, be sure to use it zealously, but always remember that it 
is written, "Not many wise men after the flesh, not many 
mighty, not many noble are called: but God hath chosen the 
foolish things of the world to shame the wise; and God has 
chosen the weak things of the world to shame the powerful; and 
the lowly-born of the world and things which are despised God 
hath selected, and things which are not, to bring to nought things 



that are." (1 Cor. 1:26-31.) Yea, God hath chosen generally 
those not richest in talents or opportunities, but the poor of this 
world rich in faith, to be heirs of the kingdom and co-workers 
with him now. God has arranged his plans thus that he might 
hinder human pride and vain-glory -the very thing so many are 
disposed to cultivate. See the context above cited. 

Be honest, earnest, unpretentious; and if you speak in public, or 
whatever you do, seek not to make self prominent and 
impressive, but seek to show forth the truth, relying upon its 
impressiveness as God intended. Remember that it is written, 
concerning the Gospel age and God's ambassadors, ministers of 
the truth, "Out of the lips of babes and sucklings thou [Lord] 
hast perfected praise. " So then, even if the mighty and grand of 
this world have to some extent honored the Lord, his assurance 
that his praise is most perfect in those the world does not count 
great and grand— in His "little ones," should cause us to rejoice 
in humility and even to avoid imitating the style, tones and 
methods of the worldly great. 



Other stewards need a caution in an opposite direction; they do 
not quickly enough note talents which might be utilized in the 
Lord's service. These should remember that our commission 
does not limit us in the use of all, even the smallest talents, but 
reads, "Go ye into all the world and preach the good tidings." 
(Matt. 28:19,20.) It is not necessary to preach in the usual 
formal manner: Preach, as the twelve disciples preached, by the 
way side, or wherever you find a hearing ear. If you have a good 
voice for public speaking and lack the talent for preparing a 
discourse be not ashamed of it, and do not try to memorize some 
one else's words. By so doing you will fail of good results. 
Better far, if opportunity offers and you possess a suitable voice 
etc., read forcibly and clearly something touching the subject 
you consider most needful to your hearers. 

What we all want first of all is honesty with ourselves as well as 
with others; and a few words honestly spoken even though 
rough and brokenly expressed will carry more weight to your 
hearer than a parrot-like repeating of more polished sentences. 
To be an acceptable minister of the truth, pride and vain-glory 
must be cast out and trampled upon. Those whose object in 
preaching is to appear great, wise and profound are not working 
with the right motive and will not get the great prize. 



Do not be ashamed to acknowledge it if you received your first 
introduction to the truth from the humblest man or woman of 
your town. Those who are ashamed of the humblest member of 
the body of Christ are dishonoring also the head of that body 
who used that member as his honored ambassador to bear his 
message. 



All truth is of God and not of our fellow-men; it is ours when it 
comes to us and we receive it into good and honest hearts, no 
matter by which or how many channels or agencies it reached 
us; it all came from the one great fountain of truth. But while 
thanking God for the refreshing draught, let none despise, 
dishonor or ignore the humblest of the instruments by which the 
truth reached him. Remember God loves most and uses oftenest 
the humble. "The Lord abhoreth the proud, but giveth favors to 
the humble! Pride goeth before destruction, a haughty spirit 
before a fall." Beloved, let us flee these snares of the adversary! 
Let us as wise stewards use the talents given us faithfully, and 
not only will they be increased, but to such stewards the Master 
will say, Well done good faithful servant: Thou hast been 
faithful over a few things [I gave thee], I will make thee ruler 
over many things. Our Lord wants great, grand co-laborers in 
the glorious work of the next age, but he is choosing the humble 
and unpretentious of the present for that honor, and when the 
right time comes to make us rulers over many things (talents) we 
shall be "changed"-made "like him" and be with him and share 
his glory and power. "He that humbleth himself shall be 
exalted." 



R1048 : page 1 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., JULY, 1888. 

NO. 11. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

DOMESTIC, -Fifty cents a year, in advance, by Draft, P.O. 
Money Order, or Registered Letter. 

FOREIGN,-Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal 
Money Order. 

TO POOR SAINTS. 

This paper will be sent free to the interested of the Lord's poor, 
who will send a card yearly requesting it. "Ho, every one that 
thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, 
come ye, buy and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price. " And you who have it- "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor 
for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently— and eat ye that 
which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." - 
ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

WE GIVE almost our entire space this month to a "VIEW," 
which includes a series of connected articles relating to prayer, 
faith, and mind cures, -believing them to be most profitable 
when considered connectedly. 



R1048 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

SIGNS OF RESTITUTION. 

"Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish: for I work a 
work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, 
though a man declare it unto you. "-Acts 13:41. 

We are constantly in receipt of inquiries concerning Mind 
Cures, Faith Cures, Prayer Cures, etc., some wanting to know 
why we do not publish more reports of such cures. 

We make general answer again, that since the Scriptures teach 
that we are already in the "harvest, "-the lapping time during 
which the Gospel age closes and the Millennial age dawns, we 
should expect to see just what we do see,— beginnings of great 
changes. And not only do we see political, social and 
ecclesiastical changes in progress, but, as we should expect, we 
see also beginnings of personal, physical restitution here and 
there. These great changes are stealing along so quietly as not to 
attract much attention or occasion great surprise, just as 
inventions and general knowledge are spreading gradually. This 
is God's usual method of operation: He is thus preparing the 
world in some measure for the wonderful manifestations of his 
power in the near future, both in the restoring of health to the 
sick and life to the dead,-the great work of Restitution of that 
which was lost. Thus the new dispensation is gradually ushering 
in as the dawning day. 

Accordingly just as the troubles of this Day of the Lord break 
out here and there and in intermitting paroxysms, but gradually 
and to the unobservant imperceptibly increasing in earnestness 
and bitterness with each spasm, so with the marks of physical 
healing: they come in a variety of ways, here and there a number 
and then a subsiding, a lull in which there will be none, but all 
the while gradually becoming more common, and from a greater 
variety of sources and seeming causes. 



THE GIFT OF HEALING. 

But, one inquires, Is not this the "gift" of healing mentioned by 
the Apostle in 1 Cor. 12:28,30? And has not this gift been in the 
possession of the church ever since Pentecost? No; the gift of 
healing possessed by some members of the early church was 
totally different from the healings of to-day. The apostles in 
exercising this gift did not practice "mental healing," nor even 
"prayer healing. " 

Take as an illustration the case of the lame man healed by Peter 
and John as related in Acts 3:1-11. Peter and John did not kneel 
down and pray with the man, nor did they get him to fix his 
attention as "mind-healers" would; they gave him no medicine 
and used no oil, nor did they even require the man to believe in 
Jesus first, nor to have faith in their power to heal him. But 
while he looked at the apostles expecting to receive some 
money, Peter took him by the hand and lifted him up saying, "In 
the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk. " And 
immediately his feet and ancle bones received strength, and he 
leaping up, stood and walked. This is an illustration of the use of 
the gift of healing, and there are many more such recorded. (See, 
Acts 9:34; 14:10; 16:18; 19:12.) And we do not think that after a 
careful scrutiny of the subject, any one to-day will claim to 
possess this gift. Those gifts described by Paul were merely to 
the early church, as a means for its introduction to the attention 
of both Jews and Gentiles and also as a means for edification 
and instruction to the church itself. For this last named reason 
one or more gifts were bestowed upon each one who associated 
with the church, (1 Cor. 12:7,1 1; 14:26), being conferred by the 
laying on of the hands of the Apostles, to all who confessed 
Christ by immersion. Thus it was that these gifts became a token 
or sign of the possession of the holy Spirit. Yet the gifts of the 
Spirit and the Spirit itself are separate and distinct. To-day we 
possess the spirit, but certainly not all of those miraculous gifts. 
And even then some had gifts of the spirit who were evidently 
far from being filled with the spirit. That one might have those 
gifts and yet be "nothing" and as sounding brass and tinkling 
cymbals, devoid of love, and hence without Christ's Spirit, the 
Apostle clearly shows in 1 Cor. 13:1-3. 

The power of conferring those gifts rested in the apostles, and in 
them only: none others in their day or since, have been able to 
confer those gifts which Paul describes; hence they did "vanish 
away" when the apostles died. By that time the church was 
brought prominently before the attention of the world, and 
therefore those miraculous gifts were not necessary for that 
purpose; and by that time too they began to have the New 
Testament and parts of the Old Testament in the possession of 
each congregation, so that coming together they could edify and 
instruct and build one another up with the truth from those 



inspired sources, and did not longer require the miraculous gifts 
as a means for their edification and instruction as at first. 

That only the Apostles could confer these gifts is proved: first, 
by the fact that the claimed successors of the apostles cannot 
communicate them since, and second, by the cases recorded 
which show that none except the apostles ever did have the 
power to bestow those gifts. Notice in proof of this, that though 
one, Philip, possessed gifts and preached and baptized, yet he 
was not able to bestow the gifts upon others, and the Apostles 
Peter and John came from Jerusalem for the purpose. (Acts 
8:13-19.) Simon Magus, though one of the baptized, and 
evidently one of those granted a gift, had no power to bestow 
gifts upon others. It was this apostolic privilege, of bestowing 
these gifts upon others, which Simon wanted to purchase with 
money. 

Instead of miraculously receiving gifts as at first, we now grow 
the fruits of the spirit, of which are meekness, gentleness, 
patience, moderation, brotherly kindness, charity, etc. These 
fruits may really be counted as gifts or acquirements also, 
though they come to us in a different way. Hence we find too, 
that though Paul calls these graces gifts in one place, he calls 
them fruits elsewhere. (Compare Gal. 5:22; 1 Cor. 13:1-8. In 
Eph. 5:9, these are called fruits of the light. See readings of old 
MSS.) Under God's present dealing, all the needs of the church 
are none the less provided for than when the gifts were 
bestowed, as at first, in a miraculous manner, by the laying on of 
the Apostles' hands. Now we find that the Spirit of truth is 
pleased to mould and fashion and use every consecrated one by 
utilizing their natural talents and advantages of education, 
language, etc., in teaching, edifying and nourishing the true 
church which is the body of Christ. 

So then, whatever may be said of the various prevailing mind, 
faith and prayer cures, they surely are not of the gifts recorded in 
the Acts of the Apostles as possessed by the early church. 

'THESE SIGNS SHALL FOLLOW." 

Ah! says one, you seem to take no notice of that remarkable 
passage so frequently quoted by our Faith Cure friends -Mark 
16: 17- 19— "These signs shall follow them that believe, In my 
name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new 
tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly 
thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick and 
they shall recover. " 

We have two criticisms to offer concerning this passage. First, it 
is not proved true either by observation or history. Second, the 
oldest and most authentic Greek Manuscripts (the Sinaitic and 
Vatican MSS.) do not contain these verses at all, but end at 
verse 8. Of one thing we are confident,-these signs did not 



extend beyond the Apostles' days and the time of the miraculous 
gifts. Even then, we have no record of all these things being true 
of all that believed. It seems evident that Mark's gospel was 
originally incomplete and that someone undertook to finish it for 
him about the fourth century; for the Alexandrine MS., written 
in the fifth century, is the oldest of those which contain the last 
twelve verses. 

"ASK WHAT YE WILL." 

But says one, even setting aside the statement of Mark 
16:17,18 and all claim to possessing the "gifts" of the early 
church, did not our Lord's promises regarding the answering of 
our prayers cover the entire ground, and make possible the 
healing of the sick or even the moving of mountains during the 
entire age, and is it not because of lack of faith that these things 
have not been more common in the past? And is it not because 
of increased faith rather than because of the dawning of the 
Millennium that the healing of the sick is now becoming more 
frequent? 

Our answer to both of the questions is, No: a great 
misunderstanding prevails concerning our privileges in prayer. 
And it is because of this misunderstanding concerning what we 
may ask, and who may ask, and not because of any 
unfaithfulness to his promise on our Lord's part, that so many 
thousands of prayers offered daily, go unanswered. 

With the statement, "Ye shall ask what ye will and it shall be 
done unto you" certain conditions and limitations will be found 
in the sentence preceding, which reads: "If ye abide in me and 
my words abide in you. " These limitations are wonderfully 
comprehensive: they show who may ask— ye, believers, who are 
in me, whose wills are buried or immersed into the will of your 
Head, Christ Jesus, as shown in May TOWER; and not only so, 
but, ye are privileged to ask thus, only so long as ye "abide in 
me;"-if any man abide not, he is not only "cast forth" (John 
15:6), but he has no longer a share in the promise of having his 
petitions granted. These limitations evidently cut off from all 
share in this promise the vast majority of the prayers offered. 
And as we continue to scrutinize the Master's words we find still 
further limitations 

R1048 : page 2 

which cut off many other prayers, even of those offered by the 
class abiding in Christ. We refer to the condition, If "my words 
abide in you." 

Alas ! that we must write it— There are few among God's 
professed children, very few even among those who profess to 
be entirely consecrated and abiding in him, who have His Word 
abiding richly and fully in them. 



The significance and intent of this last specification or limitation 
is this: In going to God to ask for anything we should realize his 
omniscience and wisdom, and that he is ordering and operating 
the general affairs according to a perfect and orderly plan-His 
Plan of the Ages; and we should recognize our own finiteness, 
our lack of such wisdom and appreciation of surroundings, etc., 
as would enable us to rule creation, if God were to give it over 
into our control. All true children of God who are not the merest 
"babes" realize this, and sensible ones would shrink from so 
grave a responsibility and cry, "Not so, O Lord," if God should 
say without limitation, Ask what you will, your will not mine 
shall be done in heaven and on earth,-all shall be ordered and 
done according to your prayers and according to your plans. As 
for the Lord's promise that if we had faith we might command a 
mountain to remove and it would obey us, we reason thus: This, 
like the other promises, was given only to such as abide in him 
and have his words abiding in them. And it is merely given as an 
extreme illustration: If an emergency should occur so great as to 
necessitate the removal of a mountain, either literal or figurative, 
and we were sure it were the will of God we might ask and 
receive. 

But we need not speculate about how the mountains and lakes, 
seas and clouds, and rain and sunshine would move 
promiscuously about, and interfere with one another, if all the 
prayers offered heavenward in Christ's name were answered. 
God is not devoting himself to the answering of such prayers; 
but ignoring them, he is working out gradually his own grand 
plan, predetermined before the foundation of the world; and he 
assures us that notwithstanding the prayers of those who do not 
search his Word to know what his plan is, but who pray to him 
to carry out their plans and schemes, yet nevertheless "All his 
purposes shall be accomplished. " And though few even of his 
children respect his Word or seek to learn from it His plan,- 
content rather to follow the plans and theories of men as laid 
down in creeds and confessions and voiced by councils and 
human standards, nevertheless in the end God's Word shall not 
return to Him void, but shall accomplish that which he intended, 
and prosper in the thing whereunto it was sent. -Isa. 55:1 1. 

No, thank God, he has not left his plan, even in spiritual matters, 
subject to the prayers of his sectarian prejudice-blinded children, 
else each would want the whole world moulded to his own ideal 
whether that were Methodism, Mohammedanism, 
Presbyterianism, Brahmanism, or what not; and all the various 
errors would flourish. Of one thing we are sure,— that if some of 
the prayers of zealous but blinded children of God were 
answered ZION'S WATCH TOWER and MILLENNIAL 
DAWN would have been financially swamped long ago, and the 
writer of this for his endeavor to serve the truth and let the true 
light of God's Word shine out, would not only have been stoned 
to death (as one of the blind guides of this city publicly 



expressed it), but consigned ere this to everlasting woe. Yes, we 
may thank God that he does not answer most of the prayers. 

There was then, we see, a special and very particular reason for 
the close and searching limitations which our Redeemer placed 
about the promise that the Father would grant our requests. The 
import of his words, as we study them and grasp their meaning, 
appears to be this:— 

If you abide in me, entirely subject to my will and plan, even as 
I abide in the Father's love, and seek not to do mine own will but 
the will of him that sent me,— if thus my will is your choice and 
your own wills are buried and ignored, then you will seek 
earnestly to know what the Father's will is, which you know I 
am seeking to accomplish, that you may use your time, talents, 
prayers and all in that same direction, toward the same end. And 
if you have this heartfelt desire to know the will of God you will 
remember how I studied his plan as revealed in the Law, in the 
Psalms and in the Prophets, and how I endeavored to carry out 
that and not plans of my own making or choosing. 

Then, you will remember how I pointed out to you how "Thus it 
is written and thus it behooveth us to fulfill all that is written" 
and how I told you to "search the Scriptures." Following in this 
course the holy Spirit will guide you, as it has me, into an 
understanding of more and more of the divine plan as it becomes 
due. And if this be your attitude, if your hearts and energies are 
thus absorbed in the Father's plan, you may ask all the desires of 
your hearts— "Ye may ask what ye will." I make you this liberal 
promise not by way of intimating to you that the Father would 
change his plans to yours, and do your will, but as intimating to 
you that, in the course I have specified, you can come so fully 
into sympathy with the Father and the plan of the ages which he 
is working out, that you will never be dissatisfied, but always 
able to see your wishes accomplishing; because your will and 
wish, your pleasure and satisfaction, will be to see God's will 
and plan progressing in God's own way and time. Thus your 
every prayer and every wish of your hearts will be accomplished 
—the very reverse of the experience of those who seek to do 
their own wills and carry out human plans, and pray for their 
own desires; for they are ever meeting with disappointments. 

Settle it therefore in your hearts and have no fear for the results, 
no matter how dark may be the storm, or how sharp the 
persecution, God's will shall not miscarry, and thus your will 
and your plans (which are his) cannot fail; and your prayers in 
that interest will always be heard and will be answered so far as 
they are correct or would not conflict with the Father's plan. And 
you, if perfectly in harmony with the Father, should desire to 
have it so. And in any case, where there is the slightest room to 
question his will in the matter, having my spirit or disposition, 
and not the spirit of the world, you will pray as I have done in 
your hearing, saying in connection with your petition,- 



"Nevertheless not my will, but thine, Father, be done. " All such 
prayers are sure to be answered and in proportion as you come 
closer and closer into harmony with the Father's plan, and 
understand it, you will be less likely to ask or desire anything 
not his good pleasure to grant. 

As you come to see the bountifulness of the Father's provisions, 
and the wisdom and care exercised by him touching your earthly 
interests; as you come to realize that He who has clothed the 
lilies of the field with beauty, and who provides food for the 
sparrows, loves and cares much more for you than for them, and 
knoweth better than you what things you have need of,— what 
would strengthen and benefit, and what might injure you, as 
runners in the race for the great prize he has offered through 
Christ-as you realize these things your prayers for temporal 
things must become very few and very moderate. Indeed you 
will by and by, as you realize his wisdom and care, cease to ask 
anything earthly, and merely crave the spiritual gifts, graces, 
fruits and blessings, singing in your hearts 

Content whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth me. 

Thus we see dear brethren and sisters, that properly instructed, 
we would be relieved of all care [worry] concerning those 
earthly things which constitute the burden of so many prayers. 
Leaving those things to our Father's wisdom and love, our 
prayers would be more in the nature of thank-offerings, our 
hearts going out toward God in worship and adoration and in 
recounting the blessings and favors we already enjoy, rather 
than as ill-mannered greedy children selfishly crying, "Give, 
give, give." 

True, earthly affairs sometimes perplex us, and we cannot help 
wondering and feeling a deep interest often as to how they will 
result. But the soul that abides in Christ, and in which his words 
abide, would not dare take the helm into his own hands to steer 
his own course, even where he thinks he can see; but laboring 
still at the oar, pulling as best he can in the right direction, he 
leaves the helm in the Father's hands and could not ask to have 
the course changed in any degree. 

But, may we not in all our trials and perplexities take them to 
the Lord in prayer? Yes, yes; truly we can. And no comfort will 
be greater to the perplexed or sorrowing than the privilege of 
telling all to the Lord. His ear will be ever open, and the very 
telling of them to him and the realization of his interest in all our 
affairs will refresh and cheer us. It will bring to remembrance 
his promises to never leave nor forsake us, and of his wisdom 
and love and ability to cause all things, favorable and 
unfavorable, to work together for our good. And without having 
asked anything except that according to his promise this and all 
things should be overruled for good, and to his praise, we may 



arise from our knees far stronger, far happier, and far more 
confident as well as in closer fellowship and communion with 
the Master, than if we had attempted to order our affairs and to 
get the great Jehovah to become our servant to execute our 
plans, which doubtless often are foolish in his sight, and would 
if permitted, work injuriously to us or to others. 

THE PR A YER OF FAITH. 

Death is not a natural, normal, necessary thing, as most people 
suppose. It is not a step in a process of evolution to a higher 
state of existence, but on the contrary it is a catastrophe— a 
calamity —a penalty for sin. God indeed shows us that his 
wisdom is sufficient to enable Him to bring a good lesson out of 
the evil thing, but it is nevertheless an evil, an enemy, an awful 
thing; as truly so as is sin, which God also promises that his 
wisdom shall yet cause to work out a result the very opposite of 
its natural course and action. This fact, that death is a penalty, 
we shall not discuss here, but merely refer the reader to Paul's 
statements in Rom. 5:12-20. 

As death is a curse and penalty, so is sickness; for sickness is the 
death-poison working in our systems. All sickness is part of the 
dying process, and hence it is as foreign to man's natural, normal 
condition as designed by God, as is death itself. As death is a 
mark of sin, and would not have come except as a penalty of sin, 
so sickness is a mark or brand of sin. 

So it was that our Lord, who came to ransom the race of sinners, 
being free from sin was free also from pain and sickness and 
death: so that whatever he experienced of these had to be by his 
own consent-a sacrifice on our behalf. The penalty of our sins 
was the death, the sickness and pain being only incidentals; 
hence our redemption price was fully paid by our Lord's death, 
and not by anything done during his three and a half years of 
ministry. But, it pleased Jehovah to bruise him [to allow him to 
have an experience with pain and sorrow, etc.], as well as to 
make his soul [being, existence] an offering for sin. (Isa. 53:10.) 
And since he could not suffer pain and sickness because of sin, 
having none, he was placed for a time among sinners, where his 
full, generous, loving sympathy for the poor and sick and 
miserable, would lead him to spend for others his own vital 
energy. And as "virtue [vitality-healing vigor] went out of him" 
to the sick (Luke 6:19 and 8:46) so their weaknesses and pains, 
bore down upon him. And it was in this way that "himself took 
our infirmities and bear our sickness" (Matt. 8:17; Isa. 53:4,5); 
and thus He was touched with a feeling of our infirmities and is 
able perfectly to sympathize as a great High Priest,-now on 
behalf of the church or under-priesthood, and by and by, in the 
Millennial day of trial and blessing, on behalf of "all the 
people. " And as it pleased the Father that the High Priest should 
taste of the sinners' cup, so we may reasonably read his will 



relative to all the members of the Royal Priesthood to be, that 
they also should drink of the cup of suffering and be immersed 
in the baptism of death with their Lord and Leader, in this 
course to divine glory and power. 

Thus reading the Father's plans for ourselves, in the light of his 
will exemplified in his dealings with our Master, we may settle 
it at once that it is not his will to keep us from all pain and trial 
and sufferings, and to carry us triumphantly to glory on flowery 
beds of ease. Quite the reverse indeed must be our course if we 
would follow in the footsteps of him whom God set forth to be 
not only a satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, but also 
to be a pattern and example to the church which is his body. 
And this much learned of God's plan and will, promptly teaches 
us that we must not expect, and should not ask perfect freedom 
from pain and trouble. 

But some will ask: Did you not say that sickness is a mark of 
sin, and that Christ died for our sins, and is it not your claim that 
whosoever believeth in him and accepts of his ransom work, is 
freed or justified from all sin? And this being the case, ought not 
such to be free both from sin's penalty, death, and from all its 
attendant evils, such as pain and sickness? 

Yes, that reasoning is good, but you do not take all the 
circumstances into account; you have left out an important part, 
namely this: It is the Father's plan that the sufferings and death 
of the Redeemer should be followed by the suffering and death 
of every member of his "body" or church, before the Restitution 
age should be ushered in, to heal the morally and physically sick 
and blind and lame, to restore all who will to perfect life and 
every blessing lost in Eden by Adam, and 

R1048 : page 3 

redeemed at Calvary by our great High Priest's sacrifice— once 
for all. The Plan of the Ages needs to be recognized, if we 
would avoid the error of so many, in striving for the glory in the 
time appointed for trial and suffering with Christ. When the 
sufferings of the body of Christ are ended, their glory we are 
assured will follow (1 Pet. 1:11); and the world's restitution and 
the blotting out of their sins through faith in the Redeemer's 
work, will then ensue (Acts 3:19-21); and thus in God's due time 
and order will be brought about the wiping away of all tears 
when the former things of sin, sorrow, pain and death, shall have 
passed away. See the beautiful picture of this in Rev. 21:4. 

But we may suppose another inquiring, -Why did our Lord and 
the Apostles heal the sick, if that work is not really due to take 
place until the Millennial age of restitution begins? 

There were several reasons why they were granted the gift of 
healing, as well as other gifts, not granted now as we have 
showed. One reason was the necessity of such miracles to 



introduce Christianity to the attention of the people. Our Lord 
mentioned his miracles to John the Baptist as a proof of his 
Messiahship. Messiah was to heal the sick, cause the blind to see 
and the deaf to hear (Isa. 29:18; 35:1-6; 42:6,7), consequently 
our Lord must do these things and in a measure begin the work 
of restitution before Israel could be charged with the 
responsibility of rejecting him. But when they as a nation 
rejected him as God had foreseen (Zech. 9:9; Matt. 21:5); then 
they were rejected from the position offered them as the Royal 
Priesthood and Seed of promise. And there, as God had foretold, 
the gospel was sent to the Gentiles to complete from them the 
Seed, the "body" of Christ, the Royal Priesthood: and the 
restitution work which had a beginning in our Lord's ministry 
was deferred until the true Israel should be complete, when the 
Messiah shall come a second time and accomplish fully all those 
glorious features of the divine plan foretold by the holy prophets 
and foreshadowed by his miracles at the first advent. 

That our Lord's restoring work at the first advent— the healing of 
some of the sick and the awakening of a few of the dead of 
Israel, shadowed forth the greater work to be accomplished at 
his second presence, during the Millennium, seems clear. Had 
God designed a general healing of all the sick, even among the 
people of Palestine, it could have been done by wholesale 
instead of in exceptional cases here and there; for undoubtedly 
many died during Jesus' ministry besides Lazarus, the son of the 
widow of Nain, and Jairus' daughter; and there were many more 
lame and palsied, and leprous and blind, than those then healed. 

His object in doing the miracles, is explained by the statement, 
"These things did Jesus and manifested forth [showed 
beforehand] HIS GLORY-the coming glory of the Millennial 
age. And it was of that coming glory, and not of anything which 
has taken place amongst his disciples since, that he said, 
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the 
works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these 
shall he do, because I go unto my Father." (John 14:12.) His 
redemption work at Calvary and his subsequent presentation of 
it to the Father as a propitiation [satisfaction] for the sins of the 
whole world, was the basis for all the great works of restitution 
in which we shall be engaged with him in the Times of 
Restitution— which will indeed be far greater than anything done 
by our Lord at the first advent; for the awakening of the dead 
and healing of the sick was only partial then, -as nothing 
compared to the full health and vigor of perfect and everlasting 
life and all that was lost in Adam, which will be offered to all 
during the Millennium. 

The thought we wish to enforce is, that God not only had a due 
time for REDEEMING the world from sin, but that he has also a 
due time for restoring the sick and the dead. And, whatever 
work of this sort takes place before the due and appointed time, 



must be for some special object and reason, as shown in our 
Lord's ministry, and in that of the church in the days of the 
apostles. Just so it was in the redeeming of the world, typical 
sacrifices were permitted and were allowed to stand good for 
temporary, typical justification, but those were not the real 
sacrifices for sin, and never actually put away sins. As God 
deferred the redemption of our race until his due time, and in the 
fullness of time sent forth his Son to redeem us, so, in the matter 
of healings, though it has pleased God to make exceptions in the 
past for the purposes mentioned, let us not forget that those were 
exceptions and that his appointed time for restitution is the 
Millennial age. Seeing this to be God's plan, and realizing that 
his plan is wisest and best, we must restrain ourselves and 
neither desire nor ask restitution work before restitution times- 
except we see cases and reasons why it would be the Father's 
will and to his glory to make exceptions to his general rule and 
arrangement. 

In this connection notice specially that the privilege of prayer, or 
any other favor of God, is not for selfish purposes. Therefore, 
before asking anything of the Father, one question should be 
carefully considered, viz.— Why do I want this? because a thing 
which might be right in one case, might be wrong if asked from 
some other motive. To desire and ask for something good in 
itself, in order that we might be glorified before our fellows, 
would be a wrong request; because of a wrong motive. To desire 
a good thing simply for ease and convenience, would be an 
improper selfish motive. The Apostle speaks of some such, 
saying, "Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, to 
consume it upon your desires"— i.e., for selfish or vain-glorious 
purposes or selfish reasons. To ask for some good thing simply 
to make a test of it, thereby to establish our faith, would be an 
improper request, for none but the faith-full have a right to ask 
anything. Besides, God's plan is that we should walk by faith 
and not by sight. Hence, we not only should not ask much, 
except spiritual favors, but even in asking for these we should be 
particular not to specify how they are to come. And we should 
look for the answers to our prayers in natural rather than 
supernatural channels, since God's usual method is to use 
supernatural means only where the natural means are 
inadequate. 

If, therefore, the consecrated ones would ask for the healing of 
sickness, it should not be for our own glory, nor for our own 
comfort, nor for ourselves, for these would be selfish requests. 
Remember the course of our Lord and the Apostles. Our Lord 
used divine power in feeding the multitude because of their 
necessity and to glorify the Father; but when he himself was 
forty days without food he would not use the same power to 
feed himself, by commanding the stones to become bread, 
because this would have been contrary to his mission; for he 
came not to serve himself but others; not to preserve his own 



life, but to lay it down in the service of others. He healed the 
lame and the palsied miraculously when it would glorify God, 
but when he himself was weary, he sat on the well to rest, or 
used other natural means. Though he prayed often to the Father, 
and knew that he was heard always, though sometimes heavy 
and sorrowful, as in Gethsemane, yet his prayers were only 
requests for grace and strength to do the Father's will, and to 
finish the work he had come to do. And though as he tells us he 
could by asking have had "twelve legions of angels" to protect 
his person and his life, yet he would not ask-preferring to have 
the Father's will accomplished. So notably was this a 
characteristic of our Lord, that even his enemies noticed it, and 
said, "He saved others [from sickness, etc.], himself he cannot 
save." They could not appreciate the self-sacrifice which he was 
performing. And so we may reasonably expect too that the 
nominal Israelites to-day will not understand the same motives 
and conduct in those, who prefer to share in Christ's sufferings 
and to join with him in sacrifice, in order that they may share 
also in his coming glorious work of blessing and restoring to the 
world-"that which was lost." 

Notice also the apostles. They too had the gift of healing as well 
as privileges of prayer, but they never used these for themselves. 
In all the records we find no instance of the exercise of the gift 
of healing on behalf of any of the apostles or any of the church; 
nor have we any record of prayer for health, or other earthly 
blessings, being offered by any of them for themselves or each 
other, except in one case-that of Paul (2 Cor. 12:7-9); and his 
request was not granted, but he was told that instead he should 
have a sufficiency of grace to compensate and enable him to 
bear it patiently. This should strike the attention of all. 

Though Paul's request for himself was refused— God seeing that 
Paul's affliction of weak eyes could be made to work out to his 
glory and Paul's advantage— yet his gift to heal others was 
marvelous: "And God wrought special miracles by the hands of 
Paul, so that from his body were brought unto the sick, 
handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them." 
(Acts 19:12) Yet, mark the fact that though there is no account 
of the healing of the sick among the early disciples, it was not 
because they were not sick, for several instances of sickness are 
recorded. Paul writes to Timothy, "Trophimus have I left at 
Miletum sick; " and again he writes to Timothy, who was 
evidently often troubled with weak digestion or dyspepsia, to 
use wine as a medicine; saying, "Use no longer water 
[exclusively], but take a little wine for thy stomach's sake, and 
for thine often infirmities." (1 Tim. 5:23.) In neither of these 
cases did Paul send handkerchiefs or aprons from his person, nor 
does he mention either praying for their recovery, or advice to 
them to so pray. Evidently these cases should teach us that the 
gifts of healing, and prayer for the recovery of the sick were 
used, not upon the saints, but rather through them upon others, 



for the purpose of calling attention to the apostles and their 
teachings as being approved by God. 

A special reason why the saints cannot properly ask for physical 
health and earthly blessings, we have already intimated is, that 
they like their Lord have consecrated themselves and pledged to 
God the exchange of all earthly favors and privileges for the 
heavenly favors and glories to come,— a foretaste of which we 
now enjoy in and through the exceeding great heavenly 
promises which cheer and refresh and comfort and bless more 
than earthly blessings could. Who, that understands the matter, 
would give up his heirship in the future heavenly glories 
together with present hopes in exchange for future earthly 
restitution, and present occasional droppings, foretastes of 
restitution? 

TWO CAUSES OF SICKNESS. 

But some will inquire, If it is not proper for the consecrated to 
pray for the healing of themselves, what does the Apostle James 
mean when he says, "The prayer of faith shall save the sick?" 

We answer that while the Scriptures point out no cases of 
healing of saints, neither do they point out any cases in which 
sickness came except for a cause upon this class. Accidents may 
and do occur so far as the world is concerned, but the saints are 
God's peculiar care; nothing can come upon them except 
specially permitted. While God could take all the world under 
such special supervision, he pleases rather to let them be subject 
to the ordinary vicissitudes of the present condemned state- 
accidents, sickness, etc. Only the church, the consecrated, is 
comforted with the assurances of special care: "Your Father 
knoweth that ye have need of all these things" and, Like as a 
father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth those that respect 
and love him, consecrated to his service. Of such it is written, 
Not one hair of your heads could be injured without your 
Father's permission. (Matt. 6:31-34.) All the steps of the 
righteous are ordered of the Lord. 

While therefore sickness may in a general way be considered at 
least indirectly the work of Satan who deceived mankind into 
sin, and hence into death whose servant sickness is, yet in view 
of what we see of God's special care of the saints, we know that, 
in their case at least, sickness could not come without the 
Father's special permission; and hence it should be regarded in 
their case as from Him, and not directly from Satan, who could 
have no power over us except it were given him of the Father. 

We accordingly classify the causes of afflictions including 
sickness as follows,— but only as applicable to the consecrated 
church. First, those which have been either produced or 
aggravated by our activity in the Lord's service. Second, Such as 
come upon us as discipline or chastisement from the Lord for 



sins or wanderings or coldness, or for the sin of failing to fulfill 
our covenant of sacrifice; or as needed discipline to prevent 
these. 

OF THE FIRST CLASS were the sufferings of Christ, his 
weariness, weakness, bloody sweat, ignominious bufferings, and 
all the reproaches and sneers, and bitter words to which he 
meekly and quietly submitted until the sufferings of Calvary 
terminated his human existence. Of this first class also were the 
wounds of Paul and Silas, when scourged for preaching Christ, 
when stoned, beaten and imprisoned, and when in perils by sea 
and by land, among the Jews and among false brethren. Of this 
class also was the dyspepsia of Timothy, who, probably not 
naturally strong, studied and labored for the Lord and in the 
interest of the church; and such we are distinctly told was the 
cause of the sickness of Epaphroditus, of whose sickness Paul 
writes saying, "Receive him therefore in the Lord with all 
gladness; and hold such in reputation: because for the work of 
Christ he was 

R1048 : page 4 

nigh unto death— not regarding [sparing] his life to supply your 
deficiency."- Phil. 2:29,30. 

Yes indeed, these and all such sicknesses and scars and wounds 
are honorable marks of distinction, which each soldier of the 
cross should be ambitious to bear, as Paul said referring to 
injuries endured in the service of the truth, "I bear about in my 
body the marks of the Lord Jesus." These he had received not in 
money or fame seeking, nor in self-indulgence, nor in quarreling 
and disputing about the loss and dross of earth, but in the good 
fight of faith; in contending earnestly for the faith once 
delivered to the saints, against error amongst Jewish friends, and 
against philosophies and sciences falsely so called. He endured 
his wounds and tribulations in telling the glad tidings of the 
gospel of Christ of which he was not ashamed, and holding forth 
the cross of Christ- to the Jews a stumbling block and to the 
Greek's foolishness, but to them that believe the power of God 
and the wisdom of God. 

All the "overcomers," all the faithful in Christ Jesus, are likely 
to have some such scars as proofs of their faithful endurance. 
There is no escape in this war. It is war to the death with all as 
well as with our Head and Captain, and the first loyal soldiers in 
our army. And it is in this view that Rev. 20:4 represents all 
those who shall be accounted worthy of the first resurrection, as 
being "beheaded." The beheading is symbolic; for neither our 
Lord nor the Apostles were literally beheaded. It signifies that 
all must suffer earthly disadvantages and lay down their lives in 
the defense and service of the truth, if they shall be worthy of 
that Millennial glory. Sickness and discomforts of any sort, 
incurred by our energy in the service of the truth are permitted 



by our Father as tests of our fidelity and love; because if not 
liable to such tribulations, or if relieved of them instantly by 
miracle, the Lord's service would cost us no sacrifice and the 
test of our willingness to endure for the truth's sake would be 
wanting. As it is, however, every ache and pain or wound of 
person or of feelings, and beheading socially or literally for the 
truth's sake, becomes a witness of the spirit, testifying to our 
faithfulness. And in all such tribulations we should rejoice 
greatly— as saith our Lord and the Apostle Peter.- Luke 6:22,23; 
1 Pet. 4:13-16. 

OF THE SECOND CLASS of sicknesses and afflictions are 
poverty, constitutional weaknesses, etc., which like Paul's sore 
eyes, the Heavenly Father sees will be really advantageous to us. 
For he doubtless often sees better than we how weak we are, and 
how a little more health and earthly prosperity might capsize our 
poorly balanced little vessels. These God sees best to leave us 
under, but assures us through Paul, of "grace sufficient" to 
counterbalance such weaknesses. A realization of such care for 
our real interests, while humiliating, in that it forces conviction 
of our weakness, is refreshing and inspiring, in that it proves our 
Father's love and care. 

This second class, however, includes chiefly, such afflictions as 
God visits upon his children as special chastisements for special 
transgressions. These are mentioned in Heb. 12:5-11. "Son, 
despise not thou the discipline of the Lord, nor faint when thou 
art reproved by him; for whom the Lord loveth he disciplineth, 
and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye endure 
discipline, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he 
whom the father disciplineth not? But if ye be without discipline 
whereof all are partakers, then are ye spurious and not [real] 
sons.... Now, no discipline for the present seemeth joyous, but 
grievous; nevertheless it yieldeth the peaceable fruits of 
righteousness unto them which are [properly] exercised [or 
trained] thereby. " This description it will be observed covers not 
merely the reproofs or rebukes of the Lord (verse 5), of the 
unfaithful and wanderers and transgressors, but also the 
disciplinary trials which come to us in well doing, and are 
permitted for the developing and strengthening of character. 

It is only the rebukes and reproofs of the Lord for sin and 
unfaithfulness, that we are examining in this second class of 
afflictions. We remark, too, that probably every son, except the 
one perfect one our Lord Jesus, has at times needed and received 
rebukes by afflictions, for unfaithfulness. And it is well that we 
should learn to recognize these rebukes and to wisely apply their 
lessons. Rightly dividing, we shall neither err with some in 
crediting every affliction to the devil— receiving none as rebukes 
from our Father, nor will we err on the other hand and suppose, 
every accident which occurs (including accidents, etc., to the 
world in general as well as to the church) to be a divine rebuke. 



We should see clearly that only the consecrated are under this 
special supervision of sons, which includes rebukes by the Lord 
for sins and short comings, as well as afflictions for well doing 
permitted to test and perfect us. If therefore the saints experience 
serious afflictions, they should at once examine themselves 
conscientiously before God, to see whether their afflictions arise 
in any sense from faithfulness to the Lord and the truth. If they 
find that they do, they should rejoice in them and wait patiently 
for recovery, which without our asking or expecting sometimes 
comes speedily.- Acts 14:19,20. 

But if we see no evidence that our afflictions have resulted 
either directly or indirectly from our zeal in the Lord's service, 
we should at once seek for a cause of the affliction as a rebuke 
from the Lord, remembering that nothing could happen to us 
aside from our Father's permission, and that he never permits 
except for a purpose. Even our final sickness should be traceable 
(more or less directly) to our energy in the service of the truth. 

Of these rebuking afflictions Paul wrote to the church at 
Corinth. (1 Cor. 11:21,22,27,29,30-34.) After recounting how 
careless and unappreciative of their covenant many of them 
were, failing to recognize their proper participation with Christ 
in being broken with him and sharing his cup of suffering for the 
truth's sake, he says: "For this cause many are weak and sickly 
among you and many sleep. " The Corinthian church no doubt 
had failed to properly estimate sickness as the Lord's rebuke for 
unfaithfulness, and probably like many Christian people to-day 
thought all sickness to be persecution of the devil, and wrongly 
esteemed all such afflictions as sufferings of Christ. Satan 
indeed is the executioner often, but he has no power over the 
saints except as it is permitted of our Father. — 1 Cor. 5:5. 

The general object of many such afflictions is our discipline and 
reformation; and happy is the son who shall speedily note a 
rebuke of the Father, and repent and come back quickly into full 
harmony; and who, exercised thereby, shall seldom need the 
rebuking rod of affliction. The Apostle refers to this also (1 Cor. 
11:31-34.) saying, "If we would judge ourselves we should not 
be judged" [by the Lord]. If we would critically watch ourselves 
and correct our own faults, disciplining ourselves, we should not 
need to be taken in hand and disciplined by afflictions. "But 
when we are judged by the Lord we are corrected [in order] that 
we should not be condemned with the world. " Thus the 
consecrated are tried fully now, in order that they may not need 
any further trial in the future when the world shall be on trial, 
during the Millennial age. 

It is of this class of afflictions that the Apostle James wrote, 
evidently,— sickness the result of rebukes from God for sins, and 
not sicknesses of the class first described in which we may 
rejoice. James says: "Is any sick among you? Let him call for 
the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing 



him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith 
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and though 
he have committed sins they shall be forgiven him. " The prayer 
as we understand it, should be for the forgiveness of the sins of 
which the sickness is a punishment or rebuke, rather than for 
release from the deserved punishment. But if the sickness was a 
judgment or discipline for sin, we should expect that when the 
sin had been confessed and truly repented of, the Lord would 
remove the chastisement and raise up the penitent son from the 
affliction. 

This is further shown to be the Apostle's meaning by his after- 
statement, "Confess your sins* one to another, and pray one for 
another [for the forgiveness of those sins] that ye may be healed. 

But let us remember that this statement does not refer to the 
various small aches and annoyances to which we in common 
with the world in general are subject, and which serve us a good 
purpose in the development of patience, and sympathy for 
others. We know this, first of all by the calling in of the elders of 
the church [the senior, or the chief, or official members] to pray 
over and anoint the sick with oil: because such extreme 
measures would be quite improper for a slight ailment. We 
know it secondly, by the Greek word used for sick in verse 14 
which has the significance of helpless or impotent. 

We see then that promiscuous praying for health, during the 
Gospel age, would have been improper, and that only by means 
of the gift of healing were the early cures of the age performed; 
that it ceased with the death of the apostles after accomplishing 
its object; and that the proper prayers relating to sickness, on the 
part of the saints, have been those offered for forgiveness of 
sins— as a result of which healing followed. But we see too, that 
as the Millennial age is dawning-lapping upon the Gospel age 
which is closing, we should expect that healing and general 
restitution would begin to be manifested, much as we do see it. 
And this leads us to inquire,-In the light of the forgoing 
examination of the Bible teachings, and in the light of our 
present location in the dawn of the Millennium, How and 

FOR WHOM MA Y WE NOW PR A Y? 

We answer, The saints cannot pray for their own health now, 
any more than could their Master. They cannot properly ask the 
restitution privileges which they have consecrated; nor can they 
ask that their sacrifices be nullified by having all they cost of 
weariness, exhaustion, or stripes or sickness, miraculously 
removed. But they can still feel at liberty to confess their sins 
one to another, and pray to God for forgiveness— that they may 
be relieved of sickness as a punishment, and thus they may, as a 
result, be healed. 



The saints abiding in Christ and His Word in them, may pray for 
others than themselves-for their children, or neighbors, if 
seriously sick, under certain conditions, in view of the fact that 
we are now in the beginning of the Times of Restitution: 
namely, in cases where they are sure their object is not self- 
exaltation; where their desires for the recovery of the sick are 
not selfish; where they have reason to believe that the restored 
health would be consecrated to good works and the glory of 
God. In such a case we may pray for the recovery of the 
afflicted believers in Christ who are not of the consecrated little 
flock— the sacrificers, the Royal Priesthood. Or we may under 
such circumstances pray even for the imbecile, who are not and 
cannot be believers. Yet even in such cases, though our faith 
may necessarily be strong, because confident of asking from 
right motives, we should always say as the Master did in prayer- 
- "Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done." 

It is not time yet to expect general healing and full restitution 
work, as that evidently will not be due, until the entire 
Priesthood has finished sacrificing and entered with their head 
and Chief Priest, Jesus, into the glories and perfections of the 
heavenly state or condition, typified by the Most Holy of the 
Temple and Tabernacle. 

At first sight it might appear that as the gifts at the beginning of 
the age were exercised through the consecrated church, so the 
healings to be expected in the Millennial dawn would be 
manifested mostly in answer to the prayers of the consecrated 
church. But not so we believe, will it be found; this would bring 
the saints into too great prominence, whereas, like John the 
Baptist at the first advent, we must expect to decrease here, 
while the church triumphant, on the other side the vail, will be 
on the increase. Our present relationship to the glorified church- 
-pointing out the nearness of the reign of glory— answers closely 
in correspondence to the work of John the Immerser at the first 
advent. John proclaimed, The kingdom of heaven is at hand, and 
added, "There standeth one among you whom ye know not— He 
must increase, but I must decrease. " So, much the same is our 
message, and while the church on the earthly plane will 
decrease, the glorified church on the heavenly plane will be 
increasing in power and influence during the time of trouble 
coming, while the John class will doubtless be put under 
governmental restraints as John was cast into prison by Herod. 

In harmony with what we should thus expect, we see various 
cures meeting with some success, and indeed we have heard of 
one case of healing where no cure was attempted or even 
thought of by either the sick girl or her friends. And while they 
waited for her to die, she immediately recovered got up and 
went about as ever. The only explanation she could give was 
that she had a dream in which a man laid his hand upon her 



head, and she felt a shock like electricity pass down her spine. 
And this young woman did not even profess to be a Christian. 

By these various means the Lord would gradually prepare the 
world for restitution; so that when it comes, the new order of 
things will still leave room for the exercise of faith toward God; 
for the proud and scientific to expect such things from natural 
causes, while others will be led thereby to recognize such things 
as the beginning 

R1048:page5 

of restitution. And since the overcomers have a great work to do 
in opposing error and instilling truth, and since if they were 
much engaged in praying for the sick it would detract from their 
real and important work, of healing the spiritually sick and lame 
and blind, we see great reasons why we should expect these 
manifestations of restitution both in and through others than the 
saints. 



SHOULD SAINTS USE MEDICINES? 

This question naturally suggests itself. We answer, We are 
neither commanded nor forbidden to use medicines. In our 
consecration we gave up human advantages coming to us as to 
all our race through Christ, in exchange for the spiritual 
advantages offered us. Hence all restitution blessings, every 
favor not spiritual, we are debarred from asking, though God for 
his own wise ends sometimes grants his "new creatures" special 
favors and manifestations of an earthly sort in their hours of 
need, even though they do not and have no right to ask for 
them. -See Matt. 26:53,54; Acts 12:6-11; 14:19,20. 

It should be noticed however, that even aside from Christ's work 
of redemption and restitution, even condemned men are 
privileged to use such natural means as they can command, in 
food and medicines, for the relief of their ailments and the 
sustenance as long as they may be able of their present 
condemned and dying bodies. And these privileges consequently 
the saints retain and possess, even after having exchanged the 
earthly advantages through Christ, for the heavenly advantages. 

Nothing then in their covenant of full consecration prevents the 
saints more than unbelievers from using natural means for their 
relief. We have the liberty to do so whenever our judgment 
indicates the expediency. And though we are not informed that 
our Lord used medicines, we should remember that he was 
perfect and had only such pains and aches as he himself took 
from others. However, He certainly illustrated the principle of 
making use of natural means and not asking divine power for 
relief, by resting when weary instead of praying for supernatural 
restoration; and when hungry and thirsty he ate and drank 
instead of praying for strength and refreshment otherwise. So 
too, it was with the apostles so far as we may know from the 



meagre scraps of history of their private affairs furnished us in 
Scripture. Paul tells us (2 Cor. 1 1:27,30) of his weariness and 
pains and hunger and thirst and cold and nakedness, and says he 
gloried in these marks of his faithfulness, but mentions not one 
word about praying for the removal of these by divine power; 
nor does he record one answer of such a prayer as a mark of 
favor with God. On the contrary, in the single instance he 
mentions of having prayed for earthly blessing (the restoration 
of his sight), he does tell us that the Lord refused his request, 
telling him it was best for him so-the grace sufficient being in 
spiritual and not earthly favors above those of natural men. —2 
Cor. 12:9. 

When Paul was thus needy at times how did he do? Did he pray 
God to feed him and clothe him? No; he well knew that God had 
promised that no good, needful thing should be withheld, so 
long as he was his servant. Did he ask God to create money in 
his pockets or to send some kind hearted person not too lazy to 
work with a basket of dainties for him to eat, while he studied or 
prayed? Nay, that was not Paul's sort, else he would not have 
been selected as "a chosen vessel" to bear the Lord's truth. When 
Paul was hungry he neither went out and begged nor staid 
indoors to pray for the things needed, but went to work at his 
trade,-tent-making, teaching publicly and privately as 
opportunities offered; unwilling to ask aid even of the believers 
whom he served; though he well knew that they were 
negligently losing, both the privilege of giving to his support 
and the spread of the truth, and also losing the valuable 
instruction which he could have imparted during these hours 
necessarily devoted to secular labor. 

We remember too Paul's advice to Timothy regarding medicine - 
-to take a little wine (as a medicine, not as a beverage) for his 
indigestion and "often infirmities." And this we find in perfect 
harmony with Paul's own course and that of our Lord, and 
therefore certainly a safe guide to us respecting our Father's will. 

But, says one, even if it be right to use simple remedies such as 
may come under our observation,— Would it be right to spend 
the Lord's money, (as all the money which the consecrated have 
is the Lord's) upon physicians? We answer that our Lord and the 
disciples spent consecrated money for bread which is the 
medicine needed when hungry. And we presume Timothy 
following Paul's counsel, spent some consecrated money for the 
medicinal wine. But moderation should be used in all that we 
do, that whether we eat or drink or take medicine or whatever, 
all may be done with reason and to the glory of God. We should 
not fill ourselves with medicine nor with wine nor be gluttonous 
with food. 

We cannot for a moment concede as the superiors or equals of 
our Lord and Paul, in faith or divine favor, some who in our day 
claim to live by faith, "working not at all;" who do little to 



weary or pain themselves, and who rejoice that they have no 
such experiences as Paul had with hunger, and cold, and thirst, 
and nakedness, as marks of special faith and holiness and divine 
favor. We believe that many such are sincere children of God, 
deceived on this question by following their own feelings and 
inclinations rather than carefully studying the perfect examples 
of God's will in this matter, furnished in Scripture. -See 2 Thes. 
3:8-10,11-15. 

In view of the Scripture teaching, we must therefore advise the 
consecrated to follow Christ, and walk in the footsteps of our 
Lord Jesus and those who followed him most closely; ignoring 
in this as in other things their own preferences as to how they 
would like to think about it, and how they would like to do and 
have God do, in such matters. Let us fully submit our wills and 
methods to God's plan and arrangement as expressed and 
illustrated in His Word. As "new creatures" we may ask freely 
for all spiritual blessings and graces promised. Then, sure that 
such will come, we should seek for them and acknowledge them 
with thankfulness, by whatever agency or channel sent. But in 
earthly matters we must be very careful: let us ask for nothing 
beyond our actual needs, as God (not we) sees the necessity and 
expediency-thankful always for the "bread and water" 
promised, as well as for every additional comfort. Realizing 
always God's superior wisdom and boundless love for us, we 
should fear to take our interests in any degree out of His hand. 
Thus we may live always rejoicing and always realizing that, 
whatever may befall us, all is working out for good to us. We 
may need an acquaintance with pain or to come into perplexity 
and almost to want, in order to have needful experience or 
testing or chastisement. And we should learn to search for and 
appreciate the lesson or chastisement quickly, and prove 
ourselves apt pupils in the school of Christ. 

Especially in the case of their children consecrated parents may 
well feel that, now in the dawning of the Millennial age, they 
have special privileges in prayer; for of all classes these are most 
surely the heirs of restitution blessings. The children of all 
believers are justified (1 Cor. 7:14) and hence heirs of the 
earthly blessings, restitution etc. And now that the Restitution 
Times are upon us, we should feel great confidence in asking 
health and strength and life for such. It would seem indeed that 
now the children of believers might live on down into the full 
sunlight of Millennial glory and blessing, when none will die 
except such as sin willfully against that light and favor. Yet, in 
all our requests we cannot ask otherwise than as the Master did, 
saying-Nevertheless not my will but thine be done. 

AN ILLUSTRATION. 

The following letter presents a case in which the Lord has been 
pleased to grant a measure of relief and restitution to one of the 



restitution class, a daughter of one of the consecrated. When the 
mother's request came (that we would pray for her daughter 
whose mind was breaking down, and who after being for some 
time in a hospital was growing worse and had been ordered to 
an Insane Asylum), we considered it an extreme case, one such 
as our Lord would deeply sympathize with- the broken hearts 
of mother, husband and children, of one worse off than dead. 
We saw that in asking for her the blessing of restored reason we 
were asking nothing selfishly-not even coveting the privilege of 
presenting the case before the throne of grace. (And we now 
relate it, not in public, but to the household of faith, and not for 
vain-glory but as an illustration. *) Considering that as nearly as 
we could tell this might be such a case as the Lord would be 
pleased to make an exception of, I concluded to present the case 
to our High-Priest, the Redeemer and soon to be Restorer, in 
whom the Father hath invested "all power:" joined by my wife, 
Sister Russell, I did so; expressing our reasons for supposing 
this to be such a case as the Lord would be pleased to regard 
favorably, yet carefully avoiding anything like an attempt to 
have the Lord do as we thought good, we prayed that if the 
request was not according to His will, that His will be done and 
the request refused. We noted the date and wrote to the sister 
whose daughter was afflicted. The following is an extract from 
her reply:- 

Yours of Feb. 19th, 1888, was duly received, in which you gave 
me such good and timely advice, in regard to my dear daughter, 
who was laboring under severe nervous prostration and partial 
insanity. You will not have forgotten, that I asked your prayers 
in her behalf and you so kindly responded to the request on 
Sabbath morning Feb. 19. You wrote to me the same day, saying 
for me to try to resign my will perfectly to whatever might be 
the will of God in the case. Oh, I thought I had done that 
already, but no, my will was paramount all the time. I have been 
able through His grace to yield, and trust my child to His 
keeping, and I am resting-praise His name. 

You wished to hear from myself and daughter soon, but 
circumstances over which I had no control prevented my writing 
until now. 

At the time of getting your letter my daughter was visiting me 
by my request, before being sent to an Insane Asylum, by advice 
of her physician at the hospital, where she had been for five 
months. I felt that I could not have her go to the asylum, so I 
went to my God and asked his guidance, and you know the rest. 

I wrote to you; and on the 19th you presented her case to the 
Lord, and he heard. That very day there was a decided change in 
her mind. In three or four weeks she went to her home in 
Chicago, and has been doing her work ever since. While she is 
not well in mind or body yet, her husband writes me that he 
thinks her improving slowly every day. Praise the Lord. I thank 



you a thousand times for your Christian sympathy and prayers. 
Give God the glory. Believe me, your sister in Christ. MRS. 
THOS. MADDOX. 

In this connection note that the healing was not immediate, but 
gradual; neither, perhaps, will it be complete. Full restitution 
back to perfect life and health and strength cannot be looked for 
until the "Times of Restitution" are fully ushered in. The most 
we should expect at present is merely relief. So, too, it was with 
the cases healed by our Lord. Not only were some of them 
gradual healings (John 5:52-53), but certainly none of them 
were absolute and complete restorations, else the cured ones 
would have been thereafter perfect men and women, and might 
have been living still. No, they were but partial restorations as in 
the case of Lazarus— only small foretastes of Restitution power, 
and work, and favor. 

"MIND HEALING" AND "CHRISTIAN SCIENCE. " 

That the power of the mind over the body is great no person of 
experience will dispute. Every intelligent physician knows, that 
in about one half his cases he needs to treat the mind as much as 
the body of his patient; and that in such cases to hold the 
confidence of his patient is very necessary. Who has not heard 
of the conscientious physician who in many cases administered 
bread-pills with strict orders as to proper food, drink and 
clothing and thus had great success. 

Every wise general has recognized the necessity of having the 
minds of his soldiers cheerfully employed, as promotive of 
general health. To this end sentimental music is prohibited and 
cheery and martial airs are commanded. 

It has long been observed that where an infectious disease 
breaks out and becomes pestilential, those most afraid of it, 
whose minds dwell on the disease and dread it most, are the 
most subject to it, and most likely to have it in a violent form. 
The story has been often told of the college professor whose 
class in a joke experimented upon him and put him into bed sick 
for several days by some five of them meeting him at various 
places on his way from home to the school and each succeeding 
one emphasizing more than the former that he looked unwell, in 
fact sick, and should return home at once. 

It is a well known fact, too, that French scientists were some 
years ago granted several prisoners condemned to death, to 
experiment with as they chose. One was placed in a cell in 
which a man had just died from cholera, but was not told of that 
fact and was well the next day: another was placed in a clean 
cell but told that the death from cholera had been in that cell and 
that he would surely take the disease; and he did take it and 
died. Another 

R1048 : page 6 



of their experiments was, to bind and blindfold a prisoner and 
pass his hand and arm through a partition, telling him that 
scientists wanted to learn how long it would take to bleed to 
death from the cutting of one of the arteries of the arm. He 
prepared for the execution in this form and died in a few hours, 
though really the experiment was to learn how much effect fear 
would have, for the cut made in his arm was quite insignificant 
and he lost only a few ounces of blood; the drip, drip, drip, 
which he could hear and feel run down his arm, being a 
carefully arranged device of tepid water. He was mind-killed; he 
thought he had lost the blood, and exhaustion and death were the 
result. 

Who, that has observed, will not admit that to think about an 
ache or a pain will aggravate it? And if it will intensify and 
aggravate pain to allow the mind to dwell upon it, is it not 
reasonable to believe, that pain can be lessened and a cure 
expedited by an exercise of the brain power in an opposite 
direction? The secret of how the mind operates upon disease 
undoubtedly lies in the fact that the brain is not only the seat of 
all thought, but of all feeling. It has communication with the 
entire person by its active messengers, the nerves. Consequently 
when a message of pain comes from wounded nerves, the brain 
has power either to soothe the wounded nerves and assist thus in 
allaying the pain, or on the other hand it has power, instead of 
healing, to spread a general alarm to the entire nervous system, 
and thus both to increase the pain and delay recovery. From that 
center, the brain, all the nerves are directed and more or less 
controlled, as a factory is governed and directed from the 
manager's office. If we had no nerves, we could have no pain; 
and if we had the nerves even, and had no brain to which they 
could communicate their troubles, we could have no knowledge 
of pain. Hence, we see, that whether we shall suffer much pain 
depends not only upon the fineness, delicacy or sensitiveness of 
our nerves, but also upon the way in which our minds shall 
receive the appeals of our nerves— whether we magnify or 
minimize them. And yet, the full appreciation of the mental 
powers of human beings and how best to make use of them, 
evidently belongs further along. In the full sunlight of the 
Millennial day this will doubtless be one of the prominent 
agencies of human restitution. 

But we should be on guard against a device of our enemy, who, 
taking advantage of this, (one of the principles of restitution 
which must soon be far more widely recognized than at present,) 
endeavors to use it as his balloon by which to lift into public 
notice doctrines and theories subversive of the doctrines of the 
Scriptures. We refer now, specially, to what is deceptively 
termed "Christian Science. " This entire system seems to be as 
fraudulent and deceptive as its name: though we admit that some 
honest souls are found among its advocates, having been 
deceived and misled by it. By reason of the horrible 



misrepresentations of God's character and plans by so-called 
Orthodoxy, in groping for something better, some have fallen 
into this last snare of the devil, as others have been ensnared into 
Infidelity and Spiritism and into Swedenborgism which appears 
to be a hand-maid and stepping stone to Spiritism, -as is also 
this new deception, called Christian Science. 

There is nothing Christian about it-it is against Christ and 
against the truths which Christ and his apostles taught. It is 
emphatically anti-Christian in its tendencies. But they 
acknowledge Christ, says one. Yes, we answer, so did the devils 
when they had an object in so doing. (Matt. 8:29; Acts 16:17; 
19:15.) So Spiritists acknowledge Christ too, claiming that he 
was an eminent medium and spiritist. And now these Christian 
Scientists use his name to deceive, if possible the very elect, 
claiming that our Lord was one of them-a Christian Scientist, 
who did very well all things considered, but who did not 
understand the Science so well as its present exponents, who are 
ladies, and whose finer sensibilities were requisite to a full 
appreciation of the unfathomable depths of this science. 

Candor compels us to remark that few Christian people 
recognize the meaning of the word Christian. It is not like the 
word Lutheran, or Wesleyan; the secret force lies in the meaning 
of the Greek word Christ, which corresponds to the Hebrew 
word Messiah, and is a title rather than a name. It signifies, one 
Anointed by Jehovah as his agent, to accomplish the promised 
deliverance and blessing of mankind. All this was and is 
understood by the Jew as the import of the title Messiah, and 
should be recognized as the meaning of the corresponding word 
Christ by all true Christians. 

"Christian Science" expounders, however, very far from 
believing in or expecting any deliverance through our Lord 
Jesus, the Christ, see nothing for him to do. They deny entirely 
any atonement for sin, and in fact deny any original sin, making 
necessary a ransom sacrifice, such as the Scriptures show; and 
not only do they thus deny the Lord's work already 
accomplished, but they deny any future work to be done by Him 
as the Millennial King. They deny that he did anything at his 
first advent except to teach their science,— and that very 
imperfectly as compared with what they could have done — 
especially as compared with what the self-styled "Rev." Mrs. 
Eddy, their Boston leader and teacher, would have done. 

But do not "Christian Scientists" claim to believe the Bible? 
some one suggests; and do they not quote from it frequently? 
Yes, certainly, that is a part of their garment of light, by which 
they deceive some of the Children of the light. They quote 
Scripture much as Satan quoted it to our Lord in the temptation 
recorded in Matt. 4 chapter. But though they quote from the 
Bible, it is in an inconsistent manner and wholly out of its 
relation to the context, just as Satan did, not to ascertain God's 



plan, but to bolster up a theory which proves a snare to many not 
rooted and grounded in the truth. Such, not familiar with the 
general meaning of the passages quoted, too often do not take 
the time to fully examine the context, but swallow the theory 
whole, presuming their teachers to be honest, and that the 
passages cited are correctly applied. 

"Orthodoxy," so called, by reason of the custom of its ministers 
to take texts from the Bible for all sorts of discourses, contrary 
to the meaning and intention of the text, has laid the foundation 
for just such deceptions as are now shipwrecking the faith of so 
many. Indeed we are distinctly shown that all but "the elect"- a 
faithful few, will be misled by some of these various deceptive 
snares. But the "very elect," because fully consecrated to God, 
shall have light and help sufficient to prevent them from being 
deceived so as to fall in such errors. 

We need not criticize "Christian Science" at greater length in 
this paper, for this we did in our issue of October '86, which 
those who have not read can still obtain from our office. We 
merely wish now to note that the truth on the subject of mental 
assistance to healing, presented above, already for many years 
recognized by all thinkers, though perhaps fully comprehended 
and appreciated, as yet, by none, is a very different thing from 
the claims and nonsense of "Christian Scientists." The former is 
in perfect harmony both with reason and Scripture, while the 
latter violates both. 

In fact we hold that the theories of these scientists (?) cannot 
have emanated from a sound brain, no matter how many sound 
minds may have been worked up to the point of belief in so 
unreasonable and unscientific a view of matters. We notice, too, 
that though they claim to believe that diseases and pains are not 
realities, but merely imaginations of the diseased minds and 
curable by getting rid of such imaginations, yet when it comes to 
paying for this imaginary healing, imaginary dollars will not do. 
One might suppose that they would become so convinced of 
their theory that "All is mind, there is no matter; all is life, there 
is no death," etc., that they would consider hunger and thirst and 
weariness and money as mere imaginations, and disregard them; 
but not so, food, and dress, and rest, and especially money, are 
very real to them and are sought after unceasingly. For instance 
a book to explain (?) their theory is only $3.00. And a course of 
lectures on How to heal (?) by this method costs $300.00. And 
the services of those who after hearing about twelve discourses 
get a "diploma" to practice as Christian Scientists, is never 
charged for in an imaginary manner, but at a good round figure 
in tangible money. All this is very different from the spirit and 
method of our Master whose name they fraudulently adopt, to 
deceive and ensnare his followers. 

But does some one ask, What object could Satan have in getting 
up such a deception and delusion? We answer, It is one of the 



many efforts he is permitted to make now against the foundation 
of all true Christian faith-THE RANSOM. Of course they do 
not claim to deny the ransom; nor do any of the various no- 
ransom theories make any such claim. It is part of their 
deceptive policy to retain a form of sound words, while they are 
diligent and untiring in their efforts to subvert their real 
significance. And all errors seem to take this form, evidently 
inspired by the one great deceiver and arch-enemy of the cross. 
They are all the more dangerous and deceptive because they do 
not openly deny the Bible, but underhandedly. They deny 
original sin and its penalty, and ignore the work of Christ as 
Redeemer. They do not, of course, deny that he died, but they do 
deny that He "gave himself a ransom [a corresponding price] for 
all;" for they deny that any price was required. The following 
quotation from one of their prominent writers shows that they 
ignore Christ's redemptive work entirely, and in fact ignore God 
entirely, and substitute a principle of good as their deity. A 
writer in Mrs. Eddy's Christian Science Journal says:- 

"We are growing into that state where human possibilities and 
powers expand to their ultimate limits, and are pushing on 
toward the divine development as sons and daughters of Good. " 

In this manner Satan would deceive the world into the belief that 
the restitution privileges and blessings which he can no longer 
delay, are not results of God's time and order, nor brought about 
by our Lord's redemptive work at Calvary, and his second 
coming in power as the promised "Seed" to bless all the families 
of the earth, and to restore all things, as spoken by the mouth of 
all the holy prophets since the world began. He would offset and 
hinder as much as possible the proper effect of the coming 
blessings (viz., to lead mankind to appreciate and love their 
Redeemer and Restorer), by foretelling thus the coming 
restitution to the full perfection of human powers, and 
attributing them to a mere natural, human, mental 
"development" and "growing." 

This deception, as to the cause and source of the coming 
restitution, leading the mind away from the great work of Christ, 
first as Redeemer, and finally as Life-giver or Restorer, will be 
all the greater, because Satan thus adroitly mingles truth with 
error-a truth too, more forcible far, than the world or "Christian 
Scientists" generally conceive. The Millennial restitution will 
come about as a development, expanding every good human 
quality to its ultimate limits, (full restoration to all that was lost); 
and doubtless this will be accomplished very largely through 
faith and mental healing. 

KEEP THE MIND PURE. 

PROV. 4:23-27. 



Few recognize the influence of a pure mind over the body. God 
has so organized the human kind, that pure, noble, holy thoughts 
in general, have not only an elevating and ennobling effect upon 
the mental and moral constitution, but an invigorating influence 
upon the physical system. And on the contrary, every unclean, 
ignoble, unchaste, unholy thought (as well as act) has a direct 
effect not only toward debasement of mind and morals, but 
germinates seeds of disease already in the constitution of all the 
fallen race. 

If this were more widely known and more fully recognized, it 
would be a great blessing to very many, and would tend to 
prevent very much sickness among both young and old, and 
would sometimes explain, why those whose hands and brains 
are busiest are often the most healthy and most happy. "Keep 
thy heart-for out of it are the issues of life. " These words should 
be deeply engraved upon the tablet of memory by every person. 
They are words of wisdom. Their full import may be recognized 
by many in the present time, but surely all must sooner or later 
learn it; for this is to be the rule and arrangement by and under 
which, during Christ's Millennial reign, the world will be 
blessed. 

Mankind will be brought to a knowledge of the truth, and to an 
opportunity for restitution to full perfection by the great 
Redeemer, but in such a manner as to require them to strive 
against sin and impurity, and to strive for righteousness and 
perfection,-which in response to their prayers and efforts the 
Life-giver will supply freely, having redeemed them from 
Adamic condemnation for this very purpose of restoring them to 
all that was lost in Adam's fall. 

It is a mistake to suppose, as many seem to do, that because our 
Lord Jesus paid the full price of our redemption from sin and 
death, therefore all the redeemed ones must be freed forever 
from condemnation and sin, as soon as the Times of Restitution 
begin. On the contrary, our Lord's sacrifice covered and 
cancelled only the sin of Adam and its wide-spread results. 
Hence it covers only those sins of our committing, which result 
from weaknesses within ourselves and evil and temptation 
surrounding us, which our hearts do not consent to or approve 
when we come to know the right and wrong in God's sight. 

As soon as we come to a clear apprehension 

R1048 : page 7 

of our provided redemption, and into harmony with its 
conditions, we may consider ourselves "saved" from the Adamic 
condemnation and restored to divine favor, though the time for 
actual restoration to the blessings secured is at the close of the 
Gospel age. The actual attainment of the privileges and 
blessings provided for all by God, through our Redeemer, and 
freely offered (sooner or later-in the present or in the coming 



age) to all, will not be attained except by the desire and effort of 
"whosoever will." 

As soon as we know and except of Christ's redemption work, we 
may reckon ourselves free from all condemnation on Adam's 
account, or traceable to his failure; and then, at that moment of 
knowledge, the individual trial of each human being begins; and 
by his efforts as well as his prayers he shows his desire for a life 
of holiness and purity and fellowship with God. And to such the 
Lord is pleased to extend his favor and every needed aid, 
bringing them ultimately to full perfection and to the enjoyment 
of all the privileges lost by willful sin in Eden. And every sin 
and impurity, every unholiness, every dishonesty, of thought or 
act, will react upon the evil-doer bringing; with it a heavy toll of 
interest: and if persisted in, it will prove such an one unworthy 
of the everlasting life of holiness and purity. This, the only 
everlasting life which God has offered, or will grant, will be 
given only to those who, when brought to a full knowledge of all 
the facts, shall so desire a life of holiness as to strive against sin 
and impurity in every form. 

And while this principle will apply specially to mankind during 
the Millennium, it is also a principle with the saints in the 
present time. Purity, chastity, holiness of heart (of mind), belong 
to our consecration,— to be copies of God's Son who was holy, 
harmless, undefiled. Wherefore:- 

"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of 
life."-Prov. 4:23. 

"Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, 
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, 
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good 
report,... think on these things."— Phil. 4:8. 

"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. -Matt. 5:8. 
*Sinaitic MS. reads sins. 



*In fact we consider it far more a proof of sonship to God and 
of close relationship and friendship with our Lord Jesus, to have 
a knowledge of his Word, an understanding of his plan and 
information concerning "things to come" (John 16:13), than to 
possess even the gifts of healing and of speaking with tongues: 
for as the Apostle clearly shows, one might possess those gifts 
and yet be but sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal. Our Lord 
declares that— Many shall say in that day, In thy name we have 
done many wonderful works, and yet be of the class whom he 
cannot and will not recognize as overcomers-his Bride. -Matt. 
7:22. 



R1048:page7 

FIGHT YOUR OWN BATTLES. 

This you must do, for there is no one else to do it for you. 
When your enemies compass you about like bees, when they are 
more than the hairs of your head, you will find few men who 
will stand as your defenders. When you are lied about, abused 
and set at naught, good men will stand aloof and see how it will 
go with you. If you go down they will let you go, without protest 
or defense. If you survive the storm, surmount the wave, fight 
the battle, and defeat the foe, years afterwards your friends will 
be glad to let you understand how kindly they have always felt 
for you, and how glad they are that all things have come out 
right. But you must not anticipate this decision. You are on trial, 
and they will not pronounce blindly or in advance, on the merits 
of the case, nor will they regard you as innocent till you are 
proved not to be guilty. More likely they will not even insist that 
your trial shall be fair. In the day of adversity, sorrow, or 
dishonor, some rare spirits will search you out and give you the 
sympathy and help that you sorely need. Let them come and 
welcome them with thanks, and remember them when the day of 
trial is past; but do not go far to seek them, or you will find your 
friends far fewer then, than in the days of your prosperity. 

You must not expect too much of poor humanity, nor blame 
men too severely. They cannot read your heart. They may have 
listened to lies, and slanders, invented by bad men, and repeated 
by good men, until they are perplexed, undecided, and know not 
what to do. Let them alone. The more you talk to them, the more 
they suspect your motives; the more you plead, the less they are 
disposed to help. Go to God in your troubles, and seek his 
almighty aid, promised in your time of need. He knows you 
altogether. With him there need be no explanation, and there can 
be no deception. If you can wash your hands in innocency, you 
can compass his altar, and receive his blessing, and He can carry 
you through. The devil cannot kill a man whom God undertakes 
to keep alive. All the liars in the universe cannot prove that gold 
is brass. All the slanderers in creation cannot make an honest 
man a rogue. If men call you a liar, keep telling them the truth. 
If they repeat the charge, still repeat your faithful testimony. 
Stand for God and God will stand for you, and by and by the 
change will come. Missing friends will come back. The Lord 
will open more doors than Satan can close; and He will set 
before you open doors that no man can shut; and all the 
reproaches and sorrows borne for the name and sake of Christ 
will turn to joy and blessing, if we faithfully follow him, and 
commit the keeping of our souls to him in well-doing, as unto a 
faithful Creator. — H. L. Hastings. 



R1048:page7 



FULLY PERSUADED. 



We presume there was joy in heaven about the time the 
following letter was penned and we know there will be joy in 
many hearts as it is read. 

The letter fully introduces and explains itself, but we wish all to 
note while reading, what is the natural result of the introduction 
of the truth into an honest heart prepared by discipline and 
experience and freed from sectarian prejudice. Note how quickly 
the truth commends itself over and beyond errors of many years 
growth and with every surrounding favorable to the errors and 
unfavorable to the truth. Note also the effect of the truth upon a 
fully consecrated heart. 

Earthly prizes of worldly fame and earthly wealth, and worldly 
pleasures fade before the excellent glory of the great "prize of 
our high calling. " And no wonder; if the accomplishment of the 
great divine plan was so grand as to be worthy our Saviour's 
coming from the heavenly courts to engage in it, is it not worthy 
the sacrifice of paltry earthly comforts or privileges on our part- 
if we are privileged to share in the present sufferings of Christ 
and also by and by in the glories to follow? 

The letter is as follows:— 

May 21st, 1888. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I want to write you a letter about 
myself: you can sympathize with me, and there is no one here 
that I know of, who can. But very soon I hope and believe the 
truth will have friends here, who will see and believe as I do. 
There are in this community, I think, quite a number of 
consecrated ones who do not see clearly, whom I humbly trust 
the "Chief Reaper" will permit me to search out, and be an 
humble instalment in his hands of leading them into the light, 
and more full consecration. 

When I was quite a young man I felt that I was begotten of the 
Spirit, and if I understand myself, I was very honest and earnest 
in the matter. I united with the Baptist Church, and thought for a 
while I was all right. Being young and full of worldly- 
mindedness, I soon discovered that I was not living up to my 
duty, and so doubts came and I struggled on, but finally plunged 
into money making, pleasure and dissipation. And though 
prosperous financially and socially, yet I was very miserable and 
unhappy, and there was no peace. But the Lord in his goodness 
and mercy chastened me, and while it was the greatest trouble of 
my life, it brought me to my extremity, and then God took me 
up and comforted me, and I consecrated myself and all I have 
and am to his service. That was about six months ago. I then 



commenced to study God's Word with all the energy I had, with 
a view to engaging in the ministry. 

When I commenced to study, and ever since, I have lived 
trusting earnestly in God to guide me in the way of all truth. I 
am 33 years of age and a little more, have a wife and three little 
children. I realized that I could not go to college to get the 
education and preparation I needed for the ministry, so I said, I 
am going to the feet of Jesus— He will be my teacher— and I 
prayed day and night as I studied, that the holy Spirit would 
guide me in the way of all truth. 

Gradually I began to realize that in order to be a God pleasing 
minister, I could not preach the doctrine that most of the 
preachers I knew, preached. I saw there must be something 
wrong in the doctrines I had been taught. I saw that the parable 
of the Leaven surely did not mean the gospel hid in the three 
measures of meal until the whole lump was leavened with the 
gospel. I realized that Leaven meant something impure, 
consequently error, and I looked around me and I saw sure 
enough the whole lump is about leavened. I also discovered that 
our Master's second coming must be pre-millennial, and that 
according to the signs of the times, he would come long before 
the world was converted. So I made up my mind that the Baptist 
Church was the nearest right after all, and that the truly 
converted in that church would compose the "Bride," and so I 
went to work in earnest talking to our large membership of 
Baptists, trying to get them more fully consecrated. I also went 
to work on the church roll with a view of getting the negligent 
and unworthy to either do better or withdraw so as to keep the 
church pure, but soon discovered what a Herculean task this 
would be, so I was puzzled. 

I prayed more earnestly than ever for the truth, the whole truth, 
and nothing but the truth. I received fresh courage and strength, 
studied earlier and later, and talked to my Sunday School more 
earnestly than ever: I am Supt. of a Baptist S.S., numbering 125. 
I also went from church to church and assisted in revival 
meetings; but the more I engaged in that, and listened to the 
Evangelists, and heard them teach error, and saw them work for 
the big number of so called converts, and saw how they 
deceived the young and unsuspecting, the heavier my heart got, 
and I almost shuddered when I thought of being ordained by 
men to teach. So I made up my mind that I would close out my 
business, and go out in the highways and hedges, and invite and 
if possible bring in guests for "the marriage supper of the 
Lamb." When I reached this decision I was better contented, and 
God's blessed word seemed better food for the soul than ever. 
And while my eyes were thus becoming ready to be opened, yet 
I could not see clearly —the plan would not harmonize. I was so 
full of the eternal torment, and no chance after death doctrine, 
that at times I was almost ready to give up in despair; but I had 



faith in the blessed promises of my Master, and I continued at 
his feet, 

R1049 : page 7 

and my whole soul was filled with a longing desire to know and 
preach the doctrine first delivered to the saints. 

By accident I came across your address written in pencil on a 
card, and so I wrote to you for a sample copy of your paper; you 
sent me two. I eagerly read them, and while I was bewildered, 
amazed, and almost stunned at times, yet I did not comprehend 
your full meaning, and I wondered who you are, and what 
church you belong to, etc. And I said that does begin to look like 
the "Truth," but his views are rather too broad; I must be careful, 
it may be another seducing spirit, but anyway, I will send $1.50 
and get the paper for a year, also a copy of M. DAWN and some 
back numbers, and I did so. I said, I will prove it if I can as I go 
along, and if it is not according to the Bible, I will not hold fast 
to it. I am seeking after truth as earnestly, meekly and humbly as 
I know how, and I am not afraid to read his doctrine, for if it is 
wrong I know God will convince me that it is; for I have now 
reached the point where I have given up all else, and am relying 
completely on the guidance of the Word. 

One week ago yesterday the DAWN and a large roll of back 
numbers of the TOWER came, and I commenced. I have read 
day and night since, almost. O, it was food to my hungry soul; 
and sometimes, Bro. Russell, I would just have to stop and lay 
the book or paper down and praise God. I was alone part of the 
time. The scales dropped from my eyes, and I am honest when I 
tell you, at times I got a glimpse into the "third heaven. " The 
plan is such a glorious one; and I am now ready, God helping 
me, to commence running the race for the prize more earnestly. 
But O ! you cannot realize unless you knew me, what a struggle I 
have had already, and what I will have to undergo in cutting 
loose from business, family, church, college and Sabbath-school 
relations. I have a large dry goods store, and am doing a 
splendid business, but I have resolved to commence closing out 
my stock this week. It will take me several months to wind up 
my business, but I want to do it as fast as possible; and in the 
meantime I want to continue to study, and to put in a word and a 
DAWN wherever I think it will do good. 

But I cannot tell you how heavy, in one sense of the word, my 
heart has been all day to-day on account of a little scene I had 
yesterday in the house of my father. He is a well-to-do man, so 
far as this world's goods go, and a very strong Baptist. All my 
folks are Baptists. Yesterday I was with them— sister, wife, 
mother father. I told them of how good God was to me, and of 
how my eyes had been opened, and that I was going to 
commence closing out my business, to go into the "Harvest 
Field" to work without money, and without price. They all cried 



as if their hearts would break, and when I went out of the room, 
I overheard them talking about me. They actually believe I have 
gone crazy, and so they are trying to keep me from studying so 
hard. But I must press on. The time is short, and I live in hope 
that their eyes may be opened too. I have given my mother some 
TOWERS. She is an honest consecrated woman, but much 
prejudiced. I have been praying very earnestly that she may 
know the "Truth" as revealed in God's Word. 

Now this is too long a letter to write to one so busy as you must 
be, but it is a relief for me to write it, even if you never have 
time to read it. O, if I could only see and talk with some one face 
to face, that thinks and believes as you do. 

May God bless you and all your co-workers in your labor of 
love, is my earnest wish. Yours in the work, J. W. B. 



R1036:page7 



THE MEEK SHALL SEE EYE TO EYE. 

Beware of the spirit of pride which seeks to find some fault 
with everything presented, from the false idea that it is a mark of 
independence of thought and superiority of intellect. Such are 
always full of the thought that there must be something wrong 
and that it is their duty to find some fault with everything. Such 
always find something to object to, and would if they were in 
heaven. They are not of the sort spoken of by the Prophet, who 
shall "see eye to eye," for they are determined not to do so. Let 
all saints avoid and root out of themselves such a disposition. It 
is not the spirit of Christ; not the spirit of the truth. It will hinder 
themselves and others. Let each seek to rid himself of all such 
pride, and on the contrary, let us cultivate the child like spirit of 
meekness. 



R1049 : page 8 

THE BISHOP OF LONDON. 

We fear that we with others have caused the "Lord Bishop of 
London" some annoyance by the sermon published in our May 
issue which purported to have been preached by his lordship on 
Christmas day last: this we regret. 

We stated, in connection with our publication of it, our surprise 
that so remarkable an event should have remained quiet so long, 
and merely published the clipping as we received it from a 
Brother in Ohio. We now have evidence that no such sermon 
was ever preached. The following letter settles the question. The 
Sanctuary, Westminister S.W. 20 June, 1888. 



Dear Sir:- 

I am directed by the Lord Bishop of London, in reply to your 
letter of the 10th inst, to inform you that the statement in the 
"Watch Tower" is absolutely without foundation. 

Harry W. Lee. 

We also procured a copy of London Justice, of the issue said to 
contain this Christmas sermon. We found it therein, verbatim, 
but preceded by a few words which the Ohio paper had 
neglected to copy. The original article had the following 
heading:-"A Christmas Sermon which the Bishop of London 
has been asked to preach in Westminster Abbey on Sunday Dec. 
25th." Thus, it appears that the sermon as printed was merely 
suggested, as a good and suitable one, for the Lord Bishop of 
London to preach. 

We are glad to correct the mistake, but are sorry that it needs 
correcting- very sorry that it is not true, for the Lord Bishop's 
sake, as well as for the sake of the powerful influence which 
such a sermon and such an act would surely have carried 
throughout Great Britain and throughout the world. 

We have no regrets on the subject, except for the annoyance of 
the Bishop; for we doubt not the unintended mistake has had 
some influence for good, in suggesting what might and should 
be done by many in high places. And the very fact that the 
sermon was suggested shows that some appreciate the situation, 
even if the bishops and lords do not. 



R1049 : page 8 

PAPACY EXAMINED BY A LAWYER. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-... 

The Pope and his minions are doing their very utmost to make 
void that part of the "Declaration of Independence" of the U.S., 
which says "all men are created equal; that they are endowed by 
their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these 
are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. That, to secure 
these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving 
their just powers from the consent of the governed; that 
whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these 
ends, it is the right of the people to alter or abolish it, etc. 

It is being strongly argued to join church and state. The moment 
this is effected, away go the "Liberties" of the people. What can 
be dearer than liberty of conscience, and this is what the 
Constitution of the United States guarantees to every American. 
On this point in 1 854 the Pope said, "The absurd and erroneous 
doctrines or ravings in defence of liberty of conscience are a 
most pestilential error -a pest, of all others, most to be dreaded 



in a state." This was reiterated in 1864 by the same Pope, 
writing of "Those who assert the liberty of conscience and of 
religious worship" and "All such as maintain that the Church 
may not employ force." The Archbishop of St. Louis writes, 
"Heresy and unbelief are crimes" and are punished as other 
crimes "where the Catholic religion is an essential part of the 
law of the land." Just so, this is the very drift of the present 
attempt to join church and state and to obliterate article iii. of the 
Articles of Confederation, viz., "The said states hereby severally 
enter into a firm league of friendship with each other for their 
common defence, the security of their liberties, and their mutual 
and general welfare; binding themselves to assist each other 
against all force offered to, or attacks made upon them or any of 
them, on account of religion, sovereignty, trade, or other 
pretense whatever. " Whenever church and state join together, it 
will put the shackles upon the people and upon each state 
severally- and thus will result a national religion subject to 
national law and the penalties thereto for its violation will be 
classified as criminal punishments and not as penalties for 
misdemeanors. 

Listen, "The Romish Church has a right to exercise its authority 
without any limits set to it by the civil power."- Encyclical 
XIX. 

"The Pope and priests ought to have the dominion over the 
temporal affairs." -Encyclical XXVII. 

"The Romish Church and her ecclesiastics have a right to 
immunity from civil law. "-Encyclical XXX. 

"In case of conflict between the ecclesiastical and civil powers, 
the ecclesiastical powers ought to prevail. "-E. XLIJ. 

Cardinal Manning when he was Archbishop made the Pope to 
say: "I acknowledge no civil power; I am the subject of no 
prince; and I claim more than this. I claim to be the supreme 
judge and director 

R1050 : page 8 

of the consciences of men: of the peasant that tills the fields, and 
of the prince that sits upon the throne: of the household that 
lives in the shade of privacy, and the legislator that makes laws 
for kingdoms; I am the sole, last, supreme judge of what is right 
and wrong." He further says: "Moreover, we declare, affirm, 
define, and pronounce it to be necessary to salvation for every 
human creature to be subject to the Roman Pontiff." On this 
point hear what Gladstone the great English statesman says:- 
"The Pope demands for himself the right to determine the 
province of his own rights, and has so defined it in formal 
documents, as to warrant any and every invasion of the civil 
sphere: and that this new version of the principles of the Papal 
Church inexorably binds its members to the admission of these 



exorbitant claims without any refuge or reserve on behalf of 
their duty to the crown." He also says: —"Rome requires a 
convert who joins her to forfeit his moral and mental freedom, 
and to place his loyalty on civil duty at the mercy of another. " 

Two hundred years ago Romanism was rampant in Scotland and 
England. Those were the days of the martyrs. It was on the first 
day of May A.D. 1685 when the infamous Graham of 
Claverhouse murdered John Brown aged 58 years, because he 
"acknowledged only Christ as the supreme Head of the Church," 
and for this answer Claverhouse said to him, "Go to your 
prayers for you shall immediately die. " John prayed and so 
powerful was he in prayer, it brought the tears to the eyes of the 
murderer's soldiers. Upon this tragedy these verses were 
written:- 

"My widow, my orphan, O God, I resign To thy care, and the 
babe yet unborn, too is thine; Let thy blessing be round them, to 
guard and to keep, When o'er my green grave forsaken they 
weep. 

At the door of his home, on the heather he knelt; His prayer for 
his family the pitiless felt; The rough soldiers listened with tears 
and with sighs, Till Claverhouse cursed him, and bade him, 
arise. 

For the last time the lips of his young wife he kissed, His dear 
little daughter he clasped to his breast: 'To thy mother be kind, 
read thy Bible and pray; The Lord will protect thee when I am 
away.' 

Isabel, farewell: Thou shalt shortly behold Thy love on the 
heather stretched bloody and cold. The hour I've long looked for 
hath come at the last! Art thou willing to part?-all its anguish is 
past' 

'Yes, willing,' she said, and she sought his embrace, While the 
tears trickled down on the little one's face. "Tis the last time I 
ever shall cling to thy heart Yet with thee I am willing, yes, 
willing to part.' 

'Twas a scene would have softened a savage's ire; But 
Claverhouse commanded his horsemen to fire; As they cursed 
his command turning round to retreat, The demon himself shot 
him dead at his feet. " 

It has long since been said that history repeats itself, and it 
behooves every child of God who is "born again" to live nearer 
and closer to his Heavenly Father, for the "tares" are growing 
rank on American soil, and the seed of the Word is being almost 
choked out, having scarcely a breathing place in this broad land, 
where unbelief and infidelity appear to hold sway. It is the great 
aim of the Catholic Church to bring everything to her grasp, no 
matter at what cost, or who shall suffer thereby, and she and her 



votaries are laboring most assiduously to get control of both the 
civil and religious affairs of this nation. 

D. COWAN. 

[We have given only a part of Bro. C.'s letter, omitting certain 
reflections upon the course of the President of these United 
States for having sent a token to Pope Leo XIII., on the occasion 
of his recent Jubilee celebration. While Mr. Cleveland had the 
right to make a present to whom he pleased, we believe that as 
President, and while holding the office, he should have 
recognized no foreign potentate by a gift, even as the law 
expressly forbids him to receive a gift from any of them. 
Occupying the office he does, his conduct, gift, etc., were 
certainly to be regarded as representative, as from the people of 
this land. Nevertheless let it be said on his behalf that the 
improper act was done in the least offensive form possible. For 
had Mr. Cleveland's purpose been the reverse of what it was- 
had he purposed an insult, he could not have found a present 
implying more irony and sarcasm than the very one he did 
select-a copy of the Constitution of these United States. Had the 
German Emperor sent a copy of Luther's protests and had 
France sent a copy of the decree for the Confiscation of the 
Papal States, issued by Napoleon Bonaparte, the joke would 
have been complete. For the Constitution of these United States 
was almost as great a blow to Papacy as either of the others. 
Perhaps a greater blow, but less direct. 

But then, let us remember that our government is in no danger of 
overthrow. Our government is not yet set up. We are waiting for 
that Fifth Universal Empire under our Lord, which shall displace 
and replace all human governments. When we pray "Thy 
Kingdom Come," we should remember that God tells us that its 
coming into power will be in connection with the breaking in 
pieces of all human governments in a time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation." Knowing this, we can view 
with complacency (though not with indifference) the various 
agencies at work for the overthrow of all nations— even this one 
which we regard as the best government man has ever been able 
to frame. 

Let us not then become immersed, even to a slight degree, in the 
affairs of this world, but faithfully and always remember that 
"our citizenship is in heaven." For it let us spend our time and 
talent-in explaining its constitution, its liberties, its glories and 
in pointing out its foes. -ED.] 



R1050 : page 8 



PAPAL LOVE FOR THE BIBLE 
AND FOR PROTESTANTS. 

A large number of copies of the Bible were recently burned in 
Barcelona, Spain, by order of the government-of course at the 
instigation of the Church of Rome. The following, translated 
from the Catholic Banner, the organ of Papacy there, shows that 
they approved and appreciated the action. It said:- 

"Thank God, we at last have turned towards the times when 
those who propagated heretical doctrines were punished with 
exemplary punishment. The re-establishment of the Holy 
Tribunal of the Inquisition must soon take place. Its reign will 
be more glorious and fruitful in results than in the past. Our 
Catholic heart overflows with faith and enthusiasm; and the 
immense joy we experience as we begin to reap the fruit of our 
present campaign, exceeds all imagination. What a day of 
pleasure will that be for us when we see Anti-clericals writhing 
in the flames of Inquisition!" 

To encourage another crusade, the same paper says:— 

"We believe it right to publish the names of those holy men 
under whose hands so many sinners suffered, that good 
Catholics may venerate their memory:— 

By Torquemada- 

Men and women burnt alive, 10,220 

Burnt in effigy, 6,840 

Condemned to other punishments,.... 97,371 

By Diego Deza— 

Men and women burnt alive, 2,592 

Burnt in effigy, 829 

Condemned to other punishments, 32,952 

By Cardinal Jiminez de Cisneros— 

Men and women burnt alive, 3,564 

Burnt in effigy, 2,232 

Condemned to other punishments, 48,059 

By Adrian de Florencia 

Men and women burnt alive, 1,620 

Burnt in effigy, 560 

Condemned to other punishments, 21,835 



Total number of men and women 
burnt alive under the ministry of 

45 holy Inquisitor-Generals, 35,534 

Total number burnt in effigy, 18,637 

Total number condemned to other 

punishments, 293,533 

Total, 347,704 



R1051 : page 8 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

We are in receipt of many letters asking, whether this work is 
of any value to English readers who have no knowledge of the 
Greek. We answer, Yes; it is specially designed for such: and 
the Diaglott, together with Young's Analytical Concordance, are 
worth more than a year's study of the Greek. Both should be in 
the hands of every Bible student; but if you cannot afford both, 
the Diaglott is the most valuable-indeed almost indispensable. 

Many orders come for the Diaglott from persons not subscribers 
to the TOWER, and for extra copies for friends from those who 
are subscribers. Hence, we must explain particularly, why we 
can supply this work to TOWER subscribers only, and to these 
only one copy each, at the special price $1.50. The reasons are 
as follows: 

Some years ago a Brother, who is a great friend to the TOWER, 
and a great admirer of the Emphatic Diaglott also, suggested 
that, Every student of God's plan, as presented in the TOWER, 
ought to have the aid which the Diaglott affords. The difficulty 
which seemed to stand in the way was, that it is of necessity an 
expensive work (Retail price in cloth binding $4.00, postage 16 
cts. = $4.16.) and the great majority of our readers are far from 
wealthy, like the majority of the saints in all ages. To meet this 
difficulty, the Brother proposed to the TOWER PUB. CO., that, 
if they would be at the trouble and expense of mailing the books, 
he would supply one copy each to all TOWER subscribers, at a 
price to bring the book within the reach of all, viz. $1.50, 
including postage. 

This was begun when our subscription list was much smaller 
than now, and is still continued: New readers of either 
DIAGLOTT or TOWER need both. Subscribers will please save 
us the annoyance of refusing, and returning their money, by 
ordering only one copy of the Diaglott: unless your first copy 
has worn out,— in which case, in ordering another, mention this 
fact. The only way for others to get the book at this special price 
is to subscribe for the TOWER: and the Diaglott must be mailed 
direct to the subscriber and not to another person. 



R1051 :pagel 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., AUGUST, 1888. 

NO. 12. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

DOMESTIC, -Fifty cents a year, in advance, by Draft, P.O. 
Money Order, or Registered Letter. 

FOREIGN,-Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal 
Money Order. 

TO POOR SAINTS. 

This paper will be sent free to the interested of the Lord's poor, 
who will send a card yearly requesting it. "Ho, every one that 
thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, 
come ye, buy and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price. " And you who have it- "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor 
for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently— and eat ye that 
which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." - 
ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

DO NOT FORGET that we have the DAWN in German- 
cloth-bound only, $1.00. Remember, too, the German TOWER; 
25 cts. a year. Sample copies of the latter, to use as tracts among 
German friends, supplied free. 



DAMAGED DAWNS. -A number of copies of the cloth- 
bound edition of DAWN Vol. I., were damaged slightly by rain. 
These we offer at 40 cts. per copy. These are of the dollar 
edition and, though not nice enough to send out as perfect, are 
really for most part very slightly spotted on the covers. 



R1051 :pagel 

BISHOP R.S. FOSTER'S VIEW. 

Instead of our own, we present this month a VIEW of the 
nominal church in general, and of the Methodist church in 
particular, as seen and described by one of the foremost 
Methodist Bishops of our day, as we clip it from The Testimony 
as follows:— 

"The church of God is to-day courting the world. Its members 
are trying to bring it down to the level of the ungodly. The ball, 
the theatre, nude and lewd art, social luxuries with all their loose 
moralities, are making inroads into the church; and as a 
satisfaction for all this worldliness Christians are making a great 
deal of Lent, and Easter and Good Friday, and church 
ornamentation. It is the old trick of Satan. The Jewish church 
struck on that rock; the Romish church was wrecked on the 
same, and the Protestant church is fast reaching the same doom. 

"Our great dangers, as we see them, are assimilation to the 
world, neglect of the poor, substitution of the form for the fact 
of godliness, abandonment of discipline, a hireling ministry, and 
impure gospel, which summed up, is— a fashionable church. 

"Do not Methodists, in violation of God's word and their own 
discipline, dress as extravagantly and as fashionably as any 
other class? Do not the ladies and often the wives and the 
daughters of the ministry, put on gold and pearls, and costly 
array?... Can any one going into a Methodist church in any of our 
chief cities, distinguish the attire of the communicants from that 
of the theatre and ball goers? 

"Is not worldliness seen in the music? Elaborately dressed and 
ornamented choirs, who in many cases make no profession of 
religion, and are often sneering skeptics, go through a cold, 
artistic, or operatic performance, which is as much in harmony 
with spiritual worship as an opera or theatre. Under such 
worldly performances spirituality is frozen to death. 



"Worldly socials, fairs, festivals, and such like, have taken the 
place of religious gatherings, revival meetings, class and prayer 
meetings of earlier days.... The early Methodist ministers went 
forth to sacrifice and suffer for Christ. They sought not places of 
ease and affluence, but of privation and suffering. They gloried 
not in their big salaries, fine parsonages, and refined 
congregations, but in the souls that had been won for Jesus. Oh, 
how changed! A hireling ministry will be a feeble, a timid, a 
truckling, a time serving ministry, without faith, endurance and 
holy power. Methodism formerly dealt in the great central truth. 
Now the pulpits deal largely in generalities, and in popular 
lectures. The glorious doctrine of entire sanctification is rarely 
heard and seldom witnessed to in the pulpits." 



R1052 : page 1 

BROTHER TACKABURY'S DEATH. 

After a protracted illness Brother Tackabury died Sunday 
morning, Aug. 5th, of consumption of the lungs. The last three 
months were a season of painful waiting and longing for the 
grim enemy, death, to finish his consecrated sacrifice. Though 
inclined, at times, to wonder why our Lord did not sooner permit 
the executioner (Satan, Heb. 2:14,) to snap the last cord, he was 
far from desiring to dictate in the matter, and accepted the weeks 
and months of weakness and pain as among the "all things" 
which he knew were being overruled for his good according to 
God's promise. Such experiences may be permitted as tests of 
faith to develop our trust in God; or, they may be profitable to us 
as giving experiences which will the better enable us to 
sympathize with the poor dying world in general, many of 
whom experience similar afflictions, without the supporting 
grace and strength of the everlasting arms, which carry us 
through victoriously. 

During health it was his chief pleasure to tell the glad tidings of 
great joy which shall be unto all people,— that the sins of the 
world had been fully atoned for by the blood of the Lamb of 
God, and that in consequence "times of restitution of all things" 
(Acts 3:19-21) shall come, when, at his second advent, the great 
King of kings shall take the dominion of the world out of the 
hands of "the prince of this world. " And when confined to his 
room, and bed, and only able to converse in low tones, the same 
gospel of restitution was his theme; interspersed with 
explanations concerning the future work of the Church, the 
Bride, the Body of Christ, after the union of all the members 
with the Head, in glory and power, as the Royal Priesthood; to 
both rule and teach, and thus to "bless, all the families of the 
earth." 



His fervency of spirit, his patience, his strong confidence, and 
his explanations of Scripture, backed by an honorable, upright 
life in his community, seem to have made a favorable 
impression, so that when the Editor preached his funeral sermon, 
to an intelligent congregation, of about one hundred and fifty of 
his towns-people, gave close attention for nearly two hours. 

His desire was, that his death might accomplish as good results, 
to the glory of God, as his life. We trust it may be so, and have 
already heard good reports that the truth is making progress 
there. 

Our readers will remember Bro. T., as one whose name has 
appeared occasionally in the TOWER as a contributor. He was, 
some years since, the pastor of a Methodist congregation in New 
York, and some will recall his open letter to that congregation, 
published in our issue of Feb. '83. For about a year he assisted 
us in the correspondence department of the TOWER, answering 
many of your letters. He died trusting in the consummation of 
our hope as set forth in 1 Cor. 15:5 1-53. "Blessed are the dead 
who die in the Lord from henceforth; yea saith the Spirit, they 
rest from their labors, but their works follow with them." Rev. 
14:13. -See, TOWER of May 1886. 



R1051 :pagel 

SELF-CONTRADICTORY. 

DEAR TOWER:-THE LIVING CHURCH, a Protestant 
Episcopal authority, not long since placed side by side, on the 
same page, two articles, "Studies in the Catholic Creed" and 
"Preserve the Prayer Book;" a comparison of which may be 
profitable to the Little Flock. 

In the first article, commenting upon that clause in the Protestant 
Episcopal creed "I believe in one Holy, Catholic, Apostolic 
Church," the writer says, that "it is Catholic because it teaches 
all the doctrine which must be universally received. She is 
therefore as a whole, the infallible teacher of mankind. The 
Scriptures are infallible, but they need an infallible interpreter." 
(The italics are mine.) Of course the rest of the article is devoted 
to proof of the position assumed, that the Protestant Episcopal 
Church is that needed "infallible interpreter;" in the course of 
which he says, "She was and is the repository of truth for all 
nations;" that the Bible is received "only on the authority of the 
Church," that "she decided what was, and what was not 
inspired. " 

The second article mentions several very fallible disagreements 
in this "infallible" Church. One party desires "to strike out the 
word Regeneration" from the Baptismal office. Another section 
would "throw open their pulpits to ministers of other Christian 



bodies;" and although the writer joyfully records failures thus 
far in these, to him questionable movements, he regretfully 
admits that "they have been invited to make their communions 
with us, and have done so. " One portion of this infallible church 
claims the "Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist," which is 
opposed by another as a relic of Pagan idolatry. Again, there is a 
contention over the matter of representation of the dioceses in 
their general conventions, a movement being on foot, 
magnanimous and perfectly fair upon its face, which will surely 
result in loss of individuality to the smaller dioceses, and 
centralize the power and influence in the larger and wealthier 
ones. So it was in civil as well as religious Rome; so it will 
result with them. It always has been, and until one Righteous 
Judge shall come, will continue to be so. 

It therefore appears that this Church "as a whole," does not 
know whether or not baptism regenerates; whether or not other 
than their own clergy should preach in their own pulpits; 
whether or not they may "communicate" with other Christians, 
and whether or not Christ is really present at Communion. This 
Church, which is vascillating on the point of permitting its 
privileges and honors to be monopolized by the wealthy, this is 
another institution which presumptuously claims to be infallible, 
and expects from its members an unreasoning obedience. 

Let us WATCH and pray, and being out of Babylon stay out. As 
ever yours. 

WM. M. WRIGHT. 

[Amidst all the systems claiming infallibility, where may simple 
souls expect to find the true infallible guide? Surely in the Word 
of God alone. And while not discarding the assistance of those 
whom God hath raised up as teachers and aids in various ways 
to the body of Christ, but receiving their aid gladly, their value 
must always be decided by the Word of God, by which we must 
prove all things. 

Teachers have no right to give out their opinions upon Scripture, 
without giving also the Scriptural reasons for drawing their 
conclusions. Then, each hearer should use his own head in 
deciding whether or 

R1052 : page 2 

not the conclusions suggested are to be considered the logical 
sense of the Scriptures. 

The day for swallowing the ipsi dixit of fallible men, merely 
because they hold reverend titles, is past. People are coming to 
see, that if a doctrine is taught by the Bible, be it ever so 
obscure, or symbolic, they can comprehend it, if it can be 
logically proved by and from the Bible. And, to thus expound 
God's Word, is the province of any teacher sent of God, 



whenever, wherever or whoever he may be, and with or without 
titles.-EDITOR.] 



R1052 : page 2 

LETTERS TO OUR CHILDREN.--NO. 2. 

THE TRINITY. 

DEAR MARION:-Your questions on the Trinity have been 
received, and after careful thought I have concluded it will be 
best to first study in the Scriptures the relationship of the Father, 
Son and Holy Spirit; and afterwards take up your questions and 
quoted objections. After getting the clear light of the Bible on 
the subject, we will be better able to compare and examine 
human reasonings and objections. 

Our first text will be from Bro. Paul, the greatest reasoner and 
greatest theologian of the Bible. "Concerning therefore the 
eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know that no idol is 
anything in the world, and that there is no God but one. For 
though there be [those] that are called gods, whether in heaven 
or on earth; as there are gods many and lords many; yet to us 
there is ONE GOD, the Father; (of whom are all things, and we 
unto him,) and one Lord, -Jesus Christ, (through whom are all 
things, and we through him). "— 1 Cor. 8:4-6, Revised Version. 

In the Hebrew language in which the Old Testament was 
written, there is a word [Adon,] which means in English lord or 
master. Thus, Sarah called Abraham lord. So Abraham, the 
angels, Gen. 19:2; andEphron, Abraham, 23:11; and Jacob, his 
brother Esau, 32:4. Joseph was lord of the treasures of Egypt, 
45:9. God is Lord of lords, Deut. 10:17. Young's Concordance 
will show you many other cases. 

The title, God, was applied by the heathen to their idols and 
Gods of their imagination, but in Scripture it always refers to 
our Heavenly Father except in a few places where it is used of 
the children of God; and in the case of Jesus our Lord, who is 
the first born SON OF GOD, and inheritor of his Father's nature 
and name. 

Our first text shows us, that while our Lord Jesus and his 
brethren-all children of God, may sometimes be called by their 
Father's name, yet strictly there is but "one God, the Father." His 
name as made known to his ancient people, the Israelites, is 
Jehovah. This name is unfortunately covered up in most places 
in our English Bibles by the translators rendering it "the LORD" 
and "Lord God." Still, you can find it by noticing that it is 
printed in small capital letters, as LORD or GOD. When printed 
simply "Lord" it is from some other Hebrew word. [Adon, Baal, 



etc.] Young's Concordance will make this plain. In the Revised 
Version Exod. 6:2-3 reads:- 

"And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am 
JEHOVAH; and I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto 
Jacob as God Almighty; but by my name JEHOVAH I was not 
known to them. " 

On one occasion, Ex. 3:14, He calls himself by another name, I 
AM THAT I AM," Yet it is scarcely another name, being from 
the same root as Jehovah. Read verses 13 to 18 and notice notes 
in margin of Revised Version. Jehovah means He who is, or He 
who will be. That is, the self-existent one; the one who has 
immortality or life in himself. This, God only possessed. It is his 
nature. He has since given this nature to our Lord Jesus, and will 
in the resurrection give it to all the overcomers of the Gospel 
age; that is, to every member of the Body of Christ, to those who 
in this age receive the privilege of becoming "Sons of God." 
Read carefully 1 Tim. 6:16; John 5:26; 1 John 3:1-2. 

Now read Deut. 4:39. "Know therefore this day, and lay it to 
thine heart, that Jehovah he is God in heaven above and upon 
the earth beneath; there is none else" [none other]. Read this 
again carefully as if God himself spoke it to you personally, for 
so he does. Read also Deut. 32:39; 2 Sam 7:22. We will read 
also Isa. 44:6-8. "Thus saith Jehovah, the King of Israel, and his 
[Israel's] redeemer, Jehovah of hosts; I am the first and I am the 
last; and beside me there is no God... Is there a God beside 
me?... I know not any." Again, Isa. 45:18-22, "For thus saith 
Jehovah that created the heavens; he is God that formed the 
earth and made it; he established it, he created it not in vain, [to 
be burned up, as some ignorantly think,] he formed it to be 
inhabited; I am Jehovah; and there is none else, there is no God 
else beside me; a just God and a Savior; there is none beside me. 
Look unto me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth; for I am 
God and there is none else. " 

God spoke this long before he had sent Jesus to be our Savior 
and redeemer, so that he was then the only redeemer and Savior; 
and really it was true after our Lord came, because only God can 
save, and he does save only in his own way,— through the death 
of "the Lamb of God" (John 1 :29) which he himself also 
provided. There is no other way. (John 14:6.) Paul says, "There 
is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man 
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all." 

Paul generally says things very clearly. Could he be any plainer 
than he is here? Paul does not say, "Now there are three Gods; 
and as Satan had upset their plans in Eden by leading Adam and 
Eve astray, they three put their heads together and thought out a 
plan to try to outwit Satan. One was to remain in heaven and 
profess to be the superior one, and to be angry with mankind. 
One was to come and live on earth and call himself the SON 



R1053 : page 2 

of God, and profess to do the will of the one in heaven. Why 
should he if he was also a God, equal in power, knowledge and 
wisdom with the other? Or, as some put it, really the same one 
who was in heaven all the time? Then the third God was to come 
down at the beginning of the public work of the second one, in 
the form of a Dove, and appear to fill him with the necessary 
power to do the first one's will. If these are three Gods of equal 
power, such a pretence would seem foolish and wrong to me; if 
all three apparent Gods were not three, but really the one God, 
appearing to be three, how much worse? Then again the pretense 
of one of them dying and appearing to be dead for three days, 
and being raised up by another, when there was not another but 
only one; and if that one had died, the universe would have been 
without a God for three days; rather forever; for that which is 
dead cannot make itself alive. But worse confusion than all, 
those who teach these absurd ideas say that the God nature 
cannot die,— which is true. How foolish all this appears when we 
compare it with Paul's plain statement. "There is one God, and 
one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus." A 
mediator is a mutual friend who seeks to make peace and 
harmony between two persons who are out with each other. 

Our Lord Jesus himself usually called himself the Son of man, 
that is, the Man; the man promised in Eden who was finally to 
destroy Satan and deliver both Israel and the rest of mankind. 
He also and often called God his Father (which we will study by 
and by,) but never spoke of himself either as one of three Gods, 
or as the one God. On the contrary, he says in harmony with all 
the prophets: "This is life eternal, [will lead to endless life,] that 
they should know thee the only true God, and him whom thou 
didst send, Jesus Christ."-John 17:1-3. 

In our next we will study that wonderful one who came to tell us 
about God, our Lord Jesus, the Anointed. 

PAPA,-W. I. M. 



R1053 : page 2 

ESTABLISHED, STRENGTHENED, 
SETTLED. 

"The God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory 
by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered awhile, make you 
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you."-l Pet. 5:10. 

The above words were penned by the Apostle Peter who after 
years of experience in the Master's service and under his 
discipline, through much tribulation, had evidently reached the 
blessed experience of one established, strengthened and settled 



in the faith and in the practice of the principles of the gospel. 
Peter had much to suffer and endure in his continuous effort to 
overcome. In common with all our Lord's disciples he had much 
to endure from without, in the way of reproach, and sometimes 
of persecution, for the truth's sake. But he had probably much 
more to contend against from within, his disposition being 
naturally impulsive and wavering and difficult to bring under 
restraint even when the truth was clear to his mind and when his 
affections were fastened upon the Lord. 

It should be, and is the aim of every truly consecrated saint to 
reach this desirable standpoint of strength and settled 
establishment in the faith, but it cannot be reached at a single 
leap. It is gained by a gradual steady growth under the discipline 
of suffering— as the apostle says, "after ye have suffered a 
while." "Now," as Paul remarks (Heb. 12:11,12), "No 
chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous; 
nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of 
righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby. " 
"Wherefore" with him we would add, "Lift up the hands which 
hang down, and the feeble knees, and make straight paths for 
your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way. " 

Are you weary and disheartened in the journey, discouraged at 
your slow progress, and almost overwhelmed with the cares and 
various besetments of this life. Is a lethargy and indifference 
creeping over you, cooling your ardor for the Master's service, 
relaxing your energies in that direction, and enlisting your 
interest more and more in other matters? Then beware! It is high 
time to wake up. Be sober; be vigilant, because your adversary, 
the devil as a roaring lion walketh about seeking whom he may 
devour. Sometimes he goes about as a roaring lion, and 
sometimes as a skulking serpent in the grass. 

Sometimes, lion- like, when we are off guard he springs upon us 
unawares, stirs up the evil of the old nature, and unless 
desperately resisted he will take full control and drive us on to 
ruin. Or he will endeavor at least to turn us off the track of the 
narrow way. And sometimes, serpent- like, (2 Cor. 11:3) he 
assumes a pleasing and seemingly reasonable aspect, and 
endeavors to beguile us from the way. If we permit ourselves to 
be so off guard either by neglect to feed upon the truth, or by 
indifference to the reception and cultivation of its spirit, we may 
be sure that our ever vigilant adversary will gain an advantage 
over us which we may not be able to resist. 

Our only safety, then, is in giving earnest heed to the Apostle's 
counsel. Be sober, be steadfast in the faith, be vigilant, and resist 
the adversary. We find foes within as well as foes without which 
we must not deal too gently with. The human nature which we 
covenanted to crucify must not be too sensitively regarded by 
ourselves though we should be careful and thoughtful in our 
dealings with others. We must let the human nature die, and 



rejoice to see the new nature triumph over it. We must look our 
old nature squarely in the face anxious to see all its deformity, 
and thankful for a brother's or a sister's kindly showing of the 
same; and even the heartless rebuke of an enemy, or the 
impatient criticism of an unwise but well meaning friend, should 
be soberly considered and profited by, though it may severely 
wound the sensitive quivering flesh. All this is a part of the 
crucifying process, a part of the humbling under the mighty 
hand of God— under the discipline of his truth. If we study it 
carefully and cultivate its spirit day by day, seeking constantly 
to purge out all that is contrary to it, our character will mature, 
ripen and grow more and more like the glorious model given for 
our imitation. 

R1054 : page 2 

Our convictions of the truth will become more settled and clear; 
our faith in God and in the power of his love and grace will be 
more and more established. And our constant effort to learn and 
to do the will of God will harden into habit, and thus we will 
grow strong in the Lord and be able to strengthen and to confirm 
the faith of others. 

If we have cares, we are invited to cast all our care upon the 
Lord, knowing that he careth for us. And we have the 
encouraging assurance in the midst of present trials that we shall 
receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away, if in steadfast 
sobriety and humility we work out our salvation with fear and 
trembling, having been first redeemed with the precious blood 
of Christ, and thus through faith having gained the privilege of 
working it out. And we are comforted in the midst of trials with 
the blessed assurance that while God resisteth the proud, and 
they also resist him, he giveth grace to the humble. Let us 
humble ourselves therefore, dear fellow members of the called 
and Anointed body, under the mighty hand of God, that he may 
exalt us in due time. And let us bear in mind that not all of the 
suffering and cross-bearing comes from the world's opposition 
to the truth, but that much of it must necessarily come from our 
faithfulness, not in excusing and cultivating, but in humbling 
and subduing the evil propensities of our fallen nature. "If any 
be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man 
beholding his natural face in a glass; for he beholdeth himself 
and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of 
man he was. But whosoever looketh into the perfect law of 
liberty, and continueth therein, he, being not a forgetful hearer, 
but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed. "-- 
James 1:23-25. 

Oh, to be nothing, nothing, 
Painful the humbling may be; 
Yet low in the dust I'd lay me 
That the world my Savior might see." 



R1053 : page 3 



FAITH. 



Faith soars and sings on her tireless wings; 
Though woe assail, with her blinding hail, 
And pain come near 
With her words of fear. 

Through all the day on her love-tracked way, 
Her burnished eye is turned to the sky, 
As if something there 
That were wondrous fair, 

Her soul has bound, in its gold threads round; 
And ne'er again, can the hand of pain, 
Nor aught of woe 
That we mortals know, 

Bring Faith's wings back from the shining track, 
Whose end she sees by the healing trees, 
Where waters run 
In a glowing sun, 

And days are bright with seven-fold light, 
And the moon is clear as the sun is here; 
Where gates of pearl 
In their colors whirl, 

Like rainbows blent in the Orient; 
And walls are fair with their jewels rare- 
Oh, her anchor holds 
To the streets of gold! 

And she soars and sings on her tireless wings, 
For some day she in that nest shall be, 
When it cometh down 
On the mountain's crown! 

And his feet are set on Olivet 
Who went away at the close of day 
To return again 
With a kingly train. 

Oh! naught faith cares for the scorn she bears: 

Will not her Lord bring sure reward, 

In the coming hour 

Of his pomp and power? 

When the waste shall bloom and the robber tomb 
Engulf no more on the sea or shore, 
And knowledge be, 
Like the deep broad sea? 



-S. Roxana Wince. 



R1054 : page 3 



CHRIST LIFTED UP. 



"And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto 
me. "-John 12:32. 

There have been various speculations with reference to the 
Lord's meaning, relative to being "lifted up." It seems to be a 
peculiarity of human nature, especially until we come to a 
position where we have learned that our own thoughts are 
frequently stumbling stones to us, and have learned the lesson 
that we must cast aside our favorite opinions and seek the 
meaning of the words from the context, to decide that a passage 
must be understood in some way more difficult to understand 
than the simple narrative itself. And many a Bible student has 
gotten himself into quite a labyrinth of difficulty from 
endeavoring to make out of simple statements something more 
elaborate than the Lord put into them; and yet the simplicity of 
the truth,— the simplicity which all the children of God should 
observe, will be to receive the Word as little children, and 
understand it just as it reads. With the idea of elaborating the 
thought, many have undertaken to say, and to imagine 
themselves, that the lifting up of the Son of man, meant his 
glorification: I, if I be glorified, will draw all men unto my 
glorified condition, is what they prefer to have it mean, and 
therefore they so construe it. But that would be a wresting of 
scripture, for nothing of the kind appears in the passage. 

The passage clearly and distinctly says the lifting up referred to 
was a lifting up at the cross. "These words spake Jesus 
signifying what death he should die. " If we would always let the 
context tell us just what is meant, how much difficulty it would 
save ourselves and others. The same Greek words here rendered 
"lifted up," are elsewhere used, as for instance, in John 8:28, 
"Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of 
man, then shall ye know that I am he; and I do nothing of 
myself, but as the Father hath taught me, I speak these things." 
Who was to do the lifting up? Not the Father, nor the Lord Jesus 
himself, nor the Holy Spirit, but ye-When ye have lifted up the 
Son of man. It evidently then does not refer to an exaltation to 
glory. The same Greek word is used also in John 3:14. "And as 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness." Did Moses 
glorify the serpent? Not at all. "As Moses lifted up the serpent in 
the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, that 
whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have eternal 
life. 

It is a fact of course, not a fact taught by this passage but taught 
by other passages, that our Lord Jesus after he was lifted up 
upon the cross, after he had died for our sins, was highly 



exalted; and that he is glorified now, and forever. But what we 
are here noticing is, that this fact is not taught in this passage; 
nothing in this passage favors any such construction. Some who 
take the view which we have presented, that the "lifting up" 
referred to the glorifying of the Lord have an object in view: 
they wish, as they sometimes say, to do away with the wooden 
cross. They wish to set aside the importance of the death of 
Christ which this text, properly understood, shows. In the very 
next verse the Jews show that they understood exactly what our 
Lord meant, when they answered, We have heard that when 
Christ cometh he will never die, he will live forever; how is it 
that you say the Son of man will be lifted up. We see that the 
Jews understood it, the disciples understood it, and our Lord 
expressly spoke it, with reference to the death he should die, and 
not with reference to his exaltation to glory. 

Now, then, it makes just this difference. Taken in the way the 
Lord gives it, it makes the cross of Christ the very center of the 
whole plan of redemption; just as the Lord meant it should be; 
just as the Scriptures everywhere present it to be,- the very 
center of the whole plan. For our Lord to be crucified, to be 
"lifted up," to die, was a necessity which lay at the foundation of 
the divine plan. The death of Christ, "the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world," was the only way by which 
mankind could be brought into harmony with God. Thus we see, 
that the drawing of mankind was dependent on the death, the 
lifting up, of Christ. 

Not only is the cross of Christ now a stumbling-block, which 
very many do not like, and which many are ignorantly stumbling 
over, but it was a rock of offence to the Jews. They could not 
understand why the great Messiah who was to be so powerful, 
and an everlasting deliverer, must die. They could not see how 
or why the cross was connected with the fulfillment of the 
Covenants. But, our Heavenly Father's ways, as we have 
learned, are not man's ways, and His plan was, that the one who 
should restore Israel and the world, and be the King of glory, 
should be also the one that would prove and show his worthiness 
by his obedience even unto death, even the death of the cross, as 
the Ransomer of all. So, then, we see that the cross of Christ is 
truly indeed the center of God's plan for blessing all the families 
of the earth. If I be lifted up I will draw men;-if I am not lifted 
up I can never do so. Whenever, therefore, any attempt to show 
that the cross of Christ was not a necessity, that the penalty of 
sin was not death and that it was not necessary for our Lord 
Jesus to redeem mankind from it— by giving his own life as our 
ransom price, let this, one of the hundreds of passages that point 
to the ransom price, Christ's death, as the foundation of all our 
hope, be the answer to such; and show that sinners were not 
drawn to God until first the penalty against all had been paid, by 
our redeemer, who "bought us with his own precious blood" - 
his death— the sacrifice of his life. Not until all were thus 



redeemed, at Calvary, was the gospel, the good tidings of great 
joy, sent forth unto all people,— drawing all by promising 
everlasting life to all who would obey the great Redeemer. The 
fact is incontrovertible, that "life [everlasting, for restored 
human sons of God], and immortality [the grand superlative 
degree of life, which pertains to the divine nature only, and is 
offered as the great prize to the overcomers of the Gospel age — 
the church] were brought to light through the gospel. And the 
gospel was never declared (except in a prophetic and typical 
way to the typical Israelites), until after his resurrection our Lord 
sent forth his disciples saying "Go ye into all the world and 
preach this gospel [good tidings -of a hope for life through the 
ransom given for all] to every creature. " 



R1054 : page 3 

"I WILL DRAW ALL MEN UNTO ME." 

"The love of Christ constraineth [draweth] us." -2 Cor. 5:14. 

Nearly two thousand years have passed since the ransom price 
for sinners was paid-since the Son of man was lifted up -and 
even in this most favored day we see that the vast majority of 
men are still in ignorance of this great gift of God; and that they 
have not been drawn by the Lord even in the remotest sense 
conceivable. And when we think of the still greater mass of 
mankind who have died during the centuries past without being 
drawn, our faith in the Master's promise compels us to look to 
the Millennial age for its fulfillment. And why not? If infinite 
wisdom permitted four thousand years to elapse from the time 
that sin entered the world, and death, the penalty of sin, was 
inflicted with all its train of woes, before the ransom was given, 
why should we not presume that a long period might 

R1055 : page 3 

elapse after the ransom had been paid, before the general 
drawing promised should take effect. 

Our Heavenly Father loved his creatures all those four thousand 
years before sending the Redeemer, and he sympathized with 
them in their fallen and dying condition just as much as he does 
to-day; for he changes not. Now he has allowed almost two 
thousand years more to elapse, and yet the drawing power of 
Christ, we might say, has not begun to affect the world. Strange! 
says human shortsightedness, if God so loved the world as to 
give his Son to redeem all, and if Christ so loved us as to freely 
deliver himself up for us all, wherefor this tardiness in bringing 
to pass the promised blessings? Why should two thousand years 
intervene before the drawing of all men begins? 



Careful study into the wonderful plan of God discovers both 
love and wisdom even in this seeming tardiness; for all this time 
the drawing power of Christ has been exerted upon a special 
class— a class in whom the love of God and of Christ, as 
manifested in this lifting up, awakens such a sense of gratitude 
as to draw them to follow in his foot-prints at any cost of 
tribulation, distress or persecution. And this class of zealous, 
devoted faithful souls the Lord designs to associate with himself 
in the great work of blessing, drawing and saving all his 
purchased possession. 

Thus Christ does draw some now— a "little flock," he terms it, in 
comparison with the masses of men. And these shall be his 
bride, and the first fruits of his great sacrifice. As the Apostle 
expresses it, it is the love of Christ that constraineth or draweth 
us now; and how strongly that cord of love has drawn the saints, 
has been wonderfully manifested in their sufferings, self-denials 
and self-sacrifice, even unto death: and that often in the most 
revolting forms. Many in the days of Papal persecution rather 
than deny their faith or walk according to the spirit of the world 
were so drawn by the love of Christ as to submit to all sorts of 
indignities and ignominious deaths by cruel rackings, burnings 
and tortures of every description. 

What a wonderful power is the love of Christ, made manifest to 
us through his lifting up on the cross for our redemption! It has 
not lost its power yet to draw some, and to hold them in loyalty 
and fidelity to Christ even against all the subtle and deceptive 
influences of this "evil day," and these perilous times. Yes, the 
love of Christ still draws the saints, so that they do not seek to 
do their own pleasure but the will of God. And this will of God 
in them controls in all the little affairs of life-in the house- 
keeping and the training of families; and into business life, at the 
counter, the office, and the workbench; it influences them when 
seen and when unseen, in the light and in the dark, in thought as 
well as in action and word. The love of Christ is thus constantly 
constraining a faithful few, restraining all evil propensities and 
strengthening, ennobling and beautifying character, while 
affecting all their relationships with families, friends, neighbors 
and business associations. 

The power which constrains or draws the saints into harmony 
and union with Christ, and through him with our Heavenly 
Father, is the truth. Hence the more clearly we discern the truth, 
the more it can influence or draw us. The truth shows us our 
condition in sin and condemnation; and by showing us God's 
provision for our recovery, the truth discloses to us the love of 
God and our Lord Jesus. A little truth draws a little; and the full 
clear truth, received into good and honest hearts, is a power,— the 
power of God, working in us to will and to do his good pleasure. 
Without this power of the truth we cannot even will aright; the 
truth directs our wills; and to such as have consecrated wills in 



harmony with God, the truth is the greatest motive power to 
good deeds. A knowledge of this same truth of God, of which 
the lifting up of Christ is the foundation principle, will be the 
drawing and moving power of the Millennial age also, and in a 
similar manner, only there will no longer be besetments, or 
drawings of the adversary in contrary directions. Satan will then 
be bound, restrained from deceiving and drawing away from 
God. It will no longer cost what it now does, and what it has 
cost in the past, to will and to do right; for not only is Satan to 
be bound, but a highway (a public thoroughfare) is to be cast up, 
and all the stumbling stones are to be gathered out, and no 
ravenous beasts of prey (no fierce temptations) shall go up 
thereon, but the ransomed of the Lord shall walk there with none 
to molest or make them afraid. They shall go forth with joy and 
be led forth with peace, with every influence toward 
righteousness in their favor.-Rev. 20:2; Isa. 35:8; 62:10. 

There are various reasons why the number drawn in this age is 
comparatively few: Some indeed are willful sinners, "children of 
the devil," who love darkness rather than light because their 
deeds are evil. 

R1055 : page 4 

And then the god of this world has so blinded the minds of a 
better class with doctrinal errors that they do not recognize and 
cannot appreciate the truth; and the deceptive aspect of the 
things of this present life deceive others, drawing and 
constraining them to such an extent as to offset the drawing 
power of the truth. Even where the seeds of truth fall into 
hopeful soil and begin to spring up they are often choked by 
weeds and thorns such as the absorbing cares of this life, the 
love of this world's approval, and the deceitfulness of riches, or 
the alluring hope of acquiring them. 

While the whole world is in this condition of imperfection, 
weakness and sin, we cannot expect otherwise than that the vast 
majority would be influenced by their surroundings, their 
appetites, and the deep degradation into which they have fallen. 
What hope is there then that the time will ever come when 
Christ will draw all mankind unto him? If the truth is 
unchangeable, and if it does not draw the masses of men now, 
what prospect is there that it will ever draw them? None 
whatever from a human standpoint. We have no such assurance 
except in God's Word. Our Lord has promised not only that he 
would draw a "little flock" in the present time (John 6:37,44; 
Luke 13:32), but that in due time he will draw all men; and that 
for this purpose this little flock shall be exalted and associated 
with himself, that the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole 
earth, and that the power of the adverse influences of the present 
time shall be broken. The chains that now bind men, as slaves to 
sin, shall be snapped assunder; and all will then have power 
(liberty) to become sons of God. 



Sin is represented in the Scriptures as a great tyrant compelling 
mankind to do his bidding; and the fallen race is so fettered by 
inherited weaknesses that none can do otherwise than obey him 
except such as hear the truth and appeal to Christ to have their 
shackles broken, to obtain liberty from him. Such are freed from 
further service of the tyrant, Sin, and may become sons of God, 
servants of righteousness, and have everlasting life. 

This matter of returning to harmony with God through Christ, 
being moved or drawn by the truth whose centre is the cross is 
therefore a liberty, a privilege, granted to believers in Christ-a 
privilege that men are incapable of appreciating or using so long 
as they are bound in ignorance, under the power of evil and their 
own inherited weaknesses. We sometimes say that men are free 
moral agents, free to choose good or evil, yet evidently this is 
the case only to a very limited extent. The first man indeed was 
created a free moral agent, but since the fall all have been 
measurably under bondage to sin, and are held in this slavery by 
their own inherited as well as cultivated weaknesses, under 
circumstances which none is able to control, until, under God's 
arrangement, Christ shall take the power into his hand. The 
Redeemer of all is to take the kingdom and dominion of earth, 
and is to break off the shackles that are now fettering the world, 
and hindering even those who desire to love and serve the Lord 
from being drawn thereto. 

It was needful that our Lord should die to redeem men, but more 
is necessary to the complete success of God's great plan. 
According to that plan the Ransomer must also be the Deliverer 
to free those purchased with his own precious blood from the 
shackles of sin— ignorance, prejudice, perverted tastes and 
inherited weaknesses, and many from the tomb itself. He could 
not deliver one, until he had redeemed them, but the object of 
redeeming them was that he might set them free from the 
bondage of sin and its penalty, death. The Prophet Isaiah 
foretold the ultimate object of our Lord's great work which 
began with his sacrifice for our sins, when, speaking for Christ, 
he said, "The Spirit of the Lord Jehovah is upon me, because 
Jehovah hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; 
he hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim 
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that 
are bound." (Isa. 61:1.) Those who have learned of God's great 
plan of the ages can see much more than others in this reference 
to the opening of the prison to them that are bound. We see that 
all the living generations of men are prisoners of Satan, fettered 
and bound for the tomb, the same great prison in which he has 
confined all the generations past, and that the great Deliverer 
who redeemed them must set them free, before even the willing 
can be drawn to him. 

For this great work of giving liberty to the captives of sin and 
death, God has appointed the Millennial age. He not only had a 



due time for sending his only begotten Son into the world, and a 
due time in which he was to give his life a ransom for us, but he 
has also a due time for this liberating of sin's prisoners. That age 
of deliverance will be earth's great jubilee year, the antitype of 
that jubilee which Israel observed every fiftieth year. 

R1056 : page 4 

In that type, the setting free of every debtor, and the return of 
every one to his home and possessions and privileges, 
foreshadowed the return of all mankind to liberty-to freedom 
from sin and its tyranny, to liberty such as Adam had to decide 
for righteousness or sin knowingly. 

The great Deliverer has the emancipation proclamation all 
ready: it is written in his own precious blood, and the hour for 
its special announcement is the dawn of the morning of the 
Millennial day. 



R1056:page4 

ALL DRAWN, NONE COMPELLED. 

When our Heavenly Father has revealed his plan it becomes us 
to submit all our reasonings to what he has laid before us of that 
plan. Human reason must not array itself in opposition to divine 
wisdom, but should always be guided by the divine revelation. 
When, therefore, our Lord declares that he will draw all men 
unto him, we should avoid reasoning on this statement out of 
harmony with the various other scriptures which touch the same 
subject. 

Some err in this matter, and reason thus:-Our Lord Jesus is 
exalted to glory and he himself has said, "All power in heaven 
and in earth is given unto me. " Therefore, if he who has all 
power shall draw them, every one will come; for none can resist 
his "all power." 

This would be fatalism; it would be casting aside the true 
significance of the word "draw," and substituting another idea 
which the Master did not express, viz., force. We have no more 
right to thus change the significance of his words than we have 
to change the words themselves. What our Lord meant by the 
term draw, is illustrated in the experience of each of us, for he 
used the same Greek word when telling us that, in this present 
age, none could come to him except the Father draw him. (John 
6:44.) The Father draws the bride now, as the Son will draw all 
men in the Millennial age. The Father draws us by the truth and 
by his providences, but he does not force or compel one. Even 
when drawn, by the opening of our mental eyes to the truth, 
under the unfavorable conditions of the present time, we are not 
compelled to follow; we may "go away" (John 6:66,67); we may 



"do despite to the spirit of favor" which enlightened us and thus 
drew us; we may sin willfully after that we have come to a clear 
understanding of the truth, and been made partakers of the grace 
of God in Christ (Heb. 10:26-29); we may abide not in him, and 
be cast forth as rejected branches (John 15:6), "twice dead, 
plucked up by the root." (Jude 12.) So likewise, our Lord's 
drawing of all men in the Millennial age, implies that all will be 
shown the truth and the advantages of righteousness and the evil 
and disadvantage of sin; and such as choose, [i.e. will follow 
after righteousness,] will be enabled to come into complete 
harmony with the divine plan, and will obtain, as the reward of 
their choice, the gift of life which they may retain forever. 

The drawing is one thing and the coming another. It is God's 
prerogative to invite, and man's privilege to come. God did not 
make man a mere machine to be operated and drawn about 
hither and thither, with no will of his own; he made him in his 
own noble likeness, possessed of the God-like faculty of will. 
Such only of God's creatures as have this quality of free will, in 
his likeness, does he recognize as sons, whether they be on the 
earthly or heavenly plane- human, angelic, or divine sons. All 
of God's sons have a will of their own and may decide in matters 
concerning themselves; and this will be as true in the next as in 
the present age, though it will be more noticeable then. 

This privilege of free agency, ultimately to be restored to all 
men, will not interfere at all with the divine plan; nor can it in 
any degree interfere with the final harmony of God's kingdom; 
for, though leaving all free to choose life by conformity to the 
spirit and plan of God, God foretells his intention to cut off from 
life all who do not thus willingly conform. 

What is it that draws us to Christ? It is the truth. What was it 
that drew the early disciples, when they said, "Lord to whom 
shall we go?" They confessed it was the truth when they added— 
"Thou hast the words of eternal life. " It was the truth, "the words 
of eternal life, " that both drew and held them to the Lord; and so 
it is with us also. The poet beautifully expressed this drawing 
and holding power of the truth, saying, 

He drew me, and I followed on, 
Charmed to confess the voice divine. 

Not only are we drawn by the truth, which as a cord wraps about 
us to hold, and steady, and keep us, but we cast out our anchor 
of hope and faith, which enters into that which is beyond the vail 
(beyond the present life), and we are thus anchored there. Yet 
we can sunder either of these cords at our will; they hold us only 
so long as we will to permit them to control us. Thus we have 
two cords binding us-first, the truth coming out from God and 
fastening upon honest hearts; and secondly, the faith and trust of 
our consecrated hearts reaching back unto God again. So it will 
be with all mankind in the Millennial age. He who taught and 



drew us, by giving us the knowledge of the truth, shall so teach 
the whole world. Not one will be left in ignorance of the 
goodness of God, or without a clear knowledge of his wondrous 
plan. Not one will be left without being drawn, just as we are 
being drawn, by the truth. Yet not one will be forced then, any 
more than we are forced now. God seeketh such to worship him, 
not only in the present time, but everlastingly, as worship him in 
spirit and in truth, not needing to be lashed, or forced, or barred, 
but such as will be glad to be in harmony with God and delight 
in his favor. 

Some have supposed that the only thing that gives us any 
appreciation of good, is our experience with evil, but it is not so; 
those angels which kept their first estate and never sinned, are 
none the less able to appreciate righteousness. Though by reason 
of inherited weaknesses we are inclined to sin and find it 
difficult to do right, yet we do not find it difficult to love 
righteousness. All present human weaknesses (results of the fall) 
will be entirely taken away in the Millennial age, so that men 
will have none of that gravitation towards evil now experienced 
by all. 

But does the assurance of the Scriptures that there shall be a 
restitution of all things prove that if all were put into a perfect 
condition, all would therefore willingly serve the Lord and 
conform to his regulations? No, we answer, we have illustrations 
of some who were in the perfect state who did not do so. One 
illustration is Adam. But says one, ignorance in part contributed 
to Adam's fall; with fuller knowledge he may act differently. 
But what shall we say of Satan's case? was it ignorance on his 
part that led to sin? is it ignorance that still holds him in the 
attitude of a sinner? and will it be ignorance on his part all 
through the Millennial age down to its close that will keep him 
in rank rebellion against God? No, Satan was not, is not, and 
will not be ignorant of sin and its wages; and yet through it all, 
with unimpaired powers and clear knowledge, Satan chooses 
and wills to do evil. We here cite this remarkable case to show 
that perfect men- all the race- when the work of restitution 
(restoration to perfection) is complete— will still need to be 
tested to prove whether their wills are set to do right, or to do 
wrong. 

God is not attempting to deal with the world now as he is 
dealing with the church. This is our time of trial, but in the next 
age when men will have their disabilities removed their trial or 
testing will begin; and in each individual case the course chosen 
under that trial, will decide his worthiness or unworthiness to 
pass beyond the Millennial age, into the ages of glory to follow. 
"There shall in no wise enter into [that glorious city, the 
everlasting kingdom] anything that defileth, neither whatsoever 
worketh abomination, or maketh a lie, but they which are 
written in the Lamb's book of life;" "and there shall be no more 



curse;" "and they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations 
into it." "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they 
may have right to the tree of life and may enter in through the 
gates [through the testing process] into the city"-the city for 
which Abraham looked— the city that hath foundations [of 
justice and truth] whose designer and builder is God. " 

Human society will be something grand when the great High- 
Priest shall have completed the work which he began to do —or 
rather, which he gained the privilege of doing, by being "lifted 
up;" all the willing and obedient having been drawn to him, and 
the unwilling and disobedient having been cut off. This end of 
the wicked, at the close of the Millennial age, so repeatedly 
referred to in the Scriptures, was clearly expressed by the 
prophet Moses (Acts 3:22) saying, "A prophet shall the Lord 
your God raise up unto you ...like unto me;... and it shall come to 
pass that every soul which will not hear [heed, obey] that 
prophet [then] shall be cut off from among the people. " 

R1056 : page 5 

Christ is not only the High-Priest and Prophet to make 
atonement for sin and to draw all men unto him, but he is also 
the King, the executive officer, the great Judge who in the end 
will pronounce the sentence of justice, saying to the worthy, 
"Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared 
for you from the foundation of the world; and to the unworthy, 
"Depart from me, ye cursed into everlasting cutting off prepared 
for the devil and his messengers." 

Thank God, none are going to be tortured; his sentence is a 
righteous sentence: "The soul that sinneth it shall die." 



R1057:page5 

EVERY KNEE SHALL BOW. 

"He must reign till he hath put all enemies under his 
feet. "..."And he shall rule them with a rod of iron. "..."God hath 
highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every 
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow... and 
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the 
glory of God the Father. "-1 Cor. 15:25; Rev. 2:27; Phil. 2:9,11. 

Christ's Millennial work will not consist simply in drawing 
men's hearts by love, through a knowledge of the truth; it will be 
more than that: it will be a ruling with an iron rod- with 
unbending justice, as well, over any disposed to be rebellious 
against the rules of righteousness then in force. Such will be 
forced to comply with law and order. The perverse and obstinate 
will be roughly handled if they attempt resistance. Nothing will 
be permitted to hinder the divine plan for growth in grace, 



knowledge and love, and advancement toward perfection under 
earth's new government. But this forced submission, in which 
every knee will be forced to bow, and every tongue be forced to 
confess, will be very different from the drawing of men's hearts 
which will be progressing at the same time. Hearts are not 
forced— they cannot be: God has made them free, in his own 
image. While the whole world will be compelled to render 
outward obedience to the laws of Christ's Kingdom, those only 
will be approved of God who do so willingly and from the heart. 
And only such as submit to the drawing influence of the truth, 
and render willing obedience from the heart,- who hate sin and 
love truth and righteousness, will be admitted to the everlasting 
life beyond the Millennium. It is this class which in the close of 
the Millennial reign will be addressed in the words of our Lord 
as foretold: "Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom 
[of earth] prepared for you from the foundation of the world. "-- 
Matt. 25:34. 

That there will be some who after being forced to bow in 
submission will remain enemies at heart and require finally to be 
destroyed, is evident from the words, "He must reign until he 
hath put all enemies under his feet. " That the significance of this 
expression is not conversion, but destruction, see Rom. 16:20. 
The same lesson, that all who will not conform willingly, to the 
law of love to God and man, during that age of fullest 
knowledge and ability, and help, will be counted enemies 
against God, and against the law of his empire, and no longer 
coerced, but destroyed, is taught in the symbolism of Rev. 20:10 
heretofore explained (March '88 TOWER) and also in the 
sentence of the "goats" ("enemies") in Matt. 25:41,46; - 
expounded in our June issue. 

Thus we see clearly the meaning of those passages of Scripture 
which teach that force will be employed during the Millennium. 
And we can see that the force will not in the slightest sense 
interfere with man's God- like quality of free will, with which 
God endowed him, and which he has always recognized in 
dealing with him. 

How many will then choose life, by choosing and loving 
righteousness and obedience to God, we cannot judge from the 
conduct of the majority now, who love sin rather than 
righteousness. We should remember that they do not now know 
God, not yet having seen the height and depth, and length and 
breadth of his loving plan for human salvation, as we do, -as it 
will be finally wrought out through Christ. They are blinded by 
the misrepresentations of Satan, and prejudiced by their 
perverted judgments and tastes which often make good to appear 
undesirable and evil to appear desirable. 

When in the Millennial age, the whole truth regarding the 
pleasures of sin and its consequences, and concerning the joys of 
righteousness and its results, are fully understood by all, and 



when all are granted a choice, each will decide for himself 
which is his choice; and though the Judge can read their hearts 
and know their choice and could decide thus, their future fitness 
or unfitness to pass beyond the Millennium, through the portals 
into the everlasting and perfect state, yet he will make a test so 
searching and thorough as to prove and make manifest the hearts 
of all to all, as shown in Rev. 20:7-10. 

At first thought we might be inclined to judge all others by our 
own feelings and preferences. If we have accepted Christ and his 
rules of righteousness with joy, we are apt to feel as some one 
has expressed it, that,— 

If all the world our Savior knew, 
Then all the world would love him too. 

But we must remember that the saints are not samples 
representative of the whole race, but of those only who do love 
and obey, and rejoice in righteousness. Our feelings represent 
those of the "sheep" of the next age, and not at all those of the 
"goats." Love of sin, while largely attributable to ignorance and 
weakness, as we have shown, is not always the result of these 
conditions. One notable illustration of love of sin, even while 
possessing full knowledge and power, is seen in Satan. With full 
knowledge he has not only sinned himself, but has spread sin 
among others; even lying and deceiving so as to get some into 
sin who do not prefer it; and with the full power of his 
unimpaired organism, after thousands of years of experience, he 
still prefers and clings to sin; and when granted liberty at the 
close of the Millennium, he will, as God has shown in Scripture, 
be of the same mind-preferring sin to righteousness; until 
finally, having served God's purpose even while fighting against 
God and righteousness, he shall be cut off, annihilated, with all 
who similarly love error and sin more than truth and 
righteousness. 

To us who love righteousness, it seems reasonable to suppose 
that a large majority, when granted full knowledge and ability 
for choice, would choose and love righteousness; but we know 
of nothing in Scripture which would serve to show the 
proportionate numbers of the righteousness-lovers and the sin- 
lovers, except one item in the parable of Matthew 25:33;- the 
likening of the two classes to sheep and goats. The fact that the 
sheep are more numerous than goats, and that these were used 
by our Lord to represent the two classes among men in the next 
age, seems to teach, in agreement with our judgment, that the 
obedient will out-number the disobedient in the close of the 
Millennium. 

Even if the number then accepted by the Judge, as worthy of 
everlasting life, should be less than one half of all the children of 
Adam, it could be no reflection against the wisdom, or love, or 



power, or justice of that one whom God has appointed the Judge 
of all,— to any who have the proper Scriptural view of the case. 

The supposition of some, that human salvation is a matter of 
contest between God and the devil, as to which shall get the 
majority on his side, much like the contests between ward- 
politicians seeking for votes, is a miserable misconception, born 
of old-time errors; and its fallacy we trust is clearly discerned by 
our readers. So far as God is concerned, there is no contests- 
there has been none, and will be none. So far as Satan is 
concerned he may, and no doubt does, consider it a contest; an 
opposition and defiance of God; but like that of Pharaoh, the 
result will prove that his temporary success was permitted only 
because the divine plans could thereby be forwarded. 

In creating our race, God was seeking such creatures, and only 
such, as would love his law of righteousness, and delight to 
serve and obey so great and grand and infallible a law-giver. In 
order that their service and love should be voluntary, they must 
be created free to obey or disobey; as free to love sin as to love 
righteousness; and they were so made in his own likeness; and 
their love of, and obedience to, righteousness must in the end be 
the results of preference for the tendencies and fruits of right 
doing, as we may presume it is with God. The condemnation of 
all mankind to death, by the failure of the first man Adam, left 
room for mercy, and they were redeemed without cost to them — 
at the cost of another, who willingly paid their debt and became 
Judge of all in the new trial, which his sacrifice (in accordance 
with God's plan), provided for all. 

The trial of the world, during the Millennium will not be a trial 
of strength, or a struggle for mastery, between God and the 
devil; on the contrary, the devil will be bound, so that there 
could be no such competition. God does not compete with any 
one; if it were a competition of power, who could withstand 
Jehovah's power? The binding of Satan shows that in such a 
matter competition would be out of the question. 

But it is not God that is to be on trial during the Millennium-to 
test his power, whether he could coerce man's will. Jehovah did 
not appoint our Lord Jesus as Judge to try Him. (Acts 17:31.) 
Quite the contrary: God's course, in condemning man as 
unworthy of life, is already justified (Rom. 3:19); it is man that 
will be on trial-the race, every member of which has been 
condemned once, as sinners worthy of death. It is a new trial 
granted to these through their Redeemer— to test how many of 
them, when granted full opportunity (with the advantage of full 
knowledge and experience), would prove their love of God's law 
by their willing obedience; in order that such, and such only, be 
they few or many, might enjoy forever the blessings which God 
provided for such only; -for such as love him and rejoice in his 
laws. 



Full of pain and sorrow, though it often is, the few years of 
dying which we sometimes call the present life, is really a boon, 
a favor from our Creator; even if he had made no provision for 
us in the future. This is evident from the effort with which 

R1058:page5 

every animal creature, as well as man, clings to the brittle thread 
of vitality. And the fact that in great mercy God has provided an 
everlasting future for a class of humanity who when "drawn" 
shall willingly come into full harmony with him and his 
righteous laws, is certainly not a proper ground-work for 
reasoning that it would be a slur against God's wisdom and 
power, that all will not receive his gift of everlasting life upon 
his reasonable and gracious terms. 

Nor should the fact that God has provided, through an all- 
sufficient ransom price, for a full and impartial offer to all of 
this gift, upon his terms, be construed as in any sense obligating 
him for the failure of those unwilling to accept his gift upon his 
terms. God's wisdom and foreknowledge enabled him to foresee 
that all will not accept everlasting life on his terms; and this fact 
he has pointed out to us in the Bible. 

The wisdom of God assures us, not only of the final destruction 
of all willful sin-lovers, but also that his original plan of 
peopling the earth, with human beings in harmony with himself, 
will be accomplished, —however many or few may be the 
"vessels of wrath fitted for destruction," who shall be 
"castaways" in the selection of the worthy and desired "vessels 
unto honor. " 



R1058:page5 

RANSOM OR PARDON--WHICH? 

The failure to discern the distinction between ransom and 
pardon has led to considerable confusion of thought on the 
subject. Christian people of general intelligence will quote texts 
relative to our being ransomed from the tomb, redeemed from 
death, bought with a price, even the precious blood of Christ, 
etc., and in the same breath they speak of the Father's gracious 
pardon of all offences. Seemingly few think, though many must 
know, that pardon and ransom express exactly opposite 
thoughts. 

Webster defines Ransom to mean— "to redeem from captivity, or 
to forfeit by paying an equivalent. " 

His definition of Redeem is- "to purchase back, to regain 
possession of, by payment of a stipulated price. " 

His definition of Pardon is— "to remit the penalty, or to suffer to 
pass without punishment-to refrain from exacting a penalty. " 



The most ordinary thinker must see that these words are as 
opposite in meaning as could be, and that both could not be true 
of the same thing. If Jesus did redeem or ransom us by paying 
an equivalent for us, thus purchasing our release from death, 
then our Father did not pardon us. That is, he did not suffer our 
sins to pass without punishment; but as the Scriptures declare, 
he laid upon Jesus (who became our willing substitute) the 
iniquity of us all. (Isa. 53:6). Hence God did not pardon (remit 
the penalty); for "Christ died for our sins according to the 
Scriptures." -1 Cor. 15:3. 

The principal cause of the difficulty arises from the fact that the 
terms forgive and pardon have come to be used interchangeably, 
and are commonly understood as synonymous, while the strict 
or primary meanings of the words do not admit of this loose 
interpretation. 

Webster's primary definition of forgive is- "to give away, to 
make over, to resign, to cease to feel resentment against, or, to 
cease to impute, to remit. Webster also gives as a secondary 
meaning of forgiveness, the generally accepted sense, pardon. 
But note the difference in the primary meaning of the words: 
Pardon refrains from exacting a penalty, while forgiveness 
signifies much less, viz., that harmony is restored as a result of 
some settlement, or that the claim is made over to some one 
else. 

Thus we see that the word pardon does not represent Jehovah's 
course in dealing 

R1058 : page 6 

with the sinner, but that, while he has not pardoned us, he has 
forgiven us, according to the above primary definition of the 
word. That is to say, God has "ceased to impute" sin to those 
sinners who have laid hold of Christ as their substitute or 
redeemer -"Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation 
[satisfaction] for our sins"— believers' sins. And not for ours only 
[who now accept] but also [for all who shall at any time accept] 
for the sins of the whole world, [who sooner or later shall all 
come to the knowledge and opportunity to believe and accept]. 

There was a sin-penalty upon the race [death] which must be 
paid, and by paying this penalty for the race, our Lord Jesus 
bought all with his own precious blood [life shed,— death]. Thus 
the claims of God's justice against the race were resigned or set 
over to the purchaser, and he may do what he will with his own. 
He could let all be in death as when he bought them, or he has 
full right to restore any or all as he may please. But so far as the 
Father is concerned, the Adamic sin is forgiven and all claims 
under it are set over to the Redeemer, the Purchaser, our Lord 
Jesus; as it is written, "The Father judgeth no man, but hath 
committed [or transferred] all judgment unto the Son."- John 
5:22. 



Thus we see too, that when "we were reconciled to God by the 
death of his Son," it was because he forgave us, i.e., ceased to 
resent our sins, because our ransom price had been paid, as 
provided by himself, who so loved us that he gave his Son to 
redeem us. Thus, too, "God was in Christ reconciling the world 
to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them" (but unto 
his beloved Son, who freely gave himself as our substitute). The 
sins were imputed to mankind until Jesus died; then God 
forgave, i.e., ceased to impute to us what had been paid by our 
Redeemer or Substitute. 

Mark clearly, that God did not PARDON, i.e., refrain from 
exacting the penalty," but "laid upon him [our Redeemer] the 
iniquity of us all." (Isa. 53:6.) He bore [the penalty of] our sins 
in his own body on the tree. (1 Pet. 2:24.) And thus we see, how 
God forgave us freely for Christ's sake— because he paid the 
penalty which was the full satisfaction of justice. 

Let it not be presumed that God compelled the just one to die for 
the unjust. Justice could not inflict the punishment of the guilty 
upon the innocent unless the innocent one freely gave himself as 
a substitute for the guilty. This Jesus did. The Scriptures declare 
that he laid down his life of himself; not for fear of divine wrath; 
not because compelled; but for the joy that was set before him 
(the joy of redeeming and restoring mankind, and of bringing 
many sons to glory) he endured the cross.— Heb. 12:2. 

Now notice that the Greek words— apoluo, aphiemi and aphesis- 
-translated forgiveness, forgiven and forgive in, the New 
Testament, have the same significance as the corresponding 
English words: or, as given by Young— "To let go, to send 
away. " Mark well, the meaning is not as some seem to infer— to 
send away without an equivalent, as the English word pardon 
would imply. It is not that God will let the sinner go 
unconditionally; but as Scripturally declared, God will let go the 
prisoners out of the pit (out of death), because he has found a 
ransom. (Job 33:24) Yes, the man Christ Jesus gave himself a 
ransom (a corresponding price) for all. (1 Tim. 2:6.) Therefore 
all that are in their graves (prisoners in the pit) shall hear his 
voice and come forth, in due time— when the Redeemer shall 
"take to himself his great power and reign. " 

Though the word pardon does not occur in the New Testament, 
a Greek word of nearly the same meaning does occur— 
karazomai. It signifies, to forgive freely. We will give some 
illustrations of the use of this word, from which it will be seen 
that it does not oppose but confirms the statement that our 
Father does not pardon, or unconditionally set sinners free from 
sin's penalty. The words forgive and forgave as translated from 
the word karazomai occur in all only twelve times, as follows:— 
"Forgiving one another... even as Christ forgave you" (Col. 
3:13); "When they had nothing to pay he frankly forgave them 
both;" "He to whom he forgave most." (Luke 7:42,43.) Here are 



four instances in which free forgiveness, or pardon is meant. But 
notice, it is not Jehovah, but Christ and the disciples who do the 
free forgiving. Jesus was in the very act of paying the ransom 
price of Simon, Mary and others, and realizing that justice 
would be satisfied by his act, he, as the purchaser, could freely 
forgive them. The very object of his purchasing sinners was, that 
he might freely release them from sin's condemnation. Here we 
see that had our Lord Jesus been unwilling to pardon those 
whom he had purchased with his own blood, had he still held 
against them the wages of Adam's sin, his sacrifice would have 
been valueless to them; it would have left all as they were— 
cursed-condemned. On the other hand, had the Father pardoned 
us, Christ's death would have been useless, valueless, as it 
would have accomplished nothing. 

We wish that all our readers might hereafter be able to 
appreciate clearly the difference between pardon and 
forgiveness, i.e., reconciliation toward us based on our 
redemption through the precious blood of Christ. -Col. 1 : 14. 

All will admit that God is just; and if so, he did not inflict too 
severe a penalty on man when he deprived him of life. 

R1059 : page 6 

Now if that penalty was just six thousand years ago, it is still a 
just penalty, and will be just for all coming time. If the penalty 
was too severe and God pardons the sinner (releases him from 
further continuance of the penalty) it proves either that God was 
at first unjust, or is so now. If it was right six thousand years ago 
to deprive mankind of life because of sin, it would always be 
wrong to restore the life unless the pronounced penalty were 
justly cancelled by the payment of an equivalent price. And this 
could only be accomplished by the willing sacrifice of another 
being of the same kind, whose right to life was unforfeited, 
giving himself as a substitute or ransom. 

It is written, There is none righteous, no, not one. Therefore 
none of the condemned race have a right to life; and God could 
not justly give pardon and life to those whom he had justly 
condemned. To do so would be to make mercy and love 
override justice, and such a conflict is not supposable in God's 
attributes. If the love and mercy of God would benefit men they 
must act in harmony with justice. And thus it was: Love 
provided the ransom (1 John 4:10) and will use the same one 
(Christ,) as its agent in blessing the world. 

Forever firm God's justice stands 

As mountains their foundations keep. " 

This very principle of justice which underlies all of our Father's 
doings, is the ground of our strong confidence in all his 
promises. The Scriptures declare that he is the same yesterday, 
to-day and forever, that with him is no variableness neither 



shadow of turning. (James 1:17). If he were so changeable as to 
condemn the race to death in Adam's day, and six thousand 
years after revoke his own decision, what assurance could we 
have that in six thousand years more— or less, he might not 
change again, and remand us to the prison house of death by 
revoking the pardon of some or of all? As a race of sinners we 
have no foundation whatever for hope of a future everlasting life 
except in the fact that Christ died for us, and thus satisfied the 
claims of justice against us. 

So then, so far as Jehovah is concerned, we are forgiven through 
his own provision, -through Christ. And so far as our 
relationship to the Lord Jesus, who bought us, is concerned, he 
freely pardons all who would come unto the Father by him. And 
so far as we are concerned, the results attained by God's plan are 
most favorable —to us it amounts to the same as though the 
Father had pardoned us unconditionally and without a ransom, 
except that a knowledge of the fact enables us to reason with 
God, and to see how though our sins were as scarlet, we are 
made whiter than snow, and how God is just while justifying 
and releasing us. Thus we have a sure foundation for faith and 
trust. 



R1059 : page 6 

"BEFORE ABRAHAM WAS, I AM." 

The spotless purity, the marked intellectual superiority, the 
humble dignity, the meek gentleness, the bold and 
uncompromising justice, linked with benevolence and untiring 
self-sacrifice, marked Jesus as a man peculiar and separate from 
all other men. In his day "he taught as one having authority," 
and men said, "Never man spake like this man. " Whatever 
others may think or say of him, he claimed to be the sent of 
God, and of heavenly origin, saying. "I came down from 
heaven. " "I am the living bread which came down from heaven. " 
(John 6:38,51.) The Jews disbelieved this claim, and said, "How 
can this be?" And many of his disciples, when they heard it, 
said, "This is a hard saying, who can hear it?"-Verse 60. 

"When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, 
he said unto them, Doth this offend you? What and if you shall 
see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" But "from 
that time many of his disciples went back and walked no more 
with him" (verses 61-66); because of this claim of heavenly 
origin and pre-human existence. 

Again we find him before the Pharisees declaring the same truth, 
saying, "I know whence I came and whither I go.... I am from 
above, I am not of this world; ...I proceeded forth and came 
from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me.... It is my 



Father that honoreth me, and if I should say I know him not I 
shall be a liar." (John 8:14,23,42,54,55.) Then said the 
Pharisees, "Art thou greater than our father Abraham?" Jesus 
answered, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he 
saw it and was glad. " "Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art 
not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? [Abraham 
had been dead two thousand years.] Jesus said unto them, 
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am."- 
John 8:53,36-58. 

There is no mistake about that expression. Since his humanity 
resulted from the transference of the life-principle from spiritual 
to human conditions; the being, the individuality, was the same. 
Jesus as a man, recognized himself as the same being— the Son 
of God, and could remember his former glory. "I AM" expresses 
his continuous existence, and identifies Jesus of Nazareth with 
the "only begotten" and "first born of all creation." The Jews did 
not believe this wonderful truth, and took up stones to stone 
him. Our Lord's teachings only convinced the meek, and only 
such he expected to receive them.— Isa. 61:1. 

Referring again to the saying of Jesus (John 6:62), "What and if 
ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?" 
and comparing it with Mark's statement (chap. 26:19), "He was 
received up into heaven and sat on the right hand of God, " we 
conclude that before his advent to earth he occupied the right 
hand, or chief position on the heavenly or spiritual plane; not the 
Father's position, but the chief position at the Father's right 
hand— right hand signifying the chief place of favor and power. 
But we learn that the right hand position, before his advent to 
earth, was not so exalted as his present position at Jehovah's 
right hand, since it is expressly stated that because of his 
humiliation and obedience even unto death "God hath highly 
exalted him" (Phil. 2:9) and given him additional honors and 
glory. 

Again Jesus had been explaining the truth to Nicodemus, but 
Nicodemus was slow to believe, and Jesus by way of reproof 
remarked, "If I have told you earthly things and ye believed not, 
how shall you believe if I tell you heavenly things?" Then he 
intimates that no one else could teach him those heavenly 
things; for "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that 
came down from heaven, even the Son of man;"* consequently 
no one else knew the heavenly things. Then Jesus proceeded to 
explain that "God so loved the world as to give his only begotten 
Son" (a son on the higher plane before he was sent) to redeem 
men.- John 3:12-17. 

If Jesus had been conceived and born in the usual way, that is, in 
sin, even as others, we must believe, either that he was an 
imposter who sought to delude his followers into thinking him 
some great one, or else conclude with the Jews that he had a 
devil and was mad (insane). But, since in him was no sin, as not 



only the apostles and prophets but even his enemies have 
testified, we mark his words when again we hear him say, "No 
man knoweth the Son but the Father, neither knoweth any man 
the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will 
reveal him. "--Matt. 1 1 :27. 

Strange language! Did not the disciples know Jesus? Yes, as a 
man they knew him, but they did not understand the secret of his 
wonderful being-his pre-human glory, and the mystery of his 
incarnation. Jesus was just beginning to reveal himself to them, 
as they were able to receive the truth. And he had yet many 
things to tell them which they were not then able to bear, but 
which the promised Spirit through the Word has since made 
plain. Whence his intimate knowledge of the Father here 
claimed? We find answer in the Scriptures we have just 
considered. But we also find further testimony. 

Turning to Prov. 8:22-30, we find that this same Jesus whom 
Isaiah calls "The Wonderful, Counselor," etc., (the same being, 
though known by many names,) Solomon speaks of, as Wisdom 
personified, saying: "Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of 
his way, before his works of old. I was set up from everlasting, 
from the beginning, or ever the earth was. When there were no 
depths, 

R1059 : page 7 

I was brought forth; when there were no fountains abounding 
with water. Before the mountains were settled, before the hills 
was I brought forth; while as yet he had not made the earth, nor 
the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world. When he 
prepared the heavens I was there: when he set a compass upon 
the face of the depth: when he established the clouds above: 
when he strengthened the fountains of the deep: when he gave to 
the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his 
commandment, when he appointed the foundations of the earth; 
then I was by him, as one brought up with him; and I was daily 
his delight, rejoicing always before him." 

This scripture together with John 1:1-18 not only shows his 
intimate acquaintance with Jehovah and knowledge of his plans, 
but exhibits him as his honored agent in their accomplishment. 

R1060 : page 7 

When we consider the length of time that must have elapsed 
during the creation of the material universe and that our Lord 
was the "beginning of the creation of God" (Rev. 3:14) before 
angels as well as before man, and Jehovah's agent in the creation 
of angels as well as men, we may have some idea of our Lord's 
intimate and long acquaintance with Jehovah and his plans. No 
marvel, then, that Jesus said, "No man knoweth the Son but the 
Father: neither knoweth any man the Father save the Son. " And 



again, "O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee, but I 
have known thee. "-John 17:25. 

The key to his knowledge of heavenly things is furnished in 
John 3:31,32. "He that cometh from above is above all: he that is 
of the earth is earthy and speaketh of the earth; he that cometh 
from heaven is above all. And what he hath seen and heard, that 
he testifieth. " No wonder that some said, "Whence hath this man 
this wisdom." It was his knowledge of heavenly things, his 
intimate and long acquaintance with the Father, begetting faith 
in the Father's promises, which enabled him, as a perfect man, to 
overcome the world and present an acceptable sacrifice for our 
sins. As it was written, "By his knowledge shall my righteous 
servant justify many while he will bear their iniquities. "-Isa. 
53:11. 

O that all God's dear children would be more earnest in studying 
the Scriptures, for, said Jesus, "These are they which testify of 
me. " (John 5 :39.) As we are able to bear it, the glories of the 
Father and Son, and our promised glory through them, will be 
made very clear to us. "He [the Son] was in the world, and the 
world was made by him, and the world knew him not," and still 
does not know him. Only those who humbly walk by faith in the 
light of the Word, will know him, until his glory and power shall 
be revealed, so that all flesh may see it together. 

Very soon, we know, his power shall be universally felt; and the 
Psalmist intimates that his power, displayed in restoring and 
perfecting all things, will at least equal his power, as Jehovah's 
agent, in creating them- "Thou hast the dew [freshness, vigor] of 
thy youth. "-Psa. 110:3. 

With all this united testimony of the Scriptures before us, we 
cannot doubt the pre-human existence and glory of our blessed 
Lord, or the sincerity of his own prayer, "Father, glorify thou me 
with the glory I had with thee before the world. " 

In no other way can we understand how "He was rich, yet for 
our sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might be 
rich." (2 Cor. 8:9.) As a man he had none of this world's goods. 
True, he was rich in wisdom, grace and understanding; but it 
was not in giving these that he became poor. He did not become 
poor in wisdom or grace for us. But both Jesus and the apostles 
tell us of the glory he had with the Father before the world was. 
There was the wealth which he left- humbling himself and 
taking the form of a servant, etc., (Phil. 2:7) that we through that 
real poverty might become rich. 

In no other way can we understand Jesus to be the Alpha and 
Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last, as he 
claims in his revelation to John (Rev. 1:8; 3:14; 21:6; 22:13), 
than as the Scriptures harmoniously teach, that as Jehovah's 
agent he is the beginner and finisher of the wondrous plan, 
though not its author. In a word, he was the only direct creation 



of Jehovah-born "from the womb of the morning," as the 
Psalmist expresses it (110:3), -all other creations being through 
him, as Jehovah's agent, or representative; as we read: "To us 
there is one God-the Father-of whom are all things and we in 
him; and one Lord-Jesus Christ-by whom are all things, and 
we by him." (1 Cor. 8:6.) He is the first born of every creature 
[born before all creation]; for by him were all things created that 
are in heaven and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether 
they be thrones or principalities or powers; all things were 
created by him and for him: and he is before all things, and by 
him all things consist. And he is [also] the head of the church, 
who is the beginning, the first born from the dead-that in all 
things he might have the pre-eminence.-Col. 1:15-18. 

Our Lord's pre-human condition, we have thus seen, was one of 
mighty power, as the chief of all Jehovah's creation, and his 
agent in all subsequent creations. He was the first and the last 
direct creation of Jehovah. Hence with the proper conception of 
the meaning of the word God, as used in the Scriptures, namely, 
a mighty, a powerful being (See, Nov. '87 TOWER), we see the 
propriety of applying the name God (which in Scripture is 
applied to angels and to some great men) to this great being, 
who was and is the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, of 
Jehovah's creation. 

And so we find our Lord mentioned by this title, God, in John 
1:1-18.- 

"In the beginning [not at Jehovah's beginning, for he had no 
beginning, but in the beginning of his creation] was the Word 
[one of our Lord's titles-Rev. 19:13], and the Word was with 
the* God [Jehovah] and the Word was a God. The same was, in 
the beginning [of creation- himself the first creation], with the* 
God. All things were made by him [the Word] and without him 
[aside from him as the direct instrumentality] was not anything 
made that was made. In the same was life, and the life was the 
light of men. ...He was in the world, and the world was made by 
him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and 
his own received him not.... The Word was made flesh 
[previously of a spirit nature our Lord was made flesh i.e., he 
underwent a change of nature— for the purpose of giving our 
ransom price; for since by a man came death by a man also "the 
resurrection of the dead" must come about. 1 Cor. 15:21] and 
dwelt among us, and we beheld his dignity [of character], the 
majesty as of the only begotten of the Father— full of grace and 
truth." 

How beautifully simple is the truth; how different from the 
confusion of error. Yet, strange to say, some poor souls are so 
used to believing errors, called holy mysteries, that they fear that 
anything reasonable is error. 



*The oldest and most authentic Greek MSS., (Sinaitic and 
Vatican) omit, with evident propriety, the words "which is in 
heaven" after this text. 



*The Greek emphasizes the word here rendered God. 



R1060:page7 

DID THE JEWS BELIEVE 
IN EVERLASTING TORMENT. 

Noting, from a back number of the TOWER, that we hold that 
the doctrine of everlasting torment was engrafted upon the 
doctrines of the Christian church during the period of the 
apostasy, the great falling away which culminated in Papacy, a 
Brother asks whether it does not seem, according to the works of 
Josephus, that this doctrine was firmly held by the Jews; and if 
so, he inquires, does it not seem evident that the early Christians 
being largely converts from Judaism, brought this doctrine with 
them, in the very out-start of Christianity. 

We answer, No; the doctrine of everlasting torment sprang 
naturally from the doctrine of human immortality, which as a 
philosophic question was first promulgated in anything like the 
present form, by the Platonic school of Grecian philosophy. 
These first decided that each man contained a fragment of deity 
and that this would prevent him from ever dying;— that live he 
must, somewhere. This foundation laid, it was as easy to 
describe a place for evil-doers as for well-doers. But to the 
credit of those heathen philosophers be it recorded, that they 
failed to develop, or at least to manifest, that depth of 
degradation, from benevolence and reason and pity, necessary to 
paint, by word and pen and brush, such details of horrors and 
agonies as were soon incorporated into their doctrine, and a 
belief thereof declared "necessary to salvation" in the professed 
church of Christ. 

To appreciate the case, it is necessary to remember that Greece 
stood at the head of intelligence and civilization when the 
Christian church was established. Alexander the Great had 
conquered the world, and had spread respect for Greece 
everywhere; and though, from a military point of view, Rome 
had taken her place, it was otherwise in literature. For centuries 
Grecian philosophers and philosophies led the intellectual 
world, and impregnated and affected everything. It became 
customary for philosophers and teachers of other theories to 
claim that their systems and theories were nearly the same as 
those of the Grecians, and to endeavor to remove differences 
between their old theories and the popular Grecian views. And 
some sought to make capital, by claiming that their system 



embraced all the good points of Platonism with others which 
Plato did not see. 

Of this class were the teachers in the Christian church in the 
second, third and fourth centuries. Conceding the popularly 
accepted correctness of the philosophers, they claimed that the 
same good features of philosophy were found in Christ's 
teachings, and that he was one of the greatest philosophers, etc. 
Thus a blending of Platonism and Christianity took place. This 
became the more pronounced as kings and emperors began to 
scrutinize religious teachings, and to favor those most likely to 
awe the people and make them law-abiding. While heathen 
teachers were truckling to such imperial scrutiny, and teaching 
an everlasting punishment for those who violated the laws of the 
emperors (who ruled as divinely appointed) we cannot suppose 
otherwise, than that the ambitious characters in the church at 
that time, who were seeking to displace heathenism and to 
become the dominant religious power instead, would make 
prominent such doctrines as would in the eyes of the emperors 
seem an equal hold upon the fears and prejudices of the people. 
And what could be more to the purpose than the doctrine of the 
endless torment of the refractory? 

The same motives evidently operated with Josephus when 
writing concerning the belief of the Jews. His works should be 
read as apologies for Judaism, and efforts to exalt that nation in 
the eyes of Rome and the world. It should be remembered that 
the Jews had the reputation of being a very rebellious people, 
very unwilling to be ruled even by the Caesars. They were 
hoping in God's promise to become the chief nation. Many 
rebellious outbreaks had occurred among them, and their 
religion, peculiar from all others, came in for its share of blame 
for favoring too much the spirit of liberty. 

Josephus had an object in writing his two principal works, 
"Antiquities" and "Wars of the Jews." He wrote them in the 
Greek language while living at Rome, where he was the friend 
and guest successively of the Roman Emperors Vespasian, Titus 
and Domitian, and where he was in constant contact with the 
Grecian philosophers. These books were written for the purpose 
of showing off the Jewish people —their courage, laws, ethics, 
etc, to the best advantage, before the Grecian philosophers and 
Roman dignitaries. This object is covertly admitted in his 
preface to his "Antiquities," in which he says:— 

"I have undertaken the present work as thinking it will appear to 
all the Greeks worthy of their study.... Those that read my book 
may wonder that my discourse of laws and historical facts 
contains so much of philosophy.... However, those that have a 
mind to know the reasons of every thing may find here a very 
curious philosophical theory. " 



In a word, as a shrewd man who himself had become imbued 
with the spirit of the Grecian philosophies then prevailing, 
Josephus drew from the Law and the Prophets, and from the 
traditions of the elders and the theories of the various sects of 
the Jews, all he could find that, in the most remote degree, 
would tend to show:— 

First, that the Jewish religion was not far behind popular 
Grecian philosophy; but that somewhat analogous theories had 
been held by some Jews, and drawn from Moses' Law long 
before the Grecian philosophers broached them. 

Secondly, he would fain show that it was not their religious 
ideas which made the Jews as a people hard to control or 
rebellious, as all liberty-lovers were esteemed by the Caesars. 
Hence he attempts to prove, at a time when virtue was esteemed 
to consist mainly in submission, that Moses' Law "taught first of 
all that God is the Father and Lord of all things, and bestows a 
happy life upon those that follow him, but plunges such as do 
not walk in the paths of virtue, into inevitable miseries." And, it 
is in support of this idea and for such purposes, evidently, that 
Josephus after saying: "There are three philosophical sects 
among the Jews, first the Pharisees, second the Sadducees, and 
the third Essenes," proceeds to give an account of their three 
theories; especially detailing any features which resembled 
Grecian philosophy. And because the last and least, the Essenes, 
most resembled the doctrines of the Stoics and leading Grecian 
theories, Josephus devotes nearly ten times as much space to 
their views as to the views of both Sadducees and Pharisees 
combined. And yet the Essenes were so insignificant a sect, that 
Josephus himself admits they were few. Whatever views they 
held, therefore, on any subject cannot be claimed as Jewish 
sanction, when the vast majority of Jews held contrary opinions. 
The very 

R1060 : page 8 

fact that our Lord and the apostles never referred to them at all, 
is good evidence that the Essenes' philosophy by no means 
represented the Jewish ideas. This small sect probably grew up 
later and absorbed its ideas, concerning immortality and the 
everlasting torment of the non- virtuous, from Grecian 
philosophy. It should be remembered that Josephus was not born 
until three years after our Lord's crucifixion, and that he 
published his "Wars" A.D. 75 and "Antiquities" A.D. 93- at a 
time when he and other Jews like all the rest of the world were 
eagerly swallowing Grecian philosophy, and science falsely so 
called, against which Paul warned the church. -Col. 2:8; 1 Tim. 
6:20. 

Josephus directed special attention to the Essenes because it 
suited his object to do so. He admits that the Sadducees, next to 
the largest body of Jewish people, did not believe in human 



immortality. And of the Pharisees' views he makes a blind 
statement, calculated to mislead, as follows: "They also believe 
that souls have an immortal vigor in them [This might be 
understood to mean, that the Pharisees did not believe as the 
Sadducees that death ended all existence, but believed in a vigor 
or life beyond the grave-by a resurrection of the dead.] and that 
under the earth there will be rewards and punishments, 
according as they have lived virtuously or viciously in this life; 
and the latter are to be detained in an everlasting prison [not 
tortured] but that the former [the virtuous] shall have power to 
revive and live again. " 

Is it not apparent that Josephus has whittled and stretched the 
views of the Pharisees, as much as his elastic conscience would 
allow, to show a harmony between them and the philosophies of 
Greece? Paul, who had been a Pharisee, contradicts Josephus. 
While Josephus says they believed "that only the virtuous would 
revive and live again," [Does not this imply a resurrection and 
imply also that the others would not live again, but remain dead, 
in the great prison— the tomb?] Paul on the contrary says: "I have 
hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there 
shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. "-- 
Acts 24:15. 

We have no hesitancy about accepting the testimony of the 
inspired Apostle Paul, not only in regard to what the Jews 
believed, but also as to what he and the early church believed: 
and we repeat, that the theory of the everlasting torment of the 
wicked, based upon the theory that the human soul cannot die, is 
contrary to both the Old and the New Testament teachings and 
was introduced among Jews and Christians by Grecian 
philosophers. Thank God for the purer philosophy of the 
Scriptures which teaches that the death of the soul (being) is the 
penalty of sin (Ezek. 18:20) and that all souls being condemned 
through Adam's sin were redeemed by Christ's soul (Isa. 53:10); 
and that only for willful, individual sin will any die again-the 
second death -an everlasting punishment, but not an everlasting 
torment, as shown in June TOWER. 



R1061 : page 8 

PURITY OF CHARACTER. 

Over the plum and apricot there may be seen a bloom and 
beauty more exquisite than the fruit itself,— a soft, delicate flush 
that overspreads its blushing cheek. Now, if you strike your 
hand over that, and it is once gone, it is gone forever; for it 
never grows but once. The flower that hangs in the morning, 
impearled with dew, arrayed with jewels,— once shake it so that 
the beads roll off, and you may sprinkle water over it as you 



please, yet it can never be made again what it was when the dew 
fell lightly upon it from heaven. 

On a frosty morning you may see the panes of glass covered 
with landscapes, mountains, lakes and trees, blended in a 
beautiful fantastic picture. Now, lay your hand upon the glass, 
and by the scratch of your fingers, or by the warmth of the palm, 
all the delicate tracery will be immediately obliterated. So in 
youth there is a purity of character which, when once touched 
and defiled, can never be restored, -a fringe mere delicate than 
frost work, and which, when torn and broken, will never be 
embroidered. 

A man who has spotted and soiled his garments in youth, though 
he may seek to make them white again, can never wholly do it, 
even were he to wash them with his tears. When a young man 
leaves his father's house, with the blessing of his mother's tears 
still wet upon his forehead, if he once loses that early purity of 
character, it is a loss he can never make whole again. Such is the 
consequence of crime. Its effects cannot be eradicated, they can 
only be forgiven. -Beecher. 

Thank God for the abundant provision made for all; for though 
all have lost purity and perfection and could never restore it to 
themselves, God has provided that the pure in heart-in motive, 
in intent, shall not only be accepted through Christ as if pure, 
but, more than this, has provided for a restoration (in his due 
time- the Millennial Day), to actual purity and perfection, of all 
who hate sin and accept aid and deliverance through the Life- 
giver. 

Mr. Beecher, great man and orator though he was, missed the 
pearl in his subject, as all who overlook the ransom do.— 
EDITOR. 

His blood can make the foulest clean, 
His blood avails for me. 



R1060 : page 8 



RESURRECTION HOPE IN CONTRAST. 

We learn that Julius Caesar boldly averred, in a speech made in 
the Roman Senate, that man had nothing to fear, or hope for, 
after death. Speaking of death he says: "Concerning punishment 
we are enabled to speak confidently, as to what may pertain to 
it, that for the grieving, and miserable, death brings a state of 
absolute repose from all affliction, and not a state of 
excruciating agony. It sets mortals most absolutely free from 
every form of evil; and beyond it there is no place for either 
trouble or enjoyment." 



M. Portius Cato, an illustrious philosopher of the Stoic School, 
gives these sentiments of Caesar his unqualified approbation in 
these words:— "Caesar a very short time ago reasoned in a happy 
pertinent style, in this particular manner, concerning life and 
death. In making his estimate of what is commonly narrated 
about the dwellers in the nether world he says, I believe it all 
false that the wicked make a diverse journey, from that made by 
the good, to hideous, waste, foul, and horrible abodes." 

In the opinion of those two eminent Romans death ended all. 
And this was the opinion of whole schools of heathen 
philosophers. With these, misery has its end in the eternal 
insensibility and unconsciousness of the grave. To what Caesar 
and Cato have said we will only add, at this time, the expression 
of another Roman of distinguished eminence. The Elder Pliny, 
speaking of the death-state, says:— "From the last death-day the 
same state will be for all as it was before the first birth-day. 
Onward from death there will never more be either bodily 
sensation or mental consciousness any more than there was 
anterior to our birth. " Pliny thus makes our human existence a 
brief hour of sensation and unconsciousness between two eternal 
nights. [Plato's philosophy had not yet gained general 
acceptance amongst Romans]. Leaving now the ancients let us 
see how this latter thought of Pliny was draped in figure by one 
of our English ancestry. Green, in his history of the English 
people, informs us that an aged Ealdorman once addressed 
Eadwine, king of Northumbria, in the following manner:-"So 
seems the life of man, O King, as a sparrow's flight through the 
hall when a man is sitting at meat in winter-tide with the warm 
fire lighted on the hearth, but the chill rainstorm without. The 
sparrows flies in at one door and tarries for a moment in the 
light and heat of the hearth-fire, and then flying forth from the 
other vanishes into the wintry darkness from whence it came. So 
tarries for a moment the life of man in our sight, but what is 
before it, what after it, we know not. " 

Then speaking of Christianity, which was then just being 
introduced into Britain, 

R1061 : page 8 

he says:— "If this new teaching tell us aught certainly of these let 
us follow it. " The mysteries of life and death were pathetic 
themes for the bards. The language of one of these poets of the 
olden time warns the living in these words:-"Soon will it be, 
that sickness or sword-blade shear thy strength from thee, or the 
fire ring thee, or the flood whelm thee, or the sword grip thee, or 
arrow hit thee, or age o'ertake thee, and thine eye's brightness 
sink down into darkness." With them life and death were 
controlled by "weird" or destiny. "Strong as he might be, man 
struggled in vain with the doom that encompassed him, that 
girded his life with a thousand perils and broke it at so short a 
span." Life had its work of "doomed deeds," closing in the 



fateful "weirdness" of death and the tomb. It was a "sparrow- 
flight through a warm light room" from an eternal winter-night 
out into the self-same, eternal winter-night again— into endless 
darkness and nothingness. 

How ardently we should prize the glorious gospel through which 
"life and immortality are brought to light." In order to this let us 
read, in contrast to the words above quoted, some few of the 
triumphant expressions of the ancient worthies, who walked in 
the light of divine revelation, and spake as they were moved by 
the Holy Spirit. Says Job:- "I know that my Redeemer liveth, 
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: and 
though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh 
shall I see God: whom I shall see for myself and mine eyes shall 
behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within 
me." David says: "As for me, I will behold thy face in 
righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy 
likeness." Speaking of the living God, Isaiah says: "He will 
swallow up death in victory; and the Lord God will wipe away 
tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall be 
taken away from off all the earth; for the Lord hath spoken it." 
And again: "Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead 
body shall they arise. Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust; for 
thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the 
dead. " We close the contrast with the glowing words of Paul 
who lived shortly after Caesar and Cato, and who was 
contemporary with Pliny. "Behold I show you a mystery; we 
shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in 
the twinkling of an eye at the last trump; for the trumpet shall 
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall 
be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and 
this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought 
to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in 
victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy 
victory?" "Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory 
through our Lord Jesus Christ. " 

Jesus Christ is "the resurrection and the life," and he will raise 
up all his people at the last day. Death, to the believer, is only 
the briefest suspension of conscious activities, and the grave- 
sleep a short, deep, undisturbed and unmeasured repose, during 
which the unmanifested life is hid with Christ in God. 
"Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmoveable, 
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye 
know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. -The Restitution. 



R1061 : page 1 

VOL. X. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., SEPTEMBER, 1888. 

NO. 1. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

DOMESTIC, -Fifty cents a year, in advance, by Draft, P.O. 
Money Order, or Registered Letter. 

FOREIGN,-Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal 
Money Order. 

TO POOR SAINTS. 

This paper will be sent free to the interested of the Lord's poor, 
who will send a card yearly requesting it. "Ho, every one that 
thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, 
come ye, buy and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price. " And you who have it- "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor 
for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently— and eat ye that 
which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." - 
ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

FREE TO NEW READERS. 

For the sake of new readers, we mention below special topics 
treated in recent issues of the TOWER of which we still have a 
supply. Order any one of these as a sample, free. Additional 
copies 5 cents each, except to those too poor to pay, who are 
welcome to any or all free. 

THE LAND QUESTION. -June '87. 

THE SABBATH QUESTION -Sept. 87. 

OUT OF BABYLON,-the claims of the Episcopal Church 
examined. -Oct. '87. 

"ONE GOD,"--the Bible teaching vs., human tradition of 
Trinity. -Nov. '87. 

"SPIRITS IN PRISON."»Dec. '87. 

"HELL," "EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT," "WAILING 
AND GNASHING OF TEETH," "THE RICH MAN AND 
LAZARUS," etc., are subjects treated in January, February, 
March and June 1888, TOWERS. 

BAPTISM,-the Bible doctrine. -May '88. 

SIN AND SICKNESS, "FAITH CURES," "PRAYER 
CURES," "MIND CURES," etc. -July '88. 

THE TABERNACLE AND ITS SACRIFICES, -their 
lessons to the saints. -July '85. 



R1047 : page 1 



DAWN IN GERMAN, PAPER-BOUND. 

A cheap, popular edition for loaning, etc., greatly desired by 
some of the friends, has finally been decided upon. The first 
thousand will be ready about October 1st, and orders will be 
filled in rotation as received. The price will be 25 cents each, the 
same as the English edition, that being the popular limit. The 
same "expense allowance" as on the English edition will be 
granted. See June '88 TOWER, page 1. Order at once. 



R1061 : page 1 



AN EPISCOPALIAN MINISTER'S VIEW. 

At the Baltimore Conference of the P.E. church, recently held, 
the annual sermon was preached by one of their number, A.R. 
Stuart, D.D. "His theme was The Perils of the Church at the 
present time; " and the following extracts from his discourse, 



clipped from the Baltimore press, indicate that at least one in the 
P.E. church sees as clearly as the M.E. bishop, quoted in our last 
issue, that the blind leading the blind in the nominal church are 
stumbling into the ditch of unbelief as truly and as surely as the 
Jewish Church at the first advent. We quote as follows :- 

"Never was there an age in which there has been more fervid 
zeal in connection with the church than in this— more energy, 
more self-denial, greater munificence, greater exertions or 
greater sacrifices. The working bands, the parish organizations, 
and religious agencies of every kind, the multiplied services and 
communions of this nineteenth century have never been equaled 
or surpassed in days gone by. Is it possible that vital godliness 
can be on the decline in the midst of so much ardent and pious 
enterprise? What better evidence than the foregoing can be 
produced to show that the church is as firm as a rock, and that 
there is no reaction against the reformation, and no movement 
toward atheism or papalism? 

"I concede the strength of this position and the force of 
argument sustaining it, but I am not afraid nevertheless in 
defense of my assertion and belief that there is a falling away; 
notwithstanding all this wonderful zeal, to point out the fact that 
godless ambition, baptized worldliness, strife and vain glory, 
party spirit, sordid motive, selfish interest, simple bigotry, or all 
combined, may lie at the root of much which seems so laudable. 

"With the men of this generation for the most part the practical 
work they are engaged in with zeal and energy does not and can 
in no measure supply what is all the while really lacking in their 
faith. This they are discovering, and it is sending many of them 
away sorrowful— some to seek refuge under the baneful shelter 
of a semi-pagan system, and others to dismally flounder about in 
the rayless, bottomless pit of blank negation. 

"The church is growing in power and wealth, and yet there is 
much to cause dread in the minds of thinking men. The perilous 
times of which the Apostles spoke having come and there can be 
no doubt but that great danger is at hand from Italianism and 
infidelity. It is true there never was a time when the church was 
more active in good works. The practical and pressing question 
now is Are we going back to Judaism? are we holding on to a 
too slavish respect for the ordinances of men? It looks like we 
are, and it is this that is driving many into Romanism and others 
into the arms of infidelity. There is a loss of simplicity of faith; 
men are laying too much stress upon what they call religious 
duty and 

R1062 : page 1 

what they are doing for God, instead of contemplating what He 
has done for them and placing their trust in Him. Instead of 
relying upon the pure gospel their minds run to forms and they 
soon descend to semi-paganism, or blank nothing. 



"In the light and strength which we find in the Gospel, and 
nowhere else, may we hope to lead a life of true devotedness to 
God and goodness in the fellowship of the life of our Lord. In 
that light and strength will we certainly come to know that the 
essence of a true church does not consist in the length or the 
brevity of its title; in its being called Protestant, or called 
Catholic, or called neither." 



R1062 : page 1 

SOME PRESBYTERIANS AWAKING. 

The Presbytery of Nassau, (L.I.,) recently unanimously passed 
the following Resolution, addressed to the General Assembly:- 

"The Presbytery of Nassau hereby respectfully overtures the 
General Assembly that a committee be appointed to revise 
Chapter III., of the Confession of Faith (with special reference 
to Sections 3,4, 6 and 7), on the ground that in its present form it 
goes beyond the word of God, and is opposed to the convictions 
and repugnant to the feelings of very many of our most worthy 
and thoughtful members; and that said revision be sent down to 
the Presbyteries, and, if accepted by them, be substituted for 
Chapter III. in the Confession of Faith. " 

One who signs himself a "Long Time Presbyterian Minister" 
writes as follows on this subject, to the Christian Union. "It is a 
matter of the highest importance, that a Presbytery has at last 
moved in the direction of the Revision of the Confession of 
Faith. The Presbytery of Nassau ask the coming General 
Assembly to revise chap. III. of "God's eternal decree," 
especially the sections which refer to reprobation. This is an 
awful chapter, in which it is said (sec. 3): "By the decree of God, 
for the manifestation of his glory, some men and angels are 
predestinated unto eternal life, and others foreordained to 
everlasting death." Also, in sec. 4: "These angels and men, thus 
predestinated and foreordained, are particularly and 
unchangeably designed, and their number is so certain and 
definite that it cannot be increased or diminished." As Calvin 
said, "This is a horrible decree." It is the sheerest rationalism. It 
puts the inference and conclusions of fallible human logic on a 
par with the word of God. It is a libel on the character of God, 
which the enlightened Christian conscience of our time will not 
for a moment receive as an article of faith. 

"We long and pray for the reunion of Christendom, but we 
should not try to hasten it by professing to believe the obsolete 
tenets of past ages, which are repugnant to the moral and 
historical sense of the present generation. " 



We are glad to note that light is breaking in upon, and revealing 
some of the hideous features of, the old creed-idols; to which 
alas ! so many still bow down. But while we must ever pity the 
blind, and pray and labor that they may see, what must be our 
righteous indignation (and God's) against such hypocrisy as this 
"Long-time Presbyterian Minister" accuses himself of. Hiding 
behind this unrecognizable title, he confesses that he does not 
believe the very Confession of Faith which for years, and still, 
he publicly professes to believe. What moral cowardice! For 
fear of the loss of an easy and sure living, and for fear of the loss 
of dignity and honor among those whom he admits are 
perpetrating "a libel on the character of God," he prefers to 
stultify himself and stand with them; not only sharing in this 
"libel," but more,-an admitted hypocrite, false to the solemn 
vows which he took when he accepted his "ministerial license" 
to libel God's character. 

"Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee," says the Master to 
such; and we greatly fear that the number willing to thus libel 
God's character for the sake of peace, harmony, honor of men, 
and a good easy living, is not a few. Better far in the esteem of 
God and all his honest children is the condition of the Infidel, 
who honestly speaks his mind, than such deceivers who sell the 
truth and God's character for pieces of silver. 

"The latter end of that man is worse than the first. " "It had been 
better for them, not to have known the way of righteousness 
[truth], than after they have known it to turn from the holy 
commandment, delivered unto them. But it happens to them 
according to the true proverb: The dog returned to his own 
vomit. "-2 Pet. 2:21,22. 

Awakening is good, and we are striving to awaken all— ministers 
and people-to see the truth regarding God's plan and character; 
and to see the incongruities and unreasonableness of creeds 
formulated in the Dark Ages; and to get them to reject these 
befouled streams of human tradition, impregnated with Papal 
errors and corruption. But each one who is awakened and sees, 
is a thousand fold more guilty than the poor blinded deluded 
ones whom his influence and example helps to keep in bondage 
and ignorance of the truth. He that knew his Master's will and 
did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. 

We speak forcibly, because such hypocrites, both in pulpits and 
pews, are increasing, and often do not realize their hypocrisy 
because it is common and popular. We speak not in anger but in 
love. Following God's example we would wound to heal. 



R1062 : page 2 



WHY WAGES SEEM LOW. 

The widening of the sphere of one's surroundings, and a larger 
acquaintance with other men and their pursuits, have long been 
recognized as not productive of content. Writing to his nephew a 
hundred years ago, Thomas Jefferson thus concisely expressed 
the results of his observation: "Traveling," he says, "makes men 
wiser, but less happy. When men of sober age travel they gather 
knowledge, but they are, after all, subject to recollections mixed 
with regret; their affections are weakened by being extended 
over more objects, and they learn new habits which cannot be 
gratified when they return home. " Again, as the former few and 
simple requirements of the masses have become more varied 
and costly, the individual effort necessary for the satisfaction of 
the latter is not relatively less, even under the new conditions of 
production, than before,-and in many instances, is possibly 
greater. Hence, notwithstanding the large advance in recent 
years in the average rate of wages, and their increased 
purchasing power, there is no less complaint than formerly of 
the cost of living; when the foundation for the complaint is for 
the most part to be found in the circumstance that a totally 
different style of living has been adopted; and that society 
makes conformity with such different style a standard of family 
respectability. -Hon. A. D. Wells. 



R1062 : page 2 

LETTERS TO OUR CHILDREN.--BY W. I. M. 

THE TRINITY-CONTINUED. 

DEAR M.:~In our last we found that, according to the 
Scriptures, there is one God only. Naturally you ask, "Then who 
or what is Jesus?" So much mystery has been thrown around his 
nature that it is no wonder that he is indeed "a mystery" to 
many. But does not the Bible speak of him in a very peculiar 
manner; and are not his own sayings about himself very dark, 
and difficult to understand? Yes, to some they are probably very 
dark. 

Have you ever stood near a group of foreigners talking (all 
together, as we sometimes do) in a language you did not 
understand a single word of? You have noticed their manner,- 
now grave, then gay; now seemingly angry in their earnestness, 
then suddenly all seized with convulsive laughter. How strange 
it all seemed to you; though to one of their own people standing 
by, there might be nothing strange about it. 

Many have never learned God's language. It has been too much 
trouble; or they had not time to learn it, they were too anxious to 
make money or to enjoy this life; so "it is all Greek" to them. 



Our citizenship is of the Heavenly Kingdom (See Phil. 3:20; 
Heb. 11:13-16; Eph. 2: 19-Revised Version.), therefore we 
should be diligent to learn its language. 

If we study God's Word faithfully, earnestly asking that his 
spirit may enlighten the eyes of our understanding, we shall 
learn his language, and his Word will no longer be "a sealed 
book" to us. -Isa. 29:9-14. 

R1063 : page 2 

WHAT THINK YOU OF THE CHRIST, 
WHOSE SON IS HE? 

This is the way our Lord Jesus asked the Pharisees their official 
opinion concerning the promised Messiah. They answered 
correctly, in the language of the Scripture: "The Son of David." 
Then he showed them that David called him "Lord," and asked 
them again. "If David then called him Lord, how is he his Son?" 

They had not got over as far as to understand that, and could not 
answer him. 

Let us find the answer. 

Whose son is he? He had been announced as the son of David, 
and heir to David's throne, Luke 1:32: As the seed of Abraham 
and heir of the world, Gal. 3:16; Rom. 4:13: As the seed of the 
woman [Eve], who was to crush the head of their deceivers- 
bringing deliverance to the race. -Gen. 3:15. 

The Jews might have partly understood this, knowing that Eve 
was the mother of all the human race, that David was a 
descendant of Abraham, that the promised Messiah [or Christ] 
would be a descendant of David, and that he would take the 
kingdom of Israel [David's throne], and subdue and rule the 
world with it. 

But it was also written that the Christ was the Root of David's 
family (Isa. 11:10), as well as the Branch. (Jer. 23:5-6.) After 
David's Genealogical Tree had apparently been cut down and 
dried up and dead, new life was to enter one of the roots (Isa. 
11:1), and it was to bud and blossom and fill the world with 
fruit. -Isa. 27:6. 

Stranger things than these were written of this Wonderful One. 
Moses foresaw him as a prophet; and, like himself, as a leader; 
in a greater deliverance than the coming out of Egypt. (Deut. 
18:15-19; Jer. 16:14-15.) Again, he was seen as a priest; and- 
like Melchisedec (Heb. 7:1) -as a royal priest; a priest upon a 
throne. (Zech. 6:12-13.) He was to be a king (Isa. 32:1), yet he 
would be born in a manger (Luke 2:12) and would come as one 
of the humblest of earth. -Zech. 9:9. 



Lord of all, yet servant of all. (Matt. 20:25-28.) Without a place 
to lay his own head, yet able to say "Come unto me... and I will 
give you rest."-- Matt. 11:25-30. 

Hungry and thirsty, yet dispensing living bread (John 6), and 
living water (John 4) and feeding thousands. -Matt. 14:13-21; 
15:32-38. 

Tired, weary and asleep, yet rising to subdue the winds and the 
waves of the raging storm.— Luke 8:24. 

Rich, yet for our sakes becoming poor; that we through his 
poverty might be made rich-2 Cor. 8:9. 

Innocent, yet wounded for our transgressions, that through his 
stripes we might be healed.— Isa. 53:5. 

Sinless (Heb. 4:15), yet bearing away the sin of the world. -Isa. 
53:11-12. 

The Lamb of God (John 1 :29), yet the Lion of the tribe of 
Judah-Rev. 5:5. 

Rejected by his own (Isa. 53:3), but yet to be revealed as the 
"Desire of all Nations. "-Hag. 2:7. 

To blind bigots he was without form or comeliness [good looks], 
(Isa. 53:2) but to those whose eyes are opened he becomes "the 
chiefest among ten thousand" and "altogether lovely."- 
Solomon's Song 5:10,16. 

He is the Light of the World (John 1 :4,9); The Morning Star 
(Rev. 22:16); The Sun of Righteousness.-Mal. 4:2. 

Surely we are ready to cry out, "What manner of man is this?" 
Was he a man? He was certainly no common man like the rest 
of mankind. Try to compare him with the greatest men the world 
has seen, and you find you cannot. They were not enough like 
him to compare with him. He is beyond comparison. The most 
famous of earth's heroes have been its warriors: Such men as 
Alexander, Julius Caesar and Bonaparte. They were called great 
men because very successful, but their success was through the 
slaughter of millions of their fellow men who had as much right 
to life as they had. But here is a hero who refused the honors of 
men (John 6:15) and who instead of taking life, actually yielded 
up his own; that he might enjoy the pleasure of bringing back to 
life and joy and peace the untold millions whom the tyrants of 
earth have ground down to degradation and death. "Greater love 
hath no one than this, that one lay down his life for his friends." 
Jesus died for his enemies. 

If Jesus was not God, nor a common man, what was he? He 
nearly always spoke of himself as, the Son of man. In a few 
instances he acknowledged the title the Son of God. Was he 
both, a Son of man and a Son of God? Yes. Was he therefore 
both God and man? No. 



I think you are puzzled now. Well, God's Word contains 
wonderful mysteries and strange secrets. But Jesus said to his 
disciples "Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the 
kingdom of heaven, but to them [unbelievers] it is not given. " - 
Matt. 13:11. Read also, Psa. 25:14; Amos 3:7. 

God's Word explains many mysteries, and his faithful servants 
who study his Word are not in darkness (1 Thes. 5:4-8), as the 
worldly are.-l John 2:11. 

David said:— 

Oh how I love thy law ! 

It is my meditation all the day. 

Thy commandments make me wiser than mine enemies: 

I have more understanding than all my teachers, 

For thy testimonies are my meditations. 

I understand more than the aged, 

Because I have kept thy precepts. 

-Psa. 119:97-100. 

Let his prayer also be yours:— 

Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold 
Wondrous things out of thy law. 

-Verse 18. 

Read carefully what Paul said to Timothy. 2 Tim. 3:14-17. 

Now let us turn to God's Word with confidence that he will 
reveal even this mystery to us. In John, chap. 17, Jesus speaks 
clearly of God as his Father; of having been sent by his Father to 
the world; and of having been in glory with his Father before the 
world existed. This carries us a long way back into the past, but 
John goes further. He tells us that not only "the world was made 
by him, " but "without him was not anything made that has been 
made. "-John 1:3. 

Paul makes it still clearer in Col. 1:15-18, saying;-"In him were 
all things created, in the heavens and upon the earth, things 
visible and things invisible [to us];. ..and he is before all things. 

You are ready to say: "If before all things, and if all things were 
made by him, would it not prove that he was eternal, and not 
created? In other words, that as he made all things, therefore he 
was not made; and if not made, then he must be an uncreated or 
self existant God?" Well, if there were no other scriptures on the 
subject it would look as if John and Paul meant that; and this is 
the argument of Trinitarians, and a very plausible one. But we 
have no right to select texts to support one side of a seeming 
argument, and ignore or set aside other scriptures which 
overthrow our pet theories. We have seen that our Lord Jesus is 
not the Lord Jehovah, and Jehovah has said clearly and 
repeatedly that there is only one God, and that he is that one. We 
will not discuss the assertion that the three Gods ("God, the 



Father; God, the Son; and God, the Holy Ghost; as the church of 
Rome invented it), are one God, as it admits of no discussion, 
being a simple impossibility, and too absurd for reasonable 
people to believe. 

Paul in the place last quoted from (Col. 1:15) explains what he 
means. He tells us that our Lord Jesus was "THE FIRSTBORN 
of all creation. " Let us examine this very carefully, for if we 
understand Paul here it will make the whole subject plain. The 
old version reads: "The Firstborn of every creature." This is not 
so clear, as we might get the thought of each creature, whereas it 
means every created thing. Not only the human race, or all 
living creatures [beasts, birds, etc.] on this earth, but all angels, 
and all worlds are included;— the countless spheres in the starry 
heavens, which are probably under process of preparation for 
future habitation under the reign of him who is to fill and perfect 
all things. -Eph 1:23. 

When God began the work of creation he first made our Lord 
Jesus. He was not called Jesus then, neither was he a man. He 
was made in the highest order of created beings that we have 
any knowledge of. He is called "The Archangel. " We do not 
know that there was any other "Archangel," though there were 
other "Princes" among the angels. The word means the first or 
chief angel. He was both the first created and the first or highest 
in rank. Just as Adam was pre-eminent among men by being the 
first, and therefore the life-giver to all the others, so this 
Archangel was pre-eminent over all and the life-giver to "all 
creation." He was, as he himself says, "THE BEGINNING of 
the creation of God." (Rev. 3:14.) But he was more. God, having 
created him, evidently used him as his instrument in the further 
work of creation. That is, God did not continue to create things 
himself, but he told this "Firstborn" what to do and he did it. 

Now, as God created all things through Jesus Christ, God was 
the Creator, and his Firstborn was also the Creator; but you see 
that the Son was not Creator in the same way that his Father 
was. God gave him the necessary wisdom and power to do all 
these things, "For it was the good pleasure of the Father that in 
him should all fullness dwell." (Col. 1:19) Fullness here means 
unlimited or complete power, etc.-John 3:34-35. 

R1064 : page 2 

This Firstborn then became the fountain from whence flowed 
out the life and power which both created and continues to 
sustain all things. Behind the Fountain was the great 
inexhaustible Reservoir, God. 

Many of the texts applying to our Lord Jesus as Creator, Son, 
Firstborn, Prince, Fullness, etc., refer to him as the Head of the 
New Creation, of which he and the true Gospel Church-"The 
Church of the Firstborn"— are the "Beginning." We will study 
that feature in our next letter. 



The old creation was in many things a picture or type of the new 
creation. Thus the first Adam was an image or small 
representation of the second Adam. — 1 Cor. 15:44-50. 

Abraham offering up his son (Gen. 22), and other circumstances 
in their history prefigured Our Father's dealing with Jesus, and 
with the Church. (Gal. 4:24-31.) David as a king represented 
Christ. So the work of the Firstborn of the old creation 
corresponds in some things to the work of the Firstborn of the 
new creation; but if we study faithfully with our Lord's help, we 
need not get confused, and the subject will become more and 
more clear and plain to us. 

In our next we will follow the history of our Lord Jesus down 
from the glory he had with the Father before the world was, 
through his trial and victory to his glorious reward, his 
exaltation. -PAP A. 



R1064 : page 3 



ALL THINGS NEW. 

The world is old with centuries 
But not for these she bows her head; 
Close to her heart the sorrow lies, 
She holds so many dead! 

Sad discords mingle in her song, 
Tears fall upon her with the dew, 
The whole creation groans— How long 
Ere all shall be made new? 

Yet brightly on her smiles the sun, 
A bounteous heaven delights to bless; 
Oh, what shall be that fairer one 
Wherein dwells righteousness? 

Oh, happy world! Oh, holy time! 
When wrong shall die and strife will cease, 
And all the bells of heaven chime 
With melodies of peace. 

No place shall be in that new earth 
For all that blights this universe; 
No evil taint the second birth, 
'There shall be no more curse.' 

Ye broken hearted, cease your moan; 
The day of promise dawns for you; 
For He who sits upon the throne 
Says, 'I make all things new.' 



We mourn the dead but they shall wake! 
The lost, but they shall be restored! 
Oh, well our human hearts might break 
Without that sacred word! 

Dim eyes look up, sad hearts rejoice, 
Seeing God's bow of promise through, 
At sound of that prophetic voice- 
'I will make all things new.' 



-Sel. 



R1064 : page 3 

THE VALUE OF SUPERSTITION. 

As Josephus was disposed to apologize for his countrymen the 
Jews, and to attempt to show that their restlessness under the 
government of Caesar was not the result of their religious laws, 
etc., (as shown in our August issue), so many Christians are 
disposed to apologize for the spread of a Revolutionary spirit, a 
spirit of insubordination, wherever the gospel goes; and they, 
like Josephus, disclaim the responsibility of themselves and of 
the Christian religion. But this is because both they and 
Josephus are tinctured with the philosophy of their times. 

The liberty and equality which the gospel inculcates is much 
akin to the more shadowy typical teachings of the same, given to 
the Jews; and the natural results of this knowledge upon the 
unconsecrated are much the same now as then, leading to 
socialism, anarchism and various impracticable ideas on the part 
of some who are neither controlled by a well-balanced intellect, 
nor by the spirit of Christ, nor directed by a knowledge of God's 
time and method of righting matters now seriously at fault. 

Josephus, writing for Grecians and Romans in Rome, manifests 
his object to have been, to show that the Jewish philosophies, no 
less than the Grecian, tended to peace, and submission to rulers; 
hence after reporting the Jewish views as nearly as possible to 
correspond to the Grecian, he adds, "on account of which 
doctrines they are able to greatly persuade the body of the 
people. " 

The intelligent portion of the world has always esteemed peace 
and good government as of vital importance, hence worldly- 
wise philosophers and statesmen have often approved and even 
advocated theories which they themselves at heart rejected as 
absurdities, simply because they realized the need of some 
"doctrines by which the body of the people might be greatly 
persuaded" to relinquish their freedom and submit to the ruling 
of the more able and crafty. Since fear is one of the greatest 
incentives, fear has generally been used; and since prejudice and 



superstition are the ablest supports to fear, these have been 
cultivated by all philosophies. And by whatsoever name known, 
or accompanied by whatsoever appearances of learning— as 
colleges, learned men, books, etc.,— such philosophies (built 
upon superstition and prejudice) are really but vain imaginings 
of imperfect men, and reveal their ignorance of the truth. 

Nevertheless, in some respects at least, the world has profited by 
these systems and their various errors, which have had the effect 
aimed at by them all— namely "to greatly persuade the body of 
the people" -through fear. And it is for the same reason 
(philosophical conservatism), that wise statesmen and thinkers 
of later times, -such as Webster, Clay, Lincoln, Grant, 
Bismarck, and others, while not able or willing to accept any of 
the modern creeds of Christendom, nevertheless have favored 
all, realizing the need of "doctrines which would greatly 
persuade the body of the people. " 

Mankind in general, in the present fallen state, is mentally 
unbalanced and incapable of reasoning logically on any 
question. Only the few, the exceptions, are capable of drawing 
logical conclusions on financial, scientific and social, i.e. 
political, problems. Hence the world had its season of greatest 
contentment (which in some respects should be sought by all) 
when the masses were in utter ignorance, and trusted and obeyed 
blindly the dictates of the abler, more logical, and balanced 
minds, which rose to the surface and gained the power. But 
avarice, greed for power and honor and wealth, continually 
corrupted this abler class; and the philosophies of oppression 
and superstition overleaped their bounds; and the sleeping world 
began to awaken; and the great Reformation of the sixteenth 
century followed. 

By fits and starts the awakening of the Reformation time has 
since progressed. And it has brought with it revolutions- 
political, ecclesiastical and scientific. This results from the 
dissemination of Bible truths among the people. The Bible is the 
greatest of all levellers; the greatest of all liberators; the greatest 
of all revolutionizers. It sows its seeds deep and broad, by 
showing that all men are of one blood; that all alike were 
condemned to death; and that all alike, king and pope and 
peasant and slave, were redeemed by the one sacrifice given 
"once for all;" and that there is only one way for all to come to 
God, and that as they come they must all stand upon one level of 
acceptance, because God is no respecter of persons. 

Wherever these principles of the true gospel are appreciated they 
are recognized as a grant of liberty from God, which inspires the 
people to a realization of their common rights and privileges, 
and causes them to feel restive under earthly potentates both 
kingly and priestly. 



Though the world possesses the blessing of greater knowledge, 
and that more widely distributed among the masses than ever 
before; and though with it they possess many more comforts and 
conveniences than ever before— yes, even luxuries formerly 
possessed scarcely by the few, are now classed among the 
necessities by the many; and though there never has been a 
period of such general freedom, -liberty of person, of thought, 
and of conduct; yet for all this, it is doubtful if there ever was a 
period of more general discontent. 

Let none misunderstand our meaning when we assert, that the 
Bible is indirectly the source of this discontent, as well as of 
present enlightenment and progress. Had the Bible been kept in 
the background, hidden from the people under cover of dead 
languages, as Papacy designed; had the decretals and bulls of 

R1065 : page 3 

the church of Rome continued to be the standard and law of 
men's consciences; the dark ages would still continue, and 
ignorance, superstition and contentment would prevail now, as it 
did in the twelfth century. 

Knowledge and liberty can only be profitably used, and without 
danger of bad results, either by perfect beings able and willing 
to reason out fully the results, and to voluntarily submit to such 
restraints and regulations as would be for the general good; or 
by imperfect beings, who are conscious of the imperfections of 
their minds and bodies, but whose hearts recognize the divine 
law and voluntarily submit every thought and act thereto; or by 
fallen beings under a just, infallible, rigorous government which 
could and would enforce righteousness. 

To-day we see the knowledge of human rights spreading among 
the masses, and the chains of ignorance and superstition 
breaking, yet the people are unprepared for such liberty; they are 
unbalanced in judgment so as to be incapable of correctly 
estimating causes and effects; they are not consecrated to God, 
so as to be willing to be under the control of his will, expressed 
in the Scriptures; and we have no just, infallible government, 
able to enforce righteousness. 

The result must be, that as superstitious dread of everlasting 
torment and other falsities depart, and the unwise, unbalanced 
masses gain a knowledge of their power, laws and governments, 
good, bad and indifferent, will all be swept away, and confusion 
and anarchy will obtain,-to the injury of all. That this very 
condition of things is rapidly approaching, all can see, who see 
at all. It cannot be repressed; it already has a great momentum 
and makes greater progress daily. It is both an evil and a 
blessing. Its first results will be evil, but it will prove to all 
mankind the absolute necessity of a just, strong government, 
which can enforce the right while men progress in knowledge— 



without requiring the aids of ignorance and superstition to 
maintain its control. 

And while the people will be getting ready to welcome such a 
government, God is preparing just such a government for them,- 
-Christ's Millennial Kingdom. Under its beneficent reign, 
knowledge shall be greatly increased, and man restored to God's 
image, which has been almost effaced by the past six thousand 
years of sin, so that he will be mentally balanced again and able 
to reason correctly on good and evil, right and wrong, advantage 
and disadvantage. 

So then, ignorance and superstition are more favorable to 
contentment than a little knowledge; and the worldly-wise of the 
past saw this, and to the benefit of all kept the masses under 
subjection to law by these means. And God permitted it so to be, 
until his due time should come, in which, under control of the 
King of kings knowledge shall be made so perfect as to turn 
aside its present danger and to make it the basis of a much 
greater and more enjoyable contentment than ignorance ever 
produced. 

We are now in the transition period, from the rule of superstition 
to the rule of truth. Many seeing the trouble will be inclined to 
shrink back, and to desire ignorance and superstition to chain 
and restrain the masses; and attempts to perpetuate these 
restraints will doubtless be made; but since God's due time has 
come for knowledge to be increased none can stay its progress. 
The consecrated church occupies, as ever, a peculiar position, 
seeing and appreciating without fear the result which others will 
dread. We have no fear, because we see the glorious results to 
be wrought out thus. It is in order that we should not be in 
darkness, as the world, that our Father's plans are thus unfolded 
to those of his children who, led of his spirit, have an ear to hear. 



R1065 : page 3 

CHRISTIAN FREEDOM. 

It is said that, after the emancipation of American slaves, when 
millions who had for years been subject to the master's law and 
whip, were suddenly given the right to control their own affairs, 
it was almost impossible to get the majority of them to do 
anything. In their degraded condition liberty meant license; and 
had it not been for their fear of everlasting torment, there is no 
telling what extremes might have been reached. Since then, 
experience has been a valuable educator to many of these freed- 
men. Many of them have learned that they must master 
themselves, control their desires and weaknesses, and overcome 
their sloth; and that they must really be both master and slave. 
Experience is slowly teaching them that sloth brings hunger and 



nakedness and disrespect, and that diligence and sobriety bring 
honor and comforts and respect and a higher order of pleasure; 
and that now they must not only be their own masters, but also 
their own slaves. 

So, too, it requires a large degree of experience, which is one 
sort of education, to enable our weak fallen natures, so long the 
slaves of that severe master, Sin, to use the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes us free. 

If we were perfect beings as Adam was, in God's likeness, we 
should probably with present experience, find no such difficulty, 
but only pleasure and real advantage from fullest liberty. But 
alas ! such is not our case; we are painfully conscious of our 
imperfections and downward tendencies; we find that as a 
knowledge of God's plan comes to us, the very freedom it brings 
becomes a snare to many. As they get the truth, and through it 
freedom from the superstitions and fears of error, wherewith Sin 
had bound us as slaves, the first tendency with many is apt to be 
toward spiritual lethargy and idleness, or into slavery to politics 
or business. 

When the task- master, the law, is gone and can disturb us no 
longer, because we are "not under law but under grace" (favor), 
we are in serious danger, even while joyfully singings- 
Free from the law, oh, happy condition, 
Jesus hath died and there is remission. 

But, a greater responsibility rests unto us, in some respects, by 
reason of this liberty. To be "under grace" leaves room for our 
wills to act; to use this "liberty wherewith Christ hath made us 
free. " Our liberty is a liberty to act; to co-operate with our Lord 
and Redeemer in overcoming our former master, Sin. 

The fuller and clearer our apprehension of God's love, and of the 
length and breadth of his full salvation, the fuller will be our joy 
and our appreciation of "this liberty wherewith Christ hath made 
us free. " The more we learn of the particulars of our 
emancipation, the greater and grander we find our liberty to be, 
and the more our joy, the greater is our responsibility. "Brethren, 
ye have been invited to liberty only use not liberty for an 
occasion to [serve] the flesh, but by love serve one another."— 
Gal. 5:13. 

The American freedmen found many of their former masters 
willing to take advantage of their weaknesses and ignorance, to 
get them into their debt in advance; so that they would be 
compelled to serve them virtually as before. So, those whom 
Christ makes free, find their old 

R1065 : page 4 

master, Sin, even while admitting their freedom, ready to take 
advantage of their weaknesses and to make them serve him 



virtually as before; even while they are conscious of their 
emancipation. Those who are thus overcome are really slaves 
again, except in name. 

What safe course, then, can such weak and inexperienced 
freedmen pursue? becomes a most important question to us all. 

There is but one safe course. Because imperfect, we are unfit for 
self-control and incapable of using liberty to our own real 
advantage; hence we must really become slaves again. It 
becomes a question only as to whose slave. Left to itself, the 
question would soon solve itself; we would gradually become 
re-enslaved to Sin, with merely the name of being free, but 
without any of its advantages. There is only one other Master 
besides Sin, and that is Christ; and unlike Sin, he never enslaves 
any; all of his household are voluntary servants, and he treats 
them as "brethren. " Though all such must be as obedient to his 
will as though they were the veriest slaves, yet he binds none; he 
compels none to stay, or to serve him. In a word, all his servants 
are voluntary slaves. His household is really a school where he 
is sole Master, using his authority for the benefit, education and 
development of his faithful ones. 

The only safe course for those made free— justified by Christ— is 
this:- 

Go to Christ at once, tell him of our joy and thankfulness for 
freedom; and of our realization of our own imperfections which 
incapitate us for self control; and of our fear lest our former 
master by cunning devices might bring us into bondage; and 
pledging unqualified submission to him as his servants, ask that 
he take us under his control;— to teach us, to chastise us, and to 
make use of our time and talents, in whatever way he pleases. 

But we query- 

(1) Would not this complete surrender deprive us of liberty? 

(2) Would it not put us completely under the control of a master, 
whose every wish such an agreement would bind us to consult 
and obey? 

(3) Is not all slavery detestable? 

(4) Is such a slavery reasonable? 

R1066 : page 4 

We answer (1), Yes, it would deprive us of liberty in one sense; 
in that we could not abide in his service, draw his pay, and have 
the blessings which his household enjoy, without full 
submission to his will regardless of our own. But this would not 
interfere with our freedom in that it would be our own voluntary 
act, and in that we should not be bound by Christ to continue in 
his service. We retain the liberty to leave, even after we accept 
the privilege to enter this service. It is a privilege, not a 
compulsion; a voluntary enslavement. 



(2) Yes, full submission is required of the entire household; all 
are required to obey whether they see fully the wisdom of the 
rules or not; as they obey, they are made more and more to see 
the justice and wisdom of their Master's rulings. But surely we 
need not fear to fully submit to such a master. He takes 
advantage of our confidence, not to injure and enslave, but to 
bless us and protect us from our former master and enemy Sin. 
We can surely trust him who died to secure for us freedom from 
the service of Sin, and from his wages, death;— who purchased 
for us life and liberty. Ah, yes, this one is interested in us, and is 
benevolent, wise and powerful-our tried friend. 

One there is above all others 
Well deserves the name of friend. 
His is love beyond a brother's, 
Costly, free, and knows no end. 

Which of all our friends to save us 
Could or would have shed his blood? 
But this Savior died to have us 
Freed from Sin-restored to God. 

(3) Slavery to sin, is detestable and galling indeed; enforced 
slavery of any sort is always dishonorable, both to master and 
slave. But the voluntary slavery of love, subjecting itself to 
righteousness and wisdom and submitting every talent and 
moment to the direction of this Master, is grandly noble, and, 
moreover, the very essence of wisdom. 

A mother's love and service and slavery to her family, is but an 
imperfect illustration of this love-slavery; and yet it is justly 
regarded with respect and veneration. 

(4) Our weakness and inability to rule ourselves, and to protect 
ourselves against being again entrapped, by our old master, Sin, 
shows us that the only reasonable course for us to follow, is to 
submit ourselves to the one interested in our welfare, who will 
raise us up and strengthen us. It would be the part of wisdom to 
thus submit to Christ if our reason were none other than a selfish 
one,— that thus we might escape the other, the cruel master, Sin, 
whose wages are suffering and death. 

But there is another and a weighty reason why we should 
volunteer to enter the service of Christ, -namely gratitude. When 
we realize that all we have and are is of and through him, that all 
our liberty is his gift purchased with his own self-denying 
sacrifice, gratitude of the commonest sort demands that we not 
only thank him, but also that we show our appreciation by using 
our redeemed lives to his glory, in his grand and honorable 
service. 

Seeing human weakness, and the crafty deceptions of Satan, 
Paul urged some of our fellow- freedmen, in his day, saying: As 
ye have yielded your members— servants to uncleanness and to 



iniquity, even so, now yielded your members servants to 
righteousness unto holiness." (Rom. 6:19.) And again he says, 
"Being made free from Sin, and become [bond] servants [slaves] 
to God, ye have your fruits unto holiness, and the end 
everlasting life." (Verse 22.) And again he says: "I beseech you 
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies [in 
his service] living sacrifices, holy, acceptable unto God, your 
reasonable service. " -Rom. 12:1. 

So, then, the only safe course for any of the justified, lies in 
consecration; i.e., in a voluntary and full surrender to Christ. All 
others really become re-enslaved to Sin, even though they may 
despise the service. Others, knowing not how to use their liberty 
and not having full divine direction, are in some respect worse 
off than if still in ignorance and bound by superstition; for 
otherwise, their release becomes a fresh source of temptation, 
the more difficult, yea impossible, for such to restrain. Hence 
self-control is dangerous to a fallen imperfect being, though 
good and proper for the perfect. Hence the necessity that all who 
realize freedom through Christ's pardon, should submit 
themselves to their Redeemer's control. 

Indeed we may herein see the wisdom of God's course in 
permitting mighty systems to bind the fallen race, with chains of 
ignorance and superstition, until the present time; when, the 
selection of the church, the Body of Christ, being about 
complete, full knowledge as well as full power to control, will 
be established in the earth; after the now rising and designed 
tempest (Dan. 12:1) shall have swept away present systems and 
broken their chains. 



R1066:page4 



KNOWLEDGE SOMETIMES A SNARE. 

We have noticed some of the bad effects of knowledge 
(freedom from superstition, etc.) on the depraved world, -in the 
futile efforts of fallen men to govern themselves by the simple 
power of love of right; for the twofold reason of their lack of 
wisdom, and their lack of strength of character. 

Let us next notice, the bad effect of knowledge (freedom from 
errors and superstitions) upon believers in Christ who do not 
submit themselves fully to his control. They are exposed, by 
their freedom to greater besetments from their own imperfect 
organisms. Thus for illustration: Some who had dreaded to 
speak an untrue word; who had been scrupulously honest; who 
had been generous toward the poor, and in support of religion; 
who had been prompt and regular in worship, both in the public 
gatherings of believers and in private and family worship; who 
in a word were exemplary persons,-more than they perhaps 



imagined have been held and bound to such a life, by a fear that 
eternal torment would be their lot if any other course were 
pursued, than by real love of righteousness. It is easily seen that 
a knowledge of God's love and gracious plan, setting free such a 
one from his bonds of superstition, must have one of two effects 
upon him:— 

The effect may be to make him less careful of his word,— of his 
business and social engagements; less generous toward the poor 
and toward religious work; less regular in God's worship, public 
and private; more disposed to gratify self, and less disposed to 
sacrifice anything for God or for fellow creatures than before; 
because the impulse of fear is removed, and must is replaced by 
may; and may is fought against, by every selfish interest which 
before selfishly urged the other course. 

Or, the effect may be the very reverse: The fear being removed, 
and the love of God being seen the more clearly, the effect may, 
and certainly should be, to overwhelm the heart and lead it, 
bound in loving gratitude and appreciation, to the feet of the 
Redeemer; consecrated fully and forever to his service, and 
anxious, if but permitted, to share even the humblest part in 
carrying forward the great work which God has foreordained. 
Such a one will be blessed and enlarged in every way by his 
freedom. Seeing God's goodness and love, and having 
consecrated to God's service and will and plan, he will seek to 
copy and imitate his character and methods. Seeing the firmness 
and justice of God, he will seek to be more and more just. 
Seeing God's love and benevolence more clearly, he, while just 
and firm, will be more generous toward the weak and erring. 
Partaking of the spirit (the mind, the plan, the sentiment) of 
God, gradually, he will lose that selfishness which is always 
seeking its own advantage, and will begin to take so deep an 
interest in God's plans as to gladly sacrifice selfish desires, plans 
and conveniences, etc., etc., in the effort to fulfill the divine 
plan. His love for all for whom Christ died, will make him more 
than ever kind to the poor and sympathetic toward the 
unfortunate. More than ever will he desire to use money, and 
time, and influence, in God's service; because now, love has 
made self-sacrifice a pleasure. More than ever will he desire to 
acknowledge the Lord in all his affairs, and to worship him in 
private and with his family. More than ever will he be desirous 
of meeting both publicly and privately for worship, and for the 
study of the Master's will, with those "of like precious faith" and 
consecration. And less than ever will he crave other fellowship 
or company, except he can at least have a hope of telling them 
of the full salvation and of the gracious Master he has found. 

Some of his unconsecrated friends, may think and say of him, 
that he is a fool- a very slave to Christ, doing and enduring in 
his Master's service (willingly, gladly), what they would not 



endure under any consideration; not even in the interest of self, 
the master they chiefly consult and seek to please. 

R1067 : page 4 

But oh, how differently the truly consecrated feel:— 

Oh what comfort it brings, 
That soul sweetly sings; 
I am safe from all danger 
While under his wings. 

A slave?— Yes, a willing slave; and yet free to leave the service 
and go away, if he wills. A menial servant?— Yes, and one 
whose chief anxiety is to do the work to the approval of the 
gracious Master. One whose only fear is to displease, or to be 
rejected from the work. These are the only ones on earth to 
whom knowledge and liberty have brought the proper fruit so 
much desired by all, namely contentment. And truly as it is 
written, "Godlikeness with contentment is great gain. " 



Then- 



Farewell ye dreams of night, 
Jesus is mine! 
Mine is a dawning light 
Jesus is mine! 

All else my soul has tried 
Left but an aching void; 
Jesus has satisfied! 
Jesus is mine!" 



R1067:page4 

BE NOT ENTANGLED AGAIN. 

"Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, 
and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. "-Gal. 5:1. 

Few get truly free from errors and superstitions, because few 
seek earnestly enough the voluntary enslavement to Christ, 
referred to above. Stepping out of one error and bondage of 
superstition, they step into another because of their own 
weaknesses. As we have already shown, none are strong enough 
to stand alone, and there is but the one we can lean on, and not 
be taken advantage of and deceived, enslaved and bound again, 
all our present surroundings being imperfect or evil. 

All such enslaving, binding entanglements are deceptive; they 
all appear harmless or even beneficial, else few would be thus 
entangled. One of the very deceptive entanglements of our day, 
which hinders more than all others together, perhaps, that 
fullness and closeness of heart-fellowship with Christ, the only 
Master, is the prevalent idea that in joining the one church, 



whose names are written in heaven, we should also join some 
one of the numerous earthly organizations which each claim to 
represent that one true church, and whose creeds each claim to 
represent the "one faith"- "the faith once delivered unto the 
saints." 

The impression is freely given, and is generally received, that to 
fail to become bound to some earthly sect, is to fail of 
membership in the one true church. The innocent soul, freed 
from Satan's service through Christ, is told truly that it cannot 
stand free alone, but instead of being pointed to Christ as the 
only Master and to the Word of God as the only rule for faith 
and service, they are pointed to the various sects as representing 
Christ, as appointed by him to receive their services, and they 
are pointed to the doctrines of these sects as taking the place and 
showing the real meaning of God's Word. 

To become a probationary member of 

R1067 : page 5 

the one true church, "whose names are written in heaven," the 
conditions are first, a realization of our own imperfection and 
condemnation as sinners; secondly, of Christ's full atonement 
for our sins; thirdly, implicit faith in his love and goodness and 
in all his exceeding great and precious promises, however 
beyond the range of human skill or thought; and fourthly, a full 
consecration to him as our Lord and Master. These are the only 
conditions of our acceptance in the true church and they imply 
fullness of consecration, to do and be whatever our Master may 
desire, as we shall continually seek to grow in his grace and in 
the knowledge of his will. But to become a member of one of 
the earthly organizations, (churches), means to bind one's self 
beforehand, to believe and do neither more nor less than is 
stated in their creed and "covenant. " 

This leaves no room for the spirit of the truth to guide into all 
truth, and to show us things to come (John 16:13); no room for 
growth in grace and knowledge; and as a consequence, the new 
member, if he shall remain faithful to his covenant with the sect 
he has joined, can get no nearer to a full understanding of the 
truth, and no nearer to a full consecration, than the other faithful 
members of the same sect. He is bound by a creed seldom 
understood, and by a supposed interpretation of the Bible, 
framed by fallible men in a time of great ignorance and 
superstitious fog, which originated in Papacy in the dark ages. 

When thus bound they are led to believe that every service 
rendered to such organizations, composed for most part of 
"tares," is service to the true church, the "little flock" of 
overcoming and fully consecrated believers. They suppose that 
money spent in cultivating sectarian pride, is sacrificed to the 
Lord; that fairs, suppers, and many worldly and questionable 
schemes to get money, are work for the Lord, and for the truth; 



they suppose that time and energy spent in getting repentant 
souls, and many others not repentant but merely alarmed, into 
these sects, where they will be blinded to a higher consecration, 
and bound and held back from growth in grace, knowledge and 
love,-this they are deluded into supposing is "working for 
Jesus!" Alas! how sadly some are thus, in the name of the 
Master and in the name of the true church, entangled, misled, 
yoked up to error, and hindered from hearing his Word, and 
from following in his footsteps. A fellowship with the world, 
and the spirit of the world, and worldly follies, extravagancies, 
manners, customs and views, is thus substituted for fellowship 
of saints under the deceiving titles of Church and Christian. 

Whoever has gotten free from such entanglements and has found 
the Master and submitted all to him, should take heed indeed 
that nothing— neither Protestant nor Catholic, church or priest, 
shall come between his heart and the true Lord and Teacher, 
Christ Jesus. And it should be the chief and most enjoyable 
service to the free, to lead others out of bondage of Sin and into 
the service of Christ. But, touch them gently as you seek to set 
them free! Remember that they have learned to love the galling 
yoke and chain; and some at least wear it lovingly and patiently, 
supposing that the Master placed it on them. Apply the oil and 
wine, to strengthen and mollify, and touch their weak sore-spots 
as gently as possible. The true ones are deceived, inveigled 
sheep belonging to our own one fold, and the Master seeketh to 
lead them into it, and you are his messenger. Be wise for his 
sake and theirs. 

Then, too, there are other bonds of error, outside the pale of the 
great organizations which claim to be the living church but are 
dead. There are forms of error purporting to be the light of 
advanced truth, which only the elect will probably escape, in 
this evil day. Their full consecration, and faithfulness to the 
Master, will keep them so near to him that no such plague shall 
come nigh their dwelling. Being filled with the truth and with 
the spirit of the truth they will quickly discern error, so that it 
will have no power to entrap and enslave them. 

To all, therefore, who have separated themselves from former 
entanglements and who desire to continue to stand fast in the 
liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, we would say, Let 
us live very near the fountain-head of truth; imbibe its spirit 
freely; take a firm and positive stand for truth and be faithful at 
any cost. The Master we would thus obey, our sure and safe 
Guide, will be with us to the end. He will never leave us nor 
forsake us, nor suffer us to be tempted above that we are able to 
bear, but with each temptation provide also a way of escape. 

A thousand may fall at my side, 
Ten thousand at my right hand; 
Above me his wings are spread wide, 
Beneath them in safety I stand. 



His truth is my buckler and shield, 
His love he hath set upon me; 
His name in my heart he hath sealed 
E'en now his salvation I see. " 

[In our October issue we hope to examine the question of THE 
TRUE CHURCH, and the liberties and restraints of its 
members.] 



R1068:page5 



THE CURSE LIFTED. 



A curse signifies an opposition, a punishment. Ever since the 
representative of our race was tried in Eden, and transgressed 
God's commandment, the curse of that broken law has rested 
upon him and upon all whom he in trial represented -all the 
Adamic race. That this is so, we need not stop to prove at length; 
we merely refer the reader to the many scriptures which declare 
it, and the many which declare that it will be removed. 

But if the Scriptures were silent on the subject, our experience 
proves that a curse rests on mankind. The anguish, sorrow, 
distress and death, which attend us from the cradle to the tomb, 
all tell us that a curse rests upon us. Surely we would be justified 
in reasoning that, if man were in full harmony with his Creator, 
something much better than he has, would be his portion. And 
looking into God's Word this thought is corroborated. We find 
that when man was sinless and in harmony with God, there was 
no curse, no sorrow, no wearying labor, no pain, nor dying; but 
joy, peace, life and communion with God. All our distresses are 
included in the term death, because they all surely lead to it, and 
are caused by it. And this curse- DEATH-passed upon all men 
in that all had sinned in the person of their representative 
Adam.-1 Cor. 15:22; Rom. 5:12. 

It was God's law that cursed us. And since the law is the 
expression of God's mind, or decision, it was God's curse that 
came upon us. Every law, to be made of force, must contain a 
penalty or curse for its violation. This curse is elsewhere termed 
by the Apostle an "ENMITY," which word has much the same 
meaning as curse. (Eph 2:14,15.) Enmity signifies an opposition 
to— a resentment. 

Not only has God, represented by his law, a just and righteous 
opposition or enmity toward sinners, but the sinners have since 
come to have an opposition or enmity toward God, without a 
cause. Cast off, from communion and fellowship with his 
Maker, man went headlong into evil; and the more he lost God's 
image and the more degraded he became, the more opposition 
and enmity he had toward that which is good and holy and right. 



"The darkness hateth the light," and the darker the hearts of men 
became the more enmity they felt toward God. 

Now, if God and man ever again come into harmony, and are 
made at-one, he who makes the at-one-ment must entirely 
remove this enmity. Then "There shall be no more curse. "-Rev. 

22:3. 

Some would make it appear that the only enmity, is that which 
man feels in opposition to God and righteousness; but such see 
only one side of the subject. What about God's opposition to the 
sinner, which drove him from Eden into sorrow and death? Any 
theory which fails to recognize this, fails entirely; for there have 
been some of the race in all ages who felt no enmity toward 
God, but desired the blessings of his favor-Eden life and joy in 
his fellowship: yet such never were brought back to the original 
condition. And any with whom God deigned at all to commune, 
were made to feel that his enmity, his opposition, his curse, as a 
barrier still separated between them as sinners, and himself as 
holy. This was shown in various ways, but in none more 
emphatically than in the SACRIFICE FOR SIN, which they 
were obliged to offer, before they could have communion with 
God. 

In these sacrifices there was remembrance or acknowledgement 
of sins; and since they were repeated, it proved that they never 
really took away sin (Heb. 10:3,4), or removed the curse. But 
these were typical of a better sacrifice, which God himself 
provided in due time, which did, once for all and forever, 
remove the sin, the curse, and the enmity on God's part. -Heb. 
10:5-10. 

The idea that the enmity is all on man's part, carried to its 
legitimate end, leads to the very absurd conclusion, that man got 
angry with God and went out of Eden full of enmity; and that he 
would not commune with God. Then God is represented as 
remonstrating and pleading with him to return and have his 
communion and fellowship. Man refuses, and turns his back on 
his Maker. God sends prophets and teachers, but man spurns 
them. Finally God concludes to make a great sacrifice to men to 
appease THEIR wrath and to win their love. This theory would 
represent God as saying, I have been too severe; if I had it to do 
again I would not be so strict; I would pardon sin quickly before 
you had time to get angry with me for my justice, and cast me 
off from your favor and love. I would bless instead of cursing 
you; my love for you has conquered my justice and love of right, 
entirely. Come, now, see what an evidence of my repentance I 
am willing to give. My son shall die merely to show and assure 
you that your sins are pardoned, and that I am anxious to have 
your good will. What a God that would be? Both men and 
angels would have in contempt such laws and such a lawgiver. 



How different from this is the truth on this subject! Jehovah 
declares his JUSTICE as unalterable as his LOVE, and that 
infinite wisdom and power make possible the harmonious 
operation of both. He assures us that justice is the very 
foundation of his throne; that the empire of the universe, and the 
laws for its government are upheld by justice.— "Righteousness 
and justice are the prop of thy throne." (Ps. 89:15. -Lesser.) 
While stern Justice was reading to Adam the penalty of the 
broken law-THE CURSE-Love was telling him that there 
would be a deliverance. Men might have supposed that God 
would relent, and not long enforce the penalty; they might have 
supposed that God's enmity or opposition to sinners expressed 
by the curse of his law would be forced aside by his love; but if 
they did thus imagine, the long years of death's reign should 
have shattered such hopes. And when God declared that he 
changes not, and will never clear the guilty (Mai. 3:6, and Exod. 
34:7), any false expectations might well be extinguished. 

Then we may well inquire, If God's justice can never yield, how 
can his love help us? Infinite Wisdom was equal to the 
emergency, and God removed the enmity of his own just law by 
providing a ransom, a representative or substitute, to take man's 
place before the law, to suffer the just for the unjust. And thus, 
while he did not destroy that law, which was just and holy and 
good, Jesus destroyed its enmity or opposition to the Adamic 
race, by himself enduring its curse, as it is written: "He was 
made a curse [i.e., he was cursed, he bore the penalty of the 
curse-death, destruction] for us. "-Gal. 3:10-13. 

Because Jesus was our representative or substitute [See 
Webster's definition], therefore, the curse belonging to us fell on 
him; and the enmity or opposition against us, was reckoned 
against him. He was treated as man's representative or 
substitute, cast off to die, as an enemy, and a sinner. Remember 
his dying words, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 
me?" Yes, "He is our peace, who hath made both (Jew and 
Gentile) one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition, 
having abolished IN HIS FLESH the enmity."- "That he might 
reconcile BOTH [Jew and Gentile] unto God, in one body, by 
the cross, -having slain the enmity [opposition, condemnation, 
against both Jew and Gentile] thereby. " "For through him we 
both have access, by one spirit unto the Father. "-Eph. 2:14-19. 

Both Jew and Gentile needed to have a work done for them. Not 
to make God right, in their eyes, but to render them acceptable 
with God. Not to atone for any injustice on God's part, but for 
unrighteousness (violation of God's law) on their part. Jew and 
Gentile are here kept distinct in speaking of Christ's work of 
reconciliation, because, while all were of one family originally, 
and all condemned in Adam, the Jew had been separated from 
the others and given another trial (typically) under Moses' Law- 
in which also they had failed, forfeited life (typically) a second 



time. So that had their covenant been real, -and not merely a 
typical one, the death penalty under it would have been final and 
hopeless, the Second Death,-from which there is no hope of 
recovery or resurrection. 

Our Lord Jesus, by his death, not only bore all the penalty 
against Adam, and hence against all condemned through Adam; 
but as a Jew he met, on behalf of all Jews, all that special 
condemnation which was upon them because of failure to keep 
their Law covenant. There was no "access unto the Father" as 
long as the enmity (opposition) of his just law barred us off as 
sinners; but when Jesus became our substitute and suffered the 
condemnation, he thus destroyed all claim and enmity of the 
original law against us on account of Adam's disobedience as 
well as the condemnation of the Mosaic Law against the Jews. 
"Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners," and 
outcasts from the Lord and his communion, 

R1068 : page 6 

but are "made nigh by the blood of Christ."-Eph 2:13,19. 

Jesus offered himself as a sacrifice, not for God unto men, to 
appease their enmity or opposition, but "unto God" "for men," to 
remove the righteous enmity and curse of God's law which was 
against men because of their sin. 

But, note, the Law of God has not been changed; right is still 
right, and wrong is still wrong, and will ever so remain; but 
mankind has been purchased out from under the dominion of the 
curse, or penalty, which resulted from the original violation of 
the law. Mankind is reckoned as now belonging to him who 
bought them with his own precious blood. The claims of the law 
being all settled by him, the entire control of men is delivered to 
the Lord who bought them. Whatever now shall be done with 
them he shall do it. He may do what he will with his own- 
thenceforth "the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all 
judgment unto the Son. " Having purchased all mankind, he is 
therefore "Lord of all. "-John 5:22; Acts 10:36. 

Having delivered mankind from the dominion and curse of the 
perfect law, abolished the legal opposition-the curse of death 
which was against them— the work of Messiah is toward men, 
and not toward God; and for this work he takes to himself his 
great power, and will reign. The object of his reign will be to 
destroy man's enmity to God and his law, and to re-engrave that 
law upon their hearts. 

Thus, our Lord not only releases us from the penalty of Adam's 
violation of God's law, but more, he releases us from all 
accountability to the Father's law; for having "bought us" we are 
under whatever laws or arrangements he may make for us. True, 
he will make no arrangement but such as is part of the Father's 
plan; but (as shown in August TOWER-Ransom or Pardon 



Which?), it is the Father's plan to deal only with perfect beings, 
and to have but one perfect law, viz., the obedient may live, the 
disobedient must die. If placed under this law (though it is just 
and holy and good), we fallen, depraved creatures could gain 
nothing by a release from the penalty of Adam's disobedience; 
because, we would violate this law unintentionally at once. 
Hence, that good law would not be good for us, now. It was 
made for perfect beings who could obey if they would, while 
fallen humanity cannot. Even released from Adamic 
condemnation, we realize that it would profit us nothing, if thus 
put under Jehovah's perfect law. As Paul suggests, it would be a 
fearful thing for imperfect beings to fall into the hands of the 
living God. -Heb. 10:31. 

The purchase plan was adopted, therefore; so as to transfer man 
from accountability to the uncompromising law, under which he 
was created, into the complete control of his Redeemer, Christ 
Jesus; who for a time puts all under a compromising law, which 
takes cognizance of men's weaknesses and inflicts lesser 
penalties (as well as the death penalty— which is the only one in 
the Father's perfect law for perfect beings) according to the 
willfulness of the disobedience. 

But, this change of jurisdiction, from God's judgment-seat to the 
judgment-seat of Christ, is not a permanent change. It is only a 
temporary measure, made expedient because of man's fall and 
because he had been redeemed, and was to have a fresh trial for 
everlasting life; and because he could not stand trial in the 
higher court. During the Millennial reign, Christ will not only be 
the Judge, but also the Priest and Physician and Lifegiver; to 
restore men to perfection, step by step, as under his judgment 
they are found worthy; until all shall be tested, and the 
disobedient cut off from life. (Acts 3:23; Rev. 20:9.) Then, all 
the worthy having been made perfect, the perfect law will be 
very good for them; and we read that then, the Son shall deliver 
up the kingdom to God, even the Father,-his special law and 
special judgment being over.- 1 Cor. 15:24,25. 

The work of reconciliation toward God for man's sins was 
quickly accomplished, for Jehovah waited to be gracious. And 
when after laying down his life on our behalf, our Redeemer 
ascended up on high and there appeared in the presence of God 
for us, and presented the price (his sacrifice) as the redemption 
price of all, it was at once accepted by the Father, and the holy 
spirit (with gifts) was at once given (at Pentecost), as the 
evidence of God's reconciliation-the seal of acceptance to the 
consecrated waiting disciples. While there has been much error 
held with reference to God's character, representing him as 
without love, and the embodiment of stern justice only, there 
was in it much truth also. Like many subjects, this one has two 
sides; God is both loving and just. Our Father's love could not 
override his justice and could not acquit the guilty. The penalty 



must first be fully met before his love could embrace and own 
the sinner as his child. This was witnessed to and sealed at 
Pentecost and the words are now true:— 

My God is reconciled, 

His pardoning voice I hear. 

He owns me for his child, 

I can no longer fear. 

With confidence I now draw nigh, 

And Father, Abba Father, cry. 

But the reconciling of men is not so quickly done. While some 
were anxious for reconciliation and restoration to divine favor 
before Pentecost, and could only receive it in part, and that after 
typical sacrifices for sins had been offered, yet the great 
majority have wandered so far from God, and have had the 
divine likeness or resemblance so effaced, and their ideas of 
right and wrong, justice and injustice, so warped and twisted, 
and their eyes so blinded by evil and error, that they love their 
degradation. They will require a thorough course of training 
before they can appreciate the privilege now offered them 
through and by Christ. Only the few, are ready for this during 
the Gospel age; and these are offered a share with Christ in the 
future work, on conditions. The vast majority, however, must be 
released from prejudice, superstition and blindness, before they 
can see; and this great work of making known to men God's love 
and favor and their need of it, we are informed by the Scriptures, 
will require an age-The Millennium. 

The reason of this is apparent: It will require all of the 
Millennial age to rewrite the law of God upon the hearts of men. 
When perfect, before the fall, the law of God was so thoroughly 
imprinted in man's nature, his judgment of right and wrong, his 
conscience, was exact; so that no written law upon tables of 
stone was needed. Man, a moral image of God, had a conscience 
so delicately adjusted that it would decide instantly what was 
right and what wrong. His difficulty, as we have already seen, 
was that he did not fully appreciate the evil or curse or enmity, 
which was the penalty of wrong-doing. 

But, cast off from the fellowship and communion of God, by 
reason of sin, this law became more and more obliterated; and 
instead there sprung up an enmity or opposition to the law which 
they acknowledged as good, but found themselves less and less 
able and willing to observe. Paul refers to this blotting out of the 
image and knowledge of God and his law, saying: "When they 
knew God they glorified him not as God, neither were they 
thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their 
foolish heart was darkened." "And even as they did not like to 
retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a 
reprobate mind. " -Rom. 1:21,28. 



About two thousand years after the fall, and when the original 
law was well nigh erased, God selected the small nation of 
Israel, and made covenants with them based on their keeping his 
law, which being so erased from their hearts, was expressed to 
them in commandments on tables of stone. But, as God 
foreknew, the law in stone only re-condemned them; for none 
could render full obedience except with it written in their hearts, 
as a part of their very being. They must be constitutionally right, 
and just, and loving, else they would be constantly warring 
against themselves and unable to obey perfectly. But that law 
served to give them an idea of their need of divine favor, rather 
than justice;-their need of having their penalty paid, and also of 
having the law re- written in their hearts. -Jer. 31:33,34; Heb. 
8:10; 10:16. 

Though Satan and sin have done a terribly degrading work in 
man, putting darkness and error for light and truth, we may still 
find traces of the original law, in the most degraded of men, the 
world over. Even savages have some ideas of right and wrong, 
justice and injustice, however crude. Paul testifies to this also, 
saying of the heathen: "These having not the [written] law are a 
law unto themselves, which show the work [some evidence] of 
the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing 
witness."-- Rom. 2:14,15. 

It is because this law has been so nearly blotted out of the once 
perfect human nature, that it will require so long to restore it to 
perfection. This law must gradually be again interwoven into 
human nature before it will again be an image of God, and at 
one with him. When so restored to Gods image, all doubts as to 
what is right and what is wrong, and all preference for the wrong 
will be at an end. With his whole nature right, the law of God 
written all over him, as the law of his being, man will be 
prepared to do right-not from fear, nor for reward, nor because 
some one would see or some one would not see, but because 
right is right— the very same motive of righteousness and justice 
which governs all of our Maker's actions. 

Then, God and men will be entirely at one— in perfect harmony.* 
Then, it will be seen that God's laws are only blessings; that they 
are the only prevention of sin, the source of misery. When God 
and his creatures are thus made entirely at one, the at-one-ment 
will he complete, and then Christ the Mediator who died to 
redeem, and reigned to restore men to God, will "deliver up the 
kingdom to God, even the Father." (1 Cor. 15:24.) All enmity 
and curse will have been destroyed; the enmity (opposition) of 
God's law having been cancelled, and man's enmity to the law 
removed by a restitution to original perfection, the image of 
God. 

In harmony with this is another Scriptural statement: "If while 
we were enemies we were reconciled to God [the opposition and 
curse of his violated law being lifted] by the death of his Son, 



much more, being reconciled, we shall be SAVED by his life;" 
i.e., brought back into that condition of perfection and harmony 
with God and His law, where we will be no longer condemned 
but approved. (Rom. 5:10.) This is another brief statement of the 
same glorious truth by the Apostle. When the work of Christ is 
fully accomplished, "Then there shall be no more curse;" "for 
the former things" [the evil incurred through Adam's 
transgression] will have passed away (Rev. 22:3; 21:4), being 
put away legally by the sacrifice of Christ, and put away in fact 
by his glorious reign. "Behold the Lamb of God that TAKETH 
AWAY THE SIN OF THE WORLD," for "Christ hath 
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for 
us." 



*We here deal with the great mass of the world and purposely 
omit mention of two comparatively small classes— the church 
selected in the Gospel age, and the finally impenitent of the 
Millennial age. (Acts 15:14; Matt. 25:46.) Because previously 
mentioned, it is unnecessary to interrupt the statement of the 
general plan as it relates to the great mass of mankind. 



R1068 : page 6 

PEACE IN TRIBULATION. 

"Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide, keep 
the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom; for the 
son dishonoreth the father, the daughter riseth up against her 
mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; a man's 
enemies are the men of his own house. Therefore I will look 
unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my salvation: My God 
will hear me."— Micah 7:5-7. 

The beloved and faithful Apostle Paul wisely counseled the 
church, saying— "If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live 
peaceably with all men." (Rom. 12:18.) But in the outset he 
plainly admits that it may not always be possible; and we are 
taught that to maintain peace under some conditions would be 
wrong. Paul shows plainly the character of the effort we should 
make for peace,— that we should cultivate a loving, affectionate 
disposition toward others, in honor preferring one another; not 
slothfully casting our cares on others, but diligently bearing our 
own burdens to the full extent of our ability; providing things 
honest in the sight of all men for ourselves and those dependent 
upon us, and kindly sympathizing with and helping to bear the 
burdens of others who are overburdened; putting away vanity 
and self-conceit; 

R1069 : page 6 



not minding high things, but condescending to men of low 
estate; and if rewarded with evil, overcoming the evil with good- 
-if it be possible. 

And yet, strange to say, it is not always possible to secure peace 
with those about us, even with the most careful manifestation of 
such a disposition. Peace on such terms is secured with all those 
who love righteousness, truth, and fair dealing; but it is not so 
secured with others. With the world in general, peace and 
harmony is only secured by lowering your principles of truth 
and righteousness to conform to their ideas. Many do this in 
whole or in part, and verily they have their reward; for "the 
world will love its own." But those who closely adhere to the 
principles of Christ and faithfully carry them out, must not 
expect to have peace with the world— "In the world ye shall have 
tribulation;" "They that will live Godly shall suffer persecution." 
It is not possible in this age to have it otherwise. The apostles 
found it so, and so did the Lord. And he said for our 
encouragement, "If the world hate you, you know that it hated 
me before it hated you.... The servant is not greater than his 
Lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; 
if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also. But all 
these things will they do unto you for my name's sake, because 
they know not him that sent me. 

R1069 : page 7 

If I had not come and spoken unto them they had not had sin, 
but now they have no excuse for their sin. But now have they 
both seen and hated both me and my Father. But this cometh to 
pass that the word might be fulfilled that is written, -They hated 
me without a cause. " 

If after the same manner, we find persecution instead of peace in 
the world, we should not think strange of it, or change our 
course of action, but should follow on in our Leader's footsteps, 
letting our light shine in words and deeds of no uncertain sound, 
however severely they reprove the works of darkness, and bring 
hatred and persecution from those who love darkness rather than 
light. If the Lord and the apostles and all the faithful saints had 
just kept quiet and said nothing about the truth,-the kingdom to 
come, and the overthrow of present evil powers civil and 
religious, in order to its establishment; if they had flattered, 
approved, and worked in harmony with the Chief-priests and 
rulers of the synagogues, and conformed to the ideas of the 
masses of professed religious people; if they had just let them 
alone to work out their own plans and ideas without 
interference, doubtless they could have lived at peace with all 
men and had no persecution. And just as surely as we let the 
world and worldly religious systems, etc., alone, to do their own 
will, without warning or remonstrance against their evil 
character, and erroneous teaching, we also will escape 
persecution and live at peace with the world. But as surely as the 



Lord did not do it, we must not do it; unless we are willing to 
turn aside from the narrow way and to give up the prize of our 
high calling. 

Although the Prophet had foretold that Messiah should be the 
Prince of Peace, yet when Messiah came, he said in almost the 
same words as the Prophet above quoted, "Think not that I am 
come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a 
sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, 
and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law 
against her mother-in-law; and a man's foes shall be they of his 
own household. "-Matt. 10:34-36. 

Though this has been true in a measure during the entire age, it 
is specially true in the harvest or end of the age, when the sickle 
of truth is doing its work of separation; for in the time of 
harvest, not only are Christians to be separated from the world, 
and wheat from tares (the true from the false), but the ripe wheat 
is also to be separated from the unripe. And so it will probably 
be true of the faithful now, as it was true of our Lord, that they 
shall be left alone. He said even to his disciples, "Behold the 
hour cometh, ...that ye shall be scattered every man to his own, 
and shall leave me alone."- John 16:32. 

When our Lord first started in his ministry he was glorified 
(honored) of all (Luke 4:15), and men "wondered at the gracious 
words that proceeded out of his mouth; " yet faithfulness to the 
truth quickly aroused hatred and opposition. Very soon the great 
ones in the church began to oppose him bitterly; but still many 
of the common people heard him gladly. And it seems that 
persecution from his earthly kindred was not lacking in his case, 
and that he was unwelcome in the home of his childhood; for he 
said, "The foxes have holes and the birds of the air have nests, 
but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." (Matt. 8:20.) 
His brethren did not believe on him, and seemed ashamed of the 
unpopular notoriety which his course brought upon them as a 
family. And though Jesus walked no more in Jewry [Judea] 
because the Jews there sought to kill him, his brethren urged 
him to go, notwithstanding the danger, and do some of his 
mighty works there. But Jesus replied to them, "My time is not 
yet come, but your time is always ready. The world cannot hate 
you; but me it hateth [and they seek my life] because I testify of 
it, that the works thereof are evil. Go ye up unto this feast: I go 
not up yet unto this feast; for my time is not yet full come"— 
neither the time for manifesting his power to the world, nor to 
lay down his life as a sacrifice. (John 7.) His mother was 
doubtless always in sympathy with him, though she could not 
fully understand him and with a true mother's love, as well as 
the love of a disciple, she shared his reproach and followed him 
to Calvary and the tomb. 

But while the world, and the nominal church, and they of his 
own house, were arrayed in opposition to the Lord, he turned to 



his disciples and said, "Who is my mother, and who are my 
brethren? He that doeth the will of my Father, the same is my 
brother, and sister, and mother." (Matt. 12:50.) And yet the hour 
came when even these were scattered, and he was left alone. The 
persecution became so severe that they all fled. 

And so it will probably be in the end of this age with the body of 
Christ. The separation must come closer and closer; friend after 
friend will depart; and foes will become more numerous and 
bitter in their opposition, until the reproach will rest so heavily 
upon the faithful, that all not like-minded will depart and leave 
them alone-alone in their fearless defence of the truth, alone in 
their bold declarations of the presence of Messiah and the 
setting up of his kingdom which shall overturn and destroy all 
opposing powers; and alone in bearing whatever of reproach or 
persecution such a course may bring. 

If such is to be the stormy pathway of the saints in this day of 
harvest separation, how necessary is the counsel of the Prophet 
at the head of this article- "Trust ye not in a friend; put ye not 
confidence in a guide, etc. " To trust in and take counsel of 
former friends, however dear, with reference to our present 
course of action, is dangerous. Unless they join us in the same 
narrow way of sacrifice, we must generally keep our thoughts 
and purposes to ourselves, with a resolute determination to 
accomplish our Father's will at any cost; for their very love for 
us will often cause them to bitterly oppose us. And in the end 
even that love will sometimes turn to hatred. 

We may not put confidence now in former guides however 
much we had esteemed and reverenced them— whether they were 
the ministers of the nominal church, or parents, or husbands, or 
Christians of considerable advancement, highly esteemed for 
their work's sake. None of these must be looked to as guides 
now; for the tests are now being applied to all. -Every man's 
work is being and shall be yet more thoroughly tested— so as by 
fire —and only those who can stand the tests themselves can be 
helpful to others. And even the wife (or husband) who hitherto 
shared your joys and sorrows, and entered into all your plans, 
will not now be able to sympathize with, or comfort, or help you 
in this way, unless of the same consecrated class. Hence the 
counsel of the Prophet, "Keep the doors of thy mouth from her 
that lieth in thy bosom. " If not of the fully consecrated class, she 
cannot understand or appreciate the prize for which you run. She 
can see only the thorns in your way, and her share in bearing 
some of the reproach with you, and her efforts will, in kindness 
to you and in the desire to reach her own ambitions, etc., be 
directed toward dissuading you from your course. 

To whom then shall we look? Must we walk the thorny path- 
way alone— with foes and dangers all about us? If we should, as 
individuals, be left entirely alone, so far as human sympathy is 
concerned, we should be willing; for the disciple is not greater 



than his Lord, and he was left alone; yet not alone as he said, 
"because the Father is with me. " But we are not, and probably 
shall not be so alone as he was; for other members of the body 
are now in existence, and their hearts are one in love and 
sympathy. The Prophet speaking for this class directs us where 
to look for help, for comfort and consolation, saying, "Therefore 
[though all other helps and comforts fail] I will look unto the 
Lord; I will wait for the God of my salvation: My God will hear 
me." 

This must be the attitude of the saints. They must look to the 
Lord— through his Word-to learn his will, his plan, and the part 
he would have them take in the execution of that plan, and then 
go about their Father's business with an eye single to his glory, 
taking comfort and rejoicing in his words of encouragement, and 
his exceeding great and precious promises. In him, through his 
Word, we must find our friend, our comforter and guide. But we 
must wait patiently for the grand outworking 

R1070 : page 7 

of his plan-Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him. Commit 
thy way unto the Lord, and he shall bring forth thy righteousness 
as the light and thy judgment as the noonday. -Psa. 37:5-7. 

During all this time of patient waiting under affliction we rejoice 
in the full assurance that God is causing all things to so work 
together as, in his own best time, to establish universal peace on 
a sure and permanent basis. But before that peace, must come 
the lash, the tumult, and the storm. Before Christ can reign as 
"Prince of Peace," he must rule with the rod of iron, subduing all 
things unto himself and establishing his own righteous authority. 
Peace on any other basis than that of righteousness is not a 
proper peace, nor is it the peace which God wants. In its very 
nature such a peace cannot last, and while it lasts it is injurious. 

If a parent would have peace in the home circle, it should be 
established on the recognition in the family of the righteous 
principle of parental authority over children who have not 
attained their majority, and respectful consideration for their 
wise and loving counsel from those who have come to that age. 
If the adult child would live at peace under the paternal roof, it 
should be on his part with a cheerful concession of the rights 
and privileges of every other member of the family, and a 
careful attention to filial and fraternal duties; and with the 
recognition on the part of parents and brothers and sisters of the 
righteous principles of his individual rights, and liberty of 
conscience, to serve God and his fellow-men, or himself, or 
them, according to the dictates of his conscience. When we were 
children, we were wisely placed by God under parental 
authority, but when we become men, we are subject to God 
only, though he directs that we still be subject to the civil 
powers that be, as long as he permits them. If we would have 



peace with our neighbors, it should also be with a recognition on 
the part of each of the natural and inalienable rights of each 
other as individuals, and a proper respect and regard for those 
rights, whether esteemed as wise or unwise. To seek peace on 
any other ground is merely to cry, "Peace, peace, when there is 
no peace. " 

If we are saints, our individual liberties and right will not only 
be exercised in the interests of peace, but for that lasting peace 
which is founded on the firm principles of righteousness-the 
recognition of God as the rightful sovereign of earth; and of the 
common brotherhood and equal rights of all men. And while we 
boldly assert these principles, and rule ourselves and those under 
our authority and care accordingly, we must wait patiently for 
the grand result. 

The Prophet adds another word of encouragement saying, 
"Rejoice not against me O mine enemy: when I fall I shall arise; 
when I sit in darkness the Lord shall be a light unto me. " (Micah 
7:8.) How like our Lord's expression, "I have meat to eat that ye 
know not of; " and Paul's triumph in affliction, and rejoicing 
under persecution. However dark our way may grow, the Lord 
will always be our light if we walk in close harmony with him. 
And though we fall in death, our power and strength will be 
renewed, and glory, honor and immortality will be granted when 
we rise in the likeness of our Lord, as his bride and joint-heir, to 
carry on to completion the grand work of establishing peace on 
earth and good will among men. 

But let us not forget our Lord's words -"A man's foes shall be 
they of his own household. He that loveth father or mother more 
than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son or daughter 
more than me is not worthy of me. And he that taketh not his 
cross and folio weth after me is not worthy of me."— Matt. 
10:36-38. 

There is still another thought to which we would call attention 
before leaving the subject. It is that precious promise recorded 
by the Prophet Isaiah (26:3), "Thou wilt keep him in perfect 
peace whose mind is stayed on thee. " 

Well says one, I do not see how this can be true in view of the 
scriptures above quoted. It seems to me the Christian's 
experience if he is faithful, is very far from peaceful. Look at 
Paul and all the martyred saints of the past: and look at the 
Lord's sufferings. 

True, from the world's standpoint, such experiences look to be 
far from peaceful; but if it were not for the deep under current, 
the gentle steady flow of communion and harmony with God, 
the Christian character could not stand amid the surging billows 
that disturb the surface. Like an iceburg, towed by a powerful 
under current, the Christian is upheld and borne onward by the 
strong under current of peaceful communion with God, and thus 



moves grandly on in opposition to the counter-surface-currents, 
steady and tranquil even in the midst of the wildest storms. Men 
of the world look on and wonder because they know nothing of 
this grand, silent motive power. 

The mind thus stayed on God is kept in perfect peace even in the 
midst of persecution, just as the depth of ocean is calm and quiet 
while the surface is lashed with storm and tempest. Peace is not 
enthusiastic, ecstatic joy, but real joy can never be experienced 
without the firm foundation of peace. Peace is calm, quiet, 
restful tranquillity. When our Lord said to the raging winds and 
waves, "Peace be still," "there was a great calm." The sun may 
or may not have shone out brightly, but no matter, the peace, the 
calm quiet rest, had come. 

It is not continuous, delightful, ecstatic joy, that is promised to 
the Christian, but this calm, quiet, restfulness, which comes 
from acquaintance with God and his great 

R1070 : page 8 

plan of salvation, and implicit confidence in his love, and power, 
and wisdom, which in due time will cause all things to work 
together for the accomplishment of his grand designs. You may 
be troubled on every side, but you will not be in distress; you 
may be greatly perplexed, but you will not be in despair, unless 
you throw away your confidence in God, and cease to consider 
and meditate upon his word. 

Those who abide in him by faith, will never know the feeling of 
despair. They may see every earthly tie severed, and realize to 
the full that in following Christ, their bitterest foes are those of 
their own household, and those whom they once regarded as 
members of the household of faith; yea, they may realize the 
loss of all things earthly, yet their peace will never be disturbed, 
if their minds are stayed on God, trusting in the sure outworking 
of his marvelous plan, and patiently awaiting and working in 
harmony with him for its development. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Neshannock, Pa. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am glad to tell you that I am 
still resting my hope on the finished work of my Redeemer, his 
unchanging love, and his all sufficient grace. Although of late 
my pathway has not been strewn with roses, neither my pillow a 
very downy one, nevertheless I realize the everlasting arms of 



God's unchanging love are entwined around me bearing me up, 
amid the varied trials and conflicts which are but for a moment, 
but working out a far more exceeding and an eternal weight of 
glory; for if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. 

And thus we can sing with the poet, 

He helped his Saints in Ancient days, 
Who trusted in his name; 
And we can witness to his praise, 
His love is still the same. 

His presence sweetens all our cares, 
And makes our burdens light; 
A Word from Him dispels our fears, 
And gilds the gloom of night. 

Blessed be his holy name! With best love to you and Sister 
Russell and all the faithful ones, I remain your brother in the 
blessed hope, 

I. W. M . 

Dunbar, Miss. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your highly prized letter came 
duly to hand. It was to our hearts as a refreshing shower upon a 
parched land. I read it over several times myself, and then read it 
to those who were expelled with me from Babylon, for the 
testimony of Jesus. It revived them also very much. I would like 
to meet and serve them oftener, but I am busy teaching and 
cannot do so. When my school closes I can meet them oftener, 
and give more time to selling DAWNS. 

I was a local preacher in Babylon, but now the doors are closed 
against me; so that I have not had opportunity to preach until 
lately. I will soon send for another supply of Dawns. 

Your Brother in Christ, F. M . 

Utica, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Please send me 1000 Arp Slips. I find it is 
a good plan to leave them in the seats in the R.R. depots. I notice 
the passengers read them carefully, and fold them up and put 
them in their pockets, which shows, I think, that they are 
interested. Yours in the service. 

L. A. P . 

Orangeburg, S.C. 



BRO. RUSSELL:— I think my subscription expires about now, 
and I therefore enclose a postal note for its renewal. It is now 
five years that I have been taking the WATCH TOWER, and so 
faithfully and truthfully and inspiringly has it watched for and 
proclaimed the signs of that unspeakably grand and glorious 
Millennial day, now so near at hand, that I cannot well do 



without it. It opens up the Scriptures so fully and harmoniously 
that it has become my companion, continually pointing me to 
and aiding me along, the journey of the "narrow way." 

God bless you. 

G. W. D . 

R1070 : page 8 

Magazine, Ark. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-There are six of us here, and we 
belong to what is known as the Second Advent Church. We 
want to know if this is right. Do you have any fellowship with 
the Second Adventists? We have been baptized by Baptist 
ministers, but we did not then have the truth as we now see it. 
Do you think we ought to be baptized again? It makes our hearts 
glad to read the letters from the dear brethren of like precious 
faith. The Advent preachers publicly denounce you as a 
dangerous heretic; though they teach a good deal of the gospel. 
We hope you will answer this letter, publicly or privately. 

May our Father greatly bless you, and all of like precious faith. 
J. P. B . 

[DEAR BRETHREN:-We are glad to know that you are 
growing in grace and in the knowledge of the truth. This is right. 
Let the good work go on. Never do as many have done— stop, 
and conclude that you have all the truth and can make no further 
progress. 

In the matter of baptism: As you probably saw by the May 
TOWER, the real Baptism was your consecration. This had a 
definite time, no doubt, of beginning and it is not yet ended. The 
dying process must continue daily until literal death shall finish 
it. The water immersion, by which you outwardly manifested 
your consecration, should come after consecration, but not 
necessarily after a full knowledge of the divine plan. God gives 
the knowledge of his plan to us because we have consecrated, 
and not before we consecrate. So then I say that the matter of 
your immersion having preceded your full knowledge, is the 
right order, from God's standpoint; and if to you immersion 
implied consecration, then you have as valid (symbolic or water) 
immersion as any could have; provided of course, that you were 
believers in the Lord Jesus, as your Redeemer, beforehand. 

In the matter of worshiping with the Second Adventists: -The 
principle is just the same as with any other denomination. They 
have perhaps two advantages over some others, viz., they hold 
some truths more than others, and they are generally poor and 
unpretentious. And they have some disadvantages over others: 
They are generally conceited, and so filled with the one doctrine 
of the non-immortality of man, that they have no room for 
anything else, and, still worse, have little taste for other truths. 



They have the disadvantage of false expectations concerning 
both the manner and object of 

R1071 : page 8 

the Lord's second coming, though like the Jews at the first 
advent, they are so sure that they know it all, that they will not 
study further. 

The same rule should guide you in dealing with them as with 
others. If you are perfectly free to meet with them as God's 
children, without being hindered from talking, both in meeting 
and privately, of all the truth which God gives you, then you can 
feel perfectly free to go among them and let your light shine. 

If you cannot be thus free, you of course cannot think of being 
among them on any other terms. And even if you have this 
freedom among them, it becomes then necessary for you to 
judge of whether your time thus spent is being used to the best 
advantage; whether you are getting good, growing in grace and 
knowledge and love yourselves, or helping others so to grow. If 
you conclude that to be among them is purely a waste of time, or 
that you can accomplish more good by spending the same time 
either in study at home, or with one or two, or in visiting and 
conversing about the truth with neighbors or friends, then it 
becomes your duty to do that which will most glorify God and 
most profit yourselves and others. Thus with these suggestions 
as to the Lord's will, your course is for your own decision. 

Praying for your welfare, I trust that you will be faithful and let 
your light so shine as to glorify our Father. -EDITOR.] 

Jackson, Mich. 

DEAR SIR:-I am much in love with Millennial Dawn and 
Z.W.T., though I cannot get time to read them as much as I 
should like to. I have other duties that seem to take nearly all my 
time. I keep those Arp tracts on my show case, and give to any 
that I think will read them. I have quite a curiosity to know by 
what name your church is called. Some say, Do not be too fast 
now, perhaps they are Adventists or Latter Day Saints. Well I 
don't know by what church name you go, but I believe you are 
going and not standing still; and that you are not dead, while you 
profess to be alive. 

I do enjoy conversing with living Christians, and reading the 
writings of those who do feel the spirit's influence while their 
pen is moving on to honor God and battle for the right. When I 
read DAWN and the WATCH TOWER, I cannot but feel that 
the doctrine is true. The July TOWER interested me greatly. 
Bless God for this food for my soul. There is so little to be had 
in the church now. I send you $1.00 for four more M. DAWNS, - 
-I have sold two more. My own copy is out on a mission of 
good. Yours in Christ. 



MRS. E. J. L 



[DEAR SISTER IN CHRIST:-We are glad to know that the 
truth has found you, and that you are being fed by it. 

You seem to have nearly the right idea about what should be 
"the path of the just ...shining more and more unto the perfect 
day. " We are going on. Thank God we have no disposition to go 
back to the world, nor to sectarianism, nor to darkness, but to go 
onward to the perfect day. As Paul expresses it, we press along 
the line towards the prize of our high calling of God by Christ 
Jesus.— Phil. 3:14. — Diaglott. We do not separate ourselves from 
other Christians by taking any distinctive or peculiar name. We 
are satisfied with the name, Christian, by which the early saints 
were known. We recognize as brethren all who own our 
Redeemer and his work, and who are consecrated to his service. 
The Lord bless you; go on. -EDITOR.] 

The path before shines more and more 
As we near the golden city. 

Sumter Co., S.C. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am still selling DAWNS whenever I 
have an opportunity. I have only sold about forty, as I have very 
little time to spare. I have an afflicted family dependent on me. 

I have never seen a book to sell as Dawn does. I never have any 
trouble to sell it whenever I have an opportunity to show it. I 
rode across the country about fifteen miles a few days ago and 
took a few Dawns with me; I sold them all and could have sold 
many more if I had had them along. One Methodist young man 
told me he had read Arp's comments, and shed tears when he 
read it; he was very glad to purchase a book and said he could 
not believe the doctrines taught by the nominal church-of 
almost universal damnation, and everlasting torment. I meet 
many who express the same sentiments. 

I could sell hundreds if I could travel with it. I hope to be able to 
spare more time in the work soon; for as in the Jewish harvest, 
so now, "the harvest is great but the laborers are few. " 

May our Heavenly Father bless you in spreading the good 
tidings. Yours in fellowship. 

J. A. G . 



[We feel to urge this Brother, and others thus situated, that they 
hereafter give all their strength and time to this, in one way the 
most successful method of preaching the truth; and that they do 
not hesitate to avail themselves of the allowance made from the 
TRACT FUND for their expenses. Do not feel that thus you are 
robbing the Lord's cause; for this TRACT FUND is supplied by 
the voluntary donations of dear Brethren and Sisters anxious to 
have a share with you in the work, but so situated that they are 



debarred from the more active and public service of the truth. - 
EDITOR.] 

page 8 

Virginia. 

DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER:-I have returned home after 
an absence of several days, and a long tiresome walk over a 
sparsely settled country seeking to spread the truth by selling 
Millennial Dawn. 

I enclose $6.50 to pay for forty copies of Millennial Dawn, (less 
ten cents expense allowance), and a years subscription for the 
WATCH TOWER. We have been very busy farming; and as 
help is hard to get, and wages high, I have not done as much as I 
would have liked to do in the spiritual harvest field. I have 
thought it might be a good plan to have a horse, and be supplied 
with a large number of Dawns, ready to give them out when 
canvassing. It is much more easy to sell in the country than in 
the cities, in this section at least. Please send the books at once. I 
want to contribute as soon as I can to the Tract Fund. Yours 
fraternally. 

I. S . 

Oregon. 

DEAR TOWER:-I am feasting and praising. Ah! the dear Lord 
Jesus. How glad we are to help glorify Him. "Hallelujah what a 
Savior!" 

J . 



R1071 : page 1 

VOL. X. 
ALLEGHENY, PA., OCTOBER AND NOVEMBER, 1888. 

NO. 2. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

DOMESTIC, -Fifty cents a year, in advance, by Draft, P.O. 
Money Order, or Registered Letter. 

FOREIGN,-Three shillings per year. Remit by Foreign Postal 
Money Order. 

TO POOR SAINTS. 

This paper will be sent free to the interested of the Lord's poor, 
who will send a card yearly requesting it. "Ho, every one that 
thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, 
come ye, buy and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price. " And you who have it- "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor 
for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently— and eat ye that 
which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." - 
ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



R1071 : page 1 

SPECIAL NOTICE 

This paper is dated to represent two months, October and 
November, but numbered as one issue. From this you will know 
not to expect another issue until December. Your subscription 
year will be estimated as extended one month beyond the date at 
which it would otherwise have expired. 

This has been found necessary to enable us to use our type for 
M. DAWN VOL. n., which we hope to be able to announce as 
ready in our next issue. The first edition will be in cloth binding 
only and it is questionable whether it will be worth while to get 
out a paper bound edition; because it will probably be of interest 
only to the deeply interested, who will prefer it in cloth binding 
for preservation as a book of reference. 



page 1 

WE HAVE gotten out a new lot of ARP TRACTS-slightly 
changed. These we have now in both English and German. They 
are supplied FREE, in any quantity, postage paid by us, to those 
who will promise a proper distribution of them. IN ordering say 
what quantity you can judiciously use. 



R1067 : page 1 

DAWN IN GERMAN, PAPER-BOUND. 

A cheap, popular edition for loaning, etc., greatly desired by 
some of the friends, has finally been decided upon. The first 
thousand is now about read and orders will be filled in rotation 
as received. The price will be 25 cents each the same as the 
English edition, that being the popular limit. The same "expense 
allowance" as on the English edition will be granted. See June 
'88 TOWER, page 1. Order at once. 



R1071 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

MISSION RESULTS IN INDIA. 

Our Lord said to the nominal Jewish church, "Ye compass sea 
and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made ye make 
him twofold more the child of hell [gehenna-the second death] 
than before." (Matt. 23:15.) The fault on the part of the Jews lay 
not in the zeal, which prompted labor and expense for others 
(Rom. 10:2), but in the false ideas by which the zeal was 
inspired, which evidently was in great measure sectarian pride 



rather than love. The damage done to the Gentiles did not 
consist in the introduction of immoralities; for the Jews, and the 
Law of Moses which they took with them, favored morality, and 
doubtless had thus a good tendency in this respect. The evil 
consisted in the false ideas which they spread among the 
Gentiles. They taught that circumcision and the keeping of 
Moses' law justified to life. They raised their own imperfect 
lives as standards or illustrations of the demands of the law. By 
thus raising false standards of righteousness before the Gentiles, 
and telling them that they could keep the Law and justify 
themselves by (imperfect) works, they were breaking the very 
effect the law was designed to have, viz., to show human 
imperfection and thus point to Christ as the only perfect one, 
whose sacrifice for our sins was all-necessary. They were thus 
(ignorantly) opposing God and injuring the Gentiles; for, as 
many of the Gentiles as received their teachings, were in a 
worse condition, less likely to receive Christ as their Redeemer, 
than if left in heathen darkness. 

We fear that our Master would offer a very similar reproof to 
much of the missionary effort of our day, done in his name. 
Even if the moral tone of the heathen people is elevated to some 
extent, and if education and civilization of manners and customs 
follow as the good results of missions, it would still be proper to 
inquire, Is the result favorable to pure Christianity or not? Do 
the doctrines taught tend to bring the people into fellowship of 
spirit with the Master and the 

R1072 : page 1 

true plan of redemption and salvation, by and through the great 
Life-giver; or, do they tend to a spirit of fear, and lead to trust in 
a gloss of morality, as a basis for hope of escape from a 
vengeful God and a burning hell? Ignoring the question of 
morals, which may be practiced by infidels as well as by saints, 
we ask, Is the religious tendency of mission work as now carried 
on, favorable or unfavorable as a whole? 

On this point we have an undesigned answer, given by a 
Presbyterian missionary, J.C.R. Ewing, D.D., who having spent 
nine years in mission work in India, is certainly qualified to give 
an opinion on the general results of mission work there. While 
on a visit home recently, he delivered a lecture on the subject, 
before the Y.M.C.A. of this city, from which the following was 
reported in the local press. He said:- 

"India owes more to the direct and indirect influences of 
Christianity than to any other one thing. It has done much to 
break down the old idea of material gods, and in its stead set up 
the idea of a single supreme God, but not the same idea of a God 
that the people of the West [Europe, etc.] entertain. 

Among the 263,000,000 of people in that country there are 
10,000,000 young men who speak the English language and 



who are instructed in the Western ideas that we are taught. The 
higher caste are thoroughly learned in the literature, the religion 
and the sciences that are the basis of the education of the people 
of this country. The old idea of a vengeful God, who must be 
propitiated by numerous gifts and many prayers has given way 
to the modern spirit of infidelity. The educated men of the East 
no longer believe in the gods of their fathers. They have 
abandoned them forever and replaced them with the teachings of 
Colonel Robert J. Ingersoll, of Paine, of Voltaire, of Bradlaugh 
and of every other atheistical and pantheistical teacher. This 
skeptical age will soon pass away, and the West, just as it has 
given India her ideas, will give her the religion of the Christian 
God, and the people will no more bow down to the God Vishnu, 
or Corla, the goddess with the necklace of skulls. 

The young men of India are well educated, acute observers, 
intelligent, well posted in all the affairs of other nations besides 
their own, and though it may seem strange, well acquainted with 
our Bible. Indeed they know it so well that none but a man 
thoroughly conversant with its teachings, and the Christian 
theology, could hope to be able to successfully answer all the 
objections that they bring forward against it. The popular idea 
that a missionary sits in the shade of a tree and teaches naked 
savages who gather around him, is an exploded one. In India the 
missionary meets intelligent and educated men, and he must be 
well equipped to influence them. They are, besides being 
intelligent a fine looking people, amiable, courteous, 
gentlemanly, and treat all foreigners with the greatest 
consideration and respect." 

Thus, while telling us of his great hopes, this gentleman 
honestly confesses that missionary influences tend far more 
toward infidelity than toward Christianity; and that it is the 
intelligent class who become infidels, and only a few of the 
ignorant and young that accept of Christ, is to be implied from 
his statement, as well as from the more direct testimony of other 
missionaries. 

Where is the fault? It is with the doctrines taught, which are 
neither Scriptural, nor truthful, nor reasonable. The effect of 
these false teachings is to embitter one class against Christ and 
every thing connected with his name, and to prejudice and 
enslave another class by fear, to the service and spread of error. 
Thus, while perhaps morally elevated, those people are less 
ready to receive the truth than if they had never seen or heard 
the false gospel. 

Nor is the effect very different nearer home. Here too, we see 
the same bad fruit of false doctrine. As knowledge increases, it 
is rapidly driving the thinking class into either active infidelity, 
or passive doubt and unbelief. The majority of the young people 
brought into the various sects are merely credulous and deluded 
unbelievers. Calling themselves Christians, and supposing that 



they are such, they are really nearly as ignorant of the doctrines, 
and words, and spirit of Christ, as the heathen. They are really 
farther from the kingdom of God, by reason of their delusion, 
than if they were totally ignorant of Christ. 

It is far from our thought to intimate that all who are zealously 
engaged in promulgating the false doctrines referred to, are 
destitute of the spirit of Christ. Quite the contrary; there are 
such, who hold on to Christ by faith, notwithstanding the 
tendencies of false doctrines, handed down from Papacy, to 
overthrow their faith in God. 

To some of those to whom the Lord had said, "Ye compass sea 
and land to make one proselyte; and when he is made he is 
twofold more the child of gehenna than yourselves," Peter said, 
"I wot that ye did it ignorantly, as did also your rulers." (Acts 
3:17.) So now many of God's children who teach falsely, and 
thus exercise an injurious influence on the world, do it as 
unintentionally as did Saul before he saw the great light in the 
way and found that he was opposing the Messiah whose cause 
he before supposed he was serving. 

Mr. Ewing has a hope without foundation, when he believes that 
the infidelity of India is a step nearer to God and Christ than 
their former conscientious idolatry. Not so; they have been 
injured deeply by these false doctrines; just as infidels here are 
injured. They are farther from Christ and harder than ever to 
reach. Bible truth can convert an infidel, but sectarianism never. 
Although the Millennial age shall bring all to a clear 
comprehension of the truth, these infidels will, we doubt not, be 
far slower to receive the truth than if they were still in heathen 
darkness. And many of those young and ignorant converts are 
injured also, they are prejudiced against the truth and in favor of 
errors to such an extent that it will be more difficult to convert 
them to the truth than if left in total ignorance of Christ until the 
truth in its purity, simplicity and grandeur shall be taken to 
them. 

And when the gospel shall be preached to every creature, during 
the Millennial age, we have no doubt that many simple, 
unprejudiced ones, who make no profession of Christianity, will 
hear and receive the truth much more readily than some who 
have been Christians in name, but not in deed and in truth. - 
Matt. 7:22. 



R1072 : page 2 

A MORNING WITHOUT CLOUDS 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

Who can look around him, and consider the state of the world 
in which we live, and not be obliged to confess that clouds and 



darkness are now on every side? "The whole creation travaileth 
in pain." Rom. 8:22. Look where we will, we see confusion, 
quarrels, wars between nations, helplessness of statesmen, 
discontent and grumbling of lower classes, excessive luxury 
among the rich, extreme poverty among the poor, intemperance, 
impurity, dishonesty, swindling, lying, cheating, covetousness, 
heathenism, superstition, formality among Christians, decay of 
vital religion— these are the things which we see continually over 
the whole globe-Europe, Asia, Africa and America. 

But there is a good time coming which David saw far distant, 
when this state of things shall be completely changed. There is a 
kingdom coming in which holiness shall be the rule, and sin 
shall have no place at all. 

Who can look around him in his own neighborhood, and fail to 
see within a mile of his house that the consequences of sin lie 
heavily on the earth, and that sorrow and trouble abound? 
Sickness, and pain and death come to all classes, and spare 
none, whether rich or poor. The young often die before the old, 
and the children before the parents. Bodily suffering of the most 
fearful description and incurable disease, make the existence of 
many miserable. Widowhood, and childlessness, and 
solitariness, tempt many to feel weary of life, though everything 
which money can obtain is within their reach. Family quarrels, 
and envies and jealousies break up the peace of many a rich 
man's happiness. Who can deny that all these things are to be 
seen on every side of us? There are many clouds now. 

Will nothing end this state of things? Is creation to go on 
groaning and travailing forever after this fashion? Thanks be to 
God, the second advent of Christ supplies an answer to these 
questions. The Lord Jesus Christ has not yet finished his work 
on behalf of man. He will come again one day (perhaps very 
soon) to set up a glorious kingdom, in which the consequences 
of sin shall have no place at all. It is a kingdom in which there 
shall be no pain and no disease, in which "the inhabitants shall 
no more say, I am sick," (Isa. 33:24.) It is a kingdom in which 
there shall be no more partings, no moves, no changes, no good- 
byes. It is a kingdom in which there shall be no deaths, no 
funerals, no tears, and no mourning worn. It is a kingdom in 
which there shall be no quarrels, no losses, no disappointments, 
no wicked children, no bad servants, no faithless friends. Where 
is the Christian heart that does not long for this state of things to 
begin?— Bishop Ryle. 

R1073 : page 2 

Like the great majority of those who have caught glimpses of 
the Millennial kingdom, this brother's mind settles upon the final 
results to be obtained at the close of the Millennium; and his 



view consequently is rather that of the perfection to follow, than 
of the Millennium itself. 

There will be pain and sighing and trouble and death all through 
the Millennium, down to its close. But there will be a vast 
difference between now and then. Now, both saints and sinners 
suffer, and the former generally suffer most; then, only the 
wicked will suffer. Now, all who serve God are disadvantaged— 
"whosoever will live godly, shall suffer persecution;" "in the 
world ye shall have tribulation;" "marvel not if the world hate 
you." Then, "ye shall turn again and discern [a difference] 
between him that serveth the Lord and him that serveth him 
not." It shall not be as now: the wicked shall no more "spread 
himself as a green bay tree;" no more shall it be true of them that 
"their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than heart 
could wish," while the just are led as lambs to the slaughter.— 
James 5:6. 

The tears and pains and sorrows of the overcomers— the good 
soldiers of Christ who endured much and bravely for his truth's 
sake- will be at an end then. They all end with the present age of 
the Church's trial. The tears and groans and pains of the coming 
age will come from the ungodly. All wickedness will meet with 
a just and speedy punishment then, and every effort toward 
righteousness will bring blessings and releases from present 
imperfections which now cause pain, suffering and death. 

Now the penalty of sin rests heavily upon all because of Adam's 
sin. The fathers ate a sour grape of sin and all the children's teeth 
are set on edge; but all this ends with the present age. Pain and 
death will then be an individual matter; only the sinners will 
suffer, as the prophet explains. (Jer. 31:29,30.) There will be 
death then too, but not as now, the Adamic death upon all; "the 
soul that sinneth, it shall die," and no others. (Ezek. 18:4,20.) 
None but willful sinners will die then, but such shall surely die. 
Some, after coming to a full knowledge, and after a hundred 
years of trial, because still wilfully rebellious following the 
example of Satan and loving sin rather than righteousness, will 
die at a hundred years of age, and yet be but children. Others, 
who will make some progress under the Millennial trial, and 
continue to live down to its close, will be proved by a trial at the 
close of the Millennium, to still love sin, notwithstanding all 
their knowledge and experience with it— its cost, etc., and such 
too will be cut off from life, in the Second Death as clearly 
shown in Rev. 20:14,15. [See TOWER of Oct. 86.] Hence we 
see that sorrow and pain and death will still be known until the 
great Redeemer and Restorer has finished his great work of 
judging the redeemed world in righteousness,— to test which of 
them are worthy of everlasting life upon the condition of free, 
willing, glad obedience to all of God's requirements —which are 
all righteous. 



So then, the Millennial reign of the great Restorer is the "times 
of restitution, " a time in which imperfection will still continue, 
but in which it will gradually give place to perfection in the 
obedient. It will be the time for making all things new; but all 
things will not be perfectly restored and new until its close. It is 
to be the great schooling time for earth's billions, in which they 
shall all come to a knowledge of the truth; the great restoring 
and perfecting time both for man and for the earth, both so far 
from being perfect or very good now. It is the great Day of 
Judgment in which Christ shall "judge the world" and "judge 
angels" (Acts 17:31; Psa. 96:13; and 1 Cor. 6:2,3) rewarding 
with restored perfection the willing and worthy, and cutting off 
from life, forever, all willful sinners. This "righteous judgment" 
of all, necessitates the fullness of knowledge and assistance 
promised to all, then. 

Hence, we say the Morning without Clouds is that of the perfect 
age beyond the reign of Christ. The Millennial morning will be 
specially cloudy— "Behold he cometh with clouds." (Rev. 1:7.) 
"Clouds and darkness are round about Him." (Psa. 97:2; 50:3.) 
The Millennial dawn will be amid "clouds and thick darkness, "- 
a "time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation," in 
which the new and rightful King of earth will rule and correct 
the nations with a rod of iron and dash them in pieces as a 
potter's vessel-debasing the high and the proud and exalting the 
humble lovers of righteousness. -See, "The Plan of the Ages," 
chapters xiii, xiv, and xv. 



R1073 : page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Columbus, O. 

DEAR SIR AND BRO.:-I have been reading and investigating 
your book DAWN, and must confess to some interest and also 
curiosity. I know very well that in such investigation many 
important things are liable to be overlooked as well as brought 
out, and your book, or some other of your published conclusions 
may contain information on the very question I am going to ask 
you, viz.:— Do you teach the Scriptures on baptism (as well as 
faith and repentance), as an essential to forgiveness of sins? If 
not, why not? 

If the church is not to evangelize the world, how do you justify 
your efforts to induce people to accept what you most certainly 
believe and discuss to be the truth. 

I like much of what you say, as far as I have read it; but must 
confess that it is decidedly revolutionary. No matter for that, if it 



is the truth; for revolutions never go backward. I have met and 
heard Bro. Adamson, and expect to hear him again. 

Sisters H. and M. of this city and I are friends, and we have been 
together in the same church, and I was curious to know what had 
led them and so am reading your book and paper. Yours for all 
the truth. 

C. W . 



[Your questions with reference to baptism, I trust, are 
satisfactorily answered in the May TOWER and others to some 
extent in other TOWERS sent you. 

With reference to your query— "How do you justify your efforts 
to induce people to accept what we believe and discuss to be the 
truth, if you do not believe in evangelizing the world?"-I 
answer, we believe in the evangelizing of the world; but we do 
not believe in converting the world; that is, we find that God 
neither intends his truth to convert the world in the present age, 
nor has he told us to expect it to do so. He has commissioned us 
to go into all the world and declare the good tidings and thus to 
witness to the truth, and he has told us to expect only here one 
and there another, a little flock in all, to receive it. He shows us 
that his plan is, that when this little flock is selected under the 
trying circumstances of the present age, he will then make use of 
them in the age to follow this (the Millennium) as his agents in 
blessing all the families of the earth, and that under more 
favorable circumstances, than the present. 

This promise to raise up an Abrahamic seed to power and glory, 
and through it to bless the world, was the gospel first preached 
to Abraham; it is the good tidings of great joy for all people 
which must be fulfilled. Our Lord Jesus came as the head of this 
seed; and the Apostle Paul tells us (Gal. 3:29) that all the faithful 
church are members of this seed, and heirs with Christ of the 
promise made to this Abrahamic seed, that through them all 
shall be blessed. 

Besides, we understand that now we are living in the closing 
period of the Gospel age, called "the end" or "harvest." -"The 
harvest is the end of the world [age]." This being true, it follows 
that the character of the work now to be done is harvest work- 
reaping rather than sowing. We, therefore, are engaged in 
dispensing the stronger truths not to the world but to the wheat 
and tares (Matt. 13), the professed church. These truths as 
harvest sunshine are warm and strong and tend to ripen the 
wheat; and they also lead (through a clearer knowledge of the 
truth) to a separation between the wheat and tares. In this, these 
harvest truths are the Lord's sickle. The separation of the true 
wheat from the mere professors, the tares, goes on as quietly but 
as surely as a similar separation did in the end of the Jewish age- 
- which was also called a "harvest."— John 4:35-38. 



I trust dear brother, that these things may be indeed good tidings 
to you, as they are to be to all the meek eventually; and let me 
hope that you will not only have the grace to see the truth and 
receive it into an honest heart, but also the courage when seen to 
confess it, and to give your entire life in its service.— EDITOR.] 

page 2 

Hartsville, Tenn. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I feel greatly benefited by the July 
number of the WATCH TOWER. I have read and re-read the 
rich truths contained in it, and have been wonderfully blest. It 
was food indeed to my hungry soul; it made the subject of 
prayer very plain and comprehensible. It is a lesson worthy the 
study of every saint; if we pray to God let us pray aright. I 
needed just such a lesson on how to pray, and when to pray, and 
what to pray for. Many thanks for it. 

When I read the letter from the dear lonely brother, J. W. B. 
found on the seventh page, it filled my heart with joy; and tears 
of sympathy flowed from my eyes, for his opposition will be 
great. We will pray for, and sympathize with him. 

Blest be the tie that binds 
Our hearts in Christian love, 
The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above. 

God bless you in all your labors of love. Your brother in harvest 
work. 

E. B. S . 

R1073 : page 2 

Hopkins Co., Ky. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have long wanted to write to 
you, but feared you were almost too busy to read. I am a farmer 
and belong to the Missionary Baptist church. I am sixty years of 
age and have been preaching thirty-five years, devoting part of 
my time to that work and refusing any pay. So you see I am 
quite free. 

Only last fall I received Millennial Dawn, and read it with 
delight. I had long been seeking for more light on these deep 
subjects, and it was like the rising of the sun after a dark night. 
With my knowledge of the people hereabouts, I knew but few 
could stand the light all at once; so I have begun giving it to 
them 

R1074 : page 2 

just as they can bear it. The plan I adopted was to select about 
twenty of our very best men, without regard to their church 
creeds, and place in their hands M. DAWN for careful 
examination. The result is, about one half endorse it freely, and 



the rest seem undecided. I find it requires prudence to avoid a 
raid of persecution against it before it is understood. I am 
moving, but slowly and safely. 

Out of four preachers I have the attention of three who promise 
to examine further to see if these things be so. I have been 
earnestly desiring Volume II. 

May God bless you in your glorious work. 

S. D. C . 

page 2 

Pott Co., Iowa. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am again out on the road selling 
DAWNS. I could not be contented to settle while there is such a 
favorable time to be at work. I believe there will be time enough 
to fold our hands when we cannot find work, but now is the 
harvest truly ripe, and laborers few indeed. I have been on the 
road since the latter part of last week and have sold nearly half 
of the one hundred Dawns I had left, and will now order more, 
(order enclosed). I tell you it is a pleasure to me to scatter those 
tracts and Dawns. I would rather do it than anything I ever did. 
Of course there are lots of disadvantages about traveling in a 
covered wagon, but I cannot travel by train on account of my 
children, as I have no one to leave them with. I am very happy 
when I work just as hard as I can for the Lord, and in no other 
way. So as long as I can I shall sell Dawns. I have to stop now 
and then to clean and mend, and then go again. When winter 
comes I shall be compelled to settle, as did Paul, to winter. With 
great love to you and Sister Russell, I close by asking you to 
pray for my full deliverance into that blessed kingdom. I remain 
yours in Christ. 

MRS. M. L . 



R1074 : page 3 



HE RESTORETH MY SOUL. 

I am often so weary of sorrow, 
So weary of struggling with sin, 
So timid concerning the morrow, 
So faithless of entering in 

To the beautiful rest that remaineth 
Secure in the city of God, 
Where shall enter no evil that staineth, 
Nor ever the spoiler hath trod. 



But aye when the struggle is sorest, 
And dark are clouds on my soul, 
Dear Lord, the sweet cup that thou pourest 
Has balm, and I drink and am whole. 

From the quenchless old well of salvation 
I quaff the pure waters divine, 
And a sense of triumphant elation 
Is thrilled through this spirit of mine. 

No hand but thine own, blessed Master, 
Could comfort and cheer in the day 
When the touch of a sudden disaster 
Has cumbered and tangled the way. 

No look but thine own could illumine 
When night gathers black o'er the land, 
And strength that is failing and human 
Lies prone on the desolate strand. 

But ever thy help is the nearest 
When help from the earth there is none, 
And ever the word that is dearest 
Is the word of the Crucified Son; 

And aye, when the tempest-clouds gather, 
I fly for sweet shelter and peace 
Through the Son to the heart of the Father, 
The terror and tremor doth cease. 

He restoreth my soul, and I praise Him 
Whose love is my chrism and crown; 
He restoreth my soul; let me raise him 
A song that his mercy will own. 

For often so weary of sorrow, 

So weary of fighting with sin, 

I look and I long for the morrow 

When the ransom'd their freedom shall win. " 



-Selected. 



R1074 : page 3 

THE ONE TRUE CHURCH. 

"As the body is one and hath many members, and all the 
members of that one body being many are one body, so also is 
Christ; for by one spirit are we all baptized into one 
body. "..."There is one body, and one spirit; even as ye are all 
called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one Faith, one 
Baptism, one God and Father of all."... "After the way which 
they [many] call heresy, so worship I the God of my 
fathers. "..."Am I become your enemy because I tell you the 



truth?" [If so, then,] "I have become a fool for Christ's sake."-l 
Cor. 12:12,13; Eph 4:4-6; Acts 24:14; Gal. 4:16. 

That during the Gospel age God has been selecting a church, is 
admitted by all Christians except Universalists; and that all thus 
selected constitute the one church, and that God recognizes only 
the one church, and that a membership in that one church can 
only be secured during the present life-during the Gospel age- 
is also generally admitted to be the teaching of the Bible. 

And many will admit also, that our present union with Christ's 
body, the church, though precious, is but a probationary 
membership, which will only be confirmed and made 
everlasting by introduction into full membership in the church 
triumphant, at the close of this probationary period of the 
present life. -John 15:5,6; Phil. 3:12-16. 

But, while we and other Christians agree that the church 
triumphant is to be one church and not many churches, there are 
parts and bearings of the subject regarding which we are not 
agreed. 

We hold, that the conditions of the present trial, of all accepted 
as probationary members of the heavenly church, are much 
more severe and exacting, and that the selection is consequently 
much smaller than Christian people generally suppose; -a "little 
flock" only, is now being selected. (Luke 12:32.) Many suppose 
that the object of our God in calling and highly exalting the 
church was merely to save them from everlasting torment. We 
claim, and find and produce abundant Scripture proof of it, that 
God's object in this selection, training, discipline and final 
exaltation of the church, is for the ultimate purpose of blessing 
all his fallen, sin-stricken creatures (human and angelic) through 
them; by granting to all a full perfect judgment or trial under 
most favorable conditions, of which perfect knowledge and 
sufficient help, will be the chief elements of favor. Thus seen, 
the church is being selected for the great work to be 
accomplished during the Millennial age, of restoring 
"whosoever will" of the fallen ones back to their former estates, 
and consigning the wilfully unholy to the second death- 
everlasting punishment-everlasting destruction. 

Nor can it be denied, that this Scriptural view is much more 
elevating than the common selfish view which originated in the 
great Apostasy. Those called out by the hope of sharing in God's 
plan for doing good to others- blessing all the families of the 
earth-are sure to be both fewer, and spiritually above the 
masses, who are only moved by a selfish hope of escaping 
torment. 

We also differ from most Christians in regarding the church in 
its present condition as merely in a probationary state. And we 
further claim that there is only one church now, even as there 
will be but one church in glory; that our Lord and the apostles 



never recognized any but one church on earth; that so far from 
establishing many, or recognizing many, they denounced all 
efforts to separate into different parties and under different 
names, as schismatic, sectarian, and contrary to God's will, and 
as injurious, and an evidence of carnality in all who consented 
to, or aided such divisions of the probationary church. 

Paul's able and pointed reasoning upon this subject is partially 
obscured by the common translations, yet even in it, when the 
attention is called to it, the trend of the Apostle's reasoning can 
be clearly discerned; much more so in that valuable and 
generally very faithful translation, the Emphatic Diaglott. He 
exhorts that those teachers who favor divisions in the flock of 
Christ, be "watched" and turned away from; because they are 
not following the Lord's will, but their own. And he adds, "by 
kind and complimentary words they mislead the unsuspicious." 
(Rom. 16:17.) He reproved the Corinthian church because of a 
tendency toward sectarianism among them. (1 Cor. 1:10-13; and 
3:3-6.) They were dividing into Paulites, Apollosites, and 
Peterites, while a few rightly clung to the name Christian. 

Each of these teachers had his peculiarities of manner in 
teaching, which caused some to esteem one, and others another, 
most highly. But they all had the one gospel— the one Lord, one 
faith and one baptism. The spirit of favoritism, which led to 
factions and divisions, and to the exaltation of sectarian or party 
names, or the name of an individual teacher, to be the standard 
around which to rally, the Apostle declared was an evidence of 
carnality-proof of a worldly spirit. 

While the taking of different names was wrong, it was an 
evidence of a deeper wrong— of a selfish, party spirit. It was an 
evidence that those Corinthians, who took the party names, had 
never really appreciated the oneness of the Body of Christ; that 
they did not really appreciate that Christ is the only head, leader 
and standard; and that his is the only name by which his 
followers should recognize themselves and each other. Where 
scoffers apply a name in derision, it is not the fault of the 
faithful. But the true, loyal soldiers of the cross, should never 
own or recognize such a name. Instances of names so 
originating are Methodists and Baptists, both of which were first 
given in derision, but were afterwards adopted as party names, 
representing sects, factions, or divisions in the body of Christ. 
All true teachers are not only sent by Christ but receive their 
instructions from him; and any man who attempts to put his own 
or any other name upon all or any portion of the church is an 
opponent, an adversary to the true and only Lord and Head of 
the church. He is a misleader and evil doer, no matter what his 
claims or motives may be. 

The Apostle upbraiding the Corinthians, and seeking to show 
them their error in owning any other teacher besides Christ to be 
their head and standard and leader, asks, "Has Christ been 



divided?" Are there several seeds of Abraham now, each an heir 
of a promise? Is this the reason you countenance divisions into 
different parties? Or, is it because each of these leaders-Paul, 
Apollos, and Peter, have done some special favors to you and 
put you under obligation to them, you requite them by calling 
yourselves their servants and followers, bearing their names?— 
Was Paul crucified for you? or were you baptized in his name? 

Nay, nay, dearly beloved; one, and only one deserves all the 
honor of the church, both now and forever, and that one is her 
true Lord and Master; and His name only she should own in any 
manner. He leads, he teaches, he feeds; and the various human 
agents used by him, as channels for his blessings to his 
espoused, should neither take his place in her heart nor share his 
honor before the world. 

For a long time, in fact until very recently, Christians recognized 
this true principle, that there is but one body or church on earth, 
even as there will be but one in glory. And following this idea, 
each sect claimed to be that one, the only true church, and 
persecuted others. But by and by each began to see in the other 
certain good features of doctrine and practice, and gradually 
their ideas changed, until to-day they claim boldly, and in 
opposition to the word of our Lord and of the apostles, that sects 
are a decided advantage; that the human mind is so constituted 
that a common faith, which Paul urges upon the church, is an 
impossibility; and that the various sects of to-day with their 
contradictory diversities of faith are necessary accommodations 
to human prejudices and imbecility. 

Yet, still clinging to the idea that somehow there should be but 
one church, they are anxious to reunite all the larger sects so as 
to make (nominally) one church, while each sect therein may 
retain its own special features of faith or disbelief as at present. 
All in such a union (of which the Evangelical Alliance is a 
beginning), merely agree to disagree, to live and let live; and to 
recognize each other, in this general way, because of an 
increased influence and power and protection which it will bring 
to each sect thus associated; and because it would detract from 
the influence of others not so associated, and thus hinder 
independence of thought. This would serve to fix and establish 
an "orthodox" boundary line, inside of which there would be 
bounds to individual liberty, and yet a measure of freedom —to 
choose a preference among the forms and doctrines of the 
various sects thus acknowledged as "orthodox. " 

This is in fact the case now, among the so-called "liberal minds" 
of all denominations; and it is being urged of late that an 
organization of this sort, already founded in the Evangelical 
Alliance, be fully consummated; and that an attempt shall be 
made to have such a composite church in some degree 
recognized by the government. 



But, even when fully consummated, this could be no more than 
a union in name, with the same divisions and differences in 
fact;— one church nominally, and many sects really, as now. 

The first danger against which the Apostle warned the church, 
was sectarianism. He evidently was heeded at the time at least; 
for no great sect of Paulites or Apollosites developed. But, as 
usual, the great enemy thwarted in one direction moved to the 
opposite extreme, and attempted to insist upon a oneness very 
different from what the apostles or our Lord ever taught. This 
attempt was to have every recognized member of the church 
think exactly alike, on every minutia of Christian doctrine. This 
attempt finally headed up in Papacy, where every matter of 
doctrine was decided by the popes and councils; and every man 
who would be considered a church member was obliged to 
accept such decisions fully, and to profess that such decisions 
were his belief, his faith; whereas they were not his in any sense, 
but that of adoption. They were generally either blindly received 
or hypocritically professed with mental reservations. 

This was not at all the oneness urged by Paul. He urged a 
oneness of heart, and of mind and not a thoughtless, heartless, or 
hypocritical profession. He urged a oneness such as naturally 
results from the proper exercise of the liberty which we have in 
Christ-to search and believe the Scriptures, and to grow in 
grace and in knowledge, every man being thus fully persuaded 
in his own mind, and firmly rooted and grounded in the one faith 
as set forth in the Scriptures. The oneness of faith which Paul 
urged, was not that elaborate faith which touches and embraces 
all subjects, heavenly and earthly, human and divine, revealed 
and unrevealed. Quite the contrary: Paul's letters, weighty with 
logical reasoning, do not even mention the subjects upon which 
sectarians do most insist, and which are generally made tests of 
fellowship by them. 

Paul said nothing about an everlasting torture for sinners; he 
said nothing whatever about a mysterious trinity, in which three 
Gods incomprehensibly are three Gods and at the same time one 
God; he said not a word about man being of a nature such as 
could not die but must live, either in a place of pleasure or woe, 
everlastingly; he said nothing, either, about the present life 
ending all trial for all classes; and he entered into no entangling 
discussion about the bread and wine used in commemoration of 
the Lord's death,-as to transubstantiation or consubstantiation; 
yet it can easily be discerned that he was not in harmony with 
any of these errors. 

Notice particularly, however, that without so much as 
mentioning a single one of these sectarian tests of fellowship, 
Paul declares,— "I have not shunned to declare unto you the 
whole counsel of God. " (Acts 20:27.) From this it is very 
evident, that none of these points, which are to-day regarded as 
the very essence and substance of Christian doctrine, and the 



tests of faith, are the "one faith" or in any sense or degree parts 
of "the faith once delivered unto the saints."— Jude 3. 

The one faith which all should hold, was a very simple one; one 
so simple that all, the learned and the unlearned alike, could 
grasp it and comprehend it, and be 

R1074:page4 

"fully persuaded in their own minds" concerning it. It was not a 
dose of incongruous mysteries, inconsistent with themselves and 
inharmonious with reason as well as with the Bible, to be 
swallowed by the ignorant with credulity, and by the learned 
with hypocritical mental reservations; but it was so simple, and 
clear, and reasonable, that any and every honest follower of 
Christ could be fully persuaded in his own mind concerning it. 

What was this one faith? The basis of it is stated by Paul thus: "I 
delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received [first of 
all-as a foundation truth or doctrine, upon and in harmony with 
which all other doctrines must be built], how that Christ died for 
our sins, according to the Scriptures; and that he was buried; and 
that he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures." (1 
Cor. 15:3,4.) "There is one God and one Mediator between God 
and men, the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time. " 

This in a word, confesses sin and utter helplessness; it 
acknowledges God's loving plan for our redemption; it owns 
that our Lord's death was our ransom price; and that forgiveness 
(justification), and reconciliation to God, and the restitution of 
man, come as a result of faith in this Redeemer, when in due 
time it is made known to each and all. 

These brief statements contain the whole gospel, in the same 
sense that an acorn contains an oak tree. Without this gospel 
kernel, the true gospel can never be possessed; hence this must 
be insisted on as a test of Christian fellowship. This must be 
received else the gospel is not received. When it is received the 
gospel is received. Then a work of growth begins— a 
development of this gospel; it may vary in rapidity of growth 
according to the temperament and surroundings; it can develop 
into a twig, a sapling, a sturdy oak successively, but if 
developed from the one sort of seed the nature of the seed will 
appertain to it in every stage of its development. So is faith-the 
true faith; it must begin with the one kind of seed-faith in all, no 
matter what stage of development each may attain. This one 
gospel acknowledges man's fall and sinfulness, and God's mercy 
and love manifested through Christ's great work of redemption, 
forgiveness and final restoration; and all theories which omit 
any of these items are spurious: and they are many. 

Some deny God's love in the matter, and claim that all the love 
was Christ's and that he interposed and thwarted the Father's 



original plan; but the one faith is guided by the Apostle's 
testimony, that God so loved the world that he devised the plan 
as it is being carried forward, and sent his only begotten Son to 
do what he has done and is yet to do for the world. Others deny 
that any redemption was accomplished by the death of our Lord 
Jesus, deny that his life was substituted as a corresponding price 
or "ransom for all," and claim that the Father does all by simply 
pardoning the sinners. But again the one faith is clearly pointed 
out by the words of Paul "There is one mediator between God 
and men, the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom 
[corresponding price] for all." — 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

When received into honest hearts this simple gospel, the true 
gospel, will gradually open up and spread its roots of reason and 
its branches of hope in every direction, feeding upon the 
promises of God and building itself up as He designed, grasping 
the "one baptism" [See, May '88 TOWER], and every other 
feature of the gospel in its fullness as it progresses. 

Note the difference between this, God's test, on the simple first 
principles of the gospel, and the wrong course of men who 
attempt to enforce upon all an entire system of faith, and that 
when they are the merest babes in Christ; so fettering them then, 
that they are hindered from growing. To ask babes in Christ to 
assent to thirty or forty articles of faith arranged by fellow-men, 
and to agree to take those as the infallible truth, and to promise 
never to believe either more or less than they contain, is like as 
if in an orchard one gnarled and crooked tree were selected as a 
standard, and all the other trees were required to be padded out 
to make them look as thick and as gnarled as the sample and 
bound with iron bands that they might never grow larger or 
straighter. 

This true gospel, this simple faith, easily understood and 
confessed by the weakest babe in Christ, must also be, and 
always, and equally, the faith of the most developed sons of 
God. This one faith (and not the endless ramifications and 
details of faith which lead out from it) Paul placed as a standard 
or test of all claiming the name, Christian. All the consecrated 
who agreed on this one standard, or foundation truth, Paul 
counted as in and of the one church. While each member was to 
grow in grace, knowledge and love, if all growth were kept in 
line and harmony with this foundation truth, there would always 
be harmony and oneness in the faith and fellowship of the 
church. 

Here was a perfect basis of union which allowed for all the 
various stages of individual development in the truth; and which 
guarded against errors most effectually. For if this simple creed 
were made the standard by which all doctrines would be tested 
to-day, it would speedily lead to the discarding of every error 
and to the true union of the church in the "one Lord, one faith, 
and one baptism. " 



The endeavor to compel all men to think alike on all subjects, 
culminated in the great apostasy and the development of the 
great Papal system; and thereby the "gospel," the "one faith" 
which Paul and the other apostles set forth, was lost; buried 
under the mass of uninspired decrees of popes and councils. The 
union of the early church, based upon the simple gospel and 
bound only by love, gave place to the bondage of the Church of 
Rome— a slavery of God's children, from the degradation of 
which multitudes are still weak and suffering. 

The Reformation movement of the sixteenth century, came as an 
effort to regain liberty of conscience; but deluded by the idea of 
an elaborate creed, insisted upon for so many centuries, the 
reformers and their followers formed other systems of bondage 
very similar to that of papacy; with slight modifications, giving 
liberty to fuller ideas on some subjects. And so it has been ever 
since, each new reform movement has made the failure of 
attempting to make a creed just large enough for its prime 
movers. 



R1074:page4 

A "CHURCH TRUST" UNDESIRABLE. 

But while divisions in the Church of Christ are very wrong, and 
very contrary to the will and word of our Lord, they are better 
far than a union of bondage under Papacy's system, faith, etc. 
Instead therefore of attempting to get all the sects to combine in 
a sort of "Church Trust" an image or likeness of the Papal 
system of oneness (though on a higher plane), to regulate and 
restrict further investigation and further growth, we need to do 
the very opposite,— to abolish all sects and all elaborate creeds 
and confessions of faith. Instead of being further bound (by such 
a Church Trust Union-or wheel within a wheel, double 
imprisonment), all bondage should be set aside, except the 
simple tests first imposed in the one faith once delivered to the 
saints; and all party sectarian names should be repudiated, and 
the name of Christ should be the only name borne by his 
Church. 

Such a breaking down of sectarian fences would leave the true 
children of God willing to accept the original and simple test- 
"all one in Christ Jesus;" and this is what is needed. It would 
destroy sectarian pride, which so often counterfeits true 
Christian zeal and love, but it would tend to develop the truth, 
and thereby to develop the real zeal for the truth which our Lord 
desires in his followers. The term Church of Christ would no 
longer mean to any "our denomination," but the one true and 
only church, when they would sing:- 



I love thy church O God 
Her walls before thee stand, 
Dear as the apple of thine eye 
And graven on thy hands. 

Under such conditions, recognizing the true and only test, as 
above quoted from Paul, those who formerly championed 
opposite sides of the various questions of doctrine would join 
heads and hearts in carefully weighing the various statements of 
the Scriptures; and truly seeking the divine plan they would ere 
long, as promised, be guided into all truth. 

They would join hands and hearts as Christians, and while their 
heads, on certain points might not at once agree, it would only 
be a question of a short time; for the unbiased study of God's 
plan with no sectarian theory and organization to uphold, would 
bring the heads of all into union and general harmony, even 
though as at first the growth of faith in roots and branches might 
vary. All would believe the "same things" even if some could 
see and believe more elaborately than others. 

This freedom, and yet harmony and union, which is the result of 
a full acceptance of God's will and word, will not be attained 
except by the few, the "overcomers" in the present age. Others 
the Scriptures show, will continue in sectarian bondage and even 
increase their bondage-union by a Church Trust or 
"confederacy" (See Isa. 8:12), until all this is corrected in the 
close of this time of trouble by the fall of sectarian monarchies 
as well as of present political governments. -Dan. 12:1; Rev. 
18:2-5. 

In the next age, during the world's trial, such great deceiving 
systems will not be permitted; but now they are permitted in 
order to the testing and manifesting of the "overcomers." 

Let the dear saints who now walk the narrow way, and whose 
names are "written in heaven" as probationary members of the 
one true church of Christ, patiently persevere in worshiping God 
after the manner which others term heresy— closely studying and 
believing all that is written in the inspired Word, however it may 
conflict with human creeds, and the opinions of so-called great 
theologians. Be simple enough to take God at his word, however 
church monopolies or trusts may seek, either willingly or 
unintentionally, to wrest it to their own advantage. 

Flee all so-called unions which are merely bondages. What is 
needed is less of such unions, not more. Each individual needs 
to feel and exercise the same liberty on doctrine that each sect 
now claims. In this sense and view the bondage-union of the 
church under Papacy was the worst and most complete 
enslavement of the individual Christian; and the full breaking up 
of all sectarianism, so that no two persons will be bound to hold 
one faith (except on first-principles), is the most desirable 
condition. The breaking of Papacy into a hundred sects, each 



free from the other, was a good work; tending to the realization 
of the liberty wherewith Christ makes free. Though at first 
regarded as a calamity, it soon came to be known as the 
Reformation. And now the breaking up of these numerous sects, 
so that each individual will be free, is essential to a fuller growth 
in grace, knowledge and love than is at present possible. This 
breaking up of sectarianism, now regarded as a calamity, will by 
and by be truly recognized as the greatest of all religious 
reformations. The signs of the times indicate that such a 
reformation is impending, and the Scriptures declare it. A little 
more light, a little more knowledge, and these sectarian shackles 
upon the individual conscience will fall. Then whatever union 
shall exist will be upon right principles, -a union of hearts and 
principles and not merely on creeds and confessions. 
Recognizing each other's personal liberties, each disciple of 
Christ will be bound to the other by his love of the Lord and of 
his word alone; and others will be separated. 

Sectarianism has woefully distorted that beautiful figure of 
Christian union given by our Lord, recorded in John 15:1-6. To 
fit it to sectarianism, and to make their error in this appear to be 
supported by God's Word, it is claimed that the "Vine" is the 
whole church and the various denominations of "Christendom" 
are the branches. But that the Lord's words will bear no such 
construction must be evident to any one who will give the 
passage candid consideration. The branches are the individuals, 
and any branch is defined to be "any man" by our Lord's own 
words. Let this, our Lord's illustration of the true proper union 
of all the branches in one vine, connected and nourished by the 
same sap, from the same roots, teach us of true union and 
personal freedom in the body of Christ. 



Suppose that the salaries and "livings" of all ministers, bishops, 
priests, etc., were cut off, all churches, chapels and cathedrals 
destroyed, all theological seminaries broken up, and their 
professors turned to other pursuits, all religious guilds and 
societies broken up, including all sectarian organizations-what 
would the effect be? 

Who can doubt that it would be a real blessing under the 
disguise of a great and terrible catastrophe? The effect would be 
to bring true Christians together as the family of God, and not as 
sectarian bands, to study God's Word and not human traditions 
and creeds formulated in the darker ages. Very soon, 
unhindered, God's word would be heard by all truly his; and one 
Lord, one faith, and one baptism would soon be the result, while 
the worldly mass would speedily drift apart and the true 
distinction between the church and the world would be 
discernible. The Scriptures seem to indicate that very much of 
this sort of destruction of present systems must take place before 
all the "wheat," the true church, will be separated from the 



"tares"-the mere professors. Party spirit and love of sect is so 
strong that, apparently, nothing short of a complete wreck of 
them all will suffice to set free all of God's children now bound 
and blindfolded in and by them. 

This catastrophe,-sectarian destruction, the fall of Babylon, is 
what is referred to in the Book of Revelation under the symbol 
of the seven last plagues. 

R1074 : page 5 

(Rev. 15-18.) The pain from these will consist largely of mental 
chagrin, from the disappointment of sectarian hopes and plans, 
and the wounding of sectarian pride. When the Master said, 
"Watch ye that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these 
things coming upon the world," it included the pain of these 
plagues, as well as other annoyances which the world will be 
subject to, because of ignorance of the real plan of God. It is of 
escape from these plagues that the Revelator (our Lord— Rev. 
1:1) speaks to us, saying, "Come out of her my people that ye be 
not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of her plagues. "- 
-Rev. 18:4. 



R1074:page5 

THREE VIEWS OF THE CHURCH. 

"There are two conceptions of the Church, which for 
convenience I shall designate as the Protestant and Catholic 
conceptions. The Protestant idea of the Church is that it is a 
voluntary association of believers in Christ; that those who think 
alike upon religious subjects join together in a society and 
choose their pastor, who derives his commission and his 
authority from them. Consequently they are at liberty to 
prescribe what he shall and shall not teach, or to unmake their 
church and make another, precisely as the members of a club, or 
of a political party have a right to withdraw and form a new 
organization. The Protestant theory of the Church is that of an 
aggregation of individuals, 'who can rearrange themselves at 
will, and thus create new churches at every re- arrangement.' 
(Ewer.) The Catholic theory, on the other hand, is that it is an 
organization which God Almighty has founded once for all, to 
last to the end of time, and into which he invites men: it is His 
family, His household, His kingdom, His city. Its officers are 
commissioned by Him and hold their authority as teachers only 
from Him. In a word; the Catholic Church is not a democracy 
but an empire, not a republic but a kingdom. As such it comes to 
man with divine authority: its officers are under oath to the 
Eternal King, and they are to minister to man in His name and 
for Him. "-The Living Church. 



Brother Wright who sends us the above clipping remarks, - 
"Two views well stated. Please give us the third and true one, 
Brother Russell. " 

In presenting the true view of the Church, we labor under the 
disadvantage that for fifteen hundred years people have been 
taught one or the other of the above views and combinations of 
both, while the true idea has been generally lost sight of since 
the second century. The true view, as we conceive it, is as 
follows:— 

God's church when completed and organized will be all that is 
given above as the Catholic or Episcopal view. But it is not yet 
completed, and hence not yet organized. When organized it will 
be clothed with power, and will be, "not a democracy but an 
empire, not a republic but a kingdom. As such it [will] come to 
man [the world-during the Millennium] with divine authority 
[and with power to back up that authority]. Its officers are [then, 
to be] under oath to the Eternal King, and they are to minister to 
man in His name and for Him." All this, it is to be noted, fits 
exactly to the coming reign of the church, when it shall "bless 
all the families of the earth;" but it will not fit at all to the 
present state or condition. There is no organization to-day 
clothed with such divine authority to imperiously command 
mankind. There is no organization doing this to-day; though we 
are well aware many of them in theory claim that they ought to 
be permitted to do so; and many more would like to do so. 

This was the fatal mistake into which the church began to fall in 
the second century; and the effort to realize this false conception 
culminated in the boastful imperious counterfeiting of the 
coming kingdom in Papacy, which for centuries sought to 
dominate the world, by claimed "divine authority." This idea has 
more or less pervaded and poisoned the ideas of all the 
"Protestant clergy" as well, who, copying Papacy's false ideas of 
the Church, claim also that the Church of Christ is now 
organized, though they make less boastful claims to "divine 
authority" to teach and rule mankind in general, than Papacy 
does. 

God's church is not yet organized; on the contrary the Gospel 
age has been the time for calling out and testing the volunteers 
willing to sacrifice and suffer with their Lord now, and thus 
prove themselves worthy (Rev. 3:4,5,21; 2 Tim. 2:11,12; Rom. 
8:17) to be organized as joint-heirs in his kingdom at the close 
of the Gospel age, when he shall "set up" or organize his 
kingdom in power and great glory, to bless and rule the world 
with "divine authority." 

In the meantime, these unorganized but merely called out ones, 
who are seeking to make their calling and election sure, that 
they may obtain a share in the kingdom (2 Pet. 1:10; 2 Cor. 5:9), 
are "a voluntary association of believers" drawn together for 



mutual assistance in seeking to know and do the Master's will, 
that they may be accounted worthy the honors and glories 
promised, and not to rule men by divine authority; for they have 
no such authority now. In this "voluntary association" of the 
consecrated there is no imperial authority of one over another; 
and no lording it over God's heritage should be permitted; for 
the one and only Lord has left the instruction, "Be not ye called 
Rabbi; for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are 
brethren. "-Matt. 23:8. 

Instead of the kingly and lordly rule prevailing in the customs of 
the world, the Master gave all another and an opposite rule, 
saying, "Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the 
Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones 
exercise authority upon them. But so shall it not be among you; 
but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister 
[literally, servant]; and whosoever of you will be the chiefest, 
shall be servant of all [or greatest servant] : For even the Son of 
man came not to be ministered unto [served] but to minister 
[serve], and to give his life a ransom for many. "-Mark 10:42- 
45. 

The Lord was chiefest servant; and among the apostles those 
who served the church at greatest cost to themselves— Paul, 
Peter, John and James— are esteemed, by those who have the 
spirit of the truth, in proportion to their service and not in 
proportion to their titles, gowns, vestments, praise of men, etc., 
of which they had none. 

The Church, or company of believers, probationers for coming 
glory, in its "voluntary association" was indeed to recognize 
"teachers," "helps," "apostles," etc., but not to make them. If 
they recognized a man "mighty in the Scriptures," "apt to teach," 
able to make clear the divine plan, and specially qualified to 
build them up in the most holy faith, they gladly acknowledged 
God's favor in raising up among them such a servant of all to 
assist them in the understanding of his word. But they should be 
careful always, even while rejoicing in and thanking God for 
such a servant, to require a "thus saith the Lord" for every point 
of doctrine, and to search the Scriptures daily to see whether 
these things be so— whether the deductions and arguments of the 
teacher agree with the whole testimony of God's revealed plan. 

Thus, the Lord is the teacher of his followers, sending them now 
and again, in their own number, certain ones to call attention to 
truths being overlooked, or to injurious errors being entertained. 
The "meek" among the probationers will hear the Master's voice 
by whomsoever he speaks; and these will be guided into the 
truth, and prepared in due time for organization as his kingdom. 
"The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he 
teach his way."-Psa. 25:9. 



Thus seen, both the Catholic and the Protestant views of the 
Church are erroneous. The Catholic view gets the future 
organization applied to the present time, and the Protestant view, 
though ridding itself of some of that error, carries along enough 
of it to injure itself; for instead of admitting all consecrated 
believers into a "voluntary association," in which God would 
raise up his own teachers, Protestantism attempts also to 
organize and bind with creeds and confessions into various 
sects, each of which anxious to perpetuate itself and its ideas, 
selects and makes its own teachers in its own seminaries. 



R1074:page5 

THE TRUE CHURCH. 

To-day there are many organizations claiming to be the church, 
and having various bonds of union; but we wish now to show 
upon the authority of God's word, what church, our Lord 
established, and what are its bonds of union; Secondly, we wish 
to show that every Christian should belong to that church; 
thirdly, the injurious effects of joining the wrong church; and 
fourthly, having joined the right church, what would be the 
results of losing our membership. 

First, then, the church which Jesus began to gather during his 
ministry, and which was recognized by the Father at Pentecost 
after their ransom price was paid, was the little company of 
disciples who had consecrated earthly time, talents and life, a 
sacrifice to God. Theirs was a "voluntary association" for 
mutual aid; and this society was under the laws and government 
of Christ, its head or recognized ruling authority. The bonds 
were bonds of love and common interest. Since all were enlisted 
under the captaincy of Jesus, the hopes and fears, joys and 
sorrows and aims of one were those of the other; and thus they 
had a far more perfect union of hearts than could possibly be 
had from a union on the basis of any man-made creed. Thus 
their only union was of the Spirit; their law for the government 
of each was love, and all as a whole were put under obedience to 
the "law of the Spirit" as it was expressed in the life, actions, 
and words of their Lord. Their government was the will of him 
who said, "If ye love me keep my commandments." 

There are two senses in which the true church of Christ may be 
considered: All who like the early church were fully consecrated 
to the doing of our Father's will, amenable only to Christ's will 
and government, recognizing and obeying none other-these, the 
saints, from the beginning of the Gospel age down to its close, 
when all of this class are sealed, constitute the "CHURCH OF 
THE FIRST BORN, whose names are written in Heaven. " 
These are all one in aim, hope and suffering, and in due time 
will be joint-heirs with Christ Jesus to the great inheritance - 



heirs of the kingdom which God hath promised for them that 
love him. 

The other sense in which this same class is recognized, is by 
counting a part for the whole; thus all the living of this class 
may be spoken of as the church; or, again, any part of this class 
of living followers who may meet together may properly be 
called the church; for, wherever two or three are assembled the 
Lord has promised to be among them. Consequently that would 
be a church meeting -an assembly of the "Church of the First 
Born." The general assembly will be, when all the church are 
made like, and glorified with, their Head. 

Such, then, is our definition of the church of Christ. It is 
perfectly illustrated by Paul (Rom. 12:4,5) when he compares 
the church to a human body. In this figure the head represents 
our Lord, and all who are his constitute the body, over which the 
head rules. Jesus has been and always will be the head over his 
church as a whole; he is likewise the head and ruler of the entire 
living church, and in every assembly where two or three meet in 
his name (when his word is sought and heeded), he is the head, 
ruler and teacher. 

If it be asked, In what sense does he teach? we answer, by 
exercising the qualities of the head, or teacher; by using one or 
more of those present as His mouth-piece in unfolding truth, 
strengthening faith, encouraging hope, inspiring zeal, etc., just 
as the head of your body can call upon one member to minister 
to another. But here a word of caution: If one becomes as useful 
a member as a right hand, he should take care that he assume not 
the position and authority of the Head, to put forth his own 
words and ideas as truth. He must ever remember that his 
highest honor is to be an index finger to point out, or a mouth- 
piece to express the will of the one Lord and Master. Be not 
puffed up; pride will paralyze and render useless. "Be not ye 
called Rabbi [master, teacher], for one is your Master [head] 
even Christ, and all ye are brethren. " And let not the least 
member despise his office, "for if all were one member, where 
were the body?" "Nay, those members of the body which seem 
to be more feeble are necessary"— "God hath set the members 
every one of them, in the body as it hath pleased him. " 

How simple, beautiful, and effectual is God's plan of the 
"voluntary association" of His children. 

This brings us to our second proposition, viz. : that all Christians 
should be joined to this association or incipient organization. In 
the light of what has just been said as to the class constituting 
the church which our Lord is calling, it is evident that if you 
have given up all your will, talent, time, etc., you are recognized 
by the Lord as a probationary member of the church, of which 
he is the head; and whose names are written in heaven. Thus, by 
consecration, we join the true church and have our names 



recorded in heaven. But says one: Must I not join some 
organization on earth, assent to some creed, and have my name 
written on earth? No; remember that our Lord is our pattern and 
teacher, and neither in his words nor acts will you find any 
authority for binding yourselves with creeds and traditions of 
men which all tend to make the Word of God of none effect, and 
bring you under a bondage which will hinder your growth in 
grace and knowledge, and against which Paul warned you, 
saying, "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of 
bondage." -Gal. 5:1. 

But say some: If it is not proper to 

R1074 : page 6 

unite with any of the present nominal churches, would it not be 
well to form a visible association of our own? Yes, this is what 
we have— a society modeled after that of the early church. We 
think we have come back to primitive simplicity. The Lord Jesus 
alone is our head or law-giver; the Holy Spirit is our interpreter 
and guide into truth; our names are all written in heaven; we are 
bound together by love and common interest. 

Do you inquire— How shall we know one another? We ask, how 
can we help knowing one another when the Spirit of our Master 
is made manifest in word and act, and manner and look? Yes, 
the living faith, the unfeigned love, the long-suffering meekness, 
the childlike simplicity coupled with the constancy and zeal of 
maturity, make manifest the sons of God, and we need no 
earthly record, for the names of all such are written in the 
Lamb's book of life. 

Do the sick need visiting or assistance? These stand ready with 
consecrated time. Does the Lord's work require money?— These 
stand ready with consecrated means. Does his work bring upon 
them the reproach of the world, and of a degenerate nominal 
church?— These have also sacrificed reputation and all else to 
God. 

But again, do you inquire, How shall we deal with one who 
walks disorderly in our midst? if we have no organization such 
as we see about us, how can we free ourselves from such, as the 
Lord requires us to do? We answer: Do just as Jesus and Paul 
directed. 

Now, as in the early church, there are various degrees of 
advancement among the individual members, and Paul says (1 
Thes. 5:14,) some are feeble-minded, comfort them; some are 
weak, support them; but while you should be patient toward all, 
warn the disorderly (those who are drifting away from the true 
spirit of Christ). Don't mistake the disorderly for the weak, and 
comfort them; nor for the feeble-minded, and support them, but 
patiently, lovingly, warn the disorderly. Whom does he call 



disorderly? Doubtless there are many ways of walking 
disorderly, but in 2 Thes. 3:1 1, he speaks of some who work not 
at all, but are busy-bodies, and says they should do as he did— 
work, that they be not chargeable to any; and if any will not 
work, neither should he eat. Thus he said he did, that he might 
be an example to others. He warns us also against immoral and 
unjust persons, and those who wrest (twist) the Scriptures and 
thus turn the truth of God into a lie. Then again, verse 14, after 
you have warned such a one, if he "obey not... note that man, and 
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.... Yet, 
count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. " 

Again, our Lord gives explicit directions where there is a matter 
of offence between two brethren, Matt. 18:15,17: "If thy brother 
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee 
and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy 
brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or 
two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every 
word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, 
tell it unto the church (the company of brethren who assemble 
together); but if he neglects to hear the church, let him be unto 
thee as an heathen man and a publican. " If, under the captaincy 
of our Head, we heed his commands, which we will do if we 
love him, how few will be the misunderstandings and 
difficulties among the brethren. 

This association has its evangelists, pastors and teachers, 
appointed and directed by the Lord. They need no laying on of 
hands by the so-called Apostolic succession; for the "Spirit of 
the Lord hath anointed" all the members of the body "to preach," 
etc. (Isa. 61:1), and it is the duty of every member of the body to 
exercise his office for the edification of the other members. The 
true church are all priests, an association of priests and not an 
association under the control of a clerical or priestly class. (1 
Pet. 2:9.) There is one great Bishop or overseer, who raises up 
and sends from time to time, his own special messengers to 
uncover truths, over-throw errors, etc.— Luther seems to have 
been one of these, Wesley another. But our Lord retains the 
Bishopric himself, as saith the apostle. (1 Pet. 2:25.) How 
complete is the voluntary union of the church of Christ with its 
heaven- written, love-bound and Spirit-ruled membership, and 
how sad the error of mistaking the nominal for the real church! 

The importance of our fourth proposition need not be urged. It 
would indeed, be a dreadful calamity to lose our membership in 
the true church or body of Christ. And no member is out of this 
danger except when keeping a vigilant watch over the old 
nature, counted dead, lest it come to life again, and assert itself 
in the form of pride, selfishness, envy, evil-speaking— or what 
not? But if filled with love (the love that prompts to sacrifice) 
and clothed with humility, and under cover of the redeeming 



blood, we are safe in the church (the body), having the assurance 
that it is our "Father's good pleasure to give us the kingdom." 

Yes, the kingdom is the glorious destiny of the true church-the 
"little flock"— now treading the pathway of humiliation and 
drinking the bitter cup of death. The glory that shall be revealed 
in us, doth not yet appear, except to the eye of faith, but the 
temptations and trials, are very apparent on every hand. "Let us, 
therefore, fear lest a promise being left us of entering into his 
rest, any of you should seem to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 

Thus Paul warned others and thus he feared, lest (even after) 
having preached to others, he himself should be a castaway. (1 
Cor. 9:27.) We may have our names cast out as evil by those of 
the nominal church, and yet "rejoice and be exceeding glad 
because our names are written in heaven. " They may frown 
upon you and despitefully use you and say all manner of evil 
against you falsely; or they may seek to win you back by 
flattery, saying they cannot afford to lose your influence, you 
could do so much good by remaining among them, etc. Oh, how 
necessary in this "evil day" is the faith— 

That bears unmoved the world's dark frown, 
Nor heeds its flattering smile; 
That seas of trouble cannot drown, 
Nor Satan's arts beguile. 

Dearly beloved, let us again repeat the warning: "Stand fast in 
the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not 
again entangled with the yoke of bondage" -not even in the 
slightest degree. 



R1074 : page 6 



GOD IS TRUE. 



"He that hath received His testimony hath set the seal that God 
is true." (John 3:33.) "A friend gives me for the Orphanage a 
check, which runs thus: 'Pay to the order of C. H. Spurgeon the 
sum of L. 10.' His name is good, and his bank is good, but I got 
nothing from his kindness till I put my own name at the back of 
the check or draft. It is a very simple act: I merely sign my 
name, and the banker pays me; but the signature cannot be 
dispensed with. There are many nobler names than mine, but 
none of these can be used instead of my own. ...I must myself 
affix my own name. Even so, each one must personally accept, 
adopt, and endorse the promise of God by his own individual 
faith, or he will derive no benefit from it."— Spurgeon. 



R1074 : page 6 



REAL CHRISTIANITY. 

The following from the Chicago Times, points out an individual 
responsibility toward God and the truth, which sectarianism will 
not take the place of. It says:— 

"It is probable that we are to be forced, ere long to the serious 
consideration of how closely Christianity, as taught and 
practiced, is in accord with the actual spirit of its Founder. 
Somehow it is meeting with unexpected opposition in the world, 
which raises the question of whether Christianity is really 
Christian. We shall have to confess that it is not satisfactorily so, 
says an exchange. If the question were put in this form, Is 
Christianity Christ-like? we should readily admit that it is not. It 
has lost, or grown weak in some of the main characteristics of its 
Founder. It does not adequately preach the Gospel to the poor, 
not do its members seek first the kingdom of God; they do not 
love their brethren as themselves, nor are they touched with the 
feeling of others' infirmities to the degree which impels them to 
adequate measures of relief. 

While it has gained much, Christianity has also suffered in its 
contact with the world— it has lifted the world up immeasurably 
beyond its old position, but it has also been dragged down from 
the sublime ideal established by Jesus Christ. It must return. It 
cannot stoop and conquer. Its only hope of acceptance lies in 
maintaining itself as the one thing pure, to which men may give 
themselves with the assurance that there is nothing better. It 
seems unnecessary to say that current Christian practice does not 
conform to such an ideal as this. 

It is easy to say that Christianity is to be judged by its ideal 
precepts and not by the actions of its adherents. But in the 
practical world it is not judged by its ideal precepts-it is judged 
by its fruits. It will continue to be judged so. Therefore it is 
impossible to see how it is to succeed in extending itself much 
further without our broadening our conception of human 
brotherhood, deepening our sense of human wrongs, miseries 
and sins, and without a larger degree of self-sacrifice, sympathy, 
and purity of life. As Canon Wilberforce says: "The only thing 
Christianity needs just now is Christians." And these sooner or 
later it will have to find. We shall be driven by increasing 
skepticism and indifference to raise our standard of personal 
fidelity to Christ and His commands. Nothing will eventually be 
found to answer except that every Christian shall try to be a 
Christ. Christianity will learn to be not only Christian, but 
Christ-like, else it cannot venture to offer itself as a remedy for 
human wrongs, an antidote for human fears and sorrows. 

It is a fact that Christianity has always made most rapid progress 
in those periods when its theology has been simplest and its 
practice purest. The creed of Christendom has never been so 
simple, nor its life so pure and Christ-like, as in apostolic times, 



when it spread so rapidly around the Mediterranean. The great 
Wesleyan revival originated in the feeling that the age had 
drifted, both in theology and in practice, very far from the 
teachings of Christ, and its entire strength lay in the emphatic 
call to greater simplicity of faith and purity of life. The Church 
was compelled to raise its standard of living by the same causes 
that are operating now, the spread of atheism among the learned, 
and indifference and immorality among the ignorant. The 
Wesleyan revival was the only answer that was ever needed or 
could be given to the infidelity of the eighteenth century-only it 
did not go far enough. There is a degree of beauty and 
completeness in the example of Jesus Christ never dreamed of 
by Wesley and his followers, and this it belongs to the 
Christians of our time to discover and illustrate in their lives." 



R1075 : page 6 

"AS BECOMETH WOMEN 
PROFESSING GODLINESS." 

-(No. 1.)- 

The thought has recently been suggesting itself, that as the 
sphere of Christian women differs somewhat from that of our 
brethren, a few observations in the TOWER bearing upon the 
duties, privileges and obligations of Christian women, and how 
we may best fulfill our mission might prove beneficial and 
helpful. 

The sphere of Christian women is by no means a narrow one, as 
many seem to regard it; and if we would properly fulfill our 
mission, it behooves us as members of the Church of Christ, and 
in the earthly relationships of wives, mothers, daughters and 
sisters, as well as neighbors and friends, to consider it with care 
in the light of the divine revelation and particularly in the light 
of our present position as the prospective heirs of God and joint- 
heirs with Jesus Christ. As stewards of God we all have some of 
his goods— some talents— however great or small, entrusted to 
our care. And if we would be wise stewards and meet the 
Master's approval when we come to render up our accounts, we 
must study the best ways and means for investing our talents so 
as to have them yield the largest possible increase. 

A merchant who simply invests his capital, be it large or small, 
in business, and pays no further attention to it, will never 
succeed. If he would be successful he must study to learn the 
best possible ways of turning everything to account. So must we 
do if we would be faithful stewards of God. 

As members of the church, we, in common with our brethren, 
are even now privileged to be co-workers together with our Lord 
and Head. The question therefore naturally arises first of all, 



What department of Christian work may properly engage the 
activities of Christian women? 

To rightly judge of the matter we need first to observe the 
natural position to which God has assigned woman; and 
secondly to inquire whether the new relationship into which we 
are called as members of the church of Christ, in any degree 
modifies our duties and responsibilities under the natural order. 
Let us therefore first consider the divine order of headship as 
expressed by the Apostle Paul — 1 Cor. 1 1:3. 

THE DIVINE ORDER OF HEADSHIP. 

"I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ; 
and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is 
God. "-1 Cor. 11:3. 

The Apostle Paul here uses the human body as an illustration of 
God's order and arrangement among his intelligent creatures. 
The symbol is an apt one, and 

R1075 : page 7 

suggestive of perfect harmony. The head is the director and 
care-taker of the body; every interest of the body is taken into 
consideration by the head, and every possible provision made 
and applied to meet those interests. And in turn, the members of 
the body are always at the prompt and willing service of the 
head. And such is the sympathy between the various members 
that if one is disabled the other members, are ever on the alert to 
execute the plans devised by the head for its recovery. 

The headship of Jehovah was expressed to Adam in his perfect 
condition in Eden, when God said: "Of every tree of the garden 
thou mayest freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good 
and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest 
thereof, dying thou shalt die." (Gen. 2: 16, 17, -margin.) Here 
was an expression of Jehovah's rightful authority, his loving care 
and generous provision-his headship. Man in turn should have 
expected to reverence, respect and obey the authority, to 
reciprocate the love, and to gratefully accept and enjoy 
Jehovah's bounty. In the obedience expected, the idea of base 
servility was absent. Love commanded, and love should have 
delighted in obedience. 

Even Christ Jesus, highly exalted as he is, delights to 
acknowledge the headship of Jehovah, saying, "My Father is 
greater than I;" "I came not to do mine own will, but the will of 
him that sent me." And again: "I delight to do thy will, O my 
God; yea, thy law is within my heart" (Psa. 40:8). In harmony 
with this thought of the headship of Jehovah, the prophet Isaiah 
represents Christ as the "Arm of Jehovah" (Isa. 53:1; 59:16), and 
in obedience to Jehovah's will he was active, prompt and 
willing, even unto death. Thus our Lord set us an example of the 



true relationship which should exist between himself as head 
and the members of his body. 

Since Christ has redeemed mankind from death, all judgment, 
authority and power is given unto him. The office of the head is 
now vested in him; hence Paul declares: The head of man is 
Christ. And whatever is implied by this term in expressing the 
relationship between our Lord Jesus and Jehovah, his head, is 
also implied in that relationship between Christ and man. He, 
then, who would be perfect, must find his chief delight in 
learning and doing the will of Christ, even as Christ Jesus 
delights to do the will of Jehovah. It should be his constant aim 
to bring "into captivity every thought to the obedience of 
Christ." (2 Cor. 10:5) And to do the will of Christ is to do the 
will of Jehovah; because the will of Christ is to do Jehovah's 
will. 

The next step in God's order indicated by the Apostle, is, man 
the head of woman; or as shown in Eph. 5:23, the husband the 
head of the wife. Many who see clearly the headship of Jehovah, 
and the headship of Christ, fail to see the headship of man in the 
domestic relation. Prejudice, public sentiment and the abuse of 
power, have made this and similar expressions of the faithful 
Apostle quite unpopular. And this is not surprising, in the 
present fallen and disordered condition of humanity. Because of 
his teaching on this subject, the Apostle Paul is variously 
charged with being a despiser of women, and as speaking 
without divine authority; and this even among Christians. But 
when rightly viewed, Paul, as usual, is found to give faithful 
expression to the divine order dictated by unerring wisdom for 
the highest good and happiness of all. 

If the husband is the head of the wife, it implies exactly the 
same responsibilities on the part of each as named above. The 
husband should be the protector, provider and director in the 
affairs of life, and the wife the cheerful, willing co-worker in 
harmony with his will. He, therefore, who would assume the 
position of husband, should see that he is capable and willing to 
fill it after the divine pattern; and she who would become a 
man's partner in life, should see that she is ready to fill such 
position according to the divine arrangement. 

Yes, says some dear sister, that would all do very well if men 
were perfect, but we know that it not unfrequently happens that 
the wife has more ability and judgment to act as head than the 
husband. That is doubtless true in many cases, but that should be 
considered before such contracts are made. If unhappily it has 
not been considered in time, such wives should make the best of 
the situation and quietly assist in the office of head, with as 
much modesty, and as little appearance of doing so, as the 
circumstances will admit. It also happens, says another, that the 
husband's will often runs counter to the Lord's will; how then? 
We answer, If the husband is consecrated to the Lord, and yet 



his will appears to be out of harmony with the Lord's will, he 
will be very ready, either to prove his course to be in harmony 
with the Lord's will or to change it. And here we see the wisdom 
which dictates that we should not be unequally yoked with 
unbelievers (2 Cor. 6:14). But if such contracts have been 
formed before we became consecrated believers, we must bear 
in mind that our first responsibility is now to our Lord, our 
Heavenly Bridegroom. The worldly husband is not the head of 
his wife as a "new creature" espoused to Christ. Her first 
allegiance, is, therefore, to her real though invisible Lord, but in 
so far as may be consistent with this new relationship she should 
endeavor to fulfill the old also-a thing not possible in every 
respect. For one of those consecrated to God as living sacrifices 
to thereafter become unequally yoked with one of the world's 
children, is to violate the direct command of God (2 Cor. 6:14), 
and to take a long step toward ignoring union with Christ, "for 
what communion hath light with darkness?" The children of this 
world strive for the things of this world and delight in the 
world's approval, while the consecrated child of God has 
renounced all these and should be striving only to obtain those 
things which are beyond and entirely unknown to the world. But 
if both are united in the Lord, studying to know and do his will, 
and walking after the Spirit, to do the will of the consecrated 
husband is to do the will of Christ. 

The consecrated wife sustains the same relation to the 
consecrated husband that the husband sustains to Christ, and that 
Christ sustains to God who is head over all. Should submission 
on the part of any be regarded as mere servility? By no means. 
Christ did not so regard it; why should we? There is neither 
servility nor tyranny where love rules. Love is neither boastful 
of its authority nor ashamed of its submission. The true 
Christian husband will delight to honor the wife as the weaker 
vessel, and the wife will reverence her husband. The wife will 
look up with a lawful pride in her husband's manly strength and 
goodness, while he will regard with admiration and affection her 
womanly grace. If the relationship between husband and wife in 
the divine order stands thus, it cannot be true as some claim that 
man and woman are exact equals in every respect. They are not 
equal in all respects, but each possesses and should recognize 
those qualities of heart and mind which make them companions 
for each other. Under such circumstances the wife will be 
subject to the husband because she recognizes such to be the 
divine arrangement for their mutual good; and further, because it 
will be her delight to serve for love's sake. And the husband will 
delight to honor and bless the wife. 

R1076 : page 7 

God never makes one the head over another exact equal. 
Jehovah is superior to Christ, Christ superior to man, and man 
superior to woman, the weaker vessel. Man's superiority consists 



mainly in his greater strength, both physical and mental. These 
various steps are in God's order. True, in the present fallen, 
imperfect condition, many women are superior to many men, 
but such women should be very sure not to become wives of 
such men; for in so doing they must either violate the divine 
order (Eph. 5:22), or else submit themselves to an inferior which 
is also out of harmony with the Lord's design. 

When after the fall God said to Eve, "Thy husband shall rule 
over thee," some claim that he there established domestic 
slavery. Truly domestic slavery has followed; but God did not 
establish it. Man, created to bless by his power to rule, too often 
falls into the error of tyrannical misrule, and the desire of the 
wife toward her husband-for his love, appreciation and 
approval-alas, too often ends in bitter disappointment just as 
God foretold. 

In view of these considerations, let us note the instruction of the 
Apostle Paul, and see that its object is the very same as that 
contemplated in the union of the first perfect pair in Eden: 
"Wives submit yourselves unto your own husbands as unto the 
Lord; for the husband is the head of the wife even as Christ is 
the head of the Church, and he is the Savior [preserver, care- 
taker] of the body. Therefore, as the Church is subject unto 
Christ, so let the wives be to their husbands in everything. 
Husbands love your wives even as Christ also loved the Church 
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with 
the washing of water by the word [the truth]: that he might 
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or 
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without 
blemish. So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies" 
(Eph. 5:22-28). Children may then obey both parents, since each 
will be in harmony with the other and with the Lord. 

In recognition of the same principle, the headship of man, Paul 
further states: "I do not permit a woman to teach or to assume 
authority over man, but to be quiet" (1 Tim. 2:12). Surely Paul 
does not mean that a woman's lips must be forever sealed that 
she may not declare the good tidings of great joy to others. Does 
not the same Apostle say: "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there 
is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female; for ye 
are all ONE in Christ Jesus. And does not the prophet Isaiah 
teach that all the anointed, are anointed to preach the good 
tidings. It is in harmony with these, then, that we must 
understand the above words of the Apostle. 

His idea, therefore, seems to be, that in no case, however 
important the truth we are commissioned to bear, is woman to 
assume a position of authority or headship over man. She may 
tell the blessed tidings of great joy and teach the principles of 
truth anywhere and everywhere, and to whomsoever she has 
opportunity; but always with becoming modesty, stating the 
truth so clearly that of itself it may carry conviction with it and 



her own individuality be lost sight of. This element of character 
is one which naturally belongs to woman, but is generally very 
soon lost by those who attempt to work in a public way. The 
work for the majority of women is the individual, quiet and none 
the less effective work. Her greatest influence is that exerted 
strictly within her divinely appointed sphere. If necessity, 
opportunity, and ability should indicate a more public sphere of 
usefulness, she may fill it as long as such necessity and 
opportunity lasts, if in so doing, she bears that modest, quiet 
demeanor, in action, word, and apparel, which becometh women 
professing Godliness. By emphasizing necessity, we mean that 
never should she seek or prefer publicity to the less obtrusive 
and equally effective ways of making her influence felt for truth 
and righteousness. It is the assumption of authority and 
dictatorship, which is so unbecoming. 

Again, we see that in this relationship of husband and wife, is 
prefigured the beautiful relationship between Christ Jesus and 
the church. And as in the type, so in the antitype, the church, the 
bride of Christ is to be subject unto him in everything; earnestly 
seeking at all times to know, and then delighting to do his will. 
As the woman is not to assume authority and direct her husband, 
so the church is not to assume authority and to attempt to direct 
the Lord's work, but is to be "quiet," searching diligently to 
know his plan and methods, and then endeavoring faithfully to 
execute them. 

When God's plan shall be brought fully into execution, we see 
that loving authority and joyful submission will fill the universe 
with blessed peace and everlasting joy-and "God shall be all in 
all"- Head over all— his will done in earth as it is done in 
heaven. (1 Cor. 15:28.) Seeing this to be God's ultimate design, 
it should be our endeavor, so far as it is in our power, to carry 
out and illustrate that purpose now. It can only be fully 
illustrated, however, by those who are "united in the Lord." The 
covering of the head by the woman (1 Cor. 11:10), signifies 
submission to authority; a recognition of God's order of 
headship. It symbolizes the relationship between the church and 
her head, Christ Jesus. The same thing was illustrated in the 
attire of the priesthood: the high-priest wore a mitre or crown 
and the under-priests (representatives of the church, the bride), 
wore "bonnets" or head coverings, indicating that they were not 
the head but under authority to the Chief-Priest. 

The Apostle's high regard for woman and woman's work is 
shown by his mention of several faithful co-laborers and helpers 
among them-see Rom. 16:1-6,13; also Phil. 4:3: "I entreat 
thee... help those women which labored with me in the 
gospel... whose names are in the book of life." And Acts 1:14: 
"All continued with one accord in prayer and supplication with 
the women. " And 1 Cor. 11:5: "Every woman that prayeth or 
prophesieth [teacheth]." 



These scriptures show that women did a work in the Apostles' 
days which was approved and appreciated by them and by the 
Lord. Yet women usually spoke only at the smaller gatherings; 
and when Paul said, "Let the women keep silence in the 
congregations," he probably had reference to the public 
gatherings at which it was the custom to have more or less 
debating. In these public debatings, Paul 

R1076 : page 8 

thought a woman's voice would be out of place, and this is the 
opinion of most thinking men and women to-day, though it has 
by many been carried to an extreme, forbidding them to pray or 
teach on any occasion, even in more private assemblies of 
Christians; which certainly is an error. 

When Paul urged that the women keep silence in the churches, 
and if they would learn anything to inquire of their husbands at 
home, he must be understood as referring to a principle to be 
observed only so far as practicable— and possibly to curb some 
unwomanly women who were a disturbing element in the church 
then. To rigidly apply the rule would do violence to the general 
spirit of Paul's teaching. Where the spirit of Christ is there is 
liberty-not liberty to violate God's law and order as expressed 
both in nature and Revelation, but liberty to progress and to 
grow in grace and knowledge under the wholesome restraints of 
God's law and established order. 

Because God has arranged that the man and woman are 
representative of Christ and his bride, the church, probably this 
is one reason that men have always been given the more active 
and public work of the ministry, and women the work of 
assisting and the more private teaching, which is equally 
acceptable to God. So Christ is the active agent in carrying out 
God's plan. He is the great minister of all, and we as his Church 
are permitted to be helps meet for his use: to do an humbler part, 
and yet an acceptable part, well pleasing to God. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R1076 : page 8 



SHALL NEVER DIE. 



"I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me, 
though he die, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and 
believeth in me shall never die. "-John 1 1 :26. 

These were our Lord's words of consolation to Martha. They 
briefly state the great hope of our race through the plan of 
redemption. 

The first statement- "He that believeth in me, though he die, yet 
shall he live," teaches, that only believers shall be resurrected 



i.e., made to LIVE. This may appear out of harmony with other 
statements of our Lord, to the effect that ALL in their graves 
shall come forth, until we recognize the full force of the words, 
resurrection and life. We have heretofore shown that the word 
resurrect, signifies to lift or raise up again to perfection; and that 
since man's fall was from perfection, as represented in Adam, 
his promised resurrection implies a bringing to perfection again. 
But, many scriptures indicate that, while the gospel Church will 
be lifted to the perfection of the new nature in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, the world of mankind will be gradually 
resurrected, or brought to perfection of human nature, from 
which all fell in Adam;— the entire Millennial age being "the 
times of restitution," resurrection, or restoration. 

R1077 : page 8 

By recognizing this fullness of meaning in the word LIVE, in 
the scripture under consideration, we have the statement clear, 
and easily understood, in harmony with all other declarations of 
the Scriptures. 

TO LIVE means a great deal, in its full import. Adam and Eve 
lived, i.e., they had life in perfect measure, before sin entered. 
When sin entered the dying commenced, and it was a process of 
ceasing to live. So death, the opposite of life, passed upon all 
men. From the standpoint of God's sentence, all are now dead. 
(2 Cor. 5:14; Matt. 8:22.) So then, though it is true that all in 
their graves shall "come forth," they will come forth with only a 
small measure of life, such as men now have; they will still be 
measurably in death as all now are, and will be gradually 
advanced to perfection, through knowledge and acceptance and 
obedience of the truth. 

That believing in Christ [including hearty obedience], is in the 
Bible made the condition of perfect resurrection to life, is a fact; 
and its reasonableness is evident; for why should the Redeemer 
continue to lift upward toward perfection, those who, when they 
came to a full clear knowledge of his character and plan, 
willfully fight against it? The mistake generally made is, in 
insisting that this belief and obedience is limited for all to the 
present life-time. On the contrary, it is as true of the Millennial 
age as of the Gospel age. 

In the present age, only a few come to that fullness of 
knowledge which brings fullness of responsibility; and how 
shall the many believe on him of whom they have not heard? 
And since only believers are to be fully released from death, it is 
evident that all must come to a knowledge of the truth that they 
may be saved -"in due time."-l Tim. 2:4,6. 

Though our Lord is the great Life-giver in whom is vested all 
the resurrection or life-giving powers, and though he has 
promised perfect LIFE, full release from death, to believers, yet 
we see that now believers die as well as unbelievers. And we at 



first wondered as Mary did why the one who has the power of 
life should let his believing friends die, when he tells us that his 
special mission is to "destroy death." (1 Cor. 15:26; Heb. 2:14.) 
The Lord's words show us that though his work as the Life-giver 
belongs to the next age, yet he will not neglect the believers who 
die before that age; and that though such are permitted to die, it 
should not be understood to imply lack of power or willingness 
to serve, on the part of the Life-giver. "He that believeth in me 
though he die, yet shall he live." 

That "whosoever believeth in him shall not perish [in death] but 
have lasting [perfect] life," is as clearly stated in the Scriptures, 
as that all shall come to a [full] knowledge of the truth,-when 
the knowledge of the Lord shall be caused to fill the whole earth 
as the waters cover the sea. And it is equally true that whosoever 
believeth not [when given full knowledge and ability] shall be 
condemned. 

In perfect accord with this view, is that peculiar statement of 
John 5:25-"Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming* 
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they 
that hear shall LIVE. " According to the general conception, this 
should read, They that live shall hear, but this would not have 
been strictly true: hence the peculiar and guarded expression 
used, which is only appreciable as we come to see more deeply 
into God's plans for that coming age. All are dead (under death's 
dominion) until entirely freed. The Redeemer has come, the 
ransom has been paid, and in due time all the dead race shall 
hear [be brought to a clear conception of these facts], and they 
that hear [heed] shall [in due time] LIVE, reach perfection. 

A few, who were of the dead class, in this age heard thus of the 
ransom price given for our release; and those who have heard 
[understood and heeded] it, could also afterward hear, of a prize 
or high calling offered during the Gospel age to believing 
sacrificers, and have "had access into this grace wherein we 
stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God." But the due time 
in which the great mass of the dead shall hear, will be when this 
"little flock" of sacrificers and heirs of God, has attained the 
glory. As members of the great Prophet they shall teach and 
bless the people, bringing them out of their graves and opening 
sin-blinded eyes and prejudice-stopped ears, as it is written. - 
Isa. 35:5. 

"He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that 
believeth not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God 
abideth on him." (John 3:36.) This is further testimony on the 
same line: that only believers in and accepters of Christ and his 
redeeming work (as their ransom) will ever attain to life, i.e., get 
fully free from death. Only the little flock, the church, thus gets 
life during the Gospel age; and they get it only by promise-in 
hope— in faith. Their life is hid now, in God's promises. See Col. 
3:3. 



The Millennial Day is the time for life-giving actually. The 
church will get hers first, in the early morning of that day. The 
Lord will give to his overcoming Bride the crown of life that 
fadeth not away. (1 Pet. 1:4; 5:4.) Hers will be like her Lords- 
life on the divine plane of being. Then will come the life-giving 
to such of the world as will believe and obey; when they all shall 
then stand trial for life, being brought to a full knowledge of 
God's character, plan and righteous laws. The gradual 
resurrection to perfect LIFE, step by step, will be of believers 
only; for, as clearly stated, the disobedient shall perish without 
attaining to life-they will never see perfect life, but as willful 
sinners shall be destroyed. -Acts 3:23. 

The wrath of God will abide on such thus: The whole world was 
condemned, sentenced to death, in and through Adam; "the 
curse" [See Sept. TOWER] was upon all; and God had provided 
only one way of escape from that curse of death— through the 
Redeemer, by the remission of sins through faith in his blood. 
Some (the church) get free from the curse now, through faith in 
Christ, and will be received of the Father (actually) at the close 
of the Gospel age. Others, the great majority, will believe and 
get free from the curse by faith during the Millennial age and be 
(actually) received of the Father at the close of that age. But 
such as reject the only "way" to God remain under the curse or 
condemnation of death (wilfully, for they must all be made fully 
aware of the conditions of life and reconciliation to God) and 
shall never see [experience] LIFE. 

Let us now examine the second part of our Lord's statement: 
"Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. " 

In the light of the previous statement, this one becomes very 
clear and simple. It is the Lord's assurance, that all who reach 
the condition of life, in its fulness, may retain it forever by 
continuing to believe and obey. It is the promise that the perfect 
life once attained may be held forever. 



*Sinaitic MS. omits "and now is." 



R1089 : page 8 

THE POWER BEHIND. 

"I girded thee though thou hast not known me." (Isa. 45:5.) A 
little boy sat in front of his father, and held the reins which 
controlled a restive horse. Unknown to the boy, the reins passed 
around him and were also in his father's hands. He saw occasion 
to pull them. With artless simplicity the child looked around, 
saying, "Father, I thought I was driving; but I am not, am I?" 
Thus it is often with men who think they are shaping a destiny 



which a higher hand than theirs is really shaping. They do their 
own will, but they also do the will of God. A stronger hand 
guides them; a mightier power holds the helm of their vessel and 
saves from rock and wreck. Happy are they who quietly yield to 
the guidance of an Almighty hand.-Sel. 



R1110:page8 

"ENTERTAIN no thoughts which you would blush at in 
words." 



"WHOEVER makes truth appear unpleasant, commits high 
treason against virtue. " 



R1077 : page 1 

VOL. X. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., DECEMBER, 1888. 

NO. 3. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

DOMESTIC, -Fifty cents a year, in advance, by Draft, 
P.O. Money Order, or Registered Letter. 

FOREIGN,-Three shillings per year. Remit by 
Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TO POOR SAINTS. 

This paper will be sent free to the interested of the Lord's poor, 
who will send a card yearly requesting it. "Ho, every one that 
thirsteth, come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, 
come ye, buy and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price. " And you who have it- "Wherefore 
do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor 
for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently— and eat ye that 
which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." - 
ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, 
at the P.O., Allegheny, Pa. 



R1088 : page 1 

GREETINGS FOR 1889. 

With the present year almost gone and the new one at the door, 
we tender humble thanks to God and congratulate our readers, 
that we are still earnestly and lovingly and deeply interested, in 
the study of our Father's Word. Thank God, the truth still shines, 
brighter and brighter, more and more. Let us thank him warmly 
for the blessings past, as we earnestly implore others for the year 
at hand- 
More and more, more and more, 
Always more to follow. 
Oh, the matchless, boundless love! 
Still there's more to follow. 

May the coming year be as this one, and much more abundant, 
in grace and love and knowledge of our Father's character and 
plan, is our prayer. 

Those of the Lord's poor who by reason of any circumstances 
are unable to pay for the TOWER the coming year, but who 
want it, should remember the offer at the head of this column, - 
to supply such free— and should accept it as from the Lord; as 
one of his numberless gifts. Such should not hesitate nor delay 
to write now for 1889, if they would have their papers 
continued. 

To all in Christ Jesus we send hearty greetings and best wishes 
for the year 1889. 



R1088 : page 1 

MILLENNIAL DAWN. VOL. II. 
"THE TIME IS AT HAND." NOW READY. 

We have pleasure in announcing this book now ready. The 
present edition is in cloth binding, embossed, price one dollar. It 
contains 368 pages on fine paper. Orders will be filled in 
rotation as received, as fast as the books come from the bindery. 

While one dollar is but a moderate price for the book, we 
propose to give Watch Tower subscribers a special price upon 
this, as upon Vol. I. and other books. Therefore, we give notice 
that for $1.25 we will mail a copy of Vol. II., "The Time is at 
Hand," postage prepaid by us, and the TOWER during the year 
1889. 

We suggested in our last, that this volume would specially 
interest TOWER readers only, and that these would all want it in 
cloth binding for preservation and reference. Many have 
murmured against this, and urged that they had friends to whom 



they had sold and loaned Vol. I. who, they believed, would be 
interested enough to read Vol. II., if obtainable in a cheaper 
edition in paper-binding, -say at 35 cents. 

We doubt the practicability of this; we fear that not enough 
would be wanted to justify an edition of ten thousand; and only 
by getting out such editions could the price be gotten so low as 
35 cents including postage. However, to test the matter, we will 
agree to get out a 10,000 edition at 35 cents each, or 3 for $1.00, 
as soon as one half that quantity is ordered. So then, let those 
who favor the cheap edition, write as soon as possible, 
mentioning how many they can use. If this edition is issued, The 
Tract Fund will probably make an allowance to the Colporteurs 
(for expenses) on it as on Vol. I. 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO. 



R1077 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, 
for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come."- 
Matt. 24:14. 

Notwithstanding the fact that sectarianism has blinded the 
hearts of the vast majority of those who own Christ's name, so 
that they cannot appreciate the real good tidings of the coming 
Kingdom of God and the blessed work it is to accomplish, yet 
God has so arranged that the gospel itself is being preached 
(declared), as a "witness," for use in the coming age; even 
though the traditions of men, which tend to make it void and 
meaningless, are permitted to accompany it. God's purposes will 
all be accomplished, even by some who forward them with their 
hands, while they oppose them with their lips. For instance, note 
the great work which has been and is being done by Bible 
Societies. They are incessantly spreading the "good tidings of 
great joy, which shall be unto all people," before all nations, and 
in all languages, even though as we know, very few of those 
engaged in the work see with any degree of clearness, either the 
harmony or the beauty of the plan of God for the establishment 
of his kingdom and the blessing of all people. 

And this work continues notwithstanding the fact that so-called 
"rationalism, " and Elsmere-ism, are convincing thousands that 
the Bible is, at best, but a conglomeration of well-meant, but 
utterly untrustworthy traditions, colored by oriental habit and 
language out of all resemblance to the real truths and facts. Still 
the work of publishing the Bible progresses, and even its 
opposers assist often in its spread. An instance of this sort was 
witnessed in this country a few years ago, when the Revised 
Version of the New Testament was first published. Unbelievers 



took hold of it, advertised it and circulated it by the million. To 
satisfy curiosity and make money, they published it in the daily 
papers, and even in Novelette form. Now-within the past 

R1078 : page 1 

month— the daily press makes mention of the fact that in Italy 
and in Spain, where Bible Societies have long been trying to get 
a foothold and to introduce the Scriptures, with but slight 
success, because of the predominance of papal influence over 
the consciences of the people-even there the Scriptures are now 
being read by thousands. The item runs as follows:— 

"A Milan (Italy) newspaper II. Secola, is issuing in daily 
installments a new translation of the Bible. The enterprise is 
extraordinarily popular, and the circulation of the paper has 
reached 50,000. This success has provoked emulation, and a 
secular paper in Barcelona, Spain [where only recently Bibles 
were publicly burned], has arranged to publish a translation in 
Spanish. Both these undertakings are purely journalistic, and 
entirely unconnected with missionary societies." 

Thus, despite every obstacle, both of friends and foes, the gospel 
is being preached for a witness to all nations. 

Some good is being accomplished too, and some appreciation of 
God's character is reaching the heathen, notwithstanding the fact 
that those who carry the Bible, in great measure offset it with 
their traditions and make merchandise of the people through 
their creeds and sects. An illustration of this is furnished in the 
article subjoined, which we clip from an exchange. It is as 
follows:— 

R1078 : page 1 

IN JESUS' NAME. 

When the Japanese Empire was thrown open to American 
commerce, the American churches were zealous to proselyte 
that country to their several Confessions. The missionaries sent 
out found that their division would be an effectual barrier to 
success, and agreed to conceal their differences and work 
together for souls alone -simply presenting one God and Christ 
crucified for sinners, until they should obtain a foothold. 

The dissimulation succeeded so well that in 1 873 in respect to 
the clamor for sectarian harvests, on the part of home Boards it 
was agreed that the converts were sufficiently numerous to 
warrant a division of the spoil. 

But when the deceit was carefully exposed to the converts from 
heathenism an unexpected difficulty arose. These poor natives 
assembled and drew up a petition, setting forth the joy and peace 
and righteousness they had found in Christ Jesus, objecting to be 
divided contrary to the Word and the Spirit of God, and urging 



the missionaries, since they had confessed such a deplorable 
state of things in their own country, to return to America and 
leave the further evangelization of Japan to them. 

Copies of this petition were forwarded to the various Boards by 
which the missionaries were supported and controlled, and 
agents were sent out to investigate and report. 

One of these agents, whose letter was published in the 
Independent, says that to these minds, just brought from the 
darkness of heathenism, "the simple joys of salvation 
overshadow all other considerations," and "it will be many years 
before they can be indoctrinated into the nice distinctions which 
divide Christendom. " 

Nevertheless, these whose "other considerations" overshadowed 
the "joys of salvation" and shut out the love of God, persevered 
in their work of dividing. 

The Spirit prompted these honest souls to meet in the name of 
Jesus only, as it always does. The most difficult thing in the 
work of the sectarian missionary is to "indoctrinate the convert 
into the nice distinctions which divide Christendom. " Very few 
of the adherents of any sect in America are so indoctrinated. 
They are prejudiced and overcome by other considerations than 
real convictions. A very small per cent have anything like 
intelligent consciences about professions of faith and the 
distinction by which they are separated from other sects. -The 
Testimony. 

WHAT ARE THE RESULTS? 

Eighteen centuries of effort are in the past. What prospect is 
there that the claims of sectarianism will be fulfilled? What 
prospect is there of a Millennium of peace on earth being 
brought about by present missionary efforts? What are the 
evidences to support the claim that soon, or ever, the world shall 
willingly submit to the gospel, and voluntarily become God's 
Kingdom— in which his will shall be done as [perfectly as] in 
heaven? 

This inquiry is now coming up from every direction. The 
nominal churches read it, and attempt to answer for themselves, 
to render up the best accounts they can in figures, while the 
world looking on draws its own conclusions. Why, we might 
inquire, is there so much reckoning, and figuring, and 
apologizing for meagre missionary results now?— a thing 
apparently not thought of in former times. We answer, it is 
because we are living in the "harvest," or reckoning time (Matt. 
25:19; 7:20-23,26,27), and the Lord of the harvest, earth's new 
King, who is about to establish his kingdom in a totally different 
manner, permits those who have chosen a different plan from 
his, and who have boasted of what they could do by 



R1078 : page 2 

their own efforts in his absence, to see and to confess to each 
other and to the world their failures. All systems, both religious 
and political, claiming the name of Christ (Christendom) and to 
be engaged in his service, must give an account. All are on trial, 
and all are being proved incompetent-incapable of bringing 
about the desired and promised results— everlasting 
righteousness, God's will on earth as done in heaven. Each 
system must render up its own account, and some of these are 
now being heard by an astonished world. 

Below we quote briefly from Canon Taylor, of the English 
Church, discussing the question:- 

ARE CHRISTIAN MISSIONS A FAILURE? 

A little more than a year ago Mr. Taylor read a telling paper 
before the English Church Congress, in which he took the 
ground that the Mohammedan religion is not only equal to 
Christianity in some respects, but is far better suited to the needs 
and capacities of many peoples in Asia and Africa. (In our issue 
of May '87 we quoted Canon Farrar and Mr. Thompson, the 
missionary, on this subject, under the caption "Christianizing the 
World."— Therein we showed the folly of comparing nominal 
Christianity with genuine Mohammedanism.) Mr. Taylor's 
article, entitled "The Great Missionary Failure, " in The 
Fortnightly Review, is likely to attract even more attention than 
his paper of last year. 

The most important point which he makes is, that at its present 
rate of progress, Christianity can never hope to overtake 
heathenism. Estimating the excess of births over deaths in Asia 
and Africa as 1 1,000,000 a year, and the annual increase of 
Christians as 60,000, it would take the missionary societies 1 83 
years to overtake one year's increase in the heathen population. 
He says:— 

"Dr. Bruce has complained that we do not succeed because the 
sums spent on missions are insufficient. It would rather seem 
that the floods of money which are poured out are the cause of 
much of the weakness of the missions. It is curious to note that 
the most costly missions are frequently the least successful.... It 
is plain that the failure does not arise from a niggardly 
expenditure. But there can be no doubt that the vast sums of 
money, and the still more precious lives of hosts of devoted 
laborers, are thrown away in the prosecution of hopeless 
enterprises. In the missions to Egypt, Persia, Palestine, and 
Arabia, where there are no heathen,* the Church Missionary 
Society employs 119 agents, and has spent L.23,545, 4s. 7d. in 
the last two years. The net results are nil. 

"To extort from Sunday School children their hoarded pence, for 
the ostensible object of converting 'the poor heathen,' and to 



spend nearly L. 12,000 a year in fruitless missions to lands where 
there are no heathen,* seems to me to be almost a crime; the 
crime of obtaining money under false pretenses." 

According to official reports cited, the 424 agents of the Church 
Missionary Society in Ceylon spent a little more than $55,000 
last year in making 190 converts out of a population of nearly 
three millions. And as there were 330 relapses from Christianity 
the same year, this great expenditure counted for less than 
nothing. The same thing was true in a measure of China, Egypt, 
Arabia and Palestine. Moreover, the converts which are made in 
these countries at a cost of from $300 to $500 each, in many 
cases reflect no credit upon the religion whose claims they 
acknowledge. As an illustration of this he says:— 

"Three years ago in a nominally Christian village [in Africa] a 
quarrel broke out, and not a few were killed. The victors cooked 
and ate the bodies of the slain. As a punishment the native pastor 
announced that they were suspended from Church privileges." 

Of the native pastors engaged in the mission work, the Canon 
has evidently a poor opinion. He quotes Mr. Johnson as saying:- 

"With a few very rare exceptions, those native African pastors, 
teachers, and catechists whom I have met, have been all, more 
or less, bad men. They attempted to veil an unbridled 
immorality with an unblushing hypocrisy, and a profane display 
of 'mouth religion, which to an honest mind seemed even more 
disgusting than the immorality itself. " 



*[The Canon's ideas of Christianity are, like those of most 
people now, that it is merely morality; and the Mohammedans 
being a temperate and moral people, he classes them not as 
heathens, but as good as Christians; hence this remark.] 

R1079 : page 2 

Commenting still upon the general character of the few 
converts made, Mr. Taylor continues thus:— 

"In Egypt, last year, there were two 'inquirers,' one a negro, and 
the other an Egyptian, but the inquiries did not lead to any 
further results. In Arabia a sick robber who was doctored by a 
missionary, promised to abstain from robbing for ten days. In 
Palestine, the one Moslem Convert of last year, a weakminded 
orphan girl, who required constant guidance, and for whom the 
prayers of all English Christians were evoked, has gone over to 
Rome, and is now in a nunnery. In Persia we are told that a 
'great and wondrous door has been opened for the Gospel,' but 
no converts are mentioned, and the door seems to consist of a 
Persian who reads the Bible, which is one of his own sacred 
books. I have several correspondents among the Persian 



Moslems, and they constantly quote the Bible, with which they 
seem to be almost as familiar as with the Koran. It is plain that 
these futile missions should be given up. A few Eastern 
Christians may be perverted, but the missionaries make no way 
among the Mahommedans." 

In giving his opinion of the cause of missionary failures: that it 
is Sectarianism, together with lack of full consecration on the 
part of the missionaries, who endeavor to live as princes 
surrounded by more than European luxuries, instead of 
consecrating time and all to the work of evangelization, Mr. 
Taylor refers to "Dr. Legge, a missionary of 34 years standing," 
saying:- 

"He thinks that we shall fail to make converts so long as 
Christianity presents itself infected with the bitter internal 
animosities of Christian sects, and associated in the minds of the 
natives with the drunkenness, the profligacy, and the gigantic 
social evil conspicuous among Christian nations. Bishop Steere 
thought that the two greatest hindrances to success were the 
squabbles among the missionaries themselves, and the rivalry of 
the societies." 

Thus the results of eighteen centuries look very meagre from the 
standpoint of nominal Christianity; and notes of their apologies 
and perplexity are constantly appearing through the secular and 
religious press. They do not see, as we do, that the object of 
preaching the gospel in all the world now, is, to witness to the 
world, and to select a "little flock" of saints, to whom with 
Christ their Lord, it is the Father's good pleasure to give the 
Millennial Kingdom,-which shall bless the world, by both 
ruling and instructing it in righteousness. -Luke 12:32. 

For some years the facts have been known to the officials, who, 
hoping for some miraculous change, have presented the 
brightest possible view of matters and urged larger and larger 
contributions. But finally, the facts are coming to the ear of the 
public, producing general consternation. It can no longer be 
boastfully and falsely claimed, that a few more millions and a 
few more years will see the world converted by present 
missionary arrangements. On the contrary, it must be admitted 
that according to statistics, at home as well as in foreign lands, 
Protestantism not only is not making headway at converting the 
world, but is actually going backward, not anything like keeping 
pace with the natural increase of population. Only this last 
month a general meeting of Protestants was held to account, if 
possible, for the great falling away in its influence and numbers 
in New York, the principle city of this land. 

What a commentary upon the failure of man's plans are these 
reports and confessions ! And when it is remembered that it was 
to carry out these plans, and insure their success, that 1500 years 
ago and since, the eternal torment doctrine and others, 



blasphemous and dishonoring to God, were invented, and all the 
creed- bondages of to-day manufactured, how great is the 
failure. How, with shame and confusion of face should Christian 
people acknowledge their failure, and their own utter inability to 
conquer evil, and look to God for help. In his plan, recorded in 
the Bible, they would find it speedily. But no, they are not ready 
for this yet; they must try their own way further. 

What shall we do about it? they inquire one of another; and 
church Congresses meet in various parts, to help fix up an 
answer. Let us ignore all differences in our various creeds, say 
many voices, and band ourselves together as one, for mutual 
assistance, and that will make a larger showing. Count in all the 
nominal as well as the real Christians, say another set. And 
count the baptized children too, say others. And count in all the 
big sects that can be induced to associate themselves. And don't 
forget "that great Christian Camp, the Holy Catholic Church of 
Rome!" calls out a Methodist bishop; and amen! amen! chime in 
his many retainers. And many in other sects re-echo the 
sentiment, saying, with a Presbyterian Minister of this city: We 
must not longer reject the "holy mother, from whom we 
received every doctrine that we hold dear. " 

But hold! says Mother Rome, I make no compromise! I am 
infallible! I will gladly receive you to my arms, but only on 
condition of submission to my authority. Here all pause and hold 
their breath in fear, as visions of her past authority and power 
flit before the mind. But what is to be done? they cry, hard 
pressed on every side. A Presbyterian minister replies, "We 
must make repeated advances until we gain her support. " 

Together they will attempt to show that all the civilization and 
progress of the world is due to sectarian efforts, and will entirely 
ignore the influence of the great truths of God's Word, which, 
notwithstanding misrepresentations both by friends and foes, has 
really been both the light and salt of the earth. Lowering the 
standard, and ignoring faith in the doctrines of Christ and the 
Apostles, morality and civilization will be the new standard or 
platform. It will be broad enough to include all grades of 
outwardly moral people— the various grades and shades of 
Protestants, including Unitarians, Roman Catholics, Greek 
Catholics, Jews, Brahmins, and Mohammedans. Under this new 
standard the world will be re-examined and found almost 
converted— almost up to the standard. But, what a standard! 

However, even this seeming successful union will be of short 
duration, for it is written: "Associate [unite] yourselves, O ye 
people and ye shall be broken in pieces;... take counsel together 
and it shall come to naught. " And again, "He that sitteth in the 
heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them [their futile 
schemes] in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in his 
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure" -declaring, 



Nevertheless I have appointed to set my King upon Zion, my 
holy mount or kingdom. Isa. 8:9,10; Psa. 2:4-6; Prov. 1:24-33. 

But the appointed work of the Gospel age, as shown in the 
Scriptures, has been going on and is almost accomplished, just 
as intended and foretold. The Word has gone forth as a witness 
to all nations; and the end, the "harvest" is here. As foretold, the 
Lord's word has not gone forth in vain; it has accomplished that 
which he pleased; it has prospered in the thing whereto he sent it 
(Isa. 55:11); the "little flock" is almost complete, and should 
now lift up their heads and rejoice, knowing that their 
redemption draweth nigh, and that their prayer- "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as in heaven"-is about to be 
fully answered. 



page 2 

BROTHER ADAMSON STILL LABORING. 

It is some time since we made any mention of the work being 
done by Brother Adamson. He is not idle, however, but fully in 
the harness is spending himself daily in the Master's service, 
Sister A. sharing his encouragements and discouragements, also, 
as a true helpmate. 

Bro. A.'s preaching or "gospelling" as he calls it, is chiefly by 
the sale of DAWN VOL. I. His plan is to make some town or 
city his headquarters, from which he makes trips to surrounding 
smaller towns and villages, selling DAWNS. Thus he makes 
thorough work, changing his base of operations about every four 
months. Toward the close of his stay in a place, he makes the 
acquaintance of some of the truth-hungry and holds some 
meetings, which serve to further establish, and to introduce to 
each other, those of like precious faith, who frequently meet 
regularly after he has gone further- without any covenant or 
bondage other than that of love, which fealty to the Lord and the 
truth produces. May He who has said that he "abhorreth the 
proud, but giveth grace (favors) to the humble, continue to 
greatly bless and own our Brother's efforts in the present 
"harvest" work. We give below one of his recent letters. 



Indianapolis, Ind. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Yours of 24th received to-day. 
I see you and Bro. Ball are doing all you can to get the DAWNS 
to me and save unnecessary trouble on my part. Sold 50 copies 
on Saturday- a good day again. 

I will mention that the main avenues of Indianapolis radiate 
from the centre like spokes in a wheel. This centre was a park 
150 feet in diameter with some seats and most of the space made 



into broad, gravelled walks. Here I preached while here four 
years ago, spending most of my Sundays there. 

After I left, the Bible Christians held meetings in this Circle 
Park, but were soon restrained by the Mayor and Council on the 
ground that they are not a religious denomination. Now the Park 
space is being filled with monuments of "great" men, such as 
Senators Morton and Hendricks, which with their broad bases 
occupy about all the space, leaving no room for either seats for 
the weary passers to and fro, nor for the preaching of an 
unsectarian gospel. 

Here is where some (an Episcopalian minister specially) told 
me, I had not the proper anointing to preach-meaning that I had 
no bishop's hands laid on my head. 

I am glad to hear you are all so heartily in the Master's service, 
and appreciate so much my own weak efforts to serve Him. 

With much love, joined by Mrs. A., to you all. In Gospel bonds, 
J. B. A. 



R1079 : page 3 



PERFECT LOVE. 

God! this is my plea, 
What'er the process be, 
This love to know. 
And if the prize to gain, 
Through sorrow, toil and pain 

1 go, e'er self be slain, 
Amen! I go. 

Rooted and grounded! yes, 

For this I plead, O ! bless 

My waiting soul. 

Will not this proud heart melt 

Unless the rod be felt? 

In mercy be it dealt, 

And make me whole. 

To Thee I humbly bow 
And pray Thou wilt e'en now 
The work begin. 
'Tis all that I desire 
This fulness to acquire; 
This one great purifier 
Dwelling within. 



E. M. 



R1079 : page 3 



THE SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND. 

"For God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and 
of love, and of a sound mind. "— 2 Tim. 1 :7. 

The word spirit is here used in the sense of mental disposition. 
Thus we sometimes speak of a bad spirit, meaning an evil 
disposition; or of a good, true spirit, meaning a pure, noble and 
amiable disposition. So the Apostle here refers to the disposition 
of a sound mind. 

A sound mind, is a mind in a sound healthy condition, and in 
full possession of all its faculties. Its perceptive faculties gather 
up various data and store them away in memory's garner; and its 
reasoning faculties arrange and compare them, and thus arrive at 
conclusions that otherwise could not be gained. However, if the 
mind is not in a sound, healthy condition, reason will not act 
properly. It will receive memory's store of facts, and by 
misapplying and misappropriating them, arrive at erroneous 
conclusions. If the mind is disturbed by undue fear and dread, or 
by superstition or prejudice, or hate, or revenge, or undue 
ambition, or pride, or self-conceit, or avarice, or any 

R1080 : page 3 

depraved passion, reason will be so influenced by such 
dispositions as to render its conclusions, or judgement, 
untrustworthy. The mind is only sound when in the full 
possession of all its faculties, and when it is entirely free in the 
use of those faculties— free from prejudice to bias it in any 
direction. Those among men who are freest from prejudice in 
the use of reason, we sometimes, and very properly, speak of as 
cool-headed, while those of the opposite disposition are called 
hot-headed. 

Strictly speaking, there is not a perfectly sound mind in the 
world. The mind could not be perfectly sound unless the body 
were so. Both mind and body are sadly bruised by the fall; and 
in the fallen race we see all shades and grades of mental as well 
as physical derangement. Mark the varieties of physical 
derangement: Here is one with a deranged stomach— a dyspeptic; 
and that derangement affects the whole body to a greater or less 
extent. Another is afflicted with an improper action of the heart: 
and the whole body is therefore in trouble. The same is true if 
the lungs will not fill their appointed office, or if the liver will 
not do its duty, or if the nervous system be unstrung. In such 
cases the mind is always more or less unfavorably affected. If 
the body is burning with fever, or racked with pain, or agitated 
by an excited nervous system, or oppressed by the distresses of a 
dyspeptic stomach, or excited by a palpitating heart, or 
enfeebled by inactive and diseased lungs, the mind is 
correspondingly weak and diseased; it is unsound, fettered in the 
use of its powers, and unable to fully govern and rightly use 
them. 



The curse of sin and its penalty has laid its heavy hand on the 
entire man-mind and body. If one member of the body suffer, 
the whole body, and no less the mind, suffers with it. And in 
addition to those sufferings of the mind which come directly 
from physical disabilities, are many others which come from its 
own derangement, from the undue cultivation of its inferior 
instincts and the dwarfing of its nobler faculties through sin and 
the necessities of painful toil-the labor and sweat of face which 
are parts of its penalty. Truly, as the prophet expresses it, There 
is none perfect (sound, either in mind or body), no, not one. 
(Psa. 14:3.) All are covered with wounds and bruises and 
putrefying sores-both mentally and physically, though there are 
various degrees of unsoundness. 

O, says one, I do not see that the world in general is so much out 
of gear mentally. Men are considerably out of order physically, 
greatly out of order morally, but it seems to me that mentally 
they are pretty straight. What evidence is there of such general 
mental derangement? 

Well, let us see. If we go into an insane asylum we find people 
who are so far unbalanced mentally as to be incapable of 
managing their own affairs, and often in danger of damaging the 
interests of others as well, because unable to exercise even 
moderate judgement. But we all know that we have neighbors 
on every hand whose judgements, as well as our own, are very 
imperfect. And not infrequently many give evidence of inability 
to manage their own affairs creditably, who are a great 
annoyance in attempting to manage the affairs of others. 
Through self-conceit they are gossips and busy-bodies in other 
men's matters though incapable of managing their own. This is 
one evidence of an unsound mind— a measure of insanity. 

What business man will not admit that, over and over again, 
when he has used his very best judgement, he has actually done 
the wrong thing when he should have known better? The large 
number of failures in business, and ill-successes generally, attest 
that the majority of people are very unsound in judgement. And 
likewise the numbers of badly raised families, of mismatches in 
matrimony, of ungoverned tempers, and of miserly, or 
extravagant, or foolish habits, etc., etc., all bear witness to the 
same fact. The great trouble in every case is an unsound mind. 
And no one knows better than the man who has precipitated 
financial disaster, or who has made a bad mistake in choosing a 
wife, or the woman who accepted a worthless man for a 
husband, that bad judgement, unsoundness of mind, was the 
cause of the trouble. And so avarice, selfishness, and other bad 
habits are evidences of mental as well as of moral and physical 
unbalance. Sometimes a man has average soundness of mind on 
most subjects, but is greatly astray on some one. He can reason 
intelligently on other subjects, but on this one he cannot; he 
reasons absurdly and draws false conclusions. There are some 



subjects on which so many are astray that mankind in general do 
not regard the wrong course as wrong, and are ready to 
pronounce those unbalanced who do not run with them to the 
same excesses. 

Suppose a man down on the river bank with a long rake, raking 
up old corks, and sticks, and rubbish out of the water, and 
having them at considerable expense carted off and stored in a 
barn somewhere. You see him day after day toiling away to no 
reasonable purpose and you say, the man is insane. Why do you 
think so? Because he is spending his time and effort at that 
which, when looked at from a reasonable standpoint, is 
unreasonable. Now while all are not as bad as the illustration 
there is a disposition of the same kind running through the 
whole race with reference to some subjects: For instance, that of 
accumulating money. That is an evidence of an unsound mind, 
but the popular opinion does not so regard it. There are 
thousands of men who have plenty of money, more than they 
know what to do with. It gives them great care and anxiety to 
take care of it, and great labor and weariness in one way or 
another to accumulate it. And yet, notwithstanding their 
superabundance, they will lie, and cheat, and steal, and defraud 
their best friends to get more; only to add greater burdens to 
their already heavy load, and to heap upon themselves the 
calumnies and hatred of those whom they have unjustly 
defrauded. What is the natural inference? The man who acts so, 
has an unsound mind. But it is on a popular subject; and others 
of similar disposition, though not always so successful, say, 
That is a great man; his aim is the grand acme of life; go on, 
become a ten times ten-millionaire (unless I should succeed in 
outwitting you). 

How should a really sound mind regard such proceedings? How 
does God view it as he looks down upon men cheating and 
fighting and stealing from one another to get money, or wheat, 
or corn into a "corner" from other men, then guarding it, and 
keeping it, and fighting for it, as if it were very life itself. 

He sees it as the result of an unsound mind, as the mental and 
moral unbalance brought about through sin. If the mind were 
well balanced its energies would be divided between 
accumulating and using; and good and noble uses would be 
thought out whereby he and his fellow-men might receive some 
real advantage. But the common practice of all the world is to 
lay it up for posterity, and posterity receives it with mean 
ingratitude and generally uses it to its own injury.- Psa. 
49:10,13. 

Another subject upon which the masses of men are of unsound 
mind, but which is not popularly so regarded, is the reckless 
propagation of the race without due regard to means of support, 
or health, or the Lord's special service to which some have 
consecrated their all, and often regardless of the barest 



necessities of life, overburdening wives whom they profess to 
love and covenanted to support and defend, with weights of care 
which they are mentally and physically unable to endure, and 
from which they often gladly find refuge in the silent tomb; 
while the mentally and physically diseased offspring, which she 
was thus unfitted to rear, and which the father is incapable of 
supporting, are left to add their burden of misery, and mental 
and moral and physical depravity to the world's long moan of 
distress and sorrow. 

True the command was given, increase and multiply and fill the 
earth, but human fatherhood should be after the likeness of the 
divine fatherhood, which provides for every son- "If a son, then 
an heir. " If a sound mind were in control, a man would not incur 
the responsibilities of husband, or of fatherhood a numerous 
family, with known inability to produce a healthy offspring, or 
to provide for them the necessities of life until able to do for 
themselves. The unsoundness of mind thus displayed has raised 
the wail of distress from thousands of homes, and nipped in the 
bud the tender plants of love and peace; and the struggle for bare 
existence has driven out every element of harmony and right- 
mindedness. 

If the spirit of a sound mind were in control here, love and 
harmony would prevail to a vastly greater extent, and a healthy, 
happy, and welcomed offspring would rise up to bless a 
mother's training hand of care, to honor a father's kindly 
providence, and to walk in their honorable footprints. 

Is it not true too, that such as have consecrated all to the Lord's 
service have little enough to give at best without tying their 
hands with more than indispensable earthly burdens and cares? 
Is it not, rather, the mission and privilege of such, to feed and 
clothe, spiritually, God's little ones? 

But there are many other evidences of unsoundness of mind not 
so general among men, and yet very numerous in one form or 
another. For instance one is a miser: he clutches a penny with 
almost a death grip; he would bargain and contend with a poorer 
man to induce him to undersell his little stock of goods on which 
he depends for the support of his family; he would deprive his 
own family of the necessary comforts of life, which he and they 
know he is able to supply, but will not, and thus introduce an 
element of discord into what might be a happy and prosperous 
home. Hugging his hoarded dollars he goes to his grave, and his 
children gather them to quarrel over them and to hate his very 
memory. O, what a mistake! 

Another man is a spendthrift; self-gratification he will have, in 
every possible 

R1081 : page 3 



direction, regardless of consequences for the future. This is 
better than the miserly extreme, yet it is founded in the same 
mean principle of selfishness, regardless of the interests of 
others, and even of self-interest beyond the present moment. 
Neither of these extremes of unsoundness is realized by those so 
afflicted: The miser congratulates himself that he is not a 
spendthrift, and the spendthrift that he is not a miser, and neither 
ever dreams that he has gone to the opposite extreme. 

O, that all the world might be blessed with a sound mind! What 
a renovation it would make! What a transformation of all things ! 
This is just what men will have when the great restitution work 
is all complete. 

But, notice that the Apostle in the above text speaks of the saints 
as now having the spirit of a sound mind. They are not actually 
sound, either in mind or body; they have mental and physical 
and moral weaknesses like other men, but they have received 
from God the spirit, the disposition of a sound mind, which, 
under God's direction, is able to a very great extent to correct, 
control, and direct the whole man. To have a sound mind, then, 
is the thing to be desired above all others, and all who realize 
their unsound condition should apply at once to the great 
Physician, who says, "Come unto me all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. " And those who have 
come to this great Physician can testify to his healing power; for 
lo, under the magic of his healing touch, old things- the old 
dispositions of fear and superstition, and evil inclinations, and 
weakness, and imbecility, have passed away, and all things have 
become new. The spirit of love and of a sound mind has taken 
its place, giving increasing power to govern the whole being as 
we grow up toward the stature of men in Christ Jesus. 

In coming to our Lord, his first requirement is, that we submit 
our minds entirely to his control, setting aside our 

R1081 : page 4 

ideas and plans entirely, to henceforth be guided by his sound 
mind. And only those thus consecrated to the doing of his will, 
have the spirit or disposition of a sound mind. 

As soon as this spirit of a sound mind comes in, it begins at once 
under the divine guidance to set the whole man in order. And it 
begins in the right place: It commands the will to assert its 
power and hold its commanding place over body and mind; it 
puts reason at the helm with the divine Word as its guide book; 
it searches the heart with the lamp of divine truth lighted by the 
holy spirit, to see what form the malady of sin has taken; and 
then looking to the divine healer by faith and the energy of 
resistance, the transforming work begins and progresses, 
bringing the mind into a more and more sound and healthy 
condition, notwithstanding the infirmities of the body may tend 



in an opposite direction. Thus the children of God are 
"transformed, by the renewing of their minds." 

Sometimes the children of God get cold and listless and almost 
cease to aspire to and seek this soundness of mind, but let such 
remember that this is the lukewarm condition of which the 
Master declares his abhorrence. (Rev. 3:16.) Let the consecrated 
ones who look for the reward of our high calling remember that 
ceaseless vigilance and earnest striving against the dispositions 
of the old unsound mind, and a constant submission to the 
divine will in the smallest affairs of every-day life, are the most 
thorough proof of our faithfulness to God. It is all-important that 
while we endeavor to faithfully serve the Lord by bearing the 
good tidings of his truth to others, we should not fail in this most 
important work of self-discipline and self-culture under the 
divine direction. The every-day life of faithful saints will preach 
a sermon to all who know them, which their lips could never 
speak. And if it does not do so— if avarice, or penuriousness, or 
pride, or selfishness, or bad tempers, or slovenly habits in 
conversation still continue, our lips had best keep silence, 
regarding godly matters except before God in our closets. There 
we may speak freely, and ask largely for fresh supplies of grace 
to help us overcome the dispositions of the old unsound mind, 
that our daily life may speak a volume to our Redeemer's praise. 
Our children, our neighbors, our friends, and all who know us as 
exponents of divine truth, are looking for its fruits in our daily 
life, and judging of it accordingly, whether they tell us so or not. 
Let us endeavor to let our light shine in this way. We should 
never be too busy to let those about us see that our mind is under 
control of the divine mind— to let them see what carefulness the 
spirit of a sound mind hath wrought in us. 

As the divine mind takes the control of our minds, it cultivates 
the nobler qualities; it nourishes them with divine truth and bids 
them expand and take possession of the man; it subdues the 
lower propensities and appoints their definite and proper place 
in the service of the new higher nature. It also lifts the mind out 
of the narrow sphere of self, and sets the man to work in the 
Lord's benevolent service of blessing others; it shows him the 
divine plan and tells him he may have a share in it— not only in 
its benefits, but also in its great work as a co-laborer together 
with God. Thus the saint approaches the divine likeness and 
enjoys communion and fellowship with God. 

Well, says one, while we criticize some who spend their lives in 
gathering dollars, and others who spend it otherwise, they also 
criticize us, and say that we are unsound in mind, "peculiar," 
because our view of life is turned so much from the ordinary. 
What shall we say of this? 

We cannot help that— we once thought much as they do, but now 
have received the mind of Christ. We cannot expect any but 
those governed by the same heaven-directed view of matters, to 



agree with us, or to commend our mind and course. The only 
way we could please all the insane people in an asylum would 
be to agree with their ideas and do as they do. And just so, the 
only way we can please the unsound world is to agree with their 
erroneous ideas and do as they do; but when we receive our 
ideas from God's Word, and recognize the world's ideas as 
contrary to that Word, then we know on God's authority that we 
have the spirit, the disposition of a sound mind, though we are 
constantly reminded of the unsoundness of our natural mind by 
the effort which it costs us to keep it in subjection to the divine 
ruling. Naturally, the children of God are no better than average 
men of the world, and often worse. Among them, as natural men 
and women, there are all sorts of mean dispositions, but when 
the spirit of a sound mind, under God's direction, takes hold, it 
transforms and beautifies them in deed and in truth. And, dearly 
beloved, if this transforming work is not going on within us, we 
are either dead or dying, branches that must sooner or later be 
severed from the vine. "Every branch in me that beareth not fruit 
[fruit of the spirit] he taketh away. "-John 15:2. 

We must then let the transforming work go on within our own 
hearts, while we do all in our power to inspire and cultivate the 
same spirit in others. God hath not given to us the spirit of fear 
and superstitious dread of him, but of power, and of love, and of 
a sound mind. And when we have discarded our own unsound 
mind, and taken God's mind as expressed in his Word, we know 
that we have the disposition of a sound mind, no matter how 
other men regard it. 



R1081 : page 4 

BONDAGE OF THE CREATURE. 

There is an aspect of redemption which many Christians 
overlook, and which is important to a right understanding of the 
Gospel of the resurrection. That gospel is the glad tidings to the 
human race that the life of man, which in this world has been so 
weighted with evil as to sink into the mire of sin and death, is to 
be delivered from this bondage to corruption, through 
resurrection. There are numerous passages of Scripture in which 
this present world or cosmos is viewed as a hostile kingdom, 
which is to be reckoned with for this long and degrading 
captivity of its highest creature- man. It harbors those hostile 
forces which Scripture designates by such titles as "Prince of the 
Power of the Air," "Rulers of the World-Darkness," "The 
Enemy, " which have power over the bodies and souls of men, 
and to whose malign energy not only diseased cravings of the 
mind but diseases of the body are due. The power of death is 
ascribed to the arch adversary, the devil. In an important sense, 
therefore, these enemies share in the responsibility for human 



wickedness. And they have been radically dealt with in the 
redemption of the race effected by the Son of Man. He was 
manifested to destroy the works of the devil, and "him that hath 
the power of death. "-Heb. 2:14. 

The redemption of the human race would be therefore 
incomplete were not all mankind to be rescued from the evil 
conditions under which they have been brought in the present 
system of the world. They are by nature children of wrath (Eph. 
2:3). It is often affirmed that this downward drag is effectually 
resisted in the case of every man by the Spirit of God striving in 
all, and that on the platform of this present world all have a fair 
chance for eternal life. But the facts do not bear out the 
assertion. How many of the vast and varied multitudes of the 
race succeed in this conflict, and by patient 

R1082 : page 4 

continuance in well-doing win life eternal? What sort of a 
chance is that in which almost everybody fails? And Scripture 
teaches that but few enter along this way into life. "There is 
none righteous, no, not one." Indeed, if eternal life consists, as 
Jesus declares (John 17:3), in the knowledge of God and of 
Jesus Christ whom He has sent, then how can there be a trial for 
eternal life where Christ is not known? Therefore He gave 
Himself a ransom for all, in order that, set free from the evil 
conditions of their life in this present world, men may have the 
opportunity to know Him in the world to come. 

This is not their second probation. They never had a first. 

[It is the second probation for the race as a whole, though not as 
individuals. In the first trial or probation the entire race was 
represented by one man-father Adam. In that trial or probation 
all failed, and all was lost. It was to secure a second probation to 
all (this time an individual trial) that Christ died. By paying our 
death-penalty, he settled for all the disastrous consequences of 
failure in the first trial. Thus a second trial (to prove worthiness 
or unworthiness of everlasting life) is assured to all— to each. 
And as knowledge and freedom of will are essential to trial, it is 
written concerning the Millennial age, that then "the knowledge 
of the Lord shall fill the whole earth," and then, "whosoever will 
may take of the water of life freely. " Then the ransom and its 
value will be testified to all, with full opportunity for each to 
avail himself of its benefits, and by hearty obedience to make 
them everlasting blessings. -EDITOR.] 

They were born into this world under condemnation. Only those 
who are here tested under the gospel of Christ may be said to be 
now under probation for eternal life. The emancipation then of 
the human race from under the yoke of this system is to be 
through death and resurrection. And this deliverance is 
connected with that of the system itself (Romans 8: 19-23). The 
enemies who have defiled this heritage of creation, and debased 



its appointed heir, must be dealt with and cast out. "Now is the 
judgment of this world, now shall the prince of this world be 
cast out." (John 12:31). We see thus why Jesus immediately 
adds, "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men 
unto me. " 

The casting out of the prince of this world would be the 
deliverance of those held captive by him. The prison doors of 
death were to be opened for all. Their resurrection will be their 
emancipation not only from bondage in death, but from the yoke 
of Satan. On the platform of the life to come they will be free to 
serve God and to choose life. The freedom of the will, about 
which men now harp so much, will only then be fully realized. 
Most men are not now free to choose the right. They are born 
slaves— slaves to natural appetites and natural laws, which drag 
them all the other way. This reckoning by God with man's 
natural enemies would fall short of its object unless man himself 
were lifted on to this high vantage ground above them. An 
incomplete and unworthy result would be this redemption of 
creation from the bondage of corruption, with the vast mass of 
men- God's highest creatures-left crushed in the mire. 
Therefore He has provided to deliver them by raising them from 
the dead. Indeed, the redemption of the creature is in order to 
provide them a proper platform on which to work out their 
destiny. If they fail under these, their failure must be final. 

But salvation attained now, when such a battle is required and 
such yielding up of self on God's altar, will be a far grander 
thing than salvation in the world to come. The church of the 
first-born whose names are written in heaven— these are to be 
God's kings and priests through all the ages. Courage, then, 
Christian, for this wrestling with principalities and powers ! We 
are passing through the very forms of trial which shall fit us to 
reign with Christ. In some form, we too must bear the burden of 
the world's evil, and feel the stress of conflict with the power of 
darkness; in order that through victory over the world we may 
take part with Christ in the world's deliverance. This discipline 
of life through which we are daily passing has a wondrous 
meaning for us if our eyes were only opened to perceive it. 
Under this our Father's training, we should learn to rejoice in the 
Lord always, and in everything to give thanks, casting all our 
care upon Him, for He careth for us.-L. C. Baker. 



R1087:page4 

THE COUNCIL AT JERUSALEM. 

BY J. G FELL, PRESIDENT OF BEREA COLLEGE. 

Inasmuch as there was a council at Jerusalem (which council 
was temporary, for a specific object, and under the declared 



guidance of the Holy Ghost), many Christians now assume 
divine warrant for other councils, associations, conferences and 
assemblies, whose organization shall be self -perpetuating, with 
supervision and control over a number of churches, and whose 
decision shall be final. 

Let us look at this original council, and see if there is anything 
in its organization, duration and authority which warrants such 
assumptions. The church at Jerusalem was the first local New 
Testament church. At the persecution of Stephen, members of 
this church were "scattered abroad." "Some traveled to Antioch, 
preaching the Lord Jesus. Many believed and turned to the Lord. 
When tidings of these things came to the ears of the church 
which was at Jerusalem, they sent forth Barnabas, that he should 
go as far as Antioch; who, when he came, exhorted them all that 
with full purpose of heart, they would cleave unto the Lord. And 
much people were added unto the Lord." (Acts 11:22,23). After 
the departure of Barnabas and Paul from Antioch, "certain men 
came down from Judea and taught the brethren 'except ye be 
circumcised after the manner of Moses ye cannot be saved.'" 
(Acts 15:1). This the church at Antioch regarded as contrary to 
the teachings of Barnabas and Paul, and as an infringement upon 
their Christian liberty. Also, the requirement to be 
"circumcised," appears to have been conveyed as a command 
from the church at Jerusalem; for reply was, "we gave no such 
commandment. " We now note— 

1 . The question to be settled was not the propriety or duty of 
circumcision, any where and every where, but whether any 
command of its observance was from 

R1087 : page 5 

the mother church at Jerusalem to the church at Antioch. 

Circumcision was one of those Jewish practices that did not 
subvert morality or true piety, and was left in observance in the 
churches gathered among the Jews. 

Now whilst this council did not pretend to settle the propriety or 
impropriety of circumcision for all people, it did decide 
concerning those who "went out from us troubling you"-the 
church at Antioch— "saying you must be circumcised,"— "to such 
we gave no such commandment." See Acts 15:24. 

The one local church, guided by the Holy Spirit, as we shall see, 
took the occasion to decide also, "that we trouble not them 
which from among the Gentiles are turned unto God. " 

2. This convention was not composed of ministers and delegates 
alone, nor of ministers and "elders" alone, nor of bishops and 
presiding elders and deacons alone, but of the one local church 
at Jerusalem. Note the language— "When they," (the messengers 
from Antioch), "were come to Jerusalem, they were received of 
the church, and the apostles and elders." v. 4. Again: "Then 



pleased it the Apostles and elders with the whole church. " v. 22. 
The apostles and elders were members of the church, just as 
"men and brethren" were members of the church. The men were 
not a separate class from the brethren. The address to the 
"angel"-minister-of the church at Ephesus was an address to 
the church at Ephesus, as the context shows. See Rev. 2:1. So 
here. Hence when Peter and James, (the latter was pastor of the 
church), arose to speak, they addressed "all the multitude, men 
and brethren. " 

3. The decision was not the mere judgment of men; whether 
clergy or laity or both, but the decision of the Holy Ghost -for 
"it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us." v. 29. 

4. Lest these converts from the Gentiles might infer that because 
they were not under obligations to observe one of the laws of 
Moses, they were alike exempt from all others, even such as 
were necessary to morality and true piety, and the canon of 
Scripture being not yet fully established, the church at 
Jerusalem, guided by the Holy Ghost, directed in reference to 
non-observance of heathen vices around this church and said 
"abstain from pollution of idols and fornication and from things 
strangled and from blood." Let the reader now fix in his memory 
the fact that the council at Jerusalem was not a body of 
clergymen, with delegates gathered from different provinces or 
districts, to decide whether a church should be formed or not, 
and how it should be formed; nor was it a body of clergymen 
and delegates met to declare that the acting pastor of a local 
church, within the boundary of an "association" was heterodox, 
and not a suitable person to be installed over another church, but 
it was simply one local mother church having the mind of the 
Holy Ghost, answering a pertinent inquiry from a child, another 
local church; and then, the canon of Scripture not fully 
complete, and the church at Jerusalem being guided by the Holy 
Ghost, gave instructions in reference to certain vices, which if 
practiced would have been subversive of true piety. This was the 
work and the manner of it. 

Now, until these modern "councils, associations, conferences 
and assemblies" can show that they are, in their organization and 
duration, like the precedent in Jerusalem, and having also the 
voice of the "Holy Ghost" in the formation of their creeds, 
regulations and edicts, we shall challenge their assumptions, and 
maintain for ourselves the strict independency of the local 
church, guided by the now complete and inspired word. 



R1082 : page 5 



THE LIBERTY OF ROMANISM. 

In the city of Boston Roman Catholics predominate and fill the 
principal city offices, having a majority on the school Board, 
City Council, etc. Not a great while ago we noted the fact that 
several Protestant ministers were arrested and fined for 
attempting to preach to the people on Boston Common-one of 
them, the widely known H. L. Hastings, being imprisoned 
because he did not pay the fine. More recently Swinton's History 
has been rejected from being a school text-book. It tells some 
truths about the past, which Romanists would fain cover up 
rather than repent of. 

The objectionable passage in Swinton's history runs as follows: 

"When Leo X. came to the Papal chair he found the treasury of 
the church exhausted by the ambitious projects of his 
predecessors. He therefore had recourse to every means which 
ingenuity could devise for recruiting his exhausted finances, and 
among these he adopted an extensive sale of indulgences, which 
in former ages had been a source of large profit to the church. 
The Dominican friars, having obtained a monopoly of the sale in 
Germany, employed as their agent Tetzel, one of their order, 
who carried on the traffic in a manner that was very offensive, 
and especially so to the Augustinian friars. The indulgences 
were in the early ages of the church remissions of the penances 
imposed upon persons whose sins had brought scandal on the 
community. But in process of time they were represented as 
actual pardons of guilt, and the purchaser of an indulgence was 
said to be delivered from all sins." 

Victor Durney, the renowned Frenchman and historian, himself 
a Roman Catholic, in his history (Historic des Temps Modernee, 
page 128), says on this same subject, what confirms the above, 
as follows:— 

"The wars of Julius II. had exhausted the pontifical treasury. 
Afterwards came the magnificence of Leo. X., who dispensed 
100,000 ducats at his coronation, and gave 500 for a sonnet. He 
was likewise compelled, in order to live, to pledge the jewels of 
St. Peter and to sell some charges, which increased by 40,000 
ducats the annual expenses of the government. The splendid 
temple commenced by Julius II. on a plan which should make it 
the grandest basilic of Christendom, St. Peters of Rome, 
threatened to remain uncompleted. Leo. X. accorded 
indulgences to all those who contributed of their money for its 
completion. The archbishop of Mayence charged with the 
publishing of these indulgences in Germany, caused them to be 
preached in Saxony by the Dominican Tetzel. 

"There were great abuses committed, both in the exaggerated 
promises made to the faithful who purchased these promises of 
salvation, and in the employment that was made, even under 
their eyes, of a part of their money. The Augustines, heretofore 



charged with the sale of indulgences, were irritated to see that 
lucrative mission pass into the hands of the Dominicans. Spite 
uncovered to them abuses, and these abuses were strongly 
attacked by their most eminent doctor, Martin Luther, whose 
theological studies led him to take a view entirely opposed. He 
had, in effect, already arrived at the principle which remained 
the foundation of the Protestant churches, -justification by faith 
alone,— whereas the doctrine of indulgences supposes also 
justification by deeds. Such was the beginning of reform." 

The above mentioned treatment of the ministers, and also that of 
Swinton's History, serve to show what toleration means, to 
Roman Catholics. They appreciate tolerance when it is extended 
to them, but then only. When President Cleveland's gift, of a 
copy of the Constitution of the United States, was presented to 
the Pope, he expressed great admiration for the religious 
tolerances of this land, no doubt longing for the power to crush 
it under the heel of Roman intolerance and bigotry. We do not 
forget that while the pope was a temporal sovereign, no 
protestant congregation was permitted to worship within the city 
of Rome. The pope would tolerate none now, if it were in his 
power to prevent it. The power alone is lacking-not the will. 

Archbishop Ryan, of Buffalo, who was one of the committee to 
present President Cleveland's gift to the Pope, made a statement 
in Philadelphia not long since which, as reported in the public 
press, is as honest an admission of Romish intolerance and its 
cause, as could be asked. We quote as follows, from the 
columns of the Methodist Advocate: ~ 

"We maintain that the church of Rome is intolerant-that is, that 
she uses every means in her power to root out heresy. But her 
intolerance is the result of her infallibility. She alone has the 
right to be intolerant, because she alone has the truth. The 
church tolerates heretics where she is obliged to do so, but she 
hates them 

R1083 : page 5 

with a deadly hatred, and uses all her powers to annihilate them. 
If ever the Catholics should become a considerable majority, 
which in time will surely be the case, then will religious 
freedom in the republic of the United States come to an end. Our 
enemies know how she treated heretics in the middle ages, and 
how she treats them to-day where she has the power. We no 
more think of denying the historic facts than we do of blaming 
the Holy Ghost and the princes of the church for what they 
thought fit to do." 



Since writing the foregoing we learn that the Archbishop denies 
the accuracy of this report. It cannot be denied however, that the 
past history of this "unchangeable" church, agrees perfectly with 



the words of the Archbishop, as reported. Indeed they are tame 
when compared with some of the well authenticated utterances 
of popes during the period of Papacy's triumph: and though her 
people have changed by the advance of civilization, in the 
Reformation (still in progress), her clergy and their general 
policy are unchanged; and they themselves claim that they are 
unchangeable. The same errors of false doctrine which led to 
persecution and general corruption in the past, still remain, and 
would undoubtedly produce the same fruits again if favored by 
opportunity, power, etc. 



R1083:page5 

AS BECOMETH WOMEN 
PROFESSING GODLINESS. 

NO. 2. 

DO THE DUTIES OF CHRISTIAN 
WOMEN CONFLICT? 

Our next question, as to whether the duties of Christian women 
as probationary members of the church of Christ, conflict with 
their duties in the various natural relationships in which they 
find themselves— as wives, mothers, daughters, sisters, neighbors 
and friends-is one of very great importance. But let us first 
notice what our duties and responsibilities are, in the anointed 
body. 

Like our brethren, we are told that "we are all called in one hope 
of our calling;" that we are "new creatures in Christ Jesus;" that 
we are "all one in Christ;" and that in Christ there is neither Jew 
nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male 
nor female." (Gal. 3:28.) And the Prophet Isaiah (61:1,2; 2 Cor. 
6:1) shows, that all the anointed ones are anointed to preach the 
gospel-the good tidings of redemption and restitution, and the 
special high calling and privilege of the Gospel age, to all who 
have an ear to hear. 

Our commission is plain, therefore, and is the very same under 
which our brethren go forth. And if we ignore it and excuse 
ourselves, we are certainly slothful servants, proving our 
unworthiness of the high position to which we are called. The 
harvest field and the harvest work are before us; and lo, the 
fields are white, the harvest is great, and the laborers are few, 
comparatively, though many precious saints are devoting 
themselves to the work. 

The harvest work is not the training of and caring for our 
families, nor the instructing of the worldly, but it is to seek out 
the saints already consecrated to God and of meek and lowly 



spirit, and to acquaint them with the plan of God more perfectly; 
that as they study it in outline and detail they may discover the 
blessed truth, that it is now time to lift up their heads and 
rejoice, knowing that their deliverance draweth nigh; and that as 
they more freely receive the truth and partake of its spirit, they 
may make ready to receive the King in his beauty, and to be 
united to him as his glorious bride. 

This is a work in which every consecrated one should be 
engaged to the extent of ability. And to do so, if we have the 
spirit of the Master, that is if we have the work at heart as he has 
it, we will be willing to sacrifice other engagements to 
accomplish it, and will learn to so bend and turn and manage our 
earthly affairs as to make them hinder this first and most 
important work, as little as possible. This effort to so manage the 
earthly affairs, and take full cognizance of our talents and apply 
them to the best advantage in the interests of the great harvest 
work, is part of the privilege and duty of every steward in the 
Lord's service. And it is because the Lord desired us to do this 
that he called us his stewards. He would have us as wise and 
faithful stewards study to show ourselves approved unto him— 
study our abilities, circumstances and opportunities after we 
have learned his will, that to the extent of our ability, we may 
accomplish it. 

The duties of the earthly and the heavenly relationships, do not 
however, conflict. Duties never conflict, though sometimes in 
our perplexity to discover the exact line of duty, they may seem 
to. The Scriptures clearly explain, that no matter what may be 
the circumstances in which we are placed, when called to be the 
bride of Christ, it will be possible to make our calling and 
election sure. The straight and narrow path will be made very 
plain no matter how rugged. If you are called being a servant, 
you need not ignore the duties and responsibilities of a servant, 
or esteem yourself too highly to meet a servants obligations. 
Fulfill them with dignity and grace; not with eye-service as 
men-pleasers, but with singleness of heart as unto the Lord.— 
Eph. 6:5-8. 

So also, art thou called being a mother, do not count yourself 
released from the duties and obligations already incurred, or 
perform them with the least carelessness or indifference. Study 
God's methods, plans and precepts, and do your best in applying 
them to the training of your children, with the single object of 
glorifying God by training them up to honor and serve and 
praise him. 

Beyond your own family extend your influence for the truth as 
far as your talents and opportunities will permit, among 
neighbors and friends and relatives-by word and deed and 
example, by letters or by printed matter, and by training your 
children in the love and service of God, to co-operate with you 
in his work, and to look forward to the good time coming 



R1083 : page 6 

when full grown, they can engage in it more effectively. 

Yet, in consideration of the great harvest work, and of the fact 
that the time is short for its accomplishment (See 1 Cor. 7:29; 
also TOWER of Feb. '87), earthly cares and responsibilities not 
yet incurred should be regarded as so many hindrances to the 
great work to which time and talent are already consecrated. 
And no entanglements of an earthly character which are likely to 
hinder or retard our usefulness in the great special work of the 
hour should be entered into. 

The Apostle says, "Let every man [or woman] abide in the same 
calling wherein he was called," whether the position be that of 
husband, or wife, or mother, or servant. And though we serve 
our families or our fellowmen, even more faithfully than before, 
yet we may remember that "he that is called in the Lord, being a 
servant, is the Lord's freeman, and likewise also he that is called, 
being free, is Christ's servant. " All service, in whatever capacity 
should be rendered unto the Lord-that is with the single desire 
and effort to please him. Ye are brought with a price; be not ye 
the servants of men— serving with eye-service as men-pleasers.— 
1 Cor. 7:20-24. 

However, the Apostle shows (verse 21), that to remain in the 
very same position in which we were called, is not always 
obligatory. If the nature of the contract be such that it can be 
broken, or in some degree compromised, and that to the 
advantage of the Lord's work, then it should be done.— "If thou 
mayest be made free, use it rather. " The marriage contract being 
one of peculiar sanctity, and solemnly entered upon for life, may 
never be broken because you see better opportunities for service 
in other directions -"Art thou bound unto a wife [or a husband]? 
seek not to be loosed. " (verse 27) Yet the Christian husband or 
wife should not be distressed if, because of his or her fidelity to 
the Lord, the unchristian partner depart:- "Let not the wife 
depart from her husband. But if she depart [if it must necessarily 
be so] let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband: 
and let not the husband put away his wife.... If any brother hath a 
wife that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let 
him not put her away. And the woman which hath a husband 
that believeth not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her 
not leave him.... But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A 
brother or sister is not under bondage in such cases: but God 
hath called us to peace."- 1 Cor. 7:10-15. 

How very plainly the course of the called ones who are already 
entangled, by what sometimes proves to be one of the most 
detrimental hindrances, is thus mapped out, while those not so 
entangled, are warned not to be unequally yoked together with 
unbelievers. In other words, we are taught to do the best we can 
in whatever circumstances we find ourselves when called, unless 



the circumstances are such as we can control and improve. And 
we are assured that not the measure of our actual service, but of 
our faithfulness in the little or great opportunities afforded us, 
will be the measure of our acceptableness, and worthiness of the 
Lord's final approval. 

The parental tie is another which can never be broken, nor its 
duties and obligations disregarded until the children 

R1084 : page 6 

have reached maturity. And even then parental interest, counsel, 
etc., should not be deemed unnecessary. These duties, therefore, 
the Lord would have us do— not as unto them, to please them, or 
their friends, or your friends, or the world in general— but as unto 
him. 

We conclude, therefore, that the real duties of Christian women 
in the various relationships wherein they find themselves when 
called, do not conflict with other duties of the higher work. God 
does not expect impossibilities of any, but he does expect great 
and studious faithfulness on the part of all, especially of those 
called to be joint-heirs with Christ. 

MRS. C. T. R. 



R1084 : page 6 

THREE MINISTERS FREED. 

The first of the following letters is from a brother in 
Connecticut, who has been for years the minister for a German 
Baptist congregation; it speaks for itself, and will be read with 
great interest. It is only a few months since his investigation of 
the Bible, from the standpoint of the Plan of the Ages, began. 
The second letter is from New Jersey, from a superannuated 
Methodist minister, coming into the clearer light. The third letter 
is from a Baptist minister in Florida, who has gotten quite free, 
and is full of zeal for the truth, and anxious to counteract the 
influence of former false teachings. The Lord's words are being 
continually fulfilled: "If any man will do my will he shall know 
of the doctrine; " and "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall 
make you free." The Lord bless these each and all. May they 
learn to expect and love the wages promised by the Lord to his 
faithful servants-in the present time "tribulation," "persecution" 
and "all manner of evil," and in the age to come everlasting life 
and glory, as his joint-heirs. -Mark 10:30. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I must let you know that the blessed 
truth has reached my heart and mind so deeply, that since I 
received the MILLENNIAL DAWN and ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, both German and English, last July, I have read and 
re-read, and studied nothing else but these blessed truths which I 



have been comparing with the different translations of the Bible, 
German, English and Greek. I have since that time done as the 
Bereans did, which received the Word of God with all readiness, 
daily examining the Scriptures whether those truths which Paul 
preached unto them were so; and I have so far found them 
Scriptural: "How precious unto me are they thoughts, O God! 
how mightily great is their sum!" So must I say over and over 
again, while I read, and study, and compare M.D. and Z.W.T. 
with the Bible. Yes, the dear Lord has blessed my dear 
companion and me through these Scriptural truths so much, that 
we cannot find words to tell it, though we speak of it whenever 
we can. We are not ashamed of these glad tidings; because they 
are unto us a power of God. One thing I do know, that having 
been blind (in regard to these real Scriptural truths) now I see." 
Now I know the truths which are so graciously given to us by 
God through Jesus Christ. Words not taught by human wisdom, 
but by the teachings of the mind of God; comparing spiritual 
truths with spiritual, as the spiritual man can examine, indeed, 
all truths! Praise the dear Lord for it; I find that this is so now! 
All the sectarian doctrines, traditions of men, etc., which I 
studied in the Theological Seminary, I can now examine no 
longer by comparing spiritual truths with human wisdom, 
doctrines and traditions, but, by comparing spiritual truths with 
spiritual; Scripture with Scripture; I see now wherein I failed to 
see and know, the real mind, will and glorious plan of God! 

With the help of God I am now determined to preach and teach 
these truths. I am willing, with the grace of God, to suffer the 
loss of all earthly things. I will give my life, my time, my talents 
for the service of the truth. I have heard already his voice, 
saying, "Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? And I said, 
Here am I; send me." I say this not hastily, but with 
consideration. Indeed, when I remember how, under false 
training in the theological seminary (though I have no bitter 
words or thoughts towards those men), I was led away from the 
real truth, now having obtained this glorious knowledge, and 
this strength which God supplies, should I not be willing to give 
up all? Yes, dear Lord I will; here am I! O, how I wish that 
others may know and believe. But knowing that wishing don't 
bring the truth to them, I will leave my church-parish, in order to 
bring the truth to them by canvassing for Dawn. I have already 
handed in my resignation as the first step toward it. 

O, what a heart-cheering joy and willingness fills my heart and 
mind, when my whole being is centered in this perfect, 
beautiful, grand and harmonious Plan of the Ages ! O, how it 
agrees with all the plain declarations of the Holy Scripture, from 
first to last-from Genesis to Revelations ! How these truths 
uphold the true character, righteousness, justice, love, mind, will 
and plan of God. And, how gloriously it relieves him of those 
fearful aspersions which a heathen philosophy and the human 
wisdom of the different sectarian doctrines and traditions of men 



have cast upon it! O, how in vain they do worship Him, by 
teaching as doctrines the precepts of men; and laying aside the 
commandment of God, by retaining the traditions of men. So did 
Jesus say: "Well do you annul the commandment of God, that 
you may keep your own traditions; making void the Word of 
God by your traditions, which you have delivered; and many 
such like things you do. " 

For this high and heavenly calling of God by Christ Jesus I 
desire, and I shall forget all things behind, and will stretch forth 
under the grace of God towards the things before; yes, I will 
press along the line (as dear old Bro. Paul says), toward the 
prize of the high calling of God. I praise God through Christ 
Jesus, my Lord, that I, even I, can be an associate of that 
heavenly and high calling. (Phil. 3:14; Heb. 3:1.) My dear 
brethren I would not want to miss this high and heavenly 
calling; no, not for all the wealth, honor and office of this world. 
It makes the tears flow for joy and gladness since my heart and 
mind is centered in these glorious and harmonious truths. O, 
how these truths, when we have learned them in the real 
theological school of God, confirm and beautify every doctrine 
of the blessed Bible! I have already found out that it is of no use 
to patch the Baptist sect with the doctrines of the new 
dispensation; and therefore will not try to patch this old worn 
garment, falling now to pieces, with the glorious and 
harmonious new stuff.- Matt. 9:16. 

In regard to your questions of DAWN Vol. I., page 347, let me 
say that, having counted the cost, the value, and the profit, I am 
ready and willing to leave all, earthly friendships, social ties, 
church-parish, ministerial-office, salary, and even my own 
brothers and sisters and parents, if required. Yes, solemnly I can 
say, I am willing to give myself with all I am, and have, and 
shall be, to the ministry of this blessed truth, as a bond-servant 
of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, knowing that the time is 
short. Your Christian brother. 

J. A. WEIMAR. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I have lately seen "Millennial Dawn Vol. 
I.," and am delighted with it. I am a Methodist minister in 
broken health, and laid aside for the present. I am seeking 
information on the second coming of Christ, and the true 
meaning and object of the Millennium, etc., feeling confident 
that the Methodist view on the subject is not Scriptural. The lady 
whose book I read, has kindly offered it to me, and I would like 
to pursue the subject further, but I am not able to purchase now. 
I would be very thankful if you could send me occasionally 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER, if you could not afford to send it 
regularly. I might, after I get work be able to subscribe for it. 
Pray that the dear Lord in whom I do trust most implicitly, may 
soon make some provision for me and mine. My family are 
1900 miles away from me in the West Indies, while I am here 



for my health, and to try to earn a living for them. Pray for us. I 
know that the Lord hears prayers, and will help me soon; but I 
believe it is Scriptural to request the prayers of God's people for 
those in distress. Yours in the fellowship of Christ. 

S. H. BAYLEY. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Again I feel that I must write 
you a few lines, to let you know how I am progressing. God be 
praised, dear brother, I am FREE from Babylon. Inch by inch, I 
have progressed until I have now passed and left far behind me, 
I trust forever, the musty traditions of men, and have been able 
to enter into the glorious liberty of the gospel. Oh, how happy I 
feel! Yet I am persecuted, by those who once called me brother, 
and have to contend with ignorance and prejudice. At times I am 
cast down in heart, faint and weary, but I can never give up the 
fight. The pleasure and consolation I now derive from reading 
the Word, I never felt before. And ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
what a white winged messenger of peace it is to my soul. I read 
it carefully, and send its glorious message to others. It is 
beginning to bear fruit in a small way; but I have faith in small 
beginnings. I have been preaching the gospel now, for some 
time, until finally the chief priests, scribes and pharisees, 
commanded me not to preach "this way. " I answered, "Whether 
it be right to obey God or men judge ye— I can but preach what I 
have learned from the Word of God. " I have sent a letter to the 
association to which I formerly belonged, announcing my 
withdrawal 

R1085 : page 6 

from, not only the Baptist denomination, but from all purely 
sectarian societies. But I have decided to let my church (where I 
am a member) bring me to trial,— instead of withdrawing as they 
wanted me to do. My object in this is, to use the opportunity this 
will afford me, in exposing the errors of so called orthodoxy. 

I hope and pray this may prove acceptable to our heavenly 
Master in a manifestation of the truth, and the consequent 
conversion of some from error. Already some are almost 
persuaded. One old brother, a deacon, says he is going to 
withdraw, and a few more are fast coming to the light. Two of 
my former churches want me to preach for them, which I will do 
as long as I am permitted. 

God helping me I will do my very best to dissipate the mists and 
fogs of so called orthodoxy, in this country. Oh how blind, how 
utterly blind is sectarianism! It is hard to realize that people who 
profess to be Christians, with an open Bible in their hands, can 
be so utterly blind to what the Word of God so plainly teaches. 

Enclosed you will find cash for one copy of Millennial Dawn, 
paper cover, and one subscription for the TOWER for myself. If 
you have any spare numbers Z.W.T. that you think would suit 



my work now, please send them to me, and also a supply of Arp 
slips. 

Oh how I need help! What a large field, and no laborers. God 
bless you dear Brother and Sister Russell. Pray for me, and for 
all the poor blinded ones. God bless all the brethren. If you have 
time, please write me, and advise me in regard to my contest 
with my church. Help me dear brother all you can. 

W. D. WILLIAMS. 



R1088 : page 6 

GIRD UP YOUR LOINS. 

Grinnell, Iowa. BROTHER RUSSELL: 

I am discouraged, I am all alone here as far as I know. Can get 
no one to take any interest in these things. It is hard to hold fast 
when one stands all alone without one congenial spirit to cheer 
him on the thorny way. Were it not for the comfort and strength 
I get from the monthly visits of the TOWER, I think I would 
lose my grip. Yours in despondency. 

W. C. P. 

DEAR BROTHER P.: 

Your prayer is heard, your desire for companionship and 
fellowship of a congenial spirit. We wish to introduce you to 
one who we know will prove a friend indeed, one with whom 
you may frequently have communion and counsel. We fear from 
the tone of your letter that you, though acquainted with him, had 
forgotten him— we refer to our Lord Jesus. Surely you could not 
feel lonely or discouraged 

R1088:page7 

if you had remembered, that "greater is he that is on our part 
than all they that be against us." Better is the communion of this 
one, than the fellowship of all on earth beside. 

Now, dear Brother, enter into your closet and hold communion 
with this friend more and more frequently. Advise with him. 
You will soon find that this, and the openings for communion 
which he will provide-the TOWER, DAWN, etc.,- will be a 
comforting and satisfying portion. Meantime of course be on the 
lookout for means of spreading the truth. Those who most love 
the truth, love most to serve it: and the appreciation and the 
service and the refreshment from it, go hand in hand. 
"Wherefore," dear brother, "gird up the loins of your mind, be 
sober and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto 
you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. "-EDITOR. 



R1088:page7 

The following article by the editor of this journal, appeared 
recently in several of the Pittsburgh dailies. We publish it here 
for the sake of a large list of new readers to whom this number 
will go. 

R1085 : page 7 

THE OLD THEOLOGY. 

THE WAGES OF SIN. 

"The wages of sin is death." "By one man sin entered into the 
world and death by [as a consequence] of sin."— Rom. 6:23; 
5:12. 

The teaching of "Orthodoxy," that the wages of sin is 
everlasting torment, is emphatically contradicted by the above 
words of inspiration, and by many others, direct and indirect, 
which might be cited. How reasonable is the Bible statement, 
and how absurd the common view, which is founded neither in 
reason nor in the Scriptures, and which is in most violent 
antagonism with the plan and character of God, as presented in 
his Word. 

The eternal torment theory had a heathen origin, and began very 
gradually to attach itself to nominal Christianity during its 
blending with heathen philosophies in the second century. The 
credulity of the present day, therefore, receives it as a legacy, 
not from the Lord, or the apostles, or prophets, but from the 
compromising spirit which sacrificed truth and reason, and 
shamefully perverted the doctrines of Christianity, in an unholy 
ambition and strife for power and wealth and numbers. Eternal 
torment as the penalty for sin, was unknown to the patriarchs of 
past ages; it was unknown to the prophets of the Jewish age; and 
it was unknown to the Lord and the apostles; but it has been the 
chief doctrine of Nominal Christianity since the great apostasy - 
the scourge wherewith the credulous, ignorant and superstitious 
of the world have been lashed into servile obedience to tyranny. 
Eternal torment was pronounced against all who offered 
resistance or spurned her authority, and its infliction in the 
present life was begun so far as she had power; and the pains of 
purgatory she promised, in such measure as she should dictate, 
to any of her votaries who showed the slightest disposition to be 
refractory. Under the terrible bondage of a superstitious 
reverence for self-exalted fellow-men, in dense ignorance of 
God's real plan, and tormented with a wretched fear of eternal 
misery, the masses of men resigned their reason; and even yet, 
under the increasing light and liberty of this nineteenth century, 
men scarcely dare to think for themselves on religion and the 
Bible. 



WHATSAITH THE SCRIPTURES? 

Let God's inspired writers be heard in opposition to heathenized 
church traditions, and let reason judge which is the sensible and 
Godlike view, and which the unreasonable and devilish. The 
prophets of the Old Testament do not mention a word about 
eternal torment, but they do repeatedly mention destruction as 
the sinners' doom, and declare over and over again that the 
enemies of the Lord shall perish. The Law given to Israel 
through Moses, never hinted at any other penalty than death, in 
case of its violation. The warning to Adam when placed on trial 
in Eden, contained not the remotest suggestion of eternal torture 
in case of failure and disobedience; but, on the contrary, it 
clearly stated that the penalty would be death- "In the day that 
thou eatest thereof, dying, thou shalt die. "-Gen. 2:17, margin. 

Surely if the penalty of disobedience and failure is everlasting 
life in torment, an inexcusable wrong was done to Adam, and to 
the patriarchs, and to the Jewish people, when they were 
misinformed on the subject, and told that death is the penalty. 
Surely Adam, the patriarchs, or the Jews, should they ever find 
themselves in eternal torment, where the various sectarian 
creeds shamelessly and falsely assert that the vast majority will 
find themselves, will have sufficiently good ground for an 
appeal for justice. Such, no less than the heathen billions who 
died without knowledge, and hence surely without faith, would 
have just ground for cursing the injustice of such a penalty as a 
most atrocious misuse of power— first, in bringing them into a 
trial subject to such an awful and unreasonable penalty, without 
their consent; and secondly, for leaving the one class wholly 
ignorant of such a penalty, and for deceiving the others by 
telling them that the penalty of sin would be death,-to perish. It 
must be admitted that the presumption to declare that death, 
destruction, perish, and similar terms, mean life in torment, 
belongs to word-twisting theologians since the apostles' days. 

Look next at the New Testament writings: Paul says, he did not 
shun to declare the whole counsel of God (Acts 20:27), and yet 
he did not write a word about eternal torment. Neither did Peter, 
nor James, nor Jude, nor John; though it is claimed that John 
did, in the symbolic figures of Revelation. But since those who 
make this claim consider the Book of Revelation a sealed book, 
which they do not and cannot understand, they have no right to 
interpret any portion of it literally in violation of its stated 
symbolic character, and in direct opposition to the remainder of 
the Bible, including John's plain non-symbolic epistles. 

Since the apostles do not so much as mention eternal torment, 
all truth-seekers, especially Christians, should be interested to 
search what they do teach concerning the penalty of sin,- 
remembering that they, and not the apostate church of the darker 
ages, taught "the whole counsel of God." 



Paul states the matter thus: -"The wages of sin is death;" The 
disobedient "shall be punished with everlasting destruction from 
the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power;" and 
"Many walk who are the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose 
end is destruction. "-Rom. 6:23; 2 Thes. 1:9; Phil. 3:19. 

John says:-"The world passeth away and the lust thereof; but he 
that doeth the will of God abideth forever.... He that committeth 
sin is of the devil, for the devil sinneth from the beginning. For 
this purpose the Son of God was manifested that he might 
destroy the works of the devil.... He that loveth not his brother 
abideth in death. Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer, 
and we know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in 
him.... He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son 
of God hath not life. "-1 John 2:17; 3:8,14,15; 5:12. 

Peter says:— The disobedient "shall be destroyed from among the 
people:" that the evil-doers "bring upon themselves swift 
destruction;" that the Lord is "not desiring that any should 
perish, but that all should come to repentance. "-Acts 3:23; 2 
Pet. 2:1 and 3:9. 

James says:— "Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death." 
"There is one law-giver who is able to save and to destroy. " — 
Jas. 1:15; 4:12. 

No one who has studied the subject, can consider the penalty of 
sin, as Scripturally set forth and defined, too slight a 
punishment. When understood, it is seen to be neither too slight, 
nor too severe, but simply a just recompense of reward. "The 
gift of God," says the apostle, "is eternal life." And that gift or 
favor bestowed upon Adam, and through him upon his posterity, 
was to be lasting only on condition of its proper use, which was 
to glorify God in its well-being and well-doing, and not to 
dishonor him by rebellion and sin. And when God creates, he 
reserves to himself both the right and the power to destroy that 
which he considers unworthy of continuous life. When man 
sinned, therefore, God simply withdrew the favor he had granted 
which had been misused, and death (destruction) followed: 
preceded naturally by the dying process— pain, sickness, and 
mental, moral and physical decay. 

R1086 : page 7 

Had God not provided redemption through Christ, the death 
penalty which came upon our race in Adam would have been 
everlasting; but in mercy all have been redeemed from death; 
yet all are again, individually, put under the same law, which 
changes not- "The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is 
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. " 

Did our Lord Jesus ever use the expression, eternal torment? or 
even once hint that he came into the world to save men from 
eternal torment? No, never! Yet, if this were the truth, and if 



they were in danger of a penalty so terrible for not receiving 
him, it would have been neither just, nor kind in him, to have 
kept back the truth whatever it might be. He did tell them, 
however, that he came to save them from death, from perishing. 
The penalty of sin, death, being against all, none could hope for 
a resurrection to any future life, but all were hopelessly 
perishing, unless Christ should redeem and restore them from 
death, to that which was lost in Adam,— to righteousness and its 
privileges of everlasting life and favor. The Lord's title, Savior, 
has a weight too in this examination. It does not imply a 
deliverer or savior from torment, but a savior from death. The 
Greek word translated Savior signifies literally Life-giver. 

What did our Lord say of his mission? we may well inquire. He 
said that he came "to preach deliverance to the captives." What 
captives could he refer to but the captives of sin, receiving daily 
its wages-dying by inches and entering the great prison-house, 
the tomb. He said he came to "open the prison-doors"- what 
prison, but the tomb? of which also the prophet had spoken. 
(See, Isa. 61:1; Luke 4:18.) He declared that he came that 
mankind "might have life;" that he came "to give his life a 
ransom for many" lives-in order that by believing in him men 
"should not perish, but have eternal life;" and again, "Narrow is 
the way that leadeth unto life," and "broad is the way that 
leadeth to destruction. "-John 10:10; Matt. 20:28; John 3:15; 
Matt. 7:13. 

AN UNANSWERABLE ARGUMENT. 

It will generally be admitted by Christians that our Lord Jesus 
redeemed mankind by his death; that he endured willingly the 
penalty of man's sins, in order that man might be released from 
that penalty. "Surely he hath borne our griefs and carried our 
sorrows." "He was wounded for our transgressions; he was 
bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement for our peace was 
upon him; and by his stripes we are healed." (Isa. 53:4,5.) This 
being admitted, it becomes an easy matter to decide to an 
absolute, unquestionable certainty, what the penalty of our sins 
was, if we know what our Lord Jesus did endure when "the 
chastisement for our peace" was inflicted upon his willing head. 
Is he suffering eternal torment for us? If so, that would thus be 
proved to be the penalty against our sins. 

But no one claims this, and the Scriptures teach that our Lord is 
now in glory, and not in torment, which is incontrovertible proof 
that the wages of sin is not torment. But what did our Lord do to 
secure the cancellation of our sins? What did he give when he 
paid our ransom price-the price or penalty against sinners? Let 
the Scriptures answer. They repeatedly and explicitly declare 
that "Christ died for our sins;" that he gave his life a ransom to 
secure life for the condemned sinners; that he bought us with his 
own precious blood; that for this purpose the Son of God was 



manifested in flesh, that his flesh he might give for the life of 
the world; that as by man came death, by man ("the man Christ 
Jesus") might come the resurrection of the dead.-l Cor. 15:3; 
Matt. 20:28; 1 Tim. 2:6; Hos. 13:14; 1 Cor. 6:20; 1 Pet. 1:18,19; 
1 John 3:8; John 6:51; 1 Cor. 15:21; 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

Is there room to question further the clear Bible doctrine that 
"the wages of sin is death"? Is there room to doubt further either 
the unscripturalness, or unreasonableness of the heathenish 
dogma of eternal torment? We answer, No ! Let the God- 
dishonoring, saint-perplexing, scoffer-making, and wholly 
absurd blasphemy go— back to its vile and worthy source, the 
devil. 

OBJECTIONS BRIEFL Y CONSIDERED. 

Limited space will permit merely a glance at certain of our 
Lord's parables and dark sayings, which, with the popular idea 
of torment firmly entrenched in the mind from childhood, 
appear to many to support that doctrine. We will, however, 
briefly notice two of these, generally considered impregnable- 
the parable of the sheep and goats, Matt. 25:4-46, and the 
parable of the rich man and Lazarus, Luke 16:19-31. We shall 
find that properly interpreted, they teach nothing of the kind. 

Not to enter into details-the parable of the sheep and goats 
describes a trial of the world of mankind in the coming 
Millennial age- "When the Son of man shall sit upon the throne 
of his glory. " The separating work will be according to 
character, and will require all of that period of a thousand years. 
Verses 41 and 46, which give expression to the final sentence 
upon all the lovers of unrighteousness, the goats, are the points 
upon which the interest of our topic centers. 

Verse 41 reads, "Depart from me accursed ones into lasting fire, 
prepared for the devil and his messengers" (servants). We must 
infer that the fire here is as symbolic as the goats which go into 
it. As goats fitly represent wayward and unrighteous 

R1086 : page 8 

men, so fire fitly represents destruction. Fire is always 
destructive, never preservative. The goat cast into a fire would 
be consumed, destroyed, if the fire did not too soon become 
extinct. And hence in the parable, in order to show the certainty 
and completeness of the destruction of the finally incorrigible, 
the symbolic goats are represented as being cast into a lasting 
fire, i.e., a lasting or perpetual destruction— extinction. 

Verse 46 reads, "And these shall go away into everlasting 
punishment. " We are not questioning that the unrighteous are to 
be punished, nor that the punishment upon this class is to be 
everlasting; the nature of the punishment is the question we are 
investigating. We have seen that the punishment or wages of sin 



is death, and nothing else, as clearly stated all through the 
Scriptures; and this parable certainly teaches nothing to the 
contrary. Only the prejudice of deep-seated error makes this 
passage even appear, to some, to teach anything to the contrary. 
The Greek word rendered punishment in this verse, speaks 
positively regarding the kind of punishment. The original word 
is kolasin, whereas if torment were meant, the Greek word 
basinos would have been used. Kolasin, on the contrary, derived 
from kolazoo, signifies, 1., To cut off; as in pruning off branches 
from a tree; 2., To restrain, or repress. The Greeks write, -"The 
charioteer restrains his fiery steeds;" 3., To chastise, to punish; 
to cut off an individual from life or society, or even to restrain 
his liberties. That the first definition, "to cut off," is the proper 
one in this case is evident from the antithesis of the succeeding 
and last clause of the verse, where life, the reward of the 
righteous, is put in contrast with the death, or cutting off from 
life of the unrighteous. 

THE PARABLE OF DIVES AND LAZARUS. 

-Luke 16:31.- 

While this is admitted to be a parable, it is generally treated as 
if it were a literal statement. To regard it as a literal statement 
involves several absurdities; for instance, that the rich man went 
to hades because he had enjoyed many earthly blessings and 
gave nothing but crumbs to Lazarus. Not a word is said about 
his wickedness. Again Lazarus is blessed, not because he was 
good, or full of faith in God, but simply because he was poor 
and sick. If this be interpreted literally, the only lesson to be 
logically drawn from it, is, that unless we are poor beggars full 
of sores, we will never enter into future bliss; and that if now we 
wear any fine linen and purple, and have plenty to eat every day, 
we are sure of future torment. Again, the coveted place of favor 
is Abraham's bosom; and if the whole statement is literal, the 
bosom must be literal, and surely would not hold very many of 
earth's millions of sick and poor. But why consider absurdities? 
As a parable, it is of easy interpretation. In a parable, the thing 
said is never the thing meant; as for instance in the parable of 
the wheat and tares, the Lord explained that wheat meant 
children of the kingdom, and tares the children of the devil; and 
similar classes in another parable were represented by sheep and 
goats. So in this parable the rich man must represent a class, and 
Lazarus another class; and the narrative applies to these classes. 

The rich man represented the Jewish people which up to and at 
the time of the parable "fared sumptuously," as the special 
recipients of God's favors. As Paul said, the Jews had "much 
advantage every way, chiefly because to them were committed 
the oracles of God" (the Law and Prophecy). The promises to 
Abraham and David invested that people with royalty, as 
represented by the rich man's "purple. " The typical sacrifices of 



the law, constituted them in a typical sense, a "holy nation, " 
represented by the rich man's "fine linen"-symbolic of 
righteousness. -Rev. 19:8. 

Lazarus represented the God-fearing people of other nations 
debarred, until the close of the Jewish Age, from those blessings 
conferred upon Israel specially. As the linen represented Israel's 
justification, so the sores represented moral defilement in this 
class, for whose justification no sin-offering had at that time 
been made. They were not even typically cleansed, and had as 
yet no share in the rich promises of the kingdom. They were on 
the contrary outcasts, strangers from the commonwealth of 
Israel. (Eph. 2:11-13.) As to how these ate of the "crumbs" of 
divine favor which fell from 

R1087 : page 8 

Israel's table of bounties, and how they accounted themselves as 
companions of "dogs," the Lord's conversation with the Syro- 
phenician woman, who was one of this class, offers a clear 
explanation.-See, Matt. 15:27. 

But there came a change to both of these classes. The "rich man" 
(the Jewish nation) died, ceased to exist as a nation, and as the 
national representatives of God's favors, when God's favors 
were taken from them (Matt. 21:43) and given to those formerly 
outcasts. 

The "rich man" class was cast out of favor, into trouble. And 
from then till now, the Jews as a people have been in torment; 
yet were hindered by their law prejudices (as a great gulf) from 
accepting of Christ. The "Lazarus" class also died, or ceased 
from their former condition, and were received into the favor of 
God. (Acts 10:28-35.) Accepting of Christ, these henceforth 
were received to Abraham's bosom— esteemed the true children 
of believing Abraham, and the true heirs of the promise made to 
him.- See, Gal. 3:16,29; Rom. 11:7-9,12-25. 

LET HONESTY AND TRUTH PREVAIL. 

Having demonstrated that neither the Bible nor reason offer the 
slightest support to the doctrine that eternal torment is the 
penalty of sin, we note the fact that the various church creeds, 
and confessions, and hymn books, and theological treatises, are 
its only supports; and that under the increasing light of our day, 
and the consequent emancipation of reason, belief in this 
horrible, fiendish doctrine of the darker ages, is fast dying out. 
But alas ! it is not because Christian people generally are zealous 
for the truth of God's Word and for his character, and willing to 
destroy the grim creed-idols. Ah no! they still bow before their 
admitted falsities; they still pledge themselves to their defense; 
and still spend time and money for their general support, though 
they are at heart ashamed of them and privately deny them. 



The general influence of all this, is to cause the honest-hearted 
of the world to despise Christianity and the Bible; and to make 
hypocrites and semi-infidels of nominal Christians. Because the 
nominal church clings to this old blasphemy and falsely presents 
its own errors as the teachings of the Bible, the Word of God, 
though still nominally reverenced, is being practically 
repudiated. Thus the Bible, the great anchor of truth and liberty, 
is being cut loose from, by the very ones who, if not deceived 
regarding its teachings, would be held and blessed by it. 

The general effect, not far distant, will be first open infidelity, 
then anarchy. For much, very much of this, lukewarm 
Christians, both in pulpits and pews, who know or ought to 
know better, are responsible. Many such are willing to 
compromise the truth, slander God's character, and stultify and 
deceive themselves, for the sake of peace, or ease, or present 
earthly advantage. And any minister, who by uttering a word for 
an unpopular truth, will risk the loss of his stipend, and 
reputation for being "established" in the bog of error, is 
considered a bold man, even though he ignominious ly hide his 
identity by withholding his name from his published protests. 

If professed Christians would be honest with themselves and 
true to God, they would soon learn that "their fear toward God is 
taught by the precepts of men. " (Isa. 29: 13.) If all would decide 
to let God be true though it should prove every man a liar (Rom. 
3:4), and should show all human creeds to be imperfect and 
misleading, there would be a great creed-smashing work done 
very shortly. Then the Bible would be studied and appreciated as 
never before; and its testimony that the wages of sin is death 
(extinction), would be recognized as "a just recompense of 
reward. " 



R1088 : page 8 

A SUGGESTION TO THE REAPERS. 

FROM BROTHER E. BRYAN. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just returned from 
Marietta, where I sold 165 copies of DAWN. As my method of 
canvassing (by which I also sold nearly four hundred copies at 
Zanesville), differs, so far as I know, from that of any of our 
brethren, it is here given. 

Take a supply of "Arp" slips and colporteur cards, and visit each 
house, giving a slip and a card in a manner like this: "Good 
morning! Please read this when you have time; show it to your 
family; keep it until I call in a day or two. " Keep a diagram of 
each street in a small blank book, taking in so much of each 
cross-street that no house will be missed. Put out several 
hundred slips before commencing to solicit. Then calling again 



you say: "You remember my leaving a slip lately. ["Oh! yes."] 
Did you read it since? ["I did."] Now I have stopped a moment 
to show you the book spoken of. The slip gives you some idea 
of it; now notice its appearance-its size, its good clear print. It 
has thrown much light on Bible study; is entirely unsectarian, 
builds up no denomination or creed. It is not paid for until 
delivered, a week from next Monday. " This is about all, except 
as circumstances require slight additions. If the slip was not 
read, request that it be, and you will stop when passing next 
time. On your diagram you had made a straight mark for each 
house where a slip was left, a cipher for each where none was 
left. If you now sell a book, with another line make a cross at the 
place; if you fail to sell, put a cipher on the straight mark. This 
diagram is useful until your last book is delivered; and it will 
save hours of time and much labor and worry. A few initial 
letters can be added when necessary, to show that you are to 
"call any time," "call later," "call on delivery," etc. 

Try to keep slips enough out among the people to furnish you 
work for a day or two ahead. Put out many at the end of the 
week, for Sunday reading.— Let your address be always pleasant 
and polite. Some book-agents employ importunity and even 
insolence, and we must make the difference between them and 
us manifest. If a person shows a bad spirit, or from any cause 
seems a hopeless case, make the interview very brief. 

Will the "Arp" slips excite the prejudice of some? Yes; but they 
will create a desire in the minds of others. And the new slips are 
not so likely to offend those who hate the very mention of hope 
for man after death. 

Then, if you feel that you are not a good talker, and reflect upon 
the great number of book-agents who are now talking the people 
overmuch, take the "Arp" slip in your hand, and on your tongue 
the words, "Please read this." E. BRYAN. 

The above is an excellent suggestion, especially for those who 
are not professional canvassers, nor great talkers; it will, 
therefore, suit well the majority of our readers, each of whom 
seems to be doing what he can to thus serve and spread the truth. 
The greatest difficulty on the part of many seems to be, that their 
hearts are so full of the good tidings, that they are tempted to tell 
a little too much concerning the Plan of God. Remember, that 
the errors are so deep-seated, that no one can remove them in a 
few moments' conversation, and that to suggest them without 
fully meeting them, is often, to prejudice their minds against the 
truth and the book. The "wise as a serpent, harmless as a dove" 
plan is, to speak of the book and plan in general terms, -to 
present it as a "Bible Key," a "Helping Hand to Bible Study," 
without telling how it helps, or what is the plan of God which it 
presents. Awaken interest, curiosity, etc., and let the reading of 
the book gradually remove their errors, disarm prejudices, and 
implant the true knowledge of God's character and plan. 



page 8 

DAWN IN GERMAN, PAPER-BOUND. 

The price will be 25 cents each, the same as the English edition, 
that being the popular limit. The same "expense allowance" as 
on the English edition will be granted. See June '88 TOWER, 
page 1 . Order at once. 



BIBLE STUDENT'S HELPS. 



SPECIAL PRICES BELOW FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN. VOL. I. 
THE PLAN OF THE AGES. 

A HELPING HAND FOR BIBLE STUDENTS. 

Cloth bound. 351 pages. Embossed. Sent, postage prepaid, on 
receipt of the price $1 .00 



SPECIAL RATES TO SUBSCRIBERS: 

1 year's subscription to Tower and 1 book, $1.25 

1 year's subscription to Tower and 7 books 5.00 

1 year's subscription to Tower and 15 books 10.00 

1 year's subscription to Tower and 40 books 25.00 



PAPER BOUND EDITION. 

Wholesale Rates for selling, loaning, gratuitous distribution, 
etc., 25 cents each, for one copy or a thousand copies. 

A rebate of ten cents each, out of the Z.W.T. Tract Funds, will 
be allowed to any canvasser as "expense money. " 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

We are in receipt of many letters asking, whether this work is of 
any value to English readers who have no knowledge of the 
Greek. We answer, Yes; it is specially designed for such: and 
the Diaglott, together with Young's Analytical Concordance, are 
worth more than a year's study of the Greek. Both should be in 
the hands of every Bible student; but if you cannot afford both, 
the Diaglott is the most valuable— indeed almost indispensable. 

Many orders come for the Diaglott from persons not subscribers 
to the TOWER, and for extra copies for friends from those who 



are subscribers. Hence, we must explain particularly, why we 
can supply this work to TOWER subscribers only, and to these 
only one copy each, at the special price $1.50. The reasons are 
as follows: 

Some years ago a Brother, who is a great friend to the TOWER, 
and a great admirer of the Emphatic Diaglott also, suggested 
that, Every student of God's plan, as presented in the TOWER, 
ought to have the aid which the Diaglott affords. The difficulty 
which seemed to stand in the way was, that it is of necessity an 
expensive work (Retail price in cloth binding $4.00, postage 16 
cts. = $4.16.) and the great majority of our readers are far from 
wealthy, like the majority of the saints in all ages. To meet this 
difficulty, the Brother proposed to the TOWER PUB. CO., that, 
if they would be at the trouble and expense of mailing the books, 
he would supply one copy each to all TOWER subscribers, at a 
price to bring the book within the reach of all, viz. $1.50, 
including postage. 

This was begun when our subscription list was much smaller 
than now, and is still continued: New readers of either 
DIAGLOTT or TOWER need both. Subscribers will please save 
us the annoyance of refusing, and returning their money, by 
ordering only one copy of the Diaglott: unless your first copy 
has worn out,-in which case, in ordering another, mention this 
fact. The only way for others to get the book at this special price 
is to subscribe for the TOWER: and the Diaglott must be mailed 
direct to the subscriber and not to another person. 



YOUNG'S ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE. 

Our supply of this valuable work, at $3.50, is now exhausted. 
Hereafter, we can give our subscribers the benefit of a wholesale 
price only, as competitive editions are about exhausted, and the 
"Author's Edition" is able to command its price,-which, the 
value of the work considered, is very cheap. The retail price of 
the book is $5.00, with postage 55 cents added-$5.55. Our price 
to our readers will hereafter be $4.25 by mail, postage prepaid 
by us; or $3.70, if sent by express at your charges. As it is quite 
a large volume (weight seven pounds), it will be cheapest for 
most purchasers, to get it by mail. 



LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE O.T. 

This is a translation of the Old Testament Scriptures into the 
English language by a Hebrew. It is chiefly valuable for 
comparison in studying. This lot we can supply— postage paid by 
us-at $1.50, in sheep binding. 



ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in G.A.R. Hall, over the Third National 
Bank, No. 101 Federal Street, Allegheny City. Readers and 
friends will be warmly welcomed. Preaching every Lords-day 
afternoon at 3.30 o'clock; Bible Class at 2.30 o'clock. Services 
in German at 10.30 A.M. of the same day. 



