Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Jesus’ Sheep Listen to His Voice
AS THE preaching work expands to all parts of the earth, Jehovah through his angels directs his servants to the sheeplike ones. They hear Jesus’ voice and learn to serve him with everlasting life in view. Jesus said at John 10:27, 28: “My sheep listen to my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give them everlasting life.” Notice how honesthearted ones in Madagascar listened to Jesus’ voice.
One of Jehovah’s Witnesses gave copies of the books You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth and Your Youth​—Getting the Best Out Of It to the physician who came to check on his sick father.
The doctor was Protestant and very much opposed to the Witnesses, but he read the book and checked the scriptures in his own Bible. His wife, a Catholic and also a doctor, read the Youth book several times because she said it seemed to have been written especially for her. The Society’s Bible-based explanation of the significance of 1914 impressed them both. The husband got in touch with the Witness who gave him the books. The Witness gave him Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? and made arrangements to visit him and his wife to answer their questions. When he visited them, he started a regular Bible study with the couple and their three children. Progress in Bible understanding was rapid.
After the first study, the whole family started attending the meetings at the Kingdom Hall and soon thereafter enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry School. The conduct of the children greatly improved. From their Bible study, they learned that celebrating birthdays and other religious holidays was not Christian; hence, they stopped observing them. The husband refused to give his blood to a relative, even though the subject had not yet been discussed in the Bible study. Soon his karate uniform disappeared from his wardrobe; he sent it to the tailor to have clothes made out of it for his children. He burned all his magazines and books on horoscopes. Just three months after they started studying, both the husband and his wife resigned from their respective churches and expressed their desire to share in the preaching work. They are now baptized.
□ A woman in Thailand was seeking the truth. Although a Buddhist, she had never been devoted to her religion because she had seen too much hypocrisy and greed. Besides, there were various customs that she found offensive. She felt tired of it all.
Then, a neighbor recommended that she try the Christians and took her to a Pentecostal church. During the service, however, the woman had a strong desire to leave and go home because of the noise, as all present were praying with a loud voice. That was the last time she attended that church.
Later, she tried a Roman Catholic church. However, after attending a number of times, she again became aware of hypocrisy and greed, as well as the luxurious life-style of the priest. She became disgusted and stopped going there. The priest was curious as to why she left. After learning the reason, he said in a mocking way: “If you wish to join a really strict people, go to Jehovah’s Witnesses.” She asked: “Where are they?” The priest replied: “They are near the waterworks.” The next day she looked for them without success. Disappointed, she nevertheless constantly thought of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
One day she overheard one of her neighbors mockingly say to another: “Soon you will become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses!” Upon hearing that, the woman rushed over to the neighbor and asked: “Are there Jehovah’s Witnesses around here?” “Yes,” was the answer. “Some will come to the neighborhood preaching from house to house. You will recognize them by their clean and neat way of dressing.” At that she ran out to look for them. At first she did not find them, but when walking back to her house, she noticed a couple of neatly dressed women conversing with somebody. She approached and asked if they were Jehovah’s Witnesses. When they said they were, she pleaded: “Please come to my house. I want to talk to you.”
A Bible study was started, and in spite of opposition and ridicule from family members, this lady has started to attend meetings and to witness to her relatives.
Jesus truly does know his sheep and is gathering them into his organization for survival into his new world of righteousness.

