Announcements
“TRIUMPHANT KINGDOM” ASSEMBLIES APPROACH
The “Triumphant Kingdom” assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses are near at hand. On June 22 Jehovah’s witnesses will gather in Chicago, then on succeeding week ends in Vancouver, Los Angeles, Dallas, New York, and by July 25 thousands of conventioners will be crossing the Atlantic for the gatherings in London, Paris, Rome, Nuremberg, Stockholm and The Hague. The public talk to climax the assemblies is “World Conquest Soon—by God’s Kingdom.” Are your arrangements made, and are they definite? Have you sent in your Room Request forms and your European rail transportation order? Do you have your passport and vaccination certificate? These things should have been taken care of by now. Room Request forms and rail transportation order blanks are available from EUROPEAN CONVENTIONS, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn 1, New York. May we see you at the assemblies?
CHRISTENDOM OR CHRISTIANITY—WHICH ONE IS “THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD”?
Have you received a copy of this new 32-page booklet? It is the most-talked-about booklet in the world! Millions of copies of it in 19 languages have been distributed to people desiring to know the answer to the vital question: “Christendom or Christianity—which one is ‘the light of the world’?” Get your copy of the booklet now for 5c, or better yet get 7 copies for 25c or 30 copies for $1. After reading this most absorbing booklet you will desire to pass copies on to your friends and neighbors.
THE IMPORTANCE OF “GATHERING OURSELVES TOGETHER”
Is it very important to regularly attend congregation meetings made possible by Jehovah God? You may read the answer for yourself at Hebrews 10:25, NW, where we are told to be “not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you behold the day drawing near.” Applying information learned at meetings, during June Jehovah’s witnesses will offer on a $1 contribution the two latest Bible study aid books and two 32-page booklets. They will endeavor to leave at least the special new booklet Christendom or Christianity—Which One Is “the Light of the World”? at every home.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
June 19: Jehovah’s Channel of Communication, ¶1-18. Page 301.
June 26: Jehovah’s Channel of Communication, ¶19-26, and Christian Channel of Communication, ¶1-10. Page 306.
July 3: Christian Channel of Communication, ¶11-34. Page 311.

