Pursuing My Purpose in Life
ONE of the earliest and most vivid recollections I have of the days when first coming to a knowledge of Bible truth is the almost stunning impression made upon my mind when I discerned that a Christian must be prepared to give up some things that are perfectly all right and proper; that dedication to Jehovah means not only giving up things that are evil and immoral, but that it may include the giving up of things that are quite legitimate in order to devote one’s time and energies more to Kingdom interests. This truth made such a vivid impression upon my mind that it stands out abruptly as the first great test that I had to face and decide upon.
I first came to some understanding of the truth at the close of World War I. I had been in the British army for four years and was just beginning civilian life over again. I was contemplating marriage, but with a person not interested in the truth, so that affair was soon terminated. But I was quite keenly interested in some hobbies such as photography and the then new hobby of radio transmission. Also, I had good business prospects. I used to lay abed at nights pondering over my dedication vows. I had friends who were very zealous for Kingdom service (such as it then was in 1920) and they had spoken to me about the “colporteur” (pioneer) work. I struggled with myself as I pondered over Jesus’ words to the rich young ruler (Matt. 19:21), but once I saw the import of Jesus’ words there was no question in my mind. By Jehovah’s spirit I never hesitated. I handed in my resignation to the firm where I was employed, wrote to the London office for instructions what to do, and within three months I was out in the full-time service.
The first few years of pioneer service were not at all difficult for me. I think I was about average for placement of literature and, having some money behind me, I was never worried about the financial side of the work. I was gradually becoming more mature in knowledge and understanding of the Word of God and the ability to use it in the ministry. I was given some opportunities for public speaking in rural assignments, which I thoroughly enjoyed, and I found myself with many more friends than I had ever had in all my life before. I was forming quite a close friendship with a particular sister. Then another test came.
I had been to a convention in London where Brother Rutherford and some of the American brothers had served and had returned to my rural assignment when I received a telegram from the London office saying Brother Rutherford wanted to see me. I somehow sensed that it was going to be an invitation to go abroad. I had no idea where. I went to London the following day pondering what this telegram really meant, but fully made up in my mind that if it was a call to serve in a foreign land I would unhesitatingly say, Yes, no matter where it was. Sure enough, the first question Brother Rutherford asked me was, “Do you mind where in the world you work?” I said, “No.” “How would you like to go to India?” was the next question. My answer was, “When do you want me to go?” And in three weeks’ time another brother and I were on the boat for India. It was a case of sailing for a great “unknown” and I thought of Abraham’s being told to go to a land that he knew not of. I thought to myself that if Abraham could do that, then so could I, because it was the same God who gave the call. Abraham went “not knowing where he was going.” (Heb. 11:8, NW) We could do the same.
All that was over twenty-eight years ago. I am still in India, and not dead yet! There have naturally been many and varied experiences through the years. When we first landed in India and experiences were not very encouraging we used to console each other by saying that the first twenty years were always the worst. In those days there were no “leave of absence” rules for missionaries, and we had been given only a one-way ticket. After five years I was able to attend another convention in London and got home for two weeks. After that brief holiday I had another spell of fifteen years in India without going home, but by this time there were friends and homes in India where I was welcome and the truth of Jesus’ words at Matthew 19:29 was manifest. In fact, I am now thoroughly “at home” in India and imagine I would feel like being in a foreign country now if I were to return to England permanently.
Experience shows that it does not really matter where one serves. The whole world is now only a relatively small place. There are people of the New World society in every land and they are as lovable in one country as in another. One soon gets accustomed to the conditions in foreign lands. It is just a matter of making up one’s mind to do it, and then seeking Jehovah’s spirit to enable him to overcome the obstacles. My advice is, Always accept an assignment from Jehovah’s organization and joyfully make up the mind to make a go of it.
—F. E. SKINNER

