Keeping Kingdom Interests First
1 Those who are applying Jesus’ counsel to seek first the Kingdom find that they have to set priorities in their lives. (Matt. 6:33) They also find that following Jesus’ counsel makes it possible for them to overcome obstacles. Commendably, many brothers and sisters with unbelieving family members faithfully continue to keep Kingdom interests first.
2 How convincingly Jesus demonstrated that he put the Kingdom first in his life! When on trial before Pilate, he remained steadfast. (John 18:36, 37) Yes, even as he hung dying on the stake, he continued to stress the hope of God’s Kingdom, saying to the evildoer: “You will be with me in Paradise.”​—Luke 23:43.
COUNTING THE COST
3 Why did Jesus view the Kingdom as so important? He had been sent from heaven to “bear witness to the truth” that God’s Kingdom would rule in righteousness and make it possible for His will to be done on earth as in heaven. What great joy then to share in carrying out Jehovah’s will to transform the earth into the Paradise that was originally purposed! Yes, what blessings are in store for believing mankind under Kingdom rule!
4 Imitating Jesus as an advocate of God’s Kingdom includes carrying a “torture stake” and all that this involves. ‘Counting the cost’ means that a person must be prepared to say “good-bye” to material belongings if they stand in the way of his service to God. (Luke 14:27, 28, 33) At the same time, Jesus encouraged all to be his followers and to share the good news with others. The attaining of everlasting life under Kingdom rule is worth any cost.​—Matt. 13:44-46.
STOP BEING ANXIOUS
5 The passing of 19 centuries has not diminished the need to keep Kingdom interests first in our lives. It is good to ask ourselves if serving Jehovah is really of greatest importance to us. Jesus explained: “No one can slave for two masters . . . You cannot slave for God and for Riches. . . . Stop being anxious about your souls as to what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies as to what you will wear.” (Matt. 6:24, 25) Are we anxious about our souls? Or do we have sufficient faith to follow Jesus’ counsel to seek first the Kingdom, trusting that all these other things will be added?
6 Some brothers have turned down higher-paying jobs because the work schedule would interfere with theocratic activities. Others have had to change employment when there was a conflict with Bible principles. Some employers have made concessions to accommodate Jehovah’s Witnesses who proved to be willing, dependable workers. (Col. 3:23, 24) Surely, a congregation is strengthened in a fine way when elders, ministerial servants, and pioneers set a good example in seeking the Kingdom first.
PLAN NOW
7 Some of you young people will soon be out of school. Are you making plans now for a theocratic career? Do you intend to work full-time for a while before you take up pioneering? It is commendable that you are thinking about a future share in the pioneer work. However, if the Kingdom is really first in your life and your circumstances permit, why not put pioneering first? When secular work takes priority, there is a danger that your heart will become weighed down with anxieties that discourage pioneering.​—Matt. 6:27, 34; Luke 21:34.
8 This world requires much from those who are willing to slave for it. If we simplify our lives and make sure of the more important things, we can experience blessings from seeking first the Kingdom. Rather than succumbing to the enticements of the world, how much better to trust in Jehovah, who knows our needs and has promised to supply them! By keeping Kingdom interests first, our lives will have real purpose, strengthened by the prospect of endless future blessings.​—Matt. 6:32; 1 Tim. 6:17-19.

