Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 6
Song 23
 8 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Emphasize those announcements needing early attention, such as literature offer for month and ordering Yearbook. Discuss talking points in current magazines. Briefly demonstrate magazine presentations that can be used in field service this week.
17 min: “New World Translation Aids Kingdom Seekers.” Question-and-answer consideration. Draw attention to helpful points in Reasoning book and information in Insight. When discussing paragraph 5, have a brief demonstration by publisher using Reasoning book references when offering Bible. Also, demonstrate how Topic for Conversation may be used. Highlight need for preparation.
20 min: Stimulate Interest for Future Calls. Talk and demonstrations. It is important that we be tactful and kind in our ministry. (1 Cor. 9:19-23) Leaving a favorable impression may make it possible for the next publisher who calls to give a more thorough witness. By raising a question as we leave the door, we may be able to stimulate the householder’s thinking so that he will look forward to the next visit. He may even want to continue the present conversation if we ask a question about a subject that interests him. It would be good to use subjects found in the Reasoning book. Questions such as “Was man created by God to die?” (rs p. 98), “Will planet Earth be destroyed in a nuclear war?” (rs p. 112), “What is the purpose of human life?” (rs p. 243), “How can a person know which religion is right?” (rs p. 328), and “Why is there so much wickedness?” (rs p. 427) or any others that would be appropriate locally could be selected from the Reasoning book. Demonstrate concluding a call where no interest is shown. As publisher leaves, he asks a question, mentioning that he will be glad to answer it the next time he calls. Also, demonstrate how a publisher might use the Reasoning book to reply when a householder asks for the answer. Chairman concludes by commenting on need to try to stimulate interest by using thought-provoking questions.
Song 98 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 13
Song 204
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Include encouraging comments about Society’s acknowledgment of contributions. Outline special field service arrangements for November 23.
10 min: “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Improve at Making Conversation?” Discussion with two or three exemplary youths based on Awake! of May 22, 1989, pages 23-5. Emphasis should be placed on ways in which conversation can be started with older people and people in the field ministry. A brief demonstration can be given illustrating suggestions made in these areas.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Helping One Another Start Bible Studies.” Questions and answers. Include two demonstrations of offering Bible study on initial call, using examples given under “Home Bible Study” on page 12 of Reasoning book.
10 min: “Are You Responding to God’s Just Ways?” Talk based on The Watchtower, March 1, 1989, pages 27-9, paragraphs 13-23, emphasizing need to be positive and determined to have a full share in preaching and disciple-making work despite increasing wickedness and injustice.
Song 213 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 20
Song 144
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Demonstrate appropriate presentations of current magazines.
15 min: Enthusiastic talk by well-qualified elder on the subject “Planning Ahead.” Basis for talk is found in October 1, 1978, issue of The Watchtower, pages 18-19, under subheading “Do Not Be Sidetracked!” Emphasize proper planning and not “planning ahead for the desires of the flesh.”​—Rom. 13:14.
20 min: “Planning Ahead for December.” Question-and-answer coverage. With paragraph 5, include interview of one or two who have applied some suggestions made in the article. Demonstrate how experienced pioneer might help a zealous publisher make personal schedule for pioneering this December.
Song 123 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 27
Song 172
10 min: Local announcements. Question Box. Outline arrangements for field service for this weekend and encourage all to share.
20 min: “Keeping Kingdom Interests First.” Question-and-answer coverage by well-qualified elder. Read paragraphs as time permits.
15 min: Local needs or talk based on article “You Can Move Mountains!” in the December 15, 1988, Watchtower, pages 25-7.
Song 129 and concluding prayer.

