New World Translation Aids Kingdom Seekers
1 Isaiah foretold a time when “darkness itself will cover the earth, and thick gloom the national groups.” (Isa. 60:2) That time has come. As “sons of the light,” we have the marvelous privilege of bringing enlightenment to people in our assigned territory. (Luke 16:8) During the month of November, we are going to do this by offering the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures so that honesthearted ones may come “out of darkness into his wonderful light.”​—1 Pet. 2:9.
2 The Bible illuminates the minds and hearts of those who read and apply it. Even secular authorities have recognized its inestimable value. Nations have based many of their just laws on its righteous principles. It gives sound counsel on how to live now, and it outlines what we must do to survive the impending world destruction and gain everlasting life in the righteous new world.​—John 17:3.
VALUE OF NEW WORLD TRANSLATION
3 The New World Translation is a powerful aid in helping sheeplike persons learn the truth. It properly restores Jehovah’s name to the text in both the Hebrew Scriptures and the Christian Greek Scriptures. It omits spurious passages, such as at 1 John 5:7. It correctly renders passages that have been mistranslated by others who were influenced by false religious doctrines, such as the Trinity. It accurately translates the original languages into clear, understandable, modern English.
4 Those who sincerely seek God’s Kingdom will be aided greatly by having and reading their own copy of the New World Translation. We will offer it along with the brochure Should You Believe in the Trinity? for a contribution of $4.30. By now, we have had time to read the brochure carefully. Prepare well for making this offer. Schedule time to review the brochure, looking for talking points to use in offering it. It may well be that the brochure will arouse the householder’s interest. If we make return visits on each placement, Bible studies may be started in due time.
HELPFUL SUGGESTIONS
5 Excellent introductions that can be used when offering the Bible are found on page 10 of the Reasoning book. Also, the information on pages 58-68 and 276-80 can help you answer the objections of those having little knowledge of God’s Word. Additional background information on the Bible can be found on pages 307-13 of Insight, Volume 1. You will find that the time you spend preparing for the ministry will prove to be a blessing to you and to those to whom you speak.​—1 Tim. 4:13, 15, 16.
6 Offering the Bible can be done in a simple, direct manner. For example, you might say: “You will notice that the Bible I have uses language that is easy to understand.” Then reason on the value of God’s Word and how knowledge of it can be of great benefit. Or you could say: “Even though the Bible is the world’s best-seller and many homes have one, many do not read it. Some translations are difficult to understand. So getting a modern-language translation may be just the thing that will encourage you to read God’s Word.”
7 How grateful we can be that Jehovah “has shone on our hearts to illuminate them with the glorious knowledge of God.” (2 Cor. 4:6) Let us apply ourselves during the month of November so that we may succeed in helping others enjoy the benefits of the New World Translation.

