Announcements
◆ Regular pioneers serving since February 1, 1970, will be sent a cafeteria ticket with the March 15 pioneer letter for use at a district assembly during this service year.
◆ Congregation servants and pioneers: It will help us considerably if all pioneer reports are sent no later than the third day of the month and if the pioneer’s name (as listed with the Society) and address appear legibly.
◆ Offer for May: “Then Is Finished the Mystery of God,” with one booklet, for 50c. In making up orders for this book, congregation servants and literature servants can check movement of other 50c publications used in recent campaigns so that they will have enough for the publishers but not be overstocked.
◆ If overseers act immediately, there will still be time to order an increased supply of the special April 15 Watchtower and the special April 22 Awake!
◆ There is still time for the overseer, if he feels it is appropriate, to arrange for those interested in vacation pioneer service during April to get together at a convenient time to discuss their plans. This will afford them an opportunity to work out arrangements among themselves and for the overseer to schedule group witnessing, if necessary, and otherwise offer assistance.
◆ Overseer should promptly mail Memorial report card after special public talk on March 29.
◆ In addition to the bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! in English, they are also available in Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, French and German. The Society has also produced The Watchtower bound volume in Hungarian.
◆ The Society still has a good supply of the 1970 Yearbook and calendar. Determine your immediate needs and order right away. They are an excellent means by which to acquaint Bible students with Jehovah’s organization.
◆ New publications available:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Arabic, Croatian, Motu, Papiamento, Sesotho
Is the Bible Really the Word of God?​—Korean
“Your Word Is a Lamp to My Foot”​—Chinese. Swedish
Rescuing a Great Crowd of Mankind Out of Armageddon​—Chishona, Cinyanja
Man’s Rule About to Give Way to God’s Rule​—Chishona, Ewe, Ga, Twi
The Approaching Peace of 1000 Years​—Korean
◆ Available again in U.S.A.:
What Has Religion Done for Mankind?​—French, Spanish
◆  Out of stock in U.S.A.:
When All Nations Unite Under God’s Kingdom​—English
“Your Will Be Done on Earth”​—Spanish
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Divine Purpose​—Spanish
◆ Congregation servants should report at the bottom of the congregation’s monthly field service report the total number of radio stations located in their assigned territory that are carrying the series “All Scripture Is Beneficial,” also the total number of programs broadcast that month. Only the congregation holding the territory where the station is located should make the report.
◆ The Bethel Home and Factory will be closed on Saturday, April 18, 1970, for spring cleaning. It will not be possible to take tours, or to pick up or to place literature and magazine orders that day.

