Building on a Right Foundation
1 “Therefore everyone that hears these sayings of mine and does them will be likened to a discreet man, who built his house upon the rock-mass.” (Matt. 7:24) Did you notice what makes a man truly discreet? It is not simply hearing, but includes doing. Yes, building things on a right foundation means being active, accomplishing something. We ourselves have been built on the right foundation and now we are anxious to help build others on that same foundation. (1 Cor. 3:10, 11) What a busy month March will be as we keep our ears open to hear what Jehovah so obviously wants us to do and then schedule our affairs to have a good share in doing it!
2 Uppermost in our minds for this month will be the Memorial, to be celebrated Sunday, March 22, after sundown. Knowing this to be the one celebration Jesus commanded his followers to keep, all of Jehovah’s people will surely do all in their power to be in attendance. We should start early in the month making a list of all those we will be helping to attend. Accounts servants can write on slips of paper the names and addresses of all subscribers shown on the Subscription Record sheets since January 1969. Then these slips can be given to study servants for distribution to publishers so these persons can be invited to the Memorial and special talk. Any who formerly associated but have not done so recently for one reason or another should be called on and warmly invited. There being no Watchtower study or public talk on this Sunday, we can devote the entire day to field service and arranging to get interested ones to the Memorial.
3 The special public talk for March 29 will be “The Road Back to Peace in Paradise.” This will be a manuscript prepared by the Society and will contain an abundance of meaty spiritual food. It is good for us from time to time to have an especially nourishing spiritual meal, one that requires close attention and concentration. But while this might be a talk with an abundance of spiritual food in it, do not for a moment hesitate to invite newer ones. There will be a great deal that they will grasp. The chairman in his closing comments at the Memorial can invite all in attendance to return on the following Sunday for this special talk. Then the talk should be widely advertised during the week.
4 We have reached the halfway mark in the Watchtower campaign. We will all want to cooperate with the magazine-territory servant in getting the territory completely and thoroughly worked with the subscription offer if at all possible. Besides offering subscriptions in the house-to-house work, have you offered them to those with whom you do business, to workmates and relatives?
5 It has been a pleasure for us to process so many applications for the vacation pioneer work for March and April. Could it be that these will be the best months yet for vacation pioneering? There is still time to share if you act quickly. Your congregation servant has the application you need.
6 Many blessings are in store for us during the month of March of course really to make these blessings our own it will be necessary to hear, but, more so, to be busy doing what needs to be done. Then we will be building other ministers on a right foundation.
[Blurb on page 1]
Building other ministers on a right foundation.
[Blurb on page 4]
Help others get to Memorial and special talk.

