Presenting the Good News​—Become ‘Intensely Occupied with the Word’
1 After the apostle Paul had done some tentmaking in Corinth with Aquila and Priscilla, the Bible account tells us at Acts 18:5, “when, now, both Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul began to be intensely occupied with the word, witnessing to the Jews to prove that Jesus is the Christ.” Was there good reason for Paul to become “intensely occupied with the word”? Apparently so, for verses 9 and 10 go on to say, “Moreover, by night the Lord said to Paul through a vision: ‘Have no fear, but keep on speaking and do not keep silent . . . for I have many people in this city.’”
2 Do we today have similar reasons for becoming intensely occupied with the word? Yes, because undoubtedly Jehovah still has “many people” in our territories that must be found and taught. We should remind ourselves repeatedly of the urgency of the times in which we live and the need to share as fully as possible in the preaching and teaching work.
3 When one has all day in which to do a job, the tendency often is to take all day. But when one has a great task to perform with only a limited amount of time in which to do it, the situation is different. Then we look for more effective methods of doing the work and we put forth greater effort.
4 A little over a year ago we were introduced to the six-month home Bible-study program. We immediately grasped that this would be an additional effective method to help get the work done in the short time remaining.
5 Now reports from the field show that Bible studies are being discontinued as publishers realize that the student is not making progress. This is entirely proper. There is no reason to spend our time with those who obviously are not really interested in doing something about the truths they are learning. Some publishers still ask, “How can I know whether to discontinue the study when they appear to be interested and still are glad to have me come?” The answer is that we discontinue studies when it is apparent that there is not the appreciation for the truth that there should be. There might be interest in continuing to take in knowledge. But is there appreciation for the knowledge already taken in? Appreciation for Jehovah and the truth is demonstrated by deeds.
6 There are three separate occasions each week for attending meetings or a total of seventy-eight in six months. If the student has not attended one of these meetings, when this is circumstantially possible, can it be said that there is appreciation? Or, if he has not, of his own initiative, or with your encouragement, done additional reading, can it be said that there is appreciation? Or, if he has not felt the urge to tell one of his friends or relatives about the good things he is learning, can it be said that there is appreciation? Each publisher will have to consider the matter carefully and then decide, but these thoughts will help in making that decision. Apparently the matter is being taken seriously by the brothers, because circuit servant reports show that many publishers unhesitatingly discontinue studies when the time comes to do so.
7 Then what takes place? The time set aside for field service is now used in the house-to-house work. Jesus said, “Into whatever city or village you enter, search out who in it is deserving.” (Matt. 10:11) There are many territories in this country that are worked less than once in six months. Additionally, many of these are not worked thoroughly. Surely we can do a great deal more in the ‘searching’ work.
8 What, then, is it that appears to be especially needed now in order to become “intensely occupied with the word”? Very likely it is a good balance between the Bible-study work and the house-to-house work.
9 There are a number of different approaches one can take in the house-to-house work with the starting of Bible studies in view. Note what one district servant writes concerning starting studies on the initial call: “Regarding starting Bible studies I have been having some very fine experiences offering the study first thing in speaking to people at their doors. As I am working mostly with brothers I have had to arrange for a sister to return and in some cases have been able to take them back with me later in the week. I have had more joy in the field as a result, as I feel it has provided a more meaningful ministry for me.”
10 Having this view of the house-to-house work and its place in starting home Bible studies has made it possible for a number of publishers to have more than one study with the public going at one time and thus they are not left without a study when it comes time to discontinue one. Then, too, they keep in touch with those whose study was discontinued to see if appreciation has been built up by the loss of the study or for other reasons.
11 Excellent work has been done recently. What has been accomplished has unquestionably been pleasing to Jehovah. But is it possible for some of us to become even more “intensely occupied with the word,” just as Paul was? This is really what we desire, isn’t it?

