Relying on Jehovah’s Spirit
1 Jehovah’s people are becoming more and more effective in preaching the good news. Personal and family study, attending and participating in congregation meetings, along with experience in various features of the ministry, have made it possible for them to speak the truth with boldness and clarity.
2 But there are some who do not participate as fully as they could in the house-to-house work and other features of the service, apparently because they do not feel as capable as others. In some congregations about one-fourth of the publishers are irregular and quite a number put in less than five hours a month. Why is this so? Possibly their secular education was limited. Or, meeting people is not easy for them. There might be other reasons for their holding back.
3 Should these things cause one to draw back from fully participating in the ministry? Not really! Today, of all days, we should appreciate the part Jehovah’s spirit plays and how it will help us in the witness work that is being done. Jesus said to some of his disciples, “If you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!” (Luke 11:13) Jehovah is capable of making up for any lack that we might have.​—Mark 13:11.
4 The Bible makes clear that the ingathering work being done world wide today is under angelic supervision. Jesus said, “When the Son of man arrives in his glory, and all the angels with him, . . . he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.” (Matt. 25:31, 32) Haven’t we heard and read of many experiences of publishers recently who “called on just one more house” and found someone waiting for a Witnesses to call? Or of a publisher who was persistent in making a back-call or a not-at-home call and found someone just waiting for the truth? Later they said it was as though an angel was guiding them to be sure that particular call was made. The angels can guide less-experienced publishers just as they can guide experienced ones.
5 In fact, the very capable and experienced publishers should also be sure to keep this in mind. Each of us should rely fully on Jehovah. One should not feel that what he is accomplishing is being done in his own strength. It has been observed that some publishers who might be thought to be less effective really have excellent results in the ministry. Often their joy is greater than that of others because of the evidence that God’s spirit was with them in accomplishing something.
6 A circuit servant says that when he works with publishers in the field ministry, instead of just standing there waiting for the householder to come to the door, he will offer a silent prayer in behalf of the publisher, praying that God’s spirit will assist the publisher in presenting the message well and also make the householder more receptive. It is good to ask Jehovah for his spirit before, during and after field service.
7 Another circuit servant says he can tell that publishers who rely heavily on Jehovah’s spirit are happier in their work. Thus, at a meeting for service, while he encourages the publishers to greater effectiveness in the ministry, offering suggestions for improvement, he also encourages them to look to Jehovah to bless their efforts. When the publishers approach the ministry from his standpoint they thank Jehovah appreciatively for the successes they experience and do not feel downhearted or discouraged if there is little or no response in the territory.
8 With this proper view, both the less-experienced and experienced publishers are happy in the service. So, if occasionally you feel somewhat inadequate, prepare to the extent of your ability and then schedule your affairs to have a good share in the work. Success will not come in your own strength. God is the one who causes growth.​—1 Cor. 3:6, 7.

