Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MARCH 8
Theme: Building on a. Right Foundation. (Matt. 7:24) Song 97.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments. Cover appropriate Theocratic News items.
13 min: “Building on a Right Foundation.” Questions and answers.
12 min: Starting New Ones in Field Service. Talk. Member of committee discusses effort that will be made to get new ones who qualify out in March and April. Maybe we can have peak of publishers in March and another one in April. Must plan now. If publisher has question, then before inviting new one into the service, good to talk about it with overseer. Include thoughts from paragraph 27, page 149 of March 1, 1969, “Watchtower.” Maybe read portions or entire paragraph. Refer to “Lamp” book pages 108, 129, 130. Mention, too, the joy all will have in sharing in field service this Memorial month, possibly sharing in establishing a peak in publishers. Be sure none are irregular in March and April.
12 min: “Your Invitation to the Lord’s Evening Meal.” Two servants discuss article in March 15, 1970. “Watchtower.” Their comments show how points in article can be used in inviting interested persons to Memorial. Mention is also made of how publisher and interested one can sit down and just read entire article together. Demonstrate use of Memorial invitation.
 8 min: Accounts servant’s report. Explain arrangement for calling on all subscribers with invitation to Memorial and special talk. Halfway through “Watchtower” campaign, so comment on progress to date in obtaining subscriptions.
10 min: Concluding comments. Congregation report and “How Did We Do in January?” Talking points on current magazines. Invite those who can vacation pioneer in April to get applications now. Song 83.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 15
Theme: Relying on Jehovah’s Spirit. (Luke 11:13) Song 80.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
17 min: “Relying on Jehovah’s Spirit.” Questions and answers. Include experiences, local or otherwise, if time allows.
10 min: Letter from Brother Knorr, on page 1. Read and discuss.
16 min: Getting Interested Ones to the Kingdom Hall. Talk based on following 1970 “Yearbook” experiences: p. 105, par. 1, to p. 106, par. 2; p. 177, par. 1; p. 185, par. 2; p. 201, par. 3; p. 257, par. 2, and p. 284, par. 4. Note, we are talking not only about “inviting” them to Kingdom Hall but “getting” them there. Have brief introduction and conclusion so as much time as possible can be spent on experiences themselves. Be sure to apply main point in experience so it stands out. Applies also to getting them to Memorial and special talk.
12 min: Concluding comments. Make final comments regarding Memorial on Sunday. Mention article “A Memorial Invitation,” in March 22 “Awake!” Use it in final invitations to Memorial. If time permits, can demonstrate welcoming new ones to meeting. Progress to date on subscription campaign. Still time to vacation pioneer in April. Appropriate Announcements. Song 87.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 22
Theme: Become Intensely Occupied with the Word. (Acts 18:5) Song 90.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
17 min: Presenting the Good News​—“Become ‘Intensely Occupied with the Word.’” Discuss with audience. Chairman can comment on some paragraphs and ask questions on others. Be sure to emphasize the point that we need to make good use of our time. If studies are not progressing, then publishers should engage in the house-to-house work. Magazine-territory servant might be called on to give brief, up-to-date report on territory coverage. If covered often, stress need for thorough coverage. Can interview congregation publisher or pioneer who obviously enjoys house-to-house work and is effective therein.
 8 min: Question Box. Possibly congregation servant can discuss this with others on committee.
18 min: “What Are You Doing About What You Have Learned?” This material, in March 1, 1970, “Watchtower,” will be helpful to those with whom we are conducting home Bible studies. Encourage brothers to bring “Watchtower” with them to this meeting. Present as talk, but draw brothers into discussion occasionally. Demonstrate briefly how material might be used to get student to appreciate what he is learning.
Make this positive and upbuilding, not negative. Use it to get students to progress and act; although, if no progress results, we will spend time more profitably in house-to-house work. Paul became intensely occupied with the word, meaning preaching and teaching. They should be progressing toward that end too. Maybe if we get them to meetings in March, the study need not be discontinued.
12 min: Concluding comments. Should have outstanding attendance at special talk next Sunday. All publishers and interested persons should be there. If some were at Memorial, then they are already acquainted with many. If not, an excellent time to invite interested ones for first time. Progress to date on subscription campaign. Song 46.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 29
Theme: Succeeding by Faithfulness in the Ministry. (1 Chron. 22:13) Song 88.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
 7 min: Talk on theme for April. See April 1, 1970, “Watchtower.”
18 min: “What Do You Want Out of Life?” Discuss article in February 1, 1970, “Watchtower.” Best if young publishers can handle this. Mature brother can be assigned to help and rehearse however. He must study material well and be acquainted with it. Young brother might introduce discussion with 3- or 4-minute talk. Other young publishers on platform can be quizzed on part of material, have round-table discussion on part, or just discuss how they feel points helped them to get solid view of proper goals for future. Important thing is for young publishers to see value of points made and how it applies to them.
 8 min: Youthful Publishers Succeed by Faithfulness in the Ministry. 1970 “Yearbook” experiences, p. 128, par 1; p. 178, par. 1. Have very brief introduction and conclusion. Spend time relating or reading experiences and highlighting thought that young publishers have shown they can shoulder responsibility, witness to others effectively, maintain integrity.
12 min: “Do You Make Yourself Available?” Material from February 1, 1970, “Watchtower.” Be sure to tie this in with the two assignments above. Possibly can be handled by father discussing article with family at Monday-night family study. Different members of family voluntarily comment on how certain points apply to them.
10 min: Concluding comments. Song 67.

