





“The Work Is Great”




IT IS time for a very important meeting in Jerusalem. King David has called together all his princes, court officials, and mighty men. They are thrilled to hear a special announcement. Jehovah has commissioned David’s son Solomon to build an extraordinary structure dedicated to the worship of the true God. Israel’s elderly king has received the architectural plan through inspiration and has given it to Solomon. “The work is great,” says David, “for it is not a temple for man but for Jehovah God.”—1 Chron. 28:1, 2, 6, 11, 12; 29:1.
David next asks this question: “Now who volunteers to come forward today with a gift in hand for Jehovah?” (1 Chron. 29:5) If you had been there, how would you have responded? Would you have been moved to support this great work? The Israelites sprang into action. Indeed, they “rejoiced over making . . . voluntary offerings, for they made the voluntary offerings to Jehovah with a complete heart.”—1 Chron. 29:9.
Centuries later, Jehovah set up something far greater than the temple. He established the great spiritual temple, the arrangement for humans to approach him in worship on the basis of Jesus’ sacrifice. (Heb. 9:11, 12) How is Jehovah helping people to become reconciled to him today? Through our disciple-making work. (Matt. 28:19, 20) As a result of this activity, each year millions of Bible studies are conducted, thousands of disciples are baptized, and hundreds of new congregations are formed.
In turn, such growth calls for the printing of more Bible literature, the building and maintaining of Kingdom Halls, and the acquiring of assembly and convention sites. Do you not agree that our activity in spreading the good news is a great and rewarding work?—Matt. 24:14.
Love for God and neighbor and the urgency of the Kingdom-preaching work move God’s people “to come forward . . . with a gift in hand for Jehovah” by making voluntary donations. How thrilling it is to “honor Jehovah with [our] valuable things” and to see how such resources are used faithfully and discreetly to do the greatest work in human history!—Prov. 3:9.



How Some Choose to Contribute to the Worldwide Work
Many today “set something aside,” or budget an amount of money, and place it in the congregation contribution box labeled “Worldwide Work.” (1 Cor. 16:2) Each month, congregations forward these contributions to the office of Jehovah’s Witnesses that serves their country. It is also possible for you to send donations directly to a legal entity that is used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in your country. To learn the name of the primary legal entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in your country, please contact the branch office. The address can be found on www.jw.org. The types of donations that you can send directly are the following:
OUTRIGHT DONATIONS
  Donations via electronic bank transfer, debit card, credit card, or mobile money transfer. In some branches this is also possible using jw.org or another designated website.

  Donations of cash, jewelry, or other valuable personal property. Include a letter indicating that the cash or the item is an outright donation.


CONDITIONAL DONATION ARRANGEMENT
  Donations of cash with the condition that it can be returned if needed by the donor.

  Include a letter stating that the donation is conditional.


CHARITABLE PLANNING
In addition to gifts of money and valuable personal property, there are other methods of giving to benefit Kingdom service worldwide. These are listed below. Regardless of the method or methods you would like to use, please first contact the branch office that serves your country to see which methods are available. Since legal requirements and tax laws vary, it is important to consult qualified tax and legal advisers before choosing the best way to donate.
Insurance: A donation made by specifying an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as the beneficiary of a life insurance policy or a retirement/pension plan.
Bank Accounts: Bank accounts, certificates of deposit, or individual retirement accounts set up as a trust or made payable on death to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in accord with local bank requirements.
Stocks and Bonds: Stocks and bonds donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as an outright gift or by means of a written agreement to transfer on death.
Real Estate: Salable real estate donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses, either by making an outright gift or, in the case of residential property, by reserving a life estate to the donor, who can continue to live in the residence during his or her lifetime.
Gift Annuity: Money or securities donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses under an arrangement where the donor receives a specified annuity payment every year for life. The donor may receive an income-tax deduction for the year in which the gift annuity is established.
Wills and Trusts: Property or money may be bequeathed to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses by means of a legally executed will or by specifying the entity as the beneficiary of a trust agreement. This arrangement may provide certain tax advantages.
As the term “charitable planning” implies, these types of donations typically require some planning on the part of the donor. To assist individuals desiring to benefit the worldwide work of Jehovah’s Witnesses through some form of charitable giving, a brochure entitled Charitable Planning to Benefit Kingdom Service Worldwide has been prepared. The brochure, available in English and Spanish, was written to provide information on a variety of ways that gifts may be made now or later, such as through a bequest at death. The information covered in this brochure may not apply fully to your situation because of tax laws or other laws in your country. By using such methods of charitable giving, many have helped to support our religious and humanitarian activities worldwide and maximize tax benefits. If available in your country, the brochure may be obtained by requesting a copy from the secretary of the local congregation.
For more information, select the link “Make a Donation to Our Worldwide Work” at the bottom of the home page on jw.org, or contact the branch office.


