From Our Readers
Snakebites  As a professional herpetologist, I am responsible for the care and handling of snakes as well as the extraction of their venom. The articles “Would You Like to Meet a Cobra?” (March 22, 1996), “Habu—A Snake to Be Respected” (July 8, 1996), and “Danger! I’m Poisonous” (August 22, 1996) all showed a positive attitude toward Jehovah’s creation. I would like to point out, however, that tourniquets are not recommended for snakebites. Most people are unable to apply one correctly, and some have lost limbs as a result. I strongly advocate the use of a pressure bandage to bind the whole limb with the pressure used to wrap a sprained ankle or wrist. While the venom is kept in the vicinity of the bitten limb, the blood supply is maintained, keeping the limb “alive.”
P. R., England
A number of recent medical textbooks concur on this point, and we thank our reader for this clarification.—ED.
The Raven  I was sick at the time the article “The Raven—What Makes It Different?” came out. (January 8, 1997) Almost nothing could have put a smile on my face. But the ingenuity of the raven made me laugh. Later on, I prepared a school report on birds, using information from Awake! articles. I got a very high mark on it!
J. B., Slovakia
Learning Disabilities  Thank you for the series “Help for Children With Learning Disabilities.” (February 22, 1997) I run a private school and have made photocopies for my teachers. I have also based newsletters on the information in your magazine. Thank you for the balanced way you approach these subjects.
E. G., Honduras
I am the executive director of the largest national nonprofit organization actively working in behalf of children and adults with ADD. You are to be commended for your thoughtful issue on Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD). These are disabling and often misunderstood disorders. We appreciate your acknowledgment that a proper diagnosis and proven treatments are now benefiting many individuals who seek help. Your emphasis on parental love and understanding also sends an important message.
L. R., United States
I have an ADHD son, and it has been very difficult for me to appreciate that he’s not just a trouble-making kid. Many unkind statements have been made, such as, “Why don’t they discipline him?” These statements hurt a lot in view of the fact that I have spent much time trying to discipline him. I hope your explanation of this disorder will help others to realize that a problem really exists and that others could be more encouraging.
M. T., United States
You can only imagine how we, as parents of a learning-disabled child, enjoyed this issue. We especially value your mentioning how this affects the parents and that we have enough of a burden to carry without having to hear cutting remarks from others.
J. C. and B. C., Canada
God’s Friend  Thank you very much for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Become a Friend of God?” (February 22, 1997) It helped me a lot. Now I feel content, for now I understand that Jehovah is my friend! I can’t wait for the article on how to maintain this friendship.a
T. E., Italy
[Footnote]
See Awake! of May 22, 1997.

