Service Meetings for December
Week Starting December 1
Song 57
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Speak About Jehovah Every Day.” Questions and answers. When covering paragraph 4, include comments from School Guidebook, study 16, paragraphs 14-16.
20 min: “The Bible​—God’s Guide for All People.” An elder discusses article along with reasons why everyone should be motivated to examine the Bible. (See brochure A Book for All People, pages 30, 32.) Briefly interview two publishers as to how they have prepared to use the suggested presentations in paragraphs 3-8. Demonstrate one of these for the initial call and corresponding return visit.
Song 165 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 8
Song 58
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
20 min: Why Report What Is Bad? Talk by an elder based on the August 15, 1997, Watchtower, pages 26-30.
15 min: “You Are Missed!” Audience discussion conducted by an elder. Mention meeting attendance averages for the congregation. Invite some to relate reasons why they are refreshed by being together at meetings.
Song 172 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 15
Song 63
10 min: Local announcements. Offer suggestions on how to respond tactfully to worldly holiday greetings. Outline special field service arrangements for December 25 and January 1.
10 min: Local needs.
25 min: “We Ought to Be Teachers, Not Just Preachers.” Questions and answers. When covering paragraph 11, read School Guidebook, study 15, paragraph 11.
Song 174 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 22
Song 138
 8 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to bring January 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry insert with them to meeting next week.
17 min: “The Theocratic Ministry School for 1998.” A talk by the school overseer. Review ways that all can benefit more fully from the school during the coming year. Encourage keeping up with the new “Supplemental Bible-Reading Schedule” each week.
20 min: Preach the Good News Everywhere. Audience discussion of Our Ministry book, pages 92-7, using these questions: (1) Why is the use of our literature effective in spreading the good news? Why should we offer literature at every opportunity? Why is it important to mention the donation arrangement? (2) Why should we be conscious of doing informal witnessing? What are some ways to witness informally? (Invite some to relate experiences of witnessing informally.) (3) Why should the congregation strive for good coverage of its assigned territory? Where territory is plentiful, what is the advantage of having a personal territory? (4) How do we benefit from arrangements for group witnessing? How can we plan our witnessing activity to make sure that we make the best use of our time?
Song 222 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 29
Song 181
 8 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports. If your congregation will change meeting times for the new year, give kind encouragement urging all to maintain regular attendance with the congregation at its new times.
12 min: Review Literature Offer for January. Show older books that the congregation has an ample supply of, and mention interesting talking points that will be helpful in preparing presentations. Include one demonstration. We should continue our efforts to start studies either in the Require brochure or in the Knowledge book.
25 min: Prepare to Attend 1998 District Convention. Secretary handles question-and-answer coverage of convention information in January 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. First, read December 15, 1997, convention assignment letter. Then, after considering paragraph 5 of article, read opening and closing paragraphs of Recommended Lodging List. As noted in the article, emphasize the Scriptural principles for following the Society’s direction in rooming matters. Commend the brothers for cooperating with the Society’s arrangement.
Song 215 and concluding prayer.

