Speak About Jehovah Every Day
1 People enjoy talking about whatever they hold dear to their heart, for out of the heart’s abundance the mouth speaks. (Luke 6:45b) What is close to our heart? The psalmist wrote: “Let my own tongue utter in an undertone your righteousness, all day long your praise.” (Ps. 35:28) He had deep appreciation for Jehovah and counted it a real privilege to speak about God and to praise him on every occasion. Being intimately acquainted with Jehovah, the psalmist had many good things to exult over. (Ps. 35:9) How can we imitate his fine example?
2 Speak About Jehovah in Your Home: Jehovah should be a daily topic of conversation within the family circle. Parents who have a strong love for Jehovah will naturally speak of him in all their activities. (Deut. 6:5-7) As they do, the children will observe that their father and mother live by faith and cherish the law of God. The children will then view the family Bible study as a genuine expression of their parents’ godly devotion.​—2 Pet. 3:11.
3 Speak About Jehovah With Your Brothers: During our weekly theocratic routine, we have many opportunities to feed our minds and hearts on spiritual food. We are never lacking for good things to tell. (Luke 6:45a) Is there a point you gleaned from your personal study or weekly Bible reading that you especially enjoyed? Share it with your brothers, thereby helping them to increase their love for Jehovah.​—Ps. 35:18; Heb. 10:24.
4 Speak About Jehovah to Others: In our everyday dealings with people​—at work, in school, and with unbelieving family members—​it should be readily apparent that our focus in life is the bearing of witness about Jehovah. Rather than be tainted with crude and coarse expressions of the world, our speech should exalt God. Daily, at every opportunity, speak to others about the good news he has commissioned us to preach.​—Acts 5:42; Col. 4:6.
5 As true worshipers of Jehovah, may we daily seize occasions to speak about our incomparable God, Jehovah.​—Ps. 106:47.

