We Ought to Be Teachers, Not Just Preachers
1 It has been observed that “Jehovah’s Witnesses have literally covered the earth with their witnessing.” How has this been possible? Not by human might or power, but by God’s spirit operating upon his servants as they make use of various provisions to fulfill their preaching and teaching commission.​—Zech. 4:6; Acts 1:8.
2 The printed page is an effective means to accomplish our preaching work. Over the years, billions of books, booklets, brochures, magazines, and tracts have been printed and distributed by Jehovah’s Witnesses to help make known the Kingdom good news. Reports in the 1997 Yearbook show that production of literature has reached record levels. To date, over 91 million copies of the New World Translation have been printed. In one year the number of Watchtower and Awake! magazines printed in the United States rose by 7.1 percent. In Germany, magazine production rose by 35 percent. Over one third of the magazines produced there were for the Russian field.
3 Why is so much literature needed? Worldwide, there has been a tremendous response to the encouragement given for us to witness wherever people can be found. With more of us extending our witnessing work​—in public places, on the streets, and in business territory—​greater amounts of literature are being placed with people who show some interest. Many of these have rarely, if ever, had the opportunity to hear the Kingdom message previously. To meet this need, congregations keep on hand a variety of publications for use in all features of the ministry.
4 What Is Our Goal in Distributing Literature? Our goal is not just to place literature. The commission to make disciples involves two aspects​—preaching and teaching. First, we have the privilege of preaching the good news of the Kingdom, making people aware that it is the only hope for mankind. (Matt. 10:7; 24:14) Our Bible-based literature is a time-tested and effective means of stimulating interest and imparting knowledge about the Kingdom to others.
5 Second, if we are to make disciples, we must teach all the things Jesus commanded. (Matt. 11:1; 28:19, 20) Again, the literature plays an important role in our sounding the truth down into the hearts of students, helping them to become disciples.
6 Those who accept literature may be ‘hearers of the word,’ but it is unlikely that they will become doers of it if they are left on their own. (Jas. 1:22-25) Few will ever become disciples unless someone guides them. (Acts 8:30, 31) They need a teacher to help them prove to themselves the truth that is found in the Scriptures. (Acts 17:2, 3) Our goal is to help them progress to the point of dedication and baptism and to train them to become adequately qualified to teach others.​—2 Tim. 2:2.
7 The Greatest Need Is For More Teachers: When we preach, we declare the good news publicly. Teaching, however, involves instructing someone progressively. While preaching makes others aware of the Kingdom message, teaching helps individuals accept the good news and act on it. (Luke 8:15) A teacher does more than proclaim; he explains, reasons with good argumentation, offers proofs, and persuades.
8 As many of us as possible ought to be teachers, not just preachers. (Heb. 5:12a) Distributing literature is a vital part of our work, but achieving the second objective of our ministry ultimately depends upon what we do as teachers. Although we can be pleased when we are able to place literature, to accomplish our ministry fully, we should not view a placement as our final goal. (2 Tim. 4:5) Placements are an effective means of opening the door to opportunities to teach the truth to others.
9 Make Return Visits to Start Bible Studies: All of us have likely placed a number of books, brochures, and magazines, compiling a list of return visits. We should schedule a regular time to go back to stimulate interest. Our main purpose in returning is not just to place more literature but to encourage people to read and benefit from what they already have. How much spiritual progress would we ourselves have made had it not been that someone returned time and again to help us acquire accurate knowledge?​—John 17:3.
10 Follow up all interest with a view toward starting a Bible study either in the brochure What Does God Require of Us? or in the book Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. These two publications present the Kingdom message in a form that is easily understood. The Require brochure contains a well-rounded-out study course, covering the basic teachings of the Bible. The Knowledge book enables one to teach the truth in greater detail, yet with simplicity, clarity, and brevity.
11 The simplified teaching program, as explained in the insert of the June 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry, makes it easy for the teacher to instruct and for the student to learn. Keep a copy of that insert readily available to review teaching methods and techniques that have proved effective. Some of the suggestions it gives involve how to take a genuine personal interest in the student, how much material to cover in one session, how to handle questions that do not pertain to the subject, how both teacher and student can prepare in advance for the study, and how to direct the student to Jehovah’s organization. By following the suggestions, more of us, including newer ones, will be able to conduct progressive studies.
12 Reports of Good Success From the Field: The Require brochure and the Knowledge book have proved to be valuable aids in speeding up the process of making disciples. Upon receiving the Require brochure, a brother in Bolivia immediately used it to start a study with a man. Four months later at the district convention, this student was among the happy candidates for baptism!
13 Many are being moved to dedicate their lives to Jehovah after completing their study of the Knowledge book. In one congregation in Angola, the number of Bible studies conducted by the publishers increased from 190 to 260 and meeting attendance doubled in number from 180 to 360 in only four months after the Knowledge book began to be used in that area. Shortly thereafter, it was necessary to form another congregation.
14 After starting his first study in the Knowledge book, one brother said that conducting it is “simple if the conductor just asks the questions, reads some applicable scriptures, and makes sure that the student understands.” Although he always thought that only very qualified publishers could conduct progressive Bible studies and that he could never do it, he realized that he could, saying: “If I can, anyone can.”
15 It is by conducting Bible studies as a part of our ministry that we accomplish the objective of making disciples. Those who have developed the ability to share in this aspect of the ministry find it truly satisfying and richly rewarding. May it be said of us that we also are “preaching the kingdom of God . . . and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with the greatest freeness of speech.”​—Acts 28:31.

