You Are Missed!
1 From time to time, we may miss one or more congregation meetings, feeling that ‘nobody will miss me; they won’t even notice I’m not there.’ That is not true! Like any member of our physical body, each of us plays a vital role in the functioning of the congregation. (1 Cor. 12:12) Our absence from a weekly meeting can affect the spiritual well-being of others who attend. If you are not there, be assured​—you are missed!
2 The Vital Role You Play: Paul longed to associate with his brothers. Romans 1:11, 12 explains why: “That I may impart some spiritual gift to you . . . that there may be an interchange of encouragement among you, by each one through the other’s faith, both yours and mine.” Likewise, by our comments, our parts on the meeting, and our very presence, we do much to build one another up to continue in a faithful course.​—1 Thess. 5:11.
3 Do you not look forward to seeing others at congregation meetings? You listen closely to their comments and appreciate their expressions of faith. Their spiritual gifts contribute to your upbuilding. If they were not present at the meeting, you would feel that something important was missing. Your brothers and sisters feel the same way about you if you are not present.
4 The Vital Role Meetings Play: The Watchtower once commented on how vital the meetings are for our spiritual survival, saying: “In this strife-torn, immoral world, the Christian congregation is a real spiritual refuge . . . , a haven of peace and love. Therefore, be a regular attender at all of its meetings.” (w93 8/15 11) Each day, we are confronted by situations that drain us spiritually. If we are not careful, we could become so absorbed in our own anxieties that we might lose sight of the more important spiritual concerns. All of us are dependent on one another for the encouragement we need in order to remain united and zealous in God’s service.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
5 Our attendance at meetings is vital. Illness or unforeseen occurrence may keep us away occasionally. Otherwise, let us be determined always to be counted among the congregated throngs who praise Jehovah together!​—Ps. 26:12.

