Animals—A Pleasure Forever
WHAT a vast variety of animals there are, each apparently with different personalities and attributes! Love and compassion for them can be a factor that draws one to their Creator. This was illustrated in the case of Maria.
About three years ago, when Maria was living in Lisbon, Portugal, her beloved dog strayed, and she had this announced over the radio. One of Jehovah’s Witnesses, who was sure that she had seen a dog fitting the description given, contacted Maria. When the two met, they found the dog, and the Witness commented that since Maria was such a lover of animals, she would certainly enjoy living in the new world that God has promised. The Witness explained that humans would then be at peace with all the animals.
Maria accepted an invitation to attend a meeting of the Witnesses. What she heard and saw there stimulated her interest to the extent that she wanted a personal Bible study. As the study continued, Maria was deeply moved by what she learned about Jehovah God and his promise of everlasting life on earth in a new world of righteousness. (Psalm 37:29; John 17:3) Eventually, on February 16, 2002, she symbolized her dedication to Jehovah by water baptism.
God’s Original Purpose
Like Maria, many have been thrilled by the evidence that God’s original purpose for humans to live forever on a paradise earth and to take care of all its animals will eventually be fulfilled. (Genesis 1:28) The Bible says that God “did not create [the earth] simply for nothing” but “formed it even to be inhabited.” Apparently, humans were to enjoy the earth and its animals forever.—Isaiah 45:18.
The Bible further emphasizes God’s resolve to carry out his original purpose to have a paradise earth. “I have even spoken it,” he declares, adding: “I shall also do it.” Again Jehovah decrees: “So my word that goes forth from my mouth will prove to be. It will not return to me without results, but it will certainly do that in which I have delighted, and it will have certain success in that for which I have sent it.”—Isaiah 46:11; 55:11.
Clearly, God’s original purpose was for humans to enjoy an earthly paradise forever. We can be absolutely sure that in time that purpose will be realized. Let’s examine glimpses provided in the Bible of what life will be like in God’s new world. We will see that, indeed, all animals, both domestic and wild, will be at peace with one another and with mankind.—Isaiah 65:17, 21-25; 2 Peter 3:13.
Pets in God’s New World
In Jehovah’s new world, people will be able to touch the furry mane of a lion, to stroke the striped coat of a tiger and, yes, to sleep in the woods without fear of any animal doing them harm. Notice this promise of God: “I shall certainly cause the injurious wild beast to cease out of the land, and they [humans] will actually dwell in the wilderness in security and sleep in the forests.”—Ezekiel 34:25; Hosea 2:18.
Indeed, wild animals will then be in submission, even to little children! The Bible says: “The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, and the calf and the maned young lion and the well-fed animal all together; and a mere little boy will be leader over them.”
But that is not all! The scripture continues: “The cow and the bear themselves will feed; together their young ones will lie down. And even the lion will eat straw just like the bull. And the sucking child will certainly play upon the hole of the cobra; and upon the light aperture of a poisonous snake will a weaned child actually put his own hand. They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain; because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”—Isaiah 11:6-9.
In Jehovah’s new world, there will not be the problem of people being crowded together in large cities that are inhospitable to both them and their pets. True, even today many enjoy their animals, and many exercise balance in their attitude and care of them. But just think of the marvelous prospect of enjoying animal pets forever in a righteous new world! The loving care given them will truly honor the Grand Creator of all living things.
If you have not learned about God’s wonderful purposes—even as animal-lover Maria had not until recently—we warmly invite you to contact the publishers of this magazine or one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, who will be glad to help you to learn about them.
[Picture on page 10]
In God’s new world, animals will be enjoyed forever

