Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Jehovah is richly blessing his people as he promised he would. A veritable “cloud” of people is flocking to the place of safety. (Isa. 60:8) As you know in the United States, 525,007 publishers were in the field service in December, when Kingdom News No. 17 was distributed. And the cold month of January saw 489,496 reporting​—our second-highest peak.
With similar increases in other lands, there is a tremendous demand for Bibles and books. To supply your needs the Brooklyn factory has produced over 18,000,000 books this service year, 44 percent more than it did during the same months last year. Fifteen rotary presses are busy printing Bibles alone! But orders are flooding in faster than we can fill them. During the same time, distributors’ copies of the magazines for the U.S. have totaled 95,727,068​—up 17 percent.
That is why, on February 14, Brother Knorr wrote to all congregations in the United States about Bethel service. We are confident that Jehovah’s spirit will prompt many of you to rise to the occasion. Are you a brother born in 1955 or earlier baptized for at least one year? Are you single and healthy? Are you free and willing to use your time and energies to help in meeting these needs of our brothers world wide?
With response from you brothers who qualify, the demand can be met. As an example: The Brooklyn factory now keeps ten bindery “lines” going daily. Here the books are taken through their final stages and packed. It is there that help is especially needed. Half of these lines are now also running a night shift. You brothers coming in could release experienced brothers to volunteer for the night shift, thus keeping all the bindery equipment busy day and night. In this way we could produce an additional three quarters of a million books a month. Publishers around the world would be grateful to get them. And think what an expanded witness could thus be given!
Can you volunteer? If so, speak to the elders of your congregation, and write the Society for an application today.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

