They Assembled as Joyful Praisers
JEHOVAH GOD’S ancient people were commanded to “become nothing but joyful” when they assembled for worship. (Deuteronomy 16:15) The “Joyful Praisers” District Conventions of 1995/96 surely have given Jehovah’s Witnesses good reasons for joy.
Since this series of conventions began, they have built faith. They have also showed how to find joy in a joyless world. Let us consider the convention one day at a time.
‘Praise Jehovah, You People . . . Be Joyful!’
The above theme of the convention’s first day was based on Psalm 149:1, 2. The discourse “We Have Reason to Cry Out for Joy” examined the application of the prophecy in Isaiah chapter 35. It had a fulfillment in ancient Israel and especially in our day with the restoration of worshipers of Jehovah to prosperity and health in a spiritual paradise. Thus, the conventioners had reason to cry out for joy over what God has purposed for his people in a spiritual paradise and in the forthcoming physical Paradise so near at hand.
The keynote address, “Set Apart as Joyful Praisers Worldwide,” answered the question: What sets us apart from this world? It is our united worship of Jehovah. No matter where Jehovah’s Witnesses live on this earth, they speak and teach in agreement. They rejoice, too, in Jehovah’s grand purpose to sanctify his holy name and to vindicate his sovereignty by means of his Kingdom. How, though, does Jehovah help us to have a place in his purpose? He has entrusted us with the truth of his holy Word. God has given us his holy spirit. He has blessed us with a worldwide brotherhood and an arrangement for pure worship. Our international family helps us to serve Jehovah with great joy of heart.
“Keeping Separate and Without Spot From the World” emphasized the need to avoid the spots of partiality and class distinctions. (James 2:5-9) Some may socialize only with those of a similar background or financial status, neglecting fellow Christians who are poor or disadvantaged. Others may tend to favor those who have positions of responsibility in the congregation. They forget that the greatest privilege anyone can have is that of being a Witness of Jehovah. Therefore, we must not allow worldly tendencies to spot us and to disrupt the peace of the congregation.—2 Peter 3:14.
The talk “Am I Prepared to Get Married?” pointed out that many enter marriage hastily. Some get married to escape a difficult situation at home or because their peers are marrying. However, valid reasons for marriage include a mutual desire to pursue theocratic goals, genuine love, a need for companionship and security, and the desire to raise children. Spiritual training is essential in preparation for marriage. Among other things, there is a need to build desirable qualities by putting on the new personality. It is also wise to ascertain whether a prospective mate gives evidence of having a real relationship with Jehovah and deals respectfully with others. Seeking counsel from mature Christians is also wise.—Proverbs 11:14.
This enlightening discussion was followed by one entitled “Parents Who Find Pleasure in Their Children.” The birth of a child is usually a time of great rejoicing. However, bearing children also brings great responsibility. (Psalm 127:3) Thus, it is important that children be taught to love Jehovah. Parents can do this by regularly speaking about Jehovah to their children and by applying the principles of his Word in the family.
Day one of the convention ended with a surprise—the release of the new brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses and Education. It clearly explains that Witnesses “encourage their youngsters to work hard and to take seriously the tasks assigned to them at school.” This publication also explains the remarkable results of the literacy classes Jehovah’s Witnesses have conducted for many years in Nigeria, Mexico, and other countries. The brochure should help educators to see that we attach great importance to education.
“Always Offer to God a Sacrifice of Praise”
The foregoing theme of day two was based on Hebrews 13:15. The morning program presented a symposium on “Answering the Call to Praise Jehovah.” Age is no barrier to answering this call. Psalm 148:12, 13 urges young men, virgins, old men, and boys to praise Jehovah. Many of Jehovah’s joyful servants have been able to increase their praise. Worldwide, more than 600,000 share in the full-time preaching activity, or pioneer service. More than 15,000 engage in special pioneer work, and upwards of 15,000 are in Bethel service.
“Serving Loyally With Jehovah’s Organization” was a talk that showed that loyalty is vital for God’s servants. To be loyal to Jehovah means to stick to him with devotion so strong that it acts like a powerful adhesive. Loyalty requires that we avoid deliberately violating Bible commands, whether others see us or not. It also requires that we loyally uphold the Bible teachings found in the Watchtower and Awake! magazines as well as all other spiritual food provided by the Watch Tower Society. This talk was followed by the baptism discourse. What joy there was when baptismal candidates gave evidence of their dedication to Jehovah!
The words of Hosea 4:1-3 set the pattern for the afternoon talk “Virtue or Vice—Which Do You Pursue?” Although the world’s view of virtue has deteriorated, Christians must put forth “earnest effort” to pursue moral excellence. (2 Peter 1:5) This begins with how a person thinks. If his thoughts are virtuous, he will speak clean, wholesome, and upbuilding words and will strive to be honest in his dealings with others. Pursuing virtue also involves striving to be understanding and compassionate toward a fellow Christian who is suffering from distress or depression.—1 Thessalonians 5:14.
Another talk, “Guard Against Snares of the Devil,” warned Christians against exposing themselves to demonic influences. In the field of treatment for sickness, Christians need to be watchful of techniques, such as hypnotism, that savor of the occult. Otherwise, what individuals do to take care of their physical health is a personal matter.
The second day ended with a joyous surprise—the release of a new pocket-sized publication designed to help honesthearted persons progress quickly to dedication and baptism. This new 192-page book is entitled Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. The Knowledge book presents the truth in an upbuilding way. It does not dwell on disproving false doctrines. Clarity of language and logical development should make it easy to use this book to conduct Bible studies and help people to get a grasp of the heartwarming knowledge of God.
“Exult, You People, and Be Joyful Forever”
These words from Isaiah 65:18 were the theme of the convention’s third day. The fulfillment of Bible prophecy points to 1914 as the year when this wicked system entered its last days. Hence, the symposium of talks entitled “Joyful Praisers During This System’s Conclusion” held the rapt attention of the audience. The speakers showed how billions are swept along with the greedy and violent spirit of the world. In time, they will come into judgment as part of the world of which Satan is the ruler. Thus, now is the time to make a choice. Which side do we want to be on? Do we want to worship Jehovah and uphold his sovereignty, or are we going to allow Satan to be our ruler by doing the things pleasing to him? All of us should take our stand unequivocally on Jehovah’s side.
The convention’s public discourse, “Praise the King of Eternity!” gave all in attendance solid food for thought. Although the idea of eternity seems beyond the understanding of frail humans, Jehovah fully understands it. “Jehovah is King to time indefinite, even forever,” sang the psalmist. (Psalm 10:16) This King of eternity has opened the way for mankind to enjoy life eternal through his Son, Jesus Christ. (John 17:3) “Yes, we sinful humans may attain to everlasting life through divine education and faith in Jesus’ ransom sacrifice,” said the speaker.
As the convention drew to a close, those in attendance were built up by the final talk, entitled “Joyfully Praise Jehovah From Day to Day.” It was heartening to receive reports of the advancement of the disciple-making work throughout the earth. And conventioners were moved to ‘bless Jehovah all day and praise his name forever.’—Psalm 145:2.
Unspeakable acts of inhumanity rob the world of joy. Nevertheless, individuals with full faith in Jehovah can possess godly joy. As a worldwide brotherhood, Jehovah’s Witnesses can therefore repeat the following words of Psalm 35:27, 28: “Let those cry out joyfully and rejoice who are delighting in my righteousness, and let them say constantly: ‘Let Jehovah be magnified, who takes delight in the peace of his servant.’ And let my own tongue utter in an undertone your righteousness, all day long your praise.”
[Pictures on page 7]
Families will benefit from the brochure “Jehovah’s Witnesses and Education”
[Pictures on page 8, 9]
The new book, “Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life,” presents Bible truths in an upbuilding way
[Picture on page 9]
Many were baptized in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah
[Picture on page 9]
Conventioners were deeply moved by the drama “Honoring Worthy Ones in Their Older Years”

