Kingdom Proclaimers Report
□ THE apostle John said: “Let us love, neither in word nor with the tongue, but in deed and truth.” (1 John 3:18) Jesus said that ‘we should love our neighbor as ourselves.’ (Matthew 22:39) Showing love in deed recommends the truth, as the following experience from Britain shows.
When Pauline visited her mother, who had multiple sclerosis, there was never anyone else there. But on this occasion, as she entered the house, she could hear the washing machine running and someone upstairs using a vacuum cleaner. “What’s happening, who’s here?” she asked her mother. Her mother explained that Jehovah’s Witnesses had come to her door, saw her plight, and stopped to help. After they had done the housework and prepared a meal, they sat down and said: “Are you ready?” “Ready for what?” inquired Pauline. Her mother explained that she had agreed to a Bible study. Pauline was hesitant about staying, but as she had come a long way, she asked if it would be all right for her to join in the study. She enjoyed it so much that she arranged to come the same day every week so that she could attend regularly. Eventually, a friend accompanied her, and now both are baptized. As a result of this original study, ten members of the same family are now Jehovah’s Witnesses! Yes, help “in deed”!
Pastor in New Guinea Responds to the Truth
□ In Jesus’ day some priests accepted the teaching of Jesus. Honesthearted clergymen today also do so, as shown by an experience from the highlands of New Guinea, reported by a circuit overseer. He relates: “A well-educated young man, a Pentecostal pastor, was building a small church quite close to the Kingdom Hall. A brother from that congregation witnessed to him, and he seemed friendly. Shortly after this, I visited the congregation and stayed with the brother just down the road from the pastor’s house. The first evening after I arrived, this young man came to our door with his Bible, along with a large group from his congregation. All wanted to hear the Kingdom message. He asked many questions, and the discussion went on well into the night. Each evening of my visit, he and the other interested ones came to have more of their questions answered. I invited him to the circuit assembly the following week, and he attended in company with the brother who had first witnessed to him. This man continued his Bible study, has left the Pentecostal Church, and is now a regular publisher of the good news.”
Truly, it is God’s will “that all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”​—1 Timothy 2:4.

