Real Help for the Poor
WHEN Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was on earth, he showed genuine interest in helping the poor. Regarding Jesus’ ministry, an eyewitness observed: “The blind are seeing again, and the lame are walking about, the lepers are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing, and the dead are being raised up, and the poor are having the good news declared to them.” (Matthew 11:5) However, what about the many millions of poor people today? Is there any good news available for them? Yes, there is a message of hope!
Although poor people are often ignored and forgotten by the world in general, God’s Word, the Bible, promises: “Not always will the poor one be forgotten, nor will the hope of the meek ones ever perish.” (Psalm 9:18) These consoling words will have their fulfillment when God’s Kingdom, a real heavenly government, replaces all human rule. (Daniel 2:44) As King of that heavenly government, Jesus “will feel sorry for the lowly one and the poor one, and the souls of the poor ones he will save. From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul, and their blood will be precious in his eyes.”—Psalm 72:13, 14.
What will be the living conditions when Christ rules over the earth? Those living under Christ’s world rule will enjoy the fruits of their labor. The Bible says at Micah 4:3, 4: “They will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble; for the very mouth of Jehovah of armies has spoken it.” God’s Kingdom will even solve the problems of sickness and death. (Isaiah 25:8) What a different world that will be! We can believe these Bible promises because they are inspired by God himself.
In addition to giving a message of hope, the Bible helps us to cope with daily challenges, such as how to overcome the lack of self-respect, which may be caused by being poor. A needy Christian knows from his study of the Bible that he is just as precious in God’s eyes as a Christian who is wealthy. The Bible book of Job observes that God “has not given more consideration to the noble one than to the lowly one, for all of them are the work of his hands.” (Job 34:19) God loves both equally.—Acts 10:34, 35.

