Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points.
● Why is mildness needed if God’s Word is to be implanted in an individual?
Because if the soil of an individual’s heart and mind is so hardened by pride as to be like a rock it will not accept the implanting of the Word.​—P. 16.a
● In its modern application, what is the “great tribulation” mentioned at Matthew 24:21, 22, and when is it to occur?
It is the destruction of the world empire of false religion (including Christendom) and the “war of the great day of God the Almighty” at Armageddon against the political allies of Babylonish religion. That “great tribulation” is yet ahead.​—P. 53.
● Why is it not unreasonable to believe in the virgin birth of Jesus Christ?
The Bible reports it as fact, and it is in harmony with other Bible teachings such as the ransom. It is reasonable that the Creator, who designed woman and gave her the ability to produce children, could also cause a woman to become pregnant by means of holy spirit.​—P. 79.
● What is meant at Proverbs 21:2, “Jehovah is making an estimate of hearts”?
The heart represents what a person is deep inside. Jehovah observes, not only what we appear to be on the outside, but also what our hearts are.​—P. 85.
● What is the distinction between “knowledge” and “understanding”?
Knowledge means acquaintance with facts, gained by observation, experience and study. Understanding means to see facts as they relate to one another. It involves seeing the whys of a matter.​—P. 105.
● What is it good for young Christians to remember when they are tempted to do something bad in secret?
They should remember that there is nothing that a person can do in secret that can be hidden from God.​—P. 149.
● According to 1 Corinthians 10:16, what special purpose does the Lord’s Evening Meal serve for the anointed footstep followers of Jesus Christ?
By partaking of the bread and wine they indicate their oneness with their Master and their determination to continue faithful.​—P. 163.
● What does the Bible mean when it says that man was created in “God’s image”?
It means that man was created with the same attributes or qualities that are possessed by God, such as love, thinking ability, a sense of justice, and so forth.​—P. 170.
● What is God’s kingdom?
It is God’s government in heaven with Christ Jesus as king. Its rule will transform the earth into a paradise of peace and happiness for mankind.​—P. 196.
● Why is Christendom’s failure no reflection on Jehovah God?
It merely demonstrates that men and organizations that reject God’s Word are wrong. God has not changed.​—P. 244.
● Why do Jehovah’s witnesses call on people who already have a religion?
God commands that this work be done. Jesus Christ set the example.​—P. 245.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1970.

