From Our Readers
Hair  I appreciated the article “Do You Worry About Your Hair?” (August 8, 2002) I have been a beautician for 14 years. The way you said to brush damaged hair is the way we do it. I am moved when I see just how professional your articles are.
K. K., Japan
As an avid reader of Awake! I must express my appreciation for this article. I started having gray hairs during my early teens. By my late teens, the gray was obvious even from afar. It really made me uneasy. This article helped me to adopt a modest view of my physical appearance while I concentrate more on developing godly qualities.
E. J., Nigeria
Infatuation  Thank you for the “Watching the World” item entitled “Intoxicated by Love.” (August 8, 2002) This article helped me to realize that even in a case where infatuation persists, it is not necessarily a stable foundation for a happy marriage. Advice like this truly can deliver a person from a foolish course!
P. L., Russia
Luaus  I read with interest your article “Let’s Have a Hawaiian Luau.” (June 8, 2002) Several years ago I attended a luau in Hawaii. I felt there were strong religious and spiritistic overtones. Even if luaus today do not involve religious or spiritistic aspects, how are they different from other celebrations that have pagan origins but simply have been adopted by modern cultures to be a family fun gathering?
L. F., United States
“Awake!” responds: As noted there in our footnote on page 24, while the luau may at one time have had a connection with false religious practices, the word now has simply come to refer to a Hawaiian banquet. A specific gathering to which the word “luau” is applied may or may not be appropriate for a Christian to attend. As in all aspects of life, Christians should make decisions that will leave them with a clear conscience before Jehovah God.—1 Timothy 1:5, 19; see also the January 8, 2000, issue of “Awake!” pages 26-7.
Postpartum Depression  Thank you so much for the article “I Won My Battle With Postpartum Depression.” (July 22, 2002) I feel as if this article were written for me. Although I do not suffer from postpartum depression—my husband and I have no children—I have been battling depression and anxiety for one and a half years. I was constantly tired and confused, feeling incapable of making simple decisions. I was afraid to be around people. I could not even go to the grocery store without my husband. I have started on the road to recovery, and I am taking medication. I can see from this article that there is much more I can do. My husband has read the article too, and he has seen how he can be more supportive.
J. R., United States
How thankful I am for the article on postpartum depression! It was after the birth of my third child that the doctors told me I was suffering from severe postpartum depression. Before that, I thought I was going crazy. It was a horrible, dark time for me and my family. I have been taking herbs and vitamins and getting regular exercise, all of which help me to cope as best I can. Please thank Janelle for sharing her story with us.
J. C., United States

