Soon—A Drug-Free World
Can you imagine a world without drug abuse?
UNITED NATIONS Secretary-General Kofi Annan called on all nations to work toward such a world. He declared: “We must take new and bold steps to combat this evil; this scourge which has ensnared too many of our children.”
Although leaders may agree to reduce the worldwide production and distribution of illegal drugs, the challenge is staggering. Hennadiy Udovenko of Ukraine, serving as president of a special session of the UN General Assembly, stated that “with an estimated worth of more than $400 billion a year, the trade in narcotics is one of the most profitable underground businesses, . . . capable of tainting or destabilizing global financial markets.” He added that the drug problem “has become a global phenomenon and no nation can feel secure from this menace.”
It is difficult to envision a world without dangerous drugs. Certainly human governments have proved unable to eradicate them. However, no one can hold back Almighty God from fulfilling his purpose to bring about an earthly paradise in which every emotional, physical, and spiritual need will be satisfied. (Psalm 145:16; Luke 23:43; 2 Peter 3:13) According to the prophet Isaiah, God’s word ‘will not return to him without results, but it will certainly do that in which he has delighted, and it will have certain success in that for which he has sent it.’—Isaiah 55:11.
Hope in those promises can yield dramatic benefits even now. Edmundo, for example, was a drug user. But embracing the Bible’s promise of a righteous new world caused him to reevaluate his life. Edmundo now says: “How stupid I have been in wasting my time.” Desirous of maintaining God’s approval, he is now motivated to stay drug-free. Yes, knowledge of God and his promises can motivate us now to “put on the new personality which was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.”—Ephesians 4:24.
Countless others formerly involved in drug abuse have also come to enjoy an intimate relationship with their Creator. To these the words of the psalmist have special meaning: “The sins of my youth and my revolts O do not remember. According to your loving-kindness do you yourself remember me, for the sake of your goodness, O Jehovah. Good and upright is Jehovah. That is why he instructs sinners in the way.” (Psalm 25:7, 8) How comforting it is for parents of wayward children to know that their children can change! With diligent effort, parents can help their young ones to fight the plague of drug abuse and to get “a firm hold on the real life,” which will be realized in God’s new world.—1 Timothy 6:19.
[Pictures on page 10]
The hope of living in God’s new world has motivated many drug users to change their lives

