





Why the Answer Matters

Why does it matter whether there is a Creator? If the evidence convinces you that an almighty God exists, then you may want to examine the evidence that the Bible is inspired by him. And if you trust what the Bible says, then you stand to benefit in the following ways.



Add meaning to your life

THE BIBLE SAYS: “[God] did good, giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying you with food and filling your hearts with gladness.”​—Acts 14:17.
WHAT IT MEANS: Everything you enjoy in the natural world is a gift from the Creator. You will appreciate these gifts even more when you discover how much the Giver cares about you.



Find reliable guidance for daily living

THE BIBLE SAYS: “You will understand what is righteous and just and fair, the entire course of what is good.”​—Proverbs 2:9.
WHAT IT MEANS: As your Creator, God knows what you need in order to be happy. By examining the Bible, you can learn lessons that can benefit you now.



Get answers to your questions

THE BIBLE SAYS: “You will find the knowledge of God.”​—Proverbs 2:5.
WHAT IT MEANS: Discovering that the Creator exists can help you find answers to fundamental questions, such as: What is the purpose of life? Why is there so much suffering? What happens when we die? You can find satisfying answers in the Bible.



Look at the future with hope

THE BIBLE SAYS: “‘I well know the thoughts that I am thinking toward you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘thoughts of peace, and not of calamity, to give you a future and a hope.’”​—Jeremiah 29:11.





See the videos How Can We Be Sure the Bible Is True? and Who Is the Author of the Bible? on jw.org. You can find each of these videos by typing the phrase “Bible true” or “author of Bible” into the search box.


WHAT IT MEANS: God promises that in the future he will eliminate evil, suffering, and even death. When you trust God’s promises, your hope in such a future will help you face day-to-day problems with courage.
How some have benefited from their belief in a Creator





“I continue to be amazed when I see how God helps us in so many aspects of life. From setting priorities in life to how to deal with conflict to how to become God’s friend.”​—Cyndi, U.S.A.






“My belief in a Creator makes my life fulfilling and rich. It stimulates me intellectually, since there are endless beautiful things to be discovered about him, about his creation, and about his Word.”​—Elise, France.






“Applying what our Creator teaches us in the Bible makes me a happier person. It helps me to be less critical, more attentive, and more content. It has also helped me to be a better father.”​—Peter, Netherlands.






“Formerly, my life was a vicious circle of eating, sleeping, and scrambling to get to work on time. I was in survival mode! Now I see life as an incredibly wonderful gift​—one meant to be enjoyed and nurtured.”​—Liz, Estonia.






“I am an anxious person. But knowing that there will be an end to wickedness, injustice, and suffering helps me to cope.”​—Adrien, France.








See how the Bible answers life’s big questions. Watch the video Why Study the Bible?​—Full Length.





