Announcements
KEEPING FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT OF GOD—Eph. 5:18.
To have God’s spirit is a matter of greatest importance. Jesus showed this by saying that the heavenly Father would be more pleased to give the holy spirit to those who ask him than earthly parents are to give good things to their children. (Luke 11:13) Asking for the filling of God’s spirit precedes acquiring it by “seeking” and “knocking.” We seek and knock by diligent study of the Bible and by applying its instructions to our way of life. Through these means one keeps filled with the spirit of God. The Bible must be studied, as it is inspired and inspiring. The Watch Tower publications are provided to aid such seekers. During May Jehovah’s witnesses will offer people the opportunity of obtaining two bound Bible-study aid books of prepared spiritual food and two Bible booklets on a contribution of $1. Be sure to join in this pleasurable service.
GET A TIGHT GRIP ON YOUR LIFE!
Life is fleeting. How firm is your grasp on the remaining time? None have too long. Even this world’s years are numbered! Do you know what our real condition is today? Do you know that this world is already in its “time of the end” and that it is rapidly approaching the climax? With it the life of every individual is at stake. Every year thousands of persons are realizing the severity of this crisis and are taking steps to ensure their safety for the future. You can too! But do not rely upon the opinions or guesses of men. Turn to the Bible with the aid of the two Bible-study helps “Let God Be True” and You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World. Together they contain over 700 pages of valuable information taken from the Bible. Together they contain over 1,800 Scripture references. These books were especially written to assist thinking persons to find in the Bible the only way to survive the crisis now rapidly approaching. Get a tight grip on your life. Send only $1 for both of these books and receive free two booklets on related subjects. Together with your Bible they will point you to the way of safety.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
June 8: What It Means to Be a Christian. Page 272.
June 15: Living Up to the Name. Page 279.

