Who Will Strike the Deciding Blow?
THE perfecting of an intercontinental ballistic missile could mean that the press of a few buttons would launch a surprise attack that would, in thirty-five minutes, lay waste much of the United States. This first blow could be the deciding blow. This fact is causing a number of persons to argue that America should strike first. Here is what the magazine U.S. News World Report said about it:
“In the missile age, just ahead, must U. S. accept the first blow, which could wipe out its major cities, much of its population and most of its industry, before striking back in event of war? In other words: Can U. S. afford a nuclear ‘Pearl Harbor’? . . . We in America and our allies abroad are faced with the danger of being destroyed because we are unwilling to strike the first blow. For us to strike the first blow is called ‘preventive war,’ and the idea is promptly waved aside as unthinkable. But where is the guarantee against surprise attack? . . . Under all the circumstances, it is desirable to reappraise the real meaning of the ‘first blow’ and to demand an ironclad agreement limiting or abandoning the use of atomic bombs and missiles. Unless such an international agreement is achieved, the free world will be compelled to be ready not merely to intercept the first blow but to deliver our own first blow the moment it is clear that the enemy mobilization has reached the danger point for us.”
These words clearly reveal the heart-chilling fear that rode in with the missile age. It is a fear that can cause complete disregard for moral principles and for cool-headed thinking.
If America were to adopt this policy of attacking first, would that not increase world tensions and fears? Would it not create less trust between the East and the West? Would it not cause either side to jump to their rocket launchers at the slightest sign of suspicion, whether real or fancied? Would it not quickly precipitate World War III with its awful consequences?
At present the United States holds to the declared policy of not intending to attack first. For protection against Communist aggression it keeps its forces on constant alert with planes in the air carrying hydrogen bombs. It depends upon this readiness to deliver a massive retaliatory blow to discourage the Communists from making the first blow. Regarding this General Norstad said:
“An aggressor would have to destroy thousands of places simultaneously every air base, every missile site—to escape retaliation. As we go along and add missile launchers, there will be increasing thousands of places an aggressor would have to destroy in one blow. No aggressor can do this. It is impossible. The retaliatory capability of our Western forces could not be destroyed by simultaneous surprise attack either now or in the future.”
How long this policy will stand before giving way to the attack-first idea remains to be seen, but whether it stands or falls the further development of missiles will mean that the one who strikes first will most likely strike the deciding blow. Even so, retaliation could not be prevented. The end results not only would be bad for the attacker but could create aftereffects that would endanger the entire world.
The wicked influence that urges the nations along their insane path is Satan, the invisible ruler of the world. Regarding this the Bible says: “Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.” (Rev. 12:12) The year 1914 marked the beginning of the last days of his long and wicked rule.
It will only be by the destruction of Satan’s world that peace and security can exist on earth. It is Jehovah God’s declared purpose to destroy it at his appointed time. “The great day of Jehovah is near, . . . That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, . . . And I will bring distress upon men, . . . their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as dung. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of Jehovah’s wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he will make an end, yea, a terrible end, of all them that dwell in the land.” And then in another place Jehovah states that he will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”—Zeph. 1:14, 15, 17, 18, AS; Rev. 11:18.
The day of Jehovah will come with the battle of Armageddon when the things foretold in these prophecies will be fulfilled. That will bring Satan’s rule to an end. Because his time is short Satan seeks to drive the nations into self-destruction. He wants no one to survive.
In spite of what Satan tries to do he will not succeed in making the earth a desolate waste. Multitudes of people who love and serve Jehovah God will live to see Satan’s world brought to an end. They will witness the fulfillment of the divine promise that “justice shall dwell in the wilderness; and righteousness shall abide in the fruitful field. And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness, quietness and confidence for ever. And my people shall abide in a peaceable habitation, and in safe dwellings, and in quiet resting-places.”—Isa. 32:16-18, AS.
No matter whether the East or the West strikes the first blow, it will be Jehovah God who shall strike the deciding blow. His blow at Armageddon will sweep both the East and the West out of existence. It will bring to a permanent end international differences and the heart-chilling fear of surprise attack. It is the only way for the meek to inherit the earth and find “their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”—Ps. 37:11.

