





COVER SUBJECT | YOU CAN BE CLOSE TO GOD
Do You Do What God Asks?




“Whatever you would like, just say the word and I will be happy to do it.” You would probably hesitate to make such a statement to a total stranger or to a mere acquaintance. However, you would likely have no problem expressing such words to a dear friend. Close friends are naturally inclined to do for each other what is asked.
The Bible shows that Jehovah regularly does what he knows will bring pleasure to his worshippers. For example, King David, who enjoyed a close relationship with God, stated: “Many things you have done, O Jehovah my God, your wonderful works and your thoughts toward us. . . . They would be too numerous to recount!” (Psalm 40:5) More than that, Jehovah even does what is pleasing to those who do not yet know him, ‘satisfying them with food and filling their hearts with gladness.’—Acts 14:17.
We gladly do things for those we love and respect

Since Jehovah delights in doing what brings pleasure to others, it is only reasonable to expect that those who want to be God’s friends would do the things that make his “heart rejoice.” (Proverbs 27:11) But what specifically can you do to please God? The Bible answers: “Do not forget to do good and to share what you have with others, for God is well-pleased with such sacrifices.” (Hebrews 13:16) Does this mean that doing good and sharing with others is all that is necessary to please Jehovah?
“Without faith it is impossible to please God well,” says the Bible. (Hebrews 11:6) Significantly, it was after “Abraham put faith in Jehovah” that “he came to be called Jehovah’s friend.” (James 2:23) Jesus Christ also emphasized the need to “exercise faith in God” if we are to enjoy God’s blessing. (John 14:1) So how can you acquire the faith that God looks for in those whom he draws close to himself? You can start by having a regular study of God’s Word, the Bible. In doing so, you will gain an “accurate knowledge of his will” and thus learn how to “please him fully.” Then, as you go on increasing in accurate knowledge of Jehovah and applying what you learn of his righteous requirements, your faith in him will grow and he will draw ever closer to you.—Colossians 1:9, 10.



