Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Using Every Opportunity
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES are known worldwide for their Bible educational work. But they also conduct programs that bring other benefits to society. This public service has been well received, as the following experiences from Ecuador show.
□ The management of a large glass factory wanted to organize a course on family values for their employees. The director of human resources invited several Catholic priests to participate but had no response. One priest told him that so few priests were qualified to talk on the subject that likely no one would be available. On hearing this, a Witness employee made arrangements for a brother who often works business territory to visit the factory.
The very next day, the Witness approached the director of human resources with a proposed study course. A list of subjects was drawn from various publications of the Watch Tower Society. The director was impressed. He selected three topics for discussion—human relations, ethics at work, and ethics in the family. Arrangements were then made to consider the information with the entire work force.
The employees were divided into seven groups of 30 each, after which three qualified brothers presented the information to them. What were the results? Quite a number of employees asked to be called on in their homes, and 216 Bible study aids were placed. The management was so impressed that they asked if the Witnesses could prepare another series of discourses.
□ Recently, Ecuador passed a law that allows religion to be taught in school. A missionary sister called on a female superintendent of a primary school and asked how the new law was working. The superintendent explained that an attempt was made to start a program on the worship of Mary but nothing ever came of it. When the sister remarked that such worship could present problems for non-Catholic children, the superintendent agreed. “On the other hand,” the missionary said, “we have a program for teaching moral principles from the Bible that does not oblige a person to accept a particular religion.” The superintendent replied: “When can you come? The day after tomorrow?” After the missionary showed her the book Listening to the Great Teacher, it was decided that they would consider the chapter “Happy Are the Peaceable.”
Upon her return, the missionary spent three hours visiting seven different classrooms with the superintendent listening in. After a session with a fifth-grade class, one of the students said: “Miss, please be sure to visit the sixth grade. They’re always trying to beat up on us and start a fight!” One teacher remarked: “Violence is such an important topic. We need more time to discuss this matter.”
Arrangements were made for return visits to the school to discuss such themes as obedience and lying. Thus far, the results have been very positive. Now when the missionary sister walks down the street, the children come running to greet her and ask Bible questions. Others proudly introduce her to their parents. Additionally, a home Bible study has been started with two of the schoolchildren.

