“God’s Way of Life” 1998-1999 Convention Is at Hand!
IN THE United States alone, 198 conventions are scheduled from May to September. Likely, one of these three-day gatherings will be at a city not far from your home. In most places, the program will begin each day—Friday through Sunday—with music at 9:30 a.m.
Friday morning’s program will highlight reports on the progress of Kingdom preaching in various parts of the world. And the theme for the convention will be set by the keynote address, “Christ’s Ransom—God’s Way of Salvation.”
In the afternoon the symposium, “Parents—Inculcate God’s Way in Your Children,” will provide suggestions on how to motivate young ones to love and serve Jehovah. The afternoon program will conclude with the talk “Is There Life After Death?”
Saturday morning’s program features the disciple-making work of Jehovah’s Witnesses in three successive parts, “Helping People Get on the Way to Life,” “The Challenge of Reaching People,” and “Teaching Disciples All That Christ Commanded.” At the conclusion of the morning program, there will be provision for new disciples to be baptized.
The opening talk Saturday afternoon, “Serving With Endless Life in View,” encourages us to give prayerful thought to our personal reasons for serving God. The talks “Appreciating ‘Gifts in Men,’ Who Teach God’s Way” and “Personality—Strip Off the Old and Put On the New” present an enlightening verse-by-verse examination of Ephesians chapter 4. Next, fine Scriptural admonition will be provided in the talk “Keep Yourself Unspotted From the World” and in the three-part symposium “Youths—Follow God’s Way.” The afternoon program concludes with the talk “The Creator—His Personality and His Ways.”
Sunday’s morning program features a three-part symposium that will discuss the concluding chapters of the Bible book of Ezekiel as well as their prophetic application. Rounding out the morning program is the full-costumed drama based on the faithfulness of the three Hebrew youths. The convention highlight in the afternoon is the public address, “The Only Way to Everlasting Life.”
Surely you will be spiritually enriched by being present all three days. You are cordially welcome to be at every session, all of which, of course, will be held without charge to you. For the location nearest your home, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses or write the publishers of this magazine.

