Vol. XXXIX 


PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER 1, 1918 


No. 23 


VIEW FROM THE TOWER 

GATHERING WHEAT — BURNING TARES 

"In the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them; 

but gather the wheat into my barn'" — Matthew 13:30. 

MUCH WOKS YET TO BE ACCOMPLISHED 

Many of the dear friends think that "the door is shut," 
and that opportunities for service are at an end, or nearly so. 
The tendency of such an opinion is to make us lax in our efforts
 and to cause us to cease watching for opportunities of 
service. The Society does not share this opinion. It is quite 
probable that the harvest, in the sense that no more will be 
spirit-ibegotten, ended in the spring of 1918, except as some will 
fall out or be rejected, and others take their places. As suggested
 by Brother Russell: 

"We have every reason at present to 'believe that the number
 of the elect is not yet completed, because of many crowns 
having been forfeited. We see coming in, day by day and week 
by week, some who give evidence of the Lord's acceptance, who 
give evidence that the Lord is permitting them to lay down 
their lives in his service. But the time will undoubtedly come 
in the near future when the number of the elect will be complete
. Then only such vacancies as might still occur by some 
falling out would remain. In that case there might be a number
 in the consecrated attitude whom God would accept to 
take the place of some who would drop out. These would receive
 fhe begetting of the holy Spirit, and would find opportunities
 for serving the truth and for suffering for the truth's 
sake."— Z '14, p. 68. 

We remind our readers that the Lord is using the truth, 
the word which goeth forth out of his mouth (Isaiah 65:11), 
to accomplish a variety of works. It has been used (1) to 
gather the wheat, (2) "to bind the tares, (3) to gather the 
clusters of "the vine of the earth/' and (4). to smite Jordan. 


Thus does our Lord call to our attention the two parts 
of the harvest work, both of which are to be accomplished 
by the same reapers. The plain intimation of this text is that 
the latter part of the harvest work is to be the burning of 
the tares. If at one time we had the thought that the burning 
of the tares was no part of the harvest work, and that the saints 
would have no part in the work of "burning" them, a careful 
study of the above text will convince us to the contrary. 

A clear understanding of these two parts of the harvest 
work is necessary at this time ; for the Lord's people are more 
or less puzzled and perplexed as to what to do and how to do 
it. How true is the saying, "Man's extremity is God's opportunity
"! How many times have we seen this principle 
illustrated during the past forty or more years of the harvest 
work! 

Tabernacle shadows came to the church in a time of extremity
. The various volumes of studies in scriptures also 
came just as they were needed. Again, the sermons in the 
newspapers, and the photo-drama as well, were given just at 
opportune times. In 1914 we thought that all the work had 
ended ; but just at the opportune time again the Lord brought 
to our attention another work, that of gathering the clusters 
of the vine of the earth. At the present time another "extremity
" is upon the church; and from every part of the field 
come the queries: ,f What remains to be done? How can I 
do more to serve the truth?" We hope that each toweb reader 
will ask himself these questions, and then act according to 
the answers. Furthermore, we wish to assist any and all to 
the extent of our ability. 


[6358] 


December J, 1918 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(355 356) 


All of this work we believe is an accomplished fact; and it 
is our thought that very soon the Lord will use the truth to 
awaken and enlighten a great company of consecrated believers 
yet in the nominal systems. On this point we quote "that 
servant" : 

"We are not to understand that the harvest is yet wholly 
finished; for there are two parts to the work — the gathering of 
the wheat and the burning of the tares. We might have 
thought that the gathering of the wheat has been accomplished; 
that if our expectations are true, with the end of the Gentile 
Times the number of the very elect would be complete, so that 
no more could enter. We are not positive of this, and we must 
not go by guessing. The latter part of the harvest work is to 
he the burning of the tares, and the waking up of the great 
company and preparing them to go out and purchase the oil 
for their lamps." — 'Matthew 25:8, 9. 

THE PLOWMAN OVERTAKING THE REAPER 

In the above quotation two points should be noticed ; namely 
that the burning of the tarea and the awakening of the great 
company are a part of the harvest work, and that the church 
will do both these works. We continue to quote: 

"In the text of Scripture which speaks of the plowman 
overtaking the reaper, we are to remember that the reaper is 
the Lord, and that the plowman is the great time of trouble. 
This time of trouble will overtake the reaping work and bring 
it to a close. But the time of trouble will go on, the plowman 
will keep on plowing, after all our efforts have ended in respect
 to the reaping. But meantime, before this dark night 
fully sets in, we are to go right on with the work which the 
Lord has put into our hands. The truth is designed, not only 
to perfect the bride of Christ, but to develope the great company
 class and also to be a witness to- the whole world. Any 
carelessness on our part, or any cessation of activity in the 
service of the truth while opportunity yet remains, would in 
our estimation be a great mistake. If we are loyal, the Lord 
will give us far greater opportunities in the future — the blessing
 of all the nations, all the families of the earth. — Gal. 3:8, 
16, 29. TH0SB CONSECRATED BETWEEN THE AGES 

"It is our thought that with the closing of the 'door' of this 
Gospel age there will be no more begetting of the holy Spirit 
to the spirit nature. Any coming afterward to God through 
consecration, before the inauguration of the restitution work, 
will be accepted by him, not to the spirit plane of being^ but 
to the earthly plane. Such would come in under the same 
conditions as the ancient worthies who were accepted of God. 
The ancient worthies came in, no call being opened to them — 
the high calling not being yet open, and the restitution opportunities
 not open. But they freely gave themselves up to God 
without knowing what blessings their consecration would 
bring, except that they had the intimation that they would, in 
the future life, have a 'better resurrection* than would the 
remainder of the world. 

"Our thought is that whoever under Buch conditions as 
these will make a full consecration to the Lord, to leave all 
to follow in his ways, and will faithfully and loyally live up 
to that consecration, may be privileged to be counted as a 
similar class to those who preceded the Gospel asre. We know 
of no reason why the Lord would refuse to receive those who 
make a consecration after the close of the Gospel age and its 
high calling, and before the full opening of the Millennial age. 

THE BURNING OF THE TARES 

"Whether the overcoming saints will have a part in the 
burning of the tare class, is a thought that is not very clear 
at this time. 'This honor have air his saints, to execute the 
judgments written.' All the saints would include, then, those 
who would be living in the world when the judgments would 
be executed, as well as the resurrected saints. Just how any 
living here would have a share in executing the judgments 
written we do not see ; but we are keeping our eyes open, with 
the thought that this may be so. 

"It would seem that the burning of the tares has now been 
going on for some time. That is, some who have professed 
that they were Christians, and who have thought that they 
were Christians, but who have never entered into true fellowship
 with the Lord and become of the wheat class, are to be 
destroyed as tares — shown in their true light. If questioned 
now as to their consecration these will say: 'I am no saint, 
but I wish to be right and just in my dealings as far as possible
,' Thus such will demonstrate that they have not understood
 what it is to be a real Christian. This great war in 
Europe is waking people up to think in a way they have never 
thought before; and now is the time when the real Christianity 
and the counterfeit will be differentiated. Many people will 
come more or less rapidly to recognize this; but there is a 
large proportion of tares that have not yet been burned, and 


the burning will progress to a completion and the true and 

the false will be completely manifested." — Z *15, pp. 269, 270. 

THE WORK CONFRONTING THE CHURCH 

Clearly Brother Russell's thought is this: When professing 
Christians cease to profess to be Christians, and come to 
recognize and acknowledge themselves to be "worldings," they 
will then have been destroyed (burned) as tares. Surely nothing
 can bring their false position to their attention but the 
truth; and just as surely this work is in the future, and the 
church is to do it. And not only this, but another future 
work, which is to beours, is the bringing of the truth to the 
attention of a modern worthy class, who consecrate too late 
to obtain "the prize of the high calling," but who will be 
counted in with the ancient worthies, and as a reward for faithful
 service during the Millennium will get the spirit nature 
at the end of that age. (Z '13, pp. 52, 53) Many are asking 
why it is, if the harvest ended last spring, that since that 
time numbers are consecrating themselves and giving every 
evidence of appreciating the truth and the privilege of sacrifice
. The above thoughts in re the second part of the harvest 
work and the quotation from Brother Russell (Z '14, p. 68), 
will clearly explain the matter. 

It would be entirely proper for all who will constitute 
the great company class to come to an appreciation of the truth 
and to symbolize their consecration. The ancient worthies also 
appreciated the privileges of sacrifice, and jlid sacrifice equally 
as much as do the church. So these modern worthies must also 
sacrifice, if they would share with the ancient worthies in the 
grand Millennial work, and at its close reap the glorious reward
 of the spirit nature. 

Brethren, if these things are true, there is a great work 
just ahead of us — a work in behalf of the great company, a 
work in behalf of the modern worthies, a work in behalf of 
the tare class, and one of witnessing to the world, sowing the 
seed of the new dispensation. It is apparent that all this work 
will properly and logically be done after the full number of the 
little flock is made up. What a wonderful incentive to activity, 
and how thankful we should be for the privilege! Surely the 
present is not the time to hesitate nor to argue over nonessentials
, but for earnest endeavor. 

PRESENT OPPORTUNITIES OF SERVICE 
For some time the opportunities of service have been considerably
 restricted, and may continue to remain under these 
restrictions for a time. While awaiting the Lord's "due time" 
for these great future services, let us not overlook the fact 
that there are still some present opportunities. It is still possible
 to sell the six volumes of studies in the scriptures. 
Many are doing this successfully. There are still many opportunities
 for persona] work, in a conversational way; and 
this can be supplemented with some literature. The Society 
is preparing some neat little tracts in booklet form, suitable 
for mailing or for handing to people. These will be reprints, 
and will as a rule contain but one article each. 

There are multitudes of parents who have lost loved ones 
in battle or by disease, whose hearts can be made glad bv 
"Where are the Dead?" "The Resurrection of the Dead," "Refrain
 thy Voice from Weeping," etc. Many letters inquiring 
about spiritism are coming into the office now. Some tracts 
are being prepared on this subject. What a grand privilege 
it will be to give to those inquiring just the information they 
need respecting the great "scourge" which is soon to "overflow
" in the earth. The time used for tract distribution in the 
past, and the money formerly spent for public meetings, may 
be profitably used in mailing literature. Telephone directories 
will furnish the names of thrifty intelligent people in city, 
town and county. Then again, we are of the opinion that 
meetings for the public can be held in many places, especially 
in rural districts — country schoolhouses, etc. 

Orders for the above mentioned booklet-tracts may be sent 
in at once. Please do not order more than you can and will 
use. These will be forwarded prepaid, and you can refund the 
carriage charges. Here are our opportunities. Let us, dear 
brethren and sisters, by the Lord's help take fresh hold of the 
work. The people never needed the truth more than they do 
now. It is the only thing that will keep them from despair 
and infidelity! People were never more ready to receive the 
truth! People realize that some great changes are at hand, 
and many wish to understand them. 

THE LOBD'g JUDGMENT 8 

"Wben the judgments of the Lord are abroad in the earth, 
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness [truth, 
justice]." The effect of the Lord's judgments on the human 
heart is disciplinary, breaking down pride, arrogance and rebellion
. When the divine judgments are in the earth, his dealings
 with mankind will be entirely changed. In the past God 


[6359] 


(357-358) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


has permitted man to succeed measurably in his aims and 
plans ; and so the prophet wrote: "Now we call the proud 
happy; yea, they that work, wickedness are set up; yea, they 
that tempt God are even delivered." (Malachi 3:15) But 
in this judgment time "the righteous will be exalted," and 
the wicked abased. 

Under these retributive disciplines, thwarting their plans 
and punishing their evil deeds, men's hearts wi5 speedily be 
mellowed, humbled; and they will begin to inquire the reason 
why these things are so. Their reason will return, as did that 
of Nebuchadnezzar, after his seven years of insanity. Even 
now, the Lord's judgments are operating thus. Never before 
have people been inquiring as now. The opportunity is ripe, 
and the people are hungry. For a long time there has been a 
famine in the land (Amos 8:11) ; and now the Lord is saying 
to us in no uncertain tones, "Give ye them to eat." 

It is the desireof the Watch Tower office to do everything 
possible, not only to encourage the friends everywhere to 
greater zeal and activity, but to bring the entire work of the 
Society up to the highest point of efficiency. T>o Colporteur 


sisters are averaging the sale of over 400 volumes per month. 
They sell chiefly Vols. 1 and 4. Their experience gives an estimation
 of what can be done. In all, there are about two hundred
 Oolporteuns in the service. Some are having excellent 
success by specializing on the Scenario; and some, by grouping 
Vols. 1 and 4. 

In order that the Pilgrims might render more effective 
service, and might more accurately represent the Society and 
its attitude toward religious and secular questions, a four-day 
conference of all the Pilgrims was held recently in Pittsburgh. 
Everybody present pronounced it a wonderful event, probably 
the first of its kind. A great number of questions came up for 
discussion; and unanimous concurring conclusions were arrived 
at. We think that great and permanent good will result from 
this conference. The suggestion was made that a similar conference
 be at least an annual event. The Society feels sure that 
as a result the Pilgrims can render a better service, and give 
a better answer to all questions re the Society and its work. 
May the Lord bless the work and "labor of love" of his saints 
everywhere! 


VARIATION IN THE APPLICATION OF CHRIST'S MERIT 

"He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our$ only, but also for the sins of the whole world." — 

1 John 2:2. 


Adam, the father of the human race, came under sentence of 
death because of his wilful disobedience to God, his transgression
 of the divine command. He alone was tried; he alone 
was sentenced ; for his posterity were as yet unborn. But hie 
children, the whole human family, came into the world under 
this death sentence. By heredity they partook of father Adam's 
imperfections, and thus shared his. penalty. Hence they could 
have no relationship with God 1 , except as in his providence he 
might make some arrangement by which the death penalty 
could be lifted from the human race. 

Immediately after the fall of our first parents, God gave 
a vague intimation that such an arrangement had been made. 
In pronouncing the curse upon the serpent that had beguiled 
mother Eve, the Almighty declared that the seed of the woman 
should yet bruise the serpent's head. (Genesis 3:15) Two 
thousand years after man's fall into sin and death conditions 
God made a covenant with Abraham in which he gave hope of 
the ultimate blessing of all mankind. Still later, he accepted 
the children of Israel as his chosen people because they were 
the natural seed of Abraham (Deuteronomy 9:5,6; Genesis 
22:15-18) ; and by the Law Covenant instituted through Moses 
at Mt. Sinai he arranged that the nation of Israel should enter 
into relationship with him as a house of servants. 
MEBIT TO BE GIVEN TO THE WORLD 

At the beginning of the Gospel age God declared his arrangement
 whereby a certain class, children of Abraham by 
faith, might come into special relationship with him through 
Christ Jesus. Then the divine purpose ae to the seed of Abraham
 was made clear. (Galatians 3:8,16 t 29) All along it had 
been God's purpose that this seed should be composite — 144,000 
in all ; and as but a remnant of the natural seed of Ahraham 
had proven worthy, the remainder of the spiritual seed were 
to be chosen from among the Gentiles, hitherto aliens from the 
covenant of promise. The choosing and the fitting of this class 
to be the future blessera of the world has been the purpose of 
the Gospel age. 

God has also arranged for the whole world to come into 
covenant relationship with himself during the age to follow 
this Gospel dispensation. By the acceptance of the merit of 
him who "by the grace of God. tasted death for every man," -all 
may be recovered, if they will, from the curse of death reBting 
upon the human family. (Hebrews 2:9) These facts are 
recognized by all who are careful students of the Word of God. 
The question is: "How is it all to be done? In other words, 
How can Christ utilize his merit on behaH of the church class 
in the Gospel age and also apply the same merit on behalf of 
the world in the Millennial age?" 

We answer: No member of the human family could be 
brought hack into harmony with God except through the payment
 of the ransom price for hia sins. Neither Adam nor any 
of his children could return to relationship with God save as 
a satisfaction had been made that would cover the sins of the 
one seeking fellowship with God. But it was just as easy for 
the Lord Jesus to redeem the whole world as to redeem one 
man; for all died in Adam. (1 Corinthians 15:21,22) Hence 
all will be redeemed from that Adamic death and awakened 
from the tomb because of the sacrificia.1 death of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. All mankind are to have a full opportunity for 
being raised to perfection of life. The death of Jesus is to 
offset the sentence of death that came upon all mankind 
through Adam's disobedience. But the benefit of the death of 


Christ is not to be made effective to^all of the human race in 
the same way or during the same period of time. — Rom. 
5:15-21; 1 Tim. 2:4-7. 

God's dealings with the church class, taken out from among 
mankind and returned to himself in advance of the remainder 
of the world, is distinctly different from his dealings with mankind
 at large. For a wise purpose he has chosen to impute 
the merit of the sacrificial death of Christ Jesus for this part 
of the race before it is applied for the residue of men or for 
Adam himself. The purchase price in the hands of Justice is 
sufllcient for all, but as yet it is not applied for all. To the 
church at the present time there is merely a temporary imputation
 of the merit, to be effective during the period of the 
church's imperfection through the fallen flesh; whereas to the 
world there will be a giving of the merit of Christ's sacrifice 
of his humanity. 

THE MERIT IK JESUS ALONE 

The church of Christ, as members of his body, are to be 
granted the great favor of being with Christ Jesus a part of the 
world's sin-offering; hence the necessity of their being first 
dealt with by God, The merit of the sacrificial death of the 
body of Christ, which is to 'be applied for the world, is the 
merit of Jesus, imputed to the church for this purpose. The 
blood of the antitypical goat is to be applied for "all the people
" (Leviticus 1(1:33) ; "but the blood of the antitypical bullock
 gives it virtue. Consequently all the merit is the merit 
of Jesus alone. Some see this matter in part; but some see 
it not at all. We wish to make the subject clear to all who 
are sincerely seeking to be guided by the counsel of the Lord. 

When our Lord Jesus ascended on high, he presented to 
the Father the full merit of his sacrifice. Tt was all-sufficient 
for the sins of the whole world; for "he is the propitation 
(satisfaction] for our sins, and not for ours only [the 
church's], but also for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 
2:2) But his merit was not applied for the whole world then; 
for God's "due time" for dealing with the world as a whole had 
not yet come. Hence to have applied the merit of Christ Jesus' 
sacrificial death for mankind at that time would have been 
to start the whole world on a new basis. Then from that time 
onward all their sins would have been extraordinary— beyond 
what had been atoned for; and because mankind had no mediator
, God's justice would have cut them off from all hope of 
future life; for "Christ dieth no more." (Romans 0:9-) Having
 had their share of the merit of Christ, they could have 
no further opportunity, and would have been without hope of 
future salvation. 

NOT GIVEK, BUT IMPUTED. TO THE CHURCH 

For this reason the whole world has been left up to the 
present time without actual atonement for their sins. But 
after the church shall have passed beyond the vail^and their 
sacrifice shall have been finished, our Lord Jesus will make a 
permanent application of this merit, which is all his own, on 
behalf of all men. Then God will turn the whole world over 
to Redeemer, the New Covenant will go into effect, and our 
Ix>rd will take unto himself his great power and reign for a 
thousand years for the restoration of the world which he purchased
. When this great work shall haw been accomplished, 
and mankind shall have been restored to the original perfection
 of Adam, then the Redeemer will have given to mankind 
everything which he bought for them by hia death on Calvary. 


[6360J 


December I, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(358-559) 


Let us reiterate: Before giving the blessings of restitution 
to the world of mankind, the Savior uses the merit of his sacrifice
 in a special way in the interest of the small proportion of 
the race which become his church. When he ascended to the 
Father after his resurrection, his merit was used for this class. 
(Hebrews 9:24) The church, like the remainder of mankind, 
were born under the death sentence. But on learning of God's 
provision for such, this class indicated their desire to come 
into covenant relationship with the Father, to follow Christ 
Jesus in the way of sacrifice, to lay down their lives as he had 
done. They declared their desire to walk in Christ's footsteps. 

The Father could not, however, accept them in their natural 
fallen condition. But as they presented themselves in sacrifice
, they came under the arrangement made especially for the 
Gospel age, when our Lord "appeared in the presence of God 
for us," the church. Thus they came individually under the 
merit of Christ's righteousness, imputed to the church in this 
age, covering their unavoidable weaknesses and imperfections, 
and canceling all their sins of the past. Then they were accepted
 of the Father through the Advocate (1 John 2:1) and 
begotten of the holy Spirit as new creatures in Christ. — 2 
Corinthians 5:17. 

Our Lord did not give his merit to this class, but only 
imputed it to them. He placed to thpir credit whatever each 
one needed ; and throughout their earthly sojourn his imputed 
merit covers all their daily transgressions, their trespasses 
which are unwittingly committed, if they confess their shortcomings
 and apply for this cleansing. 

NO RESTITUTION FOB THE SPIRIT-BEGOTTEN 

Jesus does not give the church restitution. If he were to do 
so, it would make us perfect human beings, as he was when on 
earth. But this is not the Father's plan. Our Lord merely 
imputed restitution to us at our consecration, in order that it 
might at once be sacrificed. Thereafter the imputation of hi3 
merit is sufficient for us day by day, so that justice is satisfied 
at all times, as far as the church is concerned, if this merit 
is daily applied for. Otherwise our trespasses remain charged 
up against us. 

What we consecrate, if we do it intelligently, is all that we 
have"; first, our will, then our time, our strength, our influence
, our mind, our body, our means — all that we have and 
are. All things pertaining to the present life are to be sacrificed
 on the altar of consecration with our Lord Jesus; and 
thereafter we are to walk faithfully in his steps. In other 
words, we are to give up, relinquish, that which our Lord's 
merit imputed, or aocoumed to us; that is, perfect human nature
 and all of those restitution blessings which would otherwise
 have been ours with the remainder of the world. Therefore
 as men we have nothing left. In this sense of the word 
we give ourselves up in the same way that our Lord Jesus 
gave himself up. The only difference is that he was a perfect 
man, while we are imperfect. But he covers us with the robe 
of hi3 righteousness, bo that we are able to stand before God 
as though we had received full restitution. Our Redeemer 
covers us as members of the Adamic race who have laid down 
all earthly hopes for the more glorious hopes held out to us 
as members of the ibody of Christ. 

Thereafter we are wholly in the hands of our Lord Jesus. 
He is our Head, and the One who ia to bring us off conquerors, 
yea, more than conquerors. Day by day we yield ourselves 
into his hands, that he may give us such experiences as are 
necessary in order that we may be enabled to fulfil our covenant 
of sacrifice — (Psalm 50:5) He stands bound on our account; 
and his merit cannot be diverted from the purpose for which it 
lias been appropriated — for the church, 

THE GREAT COMPANY'S POSITION 

The great company are also included in the class for whom 
Christ utilized his merit when he ascended on high after his 
resurrection ; for all of the church class are called "in one 
hope of their calling," But since this large portion of the 
church which is to constitute the great company do not sacrifice
 their earthly interests faithfully, as they covenanted to do, 
their flesh must be put to destruction. The great time of 
trouble which is due at the close of this Gospel age is the 
"great tribulation" through whieh this large class must pass 
in order to "wash their robes and make them white in the 
blood of the Lamb." (Revelation 7:14) These fail to keep 
their record clean before the Lord day by day. They fail to 
examine themselves properly and to perform dairy their vows 
to the Lord. They are lacking in the spirit of sacrifice and are 
fearful of the reproach of tiie cross. 

But if this great company whom no man can number will 
submit sympathetically to the destruction of the flesh according
 to the divine provision granted them in mercy, they will 
be purified and will come up to a place of service before the 
throne. If, however, they do not submit, then the second 


death will be their portion. But in either case they will have 
lost their place in the throne; for thi3 position of special 
honor is reserved for those who faithfully "follow the Lamb 
whithersoever he goeth." (Revelation 14:1-5) The great 
company's future work for the world will be as servants of the 
royal priesthood, the body of Christ. 

SUMMABY OF THE MAT TEE 

Ihiring the present time, then, God's favor to the church is 
through and on account of the virtue of the imputed merit of 
Christ's sacrifice. Ours is a justification by faith, which in the 
divine arrangement serves every purpose for us. But with the 
world it will be different. God's arrangement for the world^is, 
we see, a justification by works. Nevertheless, this justification
 is through the merit of Christ; for mankind can never 
attain to perfection through their own works alone, but only 
through the assistance which Christ will give them. Neither 
could they atone for their sins of the past. These must be 
canceled through the merit of their Savior Jesus Christ. The 
application of his merit in the beginning of the Millennium will 
make satisfaction for the sins of the world, for every child 
of Adam. 

This satisfaction for the sins of the world corresponds to 
the church's experience. Our sins are forgiven; the slate is 
wiped clean for us when our Lord Jesus imputes to us his merit. 
At the beginning of the Millennium the slate will be wiped 
clean for the world as a whole. Nevertheless, there will be an 
individuality of dealing; for except by personal co-operation no 
one will- come to perfection. With the church in the present 
time, it is not sufficient that our sins are forgiven, and that 
we have Christ's merit imputed to us at the start. We need 
the continual covering of our blemishes by the merit of his 
righteousness. And so it will foe with the world. Their sins 
will be forgiven by means of the application of the merit of the 
itedeemer at the beginning of the age; but they will need the 
merit throughout the Millennium, until perfected and able to 
live up to the requirements of the divine law. 

The merit of Christ was used aB the ground, or basis, on 
which the church is justified by faith. This same merit will 
be used by the Father as the means through which the world 
will attain to actual justification. It will be through the merit 
of Jesus that they will be enabled to reach perfection. That 
merit will be applied for the forgiveness of sins that are past; 
and through the sealing of the New Covenant by his blood, 
mankind will be covered while they are emerging from the 
bondage of sin and death. 

The Almighty was under no obligation to do this for the 
children of Adam. It is all of divine (mercy, which is not 
exercised apart from the principles of justice, but in harmony 
with them, so that justice and mercy are linked together in 
God's wonderful plan of redemption for mankind. 

We should not use the word impute in respect to the world ; 
for the Bible does not so use it. The world will have life as the 
result of Christ's merit, not by imputation, but by direct 
application. The merit of Christ secures the human nature; 
and the human nature secured by the merit of Christ, is to 
be given to the world. In the case of the church, however, 
the merit is merely imputed to cover our blemishes up to the 
time of our glorification, when we shall have our new body, in 
the likeness of our Lord. — 1 John 3:2. 

WOBE OF THE OHEIST TWOrOLD 

The world will have an awakening, and the assistance of 
the royal priesthood in the resurrection process. Their resurrection
 will mean much more than the mere awakening from 
the tomb. To awaken the world, to bring them back to conscious
 being and to leave them there, would be merely to brin£ 
back the conditions which prevail now. Men would soon go to 
striving and fighting again. Even if the devil were chained, 
there is enough of the Satanic spirit entrenched in fallen mankind
 to make this a world of strife. So the work of our Lord 
Jesus will be not merely an awakening of men to life, but also 
a work of uplifting, of helping them out of the weakened condition
 and the evil environment in which they now are through 
the Adamie fall from divine favor. 

The work of. the Christ will not be finished, therefore, until 
at the end of the Millennium he will have sriven all mankind 
full opportunity of rising to perfection; This blessing is to 
come first of all through the kingdom of Messiah, which is to 
direct the affairs of the world. This kingdom will be in the 
hands of the Christ, Jesus the Head and the church which is 
the .body. The Lord has promised, however, a secondary blessing
; namely, that these kings shall also be priests, to instruct 
and help mankind, to heal all the weaknesses and sicknesses 
of humanity. So in the establishment of the kingdom the 
work of the Christ will have only begun. Tt will reach its perfection
 in the work of the royal priesthood, which will bring 
mankind back to the image of God, lost through Adam's disobedience
, but redeemed at Calvary. 


[6361] 


LOVE ANEW 


OJi, how oft we lack the Spirit 
In the little things we tell, 

And how oft we lose the import 
Of the lessons conned eo well ! 

It is good to grow the graces 
Of the Spirit in our head; 

But 'tis grievous if our actions 
Prove the fruit thereof is dead. 

Love exults to see another 
Being honored at her side, 

And delights to be the agent 
If the Lord be glorified. 


Love prefers whatever method 
God may use, nor questions why; 

And for brethren of the Master 
Love would even dare to die! 

Love will suffer inconvenience 
And will have no time to rue; 

But with power and prompt obedience 
Love will seek to serve anew. 

Love, thou bond of our completeness, 
Love of God and Christ our King, 

I^ad us heavenward, to our homeland, 
There of love anew to sing! 


THE DRAWING OF GOD NOT THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 


"As many as are led by the Spirit of Qod, they are the sons o 

hath sent me draw him."- 

Very careful scrutiny, very close study, is needful In 
order that we may be able to rightly divide the Word of 
Truth. The statement of our first text is quite restricted in 
its application. The term "as many" implies that only those 
who are led by the Spirit of God are God's sons. This being 
so, how few are the sons of God! This declaration of the 
Apostle Paul makes the matter of sonship a very limited 
one. And this is in harmony with the entire Bible, which 
points out that the number of the sons of God in the world 
is only a "little flock." 

Throughout the Jewish age, God was the Instructor and 
Guide of his people through Moses and the prophets ; but they 
were not sons of God, and none of them hud the Spirit of 
God in the begetting sense. The Spirit was not yet given in 
this sense, nor could it be until our Lord had provided the 
ransom price, had been raised from the dead, and had ascended 
to the Father. During the Master's earthly ministry it could 
not come, as the Scriptures say, "because Jesus was not yet 
glorified." (John 7:39) In other words, the Spirit of God, 
as referred to in the New Testament as the possession of the 
consecrated believer in Christ, is, primarily, a special in* 
ftuence, a power, coming from God upon a special class in a 
special manner Bince a particular events— not before that event. 
The holy Spirit came, was manifested on the day of Pentecost
, so that it might stand out in our minds as separate 
and distinct from anything that had occurred before that very 
remarkable event. 

WHY SO FEW UNDERSTAND THE BIBLE 

Secondly, the Spirit of God is the mind, the disposition, 
which the holy influence or power of God operating in the 
child of God produces in the individual. This spirit, dieposi* 
tion, of God, grows and developes as it feeds upon the Word. 
The Spirit of God is variously called the holy Spirit of God, 
the spirit of Christ, the spirit of truth, the Bpirit of love, the 
spirit of a sound mind, the spirit of sonship. These terms all 
represent the one possession of the saints of the present age. 
These are a special company who have taken up their cross to 
become followers of Christ, and who, on this account, are recognized
 of the Father and begotten of the holy Spirit. This 
Spirit of God, the Spirit of truth, so illuminates and permeates 
the Bible that the revelation of God may be properly understood 
only by those who have the holy Spirit. They only are able to 
comprehend the deep things of God, which cannot be understood
 save by a supernatural illumination of the mind. While 
others not having this Spirit might get some light from the 
Bible, only the spirit-begotten can get the real essence of the 
truth; for they have this spiritual illumination. Thus, these 
can understand things that are hidden from all others. 

We call to mind Scriptures which speak of a leading of 
God's servants prior to the Gospel age, and hence prior to the 
begetting of the holy Spirit. In ages preceding the present 
age, there were a few faithful servants of the Lord who were 
guided by the holy Spirit ; that is, they obeyed God as he made 
his will known to them. They had the spirit, the disposition, 
of righteousness. God's Spirit, his power, operated, too, in a 
mechanical way upon the holy prophets, causing them to utter 
not only words from God to natural Israel and to certain individuals
 to whom they were sent, but especially to declare prophetically
 messages designed of God for the Church of Christ, 
which was to be called out centuries after their time. See 1 
Peter 1:10-12. 

But the leading of the Spirit spoken of in the text under 
consideration is a leading which is not the result of personal 
revelations from God, visions and dreams, visible ministrations
 and messages from angels, etc., as with God's servants of 
old, but is the inspiration of the holy mind to which the sainta 
of the present age have been begotten by God's power within* 


/ God." "No man can come unto me except the Father which 
Romans 8:14; John 6:44. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES THE FATHER'S DRAWING 

During our lord's ministry on earth he made a statement 
which we think has been misunderstood by many. It reads: 
"No man can come to me except the Father which hath sent 
me draw him." Let us remember that these words were 
spoken by our Master before his death, before the holy Spirit, 
therefore, had come upon any. Some, not having noticed the 
Scriptural teaching that the holy Spirit did not come until 
Pentecost, and then only upon consecrated believers in Christ, 
have asked, "Was it not the drawing of the holy Spirit that 
Jesus spoke of? Does not the holy Spirit operate upon the 
heart previous to one's acceptance of Christ, and is it not this 
that draws him to Christ?" We answer, No. It is not the 
holy Spirit in the sense of our text. The holy Spirit is given 
only to believers. It comes only after they have accepted 
Christ, when God receives them as sons — not before. 

What, then, shall we call that which went before? We 
reply : We should call it what the Bible calls it — the drawing 
of God. A« the Scriptures speak in a specific manner of some 
being led of the Spirit, we would not be wis© to confuse ourselves
 or others by speaking of it in a different way, but 
should bear in mind that none can be led of the Spirit until 
after he is begotten of the Spirit. But the Bible speaks of 
this desire to come to the Father as the drawing of God ; and 
we would best speak of it in just this way. The drawing 
whieh the Father gives, and which many nave experienced, 
seems to be a natural drawing of our human hearts along the 
lines which belong to the natural man, and is something which 
wo possessed before we were begotten of the holy Spirit. It 
is nothing supernatural. There is no Scripture for such a 
thought. It is our own mind that draws us. 
HOW MEN ARE DRAWN TO GOD 

To explain : When God created Adam, naturally he would 
love his Creator. Naturally he would desire to be obedient to 
God, to worship and serve him. These impulses were all natural
 to him because -he was in a natural condition, a pure 
condition. It is sin that has made man unnatural. But although
 sin has entered in and perverted the original character 
which God had given Adam, yet we find in the human heart 
certain longings for God, even among the depraved. They 
would prefer to be in perfect harmony with him. 

All men have degenerated from the likeness of God; but 
the desire for worship, the desire for righteousness, the desire 
to be in accord with God, is much stronger in some than in 
others. When the message of salvation is presented, some feel 
an inward response. This is the impulse of a heart from whieh 
the original likeness of the Father has been less obliterated 
than it has been in many other hearts. This natural impulse 
was God's original gift to man, a heart sentiment which 
naturally drew men to their Maker. Hence this drawing which 
still remains is properly called a drawing of the Father. 

Among mankind there are some who have not lost their 
reverence, whatever else they may have lost in Adam. Or perhaps
 they may have the organ of conscientiousness or appreciation
 of justice well developed. These qualities draw or incline
 their possessors toward God; and they feel that they 
cannot be happy without him. This is the drawing influence. 
This, influence may be illustrated by the effect of a magnet. If 
a quantity of steel filings were scattered throughout a box 
of sawdust, and a magnet were held close to the surface, the 
steel filings would immediately respond to the attraction of 
the magnet. On the other hand, the Bawdust would not be 
affected; nor would the steel filings respond to any other influence
 than that of a magnet, exercised either directly or indirectly
 upon them. 

Man was created in the image of God. The fall into sin 
has greatly marred that image, but no human being is totally 
depraved. AH have unbalanced brains, however, some iu one 


(360-361) 


[6362] 


December 1, 191$ 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(361 363) 


direction and others in another. When the truth comes into 
contact with those whose organ of veneration or of conscientiousness
 is less impaired, they are drawn to investigate it, 
with the hope of being brought closer to God. But those whose 
organs of conscientiousness and veneration are more impaired 
do not have this experience. Such are not drawn" unto God, if 
haply they may find him. Those who are without this drawing influence
 are not to be blamed, however; for they were born 
under these unfavorable conditions. Those who are reverential 
by nature are favored in that whoever would come to God 
must exercise faith in Christ as their Redeemer; and without 
this faith there can be no blessing. 

HOW TO COME TO THE FATHER 

God does not draw any one by any other means than this 
original power of the human heart which he implanted at man's 
creation, and which has not been wholly lost by the fall. This 
is the drawing which each one of us has realized who has come 
to Christ. In proportion as one desires righteousness and has 
the natural ability to exercise faith, in that same proportion 
he is drawn to Goa\ He feels after God, if haply he might find 
him. (Acts 17:27) We who have responded to "the Gospel call 
had the desire to come before we did so. That desire was something
 which awoke in us; but it was there before it was awakened
. Perhaps some great sorrow or calamity aroused in the 
heart a feeling that we might take our grief 'to God, brought 
us to realize our need of him. 

Then perhaps the thought earner "God will not hear me." 
This would be a very proper conclusion for one who is a 
stranger to God. This soul, feeling after God, learns* that 
there is no way of approach to God except through the Redeemer
 whom he has provided. From the Word he receives 
instruction, learns how to come to the Lord. Just as Cornelius 
the centurion needed instruction and St. Peter was sent to him, 
so we need help. We need to learn the terms upon which God 
will receive us. As we ponder over the Word of God, we hear 
our Savior say: "I am the way, the truth and the life, No 
man cometh unto the Father but by me." — John 14:6. 

We truly believe that thousands upon thousands of honest 
souls have been turned away from God on account of the 
creedal misrepresentations of his character. Some have been 
drawn to him in various ways, however; such as the PhotoDrama
 of Creation, etc. Not long ago we learned of a lawyer 
who had felt that he had lost his hold upon God entirely; but 
as the result of seeing and hearing the Photo-Drama he drew 
nigh to God and made a consecration of himself. The hearing 
of the true message of salvation as presented in the Bible has 
led to the Ix>rd and to an earnest Christian life many who 
had previously been repelled through false teachings. 

Not until one has the desire to come back to the heavenly 
Father is he ready to be directed to the great Advocate or to 


be directed by him; for when we come to this Advocate he 
very plainly tells us: "I can receive you upon only one condition
. Take up your cross and follow me." It would not 
be worth while to explain about the narrow pathway to any 
one who manifests that he has no drawing toward God. 
DRAWING OF GOD NOT WORK OF HOLT SPIRIT 

We see, then, quite a marked distinction between the drawing
 of the Father, that drawing which comes from the remnant
 of the original image of God not so far obliterated as to 
find no response to the Gospel message, and that which in the 
Bible is called the Spirit of God, The life and the testimony of 
a consecrated child of God often cause a drawing toward God 
or a feeling of reproof in one who is not a believer. The effect 
of the holy Spirit in this Christian life thus acts indirectly 
uipon others who are sufficiently honest and sincere to be affected
 by this testimony; but it never acts from within, in the 
case of the unconsecrated. 

Reverting to our first text, we repeat that only those who 
have made a definite covenant of sacrifice with the Lord have 
the spirit of God, only those are the sons of God. And even 
these are not yet sons in the fullest sense of the word; but 
they shall be when they receive their resurrection change. 
Those who are of thi3 class shall be sons of God on the divine 
plane, if they remain faithful unto death. 

During the incoming Milennial age the world of mankind, 
as they come into harmony with God's arrangements, will be 
coming nearer and nearer to the standard of sonship, human 
sonship. Christ will then do the drawing, and will draw all 
men to himself. (John 12:32. See also Scripture Studies, 
Vol. 5, p. 414, last par., and p. 415, par. 1) In the end of 
that age those who have met the conditions fully, who have 
come wholly into harmony with the laws of the kingdom of 
Messiah, will have attained full sonship. They will then 
have the Spirit of God which was lost in Adam, not in the 
sense that the Gospel church has it, however — a begetting and 
birth to a new nature— but in the sense that they will be in 
full accord with God's disposition of justice, of righteousness, 
of love. 

A THOUSAND YEARS HENCE 

This will then be the disposition of all of mankind who 
come into harmony with the laws of the Messianic kingdom. 
They will be earthly images of God. They will have fully 
regained the condition of perfect mentality and morality, of 
God-likeness, which Adam possessed when he was perfect, plus 
the crystallized character for righteousness which Adam failed 
to develop. All this great blessing the world will receive 
through Christ. In the Scriptures our Lord Jesus is called 
"the Everlasting Father" (Isaiah 9:6) — the Father who gives 
life everlasting to the world, but not to the church, however. 
The church receive their life as new creatures from the Father. 


JOSEPH CARES FOR HIS KINDRED 

[The last paragraph of this article was reprinted from article entitled, "Joseph's Last Days," published in issue of April 
15, 1894. Paragraphs 2 to 4 inclusive were reprinted from article entitled, "All Things Work for Good to Them," published 
in issue of May 15, 1913. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "The Close of a Noble Life " published in issue 
of October 15, 1901. Please see the articles named.] 


FAITH VICTORIES 

December 29. — Hebrews 11:8-22. 


FAITH BEFORE CHRIST CAME GOD'S DEALINGS WITH THE ANCIENT WORTHIES PROVIDENTIAL CARE OF THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL— 

THEIR EXPERIENCES OBJECT LESSONS FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAEL FAITH SINCE CHRIST CAME! — ANTITYPES OF JEWISH TYPES. 


"This 'is the victory that overcometh the 
We are living in a day when faith is greatly discounted, in 
a day when people seem disposed to declare: "I do not care 
what a man believes, if only his life be honorable." Practically
 this means that faith is of no consequence. Those who 
thus hold usually put honor of men as the highest goal. Their 
sentiment, translated into plain English, would be: "With all 
your getting get money and prosperity; for without these, no 
matter what you believe or whom you worship, you will never 
prosper in the present life, where success is the only goal now 
recognized by an increasing number of people." This argument 
appeals to the majority of our race. 

The Bible standpoint, however, is the very reverse of this. 
God's Word puts faith first, and builds character upon that 
foundation. God declares that no human being can do perfect 
works. Hence he has not made works the standard. Faith 
is the divine standard; and God assures us that whoever has 
the proper faith must of necessity have works which will 
correspond with his faith. In line with this principle, we note 
that God's favorites of the Bible have all been men of faith. 
Their faith did not make them perfect, nor were their works 
always acceptable in God's sight; but he punished them for 


world, even our faith." — 1 John 5:4. 

evil works and rewarded them for their great faith. Thus we 

find in the Bible record that some of God'3 favorites committed 

grievous sins and made serious mistakes; yet nevertheless 

they maintained themselves in God's favor by reason of their 

faith. 

Of all religious books ever written or read, the Bible is 
perhaps the most candid. It tells of the mistakes and the sins 
of the very characters which it holds up as models and examples
 of men after God's own heart. Yet the Bible leaves no 
room for any one to assume that God loves wickedness or that 
the friends of God are the depraved of mankind. Quite to the 
contrary, the highest possible standards of righteousness in 
word, in deed and in thought are inculcated; and we are 
distinctly told that full acceptance with God can be only along 
the lines of truth and righteousness. 

God tells us that all mankind are sinners by nature. He 
declares that we could do nothing to clear away our own guilt 
and the sentence which stands against us as members of the 
fallen raoe of Aidam. But he also tells us that he purposes to 
adjust the matter satisfactorily for us; and hence that our 
responsibility is not for what we cannot do } but for what we 


[6363] 


(363-364) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


can do. He assures us that the foundation for our noblest endeavors
 will lie along the lines of confidence in him. This confidence
 -ho calls faith. He assures us that without faith it is 
impossible to please him; And this lie has shown us in all the 
lessons of the Bible. 

Let us look into the past, and vote the method by which 
God sought his peculiar people. The first proclamation of the 
divine purpose respecting humanity was made to Abraham. 
After Abraham had manifested some faith, God gave him 
further tests. When in obedience to these tests Abraham left 
his native land and went to Canaan, he manifested so much 
faith that God called him friend, and made to him the very 
first revelation of the divine purposes in respeot to mankind. 

Abraham knew that there was a curse upon the entire race, 
under which the whole creation was groaning, going down to 
the tomb; and God's declaration to him was that the time 
would come when the curse would be removed and a blessing 
come instead. To Abraham this meant that instead of wasting
 away in death men would be restored from their dying 
condition and brought back from the tomb. 

THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT 
This was a wonderful proposition, even for God to make. 
Yet with childlike faith Abraham believed the message. God 
declared to him that because of his faith he and his posterity 
would be greatly blest, so that through him as a father would 
eventually come children who would accomplish the great 
work of rescuing all mankind from the power of Satan, sin 
and death. The briefly epitomized statement of all this was 
in the words: "In thy seed shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed." — Genesis "12:3. 

What did it mean for Abraham to have faith in that promise
? Assuredly it meant that henceforth his mind would take 
in a large horizon, the world of [humanity instead of merely 
his own immediate family, his flocks and herds and his nearest
 neighbors. It meant that if God would so honor his posterity
 Abraham would seek in everything to co-operate with 
God and that great promise. 

For many years God tested Abraham's faith. Yet he still 
believed. After Isaac was born and as yet had no child, God 
directed that this son of the promise, the one in whom the 
covenant centered, should be sacrificed. What a test of faith! 
What a grand development of faith Abraham had acquired 
when he was ready to obey the divine voice, accounting that 
God was able to raise Isaac from tlhe dead! Oh, for such a 
trust in God! Oh, for such appreciation of divine power! 
What could not be accomplished in the world through the 
divine message if such faitn prevailed among God's children! 
What would God not do for all who would thus trust him ! 

It was the same with Isaac and Jacob. They trusted that 
same promise, and it influenced the whole course of their 
lives. It made thorn more like God. It shaped their every 
interest. Although they understood practically nothing of 
how God would accomplish so great a blessing, nevertheless 
their faith laid bold upon that fact. From their posterity 
God would raise up a holy people to be his agency, his channel, 
for instructing the world, ruling the world, uplifting the 
world, resurrecting the dead and bringing mankind hack to 
all that was lost through Adam's disobedience. 

If their faith had been weaker, they might have had plenty 
of opportunities for stumbling. If they had been more worldly
-wise, they might have said: "How can God do this thing 
and yet be just? Having once pronounced a sentence, how 
can he clear the guilty?" But their faith wavered not. In 
their hearts they said: "God has promised; and what he has 
promised he will do; and he will have his own way of accomplishing
 it." 

ANOTHER COVENANT MADE 
By and by the nation of Israel as a whole was called the 
people of God. The nation as a whole entered into a covenant
 with God through Moses, the mediator of the Law Covenant
. Israel was impulsed by faith — faith in the promise made 
to Abraham that God would use his posterity in the blessing 
of all of Adam's race, both living and dead. 

The covenant made at Sinai pledged the people of Israel to 
be a holy nation, to keep God's law blamelessly. God covenanted
 that in that event he would fulfill in them the promise 
made to Abraham. But he knew that imperfect human beings 
could not keep ihis perfect law. Nevertheless he would let 
them try; he would let them learn that lesson; and through 
it he would give instruction to the angels respecting his own 
righteousness. Through it he would also give instruction to 
spiritual Israel, whom he would develop later, and through 
whom the blessings would actually come. This is explained 
by the Apostle Paul, who says: "The Law Covenant was 
added because of transgressions until the promised seed should 
come." — Galatians 3:19. 


In other words God started this work with Israel in a 
typical manner long centuries before the real spiritual Israel 
would be developed. But he did not thereby do injury to the 
people who had covenanted to keep the law, but who were 
unable to do so. On the contrary they as a people were blest 
by their endeavors to keep the law, as well as by the chastisements
' which came upon them because of their failures and 
their lack of faith. But God especially blest all of that nation 
who shared Abraham's faith. In addition to Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob the Apostle Paul could enumerate a large number 
who pleased God because of their faith long before Christ, 
the spiritual seed of Abraham, came. Those ancient worthies, 
although they will not be the seed of Abraham in the highest 
sense, on the spirit plane, will be the seed of blessing on the 
earthly plane, the channel through which the heavenly blessings
 will ultimately be extended to all the nations of earth. 

What was it that impulsed the Jewish people during all 
those centuries past? W T as it not faith that God would fulfil 
the promise made to Abraham? It surely was! Moreover, 
that promise still actuates Buch of the Jews as have not lost 
their faith j that is, such of Abraham's descendants through 
Jacob as are still Jews. Those who have lost the faith of 
Abraham are no longer related to the promise in any sense 
of the word; for the promise was according to faith, 

St. Paul speaks sympathetically of the Jewish nation, in 
respect to that promise which God originally made to Abraham
. He says: "Unto which promise our twelve tribes, 
instantly serving God day and night, hope to come." (Acts 
26:7) And all Jews, in proportion as they still maintain that 
hope, may continue to expect a realization of all and more than 
they have dreamed of, in God's due time. 

THE LONG-PROMISED SEED OF ABRAHAM 

The coming of Christ did not change the divine purpose, 
and therefore did not change the faith of God's people. Jesus 
and the apostles believed and taugbt the very Gospel which, 
according to St. Paul, God preached in the beginning to Abraham
. (Galatians 3:8) The apostolic message also was that 
all the families of the earth were to be blest through Abraham
's seed. But there was an additional feature then due to 
be proclaimed and to be believed ; namely, that God had begun 
to provide this seed of Abraham, the Messi&h ; that God had 
sent the Logos, his Son, into the world to become the seed 
of Abraham on the spirit plane and eventually to fulfil every 
feature of the original promise. 

All the Jews were in expectation of the Messiah, but they 
did not ail have the proper faith. ^ Therefore God preferred 
to permit some of them to remain in a measure of blindness 
on this subject, while others were granted a special anointing 
of their eyes of understanding, their eyes of faith. To this 
class Jesus said: "To you it is given to know the mysteries 
of the kingdom of heaven," the Messianic kingdom, through 
which the seed of Abraham is to bless all the families of the 
earth. Then came another step of faitih. Instead of reigning 
in triumph to dispense blessings to the world aaa result of 
hi3 sacrifice, he ascended to heaven. How was this to be understood
? 

God's answer through the apostles was that "the faith once 
delivered to the saints" was the same still, but that now under 
the guidance of the holy Spirit they were to understand that 
the Messiah would not be one person, but many; that not 
Jesus alone would be the seed of Abraham ; but that Jesus as 
the Head and the church as his members, or body, would be 
that seed. St. Paul says : "Ye brethren, as Isaac was, are the 
children of promise." In this figure Jesus was represented 
by Isaac's head, while the church was represented by Isaac's 
body. It has taken the entire Gospel age to develop the body 
of Christ, which is the church. 

Under another figure Jesus was represented in Isaac, and 
the church in Rebecca, Isaac's bride. According to this figure 
the antitypical Isaac has entered into glory, but awaits the 
development of the antitypical Rebecca. At the appointed 
and appropriate time our Lord will come, the seed of Abraham
, and receive his bride unto bimself ; and they twain will 
be made one. Then through the one, the Christ, will come 
through the Messianic reign the blessing promised to Abraham
 nearly four thousand years ago: "In thy seed shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed." 

This is "the faith once delivered to the saints," "the hope 
set before us in the Gospel," the faith that God will use the 
seed of Abraham to bless all humanity, and the hope that by 
faithful perseverance and trust we may become joint-heirs 
with Jesus, the Redeemer, in all the glorious inheritance of 
the Messianic kingdom, for which God's people long have 
prayed: "Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on earth even 
as it is done in heaven." 


[63G4J 


QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST 


IN RE-APPOINTMENT OF ELDERS 

Question: — What should be the attitude of a competent 
elder who fails of re-election? 

Answer; — The appointment to the office of elder ia by vote 
of the ecclesia, the company of the Lord's people, and is to 
be the voice of the church. We believe that the proper attitude
 for each one should be that of willingness to accept the 
voice of the ecclesia, the church, implicitly. Whoever has 
become a member of the congregation by casting in his lot 
with the others has thus become subject to the rules that 
represent the controlling majority, whether it be a majority* 
of one or a larger per cent. Having done this, he should 
seek to continue in this attitude, whether chosen as elder or 
whether another is chosen. 

Very frequently a congregation makes the mistake of selecting
 for elder a brother who does not have the proper qualifications
. This sometimes means dissatisfaction on the part 
of some of* the congregation, and often leads to the breaking 
away of some to form another class. We think that this is 
not the wise course; for if the original class made a mistake, 
the Lord is able to overrule it for good. Therefore those who 
withdraw lose some experiences which would be invaluable. 

We are not always sure, however, that in such cases the 
congregation has made a mistake. How can we know but 
that the Lord has some lesson to teach in this matter? If we 
have asked the divine blessing on whoever would be the 
choice, we should abide by that choice. Tf the one not chosen 
has the ability to present the truth properly and knows a 
number of places where he can be used and useful, we think 
the brother should take advantage of whatever opportunities 
may present themselves. He need not leave the class, however
, but could perform whatever service came to his hand. 
Perhaps he could use his time and talent in class extension 
work, not feeling restricted in this direction because he was 
not elected elder. He might go out and find opportunities for 
service. So to the brother not elected or not re-elected the 
change in elders might mean that the Lord was thus pointing 
out another field of usefulness. The Lord's providences might 
be leading him out for wider usefulness and influence. 


ADAMIC DEATH TO CEASE GRADUALLY 

Question; — When the Millennial kingdom of Christ begins, 
will the Adamic death be at an end? 

Answer; — While the reign of Christ will be one of righteousness
 unto life, we are not to understand that Adamic 
death will be at an end as Boon as Messiah begins his rule; 
for the Scriptures declare that "he must reign until he hath 
put all enemies under his feet." (1 Corinthians 15:25, 26) 
It is understood that during the thousand years of the Messianic
 kingdom the people will be more or less in the Adamic 
death condition, and will rise gradually out of Adamic imperfection
 and death to the perfection of human nature. 

In Isaiah 35:8 we read: "A highway shall be there, and a 
way, and it shall be called the way of holiness; the unclean 
shall not pass [all the way] over it; but it shall be for these" 
[i, e., for the unclean, those under Adamic condemnation.] 
The evident thought is that a way of escape is opened up for 
the unclean, whereby "the ransomed of the Lord shall return, 
and come back to Zion," and "obtain joy and gladness," and 
"sorrow and sighing shall flee away." Again, in Zechariah 
13:1 we read: "In that day [the Millennial dayj there shall 
be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants
 of Jerusalem for sin and unclean n ess," The thought 
in these texts is that of a gradual cleansing away of the 
Adamic condemnation, See also John 3:36: "He that believeth
 on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth 
not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth 
[remainethj on him." 

WHY THE CHURCH MUST SACRIFICE 

Question :~~S'mce our Lord's sacrifice was sufficient for 
the sin of the whole world, why should the church be asked. 
to present their bodies a living sacrifice also? 

Answer; — During the Gospel age an invitation has gone 
forth from the Father asking those who so desire to become 
partakers with our Lord Jesus, first in his sufferings, and then 
in the glory to follow. As our Lord was called to sacrifice, 
so those who accept the divine invitation to follow his steps 
are also called to sacrifice. "If we suffer with him we shall 
also reign with him." This is the only way that we can be 
with him on the spirit plane. If we retain the human nature, 
we can never get to heaven. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


ENCOURAGING TO COLPORTEURS 

Dear Sirs: — 

Being at home for a few days, while my ship was unloading 
and loading, and looking through the family bookcase I came 
upon one of your works, entitled "The Divine Plan of the 
Ages/' and found it very interesting, about the best book I 
have seen. I want to ask the present price of the rest of the 
Volumes 'mentioned in .the fly leaf. They are there quoted at 
two dollars; but I notice that the book is dated 1912, and the 
price may have advanced since. 

I do not know whether your Association is in the habit of 
answering questions ; but if so, do you think that I, a young 
man of twenty-two years, would, if I mend my ways and lead 
a good Christian life, have a chance of becoming one of the 
"little flock'* your great book mentions? Or does this "little 
flock" refer to the ministry or to the monastic form of life ? I 
would be very thankful to you for solving this question for 
me. One of my favorite Psalms is the ninety-first; and I 
carry a copy of it at all times. It sure is comforting when 
a fellow doesn't know when he is going to find a watery grave. 
Thanking you in advance, I am 

Yours truly, D. L. E. — Mass. 

THE REJOICING FAR EXCEEDS THE SUFFERING 

Dear Friends: — 

Greetings in the name of our dear Lord! 

Just a few lines to refresh your memories of our continued 
love and interest in you all and the work at the Bible House, 
which work we think the Lord is still supervising, while the 
world is rocking to and fro as a drunken man. How blessed 
it is to be on the mountain top viewing the things below, still 
hiding in the Rook of Ages, safe in the arms of Jesus, still 
feeding at the Lord's table! This is still bountifully supplied 
with nourishing food for the hungry. How the Lord is causing
 all things to work together for good to all his little nock! 
And while we suffer with his people in a way, yet we rejoice 
with them in that they are accounted worthy to suffer for his 
dear name; for we are persuaded the rejoicing far exceeds 
the suffering. 

May the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ be with 
you all unto the end. Pray for me. 

Your sister by his grace, Mrs. J. H. I. — N. G. 

VII— 35 


APPRECIATIVE HEARTS IN THE SOUTHLAND 
Deab Brethren; — 

The New Orleans Ecclesia wish to extend to you their 
heartfelt love and Christian greetings and to assure you of 
their appreciation of your labor of love, not only in their 
behalf which was manifested recently in the visit of our dear 
Brother Pickering, but also in behali of all the body members 
still in the narrow way. To be sure, the ministries of our 
brother were appreciated by the brethren whose minds were 
stirred up by way of remembrance and inspired to run the 
race with renewed energy, "looking unto Jesus, the author 
and finisher of our faith." 

Truly are the saints here appropriating to themselves the 
present truths which enable one to appreciate increasingly the 
work of the angel of Revelation 8:3, and to thank the Father 
daily that the Towebs are still in harmony with the glorious 
plan of the ages which was so beautifully told us oji many 
occasions by "that servant." Prayers continually ascend to 
the throne of grace that you, too, may report: "I have done 
as thou hast commanded me." 

Faithfully yours in Christ, Miss P. L. — La. 
WOULD RATHER DEPEND ON THE PROMISES 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

I have been a Bible Student now eight months. Living in 
very poor circumstances, and with very poor .health, I could 
not spare a dollar for The Watch Tower until now. But 
thanks to a dear sister I have had the privilege of reading 
it most of the time. I consecrated last New Year's day and 
symbolized February 10, and realizing that I was getting in 
late and the time short, I have tried to improve every minute 
I could; besides I have not missed a study or service of any 
kind. Oh, how I enjoyed the convention!* I truly can say 
that I never enjoyed anything so much in my life. 

I have an acquaintance who is a Portuguese ; and as I have 
explained the truth to her, she is quite anxious to buy the 
volumes- But they must be in Portuguese; so I wish to ask 
and urge that you try to furnish me with all the volumes. I 
have tried to induce our librarian to get them for me, but he 
is quite busy. I have also tried to answer the V. D. M. questions
, which you will find enclosed. I hope they may be satisfactory
 ; but as I have not been in the school of Christ long, 
I may not have answered them correctly. Please let me know. 

[6365] (366-3671 


(367-354) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh. Pa. 


We are having our meetings in a park now on account of 
the Spanish influenza; but nevertheless we enjoy them, and 
the Lord is protecting the friends pretty well so far from the 
plague. How grand to be under his protecting care and understand
 God's plan while the world is so blind! I can not 
be thankful enough to our heavenly Father for what he has 
done for me. I would rather depend on the promises to the 
"little flock" than gain the whole world. 

Hope that you are settled in your new quarters and that 
everything is going on according to the Father's will. We 
think of you often and remember you in our prayers. 

Your sister in Christ, . 

A VEEY GOOD SUGGESTION 
Dear Brethren: — 

Recently there came to me such a blessing, and at such a 
small cost, that I feel it my duty to tell you the circumstance 
and to inquire whether you do not think it a wise course for 
those to follow who live in sections where "the door is shut'* 
and the night fast settling down. A friend of mine lost a 
dear boy right in the flower of his young manhood. These 
good people are staunch Catholics; and the death of their son 
grieved them very much. I wrote the parents the most 
sympathetic letter I could, giving them an outline of God's 
wonderful plan, not only for the "little flock," but for all the 
world of mankind; and I quoted passage after passage from 
a Catholic Bible, giving reference in each instance, to prove 
the resurrection and the blessing of the dead. 

A few days after mailing this letter, I met my friend; and 
he took me by the hand, his eyes filling with tears, and B&id: 
"I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the 
kind and sympathetic letter you wrote our family. We all 
cried for joy to think our boy would be back with us some 
day and we would all be so happy." And my joy came when 
he said: "I looked up those references you gave; and my eyes 
were opened." I replied; "PraiseHhe Lord!" 

May it not be that during the dark, sad hours ahead of 
those who know not of this wonderful plan we can do a 
work of real witness for the truth, when the hearts of our 
friends, and sometimes of our enemies, are touched by the 
hand of death? May the Lord's blessings continue upon you, 


dear brethren, who continue in the work of feeding the sheep 
through The Watch Tower, is the prayer of 

Yours in the Master's service, W. D. A — Miss. 

PEOPLE ABE WAKING UP 
Dear Brethren: — 

Grace, peace and mercy be multiplied unto you; and greetings
 in the name of our dear Redeemer and Savior. 

Throughout the west many scores of dear people have symbolized
 their consecration to the Lord in water baptism since 
April of this year. Many of them seem to appreciate fully 
the covenant of sacrifice, and grasp and appreciate the hidden 
mystery. Indeed they enter into the spirit of the truth, and 
are ready to die for the truth, just like Bible students of 
years of study and blessing. 

Some say the harvest is ended; that the work of spiritbegetting
 has ceased; that those in are in forever, etc.; and 
that no more can enter. What is your thought about this 
phase of the work? Do you recommend the fllgrims to say 
from the platform that the harvest has ended? My heart has 
been made glad to see ao many take a definite -stand for the 
Lord within the last few months. Surely we would not be 
justified in -saying, "You are wrong to have such hopes ; for 
the harvest is ended." Neither would we be justified in saying
, "You are of the great company," 

Several of the Pilgrim brethren have stated definitely from 
the platform that the harvest is ended; and it causes one to 
wonder. I would like your thoughts upon these matters. My 
great joy in -serving the brethren is to encourage and comfort 
from the Word of God. In the west (Alberta, Saskatchewan 
and Manitoba) they have been greatly blest of the Lord. 
Since January 1, about three hundred or more have symbolized 
their consecration to the Lord. Many may have been called 
long ago; others have only heard lately and have come in 
promptly. 

Your loving brother in the one hope, 

G. Y.— Pilgrim. 

Our reply to the above will be found in article entitled, 
"Gathering Wiheat — Burning Tares," in this issue. 

Editorial Committee. 


IN RE ELECTION AND PROXIES 


DEAR FRIENDS: 

The question of an annual election has afforded discussion 
without end, and there is quite a diversity of opinion about 
the matter. The Acting Secretary and the Board of Directors 
desire to do the Lord's will. Recently a letter waa sent tr> 
all the class secretaries, announcing that there would be no 
election. At the time this course seemed to be the Lord's will ; 
but on looking into the matter more thoroughly we have come 
to the conclusion that such a course would not be pleasing 
to the Lord; and we herewith give our reasons: 

(1) The failure to hold an election would be a violation 
of the statute of the State of Pennsylvania which makes an 
annual election necessary. 

(2) The failure to hold an election would be a fraud upon 
the corporation. 

(3) If no election were held there would be no officers who 
could act in a legal capacity for the corporation ; for the statute 
says that an election must be held annually, and by the Shareholders
. Again, if it were possible that the officers elected by 
the Shareholders could hold over, the Charter of the Society 
makes it impossible for those elected by the Board of Directors 
to hold over. Therefore, since two of the present Board were 
elected by the Board, and not by the Shareholders, they could 
not legally hold over; and hence there could be no quorum. 

The legal authority for these statements will be found in 
"Harvest Sif tings," of Aug. 1, 1917, page 15, column 2, first five 
paragraphs. This legal opinion Avas given by the firm of 
lawyers whom Brother Rutherford himself consulted upon the 


matter; and precedents are cited for their decision. We quote 
a part of this opinion: 

"Section 17 of the Pennsylvania statute expressly provides 
that the Board shall be chosen annually by the shareholder* or 
members. This provision of the act is mandatory. , . . Again, 
where the statute authorizes the election of the Board of Directors
, any scheme or organization which dispenses with the 
statute may be regarded as a fraud upon the corporation. . . . 
Paragraph 8 of the Charter will be construed to mean what it 
says; namely, that where a vacancy occurs in the Board of Directors
 then the remaining members of the Board may, within 
twenty days, meet and fill such vacancy; but the person so selected
 could hold office only until the next annual election held 
by the shareholders. This is the only construction in harmony 
with the statute." 

This is the legal phase of the situation; and we understand 
that it would be pleasing to the Lord to have us comply with 
the law. Again, we find that quite a majority of the Shareholders
 desire such an election; and this seems to us to be another
 indication pointing to the advisability of having one. 
Therefore we are sending thiB letter, stating that in connection 
with the General Convention at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. January
 2-5, the regular annual election will be held Saturday, 
(January 4th, 1019. Proxies will be enclosed in the December 
1st, 1918, TOWER. Please properly sign and return proxies 
at the earliest possible moment to the WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
& TRACT SOCIETY, 310 Martin Building, Federal St., N. S., 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 


TELEGRAM SELF-EXPLANATORY 


Baltimore, Md., Nov. 21, 2:25 p. m. 
Messrs. Bohnet, Spill and Barber: 

Convinced error has been made in postponing the election. 
Now decide definitely election must be held. Carry out first 


plans. Get Proxies ready. State in December 1st TOWER 
that election will be held on January 4th. This action is final. 

C. H. ANDERSON. 


NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING 


NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the annual meeting of 
the Shareholders of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT 
SOCIETY will be held at Soldiers Memorial Hall, Bigelow 
Boulevard and Fifth Avenue, in the City of Pittsburgh, County 
of Allegheny and State of Pennsylvania, on the 4th day of 


January, 1919, at ten o'clock in the forenoon, for the purpose 
of electing Directors and Officers and for the transaction of 
such other business as may properly come before said meetJ
. F. STFJ>HENSON, Acting Secretary. 


[6366] 

