Announcements
◆ Literature offer: January-April: Watchtower subscription, and three booklets, for $1.
◆ Congregations having older booklets in stock can encourage publishers to place two of these along with a later booklet when obtaining a Watchtower subscription.
◆ Gift subscriptions: In sending these to the Society, please mark “GIFT” at the top of the subscription slip. Also, please neatly print the giver’s name at the bottom of the slip so that we can notify the subscriber.
◆ At circuit assemblies, starting on January 31, the new public talk will be “What Is Behind the Spirit of Rebellion?”
◆ A special public talk scheduled for all congregations for Sunday, March 28, is “Restoration of All Things of Which God Spoke.” A manuscript for this will be sent to each congregation in due time. Special handbills, showing this lecture only, may be ordered now. If the circuit servant is visiting your congregation during that week, he will give the special lecture. If your circuit assembly falls on that weekend, the special talk may be scheduled for April 4.
◆ Memorial this year will be on Friday, April 9, after 6 p.m. Orders for Memorial invitations may be sent at the same time orders are submitted for the special public talk handbills, but on separate order forms. (See announcement on “Change in Price” in December Kingdom Ministry.) If the circuit servant is visiting your congregation during that week, the Friday-night meeting with the servants may be held on Saturday afternoon after the pioneer meeting.
◆ New publications available:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Ibo, Isoko
Is the Bible Really the Word of God?​—Chinese
“Things in Which It is Impossible for God to Lie”​—Cebuano, Chishona, Efik, Ibo
Life Everlasting​—in Freedom of the Sons of God—​Afrikaans, Yoruba
“This Good News of the Kingdom”​—Hungarian, Kaonde, Kiluba, Luganda, Nama, Tamil, Tshiluba
“Look! I Am Making All Things New”​—Spanish (revised)
Man’s Rule About to Give Way to God’s Rule​—Cinyanja, Efik
The Approaching Peace of a Thousand Years​—Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, Yoruba
T1​—What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe?​—Batak-Karo
T4​—“Awake from Sleep!”​—Yoruba
T6​—The Trinity—​Divine Mystery or Pagan Myth?​—Efik
T7​—How Valuable Is the Bible?​—Efik
T8​—Life in God’s New Order—​Hausa
◆ Again available in U.S.A.:
You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World​—English
Blood, Medicine and the Law of God​—German
Living in Hope of a Righteous New Order​—Hindi
◆ Out of stock in U.S.A.:
What Has Religion Done for Mankind?​—French, Spanish
You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World​—Spanish
“Your Will Be Done on Earth”​—Italian
“Let Your Name Be Sanctified”​—French
◆ In addition to a good supply of the large-print edition of Volume I of the New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, containing Genesis to Ruth, the Society also has the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures Matthew to Revelation. Both are available in the deluxe edition for 50c to publishers and pioneers.

