Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
The news from here is that Brothers Knorr, Franz and Henschel have left for Africa. They are serving the brothers at a series of assemblies there. Brother Knorr for example, is attending assemblies in Senegal, Ghana, Togo, Nigeria, Kenya, as well as other lands. The Kingdom work is expanding wonderfully in Africa, and, with Jehovah’s blessing, these assemblies should be a stimulus to even greater growth.
Other expansion is taking place right here in the United States. On January 3, four Kingdom Ministry Schools are scheduled to be in operation: One each at Pittsburgh, Brooklyn, Chicago and Norco, California. Though 11,950 students have already attended the Kingdom Ministry School, there are still about 8,000 more congregation servants, assistant congregation servants and Bible study servants who would like to have the opportunity. The increased number of schools, each caring for twenty-five students at a time, will make it possible for more to benefit from the training.
Many of the brothers in Pittsburgh have shared in housing the servants while they were attending school, and how much they have appreciated that arrangement! “We almost feel like a part of this school,” one family said, “as we listen to the many happy and upbuilding expressions of the students.” Now, families living near the new school locations will be able to share that experience. As for the students, a brother who went through the school and who has been a high school teacher for nine years said: “The two weeks as a student were more beneficial than all the years I spent receiving a degree in worldly knowledge.” How fine it is that Jehovah provides such training for his people!
With January something else begins too​—the thirty-third annual Watchtower campaign. Are you ready for a full share in it? Last year 1,459,786 new subscriptions were obtained in the United States. Just think what a fine opportunity was given to those subscribers to learn the truth. Let’s make full use of the campaign this year to extend that blessing to many more. In this way we can help them to accept the implanting of the soul-saving Word.
Be assured of our very warm love for all of you.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

