Implanting the Word in the Hearts of Men
1 If the people to whom we present the Kingdom message are to act on what they hear, we must reach their hearts. We need to implant the soul-saving Word of God. (Jas. 1:21) Of course, some will deliberately close their ears and shut their eyes, failing to have a responsive heart. No amount of skill on our part will change these conditions. But even soil that might appear to be packed, rocky or weed infested can often be made productive. Can we in some way get the seed of God’s Word into the soil of the heart?
2 During January we again have the privilege of using one of the best instruments for reaching the heart, and that is The Watchtower. There will be especially prepared articles during the four-month campaign to fit in with the theme that we will be discussing with householders, namely, “The Government That Will Solve Man’s Problems.” How appropriate to make the Kingdom government the theme of our discussions! In illustrating the power of the Kingdom good news, Jesus said: “As for that [seed] on the fine soil, these are the ones that, after hearing the word with a fine and good heart, retain it and bear fruit with endurance.”​—Luke 8:15.
3 Do some hear the Word? Then at least they are listening. Can we help them to go farther and get the sense of it, so that the Devil by his agents does not come along and take the seed away? Can we remove any stones that might hamper the growth of the young plant? This needs to be done right from the beginning so the tribulation or persecution will not cause them to stumble. Two demonstrations under “Your Service Meetings” will offer suggestions to help you.
4 Now, to be good cultivators, there are some things we need to do in advance. Practical suggestions to help you with your presentations will be found in the December Kingdom Ministry, and in “Presenting the Good News” in this issue. If you have definite points in mind in offering subscriptions for The Watchtower, this will help you to avoid just superficially sowing Kingdom seeds and will aid you to get the seeds down deep into the hearts of receptive ones so that they get the sense of the Word. Be sure to keep a good record so that you can get back to cultivate the interest.
5 In fact, in many instances, studies can be started on the first call by using the Bible study folder. Be alert to your opportunities. If you do find someone who wishes to have a Bible study, will you be prepared to take care of it? Do you know in advance which evening, or other time, you can make free for it?
6 After teaching his disciples with many illustrations regarding the Kingdom, Jesus said: “Did you get the sense of all these things?” They said to him: “Yes.” Then he said to them: “That being the case, every public instructor, when taught respecting the kingdom of the heavens, is like a man, a householder, who brings out of his treasure store things new and old.” (Matt. 13:51, 52) Out of the good treasure of our heart, let us speak freely. Thus we show by our good fruits that we love Jehovah with all our heart, and our neighbor as ourselves.
[Blurb on page 1]
Accept the implanting of the soul-saving Word.
[Blurb on page 4]
Use “The Watchtower” to announce the Kingdom.

