Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 10
Theme: Helping Others to Get the Sense of the Word. Song 61.
 5 min: Introduction, text, comments.
 8 min: Branch Letter.
17 min: “Implanting the Word in the Hearts of Men.” Questions and answers. Discuss Matthew 13:18-23.
15 min: Several publishers discuss and practice on one another what they will say in house-to-house work. When we talk about kingdom of God, do people really understand what we mean? Show how Kingdom will solve man’s problems.
 3 min: Accounts report.
12 min: Concluding comments. Include local service report for December and “How Did We Do in November?” (Mention number baptized.) Song 59.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 17
Theme: Speaking from the Abundance of the Heart. Song 39.
 8 min: Introduction, text and comments. Include Theocratic News.
12 min: Helping Children to Be Regular Praisers of Jehovah. Talk and audience discussion based on “Lamp” book, page 109, par. 2.
15 min: Helping Teachers to Learn God’s Truth. Three youths discuss methods that can be used. Weave in “Yearbook” (1971) experiences of other young Witnesses: p. 138, ¶1; p. 141, ¶2; p. 209, ¶1; p. 210, ¶2; p. 178, ¶4; p. 247 ¶1.
15 min: Presenting the Good News. Demonstrate.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include announcements on page 3, also “A Reminder.” Song 91.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 24
Theme: Pleasing God with an Obedient Heart. (1 Ki. 3:9) Song 65.
 5 min: Introduction, text, comments.
15 min: “Servants ‘Took a Hand.’” Audience discussion.
15 min: Loyalty to God When a Family Member is Disfellowshiped. Congregation servant discusses counsel contained on pages 351 and 352 of June 1, 1970, “Watchtower” and “Lamp” book, p. 180. Love for God and our loyalty to true worship should motivate us to respect disfellowshiping decree. If some continue association that is not absolutely necessary with disfellowshiped family member living outside the home, committee should lovingly help them to understand principles involved and to comply with Bible’s counsel. If a disfellowshiped person is not living in the home, 2 John 9-11 shows we should ‘never receive him into our homes or say a greeting to him.’ Persistent disregard of the Bible’s direction to “quit mixing in company” with such a person could lead to disfellowshiping, but that should not be our reason for obedience, should it? If we love Jehovah, we obey his Word.​—1 John 5:3.
15 min: Offer Subscriptions for “Watchtower.” Invite all to give reasons why “Watchtower” should go to people; also point out opportunities for getting subscriptions.
10 min: Concluding comments. Remind publishers to bring “Truth” book next two weeks. Song 70.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 31
Theme: Loyally Advocate God’s Word. (1 Thess. 2:13) Song 96.
 8 min: Introduction, text and comments, and brief comments on theme for month. (See 2/1/71 “Watchtower.”)
20 min: Finding Joy in Personal Study. Discourse, with some audience participation. Use material on personal study as found in January 15 and February 1 issues of “Watchtower.”
20 min: What Can Be Done to Keep Bible Studies Going? (Part I)
(3 min.) Chairman: It is reported that number of studies are being discontinued after one, two or three weeks. Two main causes: (1) Lack of real concern on part of student and (2) opposition from family and friends. First will be dealt with this week, and second next week. Preparation by publisher essential.
(4 min.) Publisher at home overheard speaking to himself regarding study started one week ago. Recalls moderate interest shown by husband and wife when studied first three paragraphs of “Truth” book. What can be done to stimulate growth of interest and to help Word of God take root in heart? Brief review will help to solidify progress made on previous call and will lead into study easily. Might call attention again to picture on page 4. Also might ask if they would personally like to live where violence, crime, sickness, hunger will not exist. Such questions enable publisher to see how they are thinking. Observes that material in book often has questions directed to individual personally. (In chapter one, note questions on paragraphs 6, 7, 10(a), 11 and 12.) Will use these in such a way as to get couple to express selves from heart, remembering one is more readily convinced if helped to conclusion rather than merely telling him. Chapter ends with appropriate thoughts to stimulate desire for continued study. Publisher plans to combine that point with enthusiasm on his own part. Feels he is ready now.
(2 min.) Chairman: Important to impart knowledge with special effort to reach heart so as to motivate interested ones. Direct attention to publisher who is just getting into study.
(8 min.) Publisher carries through with plans made during preparation, considering paragraphs 4 through 7. Chairman interrupts, inviting audience to observe now how study is concluded with paragraphs 11 and 12 on page 10. In concluding, publisher makes appeal to take in knowledge of God’s Word, which will lead to getting “a firm hold on the real life.” Raises questions to be answered next week, to whet appetite. Couple glad to continue study.
(3 min.) Chairman: Emphasizes importance of endeavoring to hold student’s interest by being well prepared and using good teaching methods. Points from March 1, 1969, “Watchtower,” pages 142-149, may be used. Next week will consider how to overcome second cause for studies being canceled: opposition from family and friends. Bring “Truth” book.
12 min: Concluding comments. Include comments on progress of Bible study work in congregation. Song 84.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 7
Theme: Hearing and Retaining the Word with a Good Heart. (Luke 8:15) Song 68.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: Question Box. School servant handles by talk or demonstration. Also, encourage those not yet enrolled in school to do so.
25 min: What Can Be Done to Keep Bible Studies Going? (Part II)
(3 min.) Chairman: Last week we discussed first of two main causes for studies being discontinued: Lack of real concern on part of student. Now second main cause, opposition from family and friends, will be taken up. Discuss Matthew 13:20, 21. How can we cope with this obstacle?
(4 min.) Chairman discusses with publisher how this obstacle can be anticipated from first call. Fear is powerful force, but power of God’s Word when deep in heart offsets effects of fear. (2 Cor. 10:4, 5) Even if no indication relatives or friends will oppose, it is good to forearm student as to what may happen. At appropriate time even on first study, you might say, “You know, some do not look with favor upon a study of the Bible, and you may find that some of your family and friends will not approve of your studying with Jehovah’s witnesses.” Later such scriptures as John 15:17-23 and 1 Peter 4:4 can be used in fortifying them for such expected opposition.
(16 min.) Chairman invites all to observe now as publisher conducts third study with same couple. We see study in progress already, attention being directed to title of Chapter 2. On concluding paragraphs 1 and 2, after discussing broad and narrow roads, publisher asks, “How do you think majority walking on broad road view those few walking on narrow road?” Couple answer, “Those walking on narrow road often ridiculed.” “But should that stop us from making progress toward everlasting life?” Couple say they do not want to let what others do influence them; want to please God.
Chairman interrupts to explain that this will lay basis for further comments designed to help them face oppositions. For instance, paragraphs 4 and 5 place emphasis on examining one’s religion as to harmony with God’s Word. Assuming questions have been answered through paragraph 5, chairman invites audience to observe how applications are made. Interested couple are asked, “How can we tell when a religious organization is telling the truth?” Couple answer, “By examining what they teach in the light of the Bible.” “But suppose someone said to you in ridicule, ‘Jehovah’s witnesses are not teaching the truth of the Bible!’ Would this stop you from examining for yourselves?” Couple answer that they would like to see for themselves what Jehovah’s witnesses teach and how this lines up with Bible.
Chairman interrupts, saying, “We assume study goes on, but we have come to paragraph 12. Information there bears directly on opposition from friends and relatives. Observe as publisher resumes study with paragraph 12.”
(2 min.) Chairman concludes, summarizing important points demonstrated and emphasizing importance of preparing student in advance for opposition and educating heart.
10 min: “‘Babylon’ Book to Be Studied Next.”
10 min: Concluding comments. Song 7.

