[6190] 



AND HEPALD OF CHRISTS" PRESENCE 


Vol. XXXIX 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., JANUARY 1, 1918 


No. 1 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


"The end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer, and above all things have fervent love 

amongst yourselves." — 1 Peter 4:7, 8. 


What will the year 1918 bring forth? This question is 
upon the lips of every class of men. The world looks and 
hopes for those things which constitute its highest ideals — 
peace, plenty, health and happiness. The Christian looks for 
the year to bring the full consummation of the church's hopes. 
The world says, "How may we attain to our ideals of earthly 
blessing?" The Christian asks, "When shall we enter the 
Temple of our God, and see our Lord face to face and be 
assured of his everlasting approval? And when shall we be 
permitted by his grace to participate in reconstruction and 
blessing the human race?" For that blessed time, St. Paul 
tells us, the whole creation groans and travails in pain; yet 
the creatures know not how their deliverance shall come. Only 
the children of the Lord know by faith in his Word. 

History is making at such break-neck speed that men of 
the world go breathless in pursuit. They behold the current 
events, but understand not why they are so. Christians, watching
 the transpiring of these events, by the Lord's grace understand
 them and rejoice to see their hopes about to be realized
. The truths of the present day, earthly and spiritual, 
stimulate the child of God to greater activity in the Master's 
service 

THE COAL FAMINE 

During the severest winter weather the world's metropolis 
and many other cities face a coal famine. For many days, 
coal has not been obtainable regardless of the price. Even the 
wealthy have found their money of no avail. Many such have 
driven in their expensive limousines to the coal-distributing 
points and begged the deliverers to load their fine cars with 
coal, that they might have some comfort in their homes; but 
they fail to get it. The public press announces that 300,000 
families in Greater New York were without fire to warm by 
for several days. The worldly-minded wonder why such conditions
 are permitted to exist. The students of God's Word 
see why and know that these conditions will grow worse as 
we near the end. Twenty-five hundred years ago, God through 
his Prophet, referring to the time in which we now are, said, 
"There shall not be a coal to warm at, nor a fire to sit before." 
(Isaiah 47:14) Conditions leading up to the fulfilment of this 
prophecy are mentioned by Dr. Bromley in "The New York 
Times." October 17, as follows: 

"There is plenty of coal in the ground, yet most of Europe 
is dark and cold. Both Americas are much alarmed over the 
situation as it confronts them. The present fuel crisis is here 
because we did not realize soon enough how vital a factor is 
fuel, when whole nations and not armies alone must become 
war weapons. 

"The cry that there is no coal shortage is dangerous deception
. True 500,098.175 tone in lfllfi as against 531,619,487 
tons in 1915 was the production. But these figures are misleading
 if one forgets that the world's consumption of coal is 
greater than ever before/' 

Thousands of producers have been removed from channels 
of production and put into channels of destruction. Such 
conditions will grow worse. 

THE THIOKENIKG TURMOIL 

Asked what would be proof of the end of the world, the 
great Master said: "Upon the earth, distress of nations with 
perplexity; men's hearts failing them for fear." (Luke 21:24, 
26) Today we see the fulfilment of this prophecy. "The 
Commercial and Financial Chronicle," one of the^ most conservative
 amongst financial and business journals, in a recent 
editorial says: 

"A retrospect of the week discloses a series of events, a 
status of conditions, more momentous and depressing perhaps 
than any other week of this agonizing war. The grey skies of 
February grow dark with gloom; and hoping almost against 
hope, one tries to see some signs of the coming of the end. 
But a wall of murky, steely cloud, in which pale glimmers of 
peace flame, only to fade, shuts down upon the world, lighted 

remi 


by the terrible fires of battle, and seething with the turmoil 
of man's perverted endeavor. And for that phrase bandied 
about in a sort of light-hearted contempt, 'Whither are we 
drifting?' the serious-minded must substitute another, *To 
what further and final cataclysm are we drifting?' 

"As the search-light of all-seeing Press sweeps the world 
what do we behold? A new revolution in Russia — sinister 
with socialism and eloquent of the anarchy which must prevail 
over wide stretches of that unhappy land far removed from its 
populace centers — civil blood in the streets of Moscow and 
Petrograd. the fate of the new attempt to rule hanging in 
the balance — it may be a matter of days, mayhap presage 
other feuds to come— a Russia practically out of the war as 
far as early aid to the Allies is concerned, a fact which may 
yet prove of gigantic proportions. 

"And in our own country, a week of refrnarkable events and 
of growing apprehension. Stocks reaching their lowest point 
in ten years, recording billions of dollars of losses in market 
values since the beginning of the conflict, showing few Bigns 
of any permanent recuperation. Strikes, arbitrations and compromises
 by and between employes and employers throughout 
the country in numbers and for demands never before approached
 in the history of the country. Looming up suddenly 
is an impending demand and a possible strike for its enforcement
, having an estimated 109 million dollars increase in 
wages, to meet an alleged increase in the cost of living by 
certain bodies of railway employes in the face of the showing 
of net losses by the roads upon an increased business or in 
spite of it. 

"Yet, again, a meeting of the National Foundries Association
 in New York City, which sends a telegram to the President
 in which it is unanimously declared that: 

'Autocracy of labor is fully as disturbing to the welfare 
of mankind as an autocracy of government/ 

"These are a few of the leading events and conditions 
confronting our people. The insupportable pressure of war isat
 work, and the turmoil thickens. The time calls for serious 
thought, closer devotion to every task in hand, and solemn 
study. Our hope is that we may now be in that darkness which 
almost precedes dawn." 

LABOR SEEKS OONTBOL 

"The sea and the waves roaring." (Luke 21:25) In every 
land of earth is observed the fulfilment of this prophetic statement
. The discontented, restless element of humanity is fomenting
 more trouble. Organized labor is roaring out it's discontent
, and seeking to put its grip upon the reins of power. 
And the time draws closer when the warring classes feel that 
they must have it out with the growing aggression of the 
workers. The annual report of the American Federation of 
Laboe says: 

"Working people have**never been properly represented in 
diplomatic affairs. We insist that this Government provide 
adequate and direct representation of wage earners among the 
plenipotentiaries sent to the Peace Congress." 

Th& Chronicle, the spokesman of finance and business, on 
the above statement comments: 

"Here it is again; labor arrogantly setting itself up as a 
separate factor, an entity to be dealt with; as a class, physically
 within, but not of the country; as a sort of power which 
can make terms and conditions on which it will stand more 
or less distantly behind the Government in the great struggle 
for national life. 

"We have yielded and yielded to organized labor, until the 
final clinch cannot be longer delayed. We cannot avoid or 
divert that clinch by the Government undertaking to take 
over the roads and operate them as military instruments. Such 
they have been for three years, and the men owning them are 
virtually soldiers in the ranks. The country must now, in an 
emergency which brooks no delay and no feebleness, undertake 
and accomplish the subverting of any organization within it, 


(3-4) 


(4-S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. *. 


or else surrender to this one which defies it the more boldly 
because of having been suffered to grow by a long series of 
compromises." 

A DEFERRED HOPE ABOUT REALIZED 

The Gentile times have ended, and the kings of earth have 
had their day* The autocratic kingdoms are destroying each 
other, and their existence is but a matter of days merely. 
Concerning the Jews, Christ Jesus said: "They shall be trodden
 down of the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles be 
fulfilled/' (Luke 21:24) Zionism, organized in 1896, has all 
along had for its prime objective the establishment of a home 
government in Palestine for the Jews. Through his prophets, 
God promised to restore Palestine to the Jew; and the great 
Master said that the beginning of such restoration would be 
proof that we are at the end of the world. The English have 
wrested from the hand of the Turk the city of Jerusalem. 
Commenting editorially, the New York American says: 

"The conquest of Jerusalem is the final triumph of Zionism
. For the first time in nearly two thousand years, not only 
one, but three great powers stand ready to publicly recognize 
the Jewish nationality and its right to a land and a homo. 
Zionism means the rebuilding of Palestine by the Jews. Millions
 of Jews in every land are organized, active and intense 
in their enthusiasm for the rebuilding of Zion. It is an agelong
 dream. It is also a practical business movement of today. 
The English Rothschilds are leading it in London. The French 
Rothschilds are a part of it in Paris. In New York Nathan 
Straus, Jacob Sdhiff, Henry Morgenth&u, Max Norjiaoi and 
Schullman are in its ranks. Justice Brandeis is its apostle in 
Boston, and in Chicago the large influence and the mighty for* 
tune of Julius Bosenwald is generously behind the movement. 
Fortunately for the new home-land of the Jews, the people 
behind them include the greatest financiers in the world and 
there will be no difficulties in this line which will not be 
smoothly weathered for the Jewish state." 

Max Nordau, scientist and leader of Zionism, says : 

"We are at the turning point of the world's history. The 
gigantic war which is dissoluting humanity has inflicted more 
tortures on us than on any other people. We know our losses, 
our sufferings and our tears; but we are sustained in the trials 
of these disasters by the certainty that we are approaching the 
culmination of our national destiny." 

The London Christian World published a manifesto issued 
by some of the English clergymen to the effect that the return 
of the Jews to Palestine indicates the near establishment of 
the Lord's kingdom. The Chicago Herald interviewed a number
 of American clergymen upon this question who generally 
scoff at tine nearness of Christ's kingdom. The consensus of 
opinion by them is expressed in the words of the Rev. Oscar 
C. Helming: 

"My personal impression is that the historical interpretation
 ot the Apocalypse is a mistaken interpretation, of Jewish 
origin. I feel that the present war condition has no more 
bearing on the second coming of Christ than other wars and 
revolutions have had." 

"THAT INTERNATIONAL NUISANCE" 

The Lord's Word shows his disapproval of the alliance 
between the church systems, which claim to represent him on 
earth, and the civil and political powers. Such an unholy union 
he designates in his Word as harlotry. Even worldly men recognize
 that the mixture of politics and religion is obnoxious. 
The Wall Street Jowmal, read by the banking interest of 
Greater^ New York, speaking of the Papacy, refers to it as 
'^that ihtamaiional nuisance, the church-state." In Italy the 
Roman Catholic church is well known to be willing to sacrifice 
Italian nationality to promote its awn temporal power. It is 
claimed that not all of the weakening of the morale of the 
Italian troops was due to Teutonic influences. The Paris correspondent
 of the New York Times says: 

"No one who has not been recently in Italy would realize 
the harm done by a propaganda whose theme is America's 
abstention from war with Austria which, says the Propagandist, 
proves the justness of the Vatican's pacifism by showing that 
America also is not in sympathy with the war Italy is waging 
to complete her national unity. How far that unity is in line 
with the Vatican's dream of temporal power may be judged 
by the fact that its heart and center is Borne — the city which 
the popes regard equally as the home pivot of theiA rule on 
earth." 

The declaration of war by the United States against Austria 
was a blow to Papacy's hopes. 

The thought that the Papacy is scheming to profit through 
the present world disaster is nothing surprising to Bible Students
; for they are well aware that the word of prophecy 
points to the part, to be played by the "beast" in helping to 


establish peace and so ingratiating itself with the world as to 
make possible again the stealthy riveting of the fetters of intolerance
 upon all true freedom of religion, of the press, of 
speech and of thought. But however well such craftiness may 
succeed and induce the nations of Christendom to give their 
power and strength unto the "beast" (Rev. 17:12, 13), it will 
be but transitory; for shortly the "ten horns [nations transformed
 by revolution] shall hate the whore, and shall make 
her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn 'her 
with fire" [anarchy and revolution]. — Revelation 17:10. 

THE SUN DARKENED 

As a further evidence of the end of the age and the bringing
 in of Messiah's kingdom of righteousness, Jesus said, 
"The sun shall be darkened." (Matthew 24:29) The sun is 
a symbol of the Gospel of Messiah's kingdom. On November 
12, 1917, two thousand representatives of all creeds and denominational
 systems assembled at Carnegie Hall, New York. 
Participating in this conference were Catholic cardinals, Protestant
 Doctors of Divinity and Jewish rabbis. The purpose of 
the meeting was to formulate a scheme or plan of Biblical education
. The New York American quotes Dr. John H. Finley, 
one of the speakers: 

"Here are three steps which we may take : First, the preparation
 of a book of selections from the Bible by an interdenominational
 commission appointed by the legislature or by 
the Board of Regents for use in the schools; second, the formulation
 of a plan for non-proselyting end cooperation between
 the schools and various denominations; third, the granting
 of regents credits for serious work in Bible study outside 
of the schools. The time has come for Protestants, Catholics, 
Jews and Gentiles to co-operate to the end that every child may 
have an intimation at least of his moral and religious inheritance
." 

Dr. George Albert Coe said:. 

"We religious people must join with organized labor to 
compel teaching in the schools which makes for happiness and 
not for wealth." 

The noticeable feature here is that the name of Jesus 
Christ, his redemptive sacrifice and his kingdom for restitution 
blessings, are absolutely ignored. Truly tlhis is a fulfilment 
of the prophecy of the darkening of the sun. 

CHURCH FEDERATION 

From time to time there has appeared in The Watch 
Tower much proof from the Scriptures that before the end of 
the age there would be a federation of the nominal church 
systems. Such is now practically an accomplished fact. The 
"beast" of Revelation 13:1 is the Papal system. The "other 
beast" of Revelation 13:11 is the church of England and Ireland
. The United States has entered into an alliance with 
Great Britain. Thus there is a tacit alliance between civil 
and ecclesiastical elements, The temporary cessation of the 
war between the nations with the force of revolution and 
anarchy becoming more apparent will draw closer together the 
civil and ecclesiastical powers. Practically all of the church 
systems with one mind and with one accord are "dancing" before
 the civil powers. (Mark 6:22) This federation and alliance
 is "Mystic Babylon" in a most complete sense. In the 
type the great feast of Belshazzar which preceded the fall of 
ancient Babylon would seem to represent the rejoicing of the 
federated systems, particularly wflien they haw gained federal 
recognition, either directly of indirectly. It seems quite reasonable
 to conclude that the experiences of John the Baptist 
with Herod were also typical. Commenting upon this, Brother 
Russell said: 

"Herod would represent civil government and the unlawful
 wife would represent the nominal church which throughout 
the symbolic Scriptures is represented as a woman — 'Jezebel', 
etc. Should it prove to be a type by its fulfilment, in antitype
 the fulfilment will probably be on something like the 
following lines: 

"(1) A partial reunion of church and state. 

"(2) In such ease it would become ttfie dutv of the true 
church, the forerunners and announcers of tJie Messianic kingdom
, to reprove the civil powers as well as the nominal church 
systems and to declare their union unlawful, contrary to the 
Word of God. 

"(3) The effect of this would pretty surely be to awaken 
the animosity of both civil and religious powers; but it would 
draw out especially the animosity and venom of the latter. 

"(4) The church nominal in her false position would be 
anxious to stop the reproof and to destroy the reprovers; and 
the effect would be that the civil power would be induced to 
pass such legislation as to restrain the liberty of the faithful 
ones and hinder them from public witness — as John was hin* 
dered by imprisonment. 


[6192] 


January 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(S-6) 


"(5) Jezebel's personal influence being insufficient it may 
subsequently be gained by the influence of her daughter (United 
Protestantism). Who will be so fully in sympathy with her as 
to become her tool in the destruction of the most loyal servants 
of God."— Z. '98, p. 95. 

THE WOEK BEFOEE THE CHURCH 

We cannot with certainty know what is just before us, but 
we feel sure that the Lord is pleased to have us be on the alert 
and prepared to do with our might what he may put in out 
hands to do. When the Lord speaks to his church through his 
chosen servant, then it is reasonable to conclude that he expects
 the members to be governed by the terms of that message
. There have been seven messengers to the church. It 
seems certain that the Lord purposed their messages as a 
guide for the church. We believe that we are within the 
bounds of propriety and taking the position which the Lord 
is pleased to have us take when we say that in the examination 
of these important questions due consideration should be given 
to what Brother Russell as the messenger to the Laodicean 
ehurch wrote on the subject. Such a position is not deifying 
the man, but giving due consideration to the Lord for the message
 which he sends us. That Brother Russell was not infallible
 all will admit; but he being the messenger to the Laodicean
 church and being a profound student of the Scriptures has 
express-ions should be very closely scrutinized and given careful
 consideration at this time. 

The tangible evidence that the present order is passing 
away, and that soon the kingdom of God will be fully established
, is overwhelming. Such proof causes the true saints to 
look up and lift up their heads, with rejoicing. At the same 
time it behooves them to watch and pray. Before the completion
 of the kingdom class it seems reasonable to conclude from 
the numerous evidences that we have, that a strong, vigorous, 
decisive proclamation of the kingdom message must be given; 
and that this must be given by the Lord's people, the antitypical
 "John" class, otherwise designated as "the Elijah 
class." Then surely it behooves every truly consecrated Christian
 to view the situation calmly and inquire. What is my duty 
and privilege at this timet 

In 1916 Brother Russell said: 

"Until now we have never thought much about Elijah coming
 down to the Jordan and the important work he did there as 
having any special significance. But now we see that we went 
to the Jordan in 1914, and that Elijah and Elisha stood there 
talking, as we are doing now. After they had talked a while 
Elijah wrapped up his mantle, evidently referring to some 
special power coming to the Elijah class; and then he smote 
the waters. Everything led up to that smiting, and everything
 went before to prepare for this. Now we see that what 
preceded has only been' preparing the way for this. I am 
daily looking for what the folding up of the mantle may signify
. It looks like as if it may mean a great deal of money. 
We are trying to wrap up whatever mantle comes. The smiting
 will probably affect the whole civilized world. They are 
going to feel the influence of this smiting. Let us be ready." 

If this conclusion is correct, then it follows that the wrapping
 up of the mantle and the smiting of the waters must 
take place after 1914. It is likewise clear that such work 
must be done before all the members of the body pass into 
glory beyond the veil; for it is the members of the Elijah 
class this side of the veil who must do the Bmiting. In the 
above quotation it is stated that the mantle evidently refers 
to some special power given to the Elijah class, who after 
receiving that power will smite the waters (the people). 
Brother Russell suggested that the folding of the mantle might 
mean a great deal of money. The only purpose of having 
money would be to get the message widely distributed. If the 
Lord, has provided a reasonable amount of money and other 
means to distribute the message, it would be just as reasonable 
to say that such is represented by the wrapped-up mantle. 

The mantle, in addition to representing power as above 
stated, sometimes symbolizes authority or dignity, also indentification
. (1 Sam. 28:14) The message contained in The Finished
 Mystery — the Seventh Volume of Studies in the 
Scriptures — definitely and clearly identifies Pastor Russell 
as "that servant/' the messenger to the Laodicean church, and 
shows the dignity of his office and his authority to speak as 
the Lord's mouthpiece. Hence his interpretation of Scriptures 
bearing upon the question should receive profound consideration
. Further commenting upon this same matter, Brother 
Russell in 1916 said: 

"The 149th Psalm evidently pictures a time when the 
Lord's people on this stfde the veil would in some way be prominent
 before the world. It says, *Let the saints be joyful in 
glory.' Onee we thought this meant joyful in heaven j but now 
we see that to be joyful in glory need not be on the other 


side, but on this side the veil. The Psalmist proceeds to say, 
'Let them sing aloud upon their beds.' He declares that the 
saints upon their beds have a two-edged sword in their hands. 
The bed signifies a condition of ease, so far as the faith is 
concerned. We shall, of course, be at ease on the other side, 
but this evidently means an ease of faith on this side the veil. 
The two-edged sword means the Word of God. That must 
mean here; for no one will be smiting anything with a twoedged
 sword over there. It will surely Jbe here. This twoedged
 sword in the hands of the saints means that while they 
are resting in their faith they have the Word of God, sharp 
and powerful, and with it can oppose everything opposed to 
the truth, 

"These are the saints who execute the judgments written. 
How? I cannot give all the details. Undoubtedly there will 
be a great many details when we reach that time. We should 
be ready to take any part which the Lord may give us. He 
will give all of his people a share. We Bhall see what this 
judging may mean a little later on. The River Jordan meanti 
a judgment and the smiting of this Jordan may mean to put 
the truth in such a way as to do the judging; and Elijah will 
handle this sword." 

The Lord has permitted the compilers of Volume Seven to 
bring together all the gems of truth upon the Seriptures from 
Brother Russell's pen as these relate to Babylon. From these 
gems of truth written by the one having authority and making 
clear the Scriptural testimony we see: 

(1) That just preceding the inauguration of the kingdom 
there would be a church Federation, that there would he a 
closer relationship established between church and state, and 
that the felicitations of the ecclesiastical systems would constitute
 the antitypical feast which preceded the fall of ancient 
Babylon ; 

(2) That such federation and alliance is an abomination 
unto God, and that it would be the duty of the truly consecrated
 then on earth to rebuke such arrangement by plainly 
declaring God's message of truth; 

(3) That the Prophets Elijah and John typed the same 
class, that the class typed by them would administer the rebuke
, and that such proclamation of the message of truth would 
turn the people away from the Babylonian systems, thus constituting
 a division represented by the division of the waters 
of the River Jordan; 

(4) That everything in the harvest leads up to this climax, 
and that since 1914 everything has been making for this work; 

(5) That the smiting of the Jordan and the ubo of the 
two-edged sword are two pictures of the same thing, that the 
two-edged sword means the Word of God, that Jordan may 
mean to put /the truth in such a way as to do the judging, 
that the wrapping up of the mantle evidently refers to some 
special power given to the Elijah class; that the Elijah class 
will handle the sword with which the smiting is done; 

(6) That the smiting of the Jordan represents the dividing 
of the people and the turning of them away from Babylon, 
that Babylon will fall, and that this smiting will probably 
affect the whole world; 

(7) That the Lord's people this side the veil will in some 
way be brought prominently before the world. 

Examining these points Ve see that the federation is practically
 an accomplished fact; and since the end seems to be so 
near at hand, the time for the performance of the work above 
mentioned must likewise be near at hand. When Brother 
Russell says that the two-edged sword is the Word of God or 
message of truth, and that the truth may be put in such a way 
as to do the judging, and that the Elijah class will handle the 
sword, then it follows that there must be sotme clear explanation
 of the prophecies of Ezekiel and Revelation which exposes 
Babylon, and that this message must be given public witness. 
We find in the Seventh Volume of Studies in the Scriptures 
this identical message. One of two things is absolutely certain
 — that this is the long promised Seventh Volume with 
which the smiting is to be done or else there must be another 
one written; and since this one contains all Brother Russell 
has written upon the subject it would seem unseasonable to 
conclude that another is to be written, since the Scriptures do 
not identify another messenger having authority. to write. 

If the Seventh Volume is the sword of the truth put in 
such a way as to do the judging, and if the Elijah class is to 
do it, then it follows that everyone who fails or refuses to 
grasp this sword and go forth in obedience to the Lord's direction
 repudiates the provision made for him and could not be 
designated as of the Elijah class. 

A DAT OF DECISION 

Some are having difficulty in seeing their privileges of 
taking a part in the proclamation of the Seventh Volume message
. We suggest to all such that they take the matter to the 


L6193] 


(6-7) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N« Y. 


Lord in prayer, and then being guided by fthe principles of his 
Word, ask themselves these questions: 

Is the Lord still the Chief Beaper, directing his harvest 
workt If so, would he permit the church to be engaged in 
such a world-wide activity on a line contrary to his way? 
Would he grant his blessing upon the work unless it is right? 
Was Brother Eussell, as the Master's servant, right when he 
said that the "two-edged sword is the Word of God, the message
 of truth, and that the truth may be put in such a way as 
to do the judging"? Js it true that the Lord describes Babylon
, the false systems, in the Books of Bevelation and Ezekiel; 
and is it true that Volume Seven gives an explanation of these 
books in harmony with the truth revealed by the Lord to the 
church through his messenger of the Laodicean period* 

The point of the sword is sharp on both sides, therefore a 
two-edged sword. The Psalmist describes the saints with the 
two-edged sword in their hands. Is it true that the Books of 
Ezekiel and John constitute the point — the two-edged sword 
with which Babylon is to be smitten? — Ezekiel 21:14-15; 
G- 464, 466. 

Brother BusBell said: "The Elijah class will use this sword. 
We should be ready to take any part which the Lord may give 
us. He will give all of his people a share." Was Brother 
Russell right when he uttered these words? If so, am I of 
the Elijah class if I neglect or refuse to participate in the use 
of the sword? Do I believe that the words of Revelation 14: 
18, 1«J constitute a command from the Lord? (G 227) And if 
this is a command can I show forth my love to the Lord unless 
I keep this commandment f (John 14:15) Is not Babylon 
the product of Satan f Who would be pleased to have me use 
the point of the sword against Babylon — Satan or our Lord! 
PEOSPEOTS BEFORE US 

Will not a vigorous witness of the truth as set forth in 
Volume Seven bring persecution? Yes; such is quite probable. 
If I remain aloof and have nothing to do with the message 
against Babylon, may T not preserve myself from sudh persecution
? Yes, possibly; but can you afford to take that position
? 

Long ago thei« was recorded by "that servant," in Volume 
III, these words: 

"It will probably be in an effort at self-preservation on 
the part of great Babylon — Christendom — when she sees her 
power in politics, priestcraft and superstition waning, that the 
work of truth spreading will be stopped as detrimental to her 
system; and probably at this juncture the Elijah class, persisting
 in declaring the truth to the last, will suffer violence 
and pass into glory and escape from the severest features of 
the great time of touble coming — just in the crisis of affairs, 
when men begin io feel that desperate measures must be resorted
 to, to sustain the tottering structures of Christendom. 
Although the exact time of the deliverance or change of the 
last members of the body of Christ is not stated, the approximate
 time is nevertheless clearly manifest as shortly after the 
door is shut."— C 231. 

"The door of opportunity to engage with Christ our Lord 
in the work of the Gospel age will be closed when the night 
cometh wherein no man can work; and all who have not previously
, by faithful service, developed the necessary character 
and proved their sympathy, devotion, love and zeal for the 
Lord and his truth will then be too late to do so." — C 210. 

The prospects for the year 1918 are" thrilling — yea, wonderful
! It seems that for us to be indifferent to them by 
failing or refusing to participate in the proclamation of the 
truth now due would be nothing short of disloyalty and unfaithfulness
 to the Lord. Beloved, let us gird on our armor 
and calmly, fearlessly and joyfully meet the task that he has 
set before us. "The Lord bless thee and keep thee and cause 
his face to shine upon thee"— as you go fortlh to battle. 
BROUGHT INTO PROMINENCE 

Again we quote that servant: ''This smiting will probably 
affect the whole civilized world. They are going to feel the 


influence of this smiting. The Lord's people this side the veil 
may in a way be brought prominently before the wprld." How 
could this be possible? By turning the people away from 
Babylon and while so doing "sounding out the high praises of 
God," thereby clearing his holy name from the dishonor at 
tached to it by false teachings of Babylon's Bystem. Such 
would surely affect the civilized world. But how would the 
Lord's people come into prominence? Evidently not by becoming
 popular. One might be brought into great prominence 
and yet be very unpopular. Such has always been the result 
of faithful witnessing to the truth. (Hebrews, Chapter 11) 
Elijah was prominently known far and wide in the realm of 
Ahab and Jezebel, but was far from being popular and approved
 by that kingdom and its subjects. 

THE SOCIETY THE MESSENGER 

In Revelation 14:18 we read: "And another angel c.ime 
out from the altar which had power over fire and cried witl^ a 
loud voice to him that had the sharp sickle [the message of 
present truth] saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle and gather 
the clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully 
ripe." 

Since its organization the Lord has used the Watch Tower 
Bible and Teact Society as the messenger to bear the kingdom
 message to his people. The "altar" is the place of sacrifice
. How aptly the description fits the Society! It is the 
only institution on earth maintained by the sacrifice of the 
Lord's saints. Never yet has a plan or scheme succeeded 
which had for its avowed purpose the gathering or accumulating
 of a large sum of money to be used in the harvest work. 
Clearly the Lord desires his work to be done by the sacrifice 
of his people. He is rich in all tilings, and needs no one to 
devise ways and means for him. All of his people need the 
opportunity of sacrificing to show forth their love and zeal 
for him. The financial report of the Society for the year 
1917 shows how his faithful ones have sacrificed in order thaf 
the money might be provided for the proclamation of his message
. The money the Lord has graciously provided, and with 
the message of truth which he has also provided, and with the 
organization for his work which he is directing, the time seems 
ripe to obey the "voice" of the messenger which **had power 
over fire." Power over fire means authority to send out the 
message of truth that is destructive of error. The clear exposition
 of Ezekiel's and John's prophecies set forth in Volume 
Seven fills this requirement, and it is being sent out far and 
wide by the Society. Evoryone who truly appreciates th<> 
privilege is participating in this work according to their several 
abilities. 

YEAB TEXT IMPORTANT 

Surely the child of God can plainly see that the end of all 
things of the present order is at hand. The world is in a state 
of great excitement. Statesmen, politicians, business men, 
clergy, labor leader etc., all are at high nervous tension. 
Everyone feels it. Soon the "four winds" [evil spirits] will 
be loosened (Revelation 7:1-3); and what a fertile field they 
will find in the excited minds and high strung nerves of the 
peoples of earth. Nervous excitement, anger and lack of 
sobriety will make it much easier for the evil spirits to possess 
the mind. One who is in such condition is not fit to give attention
 to important matters. Never before has it been so im 
portant for us to remember the admonition of the Apostle — 
the words of our year text — "The end of all things is at hand ; 
be ye therefore sober and watch unto prayer. And above all 
things have fervent love among yourselves." Let us. remember 
that the victory in the battle is not with the strong alone, but 
with those who have full faith and confidence in the Lord. 
"My help cometh from the Lord." In ourselves there is no 
strength, but he who is our captain is strong. Let us be strong 
in faith, giving glory to him. Let us be calm, sober-minded, 
watchful and prayerful, using the Sword of the Spirit to his 
S'lory, and he will bring us off more than conquerors — yea, 
overcomersf 


OUR KING IS MARCHING ON 


Mine eyes can see the glory of the presence of the Lord : 

He's trampling out the wine-press where his grapes of wrath 

are stored; 
I see the flaming tempest of his swift descending sword, 
Our King is marching on. 

I see his coming judgments, as they circle all the earth, 
The signs and groanings promised to precede a second birth; 
I read his righteous sentence in the crumbling thrones of earth : 
Our King is marching on. 


The "Gentile times" are closing, for their kings have had their 

day; 
And with them sin and sorrow will forever pass away ; 
The tribe of Judaih's Lion now has come to hold the swfty: 
Our King. is marching on. 

The "Seventh Trump" i^ .sounding and our King know-; mi 

defeat, 
He will sift out the hearts of men before his judgment seat, 
Be swift, my soul, to welcome him; be jubilant, my feet: 
Our King is marching on. 


f6194] 


JESUS LORD OF THE SABBATH 

[This article, excepting the paragraph below, was a reprint of article entitled, "Which Day is Sabbath," published in issue 

of March 15, 1912, which please see.] 
February 3. — Mark 2:23-3:5. 
"The Son of Man is Lord even of the Saboath" — Verse 28. 


Few seem to get the proper thought respecting the Sabbath
. Some consider themselves as Jews under the Mosaic 
Law. Others go to an opposite extreme and, declaring that 
we aj-e not under the Law but under grace, repudiate the Sabbath
 entirely, What we believe to be the correct view is the 
intermediate one between these two extremes, as we shall endeavor
 to set forth. 

God adopted the nation of Israel, all children of Al*raham 
through Jacob, as hi a special possession in the world. With 


them he made the Law Covenant through Moses at Mount 
Sinai; to them he sent his messengers, the Prophets, and 
finally his Son. W 7 ith them, and with no other nation, it was 
his agreement that by the keeping of the Law they would 
abide in his favor and would have divine blessing upon flocks 
and herds, lands and people, instead of sickness, pain, drouth 
and dearth. To no other nation was the Law of Sinai given; 
with no other nation was that Covenant made. As it is written
: "You only have I known of all the families of the earth." 


JESUS FORGIVETH SIN 

[Paragraph 3, 4, 7 and 13 of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "The Forgiveness of Sins," published in issue 
of February' 15, 1906. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Sin Forgiveness and Healing," published in issue of 
February 15, 1912. Please see the articles named.] 

JESUS CHOOSES THE TWELVE 

[This article, excepting the paragraph below, was a reprint of article entitled, "Apostolic Succession Unscriptural," published
 in issue of April 1, 1912, which, please see.] 

Sts. Paul and John were not only Apostles, but also special 
messengers to the early Church. The special messenger in the 
harvest of the Jewish age was the Apostle Paul, who wrote 
about one-third of the Now Testament, carried the Gospel 
into Europe, suffered almost unbelievable hardships of every 
description, and died a martyr in A. 1). (10, when he was beheaded
 by the Emperor Nero. The Lord's mouthpiece to the 
second stage of the church was St. John, the beloved disciple. 
He wrote more of the New Testament than did any other, 
except St. Paul. The Apostle John died at Ephesua at the 
age of 100, about four years after writing the Apocalypse. 


REPORT OF SOUTH AFRICAN BRANCH 


Dear Brethren: — 

Enclosed herewith you will find a report of harvest work 
in South Africa during the last eighteen months. We have 
not been able to put out so many volumes as in 1914-1915; 
but this is in line, I think, with the work in other parts of 
the world. Recently, however, the colporteur work in South 
Africa received a decided impetus by the accession of a dear 
Dutch Brother to the ranks. In the last three months this 
dear Brother has put out over 2,000 volumes, averaging about 
40 per working day. This unprecedented activity, added to 
our usual output, has made a great inroad in our stock. 

Now, dear Brethren, I will give you a brief outline of the 
harvest work in South* Africa. The number of white brethren
 — other than natives — we estimate at between two hundred 
and three hundred. The larger portion of these are divided 
among four churches — Durban, Johannesburg, Pretoria and 
Cape Town, all towns of considerable size. This may seem 
a very small proportion of the people; but when we remember
 that the white population numbers only about one and a 
quarter million, scattered over 500,000 square miles, an area 
equal to one-sixth of the United States, but with only one 
sixtieth of 'your means of transportation — it will be understood
 that the difficulty of getting at the people is considerable
. Many of our dear brethren are isolated and alone, with 
no fellowship but the Lord's; yet their letters and their occasional
 presence at conventions testify low abundantly he 
is able to compensate for the lack of human fellowship. 

Then to these are to be added our dear native brethren. 
At Ndwedwe we have a flourishing class of about 80 fullbloodied
 Zulus. At Bank Location a class of. Bisutos'moet, 
numbering about 24; and a smaller class of Makosas meet 
in the East London Location. Despite the fact that we have 
no literature in the native languages, the grasp of present 
truth which these native brethren have is phenomenal. We 
can only say, "It is the Lord's doing, and marvelous in our 
eyes." Entertaining, as they all do, a profound respect for 
the Bible as the Word of God, they have listened eagerly 
to the truth imparted to them by native teachers able to read 
the volumes in English and to translate what they read into 
the vernacular. Having practically nothing to unlearn, they 
have readily embraced the Lord's message when presented. 
The intelligence and the sincerity of their consecra'tion ha\e 
been attested by their sufferings for conscience's sake. Xearly 
all of these dear native brethren have been solemnly and pub* 
licly excommunicated from Babylon — turned out of the Mission
 reserves in which they were born, and branded as dangerous
 persons in their Locations, which are their world. Yet 
none of these things move them; and they count it all joy that 
they are permitted to suffer for Christ's sake. 

In the Nyassaland Protectorate, the truth has a larger 
and older following. Nyassaland is much further away — beyond
 all possibility of visiting unless on a special tour which 
would take about three months of time and about £150 in 
money, so that our control of the work in that country is not 


so substantial. Owing to the lack of white control there, reports
 from that country are Mp.i«modi<\ But when they do 
come, however, they tell of continued interest in present 
truth on the part of many natives and of large gatherings 
more or less regularly for convention purposes. The work 
there has aronsed the opposition of the Government, spurred 
on by jealous missionaries, who see their schools emptied and 
their churches depleted, with a corresponding loss of revenue. 
As a result, several of the leading brethren have been deported
, and are now interned in Plat Island, Mauritius. Our 
hearts go out to these dear brethren; and we commend them 
to him who said, "In the world ye shall have tribulation; ; but 
be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." 

The fortunes of the Photo-Drama in Africa were varied. 
On its arrival in this country, difficulties seemed to stop our 
pathway at every turn. The crowning difficulty came when 
after snowing it to a Bioscope Advisory Committee, composed
 largely of clergymen and their henchmen, the Provincial
 Authorities prohibited its exhibition in the Cape Province 
because, forsooth I it "would offend the religious susceptibilities
" of the public! Eemembering the injunction, "When they 
persecute you in one city, flee to another," we at once took 
the Drama to the Transvaal, where we exhibited it successfully
 in Johannesburg, Pretoria and several smaller places, 
and also in the Orange Pree State and Natal. While the 
Drama has not resulted in a great ingathering, it has borne 
a great witness, and the practical results have been such as 
to cause us to thank God for its coming to Africa. Before 
leaving the subject, I wish to say that in addition to other 
contributions the brethren here raised about £250 to provide 
halls, etc., in connection with these exhibitions. This was a 
great effort on their part; for none of them is wealthy. 

It is my custom to make three and sometimes four pilgrim
 journeys each year; and owing to the scattered abodes, 
long distances, etc., the mileage amounts to considerable. 
During the past eighteen months I have traveled over 10,000 
miles in this work. 

Last Easter we held a most stimulating and refreshing 
Convention at Durban, which was a source of great blessing 
to the 65 or 70 brethren who were present. God willing, we 
hope also to have a general convention in Cape Town at the 
beginning of 1918. About 147 Brethren reported thedr memorializing
 our dear Lord's death and their dying with him. 
But I feel sure that a larger number actually sat down to 
the Table of the Lord, although they omitted to send word. 

Despite our ups and downs we have much reason to thank 
God for his great goodness to us; and our great desire is to 
press on, doing with our might what our hands find to do. 
The work in Afrioa would be greatly helped by a visit from 
our dear Brother Butherford or some other capable brbther. 
If South Africa were united to Australia for the purpose of 
a pilgrim journey, the services of some of our "mighty men 
of valor" could well be spared to make the trip. The help 
to us in the outposts of the harvest field would be enormous. 


[61951 


(7-11) 


(11-12) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


We earnestly trust, therefore, that your desire, to visit this 
part of the world will grow until it becomes uncontrollable; 
and that the Lord will speedily provide the opportunity for 
you to translate the desire into action. 

In closing, permit me to assure you of our continued love 
and loyalty to our dear Brother Rutherford, as the successor 
to our well-beloved Pastor, and to the Society as God's especially
 chosen channel of communication with his people. We 
are very jealous for the organization which, under God, has 
brought us so much blessing in the past, and very suspicious 
of all that would attempt to divide our affections. 

With much love to all the dear brethren at Brooklyn, 
Your Brother in Christ, 

Wm. W. Johnson. 


'COME, FOLLOW ME!" 


" 'Come, follow mel* the Master said; 
"Come, take the way I trod: 
And though the path be dark and drear, 
And though thy heart may faint with fear, 
It leads to home, to love-born cheer — 
The mansion of our God. 

"But oh! the way is rough and steep, 
Beset by many a stone; 
But still I hear, through brier and brake, 
'Thee will I never leave, forsake; 
Beloved one, fresh courage take, 
I trod this way alone. 1 


"And oh, he stretches forth his hands! 
And oh, he gives me grace! 
I see the nail-prints that he bore, 
The feet, enstained with dust and gore, 
The stripes, the thorny crown he wore; 
But oh, that lovelit face I 

"Dear Master, now I follow on — 

The path I cannot trace; 
The way thy love for me hath planned 
I take and keep at thy command; 
Give me the guidance of thy hand, 

The heaven of thy face!" 


SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 


CONVENTIONS RESULTING IN BLESSINGS 

Dear Brother Rutherford: — 

Loving greetings in our dear Bedeemer! Am troubling 
you with a line to mention one of the many evidences we have 
noted that the Lord is supervising every feature of the harvest
 work. We allude to the real good and blessing that is 
resulting from this year's conventions. Thank the Lord there 
are so many of them! Many have gone to these conventions, 
troubled and perplexed because of the things which have been 
sent our from Brooklyn and elsewhere — not from headquarters 
— and have returned at rest and full of confidence that the 
Lord has not lost control of his work. We are sure it is in 
the Lord's providences that such a program has been arranged. 
Praying the Father may continue to guide and bless you in 
your endeavors to serve him, the Truth and the brethren, I 
remain, with sincere Christian love, 

Yours in Him, 

W. M. Batterson. — PUgrim. 

DRAWN CLOSER TO EACH OTHER IN CHRISTIAN LOVE 

Dear Brethren: — 

Be it resolved by tihe Bible Students in Convention Assembled
, That we renew our covenant to our heavenly Father, 
and to the faithful observance of the instructions of his holy 
Word; that we pray earnestly for a greater measure of his 
holy Spirit; that we strive to increase our love to our heavenly 
Father for the- gift of his dear Son, and for the unfolding of 
his Word to us through that dear servant whom we all so 
dearly loved; that we will be so inspired by the life he lived 
that we will be drawn closer to each other in the bonds of 
Christian love and fellowship, and will put forth our best endeavors
 that we may make our calling and election sure. 

Be it further resolved, that we heartily co-operate in the 
work as mapped out by our dear Pastor, and that a copy of 
this resolution be sent to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society at Brooklyn, N. Y. 

Everett Ecclesia. — Wash, 

ABLE TO APPRECIATE TOWER MORE FTJLLY 
Dear Brethren: — 

Am sending $1.00 to renew my subscription to The Watch 
Tower, which expires this month. 

Am receiving just tthe same help from The Tower that 
I always have enjoyed for twenty-one years; in fact more, 
for I am now able to appreciate the articles more fully. 

I am in full accord with the management at Bethel and 
pray daily that love may prevail there. 

Your sister by His grace, 

A, J. R. H.— Maine. 
"GIDEON'S BRAVE THREE HUNDRED" 

Dear Editorial Committee: — 

Greetings of love, peace and joy in your daily, yea hourly, 
service in the Lord's harvest. My heart is full of desire to 
make known to you my appreciation of your suggestion in 
the March 1 Tower, page 67, especially that under the heading
, "A Word to the Pilgrims." How we do need this admonition
, "that we adhere strictly to the message which the 
Lord gave through this chosen channel"! God bless you! 

I am constrained through the great kindness of a sister, to 
note the suggestion of our dear Pastor in the Jan. 1 Tower 
of 1915, page 10, re "Gideon's brave three hundred." Could 


we have in few words a synopsis of that article, that many 
should drink properly of the water (truth)? When this dear 
sister wrote me about this article, I was at first puzzled and 
then, through the wisdom from the Father, for which I asked, 
he revealed the astounding fact that so few, even I, did not 
partake properly at all times] 

How I have wanted to shout far and wide the fact of how 
we should drink to his glory and honor, as it is so clearly 
given in that article. Your suggestion, dear brethren, surely 
i3 a direct answer to my prayer and wish. Now by his grace 
I shall drink of his Water, which is life indeed. 

I solicit an interest in your prayers, dear brethren, also 
remembering you and the harvest work daily at the throne 
of grace, and those of like precious faith. Daily I realize 
God's care and promises to his consecrated children. — Num. 
6:24-26. 

Your Sister by his grace and mercy, 

Mrs. 0. E. Norton. — Idaho. 
INSPIRING COMMENTS BE VOLUME SEVEN 

Pilgrim Brother C. E. Heard writes concerning a very effective
 method of colporteuring with the Seventh Volume, adopted 
by a class in a Canadian city, as follows: 

"This class has done remarkable work with the Seventh 
Volume. The friends left a copy in every home in town, with 
a printed slip inserted in the front telling them to read it and, 
if they wish to keep the book, to remit 60c. Fully 80 per cent 
of the homes kept the volume when the friends called to 
collect." 

"I am eighty-two years old and have often wondered, 
'Would I live to see the Seventh Volume of the world's most 
wonderful series of God's mysteries unfolded*' 'Praise tlie 
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless His holy 
name.' " G. H., W. Va. 

"Words can but inadequately express my appreciation of 
Volume Seven ; # which will assuredly prove needful, comforting
 and beneficial to God's dear people and we pray many 
others. May the Lord bless more and more the Harvest reaping
 promulgated by Jehovah's Servant." 

Mrs. 33. M. B., A T . T. 

"I cannot express to you just how I felt on receiving 
Volume fceven. To think that I should receive the 'penny:' 
How anxious we all are to circulate the 'penny' just as Boon 
and as fas/t as we will be allowed. How it draw* His little 
ones together to feed on the wonderful things it contains, 
causing us each to spring up into newness of life and zeal. 
It will drive out the dross faster than anything yet given. 
Thank God for such a stimulus." L. M. P., Ohio. 

"I thank the Lord for the long- looked for Vdhime Seven. 
We can now siee "that it came exactly at the right time far 
the direct need of the church, and for her comfort and encouragement
. Therefore we can have now fresh courage and 
realize to a certainty that the dear Lord has not forsaken 
us, but has provided for his household meat in due season by 
that wise and faithful servant, 'Pastor Russell'; and why 
should we not be thankful and be eager to go ahead with a 
burning desire to grasp our weapon and go forth to the smiting
 of Jordan, praising the Lord for this privilege, knowing 
the kingdom of heaven is AT HAND?" 

N. N., W. Va. 


[6198] 


January 1, 1918 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(12-15) 


"I am truly very grateful for Volume Seven and shall 
eagerly peruse its pages that I may be the better prepared 
to endure all things, by its strength-giving food served to us 
by our Lord's dear faithful yervant. As I have glanced 
through it, it already has made me see how deeply he saw 
our need of great faith in our heavenly Father's love for them 
that are his. Surely this feast in the Seventh Volume is from 
the hand of our Lord to cheer and comfort us to the end." 

N. C. B., Mich. 

"We desire to express our appreciation of Volume Seven — 
the last of the most wonderful books! We feel sure the Lord 
has sent this for our comfort." 

F. K. &, Mo. 

"On opening Volume Seven I saw at once that dear Brother 
Russell could not have written it. He was too modest and 
humble to have stated the facts as they exist — he occupying 
the important place in the harvest." 

W. S. S., Fa. 

"I was amused at the proviso you put in the little printed 
notice in Volumo Seven, 'if you do not desire to keep the 
volume, return it!' 


"I believe that no truly consecrated child of God who has 

waited so long and anxiously for this book, would part with 
it for any price if he could not replace it. It will certainly 
cause the 'falsa shepherds' to 'take notice/ 

"How graciously and bountifully our dear Father provided 
for our wants! Just what we want, and at the very time 
that we need it. Praise his holy Name!" F. R. E., Ohio, 

"Volume Seven has been duly received. Such pleasant surprises
 have been few in my life of 52 years. I had no intimation
 that it was in process of compilation much lese on the 
press. When I found it on my table it was hard for me to 
believe my eyes were not serving me some trick. I read the 
title over several times before I was fully convincd there 
was no mistake. It was good of you to send it as you did, 
thus sparing us the suspense of waiting for it," 

H. E. K., Ala. 

"How faithfully you must have worked to get Volume 
Seven together and in print, and how wonderful it seems to 
hear from our dear Pastor after he has passed beyond! It 
seems to me like a message sent back to us." 

M. K. N., Md. 


THE BEGETTING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT SUPERNATURAL 

Question. — Is the begetting of the new creature a direct 
act of God or is it through the Word of truth? 

Answer. — The begetting of the holy Spirit is not without 
the Word; it is through the Word, But the fact that it is 
through the Word does not signify that the Word alone is 
the begetting power. Without God's message telling us of 
his character, his plan, our sinfu] condition and the arrangement
 for the forgiveness of sin through Christ and the opportunity
 to be of this special elect class, we would not be in any 
condition to understand or to receive this holy Spirit. We 
must first have the knowledge which the Bible gives. Therefore
 it is through the Word of truth that this blessing comes. 
But the blessing is not the Word of truth. The world in tho 
incoming Age will have the Word of truth, but they will not 
receive the begetting of the holy Spirit to a new nature, which 
the church alone receives. 

The fact that the church does not now receive any outward
 demonstration is no proof that we do not receive a 
supernatural enduement from the Lord. When onr Lord Jesus 
had made his consecration and was baptized, God caused an 
outward sign to be seen by John the Baptist; who perceived 
the holy Spirit in the form of a dove descending and resting 
upon the Lord. This outward manifestation was given to 
John that he could testify that Jesus was the Messiah* It 
was not necessary that all the people should see. 

This word unction has the thought of anointing, and of 
smoothness, lubrication, as from oil. Whoever was anointed 
to be a priest among the Jewish people was anointed with a 
special kind of fragrant oil, which typified the holy Spirit. 
The Scriptures represent Aaron the priest, after having received
 the anointing oil upon his head, as typical of Christ 
when he received the holy Spirit at Jordan, In the type this 
holy anointing oil "ran down to the skirts of his [Aaron's] 
garment." And so the anointing of the holy Spirit is with 
the church down to its close. The anointing oil was made 
up of a number of special ingredients. The people of Israel 
were not permitted to use these ingredients in such combination
 under penalty of death. Thus the Lord signified that 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


the possession of the holy Spirit, which he alone can give is 
the special designation of those who are to be the priests and 
kings of his Order, and of them only. 

MARRIAGE OF THE DIVORCED 

Question. — Under what circumstances would divorced persons
 (in the truth) be free to remarry 1 

Answer. — The many inquiries we have on this subject convince
 us that the presentation on this matter in the Sixth 
Volume of Studies in the Scriptures requires supplementing
 — although we had supposed it to be a very full examination
 of the question. Indeed, this is still our belief. The 
fault is not with the presentation, but with tho fact that the 
dear friends forget what they have read, and fail to consult 
the Volume. We again refer all inquirers to that treatise. 

There are laws governing divorce and the remarriage of 
divorced persons. Each state -makes its own laws on the subject
, and the Bible sets forth a very particular law. Everybody
 is bound to meet the requirements of the civil law. 
All questions, therefore, appertain to the higher law of the 
Bible. A simple way of deciding all such questions is indicated
 by the fact that the Bible does not set forth any laws 
for the governing of the world and its doings. The only 
persons whose conduct on this and other subjects is regulated 
by the Bible are the Jews and true Christians, 

If the man or the woman were divorced before coming 
into the family of God, his or her previous course in life, if 
approved by the civil law, is not interfered with by the divine 
law. The divine law begins to operate upon the individual 
from the time he makes a surrender of himself to the Lord 
and is accepted into God's family. It is the course of the individual
 after he has become united to the Lord that is regulated
 by the teachings of the Bible. He or she, if free according
 to the civil law, may marry — but "only in the Lord." But 
being married at the time or after coming into Christ, the 
Scriptures direct that while there may be various reasons for 
separation, there could be only one reason for an absolute divorce
, which would leave the persons free to marry again — that 
given in Matthew 5:31, 32; 19:9. 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


VICE PRESIDENT'S STATEMENT 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

True to his promise, Jehovah of hosts has sent the messenger
 of the Covenant to prepare the way for the establishment
 of his kingdom upon earth. Blessed, indeed, are our 
eyes, which have been opened to see the presence of this 
One in whom we delight. We have watched with ever-increasing
 interest the progress of the first phase of His preparatory 
work, the purification of the antitypical sons of Levi — the 
household of faith. Like unto the effect of the refiner's fire 
upon gold and silver has been uhe result produced, by the 
various purging experiences arranged by the Lord for his 
people during the period of his presence. Little by little, the 
dross of selfishness in every form has been burned away from 
the hearts of those whose golden desire is to do the will of 
God. Viewed as one of these experiences, the recent sad trial, 
affecting so many of the Lord's children everj^where. becomes 
an occasion for thanksgiving. We can "count it all joy." 

The publication of my name in connection with state 
ments circulated among the friends has brought many requests
 for an explanation of the seemingly inconsistent stand 


I had taken as an officer and director of the Society. To 
none of these have I made full reply, believing it unwise to 
attempt to explain a situation not entirely clear to my own 
mind; and further believing that such explanation, if made 
would be justly due all who had read the conflicting reports. 

Before the details of the difference were published abroad, 
I failed to see sufficient cause for the threatened breach between
 brethren in the Lord who had labored together harmoniously
 for many years. Consequently, my efforts were 
bent upon preventing a split and the sore trial it would bring 
to friends in all parts of the world who have always held 
the brethren at Bethel in the highest esteem. 

When a re-arrangement of the Board of Directors was announced
 on July 17th, I deeply regretted that such a proceeding
 was deemed necessary. By signing the resolution commending
 this action, I had no intention of identifying myself 
as a party to the controversy (believing that reconciliation 
conld even yet be affected between those at variance), but 
wished merely to share my portion of responsibility, as an 
officer of the Society, in providing an explanation to the 
comparatively small number of friends who had up to that 


[6197] 


(15-19) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y, 


time learned of the difficulties at headquarters and were beginning
 to make inquiry. I fully realized the possibility of 
this action on my part being misconstrued as "taking a side*' 
and, therefore, added my name very reluctantly after assurances
 that the paper would )>e used in accordance with my 
understanding, viz., to satisfy inquiring friends. 

Following the circulation of this resolution my friendly 
attitude toward all the brethren concerned was called in question
. Immediately the unwisdom of my course became apparent
, and I saw that, if my efforts as a peacemaker were to 
have further weight, it would be necessary to undo what I 
seemingly had done in signing the resolution. This I attempted 
in the letter written July 26th, afterward published. But stepping
 from one "side" back to neutral ground was a difficult 
matter; in fact, I now realize that I overstepped to the other 
"side." It was in this position that, out of sympathy for those 
who I believed had been made the objects of undeserved publicity
^ I signed an open letter to the friends attending the Boston
 convention. When I discerned, after convention, that this 
action made me equally as incapable of restoring harmony as 
T had been after signing the resolution, I quietly withdrew, 
deeming it best to make no further statement at that time. 
1'he u.-^e of my mime in any publications concerning the controversy
 issued since the Boston convention has been entirely 
without my previous knowledge and consent. 

In the early part of August, the final endeavor to establish
 peace proved of no avail. My heart ached to think that 
brethren, respected and loved for their work's sake, •should 
have been held up before the friends all over the world in 
a way which to them seemed unwarranted. I pleaded with 
tihem to follow the course of our Master and suffer glaoly 
whatever bitter experiences the heavenly leather permitted, 
not even desiring to retaliate or justify themselves; but to 
commit their cause to him that judgeth righteously. What 
an opportunity to exhibit the spirit which we all have been 
striving to cultivate — the spirit of forbearance with one another
, the spirit of brotherly ^ovel Preferring not to submit
 to what they called an injustice, the four brethren chose 
to leave the home. Here I rested the case with the Lord. 

Meantime I have watched developments. Looking back, 
it is now quite evident that the Lord was pleased to permit 
the very condition which many of us tried earnestly to avert. 
But why should our loving Father take pleasure in that which 
has caused such widespread perplexity and sorrow? Surely 
he has no desire to injure those who are truly his. Bearing
 in mind that we are in the closing hours of our trial 
time, the reason for such treatment at the hands of the 
Judge of all the earth is obvious: "The Lord your God doth 
prove you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with 
all your heart." If we love our God supremely, we will love 
every one who is begotten of him — every one who is a partaker 
of his Spirit. Moved by the spirit of love, we will devote 
all our energies to provoking one another to love and good 
works. Remembering that "the Lord will judge his. people/' we 


will be content to wait for the expression of his approval or 
disapproval. 

According to all indications, the blessing of the Lord continues
 increasingly, with those who are striving to "show 
forth his praises,"" in eluding the brethren at Brooklyn who are 
endeavoring to direct the activities of the Society. Believing 
that they have been faithful to the divine commission, "to 
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance
 of our God," I am glad to cooperate heartily with. 
them. Our opportunities for service may be limited or great 
in number. Let us be faithful even in the least; for this will 
determine our worthiness of greater responsibility "in that 
day." 

Some have asked whether I would be a candidate for any 
office in connection with the Society's work during the coming
 year,. Recognizing that the Lord himself is interested 
in the appointment of those who shall help in the "perfecting 
of the saints for the work of the ministry," I hesitate to place 
myself as one eligible. The desire of my heart is to do his 
bidding, whatever that may be. 

Your brother in Christ, Andrew N. Ptebson. 

APPRECIATES THE "POINT" OF THE SWOED 

Editorial Committee, 

The Watch Tower. 
Dear Brethren: — 

Inadvertently and without due thought and consideration I 
affixed my name to the circular letter which 1 understood was 
circulated quite widely amongst the friends and sent out with 
one of the publications of the opposition. 

I desire now to go on record as repudiating absolutely, and 
having no sympathy with, the proposition contained in circular 
letter referred to on page 367 of Dec. 1st Watch Tower. 

I arn not in opposition to the Lord, the Society, nor Brother 
Rutherford, and do not wish to be. On the contrary, I Ibelieve 
the voice of the Lord was* expressed in the election last January
. I believe it was expressed in the voice of the church in 
the vote taken Nov. 21st, last, and that it will be expressed in 
the election of the Shareholders of the SoceetTY this January. 

I am fully in harmony with the "Point of the Sword"— 
Volume VII — and I believe it to be "meat in due season" furnished
 by the Lord to his hungry sheep during the present 
time. May it prove as much of a blessing to all as it has been 
to me! 

May the Lord continue to bless your efforts, dear brethren. 
to serve the interests of his people and give you a due reward 
is the prayer of 

Your brother in the One Hope, A. E. Burgess. 

OVERWHELMED IK READING IT 
Dear Fellow Servants: — 

I am sending you sixty cents for the Seventh Volume of 
Scripture Studies, Please pardon me for not sending it 