Always Praise Jehovah
1 There are few activities so important that they always deserve our attention. Among them we include eating, breathing, and sleeping. These are essential if we are to sustain ourselves physically. The apostle Paul put preaching the good news in a similar category when he urged: “Let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise.” (Heb. 13:15) So, praising Jehovah also deserves our constant attention. It is something we should try to do each day, always praising our heavenly Father.
2 When others tried to divert his attention elsewhere, Jesus responded: “I must declare the good news of the kingdom of God.” (Luke 4:43) During his three-and-a-half-year ministry, everything he did each day was directly connected in some way with glorifying God. We know that Paul felt this way, in view of the thought he expressed at 1 Corinthians 9:16: “Woe is me if I did not declare the good news!” Other faithful Christians were encouraged to be ready always to make a defense of their hope to others. (1 Pet. 3:15) Today hundreds of thousands of zealous pioneers and millions of congregation publishers endeavor to imitate such fine examples.
3 When we reflect on the wholehearted zeal manifested by Jesus Christ, our Model, we are prompted to follow his steps closely. (1 Pet. 2:21) Sometimes we may get discouraged when we have to face the problems of everyday living. How can we daily take advantage of opportunities to praise Jehovah when we have a full-time secular job? Nor can we forsake family obligations that require much of our time. Most young people are occupied with necessary daily schooling. Some might feel that it is not possible to praise Jehovah publicly every day. At times, some may go for an entire month without sharing the good news in some way.
4 Jeremiah was one who could not hold back. When he failed briefly to speak in Jehovah’s name, he felt an unbearable fire burning within him. (Jer. 20:9) In the face of what seemed to be overpowering adversity, Jeremiah always found some way to speak Jehovah’s message to others. Can we imitate his example of courage and persist in searching out opportunities to praise our Creator each day?
5 Our speaking about Jehovah should not be confined to formal, prearranged times for witnessing with other publishers in the congregation’s territory. All we need is a listening ear. We encounter people continuously every day​—they come to our home, we work with them on the job, we stand in line with them at the supermarket, or we ride with them on the bus. All it takes is a friendly greeting and a thought-provoking question or remark that will start a conversation. Many have found this to be their most productive form of witnessing. When we have many opportunities to speak to others about the good news, it would be unthinkable for us to go for a whole month without giving a Kingdom witness.
6 The privilege of praising Jehovah will never cease. As the psalmist indicated, every breathing thing should be praising Jehovah, and surely we want to be included. (Ps. 150:6) If our heart moves us to do so always, we will take advantage daily of opportunities to speak about Jehovah and his Word.

