Are We Staying Awake​—Avoiding Distractions?
1 Jesus gave a warning: “Keep awake, . . . that you may succeed in escaping” calamities that were sure to come. (Luke 21:36) We are living in the most perilous time in human history. Disaster awaits those who give in to spiritual drowsiness. This poses a danger for each one of us. Jesus mentioned eating, drinking, and the anxieties of everyday living. Why? Because even these things could preoccupy us, become distractions, and induce dangerous spiritual drowsiness.
2 Common Distractions: Some have become preoccupied with excessive or questionable recreation, even becoming TV addicts. Of course, seeking first the Kingdom does not mean that we must avoid all forms of recreation. When we use reasonableness and moderation, recreation can be beneficial. (Compare 1 Timothy 4:8.) But it is a distraction when it becomes a big thing in our lives, cutting deeply into our time, our resources, or our share in the Kingdom-preaching work.
3 Another common distraction that causes spiritual drowsiness is the desire for unnecessary material things. This requires that a person spend more time at secular work and causes spiritual pursuits to be crowded out. Some have lost sight of spiritual goals by becoming engrossed in acquiring material possessions in order to achieve a more comfortable way of life. While we need “sustenance and covering,” we must guard against developing a love of money, which can lead us astray from the faith. (1 Tim. 6:8-10) By failing to keep our eyes focused on Kingdom interests, we could become lax in caring for the spiritual needs of our family and fail to accomplish our ministry.​—1 Tim. 5:8; 2 Tim. 4:5.
4 Still others allow their ‘hearts to become weighed down with the anxieties of life’ to the point that they fall asleep spiritually. (Luke 21:34) At times, anxiety is experienced because of health problems or distressing family situations. But such personal concerns must not be permitted to diminish our awareness of the fast-approaching end of this system of things.​—Mark 13:33.
5 Nothing would please the Devil more than to succeed in putting us in a dreamlike state, chasing after some worldly fantasy. We have to battle to keep awake spiritually. We know that ‘Jehovah’s day is coming as a thief,’ and it is vital that we “stay awake and keep our senses.” (1 Thess. 5:2, 6) If we detect signs of drowsiness in ourselves, it is urgent that we “put off the works belonging to darkness.”​—Rom. 13:11-13.
6 Aids to Help Us Stay Awake: What are such aids? Prayer is essential. We should pray incessantly. (1 Thess. 5:17) Closeness to the Christian congregation will ‘incite us to love and fine works.’ (Heb. 10:24) A regular, honest examination of ourselves can help to keep us alert to our need to overcome weaknesses. (2 Cor. 13:5) Good personal study habits will keep us “nourished with the words of the faith.” (1 Tim. 4:6) If we are diligent, we can be confident that we will be able to avoid distractions, ‘stay awake, and stand firm in the faith.’​—1 Cor. 16:13.

