We Need the Congregation
1 The sons of Korah once expressed their appreciation for Jehovah’s congregation in this way: “A day in your courtyards is better than a thousand elsewhere.” (Ps. 84:10) To them, the world had nothing to offer in comparison. If you share those feelings, you should make the congregation the focal point of your life.
2 From its inception, the Christian congregation has manifested that it has Jehovah’s blessing. (Acts 16:4, 5) None of us should take the congregation for granted or feel that it is simply a means to bring us together physically. The congregation is the rallying point for Jehovah’s Witnesses in every community. It provides for united association so that we can be taught by Jehovah and organized for Kingdom activity.​—Isa. 2:2.
3 The Christian congregation is a basic channel for teaching us the truth. (1 Tim. 3:15) Jesus’ followers must “all be one”​—at unity with God, with Christ, and with one another. (John 17:20, 21; compare Isaiah 54:13.) No matter where we may go in the world, our brothers believe the Bible’s teachings and principles, and they conduct themselves in harmony with them.
4 We are trained and equipped to fulfill our assignment to make disciples. Each month, The Watchtower, Awake!, and Our Kingdom Ministry offer helpful information to assist us in starting Scriptural discussions. The meetings are designed to show us how to find and develop interest. The increase we see worldwide proves that we have heavenly backing in this work.​—Matt. 28:18-20.
5 Through the congregation, we receive daily encouragement ‘inciting us to love and fine works.’ (Heb. 10:24, 25) We are strengthened to endure trials faithfully. Loving overseers help us to cope with pressures and anxieties. (Eccl. 4:9-12) We are given needed counsel when we are in danger of going astray. What other organization provides such loving care?​—1 Thess. 5:14.
6 It is Jehovah’s will that we stay close to his organization to preserve our unity. (John 10:16) One way the congregation helps us maintain contact with the faithful slave class is by sending out traveling overseers for our encouragement. Our responding to loving direction draws us together in a closeness that helps to keep us spiritually strong.
7 The congregation is vital to our spiritual survival. It would be impossible to serve Jehovah acceptably apart from it. Let us, then, stay close to what Jehovah has provided. May we work in harmony with its goals and sincerely apply the counsel we receive there. It is only in this way that we can show how much the congregation means to us.​—Ps. 27:4.

