VOL. XXV. NOVEMBER 15, 1904. No. 22. 



CONTENTS 

"Baptist" Views Changing 339 

Old and New Views of Sin 339 

The Atonement 340 

Restricted Communion 341 

Further Corroboration of our 

Chronology 342 

"Like Unto the Angels" 344 

Did the Ransom Secure Full 

Resurrection? 345 

Shall We Know Each Other? 346 

"Them That Honor Me I Will 

Honor" 347 

The Captivity of Ephraim 349 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



HOME EMBELLISHMENTS CHEAP. 

We remind the friends that we have laid in a large stock 
of Scriptural Motto Cards. These are our own importation 
and are supplied at about one-half what they usually 
sell for. Our assortment is very large and if you have already 
had some and wish to have all new patterns, please 
say so. We put them up in $1.00 packages, of which we 
have five different assortments,— only about one of the 
five containing some old patterns— all good. 

For those who cannot afford $1.00 we have put up 50c 
and 25c packages of the smaller and cheaper styles. These 
prices include postage. 

On these Mottoes, as on Bibles and Bible study helps, 
we aim to make no profit— merely to cover cost and 
labor. 



INSTEAD OF FOREIGN TRACTS, hereafter use Foreign 
TOWERS. Orders all the sample copies you can use judiciously, 
FREE. 



R3457 : page 339 

"BAPTIST" VIEWS CHANGING. 

TESTIMONY OF AUGUSTUS H. STRONG, D.D., LL.D. 

DOCTOR STRONG is an authority among Baptists, 

the President of their principal theological 

seminary located at Rochester, N.Y. 

His public discourse, delivered at the "General Denominational 

Meeting" held in Cleveland, Ohio, last May, 

had the approval of that assembly as indicated by its 

"request" that the sermon be printed for general use. 

The changes of doctrinal views to which he calls attention 

may therefore be regarded by the public as 

endorsed by Baptists in general. 

We are by no means opposed to changes of views, 
believing heartily in the old worldly adage, "A wise 
man changes sometimes, but a fool never." We were 
glad when our Presbyterian brethren displaced their 
old creed with a new one, but sorry they prevaricated 
on the subject by telling the world that they still retain 
the old creed— merely made a new statement 



of it. 

Of course we agree with much that Dr. Strong 
has to say. Like other men of talent, he is able to 
state some matters in such terms that even his enemies 
and doctrinal opponents could not wholly dissent, 
and to so gloss other matters with sophistry as 
to mislead the uncritical and confiding of his hearers 
—whether educated or illiterate. We regret to note 
that such tendencies— called "diplomacy" in politics, 
"shrewdness" in business circles, and "falsehood" in 
common parlance— are more and more creeping over 
all prominent theologians. Their excuse, we presume, 
would be "necessity." 

Christendom is admittedly in a time of creedal 
upheaval and transformation, and quiet deception of 
the "old fogies" is considered a virtue, preventing a 
serious commotion. The hope is that the rising generation 
will by these deceptive phrases be kept in line 
until the "old fogies" are all dead, and then it can be 
pointed out that "our denomination changed its views 
slightly in your fathers' days and without their protest, 
and hence with their indorsement," and thus the 
most radical changes would pass unchallenged by the 
masses. 

All this is a great mistake— a seriously wrong 
course, even though pursued with good intentions. It 
amounts to— "Let us do evil that good may follow: 
let us continue to dishonor God and practise double-dealing 
on our too-confiding flocks, that our denominations 
may maintain their standing, numbers and 
influence, and that we may preserve our dignity, honor 
of men and light and remunerative employment." 

But let us examine these Baptist changes and note 
whether or not they mark advances or retrogressions, 
as viewed from the Biblical standpoint. We begin 
with their— 

"OLD AND NEW VIEWS OF SIN." 

"But our fathers did not see, as we do, that man's 
relation to Christ antedated the Fall and constituted 
an underlying and modifying condition of man's life. 
Humanity was naturally in Christ, in whom all things 
were created and in whom they all consist. Even 
man's sin did not prevent Christ from still working 
in him to counteract the evil and to suggest the good. 
There was an internal, as well as an external, preparation 
for man's redemption. In this sense, of a divine 
principle in man striving against the selfish and 
godless will, there was a total redemption, over against 
man's total depravity; and an original grace, that 
was even more powerful than original sin. 

"The great Baptist body has become conscious 
that total depravity alone is not a sufficient or proper 
expression of the truth; and the phrase has been outgrown. 
It has been felt that the old view of sin did 



not take account of the generous and noble aspirations, 
the unselfish efforts, the strivings after God, of 
even unregenerate men. For this reason there has 
been less preaching about sin, and less conviction as 

R3457 : page 340 

to its guilt and condemnation. The good impulses of 

men outside the Christian pale have been often credited 

to human nature, when they should have been 

credited to the indwelling spirit of Christ. I make no 

doubt that one of the radical weaknesses of our denomination 

at this present time is its more superficial 

view of sin." 

Here we find a new error introduced as an antidote 
for an old one. There is not one word in the 
Bible about "total depravity." Baptists, Congregationalists 
and Presbyterians got this phrase and conception 
from Calvin. It is an absurdity on its face. 
The proper, Scriptural thought is this, Man is so depraved 
as to be totally unable to recover himself, so as to 
regain perfection and divine fellowship. This is the 
Scriptural proposition— substantiated by all the New 
Testament writings. 

Why are all the creeds which contain this "total 
depravity" feature gaining in disrepute? Because it 
fixes matters for the heathen and infants— negativing 
the idea that these could pass into heaven acceptable 
to God without faith and regeneration. All along, 
these qualities of faith and regeneration in the parent 
have been counted as sufficing for his children dying 
in infancy; but, with the eternal torment idea still latent, 
modern thinkers with any heart repudiate the 
thought that all but regenerated believers and their 
children, the great mass of humanity, are rushing into 
such an awful eternity at the rate of over 80,000 every 
twenty -four hours. 

But note the new error, that it is worse than the 
former in that it is more subtle,— sophistry less likely 
to be detected by the average mind. Think of it! 
"Humanity was naturally in Christ!" Either the 
learned gentleman is sadly confused on the subject or 
else he is trying his best to confuse others. If the 
gentleman meant to say that divine grace planned a 
universal redemption before the fall occurred and that 
in due time and in some manner all the race will get a 
share of that blessed provision, he would be in full accord 
with us respecting the Scripture teaching. If he 
meant this we assume that he would have said it. 

We deny that "humanity was naturally in Christ." 
When Adam was perfect he needed not to be in Christ, 
for being sinless and in the divine image he had relationship 
with his Creator without a mediator. It was 
sin and its sentence that made necessary a Mediator 
and his work of (1) atonement for our sins, and (2) the 



R3458 : page 340 

deliverance of the willing and obedient from the penalty 
of sin, death. 

Has Dr. Strong forgotten the words of the Apostle, 
pointing to the work of the cross as a previous 
essential to the return of sinners to God? Hearken— 
"When we were enemies we were reconciled to God 
by the death of his Son." (Rom. 5:10.) "The 
friendship of the world is enmity against God." (Jas. 4:4.) 
"The world by wisdom knows not God." (I Cor. 1:21.) 
"Holy Father, the world hath not known 
thee, but I have known thee." (John 17:25.) "The 
whole world lieth in the wicked one." (I John 5:19.) 
"Ye are of your father the devil, for his works ye do." 
(John 8:44.) "Ye are children of wrath even as others." 
(Eph. 2:3.) "Condemnation passed upon all 
because all are sinners." (Rom. 5:12.) Ye were 
"without God and having no hope in the world." 
(Eph. 2:12.) "If any man be in Christ he is a new 
creature; old things are passed away and all things 
are become new." (2 Cor. 5:17.) Does Dr. Strong 
think that all Baptists are so unfamiliar with their 
Bibles that they will fail to remember these and scores 
of other pointed statements to the same effect? Or 
does he think that, remembering these, the Baptist 
people will take his declarations as more inspired than 
those of our Lord and his apostles? We are in doubt 
—which? 

Mark the Apostle's argument respecting Christ's 
relationship to the world and the universe. So far 
from intimating that the world is already in Christ, 
the Apostle declares that, "In the dispensation of the 
fullness of times [the Millennium]" God will "gather 
together in one all things in Christ."— Eph. 1:10. 

Let us next note the new Baptist views on "The 
Atonement." Dr. Strong says:— 

"THE ATONEMENT. 

"We must acknowledge also that our conceptions 
of Christ's atonement have suffered some change. 
Yet that change has been in the nature of a more fundamental 
understanding of the meaning of atonement, 
and its necessity as a law of universal life. To our 
fathers the atonement was a mere historical fact, a 
sacrifice offered in a few brief hours on the cross. It 
was a literal substitution of Christ's suffering for ours, 
the payment of our debt by another, and upon the 
ground of that payment we are permitted to go free. 
Those sufferings were soon over, and the hymn, 
"Love's Redeeming Work is Done," expresses the 
believer's joy in a finished redemption. And all this 
is true. But it is only a part of the truth. 

"The atonement, like every other doctrine of Christianity, 
is a fact of life; and such facts of life cannot be 



crowded into our definitions, because they are greater 
than any definitions we can frame. The atonement 
is a substitution, in that another has done for us what 
we ought to have done but could not do, and has suffered 
for us what we deserved to suffer but could not 
suffer without loss of holiness and happiness forever 
and ever. But Christ's doing and suffering is not that 
of one external and foreign to us. He is bone of our 
bone and flesh of our flesh; the bearer of our humanity; 
yes, the very life of the race. The life that he 
lived in Palestine and the death that he endured on 
Calvary were the revelation of a union with mankind 
which antedated the Fall. Being thus joined to us from 
the beginning, he has suffered in all human sin; in all 
our affliction he has been afflicted; so that the Psalmist 
can say: 'Blessed be God, who daily beareth our 

R3458 : page 341 

burden, even the God of our salvation.' So we add 
to the idea of SUBSTITUTION the idea of SHARING; and 
see in the cross, not so much the atonement itself, as the 
revelation of the atonement. 

"The sufferings of Christ take deeper hold upon 
us when we see in them the expression of the two 
great truths: that holiness must make penalty to follow 
sin; and that love must share that penalty with 
the transgressor." 



We cannot escape the conviction that the author 
of the above words did not want his hearers to understand 
his meaning;— that he desired to repeat the 
words atonement and substitution so as to give the impression 
that he still held the thoughts covered by 
those words, but that he now had more, along the same 
lines. The contrary is, we feel sure, the truth. This 
D.D., like all under the influence of "higher criticism" 
and Evolution theories, has lost faith in the 
Bible narrative of a primary sinless condition in Eden, 
when our first parents were in God's likeness, from 
which they fell into sin and its death penalty, from 
which they were redeemed by the precious blood of 
Christ as man's substitute, effecting an atonement before 
God for original sin. 

The gentleman seems to twist the plain word 
atonement, and as though he would have us understand 
that God and his creatures have always been 
at-one or in harmony, and that man did not know this 
and improperly supposed himself under a "curse" 
and needing a Redeemer. This view seems to be 
that the cross of Christ was not necessary to secure 
divine favor, but was expedient as a showing to man 
that God always had loved him, that God never had 
"cursed" or "sentenced" him and cast him off from 



divine favor. This is the new view common amongst 
clergymen of every school and denomination— the 
no-ransom view, which denies that the Lord bought us. 
-2 Pet. 2:1; I Cor. 7:23. 

The italics of above quotation are ours; note 
them. The arguments are cunningly framed and deceptive. 
The Doctor does not come out courageously 
and say, Our new theories entirely ignore and cast 
aside the doctrine of atonement for sinners by a ransom-substitute, 
and offers you instead the thought 
that our race never was perfect, hence never did fall 
from perfection and divine favor, hence never did sin 
any more than God expected they should, hence needed 
no redemption from sin and no release from a special 
sin-penalty, because there is none; and the story 
of Genesis about a fall and a sentence, and all the reiterations 
of the Lord and the apostles along the same 
lines are mere fudge, as all we learned "higher critics" 
have recently discovered. 

Instead of thus telling the people plainly, the reverse 
policy, as usual, seems to be pursued— the policy 
of confusing the people by complex statements. 
Yet it may be that Doctor Strong is confused and is 
merely doing his best. The following statement from 
his sermon gives us a gleam of hope, though it leaves 
the presentation as a whole the more obscure. He 
says:— 

"The moral influence of the atonement has taken 
deep hold upon our minds, and we are in danger of 
forgetting that it is the holiness of God, and not the 
salvation of men, that primarily requires it. When 
sharing excludes substitution, when reconciliation of 
man to God excludes reconciliation of God to man, 
when the only peace secured is peace in the sinner's 
heart and no thought is given to that peace with God 
which it is the first object of the atonement to secure, 
then our whole evangelical system is weakened, God's 
righteousness is ignored, and man is practically put in 
place of God." 

RESTRICTED COMMUNION OF BAPTISTS 

On this topic Dr. Strong said:— 

"If I am asked whether Baptists still hold to restricted 
communion, I answer that our principle has 
not changed, but that many of us apply the principle 
in a different manner from that of our fathers. We 
believe that baptism logically precedes the Lord's 
Supper, as birth precedes the taking of nourishment, 
and regeneration precedes sanctification. We believe 
that the order of the ordinances is an important point 
of Christian doctrine, and itself teaches Christian doctrine. 
Hence we proclaim it and adhere to it, in our 
preaching and in our practice. But we do not turn 
the Lord's Supper into a judgment-seat, or turn the 
officers of the church into detectives. We teach the 



truth and expect that the truth will win its way. We 
are courteous to all who come among us, and expect 
that they in turn will have the courtesy to respect our 
convictions and to set accordingly. But there is danger 
here that we may break from our moorings and 
drift into indifferentism with regard to the ordinances. 
The recent advocacy of open church membership is 
but the logical consequence of a previous concession 
of open communion. But I am persuaded that this 
new doctrine is confined to a very few among us. 
"There is but one army of the living God, even 
though there are many divisions. We can emphasize 
our unity with other Christian bodies, rather than the 
differences between us. We can regard them as 
churches of the Lord Jesus, even though they are 
irregularly constituted." 



Here we see well-meant confusion. The Baptist 
contention of the past is either right or wrong. Their 
standpoint in years past was the Scriptural one that 
there is but one body of Christ— one Church, of many 
members, in many places. Now Dr. Strong tells of 
"other Christian bodies." Are there other heads to 
those other "bodies"? The Apostle wrote of "one 
body," the Church, and one "head," the Lord. (Rom. 12:5.) 
Have matters changed since that inspired record 
was given us? We think not. Each head and 
each body must claim to be the Christ; but as there 

R3458 : page 341 

is but one, the claims must be false and the claimants 
must be deluding themselves. 

Evidently Baptists are drifting farther and farther 
into sectarianism— and that to their injury, 
though they are disposed to glory in it. The Scriptures 
denounce Papacy as a false "body" under a false 
"head"— as being Antichrist or a counterfeit of the 
true Head and his body, the true Church. Baptists 
once saw this point distinctly. Why can they not see, 
too, that every system or body except one must be 
spurious, must be an imitation of that one? And that 
the head of every such system, whether Pope or Presbytery 
or Conference or Ministerial Union, is a false 

R3459 : page 342 

head over a false or spurious body, and constitutes 
one of the many antichrists or false Christs which our 
Lord's great prophecy predicted for the harvest of this 
Gospel age.-Matt. 24:24. 

The difficulty with our Baptist brethren on this 
subject is their error in confounding water baptism 
with the real baptism, and the Church whose names 



are written on earth with the true Church, "whose 
names are written in heaven"— Heb. 12:23; DAWN 
Vol. VI., chap. 10. 

BAPTISTS AND THE COMING OF CHRIST. 

On this subject Dr. Strong's remarks call for our 
hearty endorsement. He says:— 

"The faith in a second coming of Christ has lost 
its hold upon many Baptists in our day. But it still 
serves to stimulate and admonish the great body, and 
we can never dispense with its solemn and mighty influence. 
Christ comes, it is true, in Pentecostal revivals 
and in destructions of Jerusalem, in Reformation 
movements and in political upheavals. But these 
are only precursors of another and literal and final 
return of Christ, to punish the wicked and complete 
the salvation of his people. That day for which all 
other days are made will be a joyful day for those who 
have fought a good fight and have kept the faith. 
Let us look for and hasten the coming of the day of 
God. The Jacobites of Scotland never ceased their 
labors and sacrifices for their king's return. Their 
passionate devotion to his cause led hundreds of them 
to exile and to death. They never tasted wine without 
pledging their absent prince; they never joined 
in song without renewing their oaths of allegiance. 
In many a prison cell and on many a battle field they 
rang out the strain: 

'"Follow thee, follow thee, wha wadna follow thee? 

Lang hast thou lo'ed and trusted us fairly: 
Chairlie, Chairlie, wha wadna follow thee? 

King o' the Highland hearts, bonnie Prince Chairlie!' 

"So they sang, so they invited him, until at last 
he came. But that longing for the day when Charles 
should come to his own again was faint and weak 
compared with the longing of true Christian hearts 
for the coming of their King. Charles came, only to 
suffer defeat, and to bring shame to his country. But 
Christ will come, to put an end to the world's long 
sorrow, to give triumph to the cause of truth, to bestow 
everlasting reward upon the faithful. 

'"Even so, Lord Jesus, come! 
Hope of all our hopes the sum, 
Take thy waiting people home! 

"Long, so long, the groaning earth, 
Cursed with war and flood and dearth, 
Sighs for its redemption-birth. 

"Therefore come, we daily pray, 
Bring the resurrection-day, 
Wipe creation's curse away!'" 



R3459 : page 342 

FURTHER CONFIRMATION OF OUR CHRONOLOGY. 

WHENEVER any point of Present Truth has 

been attacked the result seems to be to bring 

out its greater strength and beauty. This 

has happened again, in the matter of the recent questioning 

of the correctness of the Chronology presented 

in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., referred to in our 

October 1st issue, page 296. 

The diagrams presented herewith and the explanations 
attached are from three different brethren- 
two in Glasgow and one in London. Each has peculiarities 
of its own, yet all show parallels additional to 
those presented in DAWN, Vol. II., and all serve the 
one purpose of confirming the Chronology presented 
in that volume, as the only possible and consistent 
Bible Chronology, on which alone all the various lines 
of prophecy are harmonizable. As stated in DAWN, 
Vol. II., the Bible Chronology presents a sufficiency 
of difficulties to require faith that God meant to give us 
a time measurement. 

The lesson of the accompanying diagrams is that 
no such parallels would be possible were a single one 
of our prominent dates altered. For instance, the two 
years' difference between the end of the 6,000 years, 
1872 A.D. and the beginning of the antitypical Jubilee 
period, 1874 A.D., which in DAWN II. we explained 
as implying that Adam was about two years sinless in 
Eden, these diagrams 
show as necessary to 
fill out the measurements. 
Our date for 
the beginning of A.D., 
and the events connected 
with our Lord's 
birth and death, are 

R3460 : page 343 

confirmed by these parallels, too. These are one 
year and three months different from the Bishop 
Usher dates of our common version Bible, and two 
years and nine months different from the revised 
dates of today's scholarship. This is accomplished by 
the marking of the year A.D. 36 as the end of the "70 
weeks" of Israel's favor and the date when the Gospel 
reached Cornelius. 



DIAGRAM NO. 1 shows that the period from the 



time of the Fall to A.D. 36, 

4162 years, was marked 

exactly at its center by the 

Oath bound Covenant made 

to Abraham, "In thee and 

in thy seed shall all the families 

of the earth be blessed." 

This not only corroborates 

the correctness of 

our placing of the birth of 

our Lord, but also the correctness 

of all the chronology 

leading up to that date: 

for it seems incredible almost 

that such an even division 

could happen by accident. DIAGRAM No. 2 is another 

illustration of the same lesson. See also DAWN, VOL. II. 

MATHEMATICAL DEMONSTRATION. 

(SEE DAWN, VOL. II., PP. 42-54.) 

Creation to the Flood 1656 years 

Patriarchal Age (i.e., Flood to Death of } 427 " 

Jacob) } 232 " 

Jewish Age to End of Favor, A.D. 36 1849 " 

4164 " 
Less "Innocent Years" 2 " 

4162 " 

The middle of the period, viz., one-half 2081 " 

I. PERIOD. 

Creation to the Flood 1656 years 

Flood to Covenant 427 " 

Creation to Covenant 2083 " 

Less years of innocence 2 " 

2081 " 

II. PERIOD. 

From Abraham to the Law 430 years 

Israel in the Wilderness 40 " 

To the division of Canaan 6 " 

Period of the Judges 450 " 

" " Kings 513 " 

" " Desolation 70 " 

" thence to A.D. 1 536 " 

" " " 36 36 " 

2081 " 



DIAGRAM NO. 3.— This diagram presupposes 
that in the divine plan the day of Adam (Gen. 2: 17) 
and the "day of Christ" were 
each one thousand years long: 
as the Apostle declares, "a 
day with the Lord is a thousand 
years." Adam's "fall" 
into death was fully accomplished 
seventy years before 
the end of his "day," and 
presumably Christ will accomplish 
the full lifting up of 
Adam and his race (or all of 

them willing to obey the righteous conditions necessary) 
before the end of the millennial day. 

This diagram views the Millennium as beginning 
with the end of "Gentile Times," October, 1914, and 
shows that the intervening space, 5040 years, is exactly 
twice "seven times;" and more than this, it marks the 
turning point as B.C. 606, as well as the ending point 
A.D. 1914. Does it not appear that the Lord so arranged 
this matter, and that he has now brought it 
to our attention, to be distributed to the household of 
faith for their comfort and encouragement at an opportune 
time? It surely does. It will be observed also 
that all of these calculations include the same two 
years of Edenic purity. The "fall" is kept prominent: 
everything measures from it. Compare DAWN, 
Vol. II., chap. 4. 

DIAGRAM No. 4 in some particulars resembles No. 

R3460 : page 344 

3, yet it is quite different as a whole. It views matters 

from another Scriptural standpoint, taking A.D. 

1 874 for the date of the Millennium, as shown by the 

Jubilee cycles and various 

other prophecies.— See DAWN, 

Vol. II., chap. 6, and Vol. III., 

chap. 5. 

Our readers are already 
familiar with the presentations 
of this from its middle 
at 625 B.C. to the right extremity. 
(DAWN II., p. 185, 
186.) The new features are 
at the left of the center: not new in the sense of 
contradicting or altering anything already seen, but 
new in the sense of bringing to our attention great 
harmonies of the divine plan not before observed, 
and which fully corroborate our previous findings. 

The last line on the figure is interesting, too, 
showing the division of the whole period of 7,000 
years in its center at 625 B.C., the date of the last typical 
jubilee ever observed by Israel— just nineteen 
years before the "seventy years' desolation" of the 



land, since which they have had no opportunity to 
observe the jubilee, even had they desired to do so, 
since their land has always been under the suzerain 
control of alien governments. How grand the thought 
that the Grand Antitypical Cycle did not fail— that 
it counted until its fulfilment in A.D. 1874, and that 
there the real Jubilee of jubilees actually began— that 
the Lord's people are even now blowing the Jubilee 
Trumpets, announcing the "time is at hand" and the 
change of possession is due October, 1914. Do not 
these dove-tailing figures prove (as nearly as faith 
could expect proof) that we are right respecting the 
chronology on which these matters are based— this 
one proving the date 625 B.C., as the previous one, 
No. 3, proved the date 606 B.C.? 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word." 

There is nothing forced or fanciful about these 
diagrams, their deductions and conclusions. They 
are almost cold in their matter-of-factness. Yet how 
meaningful and soul-cheering to us who believe and 
appreciate their significance. They come, too, at a 
time when "science, falsely so-called," is making special 
attacks on the chronology of God's Word, and 
making those attacks applicable to the Bible as a 
whole— at a time when thousands at our side are falling 
into skepticism. Let us give reverent thanks to 
the Giver of all good, and more and more sound the 
praises of him who has "called us out of darkness into 
his marvellous light," and more and more appreciate 
and use our privileges as his ambassadors and servants 
in handing forth the "meat in due season" to 
all the members of "the household of faith." 



R3461 : page 344 

"LIKE UNTO THE ANGELS." 

AMONGST the Jews were three particular parties. 

The largest and in every way most 

important of these were known as Pharisees, 

who believed in a future life, to be attained by a resurrection 

at some future time, for which they waited. 

Second to these in importance, yet very much smaller, 

were the Sadducees, who boasted of their intellectual 

acumen, claiming that a man when he died had no 

preeminence above a brute, except in the honors done 

to his corpse— disbelieving in a resurrection or future 

life of any kind, disbelieving also that there are angelic 

beings of a spirit order, holding extremely materialistic 

views, believing nothing that they could not 

appreciate with their natural senses. The third party, 



Essenes, accepted the heathen teachings of Plato, 
disbelieving in a resurrection, and claiming that when 
a man died he was more alive than before. This sect 
or party, although mentioned by Josephus a little 
later than our Lord's time, was so small in the days 
of our Lord and the apostles that they are not so much 
as mentioned once in the New Testament. 

The Pharisees, the numerous party, the orthodox 
at that time, were our Lord's chief opponents in argument 
and otherwise; yet, as the records show, they 
uniformly failed to entrap him, though their ables 
men were put to the fore with this end in view— that 
they might show our Lord's teachings to be illogical 
or unreasonable to some degree, and thus to break his 
influence with the common people; or, failing to do 
this, that they might catch him in his words and have 
opportunity for a charge against him before the Roman 
governor, and thus bring political pressure to 
bear to stop his ministry. It was on such an occasion, 
after the discomfiture of the Pharisees, that the Sadducees 
stepped to the front with a question which 
they had every confidence would confuse our Lord in 
the presence of the people, and not only show his position 
to be illogical, but gain a feather for their own 

R3461 : page 345 

caps as philosophers and teachers superior, not only 
to Jesus, but also to the Pharisees. 

WHOSE WIFE SHALL SHE BE? 

The Jewish Law provided certain inheritances 
for each son, and it was the ambition of each to perpetuate 
his own family. This the Law inculcated, by 
providing that upon the death of any man childless, 
his brother, if he had one, should perpetuate his inheritance 
for him by taking the widow to wife. The 
skilfully arranged question of the Sadducees supposed 
seven brothers, the first one of whom married and 
died childless, the wife being taken by his brother, 
and so likewise until the entire seven had been husbands 
to the one wife. Lastly the wife died. Which 
of these seven could claim the wife in the resurrection? 
The question seemed to show an absurdity in 
the doctrine of a future life, implying that there would 
be such a muddle that all eternity would not straighten 
it out. 

Our Lord's answer was, "Ye do err, not knowing 
the Scriptures, neither the power of God." 
That is to say, the difficulty of the Sadducees arose 
from the fact that they had not understood the 
Scriptures relating to the future life beyond the 
resurrection, neither did they give proper weight 
to the power of God, which is quite able to surmount 
every difficulty that could be imagined. Our Lord 



might have stopped there, giving the not unreasonable 
inference that his hearers lacked the proper 
knowledge of the subject to permit them to clearly 
comprehend anything he might say about it. But 
rather than appear to avoid the question, and, indeed, 
with a view to giving light upon the subject to us who 
would come afterward, our Lord explained the matter, 
saying, "The children [people] of this world [age] 
marry and are given in marriage; but they which 
shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world [age] 
and the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor 
are given in marriage." 

True the glorified Church will not marry, but 
there is no reference here to the Church class, the 
Bride class. The question did not refer to saints, but 
to any ordinary Jews under the Law, to whom the 
illustration might be in any degree applicable. 

Nothing in the illustration implied that either 
the woman or any of her husbands were followers of 
the Lord or in any sense of the word "saints." Our 
Lord's answer should be understood from this standpoint, 
therefore. He did not say, My disciples will 
neither marry nor be given in marriage, nor that those 
who are faithful in following me will have such experiences, 
but he made his answer as broad as the 
Sadducees had made their question: he made the answer 
applicable to all Jews. True, also, the Greek 
article occurs before the word resurrection in the question 
and also in the answer, but this would be no positive 
proof that a special or chief resurrection was 
meant except two resurrections were referred to in 
contrast. Indeed the distinction between the resurrection 
of the Church and that of the world was not 
yet taught by our Lord— was not set forth until after 
Pentecost. Hence the Sadducees could not know to 
refer to it. They did probably know that our Lord 
had awakened some dead ones, as had the prophets of 
old, and so probably referred to the anastasis of the 
future as in contrast and distinction from any temporary 
awakening of the present time. 

DID THE RANSOM SECURE FULL 
RESURRECTION? 

We ask then, what did our Lord mean by limiting 
his answer to "they which shall be accounted 
worthy to obtain that age and the resurrection"? 
Will not the whole world be accounted worthy to obtain 
full resurrection? Did not our Lord's death purchase 
full resurrection for all the race? We answer, 
No. Our Lord's death was the propitiation, the satisfaction, 
whereby the sins of the whole world shall be 
cancelled, and whereby, therefore, the whole world 
may be awakened from the sleep of death and brought 
out of the great prison-house, the tomb. But such 
awakening and coming forth is with a view to their 



enlightenment, that they may all come to the knowledge 

of the Truth to the intent that by such knowledge 

and by obedience to it they might be saved, recovered, 

delivered completely out of all weaknesses 

and imperfections— brought gradually step by step, 

up, up, up, out of sin and death-conditions to full perfection 

and life-conditions; and this condition of absolute 

perfection or life from the dead is resurrection 

"out from among the dead" who will refuse to use 

those opportunities. 

The raising up will proceed during the thousand 
years from the time of the awakening of the individual 
until he shall have attained to the full perfection of 
manhood— all that was lost in Adam. Then he will 
be resurrected— that will constitute his resurrection. 
Thus he will attain unto "that world," that perfect 
dispensation which God has designed shall be the 
ultimate and everlasting condition of all who love and 
obey him. But some will be awakened from the 
tomb who will not be accounted worthy to attain such 
a lifting up to perfection, mental, moral and physical, 
because of their failure to respond to the blessed privileges 
and influences of that time. 

Now, as respects those who, at the close of the Millennial 
age, will have demonstrated their obedience to 
the Lord, and who shall be accounted worthy of that 
perfect state, and to be made perfect themselves, lifted 
clear out of death— such will neither marry nor be given 
in marriage. The Lord does not say what will be the 

R3461 : page 346 

intermediate conditions during the Millennial age, and 
this leaves us to infer that mankind and womankind, being 
awakened from the tomb in precisely the same 
conditions in which they went into it, will possess the 
same sex distinctions as at the present time. What 
will be the regulations of that time we are not told, 
but we have confidence in the Lord that he will be 
abundantly able to direct the course of mankind wisely 
for their benefit, instruction and uplift. 

The end of the uplifting process, the end of the 
Millennial age, will mark a change in the human constitution 
by gradual development, a change so great 
that by that time those who will be ready to pass beyond 
the Millennial age into the everlasting conditions 
will not only be perfect in the sense and degree 
that Adam was perfect before he sinned, but also before 
mother Eve was taken from him and made a separate 
being. That is to say, sex conditions will gradually 
pass away, and be no more in mankind, even as 
it is not found in angels, and as it was not in man before 
the separation into sexes was effected in Eden for 
the purpose of propagating the race and filling the 
earth. 



SEXUAL DISTINCTIONS TEMPORARY. 

It will be remembered that during the first thousand 
years after the fall, not only was life much longer 
than at present, but births were much less frequent 
than now; and so we presume that during the Millennial 
age the propagation of the species will gradually 
diminish until toward its close it will finally stop, 
mankind gradually losing the sex functions. Sex will 
no longer be necessary; for man will no longer be 
alone, as he was at first, to need a companion, for the 
whole earth will then be filled with perfect beings, 
and all the wicked, the incorrigible, will be destroyed. 
It is to this we understand that our Lord referred, 
saying, "Neither can they die any more, for they are 
equal unto the angels, and are the children of God, 
being children of the resurrection." As the angels 
do not die, neither will the perfected human beings 
die. 

Eternal life is the gift of God through Christ for 
all of Adam's race who would receive it upon conditions 
of absolute obedience, and the test which will 
take place in the close of the Millennial age (Rev. 20:7-9) 
will guarantee that none remain to pass beyond 
into the perfect dispensation except those who, like 
the angels, having been tested, will be in no danger 
of falling, and will therefore die no more. Those who 
pass that inspection at the close of the Millennial age 
will be accepted of the Father as his children, and the 
intermediary or mediatorial Kingdom of Christ over 
them will terminate. They will become God's children 
by the resurrection— by the raising up processes 

R3462 : page 346 

of the Millennial age, administered through the glorified 
Christ— the same that elsewhere is called "the 
resurrection by judgments," because the rewards and 
penalties of obedience or disobedience will follow 
promptly, having the effect of constraining to righteousness 
and uplifting from sin-and-death conditions. 

In applying this Scripture thus to the world of 
mankind, and its raising out of death conditions during 
the Millennium and its attainment to life everlasting 
and to the condition where there will be no further 
marrying, we have no desire to imply that there will 
be marrying in the glorified Church. On the contrary 
the Church is married to the Lord. As old creatures 
they are dead; as New Creatures they never will be 
married to any but the Lord; and when in the resurrection 
they come forth to glory, honor and immortality 
it will be to conditions like to their Lord, "far 
above angels, principalities and powers and every 
name that is named." 

WHAT MOSES SHOWED AT THE BUSH. 



Continuing to level his argument against the Sadducees 
—continuing to prove the general resurrection 
of mankind, and not merely the resurrection of the 
Church— our Lord adds, "Now that the dead are [to 
be] raised even Moses showed at the bush, when he 
calleth the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of 
Isaac and the God of Jacob, for he is not a God of the 
dead but of the living; for all live unto him." Had 
there been no provision in God's plan for the raising 
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, he never would have 
spoken of himself as being their God, but rather 
would have treated them as non existent, having no 
being, no God, and never to have any. Likewise the 
fact that God speaks of the coming blessing through 
Abraham upon all the families of the earth proves 
that from the divine standpoint, although the billions 
of earth are dead, they all live unto God— in his purpose, 
in his plan, in his arrangement, to be accomplished 
and fulfilled through Jesus during the Millennial 
age. 

SHALL WE KNOW EACH OTHER THERE? 

The questions are frequently asked us, What 
knowledge of one another will there be in the next 
life? and Will there be communication between the 
heavenly and the earthly classes? 

We reply that the acquaintance of the present 
time will be prolonged into the next life, and revive 
and increase. As for those who will attain the spirit 
plane of being, viz., the Bride, the overcoming class, 
and "the virgins, her companions, which follow her," 
otherwise in Scripture known as the "great company," 
all being upon the spirit plane will be able to see and 
know each other, because in those respects they will 
be alike, spirit beings. True, the Bride class, with 
her Lord Jesus and the Father, will all be on the divine 
plane, while the Great Company, like the angels, will be 

R3462 : page 347 

on a lower plane of spirit being. But all spirit beings 
may see and know and have intercourse with each other 
—those on the divine plane being superior not only 
in rank and position but also in that they will possess 
inherent life, immortality, while the others will possess 
a life that will be eternal because of its continuous 
supply. 

The world of mankind will know each other as they 
do now— some by previous acquaintance and some by introduction. 
Thus, none of the ancient worthies who 
will be present as perfect men will be known by any 
of the world today, and they would need, therefore, 
some kind of introduction, either by divine miracles 
attesting them and their authority or by some other 



means. It may be easily enough imagined how the 
world will gain introduction one to the other, just as 
such introductions are now accomplished amongst 
men. Similar introductions will doubtless be necessary 
to the glorified saints beyond the vail, since the 
majority of them have never seen the Lord, the Apostles, 
nor each other. 

COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN SPIRITS AND 
HUMANS. 

Coming now to the last feature, we answer that 
undoubtedly there will be communication between the 
heavenly and the earthly beings, not only throughout 
the Millennial age but subsequently. To our understanding 
the Father and the heavenly angels will 
have nothing to do with mankind during the Millennium, 
until the delivery up of the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son. But there will be communication between 
the Kingdom class, the Church, with Jesus at its 
head, and the world of mankind under their supervision 
and uplifting influences. Looking back into the 
past, we see that God communicated with Abraham, 
and numerous of his natural descendants, through 
spirit beings, who assumed human form for the purpose. 
But we are not to expect such manifestations 
in the future, because we find in the divine arrangement 
a different preparation. 

We find that the ancient worthies as a class have 
been prepared of God in advance to serve this very 
purpose; that they, rewarded with human perfection, 
might serve as the intermediaries between the spirit 
Kingdom and the world of mankind. As it is written, 
"The Law shall go forth from Mount Zion and the 
word of the Lord from Jerusalem." The instruction 
will go from the spiritual Kingdom to the earthly 
princes, its representatives, and be communicated from 
these princes to all the families of the earth, with full 
power and authority in the name of the Kingdom to 
enforce every regulation, to reward the well-doers and 
to punish all who fail of obedience. 

With the end of the Millennial age, wilful evildoers 
having been cut off in the Second Death, the 
world of mankind will be, like the angels, possessed 
of lasting life, and without sex. They will all be perfect 
men, like to and equal to the condition of the 
ancient worthies during the Millennium. When the 
Kingdom of Christ shall be delivered to the Father 
we believe that a similar communication will be established 
between the perfect men and the heavenly 
courts that was in vogue before the first disobedience 
and its penalty came upon men. True, we do not 
know very particularly about the character of the communion 
which prevailed in Edenic times, but it was 
sufficient for every purpose, we may be sure, and such 
will be the communion of the future between the 



perfect God and his earthly image, the perfect man- 
similar communion to that which during the Millennial 
age will take place between the glorified Church 
and its earthly representatives, the ancient worthies. 



R3462 : page 347 

"THEM THAT HONOR ME I WILL HONOR." 

-2 CHRONICLES 29: 18-31. -DECEMBER 4.- 

HEZEKIAH was reckoned in the Lord's sight 

as one of the three most acceptable kings 

who ever sat upon the throne of Judah— 

David and Josiah being the other two. (2 Kings 18:5.) 

His case was the more remarkable in that he was 

the son of King Ahaz, one of the most reprehensible 

kings that ever occupied that throne— one so disesteemed 

that he was not even buried in the sepulchers 

of the kings. King Ahaz had fostered idolatry in its 

worst forms, and under his reign the kingdom had 

sunk to a very low condition every way. At the age 

of twenty-five years Hezekiah, on his father's death, 

had succeeded to the throne, and his entire reign was 

one of reformation and indicated a hearty desire to 

please the Lord. 

The secret of the difference between the father 
and the son is found in the fact that the mother was a 
godly woman, and no doubt this is one particular reason 
why her name, Abijah, is mentioned in the Scriptures. 
The name signifies, "My father is Jehovah," 
and implies that one or both of her parents were reverent 
and God-fearing. How she came to be the wife 
of so ignoble a king we do not surely know, but evidently 
the irreverence and idolatry of her husband 
had no contaminating influence upon her mind. This 
is intimated by the name given to her son Hezekiah, 
which signifies, "Strength of Jehovah." In this we 
have another illustration of the Apostle's words, "For 
the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife and 
the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, else 

R3462 : page 348 

were your children unholy." (I Cor. 7:14.) So far 
as parentage is concerned the intimation is that the 
Lord is pleased to recognize the child as the offspring 
of the believing parent, and thus it comes under divine 
providence and care, similar to that of its believing 
parent, up to the age of discretion. 

What a lesson we have here respecting the power 
of a mother for good. True, in this case as a wife 
she did not succeed in influencing her husband to divine 
reverence and righteousness, but she evidently 



did exercise a moulding, controlling influence in the 
formation of her son's character. The influence of 
the wife and mother rightly exercised is very highly 
to be appreciated, but some, failing to properly value 
their privileges and opportunities in the home, have 
launched forth in public efforts to the neglect of home 
duties— a serious mistake. 

CLEANSING THE TEMPLE. 

The lesson recounts the opening of the Temple 
and the cleansing of its various parts, which apparently 
required sixteen days. This probably included 
the restoration of certain brass plates and borders 
which we are informed King Ahaz had removed from 
the altar and tables for use in other places; but sixteen 
days would be none too long for a proper cleansing 
of the building anyway. We recall that history 
says that before the reign of Queen Elizabeth, while 
Great Britain was under the power of Rome, St. 
Paul's Cathedral in London was used as a kind of 
market place, donkeys with burdens passing up and 
down the aisles (previously and subsequently used for 

R3463 : page 348 

worship), huckstering and servant hiring, etc., being 
a part of the regular routine. Evidently it is very 
easy for any people to lose its reverence for God and 
holy things, and such a loss is not only to be deprecated 
in a nation, but particularly in the hearts of individuals, 
for with the loss of reverence goes one of 
the mental qualities most helpful to a moral and religious 
life. 

The restoration of the Temple to the service of 
God was celebrated by King Hezekiah and the rulers 
of the city and the princes of the nation with great 
zeal, for indeed the whole nation seems in some measure 
to have come to a realization of its low condition 
and need of an uplift. Our lesson proceeds to describe 
a special sin offering for the sins of the people. 
The fact that seven bullocks, seven rams, etc., were 
sacrificed instead of one of each would merely mean 
that it was to intensify the matter, seven being a 
symbol of perfection or completeness. 

This was not the regular Atonement Day sacrifice, 
because it was in April instead of in September, 
but we may be sure that no Atonement Day sacrifice 
had been offered in the Temple for many years,— so 
thoroughly had the king and the nation under his 
guidance rejected the Lord and the gracious arrangements 
he had made for their forgiveness and fellowship 
with him. The proper date for sin atonement 
having passed, it was no doubt proper enough that the 
sacrifices should be offered in the middle of the year 
rather than wait for the beginning of the new year; 



but the atonement effected would not be good for 
twelve months, but merely for the remainder of the 
year in which it was offered. The generous spirit 
of Hezekiah is exhibited in his instruction to the 
priest that the same atonement should be effected 
not only for the people of the kingdom of Judah but 
also for those of the ten tribes which had separated 
from them. 

SPIRITUAL TEMPLE CLEANSING. 

Spiritual lessons for the Church may be drawn 
from this narrative. The antitype would not be the 
cleansing and care of church buildings, chapels, 
cathedrals, etc., although it is certainly proper enough 
that any building used for the Lord's worship should 
be respected and kept in decency and in order. The 
antitype of the Jewish Temple is the spiritual Temple 
of which the Apostle speaking says, "Whose Temple 
ye are if so be that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you." 
Applying the lesson in an individual manner it would 
mean that if any of the Lord's people have in any 
measure fallen into worldliness, sin, the worship of 
Mammon— idolatry— the neglect of the worship and 
service of the true God in any measure or degree, 
there should be first of all a cleansing to the best of 
our ability, a reformation, and secondly an appeal to 
God for at-one-ment with him, for forgiveness of 
sins. It is not necessary that we should offer bullocks, 
goats and rams, but it is necessary that in such a reformation, 
such a preparation for divine forgiveness, 
we should come before the Lord in the merit of the 
great sacrifice for sins which he has appointed and 
which already has been made— "once for all." 

Applying the lesson on a larger scale to the 
Church as a whole, we look back in history and see 
the time that the Temple of God was completely given 
over to idolatry, when the "continual sacrifice" was 
set aside, and masses, fresh sacrifices, "abominations" 
in God's sight were substituted, and even the form of 
godliness was almost obsolete and supplanted by heathen 
festivals and carnivals and image worship, wholly 
misunderstanding the divinely arranged faith worship. 
In the Lord's providence a great reformation came in 
the days of Luther, Melancthon and others, and this 
cleansing of the Lord's Temple is still in progress, 
because, alas, all of the debris of Antichrist has not 
yet been removed. 

R3463 : page 349 

A PART IN THE SERVICE FOR EACH. 

Much of superstition, false doctrines and mummery 
still remains. With many the "mass" is still 
reverenced, but, thank God, with the few the precious 



blood shed once for all for the remission of sins has 
come back again into a proper appreciation. Let all 
of the Royal Priesthood, the consecrated followers of 
the great High Priest of our profession, be on the alert 
to do all in their power for the cleansing of the Temple 
of every defilement of error, and let all of the antitypical 
Levites, the household of faith, lend willing 
hands in this same direction, cooperating for the one 
great end which at last will be secured— not by our 
efforts, but by him who declared that his influence 
will be as fuller's soap and as a refiner's fire to purify 
all of the sons of Levi— to purify all of the true believers, 
that ultimately they may be acceptable sharers 
in the heavenly Kingdom and its glorious work of 
uplifting all the people and shedding forth the blessings 
of the great atonement upon all the families of 
the earth. 

The work of reestablishing the true religion recounted 
in our lesson was not to be accomplished in 
a doleful manner, but with joy and rejoicing. The 
priests and Levites proceeded with the various departments 
of the work, and musical instruments and the 
psalms of David expressed the joy of those who rejoiced 
in the new order of things. The king and the 
people bowed before the Lord, giving the worship of 
their hearts to the invisible one instead of to idols and 
the work of their own hands. King Hezekiah, evidently 
addressing the people, said, "Now have ye 
consecrated yourselves unto the Lord: come near and 
bring sacrifices and thank offerings into the house of 
the Lord. And the congregation brought in sacrifices 
and thank offerings, and as many as were of willing 
heart brought burnt offerings." 

Thus it is with the Lord's truly consecrated people 
today. Rejoicing to be free from the errors and 
sins of the past, they rejoice to worship the Lord with 
thank offerings and praise and true worship. Let this 
be more and more the attitude of those who have been 
blessed of the Lord with the opening of the eyes of 
their understanding and a return to his favor. 



R3463 : page 349 

THE CAPTIVITY OF EPHRAIM. 

-2 KINGS 17:6-18.-DECEMBER 11.- 

Golden Text:— "The face of the Lord is 
against them that do evil."— I Pet. 3:12. 

EPHRAIM was the name of the ten-tribe kingdom 

of Israel, as Judah was the name given to 

the two-tribe kingdom of the same people. 

Our lesson recounts how, at the divinely appointed 



time, Ephraim was utterly overwhelmed by the kingdom 

of Assyria. The people, deprived of weapons, 

although otherwise well treated, were deported to the 

lands under Assyrian control, while other peoples conquered 

by the Assyrians were settled in the land of Israel. 

The object of the conqueror evidently was to 

break the national spirit and reduce the various peoples 

conquered to a kind of serfdom, the better to collect 

taxes or revenues for the Assyrian treasury. 

Probably the people were not worse off as respected 

their material welfare, for they were not treated as 

slaves but as emigrants and settlers. 

For many centuries Ephraim, the ten-tribe kingdom, 
especially after Solomon's death, was extremely 
perverse: not more degraded, we may presume, than 
the surrounding nations, but their perversion was 
more wicked, more reprehensible, because of greater 
privileges, blessings, knowledge and opportunities 
which the Lord had granted to them as the posterity 
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the inheritors of 
the great Oath-bound Covenant made to Abraham and 
confirmed to Isaac and Jacob. One is amazed, in reading 
of the Lord's dealings with Ephraim and Judah, 
to note their general tendency toward idolatry, and 
this in spite of the divine chastisements, corrections, 
etc., which evidently influence only the few. 
In thinking of these matters we are to remember that 
the surrounding nations were still more grossly steeped 
in idolatry and its lustful orgies, practised in the 
name of worship. These other nations were not specially 
chastised for idolatry as was Israel, but were 
allowed to practically take the course they chose, as 
the Apostle explains in Rom. 1:28: God gave them 
over to a reprobate mind and to doing those things 
which were not proper because they had not wished 
to retain him in their minds. 

The captivity of Ephraim should be viewed from 
this same standpoint. It was God's abandonment of 
the ten-tribe kingdom, his permission for them to 
have their way, and henceforth be treated of him as 
the heathen— without special chastisement. It was 
in this sense and in this sense only that those tribes 
were "lost." Located in various parts of Assyria 
they gradually assimilated with the population surrounding 
them, and lost identity as Israelites, intermarrying 
with their neighbors. 

It was because of their failure to appreciate him, 
because of hankering after false gods and false worship 
and the more or less mingling of these false worships 
with the true worship, that God withdrew his 

R3463 : page 350 

favor. It is pointed out that God did not cast them 

off without reproving them, chastising them and sending 

them messages by prophets and seers. To the 



seers the Lord gave prophetic visions and messages 
built upon these, and by the prophets he sent them 
instructions and warnings, encouragements and threatenings. 
Elijah and Elisha had been amongst them, 
and later Jonah and Amos and Hosea. Through all 
these the Lord had warned and cautioned. Through 
Hosea the Lord had made especially kind and loving 
appeals to them as a father to children— "How can I 

R3464 : page 350 

give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I make thee as 
Admah?"— a desolate room. Again we read, "Ephraim 
feedeth on the wind"— "I will heal thy backslidings, 
I will love thee freely." These messages had 
indeed some effect upon a few individuals in the nation, 
but did not affect the people as a whole, neither 
did it lead to a reformation. As our lesson declares 
(vs. 14), "They would not hear, but hardened their 
neck like to the neck of their fathers. ..And they rejected 
his statutes and his covenant that he made with 
their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified 
unto them; and they followed vanity," etc. Hardness 
of neck here is a figure of speech doubtless drawn 
from the stiffness of neck of a yoke of unruly bullocks 
—unmanageable, self-willed, resenting every effort to 
turn them in the right way. 

The wrong course of the people is further declared 
in the statement that they not only worshiped false gods 
but made their sons and daughters pass through the fire, 
and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves 
to do evil in the sight of the Lord. They became 
the slaves of their passions and self-deceptions, 
and were so misled of the evil spirits as to consider this 
burning of their own children as acceptable sacrifices 
to false gods. It was well that all pretensions on 
their part to be people of God should cease; it was 
well that they should be removed to new scenes, 
amongst strangers, where under new conditions their 
minds would be otherwise engaged, even though it 
should be an entire alienation from God. 

VIEWED FROM THE DIVINE STANDPOINT. 

There is but one standpoint from which the history 
of Israel can be properly understood and appreciated: 
namely, Israel's inheritance in the Abrahamic 
Covenant. All of God's dealings with the children 
of Jacob were with a view to a selection of the two 
seeds of Abraham— a natural seed and a spiritual 
one. To this end their national experiences conspired 
—to find in that nation certain noble, loyal, reverential 
souls, such as David, Jonathan, and all the holy 
prophets, and to prepare that people by disciplines, 
prunings, etc., to be the people to whom Messiah 
would first present himself and among whom he would 



find a goodly "remnant" prepared to be his 
followers. 

The separation of the ten tribes from the two 
tribes at the death of Solomon was an important step 
in this selection. The Lord had distinctly stated in 
advance that the Law-giver whom he had promised 
should come out of Judah, and hence any Israelites 
indeed in the ten-tribe kingdom must have looked 
with longing interest toward Judah as the ultimate 
end of their hopes— the Messiah, and the fulfilment 
through him of the Abrahamic Covenant. Throughout 
the varying history of these two kingdoms the 
greater religious faith and zeal was always to be found 
in Judah, and gradually many of the more religious 
in Ephraim removed to Judah and identified themselves 
therewith, because of the greater religious privileges 
and blessings there enjoyed. Thus Judah eventually 
represented the cream of the nation, and the 
records show that not only Hezekiah, the king of Judah, 
was favorably disposed toward his brethren of 
Ephraim and made them welcome to the religious 
assemblies, but that other kings, his predecessors, had 
done similarly. Thus seen the captivity of Ephraim 
was merely the rejection of the skim milk of the nation, 
and as we have already seen was really not at 
all to their injury so far as temporal interests were 
concerned. It was their cutting off from divine favor 
in respect to the Abrahamic Covenant that was specially 
regrettable. 

When a good while afterward the kingdom of Judah 
was overthrown and its people similarly taken 
into captivity and similarly scattered amongst the nations 
composing the Babylonish empire it was merely 
a carrying out of a further development of the divine 
plan. By this last stroke the Lord would put away 
all the more grovelling, sensual and worldly-minded 
of his people. The desolation of the land for seventy 
years permitted all who would to forget the original 
covenant of which they were heirs, permitted them to 
intermarry with the nations around them if they would, 
permitted them to settle and prosper and be content 
in their new homes; and then the Lord in his providence 
opened up a way for all who were not satisfied 
with the good earthly portion they were enjoying to 
return to their own land— a desolated land. 

We can readily see that none of them would come 
back under such conditions except those who had 
strong faith in the Lord and in the original Oath-bound 
Covenant made to Abraham and confirmed to 
Isaac and Jacob and the nation. All without faith 
and all of weak faith, all lacking in zeal, would surely 
find it much to their advantage every way to remain 
where they were. And so we find that only 55,000 

R3464: page 351 



out of all the millions of those two nations cared to 
return to the land of promise— for in the Lord's providence 
the proclamation of King Cyrus permitted all 
Israelites of every tribe to return to their own land. 
The faithful people who did return were the very 
cream of that nation, and their successors, to whom 
our Lord Jesus presented himself as king, represented, 
in many respects, the noblest and best people in 
the world. We should not be misunderstood: while 
the majority of Ephraim and Judah commingled with 
the heathen, others preserved their identity as Israelites 
without returning to Palestine, just as we see the 
Israelites today in every part of the world preserving 
their religious institutions and faith. But then each 
preserved his tribal identity, whereas now all tribal 
lines are lost and obliterated. It is of these that the 
Apostle sometimes spoke as "our twelve tribes scattered 
abroad"— not lost but scattered, as today. The 
only ones lost are those who have become Gentiles, 
by utter disregard of the peculiar characteristics of 
the nation, of which by divine arrangement circumcision 
was one. 

Our lesson viewed from this standpoint is profitable. 
It shows us that God is working out his great 
and wonderful plan. Those favored in that plan are 
not coerced, though graciously dealt with and appealed 
to; neither does their neglect or rejection of divine 
favor estop the development of the divine plan. 

"God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform." 

ANALOGIES IN SPIRITUAL ISRAEL. 

We may reasonably expect analogies in spiritual 
Israel, and we find them. The first epoch of the 
Church's history in the days of the apostles was quickly 
followed at their death by the great "falling away" 
from the faith and simplicity of the original establishment; 
chastisements followed, persecutions, etc., and 
finally the great majority went into captivity to the 
world— to Babylon. To these the worship of images 
and shrines and pictures and the offering of incense 
and burning of holy candles were associated with a 
great false sacrifice— the "sacrifice of the mass"— the 
"abomination that maketh desolate." 

Gradually the Lord separated from that system 
of confusion and error the few who were spiritual Israelites 
indeed. Protestantism thus gradually grew, 
and in some respects represented more nearly than 
did the Greek and Roman churches the true hopes 
and prospects of the Christian; and yet in Protestantism 
much was found that was reprehensible in God's 
sight, many who had only a form of godliness without 
the power, but some— a proportionately larger 
number than in Papacy— were found at heart loyal to 



the Lord and desirous of knowing his will and plan. 

These dealings with nominal spiritual Israel for 
the past eighteen centuries are gradually separating 
to the Lord an overcoming class and preparing a remnant 
for him in his second presence. The Reformation 
movement gathered out of Papacy the majority 
of the loyal souls indeed at that time: and now in 
the harvest time of this age the ripe wheat is being 
garnered from "all Israel," from Catholicism as well 
as Protestantism, though because of previous siftings, 
etc., much the larger proportion, as might be expected, 
will be gathered from Protestantism— Israelites 
indeed in whom there is no guile. 

"KEEP YOURSELVES FROM IDOLS." 

The Apostle's words, "Keep yourselves from 
idols," are not by any means meaningless to spiritual 
Israel. All around us we see idolatry— not on the 
same low plane practised in olden times, but idolatry 
nevertheless. Some worship the idol of wealth, others 
at the shrine of fame, and in a general sense the 
spirit of worldliness is swallowing up the time and 
talent and influence of the civilized world, which professedly 
claims to be Christendom— Christ's kingdom 
—spiritual Israel. As natural Israel had its groves 
and totem-posts, some plain and some carved, so many 
spiritual Israelites today have for their totem-posts 
the various creeds of the various denominations set up 
in the past. To these the masses bow with reverent 
thoughtlessness, largely neglecting the Almighty 
One and the Word of his testimony, which Word rebukes 
all such misrepresentations of the divine character 
and plan. 

We have not today in nominal Christendom a literal 
Moloch of brass, heated red hot by internal fires, 
with arms open to receive the children to his embrace, 
as ancient Israel had, but we have instead a Moloch 
on a much larger scale— a much worse misrepresentation 
of the only true God, whose character is wisdom, justice, 
love and power. We have today in the minds 
of people, reverenced by many, mental imaginations 
of a god red hot with the flames of hell or purgatory, 
and visions of millions agonizing in his embrace. 
How terrible the thought! How God-dishonoring! 
How manifestly the work of the Adversary and totally 
contrary to the gracious messages which the Lord has 
so repeatedly sent, not only through the prophets of 
old but also through his Son and through the apostles, 
"speaking peace through Jesus Christ," and assuring 
us of his love, as manifested in the great redemptive 

R3465 : page 351 

sacrifice, and of his intention to bless the world 
through the glorified Christ by appointing "times of 



restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all the 
holy prophets since the world began."— Acts 3:21. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY 