From Our Readers
Jews and Christians  I am moved to express my appreciation for the series of articles on Jews and Christians. (June 22, 1991) As a Christian minister, I must say that I felt somewhat at a loss as to how to discuss this matter with Jews. The article showed that we are not asking them to abandon their Jewish heritage but merely to examine Jesus and the Messianic prophecies in the light of the truth, not by distorted traditions and false doctrines.
J. L., United States
The article could give the impression that the crimes of Christendom are to be regarded as worse than those of the Jews. Was it not the Jews who nailed God’s Son to the stake?
N. L., Germany
The murder of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was indeed the greatest crime in human history. Nevertheless, there is no evidence that God condemns the individual descendants of the perpetrators of that crime. On the contrary, “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34, 35) Whereas no single nationality stands condemned before God, Christendom must answer for its record of bloodguilt, persecution, and religious intolerance.​—ED.
Gang Attack  I really appreciated your article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Protect Myself From Gang Attack?” (July 22, 1991) It came just at a time when I was sighing over not knowing how to deal with this situation. From now on I will be careful about my dress, grooming, and conduct. Thank you very much for your help.
J. H., Japan
The Great Impostor  Thank you for publishing the article “Out Of the Jaws​—The Great Impostor.” (June 22, 1991) My daughter always had headaches and was treated in various ways, but the cause was not found. I took the article to a dentist; he took X rays and found the problem. Now she is receiving the right treatment. I am not yet one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, but I enjoy reading Awake!
S. M. S., Brazil
I am a dentist, and this article will be of enormous help to a great number of people. Few know that this disorder exists, and even we dentists sometimes take too little account of it. How right you are that only our Creator has the solution to all disorders!
E. F. G., Germany
Self-Defense  Reading the article “Self-Defense​—How Far Can a Christian Go?” (July 8, 1991), one could get the impression that the martial arts promote a readiness for combat and aggression. This is not the case. Most martial arts instill bodily control, self-discipline, and a sense of fairness to a higher degree than many other sports.
T. M., Germany
It may be true that the martial arts can be of some value to participants. Nevertheless, they teach one how to injure fellow humans, and this is incompatible with the Bible principles found at Isaiah 2:4 and Matthew 26:52.​—ED.

