Announcements
LIVING UP TO ONE’S DEDICATION VOWS
To be living up to one’s dedication vows to Jehovah God is of vital importance, as brought to our attention at Ecclesiastes 5:4, where we are counseled: “When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed.” A must in fulfilling dedication vows is sharing regularly in preaching the good news of the Kingdom for the purpose of a witness to all nations. This Jehovah’s witnesses delight to do, and they prove it by diligently arranging their personal affairs so as to always have time and energy to engage in the preaching work. During September all will share in the house-to-house service, giving first an enlightening three-to eight-minute Bible sermon and then offering a superb Bible-study aid bound book on a contribution of 50c. Live up to your dedication vows by sharing in this blessed service at every opportunity.
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA ANNUAL MEETING OF MEMBERS
This year October first falls on Tuesday and so it will be at ten o’clock in the forenoon of October 1, 1957, that the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will hold its annual meeting of members. This will be at the registered office of the Society, which is located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, corner of Parkman Avenue, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Notice of the meeting will be sent in the regular way, by letter, to the members of the corporation, and in order for this to be done it is necessary that the secretary’s office have the proper addresses to which to mail such notices. All who are members should be certain that their membership records do show their addresses properly. With the notice of meeting the proxy forms will be sent. All the proxies should be returned to the office of the secretary of the Society not later than the 15th of September, and each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 15: Happy Are the Peaceable. Page 493.
September 22: The Fight of Faith of the Peaceable. Page 499.

