Witnesses in Russian Labor Camp
“I AM suffering evil to the point of prison bonds as an evildoer. Nevertheless, the word of God is not bound.” Those words, written by the apostle Paul to his friend Timothy, are also true of many dedicated Christians today, such as those in Russian labor camps.—2 Tim. 2:9, NW.
Testifying to that fact is the report the Watch Tower Society received recently from a German refugee in the United States regarding his experience in a Russian labor camp, from which we quote the following:
“I had always thought that Jehovah’s witnesses were to be found only in Russia. But when I was released from prison, I, to my surprise, met them also in Western lands. In past years these people got me to do some thinking.
“It was during my almost three years of imprisonment in Russia, eight months of which I spent, in 1946, in the labor camp of X, in the northwestern part of Russia on the Volga River. Among the prisoners were some that attracted my attention from the very first day I was there because of their cheerfulness and friendliness. They were from 17 to 50 years old, belonged to various professions and trades and seemed very intelligent. Having already spent some ten years in prison they were considered old-timers.
“They had responsible positions because of their dependability and the camp officials as well as the worst criminals had the greatest respect for them. They always seemed to have something to talk about and talked freely to everyone about their hope. Although meetings were forbidden, they managed to get together almost every evening, eight from our barracks and two or more from other barracks. In their discussions they perused a small Bible, tattered and yellow with age. They copied parts of it on all kinds of material, on empty sacks, pieces of wood and suchlike. The way they cherished this Bible made one think that their wish to have a Bible was even greater than their desire for freedom.
“What they copied they smuggled to all the five sections of the camp, for which purpose they used messengers, some of whom were not even believers but who were glad to do it for the witnesses. One of them, Brother X, seemed to be in charge. He organized their activities, seemed to know the right ones to use and regularly visited the barracks.
“Many knew of their secret meetings but none betrayed them. We arranged our beds (sleeping boards) so that they had theirs in the corners farthest from the doors, where they would not be noticed. They were thankful for this and showed it in many ways.
“Once a year the entire camp had to assemble on the factory grounds for special inspection. The witnesses used this occasion for having an assembly of their own, meeting in a place which they decorated with birch saplings. There was also an open tank which they scrubbed spotlessly clean. Although I did not see it myself, I am certain they had a baptism. And all this without the camp management knowing anything about it!
“That same evening the two youngest witnesses in our barracks, 17 and 19 years old, had many visitors. Repeatedly, strange faces showed up; there would be handshaking, patting on the shoulder and a few words softly spoken. No doubt these were newly baptized ones being congratulated. Both of them radiated so much joy that others, puzzled, asked: ‘Are you so happy because you are going to get married?’
“The witnesses were always ready for every good work, but you could not get them to go in with you to do anything crooked. Although we had a very hard time of it, their firm conviction and trust could not be shaken. We envied them; we just couldn’t understand it. Yet to have these witnesses of Jehovah with us, their very presence and the thought—there are still some real men left—well, it was a real consolation to all of us.”
It seems paradoxical that while the witnesses of Jehovah outside of Russia were wondering if any witnessing was being done inside that country, one who had been transported into Russia should find the witnesses so active as to think that Russia was the only place where the witnesses are found! Truly, while Christians may be bound, the Word of Jehovah God cannot be bound.

