
A Special Invitation




 1. When will the invitation campaign for the 2014 conventions begin?
1 If you were planning a special meal for friends or family, one that required much effort and expense to prepare, you would likely be enthusiastic when extending invitations. Similarly, much work has gone into preparing the spiritual feast that will be presented at our 2014 district and international conventions. Beginning three weeks before the start of our convention, we will have the privilege of inviting others to attend. What will help us to extend the invitations with enthusiasm?
 2. What will move us to have a full share in the campaign?
2 We will be moved to have a full share in the campaign if we reflect appreciatively on how much we personally benefit from the spiritual banquet that Jehovah provides at our conventions. (Isa. 65:13, 14) We should remember, too, that our annual campaign yields results. Some people we invite will attend the convention with us. Regardless of how many respond, however, our diligent efforts during the campaign will bring praise to Jehovah and reflect his generosity.—Ps. 145:3, 7; Rev. 22:17.
 3. How will the invitations be distributed?
3 Each body of elders should determine how the congregation can give the invitations wide distribution, including whether to leave them at not-at-homes or offer them in public witnessing within the territory. On weekends the magazines should be offered along with the invitation when appropriate. If the first Saturday of the month falls within the dates of the campaign, emphasis should be placed on distributing invitations rather than on starting Bible studies. After the campaign concludes, how happy we will be to know that we participated enthusiastically and that we invited as many people as possible to join us at the spiritual banquet that Jehovah provided!



What Will You Say?
After giving a customary greeting, you might say: “We are involved in a global campaign to invite people to a very important event. The date, time, and address are printed on this invitation.”



