
Exciting Design for New Tracts!




 1. What items for the ministry have an exciting new design?
1 Five new tracts were released at the 2013 “God’s Word Is Truth!” District Conventions. Additionally, Kingdom News No. 38, entitled “Can the Dead Really Live Again?” has been added to the series of tracts. All six of these tracts have an exciting new design. What are the reasons for the new format? When we offer them from house to house, how can we make good use of their design features?
 2. What is the purpose of the new design?
2 Why the New Design?: Effective house-to-house presentations often include these four steps: (1) Ask a viewpoint question to start a conversation. (2) Share a thought from the Scriptures. (3) Offer literature for the householder to read. (4) Leave a question to answer next time, and make arrangements to return. The tracts’ new design helps us easily to follow all four steps.
 3. How might we offer one of the new tracts in the ministry?
3 How to Use Them: (1) After giving a greeting, show the householder the intriguing multiple-choice question on the front of the tract, and ask for his opinion. (2) Open the tract, and consider “What the Bible Says.” Read the scripture directly from the Bible when circumstances allow. If the householder has time, discuss “What That Can Mean for You.” (3) Offer the tract, and encourage him to read the rest at his convenience. (4) Before you leave, show him the question on the back under “To Think About” and make arrangements to discuss the Bible’s answer next time.
 4. How could we use the new tracts on the return visit?
4 The return visit is easy too. Simply use the cited scriptures on the back of the tract to answer the question you raised at the conclusion of your last visit. Before you leave, point out the picture of the Good News brochure, show the householder the brochure and the designated lesson that contains more information on the subject, and offer the brochure. If he accepts it, make arrangements to discuss the brochure on your next visit. You have started a Bible study! Or instead of offering the brochure, you could offer another tract and arrange to return to discuss it with the householder.
 5. What value do tracts have in our ministry?
5 Tracts have been used in our ministry for over 130 years. Although their size and format have varied, they have been a very effective witnessing tool. May we make good use of this new design to continue spreading Bible knowledge earth wide.—Prov. 15:7a.




