
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Being a Helpful Companion




Why Important: Jesus recognized the value of preaching with a companion. So when he dispatched 70 of his disciples to go ahead of him and preach, he sent them out in pairs. (Luke 10:1) A companion can provide needed support if his fellow publisher encounters a difficult situation or is unsure of how to answer a householder. (Eccl. 4:9, 10) He can share his experience and occasionally offer a suggestion that may help the one with whom he is working become a more effective evangelizer. (Prov. 27:17) He can also encourage by means of his upbuilding conversation between doors.—Phil. 4:8.



How to Do It:
Pay attention when your partner is giving a witness. (Jas. 1:19) When a scripture is read, follow along in your copy of the Bible. This will put you in a better position to assist if needed.

Use good judgment to determine if and when you should join in the conversation. (Prov. 25:11) If you accompany another publisher on a Bible study, your occasional comments will likely be appreciated. However, when preaching from house to house, your service companion may prefer that you let him do the talking when it is his turn. Of course, if he is a new publisher or if he is not sure how to respond to a question or objection, he will likely appreciate your help. But whether you are accompanying a publisher in the house-to-house, return visit, or Bible study work, do not interrupt, take over the conversation, or introduce a different subject.

Share your experience. If, on occasion, you can give the publisher with whom you are working a suggestion to help him be more effective in the ministry, do not hold back. (Prov. 3:27) At an appropriate time, you might begin by saying: “How do you think that went?” or “May I offer a suggestion?” or “Here’s what I try to do.” Keep in mind that while others appreciate receiving a suggestion on occasion, they will be discouraged if every mistake is called to their attention.




Try This During the Month:
After working in the ministry with your field service partner, tell him what he said or did that made him a helpful companion.



