
“Congregate the People”




 1. District and international conventions have what similarities to a momentous gathering of the Israelites shortly after they left Egypt?
1 Shortly after leaving Egypt, Jehovah instructed Moses to “congregate the people” at Mount Sinai to hear His words so that they might fear Him and instruct their sons in His ways. (Deut. 4:10-13) What a memorable and faith-strengthening occasion that must have been! During the next few months, Jehovah’s people will gather at district and international conventions to be instructed by Jehovah. What must we do in order to benefit to the full?
 2. What must we do to “be ready” for our convention?
2 “Be Ready”: Jehovah commanded the Israelites to “be ready” for that historic gathering at Mount Sinai. (Ex. 19:10, 11) Likewise, careful preparation is needed by all who will attend the conventions, not just by those who will have a part on the program. For example, many will need to arrange to take time off from their secular job. Perhaps your situation is similar to Nehemiah’s. He wanted to leave his work as King Artaxerxes’ cupbearer in order to go to Jerusalem and help rebuild its walls, but he knew that the king might not be agreeable. Nehemiah said a prayer and then courageously presented his graciously worded request. The king allowed him to leave and even gave support to the building project! (Neh. 2:1-9) In addition to requesting time off from your employer, have you confirmed your travel arrangements and accommodations? The elders will be happy to help any who may need assistance. Plan to arrive early for each session, and be ready to “pay more than the usual attention” to what you will hear.—Heb. 2:1.
 3. What will help us to prepare our heart for the program?
3 Another important facet of our readiness involves preparing our heart so that we may listen and learn. (Ezra 7:10) The convention program will be posted in advance on the jw.org Web site and will list the titles for all the talks along with one or two key scriptures for each one. This provides excellent material to consider during our Family Worship evening in the weeks leading up to our assigned convention. Some publishers print out the program and use it for taking brief notes during the convention.
 4. How can parents use the convention to teach their children?
4 ‘Teach Your Sons’: One of the stated purposes of the convention at Mount Sinai was for Israelite parents to “teach their sons.” (Deut. 4:10) The convention gives parents an excellent opportunity to do the same. Parents should have their children sit with them during the sessions and help them pay attention. At the end of each day and later during their family worship, families can discuss the program together.
 5. How will we benefit from attending the upcoming convention?
5 The momentous convention at Mount Sinai helped the Israelites to appreciate their unique privilege of being God’s people. (Deut. 4:7, 8) Our upcoming convention is designed to benefit us in a similar way. For three days we will be able to step out of the harsh wilderness of Satan’s world and enjoy spiritual refreshment and upbuilding association in our spiritual paradise. (Isa. 35:7-9) With Jehovah’s day drawing near, may we not forsake this opportunity to meet together for an interchange of encouragement!—Heb. 10:24, 25.




