VOL. XXXVII. JULY 1 No. 13 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

Signs of the Presence of the King 195 

"Saved as Through Fire" 195 

Invulnerability of the Truth 196 

Seeking Membership in God's Kingdom 197 

True and False Ideas of the Kingdom 197 

St. Paul at Athens 198 

Some Mocked at the Resurrection 200 

Good, Better, Best in Bible Study 200 

St. Paul at Corinth 201 

Eighteen Months of Teaching 202 

Glorying in the Cross of Christ 203 

Significance of the Cross 203 

Earthly vs. Heavenly Wisdom 203 

Lesson of the Blighted Fig Tree 204 

The Fig Tree a Symbol 205 

Love in the Classes 205 

Pastoral Advice 205 

A Fourteen-Year-Old Martyr 206 

"Let Him Buy a Sword" 206 

Interesting Letters 207 

page 194 

GENERAL CONVENTIONS 

ST. LOUIS, MO.-June 22-25. For assignments address J. 

H. Hoeveler, 6126 Waterman Ave. Friends coming 

from the South to this convention should inquire of 

Ticket Agent for Excursion Rates. 
SIOUX CITY, IA.-July 6-9. For assignments address A. 

J. Strite, 1422 W. 5th St. 
NEWPORT, R.I.-July 9-16. For assignments address Mrs. 

Anna R. Calvert, 12 Everett St. 
PORTLAND, ME.-July 21-23. For assignments address A. 

F. Buxton, 55 Chestnut St. 
NORFOLK, VA.-July 22-30. For assignments address P. 

L. Derring, 216 12th St. 
NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y. -Aug. 19-22. For assignments 

address A. Fossbraey, 727 Pine Ave. 
NASHVILLE, TENN.-Aug. 24-27. For assignments address 

Milton E. Confehr, 1516 McGavock St. 
LOS ANGELES, CAL.-Sept. 2-10. The Long Beach Convention 

has been transferred to Los Angeles. For assignments 

address F.P. Sherman, 808 S. Figueroa St. 
SEATTLE, WASH.-Sept. 14-17. For assignments address 

H.G. Babcock, 2410 First Ave., W. 
MILWAUKEE, WIS.-Sept. 16-24. For assignments address 



C. Hilton Ellison, 2704 Wells St. 



PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIO 

De Luxe Edition, gilt 85c; Cloth edition, 35c; Paper 
edition, 15c— includes postage. 
Colporteur rates, 50% off collect, or charge postage or 

express. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
August follow: (1) 27; (2) 333; (3) 152; (4) 313; (5) 1; (6) 
46; (7) 58; (8) 119; (9) 60; (10) 130; (11) 324; (12) 277; (13) 
114; (14) 117; (15) 226; (16) 91; (17) 105; (18) 194; (19) 23; 
(20) 7; (21) 154; (22) 66; (23) 325; (24) 78; (25) 296; (26) 
19; (27) 57; (28) 165; (29) Vow; (30) 107; (31) 113. 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man." treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 



prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 640 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 750 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: German and Swedish, 
six vols.; Dano-Norwegian, five vols.; Greek, four vols.; Finnish, three 
vols.; French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian, 
Polish, Arabic, Roumanian, Chinese, Japanese, one vol. each; bound in 
cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the same. 

For the Blind in American Braille, English Braille and New York Point. 



R5916 : page 195 

SIGNS OF THE PRESENCE OF THE KING 

"But who may abide the Day of His Coming? And who shall 
stand when He appeareth? for He is like a refiner's fire and 
like fuller's soap."— Malachi 3:2. 

THE words of the Prophet given in our text 
refer to the close of the present Gospel Age. 
It is the same Day prophesied by the Apostle 
Paul when he declared, "The fire of that 
Day shall try every man's work of what sort 
it is." (1 Corinthians 3: 13.) It is the Day 
of which the Apostle Peter wrote so graphically 
when he said that in that great Day of 
the Lord the heavens should be on fire and 
the elements should melt with fervent heat, 
and that the earth and all the works therein should be 
burned up. (2 Peter 3:10.) It is the Day of which the 
Prophet Zephaniah spoke when he said that in the great 
Day of the Lord all the earth should be devoured with the 
fire of God's jealousy. (Zephaniah 3:8.) Isaiah, Jeremiah, 
and many of the faithful Prophets of God prophesied 
of this Day. The Prophet Daniel was instructed by 
the angel of the Lord that in that Day there should be a 
"Time of Trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation." (Daniel 12:1.) Our Lord Jesus Himself verified 
this prophecy, and added that never afterwards should 
there be such a time.— Matthew 24:21,22. 

The Scriptures call this Day "the Day of the Lord," 
"the Day of Jehovah," "the Day of God," "the Day 
of Christ," "the Day of Vengeance," "that great and notable 
Day," etc. It is the Day in which the Old Order is 
to perish and the glorious New Order is to be ushered in. 
In foretelling this Day, both the Prophets and the Apostles 



speak of the class which will stand in this Day when all 
others shall fall. St. Paul says that everything which can 
be shaken down will be; and that only the Kingdom which 
will then be set up, and which cannot be shaken, will 
remain. (Hebrews 12:25-29.) The present order of society— 
the nominal church systems, financial institutions, 
political institutions— all— will go down. 

During the Gospel Age many who have not been Christians 
have associated themselves with the Church. The 
civilized world of today call themselves "Christians," in 
contradistinction to the nations which they call "heathen." 
though from the Scriptural standpoint they are all heathen 
—Gentiles. Among all these various nations we find many 
religions, whose devotees claim that they have consecrated 
themselves to God. But the touch-stone by which these 
claims may be tested is the Word of God. See Galatians 1 :6-9. 
To the true Church of Christ alone will God give 
the Messianic Kingdom. Some who really have Christ 
and His work of sacrifice as their foundation will be saved, 
but at the expense of all their works, their character-structure, 
which the "fire" of this Day will consume. The 
tare class in the nominal churches will be bundled and 
"burned," not as individuals, but as professed Christians; 
that is to say, their professions will be seen to be without 
foundation. They will come to see how grossly in error 
they were— how far removed from the Truth. 

"SAVED AS THROUGH FIRE" 

The ones who are upon the Rock Christ Jesus, the only 
true Foundation, are those who have accepted Jesus as 
their Ransom-sacrifice, and have consecrated themselves 
wholly to God through Him. All these, "have been called 
in one hope of their calling." (Ephesians 4:4.) Many 
of these will fail to make their calling and election sure 
and will suffer great loss. They did not build properly 
upon this Foundation, Christ, a structure of gold, silver 
and precious stones of Truth and of whole-hearted loyalty 
to the Lord. They will suffer the loss of the Kingdom, 
and through much tribulation will take a lower place, 
before the Throne— not rulers, but honorable servants of 
the ruling class. All who have been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit must, as we have shown elsewhere, either be born 
upon the spirit plane or lose life altogether. Those who 
prove wholly faithful will be born Divine beings. Those 
not wholly faithful, and who miss the great "prize," 
though not denying the Lord that bought them, will be 
born spirit beings of a lower order. 

The tribulations which characterize the end of this 
Age will thoroughly awaken these careless ones. Certain 
special tribulations, we understand, have come to those 
who were of this class all through the Age. But apparently 
a larger number of these are living now, at the close 
of the Age; and these must go through "the great tribulation," 
and must wash their soiled robes and make them 
white in the blood of the Lamb. (Revelation 7:9-17.) 



They will have a blessed portion after their purification, 
but far less glorious than that to which they were called. 
The Apostle Paul in his writings lays special emphasis 
upon the fundamental importance of correct doctrinal 
teaching. It made no difference whether Paul or Apollos 
or even an angel from Heaven taught anything, it must be 
in harmony with the foundation doctrines which had been 
given them by the Lord. (Galatians 1:6-12.) He assured 
the Church that what he had taught them was from God; 
and that even if an angel should bring them another Gospel, 
it would be a proof that such angel had deflected from 
loyalty to the Lord. That Jesus Christ died to secure the 
Redemption-price for Adam and his race is the foundation 
doctrine of the Church, which was received from 

R5916 : page 196 

Jesus Himself and from His faithful mouthpieces and 

which was shown in the Divinely given types of the Law. 

Whoever taught this fundamental truth faithfully was a 

real help to the people of God. Yet even such a teacher 

might help them to build, even on this proper foundation, 

a faith and character structure which would not stand the 

tests of the great Day of the Lord; for the fire of that 

Day would surely prove the nature of this structure. Consequently, 

both teacher and pupil would suffer loss and 

be saved only "as through fire." 

INVULNERABILITY OF THE TRUTH 

This prophecy of our text is still in process of fulfilment. 
The "refiner's fire" is even now doing its work, and 
thousands and tens of thousands are falling all about us. 
The Prophet's query is very pertinent at this time. We 
see that the false teachings which have come down during 
these many centuries since the Apostles fell asleep have 
made humanity incapable of reasoning correctly on religious 
subjects. In the past we have had our own experiences 
along this line. Whenever anything religious 
was mentioned we seemed to lose our common sense. Now 
we have lost our fear of the dread penalty of using our 
reason. We have come back to the teachings of Jesus 
and the Apostles, and we find them grand and beautiful. 

Those who have been teaching errors will soon be 
ashamed (Isaiah 66:5), while the fire of this Day will only 
manifest the Truth to all. No power, no tongue, no pen, 
can successfully contradict the Truth, the great Divine 
Plan of the Ages. It is strong before its enemies and before 
all who make assaults upon it, and ere long the folly 
of its foes shall be made known to the whole world. 
"There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." 

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PRESENCE OF THE KING 

The coming of the King to possess His Kingdom will 
mean a personal as well as a national and a church examination. 



judgment and treatment. It will mean, when the 
Kingdom is fully inaugurated, the suppression of vice in 
a manner and to a degree never attempted by any earthly 
reformer. There will be no license to do evil in any form. 
The only liberty granted will be liberty to do right. It is 
no wonder that so few experience joy at the proclamation 
of the return of earth's rightful King to reign. To many 
it will mean the loss of their present advantages over their 
fellowmen. To many it will mean the prohibition and cutting 
off of sins now indulged in and enjoyed. 

Nevertheless, both the King and the Kingdom are not 
only coming, but are here; and the present troubles and 
shakings in church and state, and the general awakening of 
the people are the results of influences emanating from 
that King and Kingdom. Though men know it not, it is 
the smiting of the Kingdom of God that is even now preparing 
for the wreck of all the kingdoms of the earth, 
that the way may be opened for the establishment of 
righteousness in the world, that men's hearts may be 
humbled and prepared for the righteous Government 
which is to take control of earth. Worldly men cannot 

R5917:page 196 

realize this; for this Kingdom cometh not with outward 
observation— with outward show and display. Therefore 
they cannot say, "Lo, here," or "Lo, there." 

In spite of the awful war now raging, growing fiercer 
and more deadly every day, these continue to hope for 
peace, trying to convince themselves and others that the 
trouble must soon be brought to an end, and that matters 
will then go on as formerly. They blind themselves to 
the true conditions and refuse to believe that God has determined 
to permit this trouble to spread and involve the 
entire world and to bring about the utter overthrow of the 
Present Order of things. Selfishness, pride and love of 
money have closed their eyes. We give here an extract 
from a poem written some years ago by a Christian minister, 
which forcefully describes present conditions and 
the judgment of God which is now to be visited upon the 
world for their lasting good: 

"Woe to the Age when gold is god, and law a solemn jest. 

That helps the boldly vile to crush the noblest and the best! 
When Mammon o'er cheap millions flings his gilded harness 

strong, 
And drives them tame beneath his lash down broad highways 

of wrong; 
While Truth's shrill clarion down the sky peals faintly o'er 

the rout. 
And dust and fumes of earth and sin shut Heaven's blest 

sunlight out! 
Then look for lightning!— God's red bolts must cleave the 

stifling gloom. 
In righteous wrath to purge the world in Sodom's fearful 

doom!" 



But we are thankful that while the judgments of a 
righteous God against sin must come at this time, yet the 
ultimate results will be glorious, when the world will come 
forth chastened, subdued, purified by the awful baptism 
of fire and blood; when they shall come to see that sin, 
selfishness and corruption have wrought their legitimate 
outcome. Then mankind will be ready to cry to the Lord 
and to long for His deliverance, and He will be entreated 
of them and will lift them up and bless them. 

But the coming of the King means much trouble and 
the general overturning of the kingdoms of this world 
which, while professing to be kingdoms of God, are really 
under the control of the "prince of this world," Satan, 
"the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now 
worketh in the children of disobedience." (John 14:30; 16:1 1; 
Ephesians 2:2.) It means the shaking of society 
in a manner and to an extent never before known, and so 
thoroughly that another shaking will never be necessary. 
(Hebrews 12:26,27.) It means the breaking in pieces of 
the empires and governments of the world as a potter's 
vessel. It means the passing away of the present ecclesiastical 
"heavens," and the fall of many of its bright "stars." 
At present the sunlight of the true Gospel, and the moonlight 
of the Law with its types and shadows, are obscured 
by the thick clouds of worldly wisdom. "The sun shall be 
turned into darkness, the moon into blood."— Joel 2:30,31. 

While many would rejoice to see society relieved of 
many of its selfish, life -sapping ulcers, they seem to realize 
that so just and impartial a Judge as the Lord Himself 
might cut off certain long-cherished sins to which they 
desire to cling; they fear to have their personal selfishness 
touched. And their fears are well-founded. He will bring 
to light all the hidden things of darkness, and correct and 
suppress private as well as public sin and selfishness. He 
will expose depths of corruption never before realized. 
He will make "Justice the line and righteousness the 
plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of 
lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place." (R.V.) 
He will "bring down them that dwell on High, the 
lofty city [Babylon] He layeth low, . . . even to the 
dust." He will bring down them who have "made lies 
their refuge."-Isaiah 28:15,17,18; 26:5,6. 

LIFT UP TRUTH'S GLORIOUS BANNER! 

It is written that the Day of the Lord would come as 
a thief and a snare upon the whole world, and that only 
God's fully consecrated Church would be in the light and 
not be taken unawares. Many of the consecrated have 
been deceived by looking for the Heavenly King to come 
again in the flesh. They forgot that the only reason for 
His coming in the flesh at His First Advent was "for 

R5917:page 197 



the suffering of death" as man's corresponding-price; and 
that now He is highly exalted, a glorious spirit Being. 
"He was put to death in flesh, but made alive in spirit." 
(1 Peter 3:18.) They forgot that the Apostle Paul also 
said, "Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet 
henceforth know we Him [so] no more." (2 Corinthians 5:16.) 
The true children of God are coming more and 
more to see how the Master comes at His Second Advent, 
and are not expecting to see Him in the flesh and with 
their natural eyes. 

We who know that the King of Glory and His blessed 
Kingdom are the only remedy for the wrongs and woes of 
man should be pointing the groaning creation to this 
Kingdom, rather than to the poultices of their own contriving 
which can do no real good. Tell them the meaning 
of present world-wide conditions, and how, beyond the 
troubles now overspreading the world, will come the glorious 
Times of Restitution foretold by all the holy Prophets 
since the world began. Tell them that the death of Jesus 
was the Redemption-price for the entire race of Adam, 
and that His return is for the purpose not only of delivering 
His Church, but to bind Satan and set free all His 
captives, including all who are in the graves, giving all 
who will an opportunity to come into the liberty of sons 
of God, under the terms of the New Covenant, soon to 
be established. 



R5917:page 197 

SEEKING MEMBERSHIP IN GOD'S KINGDOM 

"Seek ye first the Kingdom of God 
and His righteousness."— Matthew 6:33. 

AT THE beginning of our Lord's earthly ministry 
the Jewish nation were invited to become 
the Kingdom of God. The offer of 
God's chief blessing was "to the Jew first." 
For many centuries they had been God's 
special people. They had been called to be 
unto God "a kingdom of priests and an holy 
nation"— a peculiar treasure unto God, composed 
of a priestly class and a chosen, holy 
people. (Exodus 19:5,6.) We do not understand 
that all Israel from the time of the giving of the 
Law could have been of the Heavenly Kingdom, however 
faithful they might have been. None could be of this 
Kingdom class before Jesus came to earth; for He was 
the Forerunner of this class. The offer was made to the 
Jews of His day. But those of the nation who lived previously, 
and who had been faithful to God, true to their 
Covenant, shall be greatly blessed of the Lord on the 
human plane. They shall be used to bless all nations under 
Spiritual Israel— the Kingdom of God now being set up. 



God's special favor to the people of natural Israel in 
choosing them above any other nation was especially because 
they were the seed of His faithful friend, Abraham. 
God had promised Abraham that because of his faith and 
obedience his seed should be blessed. It was not because 
they were of themselves holier or better than other peoples. 
(See Exodus 32:9-13; Deuteronomy 9:4-8.) But 
for their fathers' sakes God chose them to be His people. 

At our Lord's First Advent the time had come for the 
offer of membership in the Kingdom, for the testing of the 
whole nation of Israel, to prove whether they were ready 
for this choice blessing. Jesus was the One to offer this 
Kingdom; for He had consecrated Himself a Sacrifice for 
sin, which would constitute a basis for the establishment 
of the Kingdom on earth. 

TRUE AND FALSE IDEAS OF THE KINGDOM 

The Sermon on the Mount, from which our text is 
taken, points out the earnestness and singleness of heart 
necessary in those who would become members of the 
Kingdom class. The Master intimates that not all of this 
favored nation who heard His Message would be ready 
to accept it. Many were absorbed in the things of this 
life— in what they would eat, what they would drink, what 
they would wear. But in order to be ready to receive the 
proffered blessing, in order to be acceptable to God, they 
must make the Kingdom their first interest. "Seek ye 
first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness," enjoined 
the Savior, not the earthly things. If the Kingdom was 
made first, all their earthly needs would be supplied; "All 
these things shall be added unto you," was His promise. 

Not many of the Jews were ready for so drastic a 
Teacher. They had their own plans— business plans, political 
plans, social functions. Hence this invitation of Jesus 
to leave all to obtain a Kingdom of which they knew nothing 
and which seemed so intangible did not find a very 
ready response. The twelve Apostles were among the first 
to accept His offer. At the time of Jesus' death, something 
over five hundred had joined themselves to Him as 
His disciples. Of these we are told that one hundred and 
twenty were gathered in the upper room on the day of 
Pentecost, where they received the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit. After Pentecost some thousands of Jews came to 

R5918:page 197 

the point of decision to make the Kingdom of God their 
first business. These, however, were but a small minority 
of the nation of Israel. 

Throughout this Gospel Age there have been a 
few who have heard the Call and accepted the conditions, 
who have determined to make the Kingdom of God the first 
consideration of their lives. Satan has tried to make many 
of these think that papacy is that Kingdom, or that Great 
Britain or Russia or some one of the other kingdoms of 



earth is that Kingdom. To others he brought a misinterpretation 

of the words of the Apostle, "The Kingdom of 

God is righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit," 

and endeavored to make them think that all there was of 

the Kingdom of God was merely righteousness and holiness 

of life, living a godly life through the power of the 

Lord's Spirit. How far all this is from the teaching of the 

Scriptures regarding the Kingdom can be readily seen by 

a study of the subject of the Kingdom of God as presented 

by the Holy Prophets, the Apostles and our Lord Jesus 

Himself. Truly we have a wily Adversary! 

HOW CHRISTIANS MAY KEEP GOD'S LAW 

By these false ideas the true thought of the Kingdom 
was obscured— the thought that God was selecting the 
members of the Kingdom class, the thought that we not 
only make a full consecration of our little all to the Lord 
according to His terms, but that we should continually put 
this vow of consecration into practice, counting all other 
things as loss and dross that we might win a membership 
in this glorious company of which Jesus is the Head. 
This obscuration of mind still continues with the majority 
of those who have professed the name of Christ; but the 
full complement of Body members of Christ is being secured, 
despite Satan's vigorous efforts to prevent it. Now 
the number is almost full; indeed the few now coming in, 
we believe, are merely taking the places vacated by some 
who by unfaithfulness have lost the crown laid up for 
them; for we understand that the full number had accepted 
the offer and been begotten of the Spirit when the general 
Call ceased, in the fall of 1881. See STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
Vol. III., Chap. 6-"The Work of the Harvest." 

In seeking the Kingdom of God we as Gentiles are to 
realize that the Lord has not changed from His original 

R5918:page 198 

position held when He made the proposition to Israel that 
in order to obtain everlasting life they must keep the Law. 
There is no other way. God will not exalt to Kingdom 
honors any who are violators of His Law. The question 
then comes in. How can we keep the Law? If the Jews 
could not keep it in all those sixteen hundred years, how 
could we keep it? And does not the Lord say through the 
Apostle that by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified 
in His sight? To understand this is to understand 
some of the deep things of God; namely, that "God is in 
Christ reconciling the world [those from the world who 
now accept the Gospel Call] unto Himself, not imputing 
their trespasses unto them."— 2 Corinthians 5:19. 

"YOUR BODIES MEMBERS OF CHRIST" 

Christ kept the Law and satisfied Divine Justice for 
all who become His during the Gospel Age; and His 



merit is imputed to those who keep the Law in their 
heart and are hindered from keeping it absolutely by the 
weaknesses of their fallen flesh which they are unable to 
control. And so St. Paul says that the righteousness of 
the Law is fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, 
but after the Spirit. First of all, through the imputation 
of His merit to their mortal bodies, their flesh, our Redeemer 
covers their natural imperfections. Second, because 
that body so devoted, so justified, is sacrificed. He 
reckons them dead as human beings. They are then begotten 
to a new, a spirit nature. Thenceforth their mortal 
body is counted as the body of the New Creature, no 
longer as a human body; for this was sacrificed. Actually, 
however, it is quickened to be the servant of the New 
Creature. Being still actually human, it must be given a 
robe of righteousness to wear until the end of the present 
life. This is furnished by our Savior. 

The Apostle Paul, in speaking of our human bodies 
from the standpoint of our new relationship in Christ 
Jesus, says, "Know ye not that your bodies are members 
of Christ?" (1 Corinthians 6: 15.) God no longer counts 
our fleshly body as the body of a human being. It is a 
member of Christ, the property of the spiritual New Creature. 
This New Creature keeps the Law of God. Wherein 
there is failure, it is not the New Creature that fails, but 
the imperfect flesh, which is covered by the pure, white 
robe of Christ's righteousness. God looks upon it as the 
spotless body of this New Creature. Thus we stand perfect 
before God's Law; thus the righteousness of the Law 
is fulfilled in us who are walking, not according to the 
flesh, but in the footsteps of Jesus. 

LIBERTY IN CHRIST NOT THAT OF MEAT AND DRINK 

Our text enjoins that we seek God's righteousness. 
This seems to imply that for those He is now calling God 
has provided a righteousness. This righteousness is in 
Christ, and it must be accepted by every one who comes 
to God; otherwise, not having the righteousness of God 
and the assistance that goes with it, he will not be able 
to attain unto the Kingdom. 

The New Creature is so in accord with the Lord that 
he will seek to bring his mortal body fully under the 
control of the Law of Love. He will seek to be altogether 
just toward his fellowmen, toward the brethren, 
and kind and merciful toward all. His entire life will be 
given up to attaining membership in the Heavenly Kingdom. 
This will lead him to serve the cause of God's 
righteousness. Wherever God's plans are set aside, he 
would be called upon to defend them in every reasonable 
way. He will be on the side of righteousness and truth. 
All who truly seek the Kingdom have this disposition. 

When the Apostle Paul says that the Kingdom of God 
is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace and joy in 
the Holy Spirit, we are to understand him to mean, as 
shown in the context, that the privileges of those who are 



of this Kingdom class do not consist merely in liberty to 

eat and drink things forbidden to those under the Law 

or to those in bondage to heathen superstitions, but our 

liberty is far superior to this. Those Jews who became 

followers of Christ were informed that they were now 

free from the regulations of the Law which restricted their 

food, etc. As to whether they would now eat pork or something 

else was thereafter to be regulated by conditions 

and circumstances. They had liberty in Christ that they 

had not, as Jews, previously enjoyed. 

But St. Paul points out that this is not the chief liberty — 
to be able to eat oysters, pork and other things forbidden 
by the Law. This permission would not be much 
of a blessing. The chief element of their freedom in 
Christ was that true righteousness and holiness which is 
the blessing and comfort of all those who are the sons of 
God. Nor was it the Apostle's thought that righteousness, 
peace and joy constitute the Kingdom, but that these 
are the blessed results of membership in the Kingdom 
class. They are blessings which are the heritage of those 
who are heirs of the Kingdom, even while they are still 
under age, as it were, still being tutored and prepared for 
Kingdom service beyond the veil. All of the Lord's people 
are now to rejoice in true righteousness, the righteousness 
of God, and to seek it above all else. 



R5918:page 198 

ST. PAUL AT ATHENS 

-JULY 16.-ACTS 17:16-34.— 

ATHENS THE INTELLECTUAL CENTER OF THE OLD WORLD-IMAGES 
OF THEIR GODS EVERYWHERE-PREACHING IN THE PARTHENON- 

THE ESSENCE OF THE APOSTLE'S DISCOURSE- 
THE BASIC DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GREEK PHILOSOPHY AND 
THE SCRIPTURAL TEACHINGS-THE TRUTH REJECTED BY 
THE WORDLY-WISE-GREEK PHILOSOPHY STILL HOLDS 
SWAY OVER THE MULTITUDE-ONLY A FEW BELIEVE 
THE TRUTH. 

"In Him we live and move and have our being."— Verse 28. 

WHILE Silas remained with the Bereans to 
strengthen and establish them, as Timothy 
had remained at Thessalonica and Luke at 
Philippi, St. Paul went on alone to Athens, 
then the center of the world's culture, intelligence 
and wisdom. It was a college 
city, where resided the most eminent philosophers 
of the world, as instructors in its 
great colleges, to which came the world's 
brightest and ablest thinkers. Athens 
boasted that during one century of its intellectual dominance 



it had sent forth more intellectual giants than all 

the rest of the world had supplied for five centuries. Jerusalem 

had been the center of true religion; Rome was 

the center of the world's imperial authority; and Athens 

was the world's intellectual capital. 

We can imagine St. Paul walking through the streets 
of that great city, admiring its architecture— the most 
wonderful in the world— listening to some of the scientific 
teachers of that day, and noting the numerous monuments 
with which the city was fairly crowded. Pliny, the historian, 
declares that about this time Athens contained 
more than three thousand public statues and a countless 
number of lesser images in private houses. He notes the 

page 199 

fact that in one street there stood before every house a 
square pillar supporting a bust of the god Hermes. Every 
gateway and every post carried its protecting god. Every 
street had its sanctuary. 

No wonder we read that the Apostle's heart was stirred 
within him as he beheld so intelligent a city wholly given 
over to idolatry, apparently ignorant of the true God! 
The longing seized him to tell these worldly-wise men 
about the great Creator and His Wisdom, Justice, Love 
and Power. As usual, he found the Jewish synagogue; 
and there he reasoned with the Jews and with devout persons. 
Moreover, he talked daily in the market places with 
all who were willing. Our translation says that he disputed; 
but scholars generally admit that this word does 
not well represent the thought of the original, which 
rather signifies conversed or reasoned. Disputes, in the 
ordinary sense of the word, are of little value and accomplish 
little or no good. 

Some called the Apostle a babbler, implying that there 
was neither reason nor sense in his presentations. Others 
thought more favorably, and were curious to have a formal 
discourse. So in the Lord's providence the way was 
opened for St. Paul to deliver a discourse on the Plan of 
the Ages amongst the wise men of the earth on Mars Hill, 
probably in the great structure known as the Parthenon. 
This must have seemed a favorable opening to the Apostle— 
to find intelligent people really inquiring about the Gospel 
which he was proclaiming. However, the curiosity 
of the Athenians, like that of some of the worldly today, 
was superficial. They wished to keep abreast of every 
new theory, particularly that they might the better defend 
their own position, to which they were already committed. 

THE ATHENIANS TOO RELIGIOUS 

Our Common Version reports the Apostle to have begun 
his discourse by accusing his hearers of being too 
superstitious. However true the statement might have 
been, it would have been an unwise one; for it would have 
needlessly prejudiced and offended his hearers from the 



outstart. We do well, therefore, to translate the word by 
the phrase too religious, instead of too superstitious. 
The Apostle proceeds to show that by the images 
which they had erected they recognized innumerable gods, 
and that in addition he had seen one altar to the Unknown 
God. This was being overly religious in one sense 
of the word— unwisely so. Reason should have taught 
them what Revelation teaches us; namely, that there is 
but one living and true God. The mind that roams about 
and grasps many gods is truly over-religious and under-wise. 

"TO THE UNKNOWN GOD" 

The inscription on one of the altars, "To the unknown 
God," became the text of the Apostle's discourse. He 
preached the true God and Jesus Christ, whom God had 
sent. He showed Divine Justice and its requirements, 
which the fallen race of Adam are unable to meet. He 
demonstrated that thus all mankind are under condemnation 
as unworthy of life everlasting. He showed that God 
so loved the world that He sent His Son to be our Satisfaction-price, 
to redeem mankind from the condemnation 
of death and to grant them resurrection privileges. He 
explained that this true God was neither stone nor wood, 
nor were there any such representations of Him, but that 
"they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and 
in truth."— John 4:24. 

The Apostle thus drew the attention of the Athenians 
to a greater God than they had ever thought of. He 
showed the length and the breadth of Divine love- 
that it was not confined to one nation or people, 
but that God had made "of one blood all nations of 
men for to dwell on the face of the earth," having 
determined the appointed season in which they should 
come to a knowledge of Himself, according to the place 
of their residence; for He desires that all should seek 
Him, and that, feeling after Him, they should find Him. 

How true this is! To some of us the Lord has revealed 
Himself, and has drawn us to a knowledge of Himself 
and to opportunities for still further knowledge and 
grace. Yet many are still in ignorance. His time or season 
for their being brought to a knowledge of the Truth 
having not yet fully arrived. He is being found out by 
those who desire to find Him— those who are out of accord 
with sin, those who are feeling after God with a 
desire to find Him. To this class alone does He appeal. 
How glad we are to know that after having gathered the 
Elect of this Gospel Age, He will ultimately cause every 
knee to bow and every tongue to confess, and will spread 
the knowledge of His glory to fill the whole earth! 

The Apostle, in addressing philosophers, spoke from 
the standpoint of reason, instead of attempting to discuss 
the matter from the standpoint of Divine Revelation, as 
He would have done if he had been speaking to a congregation 
of Jews or of Christians. Thus to the Stoics 
and other learned men of Athens he became a philosopher. 



in order that he might the better assist them to the true 

philosophy and the Plan of the Ages. For instance, had 

he been speaking to Jews or Christians he might have 

noted the fact that all out of Christ are out of Divine 

favor and under Divine condemnation; but in addressing 

these philosophers, he stated the truth from another standpoint. 

He called attention to the fact that in one sense 

of the word the entire human family are brethren, and 

all of them God's children, or offspring. 

Note the logic of the argument. If humanity are the 
offspring of God, they should, as His children, resemble 
Him in some degree. This being true, gold, silver, and 
stone images must be very poor representations of the 
true God. Man himself, as the child or offspring of God, 
would better represent Him, especially in the higher elements 
of character. 

"THIS IGNORANCE GOD WINKED AT" 

St. Paul anticipated the questions of his hearers— 
"Why do you come here now to tell us of this God? If 
He is our Creator, and if we are His children, why did 
He not send us a message long ago? Are we responsible 
for not worshiping Him, when we knew Him not?" The 
Apostle's answer was. You are not responsible up to the 
present time. Such ignorance and idolatry "God winked 
at"— let go unnoticed; for until now His great Plan had 
not reached that stage of development which authorized 
the sending of the Message to you. Now God has sent 
the Message to you. He commands all men everywhere 
to repent— of sins, of unrighteousness— and to come back 
into harmony with Himself. 

The question may be asked, "Why tell men to repent 
at that time any more than previously?" We answer. 
The Apostle explains why, by saying that NOW God 
commands all men everywhere to repent because He has 
appointed another Day of Judgment. In the first judgment 
Adam was on trial. He was found unworthy of 
everlasting life, and was sentenced to death. His entire 
race has shared in his death penalty. But now, in due 
time, Christ died to redeem Adam and his race from that 
death sentence, and thus opened the way for the appointment 
of another Day of Judgment, of trial for life or 
death everlasting. 

This second trial, or Day of Judgment, would not be 
merely for those who would be living at the time, but 

page 200 

would have to do with all the race— every nation, people, 
kindred and tongue— "all men everywhere." This would 
imply an awakening of the dead. Otherwise the millions 
who have already died could never have God's grace and 
could never have an opportunity for participation in it. 
The proof that all this was God's purpose, and that He 
was able to raise the dead— St. Paul points out as already 



demonstrated by the fact that the One who had died to 
redeem the race had arisen from the dead, and in due time 
would be prepared to carry out all the provisions of the 
Divine Plan in dealing not only with the living, but with 
the dead members of the race, and giving to all a gracious 
opportunity for eternal life. Moreover, this blessed opportunity 
was now presented to those who heard. 

SOME MOCKED AT THE RESURRECTION 

No other religion than that of the Bible teaches a 
resurrection of the dead. All other religions teach that 
death is only a deception— that when men die, they really 
become more alive than before death; that when they lose 
all consciousness, they really become more intelligent than 
formerly. Only the Bible teaches in accord with the voice 
of our senses that the dead are DEAD and "know not 
anything." Only the Bible teaches that a future life is 
dependent upon the resurrection of the dead. 

Only the Bible teaches that the redemption of the dead 
is dependent upon the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Only the Bible teaches that the Redeemer must come again 
the second time— not to suffer again, not as a man again, 
but as the Lord of life and glory on the spirit plane to 
change His elect Bride to His own nature, to associate 
her with Himself in His Kingdom glory, and to establish 
amongst men the Reign of Righteousness long promised, 
for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be 
done on earth, as it is done in Heaven." 

The philosophers of that day at Athens, like the philosophers 
of our day and of every epoch, sneered at the 
doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. Some of them 
denied a future life entirely. Others held that human life 
persists and is indestructible. All were in opposition to 
the Bible teaching of a sentence of death, of a redemption 
by death and of a resurrection from death. All interest 
in the Apostle's teaching vanished for the majority 
when they learned that the entire philosophy rested upon 
the resurrection of the dead. 

To the worldly mind nothing seems so irrational and 
so unreasonable as this feature of the Christian religion. 
Today this doctrine of the resurrection is proving to be 
a test to many. Few can receive it. Yet all who do not 
receive it are very certain to stumble into some of the pitfalls 
of error which the Adversary is permitted to arrange 
now for all who reject the counsel of God. 

NOT MANY GREAT OR WISE 

Nevertheless the Apostle's mission was not in vain; 
for we read that "certain men clave unto him." The 
Truth is a magnet which has a drawing power upon 
hearts of a certain character. The Apostle did not expect 
to convert many of those philosophers. He knew that not 
many wise, rich, great or learned according to the course 
of this world could come in amongst those whom the Lord 



is now calling to constitute the Bride of Christ. 

(1 Corinthians 1:26-29.) He knew that their time to hear 

would be during the Millennium— in that Day of Judgment, 

or trial, of which he had been telling the philosophers. 

Some of those who declined to hear further 

said, "We may hear you again on this matter." But if 

the Truth did not appeal to them at once, it is quite 

doubtful whether the same Message would do so later. 

Does not this principle hold true today? Is it not still 
true that the Lord is seeking a Little Flock only? Is it 
not still true that acceptance of the Truth indicates those 
who are drawn to the Lord and guided by His Holy Spirit? 
Is it not still true that inability to see the beauty and the 
force of the Truth is an indication of unworthiness of it? 

Let us be content, if possible, to find and to bless with 
the Truth those whom the Lord our God has called and 
drawn. Let us be content to leave the others for His due 
time (1 Timothy 2:5,6), after we have put the Truth 
before them. The condemnation of death will continue 
upon all except the Household of Faith until the time for 
the establishment of the great Kingdom. Then Natural 
Israel will be blessed under the terms of the New Covenant, 
the blood for the sealing of which— the blood of 
Christ— is during this Age being prepared in the sufferings 
of the Head, in which the Body is permitted to share. 
(Col. 1:24.) Then, under the provisions of that New Law 
Covenant, the blind eyes of Israel shall be opened and their 
deaf ears unstopped, and reconciliation be made complete 
for them, and for the world through them. 

Evidently this privilege of reconciliation will be open 
to all the world of mankind who, by becoming proselytes, 
may share the blessings of that New Covenant with Israel. 
And how glorious will be our privilege— if we are found 
faithful— to be sharers with our Lord in putting that New 
Covenant into execution and, as its Mediator, blessing 
Israel and the world! 



R5918: page 200 

GOOD, BETTER, BEST IN BIBLE STUDY 

EVERY influence which makes for respect for 
the Bible as the Word of God is commendable. 
The Bible Study practiced in Great 
Britain and Ireland fifty to a hundred years 
ago; namely, the committing to memory of 
verses and chapters and the use of the Book 
as a reader in the Schools, had its advantages. 
Those who thus became familiar 
with the text of the Bible had a valuable 
store of information, if later they became 
Christians and sought the meaning of God's Messages. 

Other Bible Study attempts were made in various denominations 
in so-called Bible Study Classes. These, 



however, were hampered by the denominational Creeds. 
Occasionally able teachers informed their Classes respecting 
the historical setting, discussed the writer of the 
Epistle, the journeying experiences, etc. Sometimes he 
ventured off into doctrine; but on such occasions, unless 
he was very discreet and held down the Class, the result 
of the lesson was somewhat of a dispute and a general 
tangle, which left the Class more confused than before. 
Another style of Bible Study which for a time found 
favor, consisted of a number of Christian people reading 
a chapter, verse about. Each, after reading his verse, 
would make such comment as he pleased. If there were 
forty verses in the chapter there were as many little comments. 
When the meeting closed there was a feeling of 
a measure of refreshment in having handled the Bible, 
having read some interesting verses, and having communed 

R5919: page 200 

with each other; but very little knowledge of God 
or His Plan of the Ages was gained by such Bible Study. 
It is only of late— within the past ten years practically— 
that the Bible has been studied after the manner 
we mention as Berean Studies— searching the Scriptures. 
Now all over the world Berean Classes are in operation. 
Great blessing and great enlightenment are resulting. 

R5919: page 201 

For this kind of Bible Study, a textbook is used and also 

a question-book. The textbooks are the various volumes 

of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. In these volumes the teachings 

of the Bible have been collated and brought into an 

assimilable form. For instance, if the lesson appertains 

to the Holy Spirit, the study on the subject brings together 

the teachings of the Bible from every part and 

sets these in orderly array before the Class. If the subject 

be "The Man Christ Jesus," it is similarly treated. 

If the subject be "The Logos," it is treated in like manner. 

If the subject be "Justification," "Sanctification," 

"The Glorification of the Saints," each subject is treated 

systematically— brought to the minds of the Class and 

laid open for discussion, with references to various parts 

of the Bible in which these things are stated. 

It does not surprise us, therefore, that those of God's 
people who have learned the value of this method of Bible 
Study and who follow it have a clearer understanding 
of the Word of God than others. While, therefore, we 
commend any kind of Bible Study, we especially commend 
this form which the Lord has blessed above all 
others for the enlightenment of His people in this Harvest 
time. This method is for the advantage of the entire 
Class. An able leader is not so indispensable. One 
danger with able leaders with any other method of Bible 
Study is that their ability sometimes goes in a wrong 
direction and misleads. 



These Berean Studies, however, place the entire Class 
in a position of advanced scholarship in the Word of God, 
because they have the entire subject under discussion 
open before them. Nevertheless, even in a Berean Study 
and when the questions are used, a skilful leader, who 
is humble-minded, will prove a great assistance to the 
Brethren. And this is the case in nearly every Class the 
world around. We want the dear readers of THE WATCH 
TOWER to know just why we so earnestly recommend to 
them this Berean form of Bible Study. Nor should we 
wonder if the Adversary would work against a method 
which has been so blessed of the Lord. We urge upon all 
a comparison between the results in their minds, their 
hearts, their lives, as between Berean Bible Studies and 
all other kinds of which they may have knowledge or 
have tried in the past. 



R5919: page 201 

ST. PAUL AT CORINTH 
-JULY 23.-ACTS 18:1-1 1.- 

LESSONS FROM ST. PAUL'S EXPERIENCES-CORINTH A BETTER FIELD 
FOR THE GOSPEL THAN WAS ATHENS-AS USUAL, THE 
MESSAGE WAS OPPOSED AND BLASPHEMED BY THOSE 

WHO PREFERRED "THE TRADITIONS OF THE ELDERS"-ARRIVAL 
OF SILAS AND TIMOTHY-ST. PAUL ENCOURAGED AND 
COMFORTED. 

"Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace."— Verse 9. 

ATHENS did not prove to be a very successful 
field for the Apostle Paul's labors. He 
quickly perceived that, although its citizens 
were chiefly engaged in hearing new things 
and in philosophizing on every subject. 
nevertheless the tendency of science and 
philosophy, falsely so-called, occupied their 
attention and so satisfied their minds that 
they were not as ready for the Truth as were 
some others less highly educated and less 
philosophical. The Apostle's experience in this respect 
coincides with that of all who in sincerity preach the Gospel 
of Christ stripped of all human invention and philosophy, 
and also illustrates his declaration that God does 
not choose many wise or great or learned, according to 
this world's standard, but chiefly the poor of this world- 
poor socially, philosophically and financially— to be the 
heirs of the Kingdom; for this class is more inclined to 
receive the faith and to become rich therein. 

Leaving Athens, St. Paul journeyed about forty miles 
to Corinth, a prominent commercial city of Greece, noted 
for its manufactures, architecture, paintings, bronzes, etc. 



It was much less moral than was Athens, much less refined, 
but nevertheless a better field for the Gospel. 
Where religious forms and ceremonies become popular, 
they are apt to have correspondingly the less weight and 
force. But where sin, immorality and irreligion are popular, 
those minds which have a religious trend are apt to 
be more free, more open for the Truth. Unsatisfied by 
formalism, this class more keenly recognize righteousness 
because of its sharp contrast with the sin abounding. 

Similarly today, the Truth is likely to receive a cooler 
reception amongst those whose religious sensibilities are 
to some extent satisfied by forms and ceremonies. The 
heart most ready for the Truth is the one which is not 
satiated and stupefied with religious formalism, but which 
realizes to some extent the exceeding sinfulness of sin and 
longs for the righteousness which is of God. Like the 
Apostle, we are to discern the most fruitful fields and to 
spend our energy upon them, leaving the other fields for a 
more convenient season, whether it shall come during the 
present Age or during the Millennium. 

LESSONS FROM ST. PAUL'S EXPERIENCES 

Apparently the Apostle was considerably cast down at 
this time. His first letter to the Corinthian Church, written 
later on, clearly implies his discouragement and possible 
sickness. He wrote, "I was with you in weakness 
and in fear and in much trembling." His rough experiences 
at Philippi, his small success at Athens, the slenderness 
of his purse and his need of fellowship— all contributed 
to make him downcast; and he informs us that 
the Lord encouraged him with a vision. 

Soon after his arrival at Corinth St. Paul found 
Aquila and Priscilla his wife. They were tent-makers; 
and this being the Apostle's trade, he abode with them 
and labored. It was customary at that time that the sons 
of all the upper class of people should learn a trade, however 
well educated otherwise. St. Paul's trade stood him 
now in good place, enabling him to provide for his necessities 
while preaching the Gospel of Christ. From his own 
explanation of the matter we learn that even after a considerable 
number of believers had been gathered at Corinth 
as a Church, the Apostle maintained himself by his trade. 
His reason for so doing was not that it would have been 
a sin for him to receive money and support from the believers 
there, but that he hoped that the Gospel would 
commend itself the more to many if its chief expounder 
were seen to be laboring not for the meat which perisheth, 
nor for wealth, but preaching the Gospel without charge 
—laying down his life for the brethren. 

Of this period the Apostle wrote to the Thessalonians, 
"Therefore, brethren, we were comforted over you, in all 
our affliction and distress, by your faith." (1 Thessalonians 3:7.) 
Later, he wrote of his experience to the 
Corinthians, saying, "Even unto this present hour we 
both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted. 



and have no certain dwelling place, and labor, working 

with our own hands; being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, 

page 202 

we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat; we are 

made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of 

all things unto this day."— 1 Corinthians 4:1 1-13. 

Many of us can find a lesson in St. Paul's experiences. 
If God permitted him to be in want, to be traduced, slandered, 
oppressed— if he needed such experiences in order 
to bring out the best that was in him and to make his 
epistles the more useful to the Church— possibly the Lord's 
dealings with us at times may be with the same end in view 
—our preparation for further usefulness in His service. 

ST. PAUL "PRESSED IN SPIRIT" 

Notwithstanding all of his discouragements and the 
fact that his tent-making labors barely sufficed to provide 
for him things decent and honorable, the Apostle never 
forgot that his chief mission in life was the preaching of 
the Gospel. If the earning of his daily bread hindered 
his preaching during the week he at least took his Sabbath 
days for the more important work whenever he could 
reach a congregation of the Jews. We read that he reasoned 
with them in the synagogue every Sabbath day. 
But apparently he was under a measure of constraint and 
did not speak with his accustomed boldness and vigor, 
perhaps because of the lack of moral support, which is an 
important factor with all and an essential with many. 

Finally Silas and Timothy arrived, bringing with them 
not only good fellowship and encouraging news from 
Berea, Thessalonica and Philippi, but also a gift, as the 
Apostle himself tells us— quite probably from Lydia, the 
seller of purple dyes, supposed to have been comfortably 
circumstanced. The effect of these encouragements is 
intimated. St. Paul "was pressed in spirit"— he felt a 
fresh vigor urging him to present his Message more zealously 
and to bring matters to a focus at the synagogue. 

After testifying with great boldness and finding that 
his Message was repelled by the majority of the synagogue, 
the Apostle forced the crisis himself by shaking his garment 
as if he would not take from them even the dust, 
saying to those who had opposed and blasphemed, "Your 
blood be upon your own heads. I am clean. From henceforth 
I will go unto the Gentiles." 

There are times when positiveness is absolutely necessary, 
even though it cause a division amongst those who 
profess to serve the same God. There are times when 
much more good can be thus obtained than by a continuance 
under disadvantageous conditions. Oil and water 
will not mix; and time spent in trying to blend them is 
altogether wasted. When positive bitterness and hatred 
are manifested, as in the case under consideration, it is 
better to withdraw. 



But neither the Apostle nor we would recognize as 
proper or at all allowable that the Lord's people should 
quarrel and take offense one with the other over trifles 
unworthy of consideration. The shaking off of the dust 
not only was what our Lord had suggested (Matthew 10: 14), 
but was a custom of the time— a warning, as it 
were, that the Apostle felt that he had discharged his 
entire duty and now left the responsibility upon their 
own shoulders. 

The effect was good in two ways: (1) It helped 
Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, to take a decided 
stand; whereas otherwise he might have been stunted in 
his spiritual development. Crispus decided for the Lord 
Jesus, and took his stand with the Apostle and a few 
others (2) The fact that the Jews had repudiated the 
Apostle and his Message would draw the attention of the 
Gentiles more particularly to his Gospel. Some of these 
Gentiles already believed. The new meetings were held 
in the home of Justus, a reverent man who resided near 
the synagogue. Thus as the Jews attended the synagogue 
worship they would be continually reminded of St. Paul's 
Message in the synagogue, which would be an incentive 
for them to enter the house of Justus and hear more respecting 
the fulfilment of the prophecies in Jesus. 

ST. PAUL ENCOURAGED 

The result was that a considerable number of the Corinthians 
believed and were baptized, thus symbolizing 
their consecration to do the will of the Lord. Thus we 
see that opposition is not necessarily an injurious thing 
to the Lord's Cause. On the contrary, it is safe to say 
that a most dangerous condition is stagnation. 

Evidently the Lord saw that His servant Paul needed 
some special encouragement at this time. Hence another 
vision was granted, in which the Apostle was told, "Be not 
afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace; for I am with 
thee, and no man shall set on thee to harm thee, for I 
have much people in this city." 

What an insight this incident gives us as to the Divine 
supervision of the Gospel Message and its servants! How 
these words remind us of the promise that the Lord will 
not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able to 
bear, but will with every temptation provide also a way 
of escape! (1 Corinthians 10:13.) That vision and its 
message, we may be sure, were not for the Apostle merely, 
but for all the Lord's people from that time until now. 
The same God is rich unto all that call upon Him. and 
able both to shield and to deliver all of His servants. 
Therefore He will permit only such experiences as His 
infinite Wisdom sees will be advantageous to His Cause 
and will work out for His servants a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory. 

The Lord's statement that He had much people in 
Corinth teaches us a lesson also. It shows that the Lord 
knows the hearts of all, and that He has a care not only 



for His saints, but also for those who have not yet heard 
His message, but whose hearts are in a favorable attitude 
of honesty, sincerity. A further lesson comes to us in 
this connection: We are to remember that the Lord is 
His Own Superintendent of Missions, and that He is able 
to guide His consecrated servants, not only as to direction 
and place of service, but also as respects the time they 
shall remain to accomplish His will and as respects the 
character of the experiences necessary for them in order 
best to accomplish His purposes. 

The more firmly our faith can grasp this situation, the 
more we can rely upon the Lord and use His wisdom instead 
of our own, the more successful shall we be as His 
servants, and the more happy and contented; for we shall 
realize that all things are working together for good to all 
who are His, to all submitted to His guiding care. 

EIGHTEEN MONTHS OF TEACHING 

Corinth was nicknamed the Vanity Fair of the World; 
for it was a center of frivolity, pleasure -seeking, etc. It is 
said to have been one of the most licentious and profligate 
cities of its day. At first the thought may seem very 
strange to us that this vilest of the great cities should yield 
larger spiritual results than did any other, so much so 
that the Lord would especially declare that He had "much 
people" there, and would providentially detain His ambassador 
there for a year and a half, while in other places 
he had been permitted to remain only a few days or weeks. 

The philosophy of the matter seems to be this: Outward 
morality frequently leads to a pharisaical spirit of 
self-righteousness, which is a most pernicious and deadly 
foe to true righteousness. On the other hand, where sin 
stands out glaringly it has a repulsive effect upon the pure 
in heart, upon all who love righteousness; and this repulsion 

page 203 

from the evil seems to prepare such hearts the better 
for a genuine consecration to the Lord and to enable them 
to receive His Message. This theory holds good, at least 
in the missionary work at Corinth, as in contrast with that 
of places much more respectable in reputation. 

The lesson for us in this connection is that we should 
ever be on guard in our own hearts against this self-righteous 
spirit of outward observance, which lacks true 
holiness, true sanctification. It is along this line that our 
Lord found fault with one of the seven Churches, saying, 
"Because thou art lukewarm, I will spew thee out of My 
mouth. Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased in 
goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that 
thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and 
naked." (Revelation 3:16,17.) This is our Lord's charge 
against the present state of the nominal church— so rich 
in earthly advantages, so self-satisfied. Let us be on 
guard lest in any manner or to any degree such a lukewarmness 



should come over us and we should lose the 
Divine favor. 



R5919: page 203 

GLORYING IN THE CROSS OF CHRIST 

-JULY 30.-1 CORINTHIANS 1:18-2:2.- 

THE CROSS OF CHRIST NO LONGER PREACHED-REDEMPTION 
DOCTRINE FALLING BEFORE EVOLUTION THEORY-THESE TWO 
THEORIES ANTAGONISTIC-FEW UNDER THE BANNER OF 
THE CROSS WITH JESUS AND THE APOSTLES. 

"Far be it from me to glory, save in the Cross 
of our Lord Jesus Christ."— Galatians 6:14. 

ONE can dispute that the preaching of the 
Cross of Christ is dying out. Those who 
still preach it give the impression that at 
the most it means renouncement of sin and 
the incidental self-denials. Rare indeed 
would it be to find a minister in our day 
preaching the necessity for the Cross of 
Christ— the necessity for Jesus' death as the 
Redemption-price for the sins of the world. 
-1 Timothy 2:5,6; Matthew 20:28. 

Why is this? Some would answer that they have become 
Christian Scientists, and no longer believe that there 
is such a thing as sin, and no longer believe that there is 
such a thing as death; and that hence they could not believe 
that Jesus died for sin. Others would answer that 
they have gotten too wise to believe any longer that in the 
Divine Plan the death of Jesus was necessary for human 
redemption and reconciliation to the Father. Their view 
is that the Apostles and Jesus, in setting forth the Cross, 
were laboring under the delusion of the darker time, 
which present-day education shatters under a brighter 
light. Still others would say that they have become 
Evolutionists and Higher Critics, that they no longer believe 
the Bible at all, and that they adopt the opposite 
theory to that of the Bible— namely, the Evolution theory. 

From the standpoint of Evolution there could be no 
justice, no propriety of any kind, in a Ransom-sacrifice 
by a Redeemer. Why? Because, according to the Evolution 
theory, man is merely developing, and is not yet perfect 
and not yet ready for trial along perfect lines; he is 
merely merging from a brute to an intelligent creature. 
Evolutionists would claim that without any redemption 
or any interference whatever upon God's part the process 
of Evolution will continue until by and by there will be a 
family of mankind that will reach an aristocracy of wisdom, 
efficiency and power which will enable them to live 
everlastingly by their own wits. 



Small comfort is there in this for Evolutionists of 
today or of the past. If they boast of their children of 
the future and of the everlasting life to which those children 
will be gradually evolved, they admit that personally 
they have nothing beyond the tomb— that any future life 
on their part will be representatively in their children. 
And as for their parentage, they have nothing to boast of 
there, although some of them seem to boast of their ancestry, 
after all— that their forefathers were monkeys, 
frogs and, earliest of all, simply protoplasm. 

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CROSS 

These theories are the products of human wisdom, and 
indicate a misunderstanding and neglect of God's Word. 
How beautiful is the Gospel of the Cross as compared 
with any other! It assures us that God made man in His 
own image and likeness; and that man's fall from that 
perfection to his present condition of demoralization came 
as a result of disobedience to Divine Law and of the enforcement 
of the Divine penalty— "Dying, thou shalt die." 
(Genesis 2: 17, margin.) For six thousand years our race 
has been dying, not only physically, but also mentally, 
which includes the moral qualities. With all the experiences 
of the past and with all the education of the present, 
nobody has hope that our race can be lifted up out of its 
present unsatisfactory condition back to perfection. All 
that we can do is to combat the evil in ourselves, combat 
disease and death, and help others along the same lines. 

But meantime, God had from the very beginning 
planned the blessings of the Cross— planned that in due 
time He would send forth His Son, who would die for 
human sin, "The Just for the unjust," and thus open up 
the way for man's return to Divine favor and everlasting 
life. Thus it is written: "As by a man came death, by 
a man comes also the resurrection of the dead; for as all 
in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be made alive— 
every man in his own order."— 1 Corinthians 15:21-23. 

For four thousand years the world waited for the redemption 
accomplished at Calvary. For nearly two thousand 
years the results of that redemption have been confined 
to a special class of humanity, under a special call, 
or invitation, to be the Bride of Christ— "the Church of 
the First-borns, whose names are written in Heaven." 
(Hebrews 12:23.) The Scriptures assure us that this selected 
company is to be associated with Jesus in the great 
Kingdom of God, which the Bible everywhere shows is to 
roll away the curse and, instead, bring back favor. 

The Kingdom cannot come until the Royal Family is 
ready to take the Throne. Jesus, indeed, has long been 
ready; but in harmony with the Father's Plan He has 
waited and has been doing a work in the preparation of 
the Church, His brethren, who are to be His joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom— otherwise styled "the Bride, the Lamb's 
Wife." (Romans 8:17; Revelation 21:9,10.) Then for 
a thousand years the Restitution privileges will be open to 



t he whole world of mankind. It will no longer be necessary 
to preach; for all will know the Lord, from the least 
unto the greatest, and unto Him every knee shall bow and 
every tongue confess. (Jeremiah 31:34; Philippians 2:9-1 1.) 
All this is to come as a result of the Cross. 

EARTHLY VS. HEAVENLY WISDOM 

No wonder the Apostle makes the Cross of Christ the 
center of his preaching, declaring: "Without the shedding 
of blood there is no remission" of sins! (Hebrews 9:22.) 

R5920 : page 203 

As the Prophet hath declared, "By His stripes we are 
healed." (Isaiah 53:5.) Our lesson quotes briefly the Divine 
prophecy that the worldly-wise would not appreciate 
the Divine Plan, and especially the center of that Plan— 

R5920 : page 204 

the Cross of Christ. Worldly wisdom would look in an 
entirely different direction. 

However, God is not seeking the worldly-wise, but 
those loving righteousness, full of faith and obedience. 
Hence the majority of mankind, including the majority 
of the wise, are still to be found on the side of the world; 
and only comparatively few have come properly and truly 
to the Lord's side, accepting the Wisdom from Above. 
These, in the eyes of the world, are foolish; but in the 
eyes of the Lord, they are wise. The wise, the great, the 
noble, the rich, the learned, are so well satisfied with what 
they have that they are not hungering nor thirsting, nor 
seeking after the Divine arrangement. Hence those who 
accept the Lord's arrangement are usually the poor, the 
unlearned, etc., who realize their lack of wisdom and seek 
it from the Fountain of Wisdom and through the channel 
of Wisdom— the Bible. 

The whole world is perishing because of Original Sin; 
and to nearly all of the world the Cross of Christ is 
foolishness. We who believe God's Message are said to 
be saved— to have passed from death unto life— because 
we have come into relationship with the great Life-giver 
"through faith in His blood." To us the great Redeemer 
is the Wisdom of God personified, and that Wisdom is 
shown in the Master's course in sacrifice. When we accept 
this. He becomes our Justifier; and being justified 
by Him, we are granted access to the Father, who receives 
our consecration sacrifices, and imparts to us a begetting 
of His Holy Spirit. Our salvation continues as 
day by day we abide in the Lord and grow in grace, 
knowledge and the Holy Spirit. Eventually our salvation 
will be completed; as it is written, our salvation shall be 
brought unto us at the glorious appearing of our Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ.— 1 Peter 1:13; Titus 2:13. 

When the Royal Priesthood shall have entered into 



the Heavenly glory, then will begin the New Dispensation 

of Messiah's Kingdom, which will utterly scatter the 

errors of worldly wisdom and cause all the world of mankind 

to hear "the still, small Voice" of God. The Lord 

will then turn to the people a pure Message, that they 

may all call upon Him and serve Him with one consent. 

(Zephaniah 3:8,9.) Then, during the Millennium, 

will be the world's trial time; as now, during this Gospel 

Age, is the Church's day of trial, testing and preparation 

for the fulness of Jehovah's favor and for everlasting life. 

With such an appreciation of the value and the necessity 
of the Cross of Christ, we can join heartily with the 
Apostle Paul in the Golden Text of this lesson: "Far be 
it from me to glory, save in the Cross of Christ." 



R5920 : page 204 

LESSON OF THE BLIGHTED FIG TREE 

"Have faith in God."-Mark 1 1:22. 

AS JESUS and His Apostles passed along the 
road from Bethany to Jerusalem preaching 
the Gospel of the Kingdom, they had seen, 
en route, a fig tree. Our Lord, being 
hungry, went to the tree, seeking fruit 
thereon; for the time of figs was not yet 
past. But He found that the tree was barren. 
Then He pronounced a curse, a blight, 
upon the tree. The next day as they passed 
by, Jesus' disciples noticed that the fig tree 
had withered from the roots. Then Peter said, "Master, 
behold, the fig tree which Thou cursedst is withered 
away!" Jesus answered, "Have faith in God." (Mark 1 1:13,14,20-22.) 
Then He called their attention to the 
fact that it was not merely Himself who had blighted the 
tree, but that the Heavenly Father was to be recognized 
as behind Him in this. He ascribed always the honor 
to the Father. He was merely the Finger of God. "The 
works which the Father hath given Me to finish, the same 
works that I do. bear witness of Me. that the Father hath 
sent Me." "The words that I speak unto you I speak 
not of Myself; but the Father that dwelleth in Me, He 
doeth the works. "-John 5:36; 14:10. 

REAL OBJECT OF JESUS' MIRACULOUS WORKS 

Some of the people of that time, as now, had malignant 
power; and Jesus' act might have been attributed to 
that source. So He would direct the minds of His 
disciples to the things that He did as being always of 
God— thus differentiating His power from that of Satan. 
Some might wonder that God would take notice of a tree 
because it was not bearing fruit. But Jesus was not an 



ordinary person. His course was not an example for us 
to go along the street and, seeing an unfruitful tree, say, 
"Cursed be this tree; it shall not bear any more fruit 
forever!" Should we adopt this course, we might be 
finding fault with trees and with everything else. But 
our Lord was especially sent of God. He was accustomed 
to do good as He went about. He healed the people and 
taught them, giving them forceful object lessons. 

It was necessary that the disciples of Jesus be thoroughly 
convinced that He was sent of God before they 
could have developed in them the needful faith. They 
must continue this faith, consecrating their hearts and 
lives to God, before they would be ready for the Pentecostal 
blessing. Hence many of our Lord's works were 
of an outward, visible kind, intended for the enlightenment 
of His followers, for the establishment of His 
Messiahship, and for the manifestation of His future 
work for the world. Of His conversion of the water into 
wine, it is written, "This beginning of miracles did Jesus 
in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth His [coming] 
glory; and His disciples believed on Him."— John 2:11. 

St. Paul points out that the natural man cannot see the 
deep things of God because they are spiritually discerned. 
(1 Corinthians 2: 14.) Hence there was a necessity for 
teaching of this outward, material kind to Jesus' disciples; 
for they were but natural men. Although they 
recognized Him as the Messiah, they did not realize this 
clearly at first. Jesus asked them on one occasion, "Whom 
say ye that I am?" And Simon Peter answered. "Thou 
art The Christ, the Son of the living God." Jesus said, 
"Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona! for flesh and blood 
hath not revealed this unto thee, but My Father which is 
in Heaven." (Matthew 16:15-17.) It was a grand course 
of education, then, that Jesus gave His Apostles. 

And so as regarded the fig tree, the miracles of healing 
the sick, raising the dead, casting out demons, feeding the 
thousands, etc., it was not so important that certain persons 
be physically healed at that time, nor so important 
that the multitudes should not go hungry over night, nor 
that Divine displeasure should be visited upon an unintelligent 
tree. But it was important that the disciples 
should get the needed lessons and see that the Lord's 
power could and would be exercised on their behalf; that, 
with the realization that the Lord was on their side and 
would guide and protect them, they would be able to exercise 
great confidence. It was important also that we 
should have this assurance of our Father's love and care 
over us as His children. It was important that our 
Lord's coming glory during His Kingdom Reign should 
be illustrated and shown forth. 

R5920 : page 205 

THE FIG TREE A SYMBOL 

There is a further thought as regards the fig tree. We 



believe that the fig tree is a representation of the Jewish 
nation. This nation had been God's fig tree. In due time 
God sent His Son seeking fruit from that nation, but He 
found none. The tree was barren. He found a few faithful 
individuals, but nationally nothing— no fruit as a 
nation; and the blight, or curse, of the Lord came upon 
the Jewish nation because with all their privileges and 
advantages they had not brought forth the proper fruits. 
Our Lord Jesus, five days before His crucifixion, pronounced 
their House desolate. "Behold, your House is 
left unto you desolate!"-Matt. 23:38,39; Luke 13:34,35. 

Ever since that time, the Jews have been desolate and 
blighted as a nation. But there is a promise that this 
blighted fig tree shall again become a living tree— a living 
nation. They are to be restored to Divine favor, after 
their "double" of disfavor has been fulfilled. [See 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 2, pp. 217-230.] This 
"double" we understand has been accomplished, and this 
is the meaning of the great awakening now among the 
Jews, and of the great Zionist movement. 

Speaking of the time of His Second Advent and of 
the nearness then of the Kingdom, Jesus said, "Learn a 
parable of the fig tree: When her branch is yet tender, 
and putteth forth leaves, ye know thai summer is near: 
so ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come 
to pass, know that it is nigh, even at the doors." (Mark 13:28,29.) 
The Jewish nation has been having a long 
winter time. But the spring time of this nation is now 
at hand. We already see this fig tree putting forth leaves. 
So we see that the lesson of the blighted fig tree was not 
merely a lesson for an hour, but a lesson to all the Lord's 
people from that time even until now. 



R5921 : page 205 

LOVE IN THE CLASSES 

"LOVE one another, as I have loved you," is the 
Master's instruction. (John 15:12.) "We 
ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren," writes the Apostle. (1 John 3: 16.) 
"He that loveth Him that begat, loveth 
also him that is begotten of the Father." 
(1 John 5:1.) As a matter of fact, all who 
belong to the Church of Christ have the 
spirit of love at the time of their spirit-begetting. 
And if progress be made in preparation 
for the Kingdom, that spirit of love will increase 
and abound more and more, until it will be perfected in 
the resurrection. Then we shall have our new bodies, 
which will permit our loving hearts to manifest themselves 
fully. But in the meantime, how frequently the 
dear brethren of the Lord seriously try each other, vex 
each other, and fail to provoke to love and good works— 



inciting rather to strife! 

While we should properly attribute such weakness, not 
to the New Creatures, but to the old, nevertheless we are 
never to forget that the growth of the New Creature means 
the death of the old creature, and hence in proportion as 
our flesh is not dead to sin and selfishness, in that same 
proportion we, as New Creatures, have not yet reached 
the ideal for which we strive. 

The Editor frequently receives letters from Elders of 
Classes, asking advice as to how they shall deal with 
the Classes, and from members of the Classes asking how 
they should deal with their chosen Elders and Deacons. 
The chosen servants of the Classes frequently feel that 
their brethren, who elected them, do not repose a sufficiency 
of confidence in them and entrust them fully 
enough with the management of the affairs of the Class- 
that the Class wishes to manage its own affairs and merely 
to have the advice of the Elders. In such cases we recommend 
that the Elders be fully content with such a condition- 
that it is the Class as a whole which represents 
the Lord, and that no servant of the Class has the privilege 
of exceeding the authority which the Class gives 
to him by its vote. 

It is our experience that the Bible Students feel a 
great need of protecting their rights and fulfilling the 
obligations which the Lord has placed upon them. Surely 
they are excusable even if they seem to exercise too 
great care in this matter— in view of the examples all 
around us, amongst both Protestants and Catholics, of the 
power of priestcraft, and the inclination of ecclesiastics 
to grasp power and authority and to ignore the Ecclesia. 

On the other hand, frequently the Classes feel that 
they are being ridden or "bossed" by their Elders— 
whether this is really so or not. They complain sometimes, 
for instance, that the Elders get a fever for preaching 
and desire to give lectures on every possible occasion, 
sometimes even turning prayer and testimony meetings 
and Berean Study classes into lecture opportunities. If 
intimations are given that Berean lessons are preferred, 
and that changes from the Class order are not appreciated, 
the Elders sometimes take offense with the whole Class, 
declaring that they are not appreciated; and other times 
they either take offense at the individual who has had 
the courage to kindly mention the matter to them or 
fancy that he is an exception and that they are pleasing 
the Class— a case of too much self-esteem sometimes. 

PASTORAL ADVICE 

It is difficult to know how to advise Classes in 
such cases where the Elders seem to have lost, not the 
Spirit of the Lord, but the proper balance of a sound mind. 
We generally refer inquirers to the extended treatise on 
the subject in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Volume VI., and ask 
them to read afresh and act accordingly. But even after 
reading, some of the Lord's dear sheep do not know 



how to obtain proper Scriptural order and maintain the 
liberties of the Class and refrain from permitting an 
Elder to injure himself and the interests of the Class! 

Our general advice to the brethren is that they take 
such matters to the Lord in prayer, while watchful of 
any and every opportunity to promote what we believe to 
be the Lord's will in the Classes. On the one hand, we 
must admit that it would be entirely wrong for a Class 
to permit an elder to "boss" it or, as St. Peter said, "to 
Lord it over God's heritage." (1 Peter 5:3.) It would 
be injurious both to the Elder and to the Class interests. 

On the other hand, the Classes should seek to avoid 
captiousness and faultfinding. They should esteem the 
Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of devotion, the knowledge 
of the Truth and talents for its presentation, wherever 
these are to be found, and should gladly help one another 
to opportunities for development in grace, knowledge and 
utterance— each according to the talents which the Lord 
has bestowed upon him and in harmony with the directions 
of the Lord's Word. Forbearance, one with another, 
a willingness to wash one another's feet, symbolically, 
and to esteem each other for all Christ-like qualities, 
should be cultivated. 

While the will of the Class should be carefully sought 
by every Elder, and fully expressed by every Class in 
respect to all the order and arrangement of its affairs, 
nevertheless we should not be over-exacting in respect to 

R5921 : page 206 

how the will of the Class is expressed. In other words, 
we should consider what is satisfactory to the majority 
of the Class. Elders are not to be found fault with simply 
because the Class satisfaction has not been expressed in 
some special, particular manner. In other words, a minority 
of the Class should not feel at liberty to distract the 
Class and stir up strife simply because methods which 
the minority prefer have not been accurately followed. 
Each member of the Class has full liberty to express 
his conviction at opportune times— especially at election 
time; but he should be fully satisfied, after expressing his 
thought and preference, to abide by the preference of the 
majority, whether expressed positively or negatively. 

JUSTICE FIRST-THEN LOVE 

Let us, dear brethren, ever remember that while we 
are striving after Love and its bond of perfectness, nevertheless 
our own course of action should be squared first 
of all by absolute justice, and then love may add to that 
as much as it may please. For instance, at an election 
some brother may unwisely nominate, for some service 
of the Class, a brother who is not qualified for the position. 
We must not find fault with the brother, for he 
has his liberty of making the nomination and manifesting 
his unwisdom; but, on the other hand, we should not feel 



bound by his suggestion, nor should we allow fear of 

offending the nominated brother to hinder us from expressing, 

by vote, what we understand to be the Lord's 

will in the matter. And if voted down by the Class, the 

nominated brother has no right to take offense, but should 

rather admire the courage of the brethren, as expressed 

in his rejection. 

One thus rejected by a Class has no right to inquire 
either of the Class or of any member of it why they 
voted against him. That is their business and none of 
his. They merely exercised the right which they had 
according to their own conscience. It was a matter of 
justice. Love, in the sense of human sympathy, has no 
place in the deciding of such questions where the Word 
of the Lord lays down the rules to be followed by each 
member of the Ecclesia. A failure to recognize principles 
of justice— righteousness— seems to lie at the 
foundation of nearly all Class difficulties. We request 
that all who get into such troubles take the matter to the 
Lord in prayer and then consider the matter along the 
lines of absolute justice. 

We have advocated in the Sixth Volume of STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES that, if possible, the will of the Class 
be expressed by the majority— at least eighty-five per 
cent of the whole number. This, however, does not 
mean that either justice or love would turn over all of 
the affairs of the Class to the remaining fifteen per cent 
and allow them to dictate, as for instance, to permit them 
to determine that there shall be no Elders or Deacons 
elected because the minority would hold fifteen per cent 
of the whole amount and insist that its ideals should be 
met or that the whole work of the Class should come to 
a standstill. This would neither be loving nor just, and 
should not be submitted to. 

The majority rule is the standard of justice, and what 
we suggested in excess of that was a concession of love— 
an attempt to meet the tastes and preferences, if possible, 
of the entire Class, or at least a large majority of the 
Class. The majority should lovingly desire to regulate 
the Class affairs, so far as possible, to suit every member 
of the Class; and to whatever extent there is a failure to 
do this there is an invitation to discord and to a split in 
the Class. While, of course, a division of the interest 
into two Classes is always deplorable and should be 
striven against, and sacrifices be made by all to maintain a 
"unity of spirit in the bond of peace," nevertheless a 
division of the Class for a time would certainly be preferable 
to a continual strife, which would hinder the 
spiritual progress of all concerned. 



R5921 : page 206 

A FOURTEEN-YEAR-OLD MARTYR 



A LETTER has just been received from Wellington, 
New Zealand, saying that one of the 
Bible Students of thai vicinity, fourteen 
years old, had been imprisoned for refusing 
to register for military service because of 
religious objection to participation in war in 
any sense of the word. He was permitted 
to come out of his prison to partake of the 
Memorial Supper, April 16th, and then returned 

R5922 : page 206 

to prison. It seems very remarkable 

the hold that militarism is gaining on the whole world. 

Word comes to us from England that some of the 
Bible Students there were ordered to report for military 
duty. These registered their objection, but were refused 
immunity from service— receiving, however, the assurance 
that they would be put in non-combatant positions in the 
war. This promise was afterward neglected, and they 
were put into regular service at once. We are not to forget 
that practically all the world is claiming to be Christ's 
Kingdom, and yet that any who seek to follow the Words 
of Jesus seem to be thoroughly disrespected and hated of 
all men and all nations. What a proof we have here that 
Messiah's Kingdom is future! How glad we are that it 
is nigh, even at the door! 



R5922 : page 206 

"LET HIM BUY A SWORD" 

WHY did our Lord say to His disciples, "He that 
hath no sword, let him sell his garment and 
buy one" (Luke 22:36,38), and then afterward 
say to St. Peter: "Put up thy sword 
into its place; for all they that take the 
sword shall perish with the sword"?— 
Matthew 26:5 1,52. 

We should remember the circumstances. 
Jesus knew that His hour was come in which 
He would be betrayed, made prisoner, and 
the next day be crucified. It was necessary to show that 
His capture was not made by force, but that He voluntarily 
permitted Himself to be taken and crucified. The 
Father might know, the angels might know, and His 
disciples might know that He had power to ask of the 
Father legions of angels for His defense and protection 
from the hands of His enemies: but others could not know 
this. It was desirable that it should be clearly manifested 
that Jesus and His disciples could have defended themselves, 
as St. Peter, indeed, started out to do when he 
drew his sword and cut off the ear of the high priest's 
servant. Jesus promptly healed the ear and instructed 



Peter to be non-resistant, and surrendered Himself, 
merely requesting that His disciples be not molested. 

The circumstance demonstrated that our Lord surrendered 
Himself voluntarily, and therein was the lesson. 
Had there been no swords in the company of His disciples, 
it might have been claimed that no defense could have 
been made. The having of the swords made possible the 
exhibition of the courage of the disciples, and the willingness 
of Jesus to submit Himself. 

When Jesus said that if necessary their garments 

R5922 : page 207 

should be sold to purchase a sword, the Apostles responded 
that they had in their company two swords; and Jesus 
answered, "It is enough." They were intended merely 
for a demonstration, and not for a defense. 

Nothing in this Scripture seems to give any warrant 
to warfare, nor to the implication of some that Jesus desired 
His followers to take the sword. True, not all who 
have taken to the sword have perished by the sword, and 
not all who have avoided the sword have preserved their 
lives, but it is a general principle which the Lord discusses. 
He who prepares himself for warfare and trouble 
will be pretty sure to get plenty of it, according to the 
general course of the fallen human nature. On the other 
hand, the Lord's disciples are enjoined to "follow peace 
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall 
see the Lord."— Hebrews 12:14. 



R5922 : page 207 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
WAS DISGUSTED WITH MAKE-BELIEVE RELIGION 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

A deep feeling of love for you, the honored servant of 
our Father in Heaven, prompts me to express my thankfulness 
just this once for having been brought into the light now 
shining so brightly. Hitherto I have sought to quell the desire 
from a realization that you receive many thousands such letters, 
and that I should not encroach upon your valuable time. 
Please do not feel obligated to answer this. 

I first came in contact with Present Truth in 1902, through 
reading several of the Volumes; and a profound impression 
was made upon me. At that time I was teacher of a large 
school in Jamaica, Catechist of the Church of England, Sunday 
School Superintendent, Choir Master, and the rest of it. 
Pressure on all sides was brought to bear, and my desire to 
embrace the Truth was squeezed out of me. For nearly ten 
years I never came in contact with so much as one of your 
tracts. I became intensely worldly; and, thoroughly disgusted 
with myself and the make-believe religion, I quit the whole 



thing in 1907 and started anew on the Isthmus of Panama. 

In September, 1911, my wife bought a copy of "Daniel and 
the Revelation." Trying to read this book caused me to root 
out an old paper covered Volume V. which had followed us 
around these many years. It was in trying to compare the 
two books that I got a fresh start; and the Lord, almost 
miraculously, supplied the other volumes. Determined that 
the opportunity should not slip this time, I carefully made 
up my mind, and offered myself in full consecration to God 
on January 1st, 1912. My dear wife also consecrated about 
the same time. 

Since then our path has been continuously upward. We 
have read hard, prayed much, and endeavored to live Christ; 
and oh, the blessedness! Only those who have been with 
Jesus and have learned of Him can appreciate this wonderful 
transformation of mind. 

Next to the Lord Jesus our thanks are due to you, as our 
consecration was solely the product of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
and your writings have been the most important 
element in the development of our characters. 

Enclosed are four questions which have caused a good 
deal of division of thought among us of the Panama Class. 
I am aware that all of them have been treated by you time 
and again. But we are so dull of comprehension and so leaky! 

I close with warmest love and appreciation for you and 
the Bethel family, whom we remember daily in prayer. 

I am yours by His grace, 

G.L. HARRY.-Balboa, Canal Zone. 

Questions. (1) When the Apostle Paul says, "Let your 
women keep silence in the Churches" (1 Corinthians 14:34; 
1 Timothy 2:1 1,12), does he include giving thoughts in a 
Berean Study? 

(2) Does the Church belong to the order of Melchizedek 
during the Gospel Age, actually or prospectively? In either 
case, where does the "reigning" come in? Or are we in some 
way connected with the Aaronic Priesthood? 

(3) What is meant by "intuitive knowledge"? Does the 
Lord Jesus now possess this kind of knowledge, and will the 
Church eventually attain to the same? 

(4) Since all must "honor the Son even as they honor 

the Father," wherein is Jehovah's superiority? Is it a superiority 
of mental power or merely of seniority? 

ANSWER TO ABOVE LETTER AND QUESTIONS 

Your welcome letter of the 3rd inst. is before me. I 
rejoice with you that the Lord has pursued you through His 
mercy and love, and that you have surrendered to Him. I 
trust you may continue to abide under His shadow and to 
serve Him and to thus have the necessary preparation for a 
share in the Heavenly Kingdom. 

Replying to your questions: We understand that there 
would be no violation of the Apostle's injunction in the Sisters' 
taking part in a Berean Study. If there are no consecrated 
or competent Brethren present, I see no reason why 



the Sisters might not lead a Berean Class. The Church in 
association with her Head will be the Melchizedek Priest, 
during the Millennial Age. That Priest, Prophet, Teacher, 
is not yet fully raised up from amongst the people, but will 
be entirely raised up by the close of this Age, perfected in the 
First Resurrection. (Acts 3:23; Eph. 2: 10-16.) Consequently 
no reigning takes place as yet, except as our Lord is taking to 
Himself His great power and beginning His Reign— the 
majority of the Church already with Him on the other side 
the veil, and we on this side gradually passing over. 

Intuitive knowledge would be a direct apprehension, without 
the process of reasoning, or the necessity for proof. The 
Bible assures us that all power is possessed by our Lord Jesus 
since His resurrection. This would seem to include intuitive 
knowledge. The Church has the promise that in the resurrection 
she will be like her Lord. It is further written: "Now 
we know in part; then we shall know even as we are known." 

To honor the Son even as we honor the Father does 
not mean necessarily to give Him the same degree of honor; 
but rather we might state it, "We honor the Father. Even 
so let us honor the Son also— as the Son, as the Father's 
Logos and Chief Representative." 

With Christian love to yourself and all the dear friends 
with whom you are associated or come in contact, I remain 

Your brother and servant in the Lord. 



RE SOME CLASS BUSINESS METHODS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Ever since our Class has been organized much time has 
been consumed each month in our business meetings, but since 
all matters are decided by the Class, under present arrangements, 
we do not see how such meetings can be avoided and 
less time spent. 

R5923 : page 207 

We believe that with your wide and varied experience, 
you could give us a few valuable suggestions along this line 
and we would be glad if you would give us some advice. 
Praying the Lord's rich blessing upon you daily, we remain 
Yours in His service, ST. JOSEPH [MO.] CLASS. 

In Reply 

Where a Class finds, after trial, that one or more of its 
Elders or Deacons possess good business acumen and faithfulness, 
it sometimes proves a good plan to make a Business 
Committee of such and leave much of the Business routine 
to such Committee. Care, however, should be observed not 
to put matters too fully out of the hands of the Class. Care 
also should be observed not to put too much power into the 
hands of any who evidence a desire to grasp power and to 
exceed the wishes of the Class. In all matters the easiest 
and smoothest way of obtaining results is advisable; but the 



authority of the Class should be recognized. Any one ignoring 
the Class and its wishes would better be left without any 
special service as Elder, Deacon, etc. 



DEAR FRIENDS:- 

In THE TOWER of February 15, I read some quotations 
from alleged German sermons, extracted from the Methodist 
Times, and supposed to be faithful translations from these 
sermons. Since reading them I received a package of newspapers 
from my home. Copenhagen, in one of which is an 
alleged truthful explanation of those sermons. 

Pastor Loebel, of Leipzig, does not even exist. Professor 
Rheinhold Seeby should be Seeberg; he denies absolutely 
to have said anything of the kind quoted; and, while Philippi's 
expressions are not absolutely denied, their authenticity 
is very doubtful. 

I enclose the article from the Danish paper Robenhavn. 
If you so think, a correction in THE TOWER might help remove 
some of the added bitter feelings against Germans in 
general. My sympathy is rather on the side of France and 
England; but I desire justice to all. 

Yours in His service, C. PETERSEN. 



page 209 
