
No More Disasters!




IF SOMEONE told you, “There will soon be no more disasters,” how would you react? You might reply, “You must be dreaming. Disasters are just a fact of life.” Or you might just think to yourself, ‘Whom does he think he’s kidding?’
Even though natural disasters seem to be here to stay, there is a basis for real hope that this will change. The change, however, will not come through human efforts. Humans are not able to understand fully how and why things happen in nature, much less control or change them. King Solomon of ancient Israel, noted for his wisdom and keen observation, wrote: “Mankind are not able to find out the work that has been done under the sun; however much mankind keep working hard to seek, yet they do not find out. And even if they should say they are wise enough to know, they would be unable to find out.”—Ecclesiastes 8:17.
If humans cannot control natural disasters, who can? The Bible identifies our Creator as the one to make this change. He is the One who put the earth’s ecological systems, such as the water cycle, in place. (Ecclesiastes 1:7) And in sharp contrast with humans, God has unlimited power at his disposal. Testifying to this fact, the prophet Jeremiah said: “O Sovereign Lord Jehovah! Here you yourself have made the heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm. The whole matter is not too wonderful for you yourself.” (Jeremiah 32:17) Since God made the earth and all its elements, logically he knows how to manage things so that people can dwell on it in peace and security.—Psalm 37:11; 115:16.
How, then, will God bring about the needed change? You will recall that the second of this series of articles mentioned that the many terrifying things taking place on the earth today make up a “sign” marking “the conclusion of the system of things.” Jesus said: “When you see these things occurring, know that the kingdom of God is near.” (Matthew 24:3; Luke 21:31) The Kingdom of God, a heavenly government of God’s making, will bring about big changes on the earth, even bringing natural elements under control. Though Jehovah God has the power to do this himself, he has chosen to delegate the task to his Son. Speaking of this one, the prophet Daniel said: “To him there were given rulership and dignity and kingdom, that the peoples, national groups and languages should all serve even him.”—Daniel 7:14.
God’s Son, Jesus Christ, has been given the power necessary to bring about all the changes needed to make the earth a delightful place. Two thousand years ago, when Jesus was on earth, he demonstrated on a small scale his ability to control the natural elements. On one occasion, when he and his disciples were in a boat on the Sea of Galilee, “a great violent windstorm broke out, and the waves kept dashing into the boat, so that the boat was close to being swamped.” His disciples panicked. Fearing for their lives, they turned to Jesus. What did Jesus do? He simply “rebuked the wind and said to the sea: ‘Hush! Be quiet!’ And the wind abated, and a great calm set in.” His disciples were amazed and asked: “Who really is this, because even the wind and the sea obey him?”—Mark 4:37-41.
Since then, Jesus has been elevated to the spirit realm and has been given even greater power and authority. As the King of God’s Kingdom, he has the responsibility as well as the ability to administer all the changes necessary to give people a peaceful and secure life on earth.
However, as we have seen, many of the problems and disasters are man-made, caused or made worse by the exploits of selfish and greedy individuals. What will the Kingdom do about those who persist in such ways and refuse to change? The Bible speaks of the Lord Jesus coming “from heaven with his powerful angels in a flaming fire, as he brings vengeance upon those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.” Yes, he will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”—2 Thessalonians 1:7, 8; Revelation 11:18.
Afterward, this “King of kings,” Jesus Christ, will assert full control of earth’s elements. (Revelation 19:16) He will make sure that the subjects of the Kingdom no longer suffer any calamities. He will use his power to regulate the meteorological elements so that the weather and seasonal cycles will work to the benefit of mankind. The result will be the realization of what Jehovah God long ago promised to his people: “I shall also certainly give your showers of rain at their proper time, and the land will indeed give its yield, and the tree of the field will give its fruit.” (Leviticus 26:4) People will be able to build houses without fear of losing them in some calamity: “They will certainly build houses and have occupancy; and they will certainly plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.”—Isaiah 65:21.



What Must You Do?

No doubt you, like many others, are attracted to the idea of living in a world with no more devastating disasters. What, though, do you have to do to be there? Since “those who do not know God” and “those who do not obey the good news” will not qualify to live in the disaster-free world to come, it is clear that one must now learn about God and support his arrangement for rulership of the earth. God requires that we come to know him and obey the good news of the Kingdom that he has set up through his Son.
The best way to learn to do this is through a careful study of the Bible. It contains the instructions for qualifying to live in the secure environment that will exist under Kingdom rulership. Why not ask Jehovah’s Witnesses to help you learn what the Bible teaches? They are at your bidding for that very purpose. One thing is sure—if you make the effort to know God and to obey the good news, then the words of Proverbs 1:33 will come true in your case: “As for the one listening to me, he will reside in security and be undisturbed from dread of calamity.”



