R217 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY, 1881. 

NO. 11. 



pagel 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H. PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... BRADDOCK, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 

L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN, . FT. EDWARD, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance- 
includes postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R217 : page 1 

THE GOSPEL TO ABRAHAM. 

The word gospel signifies good news. There are parts or 
elements to the good news however; there are first principles of 
the gospel of Christ (Heb. 6:1.) and there are more advanced 
doctrines also. For instance, when you became aware that you 
were a sinner, and learned that Jesus had become you ransom, 
and that as a result you might now, approach God as a perfect 
man and not as a sinner, and that by and by in God's due time 
(the Millennial Age) all marks of sin would be removed and you 
would then be actually perfect (still a man), that was good news 
to you; it was the basis of your harmony and friendship with 
God. It was the same thing which centuries ago was good news 
to Abraham. Paul tells us: "Abraham believed God and it was 
counted unto him for righteousness." Rom. 4:3. What good news 
did God communicate which he believed? "The gospel... saying: 
In thee shall all nations be blessed." The process by which all 
nations were to be blessed was not understood by Abraham 
except that it should be through his offspring, but he believed 
the fact without knowing how. We are made acquainted with the 
manner in which the blessing comes, viz: that Jesus was 
(through Mary) the seed of Abraham, and as such gave his life a 
ransom for all men; that as a consequence, in due time all men 
will be justified, and released from all the ills which come 
through sin. 

Yes, the restitution from Adam's sin~the justification of 
humanity by Christ's sacrifice, was the good news to Abraham, 
to us of the gospel age, and is to be good news to the whole 
world in the Millennial Age, for it is "to be testified in due 
time." 1 Tim. 2:6. It is this message that is called "the 
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth 
and to every nation and kindred and tongue and people," (during 
the coming age). Rev. 14:6. 

But there is another phase of the good news (gospel) which 
belongs exclusively to this Gospel Age. Something "which in 
other ages was not made known unto the Sons of men, as it is 
now (during this Gospel Age) revealed unto his saints (n.t.) and 
prophets (public expounders,) by the Spirit." Eph. 3:5. 

This special good news is, that since Jesus' sacrifice, God is 
calling out from the world of humanity, some to become "the 
Bride, the Lamb's wife" -to "become partakers of the divine 
nature," (2 Pet. 1:4) to cease to be men and become "new 
creatures in Christ Jesus," (2 Cor. 5:17.) and as such to be "Heirs 
of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord." This is "our high 
calling" of God, which we are to make sure of, by crucifying 
and sacrificing the human nature. This is the prize for which we 
seek~"Glory, Honor and Immortality." 



But these prizes were not offered to Abraham; he was not told 
about the joint-heirship, nor about sitting in the throne, nor 
about Immortality. No, these were not made known in past ages. 
"Jesus Christ... brought Life and Immortality to light through the 
gospel." 2 Tim. 1:10. Nor will this high calling be made during 
the future ages, for the "body of Christ" will be completed in 
this age. The Bride will be developed, and the marriage of the 
Lamb will come when "his wife hath made herself ready." Rev. 
19:7. 

So we see that we get all that Abraham got, viz: justification by 
faith from all Adamic sin, and in addition are invited to become 
a part of "The Seed which is Christ." Gal. 3:29. Abraham was 
the father of this Seed in a certain sense, but certainly not a part 
of his own Seed. But more on this again. 

Jesus was anointed of the Spirit— "the Lord's anointed"~and this 
we have seen is the meaning of his title, Christ; and all who 
become members of the Christ, must be made partakers of the 
Holy Ghost-anointed. Now we want to show that none were 
ever thus anointed before Jesus, and if this be the case none ever 
were members of his body before this age. 

David is called the Lord's anointed, but he was anointed of 
Samuel with the anointing oil to the office of King; but both 
David and the oil were types: The oil a type of the Holy Spirit, 
and David a type of Christ in his office of King. Aaron was the 
Lord's anointed also, but he too was anointed only with the 
typical oil and was himself a type of Christ in his office of 
Priest. The Spirit of God [Holy Spirit] came upon the Prophets 
during the Jewish age, but in a different way entirely and for a 
different purpose than its operation on the church during this 
age. Then, it was simply a power, which took possession of the 
Prophet; over which he had little or no control, which simply 
used him as a machine. (See Num. 22:38.) Never before Jesus, 
did the Holy Spirit act as "a comforter" and guide into an 
understanding of truth, and this is the special work of the Spirit 
now. It is given to the new creature as a seal or evidence of his 
being begotten to the divine nature and as an earnest of his final 
deliverance, or birth into the Spiritual form. 

The Spirit had written the mysteries through the Prophets, but 
had not revealed them. These mysteries were written for the 
church; (Jesus and his 

R218 :pagel 

body) and no one else could know them, nor will any one else 
understand them until the church is complete and "the mystery 
of God... finished." 

Many of the Prophets were good men who loved God and whom 
God loved; yet, Daniel called the "greatly beloved" prayed for 
weeks, to God, desiring an understanding of some of the 



prophecies which he himself had uttered. But the Spirit gave 
him no understanding of it: finally in pity God sent an angel, 
gave him all the understanding possible (but evidently not 
satisfactory) and finished by telling him that the thing was 
closed up and sealed for a time, but would be understood when 
due. See Dan. 12:9. 

For the same reason that prophets though beloved could not 
understand, the angels also beloved could not understand, viz: 
God had not revealed his plan, hence it is written, "Eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man 
(nor angel; we might add, on the strength of Peter's statement) 
the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But 
God hath revealed them unto us (the church) by His Spirit;... 
Now we have received... the Spirit of God, that we might know, 
the things freely given to us of God." 1 Cor. 2:9,13. 

Peter evidently refers to Daniel's interest above referred to, 
when he says: (1:10.) "Of which salvation (our high calling) the 
prophets have enquired and searched diligently who prophesied 
of the GRACE THAT SHOULD COME UNTO YOU: 
searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ 
which was (speaking) in them did signify, when it testified 
beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should 
follow. Unto whom it was revealed (by the angel, no revelations 
were made to them by the Spirit) that not unto themselves, but 
unto us they did minister, the things which are now reported 
unto you, by them which have preached the gospel (good news) 
unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, [to be 
your guide in understanding the preaching] which things the 
angels desire to look into." Now we ask, could Peter express 
more pointedly than he here does the view which we are 
advocating. They prophesied of the grace (favor-high calling) 
which is come unto you-the gospel church. Now notice another 
point made strong by Peter's expression; the prophets testified 
beforehand the sufferings of Christ. To all who see how the 
church or "body" of Christ has fellowship with the "head" both 
in sufferings and glory, this statement is full of meaning. Our 
hope is to be accounted worthy to suffer with him, that we may 
be also glorified together; (Rom. 8:17.) but the Prophets spoke 
of the sufferings as all future; they spoke of them "beforehand," 
so we may be sure that no matter how much the prophets may 
have suffered as witnesses for God, their sufferings were not 
like those of the gospel church reckoned a part of the sufferings 
of the Christ. 

Now again, to his body the church, Jesus is called the "Head," 
"Leader," "Captain of our Salvation," and how proper it is that a 
leader should precede the followers. How could Abraham and 
the Prophets walk in His footsteps as he hath set us an 
EXAMPLE? (1 Pet. 2:21). If Abraham and the Prophets be 
counted as a part of the Christ, then Jesus was their follower; if 



their sufferings be a part of the afflictions of Christ, then Jesus 
was merely filling up their afflictions. But not so-the Head 
suffered first and then the body follows- "considers him" and 
his example. This is our privilege to "Fill up that which is 
BEHIND of the afflictions of Christ." (Col. 1:24). 

But we have already shown that one reason why we are called 
the Christ, is that we are like our Leader, anointed of the Spirit 
or power of God. The Father gave it without measure to Jesus 
the head; and Jesus when glorified gave of the same to his body, 
the church at Pentecost, as Peter explains: "He being by the right 
hand of God exalted, hath shed forth this." (Acts 2:33.) The 
Spirit in this sense as a witness of our sonship (on the spiritual 
plane), as a guide into all truth (as it becomes "meat in due 
season") came to the church first at Pentecost, as we read that 
The Holy Ghost was not yet 

R218:page2 

given because Jesus was not yet glorified. (John 7:39.) Jesus 
must first make his sacrifice and be accepted of the Father, 
before any could be received as spiritual, new creatures and 
recognized by the Spirit's adoption as such. Jesus' words bear 
the same import; He said: "It is expedient for you that I go away, 
for if I go not away the comforter will not come unto you; but if 
I depart I will send him unto you"-- "even the Spirit of truth." 
(John 15:7, 15:26). Hence it is evident that the Spirit in this 
sense of enlightening and anointing is given only to the body of 
Christ (anointed). 

But some one enquires, Is it ever stated that the church is 
anointed? Yes, we read (1 John 2:27): "The anointing which you 
received from Him abides in you, and you have no need that any 
one should teach you [Ye are not dependent upon human 
wisdom and science.] but the same anointing teaches you 
concerning all things." [Diaglott]. Again let Paul tell us of our 
anointing (2 Cor. 1:21) "Now he which establisheth us with you 
in Christ, and hath anointed us in God; who also hath sealed us, 
and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts." 

We conclude then, that whatever God may have in his plan, as 
the reward of Abraham, the Prophets, and all ancient worthies, it 
is not the same thing which is promised to the Christ, which 
began with the head and will end with the last member —in this 
age. Thus we see that while there was good news to Abraham, 
and is to be everlasting good news in future ages, yet our Father 
hath bestowed "the exceeding riches of his grace, in his loving 
kindness toward us in Christ Jesus." 



R218 : page 2 



"SOME BETTER THING FOR US." 

"Art thou greater than our father Abraham which is dead and 
the prophets are dead? Whom makest thou thyself?" John 8:53. 

In being born of a virgin, Jesus had taken "the seed of 
Abraham" and so continued until he was 30 years of age when, 
in baptism he consecrated his being to God a living sacrifice. He 
was accepted, and from that moment, being begotten of the 
Spirit and sealed as a new creature, he is a partaker of the divine 
nature, the human nature (Abrahamic seed) being the thing 
sacrificed. 

Consequently in this conversation with the Pharisees Jesus calls 
Abraham their father and God his Father. (Vs. 54,56). We 
answer for Jesus then, that he at that time was greater than 
Abraham and the prophets, in as much as they were only 
justified men- human nature- while he (since baptism) was 
begotten of the Spirit and a "partaker of the Divine nature." He 
was then, as much better and greater than them, as the divine 
nature is superior to the human. 

Abraham became heir to the righteousness which is by faith; 
that is, he was "justified freely from all things," but this did not 
change his nature; no, it left him still a man-but a righteous 
man. Those who become heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ, follow Abraham thus far: They also believe God and are 
justified as men, and then, they go further than he; being called 
of God they present themselves living sacrifices, as Jesus did 
and are accepted in the beloved and thus (by making their 
calling and selection sure), they become as Jesus did- "partakers 
of the divine nature." These exceeding great and precious 
promises Abraham and the prophets heard not of and therefore 
were not called, to run for the prize we seek. 

Abraham, Isaac and Jacob while in some respects noble 
characters receive much of their lustre and grandeur from their 
being used as types of spiritual things. We have often noticed 
many ways in which Abraham was a type of our heavenly 
Father and Isaac the son of promise a type of God's Son, our 
Lord: Rebecca, Isaac's wife, was a type of Jesus' bride-the 
church, who soon will become joint-heirs with him to our 
Father's inheritance. 

The promises to Abraham were all seemingly, of an earthly sort, 
and until the Spirit through Paul unfolded them, it was 
impossible to see anything but earthly promises to a human 
seed; but now thank God we see how all of those promises made 
to Abraham will have a fulfillment, just as they were made to 
him and much as he understood them; and we also see beyond 
Abraham the type, to him whom he typified-the true Father of 
the true Isaac-in the fullest sense, "The Father of the faithful" 
who is himself calling us to be the Bride of His only Son and 
heir of all things. And when we apply to our Father, God; 



instead of to the type, Abraham, the words: "In Thee and in Thy 
Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed," we see a 
strength and depth of meaning never discerned when we applied 
them to the type. No, Abraham is no part of "The Seed"; neither 
is he in any but a typical sense, its father for, "One is your 
Father even God. " 

What shall we say then, is there unrighteousness with God? Did 
he make promises to Abraham, which he never intended to 
fulfill and in which he was only a type? No, the promises which 
God made to Abraham were all of an earthly kind and so 
Abraham must have understood them; but, God foreknowing his 
own great plans, so arranged those earthly promises that the 
higher— spiritual blessings and spiritual seed, would be hid in 
earthly promises, until in his own due time, His spirit should, 
through Paul, reveal it to the church. This mystery of the 
spiritual seed 

R219 : page 2 

was kept secret in past ages, but is now revealed. Eph. 3:9. 

Now let us look at any of the promises made to Abraham or 
expressed by the apostles, and we find them all susceptible of 
earthly fulfillment. We will examine some of them shortly, first 
stating the reward we expect Abraham to get and then seeing 
how the promises accord. 

To Abraham and the prophets God will give, "a just recompense 
of reward" undoubtedly—all that was ever promised them and 
probably much more than they ever expected; yet they, may 
never receive the spiritual gifts promised only to Jesus and his 
Bride. We repeat, that the prophets knew nothing of "our high 
calling" to be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, our Lord. 

Jesus said of John the Baptist, the prophet- "there hath not risen 
a greater;" (Matt. 11:11.) yet this greatest prophet did not claim 
the honor of being a part of the Bride but said: "He that hath the 
Bride is the Bridegroom: but the friends of the Bridegroom 
which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the 
Bridegroom's voice: this my joy, therefore is fulfilled." John 
3:29. Thus does John tell us that his joy and privilege was not to 
be of the Bride, but to be a friend of the Bridegroom and to 
introduce him. Moses also was a great prophet, yet Paul does not 
class him with the spiritual house of sons, for he says, "Moses 
verily was faithful in all his house as a servant... but Christ as a 
son over his own house, whose house are WE?" Heb. 3:5,6. 

Since (as shown in the preceding article) the anointing or 
begetting of the Spirit to a new nature (the spiritual) began with 
our Head, Jesus, we conclude that none of the patriarchs or 
prophets were thus begotten; and if not begotten they never can 
reach birth or a perfection of spiritual being (like unto the angels 
and like unto Christ's glorious body). How then will they be 



resurrected we enquire— with what body will they come? They 
belonged to the human family and will be raised human 
(earthly) beings. By their faith, they were justified as men; 
(reckoned free from sin and its penalty, sickness and death), and 
in the resurrection they will we believe be raised perfect men. 

Herein will be the value of their faith, viz: that while the world 
in general will be raised to a measure of life only, and require 
faith and works during the Millennial age to prove their 
harmony and test their obedience to God and thus come 
gradually to perfection, these ancient worthies will, because 
tried and found worthy and justified by faith, be raised in the 
glory and perfection of earthly being. 

Let no one forget that there is a "glory" attaching to the earthly. 
There are "celestial (spiritual) bodies and bodies terrestrial 
(earthly): but the glory of the celestial is one (thing) and the 
glory of the terrestrial is another." 1 Cor. 15:40. 

Raised in the perfection of being, how they would tower above 
others on earth, degraded as all humanity is by sin. How 
naturally would come to them the homage and respect of the 
whole race. They would naturally assume the place first given to 
Adam -"A little lower than the angels"-- crowned "with glory 
and honor" and set over the works of God's hands:-- "Have thou 
dominion." (See Heb. 2:7 and Gen. 1:28.) 

THE NEW JERUSALEM 

is a figure of the coming kingdom of God. It represents, we 
believe, both spiritual and earthly beings. When first seen (Rev. 
21:2.) it contains only the Bride, it has not reached earth yet-it 
is "coming down from God out of heaven." From the 
commencement of the reign of Christ, the kingdom or dominion 
of God will commence; it will continue to overthrow evil and 
establish right, until in the end of the time of trouble the 
kingdom ("New Jerusalem") shall have reached earth, and it 
shall be established here, during the Millennial reign (of which 
that city is the figure). 

As we have already seen, the real rulers of earth will be the Lord 
and His Bride, invisible to humanity because of a new and 
different nature- spiritual beings-the new "powers of the air: " 
but there will be earthly agencies, made use of in ruling and 
blessing and restoring mankind— just as the present "Prince of 
the power of the air" now makes use of human agencies 
(governments and men), in oppressing and degrading. 

There will then be true "civil service reform," and none but 
perfect beings will be allowed to hold office, or be identified 
with the government; and each earthly one as soon as he learns 
of the goodness and love of God, will seek and be assisted, to 
approach the kingdom (New Jerusalem). "They shall bring the 
honor and glory of the nations into it: And there shall in no wise 



enter into it anything that defileth (sinful) neither whatsoever 
worketh abomination or maketh a lie: but they which are written 
in the Lamb's book of life." (Rev. 21:26.) 

The whole world will be on trial for life, [life as human beings— 
as Adam had it] and the conditions will be their coming into full 
harmony with the Kingdom (New Jerusalem) and its laws of 
love to God and men. None other, shall enter the kingdom or be 
enrolled of the Lamb as worthy of life. In the end of the age all 
who have not entered (the symbolic city) will be destroyed. 
(Rev. 20:14,15.) 

We see then, that the kingdom (dominion-recognized authority) 
of God, "cometh not with observation, neither shall men say, lo, 
here! or lo, there!" for the kingdom when it cometh, will be in 
their midst, a spiritual unseen power; but as it proceeds and 
conquers, it begins to have human representatives (who can be 
seen) who continue to increase until the kingdom shall be, 
"Under the whole heavens" and shall "Fill the whole EARTH." 
(Dan. 2:35). 

Now, in this kingdom there will be a work for spiritual beings to 
do, viz: to overrule, oversee and reward with perfection of being 
and continuous life, all who shall prove themselves worthy of it- 
-who will thus be delivered from the bondage of corruption 
[sickness and dying] into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. 
[Adam was thus gloriously free, before sin bound him to death]. 
And there will be work for humanity in the glorious restitution 
of all things, for they will be co-workers with the Lamb, the 
Spirit and the Bride. 

Now we can perhaps understand why it is, that "without holiness 
no man shall see the Lord," ("we shall see him as he is" for "we 
shall be like him, "--also spiritual beings) and yet, men shall see 
the Patriarchs, for we read: 

"YE SHALL SEE ABRAHAM, ISAAC AND JACOB 
IN THE KINGDOM OF GOD, 

and ye yourselves thrust out." (Luke 13:28). The earthly phase 
of the kingdom was all that ever had been revealed until Jesus 
came and taught concerning a kingdom higher, into which 
humanity (flesh and blood) could not enter. 

It was this (earthly) kingdom they sought and which had been 
promised them-the dominion over all nations to rule and to 
bless all others. It was this earthly phase of the kingdom which 
had been established in a small way under David, and this the 
Jews in Jesus' day claimed still to represent; and now notice 
Jesus' words--" You yourselves (shall be) thrust out. "--They 
could not be thrust out of a thing which they were not in, in 
some sense; and they were in the earthly kingdom, in the sense 
that they as a nation had all been typically cleansed by typical 
sacrifices, and thus constituted a figure of the future earthly 



kingdom, into which will enter none but those absolutely 
cleansed from all sin by virtue of the "better sacrifices." 

If then Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets, justified 
by faith, shall be raised perfect men, and as such will be in 
perfect harmony with God, we see how they would be the first 
of the earthly element of the kingdom. With this thought of the 
spiritual and human parts of the kingdom of God, and the 
necessity of the spiritual, being first perfected before the human 
would be possible, let us remember Jesus' words, "There 



[Continued on seventh page.] 

R219 : page 7 

[Continued from second page.] 

are last (the Gospel church) which shall be first (or chief), and 
there are first (Abraham, the prophets, etc.) which shall be last" 
(or under). Luke 13:28-30. 

But, can the promises to Abraham be thus fulfilled? We think 
so-let us see. We read (Gen. 12:1-3), "Now the Lord had said 
unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country [Chaldea] and from thy 
kindred and from thy father's house, unto a land which I will 
shew thee, and I will make of thee a great nation, and I will 
bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a 
blessing: and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that 
curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be 
blessed." If Abraham be placed at the head of the (earthly) 
kingdom, all this can be accomplished. 

Again we read (Gen. 13:15,16): "All the land which thou seest, 
to thee will I give it and to thy seed forever; and I will make thy 
seed as the dust of the earth, so that if a man can number the 
dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered." [There 
is not much need of urging that this does not refer to the "little 
flock."] 

Again (Gen. 17:7,8): "I will give to thee and to thy seed after 
thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger-all the land of Canaan 
for an everlasting possession." 

Again (Gen. 22:17): "In blessing I will bless thee, and in 
multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven and as 
the sand that is by the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the 
gate of his enemies, and in thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed." 

Now unless we can see more seeds than one in these promises, 
we will 

R220 : page 7 

have confusion: but if we can see that the earthly is to be as the 
sand, and that the blessing seed is Christ and the little flock 



under him, we may see how Abraham might suppose it all to 
belong to the natural seed. And indeed we should not know of 
the distinction were it not revealed through Paul. (Gal. 3:29). 

Paul, in Rom. 4:16, seems to mention both of these seeds 
(natural and spiritual) when he says, that God's promise was "of 
faith, to the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed, 
not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of 
the faith of Abraham who is the father of us all (...) like unto 
Him whom he believed, even God." [We give the marginal 
reading which conveys the true idea, viz: that Abraham was the 
actual father to one of the seeds and a likeness of the Father of 
the other -"even God."] 

Let us next read from the sermon of Stephen, the second 
Christian martyr, (Jesus being the first) about God's promise to 
Abraham. He says (Acts 7:1-6): "The God of glory appeared 
unto our father Abraham... and said unto him, 'Get thee out of 
thy country and from thy kindred and come into the land which I 
will show thee.' Then came he out of the land of the Chaldeans 
and dwelt in Charran: and from thence... he removed and came 
into this land wherein ye now dwell. And he gave him none 
inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his foot on, yet He 
promised that He would give it to him for a possession, and to 
his seed after him.... And God spake on this wise, That his seed 
should sojourn in a strange land and that they should bring them 
into bondage and entreat them evil four hundred years." 

Let no one question therefore that there is an earthly seed to be 
blessed with earthly blessings as men, and that the promise to 
Abraham associates him especially with that seed, and not with 
the higher one whose father is God. 

Paul speaks of Abraham's hopes, saying (Heb. 11:8-17): "By 
faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place which 
he should after receive for an inheritance obeyed; and went out, 
not knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land 
of promise... dwelling with Isaac and Jacob heirs of the same 
promise: For he looked for the city which hath foundations 
whose builder and maker is God." "These all died in faith, not 
having received the promises (the things promised- the land 
wherein they dwelt, etc.), but having seen them afar off... and 
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on earth. For 
they that say such things declare that they seek a country, and 
truly if they had (wished) been mindful of that country from 
whence they came out [Chaldea], they might have had 
opportunity to have returned. But now, [instead of returning] 
they desire a better (the promised) country, that is an heavenly, 
(Canaan in the heavenly kingdom). Wherefore God is not 
ashamed to be called their God: for he hath prepared for them a 
city." The city to which we have seen Abraham and the Prophets 
are coming, is the Millennial Kingdom into which they shall be 
the first to come on the earthly plane, and whose earthly seat of 



government will probably be Canaan the very land here 
mentioned, in which they sojourned as strangers. 

Paul proceeds to add to his list of ancient worthies David, 
Samson, Rahab and the prophets who succeeded in various 
undertakings because of faith in God: and he suggests the 
thought that these faithful ones will also get a reward in "the 
city" being prepared. But after mentioning all these Paul adds: 
"These all having obtained a good report through faith received 
not the promise [the chief or "high calling"] God having 
provided 

SOME BETTER THING FOR US 

that they without us [the Christ] should not be made perfect." 
That is, they shall not perfectly receive, the things promised 
them until THE SEED [Christ] has first received its reward; 
until the New Jerusalem shall come down; then the promises 
made to them, shall all be accomplished or "made perfect." 

And now methinks, some one would say, "Art thou greater than 
our father Abraham... and the prophets? Whom makest thou 
thyself?" To which we answer in Jesus' words, "If I honor 
myself my honor is nothing: it is my Father that honoreth me. " 
No, dear brethren and sisters, none of us could have imagined 
such a "high calling" as we have received; but as we read his 
promises we should be unworthy of them did we not believe and 
confess and accept them, with grateful hearts. 

As we see the exclusive character of the call to be joint heirs of 
"Glory, Honor and Immortality" let us lay aside every weight 
and run for it. The prize given to the patriarchs is almost beyond 
human comprehension, and yet God has PROVIDED some 
better thing for us. I shall praise him eternally for the 
opportunity provided even if I should not "so run as to obtain" it. 
But why should I not attain it- why should you not obtain it? 
Our justification is complete—it is Christ that died. Our call is 
official, it is "of God in Christ Jesus." True, we are weak, but He 
who invites us says, "My grace is sufficient for thee." Haste then 
to perform your covenant; to present your bodies living 
sacrifices. The time of sacrifice will soon be over -haste to 
make your calling and election sure by submitting yourself to 
God, who will work in you both to will and to do of His good 
pleasure. 



R222 : page 3 



'HOW READEST THOU?" 

LUKE 10:16. 



Tis one thing now to read the Bible through, 
And another thing to read, to learn, and do; 
Tis one thing now to read it with delight, 
And quite another thing to read it right. 

Some read it with design to learn to read, 
But to the subject pay but little heed; 
Some read it as their duty once a week, 
But no instruction from the Bible seek. 

Whil'st others read it without common care, 
With no regard to how they read nor where. 
Some read it as a history to know 
How people lived three thousand years ago. 

Some read to bring themselves repute, 
By showing others how they can dispute; 
Whil'st others read because their neighbors do, 
To see how long t'will take to read it through. 

Some read it for the wonders that are there, 
How David killed a lion and a bear: 
Whil'st others read—or rather in it look, 
Because, perhaps, they have no other book. 

Some read the blessed Book-they don't know why, 
It somehow happens in the way to lie; 
Whil'st others read it with uncommon care, 
But all to find some contradictions there. 

Some read as though it did not speak to them 
But to the people at Jerusalem; 
One reads it as a book of mysteries, 
And won't believe the very thing he sees. 

One reads with father's specs upon his head, 
And sees the thing just as his father did; 
Another reads through Campbell or through Scott, 
And thinks it means exactly what they thought. 

Whil'st others read the Book through H. Balou, 
And if it cross his track it can't be true! 
Some read to prove a pre-adopted creed, 
Thus understand but little what they read. 

For every passage in the Book they bend 
To make it suit that all important end. 
Some people read as I have often thought 
To teach the Book instead of being taught. 

And some there are who read it out of spite, 
I fear there are but few who read it right, 

So many people in these latter days 
Have read the Bible in so many ways, 
That few can tell which system is the best 
For every party contradicts the rest. 



-Selected. 



R220 : page 3 

NOT ASHAMED OF THE GOSPEL. 

"I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power of 
God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first 
and also to the Greek." Rom. 1:16. 

These words like all of Paul's words, in general, are fitly spoken 
and are like "apples of gold in pictures of silver." Gospel 
signifies good tell, good news, glad tidings, something to make 
one rejoice and be glad; it must have been something of very 
great importance, something far-reaching in its nature, 
something supremely grand and glorious, for it had wrought a 
most wonderful change in Paul. He had not always been of the 
opinion which he now expresses, for he had persecuted those of 
"this way" even unto strange cities, and when they were put to 
death, he gave his voice against them. 

What had caused this change in the mind of the apostle? 

Surely the gospel had not changed in its character; no, but he 
had become better acquainted with it. That is the way it ever is 
with the world: the better they are acquainted with the gospel of 
Christ, the better opinion they have of it, the higher they value it. 
Paul was expecting soon to visit Rome, that imperial city, the 
mistress of the world, and of course if he spoke in public he 
wished to talk about something which he was not ashamed of, 
and this he declared was the thing: "I am not ashamed of the 
gospel of Christ." Paul proved the truth of his assertion not only 
by his words, but by his actions as well. 

The mighty mind of Paul, in its natural sweep immense, saw 
THAT in the gospel of Christ which was infinitely above and 
beyond everything else. If he could have seen how man, through 
the blinding effects of pride, and superstition, would have finally 
come to consider the gospel of Christ -if he could have stood 
upon the orthodox platform of our day and have looked out upon 
the pile of "wood, hay, stubble," which is built on the 
foundation, Christ, can any one suppose he would have been 
able to say he was not ashamed of it? If the "mother church," 
which is proud of calling him her patron saint, and after whom 
many of her churches are named, should through some of her 
dignitaries expound to him the doctrines of penance, papal 
succession, confession of sins to the priest and obsolution, the 
state of the dead in purgatory, &c, can we suppose that he 
would endorse them and say of them, "I am not ashamed?" If 
some one were to represent to him the doctrine of predestination 
as held by our Calvinistic brethren, and undertake to prove it by 
Paul's own writings in Rom. 8:29,33: "For whom he did 



foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image 
of his son," &c, and again in Rom. 9:15,24: "I will have mercy 
on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on 
whom I will have compassion," &c, and conclude from it that 
God from all eternity planned to bring into being a few, favored 
with advantages of every sort-birth in a Christian land, 
surrounded by Christian influences and upheld by Christian 
associations and the particular favor of God; but the large 
majority by the same eternal decree were born in the darkness of 
moral night and bound by the strong cords of corrupt hereditary 
taint and association, and although they may have dim 
perceptions of God and truth, and may desire to know him, yet, 
though they may groan and strive, and turn their tear-dimmed 
eyes toward heaven, with untold longings, yet they shall go into 
a night of eternal anguish, "without one cheering ray of hope, or 
star of glimmering day," and the righteous from their exalted 
seats in glory shall look on this display of God's wisdom, and 
justice, and power and praise him for this manifestation of his 
love. 

Is it possible that any thinking man can suppose that Paul would 
endorse this? That this was what he was not ashamed of? But 
would he look with more favor upon the view of our Arminian 
brother, who should say to him: that although the decree was 
made as our Calvinistic brother has stated, yet the provision was 
for all to be saved, the ransom was provided 

R221 : page 3 

for all, but the secret of it is in the words of Jesus, "ye will not 
come unto me that ye might have life. " The table was spread and 
bountifully provided for all, but they "would not and made light 
of it;" not taking into account the fact that more than nine-tenths 
of them never knew that there was any supper provided for 
them, that is to say, that infinite wisdom decreed that a certain 
number only should be informed of it, and be at the table, but 
had it set for ten times as many as he knew would be there to 
sup, and because they were not there, consigned them to eternal 
torment. Acting upon this basis of reasoning, if such it is, our 
Arminian brethren have sent as many missionaries as possible to 
tell the starving millions that there is a supper provided so that 
the poor creatures who are fortunate enough to hear of it may 
come and welcome, but those who do not must starve. But this 
when looked at squarely, our Arminian brethren cannot see to be 
very good news, and so sometimes conclude, (though not in a 
very orthodox way) that these unfortunate millions who never 
heard of the gospel, will be provided for "in SOME way or 
other," (a good conviction). Can we think this is the gospel 
which Paul had in mind when he said, "I am not ashamed of the 
gospel? Nay, verily ! 

But there is still another view that has seemingly strong 
scriptural support, and this includes all men; this surely is a free 



gospel and universal, and Paul is supposed to be its strong 
supporter, for he has given that which is the key note in the 
promulgation of it, viz: "As in Adam ALL die, EVEN SO in 
Christ shall ALL be made alive." 1 Cor. 15:22. So our 
Universalist brother infers from this that in some way, in the 
hour of death, or before, or after, by some means, whether sinful 
or holy, everybody, everywhere shall be saved; and why not? He 
says, did not Christ by the grace of God taste death "for every 
man?" And if so did he die in vain for any man? But our brother 
of this opinion would not probably dwell with as much 
satisfaction upon the passage "without holiness no man shall see 
the Lord," Heb. 12:14, and would prefer that murderers and 
pickpockets should occupy a separate apartment in the many 
mansions." (Here again conviction almost arrives at truth.) Now, 
candidly, can we suppose that these views, which we think, in a 
plain-spoken way, we have fairly represented as being the views 
held by the churches in general, regarding the gospel, are the 
views held by saint Paul when he uttered the words we have 
referred to? 

We cannot think so, and we do think that few, if any, who 
reflect are perfectly satisfied that either of these were the views 
which he held. Then do you stand back aghast and say: Can it be 
possible that all this is error that we have been taught so long, 
and that has so much seeming support from the Bible? Do you 
say, impossible? If these are errors, which is your choice, and 
which is good news to you? Can you walk out beneath the starry 
heavens at night and looking up into illimitable space among the 
exhibitions of infinite wisdom and power, and there alone in the 
presence of God lay your hand upon either one of these dogmas 
and say, I believe THIS is the gospel of Christ, of which Paul 
was not ashamed? 

No, my dear brother or friend these dogmas are not all errors, 
neither are they all truth. Like the confederation of states, to 
which has been proudly attached the term "E Pluribus Unum, " 
so the truths of the gospel of which Paul was not ashamed are "E 
Pluribus Unum," i.e. one composed of many. We understand 
then that the gospel, of which Paul spoke, embraces in its scope 
many of the ideas held by each of our brethren to whom 
reference has been made, and for whose opinions we have 
respect, but we cannot think that either of them is complete 
alone, and we believe that either of the churches who think that 
its plan or creed is the only and true one, while so much at 
variance with the others, has done much to make the man of the 
world who is uninformed, reject the instrument (the Bible) upon 
which he thinks so many variant tunes can be played. With force 
then the question recurs to us; what was the gospel or good news 
of which Paul was not ashamed? What was the great and 
glorious thought connected with the gospel that he had in mind? 



Paul's was a critical and calculating mind, and his inspired 
thoughts were stamped with that peculiarity. He "reckons" about 
his sufferings; he "counted all things loss," etc., etc. In this case 
he is "not ashamed of the gospel for, i.e. for the reason that it is 
"the power of God," something above and beyond all human 
institutions, something that the world, the mind of the natural 
man never would have thought of, something supernatural, yes 
and something from which the mind of man (if left to itself) 
would soon wander; and that is evidently why these truths have 
been torn asunder, and the different parties in the church have 
each taken a piece, and upon it built a superstructure of its own, 
much of it, the "wood, hay, stubble," to which Paul refers in 1 
Cor. 3:12. Each of these, according to our understanding, has 
already begun to be swept away or to be burned up, and "the 
day" which "shall declare it" is even now begun, (vs. 13) we 
fully believe. We feel convinced that the fire which is to 
consume the world (of error) is even "now kindled." 

But says one, where is the disagreement? Do we not all believe 
that this gospel is the power of God unto salvation? (to every 
one that believeth, our Arminian brother breaks in-but he must 
wait a little). Well they say so, but in practice deny it. Our 
Calvinistic brother says "unto salvation" and adds, (in creed) of 
a few, and unto damnation of the many, i.e. power to save all, 
will to save a few. Our Arminian brother can emphasize the will 
of God to save, but whisper the power, for O! man opposes his 
will. Our Universalist brother can declare aloud both will and 
power and take all into glory. 

Let us illustrate the difference between our brethren, and 
suppose three natives of some foreign land, who were totally 
unacquainted with the design or nature of the national emblem 
"the stars and stripes," were to call at different times upon the 
American Consul in that land, and he was to present to one a 
portion of the flag as a memento, having only the red, at another 
time, to another one, a portion having only the white, and still 
another having only the blue, each might suppose that his 
portion represented in color the whole and contend that because 
the representative of the nation gave it to him, he was sure that 
was the true color, and so of each of the others, while the fact 
would be that each was right in supposing that he had the true 
color, but erred in the supposition that he had the only color, 
when it was composed of "red, white, and blue," and that in a 
specified proportion. 

Now our Calvinistic brother, sees so clearly that predestination 
is taught in the scriptures, that he cannot see that there is a 
universal salvation; and our Arminian brother sees so clearly 
that there is salvation provided for all, that he cannot see that 
there is clearly taught the doctrine of predestination and 
election; and our Universalist brother sees so clearly that all will 
be saved, that he cannot see either of the others. 



But says one, you seem to agree with each, and disagree with 
each; how is this? They cannot all be right and wrong at the 
same time. Well not altogether right, but partly right, as in the 
illustration. We are glad to see that each has enough ground for 
his belief to awaken our sympathy and respect. Respect for what 
Paul would have been ashamed of? No, we did not say that Paul 
was ashamed of these brethren, but of the doctrines or creeds 
that have come to be called the gospel, or are considered as 
representing the gospel. 

R221 : page 4 

Well, says our Calvinistic brother, answer me one question: Is 
not Predestination or Election clearly taught in the Scriptures? 

Yes, my brother, yes. Well, says my Arminian brother, is not 
free will as clearly taught? Yes, my brother, we so understand. 

And is not universal salvation as clearly taught, says my 
Universalist brother, and we answer we think and believe so. 

Perhaps all of these brethren, including the Papist brother, cares 
to hear no more; if so, perhaps some "fool for Christ's sake" 
will, so we will say on and consider the last question first. We 
consider our Universalist brother's text "As in Adam all die, 
even so in Christ shall all be made alive," 1 Cor. 15:22, as 
unanswerable as regards the universality of salvation; if there 
were not another text in the Bible to teach it, that would. It 
seems to us that nothing can be plainer, and for this reason other 
scripture somewhat obscure must in some way harmonize with 
it, and so of each of the other texts quoted by our brethren as 
teaching the doctrines of "Election," and "Free will," or 
Arminianism. In the above text we think no one would 
undertake to make the word "all" in the second place mean less 
than in the first, especially when the first is followed and the 
latter preceded by the words "even so." The misunderstanding 
seems to be as to the kind or mode of life. "As in Adam all die;" 
how do all die in Adam? To answer it correctly first conclude 
how all lived in Adam. Not spiritual nor eternal life was it? 
Natural life and its continuance CONDITIONED on obedience, 
was it not? Then he (and all in him) lost no more than that, and 
"even so" he (and "all" in him) will be made alive in Christ, the 
second Adam. But, says one, is that all the life we get through 
Christ? That is all the universal salvation we can find held out to 
mankind in the Bible, and that we think is "very good;" God said 
it was, but thank God there is more, but if any wish to stop there, 
God has predestinated to let them, but if they have heard of the 
higher life and 

R222 : page 4 

neglected "so great salvation," theirs will be an irreparable loss. 

Then you think, says one, that there are different degrees of 
salvation? O, yes; let us read on a little further (23d ver.): "But 



every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward they 
that are Christ's at his coming." 

Having seen that there are orders or ranks of being, as is also 
shown by the apostle in the 39th verse and onward, we can see 
that it does not follow that because all are made alive through 
Christ, they will therefore come finally to the same kind of 
being, but are brought to life and take position according to 
"order," for "As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; 
and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly" (48 
ver.). 

With this view, that there are different orders, and that all are 
brought to the restoration of what was lost in Adam, we can see 
how there may be a will in man to gain a position in any given 
order, and how there may be a selection, "Election" or 
"Predestination," (whichever you choose to call it) of God from 
among his creatures of those who are qualified or fitted for the 
different grades, orders, or ranks of being. He has predestinated, 
or established a law, that, "to those who by patient continuance 
in well doing SEEK for glory and honor and immortality, eternal 
life" shall be given. Rom. 2:7. "But unto them that are 
contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, 
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish to every soul of 
man that doeth evil," (8 and 9 verses). Now who disobey? Those 
who know the truth surely. You do not consider your child as 
disobedient until it transgresses a known command; neither does 
God, for "like as a father pitieth his children so the Lord pitieth 
them that fear him." Many fear him who do not know much 
about him, and do not know what is commanded, or whether he 
has commanded anything or not. Such cannot, of course, obey 
the truth, nor come under wrath, but will come to life (not 
eternal), the life lost in Adam without any will or choice of 
theirs, and restored to that measure, through the second Adam 
without will or choice of theirs. It was for this purpose that "He 
by the grace of God should taste death for every man." Heb. 2:9. 
And God commendeth his love toward us, in that while we were 
yet sinners Christ died for us. Yes "WHEN we were enemies we 
were reconciled to God by the death of his son." Rom. 5:8-10. 

But does some one say, very well, but Paul says here of the 
gospel, that it is the power of God unto salvation to every one 
that believeth? 

Ah, but brother, now you are reaching that point in the mind and 
teaching of the apostle in which is embraced another rank or 
"order:" the power of God UNTO; we do not imagine that the 
power of God is staid at all when man is brought back to the 
Adamic condition, that is, to a reconciled condition; he lost that 
life without previously knowing the nature of sin or death; true, 
God told him, but like children without experience, they 
disobeyed, and his posterity die for it, or because of it; whether 
they sin or not they all go down in death because of the sin of 



Adam which "taints us all," and come up because of the 
righteousness of Christ that restores us all. We die on Adam's 
account, and live again on Christ's account. Now brought back 
to the Adamic condition we are reconciled to God. Well, is there 
anything more for us? Yes, hear the apostle again, "Much more 
being reconciled we shall be saved by his life." 10th verse. 
What! Saved more? Yes, much more by the power of God unto 
salvation. Will all men be saved much more? We are sorry to 
part company with any, but though this is a blessed restored 
condition, yet we shall have to leave on this plane those who do 
not believe, for this much more salvation is to every one that 
believeth. Now my Calvinistic and Arminian brothers stand by 
and see the beauty of those texts which you have had to stretch 
and twist so. You need not stretch them now; they are all right 
and true. "Whom he did foreknow" would be fitted by desire, 
and faith, and continuance in well doing, each and severally for 
the different orders, "He predestinated" them to, and so this 
gospel, GOOD news is the power of God unto salvation to every 
one that believeth; to the Jew first and also to the Greek." Why 
to the Jew first? ("He is not a Jew which is one outwardly," "but 
he is a Jew which is one inwardly." Rom. 2:28-29), because he 
believes first, here, in time to reach the great salvation. Dear 
brethren, let us desire more, study God's word more, believe 
more, and have the "much more" salvation. "Eye hath not seen 
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the 
things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God 
hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth 
all things, yea the deep things of God." 1 Cor. 2:9-10. 

J. C. S. 



R222 : page 4 

SUNTELIA, THERISMOS, PAROUSIA. 

Though Greek, like English words, have different meanings; the 
Bible student frequently finds it extremely interesting to learn 
that many Greek words were used by Christ and the Apostles 
with a certain and fixed signification. The literal rendering of the 
three words above, is end, harvest, and presence respectively; 
and we would briefly call attention to them, 

R223 : page 4 

as they are intensely interesting terms to us, who believe that 
they all are used with reference to the period of time, in which 
we are living. 

Suntelia, end occurs six times; once in Heb. 9:26. "But now 
once in the Suntelia (end) of the aionon (ages) hath he (Jesus) 
appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself." 



In the other five cases, it has reference to the end of the gospel 
age; as can be seen by reading Matt. 13:39,40,49; 24:3; and 
28:20. 

The harvest is the end of the age, and Matt. 13:30, gives us to 
understand that it is a space of time, in which a work is to be 
done. 

Therismos (reaping harvest) occurs thirteen times; Matt. 
9:37,38; 13:30,39; Mark 4:29; Luke 10:2; John 4:35, and Rev. 
14:15. 

It will be noticed that it refers to the gospel harvest four times; 
Rev. 14 speaking of the two facts, that for the little flock and 
afterward for the great multitude. The Heb. qatsir is the 
equivalent of Therismos; and Joel 3:18, and onward, refers to 
the same harvest mentioned in Rev. 14, though perhaps first to 
the Jewish harvest. 

Parousia, signifies presence, invariably. Liddell and Scott, 
standard authority, give it that signification; and Young's 
Analytical Concordance renders it the same. Whedon's 
Commentary, page 277 says: "The word Parousia, never in the 
whole New Testament, signifies anything else." It never means 
the act of coming, but presence. It is twenty times improperly 
translated coming, in the common version; in fourteen cases, at 
least, when referring to the presence of Christ at the end of the 
age. We give the passages in which it occurs. Matt. 
24:3,27,37,39; 1 Cor. 15:23; 1 Thess. 2:19; 3:13; 4:15; 5:23; 2 
Thess. 2:1,8,9; James 5:7,8; 2 Pet. 1:16; 3:4; 1 John 1:28. The 
question, Matt. 24:3, is: What will be the sign of thy Parousia 
(presence) and the Suntelia (end) of the aion (age)? And we 
must believe that the answer had direct reference to the question. 
He not only gave a series of events which would precede his 
presence; but also events or signs which would be due, during 
the presence, as will be noticed by those who will read carefully 
the passages indicated above; and it would seem that all might 
see that not alone the passages involved in the answer to the 
question; but all the others, where parousia occurs, appeal, like 
everything else in the gospel, to the "eyes of the understanding," 
(Eph. 1:18,) rather than to the natural eyes, as has been so many 
times shown. The Therismos (harvest) is the Suntelia (end) of 
the age; and the Parousia (presence) is in the Suntelia (end) of 
the age; and the evidence seems conclusive that it is the same 
Suntelia in both cases; not one preceding the other; the evidence 
is so abundant and clear, that we must believe it until compelled 
by facts, not by any amount of scoffing, to discard the position. 
The same evidence which caused us to believe in the one, made 
us believe in the other; and any one who doubts that we are 
living in the time of the Parousia, ought to be consistent, to 
question the Therismos (harvest) also. The work of separation 
due to be done in the first part of the harvest, has evidently been 
going on, and is about complete. What was the special prophetic 



argument which proved the harvest and presence to begin in the 
autumn of 1 874? The Jubilee, we answer. The writer has been 
studying the time question since 1867, and has been associated 
with the movement in connection with the fulfillment of all the 
prophetic measurements since the above date; and still accepts 
all the legitimate conclusions to be drawn from them, as he 
understands them. 

Those who would study the Jubilee argument, will find it in the 
"Day Dawn." It is not the design to give it in this connection; 
but we reiterate that it was the main argument used to prove that 
we had come to the "harvest" or end of the age. The 1335 days 
of Dan. 12 were prolonged to their utmost, to harmonize with 
this. We would recommend all who are interested, to carefully 
study all the arguments; and caution all not to be ready to give 
up old "land marks" too easily; and to be careful lest haply you 
may be found among those referred to in 2 Pet. 3:4. 

We would suggest that those who have never had the "eyes of 
the understanding enlightened" on the subject, as well as those 
who once understood, but have gone out into darkness in regard 
to it, do not comprehend the presence. Whatever others have 
thought, or may now think, the writer has never believed nor 
taught, that Christ was walking the earth during the period of his 
presence; it is called presence, because he has assumed a new 
character, to do a new work, superintending the harvest. The 
Son of Man sowed the seed (Matt. 13:37), and he sends forth the 
reapers. Vs. 41. He employs agents in both sowing and reaping; 
yet it can be said that he does both, and during this period of 
reaping, he has appeared especially near to those who have 
understood it, and they have enjoyed the time of his Parousia. 
Some who once expressed the same enjoyment of it, are now 
asking: Where is the evidence promise: if not fulfilling the other 
part of Peter's prediction? Those who understand the teaching of 
the Law in regard to "the day of atonement," (Lev. 16) we think, 
will not expect to see Christ in the flesh, nor while they are in 
the flesh. If our understanding of the prophetic arguments be 
correct, we are nearing the close of that part of the harvest which 
pertains to the little flock. If there shall be found any mistake 
about what may be expected here, we know that the conditions, 
upon which we may attain to the Brideship are not affected: We 
must count ourselves dead indeed unto sin, Satan, self and the 
world, and alive unto God. 

B. W. K. 



R285 : page 4 

NOTWITHSTANDING the distress of that country, the Roman 
Catholic bishops of Ireland, in a recent audience with the Pope, 
presented him with a purse of over $40,000. 



R223 : page 5 



THE YEAR 1881. 



This year would be indeed a notable one, if the predictions and 
expectations of all men could be realized. "Second Adventists," 
whose applications of the prophetic periods (The "2300 days," 
the "1335 days" and the "1260 days,") have all run out, and who 
because they are looking for Jesus to again become a man and 
appear to them in the flesh, cannot discern that he is now present 
a spiritual being. They have not "the eyes of their 
understanding" opened, else they could realize that those 
prophetic periods were fulfilled and the "harvest" of the age has 
come~"the day of the Lord." 

With only a little spiritual discernment they might see the 
harvest work in progress-the ripened grains of wheat being 
separated from the "Babylon" mixture. But they see not: they, as 
well as the church in general stand in the same relation to the 
second advent that the nominal Jewish church did to the first 
advent. Jesus was then present, but they could not believe it— 
"they knew not the time of their visitation." Only "Israelites 
indeed in whom was no guile," then received him and believed 
on him, and the others "stumbled" -Thus the separating of that 
harvest was accomplished. 

And now, how fully we seem to have the parallel here. This 
movement based upon the statements of the prophets, claims 
that the Lord is present- that those prophetic periods did not fail 
of fulfillment, and some of the best and holiest people of all 
denominations are coming to a realization of these truths. 

They find spiritual food for which they have long been 
hungering; they come to the enjoyment of the liberty wherein 
we stand and rejoice, knowing no name but that of our 
Bridegroom, and recognizing each other only by the spirit of 
Christ; needing not the shackles of creeds to unite, since the 
only bonds of union are the bonds of love and of the Spirit. 

Yes, the sifting work goes on, and serves to prove every man, 
whether he loves truth and liberty, or error and bondage; let each 
one take his choice. The bondage is the most honorable and 
brings the approval of the highly respected among men, while to 
step out, brings much the same results as at the first advent. 
Then the frown and displeasure of the Chief Priests and 
Pharisees— the church— came upon all who received the words 
of the Master, and their names were cast out as evil. That was 
the test by which it was ascertained, who were "Israelites 
indeed"-so now the same class are being gathered in much the 
same way. 



"The Second Advent Church" people, and many in other 
denominations, interested in the Lord's coming and expecting 
him in the flesh, have turned their attention to 1881, and feel 
confident that they will see Jesus with their natural eyes this 
year. Their hopes are based partly upon an old rhyme called 
"Mother Shipton's prophecy," which concludes thus: 

The world unto an end will come, 
In eighteen hundred and eighty-one. 

and partly upon the teachings of "The Great Pyramid" of Egypt, 
whose "Grand gallery" measures 1881 pyramid inches. This 
"Grand gallery" is supposed to symbolize the gospel 
dispensation, and its 1881 inches are supposed to teach that the 
gospel dispensation will be 1881 years long, and a further reason 
for belief in 1881, is that so many other people are expecting 
something. (Not a prophetic period, can be claimed, as they are 
all past.) Now to us, these things seem a poor and weak 
foundation for the hopes built upon them. Our belief that the 
Lord is present, is based on the "more sure word of prophecy" to 
which Peter said, we would do well to take heed. 

The interest felt and expressed relative to this year by most of 
those 

R224 : page 5 

interested in the Lord's coming, and the fact that we expect 
SOMETHING, has perhaps led some people, who do not 
understand our position, to suppose that we are looking for 
much the same things as others. We would like to correct this 
misapprehension once for all, by stating that we do not expect 
Jesus to come this year, nor any other year, for we believe that 
all time prophecies (bearing upon Jesus' coming) ended at and 
before the fall of 1874, and that He came there, and the second 
advent is now in progress and will continue during the entire 
Millennial age. We believe that his presence will be revealed to 
the eyes of men's understandings gradually, during this "Day of 
the Lord," (forty years-from 1874 to 1914,) as it now is to ours; 
except that we, discern it through the word of prophecy revealed 
by the Spirit, and they will recognize his presence by His 
judgments upon Nominal Zion, and the World- for the Father 
"hath committed all judgment unto the Son." 

The WATCH TOWER never claimed that the body of Christ 
will be changed to spiritual beings during this year. There is 
such a change due sometime. We have not attempted to say 
when, but have repeatedly said that it could not take place 
before the fall of 1881. 

Now let us state briefly what we do expect in the fall of this year 
and why. We find that the entire Jewish age was a prophetic 
"shadow" of this Gospel Age in every respect: Its Israel and his 
twelve sons, a shadow of the true Israel of God (Jesus) and his 



twelve disciples; their sacrifices, typical of the "better sacrifices" 
for sin, offered during this age; the length of their age the same 
as ours; the end of their age "a harvest" the same as ours: Jesus 
present as the Reaper in their harvest as in ours. The unexpected 
manner of his coming caused him to be "a stone of stumbling" 
to the nominal church there, and it is proving the same here: He 
is to be "a stone of stumbling and rock of offense to both the 
houses of Israel." Isa. 8:14. (The nominal house of servants, of 
which Moses was the head, and the nominal house of sons, of 
which Christ is the head. Heb. 3:5-6). The harvest of the Jewish 
house was of two parts, viz: Seven years of favor to the church, 
and thirty-three years of wrath and trouble upon the then 
rejected and desolate one, from which the wheat was gathered. 
These parallels being prophetic and in harmony with the 
prophecies already fulfilled, give reason for believing that the 
harvest to this age which began in 1 874, will be like the shadow, 
viz: Seven years of favor to the church, to be followed by thirty- 
three years of falling and destruction upon the "Babylon" 
company which will completely separate all grains of wheat 
from tares. 

The seven years of favor to the church, commencing with 1874, 
will end in 1881 -about the 2nd of October. Now what special 
favor did the church enjoy during these seven years? We can get 
an answer best by looking at the prophetic shadow- What favor 
did fleshly Israel enjoy during the seventieth week? Jesus was 
present- "He came to his own, and his own received him not"- 
yet it was a favor to have the offer, even though the nominal 
church rejected him. This special part of the work, offering 
himself to the nominal house, lasted three and one-half years 
(until five days before his death) when He addressed them, 
saying, "How often would I have gathered you as a hen 
gathereth her brood under her wings, but ye would not: Behold 
your house (the nominal church) is left unto you desolate. " 
(Matt. 23:38.) Yet for the remainder of their covenant week 
(three and one-half years) he showed them favor. It was not in 
the same way-it was no longer an appeal to the nominal house 
"left desolate," but to the pure and true individuals in that house 
to come out of it. (The preaching of the gospel by apostles was 
confined to Jews, for three and one-half years after Pentecost). 
The gospel call was to come out on the Lord's side, separate 
from Judaism, and "stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made you free. " 

Now what would be the parallel, or meaning of this prophetic 
"shadow" here? We answer that during the three and one-half 
years from 1874 the proclamation of Jesus, the present 
Bridegroom was made to the church as a whole, that the spirit 
addressed nominal Zion as a whole, saying: "I counsel thee buy 
of me gold tried in the fire, and white raiment,... as many as I 
love I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore and repent. 
Behold I stand at the door and knock." (Rev. 3:18). 



But they heeded not his presence and call, as the "shadow" 
showed they would not, (the "Doctors of Divinity" mostly 
opposing it, as the "Doctors of the Law" had done in the 
"shadow"). After three and one-half years (in 1878) he rejected 
or left desolate the nominal church here, as he had done in the 
"shadow," saying, "Because thou are neither cold nor hot I will 
spew thee out of my mouth." (Rev. 3:16). The Jewish church 
was God's mouthpiece until "left desolate," but from that time 
forward God's truth came through another channel. So here the 
gospel church has been God's recognized channel of truth, or 
mouthpiece, but are such, we believe, no longer. Truth will now 
come through other channels. 

Since 1878 (and never before that) we have felt at liberty to call 
God's children out of the nominal churches to a position of 
freedom and liberty, where they would be free to serve Him 
fully, as well as to study his word and be taught of Him: saying, 
"Babylon... is fallen and become the habitation of devils and a 
hold of every foul spirit and a cage of every unclean and hateful 
bird." (This falling of the nominal church and receiving into her 
bosom the corruptions of earth has been in process for some 
time). Now comes the message: "And I heard another voice 
saying, Come out of her my people that ye be not partakers of 
her sins and receive not of her plagues." (Rev. 18:2-4). The 
favor of the present (and which we believe will end in October, 
1881) is not to the nominal church but to individuals in her, that 
they may come out and receive the present Lord. He says: "If 
any man (not church) hear my voice, and open the door I will 
come in to him and will sup with him and he with me." (Rev. 
3:20). 

We have no desire to dogmatize nor to keep any one out, but we 
believe (and therefore speak) that the favor which ends this fall, 
is that of entering the Bride company. We believe the door of 
favor is now open and any who consecrate all and give up all, 
can come in to the wedding and become members of the Bride, 
but that with this year the company will be reckoned complete 
and the door to that high calling (not the door of mercy) closed 
forever. 

In one of His parables pointing to the end of this age Jesus says, 
"The Bridegroom came and they that were ready, went in with 
him to the marriage and the door was shut." (Matt. 25:10). Our 
understanding of this is, that the Bridegroom came in 1 874 and 
since then the ready (consecrated) ones have been going into a 
condition of light with reference to his presence, and preparation 
for marriage, and that this fall, the door of opportunity to join 
this company will close. 

Another of Jesus' discourses seems to bear upon this point-He 
said: (Luke 13:24) "Strive to enter in at the straight gate; for 
many I say unto you will seek to enter in, and will not be able, 
when once the Master of the house (church) is risen up and hath 



shut to the door (to the "Narrow way"~see supplement tract No. 
5), and ye begin to stand without and to knock at the door, 
saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; (Let us also become a part of 
your Bride.) And he shall answer and say unto you, I know you 
not, whence ye are." (I do not recognize you as the ones I 
promised to make my Bride—she has come in). 

What may be the outward indication that the door is shut, we 
know not, but will expect to see some evidence of it. 

Now, it was on the strength of this prophetic "shadow" which 
shows that the "door" would not close until this fall, that we 
said, the living would not be changed before that time. As to 
when our change is due we can only say: To our understanding 
it will be due at any time after October 2nd, 1881, but we know 
of no scriptural evidence as to what time we will be changed 
from natural to spiritual, from mortal to immortal. We have the 
testimony that we shall "execute the judgments written" (seven 
last plagues) and we expect our change before those last plagues 
begin. We should be glad to go sooner if it were the 
Bridegroom's will, but we will be equally glad to remain here in 
earthly conditions if it is His will. 

Our expectations then, relative to this year, are very different 
from those of others interested in it. As to "Mother Shipton's 
prophecy" we of course give no heed to such "old wives' fables." 
But the teachings of 

THE GREAT PYRAMID 

are quite different. We have great respect for it, though we do 
not build our faith upon it. It has well been called "A Miracle in 
Stone," and it commends itself to us as a work of God, and not 
planned by men, for it seems in every respect to be in perfect 
accord with God's plan as we are finding it written in His Word; 
and this it is, that causes our respect for it. 

It has an entrance passage downward to a pit representing the 
"broad road to destruction." From this a passage starts upward- 
representing the Law dispensation. This in due time enlarges 
and becomes a "grand gallery," seven times as high, still leading 
upward, representing the Gospel Age. Thirty-three inches from 
the beginning of the grand gallery 

R224 : page 6 

is a well, representing the death and resurrection of Jesus. From 
this well there is another downward passage-way which 
connects with the entrance passage near the pit, and seems to 
teach the restoration of all 

R225 : page 6 

men from the "horrible pit" of death, through and on account of 
Jesus' death. 



The "grand gallery" measures 1874 inches long at the top, 1878 
inches long at a groove cut in its sides about midway between 
bottom and top and 1881 inches, at the bottom. (The upper end 
wall impends or slants forward). 

Now notice how aptly these three distinct dates (1874, 1878, 
1881,) are marked by the pyramid, in ending the grand gallery, 
and see how ably it supports the teaching of the Bible, viz: that 
the gospel favors and privileges have been ending during these 
seven years~and will entirely cease this year. 

Two other ways, in which the Pyramid corroborates scripture, 
are these: At the top of the "grand gallery"— just where it 
measures 1 874 inches, there is an opening or passage-way 
which seems to say, something might go out or come in here. 
For some time we thought this might represent the "change," or 
catching away of the church as spiritual beings; but it would 
have been due in 1 874 and no translation took place; then it 
must mean something else. It seems very plain and clear to us 
now that that opening can mean nothing else than what the 
Prophets have taught us, viz: that there the Bridegroom came a 
spiritual being. It fits, as all the other parts of that wonderful 
structure fit and harmonize with the Word. 

Secondly, we are claiming that our Lord's presence here, is to be 
to many in the nominal church "a stone of stumbling," and this 
too finds its illustration in the Pyramid, for at the upper end of 
the "Grand gallery" a huge block of stone juts out into the 
pathway and further progress becomes impossible, unless the 
traveler climbs with difficulty to its level. So we find it; many 
are stumbling, and the progress of all seems to depend on their 
recognizing the present one. 

IF I WERE SURE. 

There seems to be a disposition on the part of some to say-now 
if you could only assure me positively that we will be changed 
this fall, I should be willing to endure anything: I could then 
take up any cross, deny myself, and do God's will only. 

Now dear brother, sister, this is not the right way; it is not the 
correct thought: God called you to the "high calling" on 
condition, not that you would do his will and not your own, for a 
few months only, but for all eternity. And this you promised to 
do, did you not? Well, if so, what right have you to any will in 
the matter? Should you not the rather say, "Not my will, but 
thine be done?" His will regarding our present life and its 
circumstances-its joys and its sorrows and its labors; and His 
will as to the time the present kind of labor in His service shall 
give place to the more perfect service, when we shall be 
"changed" into likeness of Him who is the express image of the 
Father's person. 



The Lord's grace (favor) he says, "is sufficient" for us and we 
should ask no more. It has proved sufficient in the past and we 
trust Him for the future. He gives his favor-gives us strength by 
showing us more and more of his plan and our part in it, etc., 
and how much in this way we have enjoyed during the past three 
years, especially our daily feasting on the heavenly food. I trust 
we all feel stronger spiritually than ever before. If any do not, let 
them fear that they are not walking up to the light, in the full 
consecration of their all. 

But does some one say: I would consecrate all-my means, my 
time, my talents, and my reputation, if I knew surely that I 
would get the prize; but I fear to lose my little stock of earthly 
treasure and perhaps not be accounted worthy of a place in the 
Bride company? To such we say, "Oh thou of little faith, 
wherefore didst thou doubt?" "Faithful is he that calleth you, 
who also will do it." (Will keep his promise.) 1 Thes. 5:24. We 
are absolutely sure of obtaining what God, who cannot lie, hath 
promised, if we do sacrifice all. The very object of the present 
age is to develop from among others those who will- 

"Trust in His unchanging grace." 

If you think the prize too dear- not worth your little all, don't 
exchange; but if you see it to be worth a million times what you 
are asked to give for it, sell "all that you have and purchase it." 
If our understanding of the matter be correct, the opportunity for 
making this exchange which is so favorable to us, will end with 
this fall. 

Those who do not exchange, will soon have reason to regret it, 
as they will find their all melting from their grasp during the 
time of trouble. Those who come knocking afterward, desiring 
admittance would apparently be glad then to give all for an 
opportunity to enter, but it will be too late "when once the 
Master... hath shut to the door." Luke 13:25. 

Just what we should look for from October 1881 onward we can 
scarcely say, but expect that as these seven years of the harvest 
(which altogether is forty years) have been a time of favor to the 
church, the succeeding years will show a lack of favor, and that 
consequently the nominal church will rapidly fall to pieces, and 
as a consequence, many who have heard of these things but 
dared not brave the frown of a popular and flourishing church 
organization, will then be set free and begin to knock and 
inquire. But while we shall be glad to greet them and to help 
them in every way in our power, we believe that they will not be 
recognized of the Lord as a part of the Bride. It is not for us to 
judge, however; we understand this to be the teaching of His 
word, but will wait for him to tell them that they are a part of the 
"great company" and not of the "little flock" to whom "it is the 
Father's good pleasure to give... the kingdom." 



In different churches there are dear saints of God-consecrated 
to Him- sanctified yet ignorant of his presence, the harvest, etc. 
They are out of harmony with the spirit of the world, and the 
money influence which rules the church, but do not yet hear the 
voice of the Lord saying, "Come out of her my people that ye be 
not partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues." Such 
will, we believe, be brought to recognize the Lord's presence, 
and that the "harvest" or separating time has come, before the 
door closes and it will test their consecration, and all who are 
fully consecrated will follow the voice of the Shepherd and 
come out. 

To those who are seeking to sacrifice all, we would suggest that 
the spreading of this light and these truths which God has given 
us, is the important work of these times. When God gives light it 
is not to be put under a bushel—not to be hid in your own heart 
for fear, or for any other cause; it is given you that you may let it 
shine. Now, "pray ye the Lord of the harvest that he will send 
forth laborers into his harvest" -pray him to send you to tell the 
glad and cheering tidings to others of his dear ones who as yet 
know it not. Then realizing that he heareth us and is willing to 
let us do our little part with him, go forward day by day doing 
with your might what your hand finds to do, and you will 
doubtless find your prayer richly and abundantly answered. 

Thus while looking forward to the future glory, you will also 
enjoy present privileges of suffering and self-denial as a member 
of His body, for other fellow members. O, how much work there 
is in this direction, how much opportunity for all who will lay 
aside all unnecessary earthly hindrances. 



R225 : page 6 

OUR PASSOVER 

Our celebration of the death of "Christ our Passover" on its 
anniversary, the 14th of April, announced in last paper, was, as 
the occasion has always been, a "blessed season:" a time for 
remembering our Lord's agony for our sins, and also of our 
"redemption through His blood. " As we looked at the 
acceptableness of our ransom we realized the completeness of 
our forgiveness, and said with Paul: If God be for us who can be 
against us? He that spared not his own Son but delivered him up 
for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all 
things? Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It is 
God that justifieth. [God by his own arrangement has purged us 
of sin— who shall say it was not fully and properly done?] Who 
is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died. [Who says we are 
yet sinners? Let him remember who it was that paid our debt-it 
was Christ, and surely his was an acceptable sacrifice.] (Rom. 
8:31-34.) 



Seeing our justification, we reflected on what Paul said to all 
justified persons: "I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God 
[His daily mercies and especially his mercy in providing Jesus 
as your ransom and thus justifying you] that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, your 
reasonable service." We looked at the significance of the 
memorials of his death which Jesus had provided-the bread and 
the wine-and found that they taught the same lesson- 
consecration and sacrifice. First the body was broken and the 
blood shed for our sin— to justify us-then the bread (truth-"I am 
the truth") is offered us to give strength for the sacrifice which 
we are asked to make. God first gives the exceeding great and 
precious promises of becoming joint heirs with Jesus Christ our 
Lord to the "Divine nature" and kingdom, and then tells us how 
we may claim and attain those promises, viz: "If so be that we 
suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together." Rom. 
8:17. This is all expressed 

R226 : page 6 

in the symbol, as Jesus first handed the "bread," and after supper 
the "cup" (wine), so during this age to all that come to him as 
disciples he offers first the nourishment and preparation of truth, 
and when they have eaten it and discerned the prize of their high 
calling, he offers them the cup of-death. Wine is a symbol of 
two things— first, in appearance it is like blood, and is called "the 
blood of grapes," in this way it symbolizes death; second, it 
symbolizes the spirit, the effect being to cheer, refresh and 
enliven. 

When we have been enlightened and strengthened by the 
heavenly food, Jesus passes us each the cup, saying, "Drink ye 
all of it"— drink unto my death-take up your cross and follow 
me, and at the same time you will be drinking unto my spirit and 
have a joy and refreshing which the world can neither give nor 
take away-and finally with me, inherit all things. 

We remembered that we had been thus fed and strengthened by 
God's promises, and had already covenanted to drink of his cup 
and become dead with him if we might "reign in life" with him. 

We remembered the two disciples who had asked Jesus about 
their positions in his throne, to whom he answered, "Ye know 
not what ye ask. Are you able to drink of the cup that I shall 
drink of, [death- "Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from 
me."] and to be baptized with the baptism that I shall be 
baptized with"-death? ["I have a baptism to be baptized with"- 
water was its symbol- "and how am I straightened until it be 
accomplished."] The disciples answered him, "We are able," and 
he said "Ye shall indeed." So we have been begotten to the hope 
of sitting with him in his throne, and how his words apply to us: 
"Are you able to drink of my cup?" We asked ourselves, are we 
willing to share the sufferings as well as the glory? Then we 



said-Lord by thy word we know that we may have "Grace to 
help in time of need;" and that "Thy grace is sufficient for us." 
We have given our all to Thee- "Work in us both to will and to 
do of thy good pleasure." Thus having his strength made perfect 
in our weakness— we are able. Amen. 

Brother A. D. Jones reports a very interesting and profitable 
meeting at Newark, New Jersey, among the friends there and 
some from neighboring towns, with whom he celebrated "Our 
Passover "-between fifty and sixty taking part. 

A number of letters received seem to indicate that the occasion 
was very generally celebrated among the scattered "twos and 
threes" "of this way." We presume that it was celebrated in 
about twenty places. All who wrote expressed the feeling of 
solemnity and appropriateness, attaching to the celebration on 
the anniversary, rather than at any other time. 

One or two brethren questioned the date announced-suggesting 
that by the almanac it would fall on the 12th instead of the 14th 
of April. To these we reply that the calendars in most almanacs 
are arranged upon astronomical calculations and are seldom 
exactly in harmony with the Jewish methods, which seem to be 
based on the eyesight. Some almanacs publish the Jewish 
calendar, and we used it in ascertaining when the "14th day of 
the first month," Jewish time, would come. 

The moon is used to symbolize The Law or Jewish nation, 
which reached its full at the time of Jesus' presence, but began to 
wane when he gave them up and died. The moon was at its full 
on the 14th of April and began to wane; this seems to agree with 
the Jewish calendars and therefore we observed that time. 

One sister wrote expressing disapproval, and asks, Why not go 
back to the Law in everything as well as 

R226 : page 7 

in keeping the Passover? Our sister is in haste; we did not 
suggest the observance of the Passover as instituted by The Law, 
but the observance of "The Lord's Supper" instead of it. Nor did 
we suggest this as a law, believing that "Christ is the end of the 
Law for righteousness to every one that believeth." (Rom. 10:4, 
and 7:6). But who will say that we may not celebrate the death 
of our Lamb on the anniversary, for, "as often as ye do this, ye 
do show forth the Lord's death." 



R226 : page 7 



"PINK COTTAGE" FAITH CURE. 

We are in receipt of information relative to some remarkable 
cures being performed in answer to prayers of faith in different 
sections of the country, among others, one recently received 



refers to several such cures at "Pink Cottage" Faith Cure. The 
writer (a brother) inquires our view of these cures— are they of 
God, or by Satan's power? We answer: "He that hath the power 
of death, that is the devil," very seldom uses it to restore life and 
health, and never, we think, in answer to the earnest prayers of 
God's children. Unquestionably then we would regard every 
case of curing in which the instruments are the prayers of saints, 
as being of God. 

Many have been led to question whether the power were of God, 
because many of those thus used are wonderfully in the dark 
regarding God's plan, the time of "harvest" and the presence of 
the Lord, but to thus judge would be much like the disciples, 
who said to Jesus: "We found one casting out devils in thy name 
and we forbade him because he followed not with us." But Jesus 
answered them, "Forbid him not, for he that is not against us is 
for us." Luke 9:50. 

We must learn that in the school of Christ, there are various 
classes, and the exercises and instruction of each is under the 
direction of the principal teacher, Christ, who will lead each 
class as it may be able and willing to advance. 

Seeing these classes we should earnestly desire the best gifts— 
the higher class, for though it be honorable to be used of the 
Lord in opening blind natural eyes, it is more honorable to be 
used in giving the spiritual sight and insight into God's word and 
plan and love. It is grand indeed to be an instrument in restoring 
and perfecting the old human body, but it is yet more grand to 
be used in building up and perfecting the new nature- showing 
them how they may sacrifice the human and obtain a divine 
nature and form. Both branches of service are well pleasing to 
God. Choose which you think the "most excellent," but "forbid 
no man because he follows not with us." 

It is a little remarkable that very few of those who are used thus 
of the Lord in physical healing, are in any way identified with 
the nominal church; and they are generally out of all harmony 
and sympathy with its degenerated worldliness and 
faithlessness. 

In this connection we might add that we have been agreeably 
surprised within the last six months to learn by meeting with 
some, and hearing from others, that in many cities and towns 
little companies of men and women meet regularly for the study 
of God's word. Though not so fully instructed in the plan of God 
and the times in which we live and the "harvest" separating, as 
we are, yet they have felt the cold deadness of the nominal 
church; they have felt that in it they were starving for "meat in 
due season," while the under shepherds acted like hirelings 
whose own the sheep are not, and preached to the "itching ears" 
of largely unconverted congregations. 



These sheep are gathering in little bands to have the "chief 
Shepherd" himself feed them. Thus already consecrated and 
following his leadings, they are already out of Babylon and in 
this respect are in advance of some who have had more 
knowledge. These, so far as we have met them, seemed prepared 
for the very things we had to present-the presence of the Reaper 
and the "harvest" work of separation now going on. Among such 
we are finding many of the faith-prayer-cure people. 

In this connection, we are reminded of the prophecy by Joel 
which Peter quoted at Pentecost, viz: "It shall come to pass in 
the last days saith God, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh: 
and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your 
young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream 
dreams: And on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour 
out in those days of my Spirit and they shall prophesy." 

Few perhaps have noted the double character of this prophecy, 
that one part relates to the servants and handmaidens [The literal 
rendering of the Greek here would be male and female slaves- 
bounden persons -those who are bound to the Lord by a 
covenant.] and the other part of the same prophecy relates to all 
flesh: and again, one part is to take place in certain days [Gospel 
days] and the other part is to be fulfilled after those days. 

By referring to the prophecy (Joel 2:28,29) you will see this 
distinction much more clearly. This prophecy began to have its 
fulfillment at Pentecost, where the servants and handmaids 
began to prophesy (or instruct) and all through this age it has 
continued to be so, and those who partake of the Spirit of truth 
are particularly the channels through whom truth and knowledge 
flows. As Jesus had said: "When he the Spirit of truth is come he 
shall guide you into all truth." 

R227 : page 7 

A further part of it will not have its fulfillment until the little 
flock is complete-the sacrifice over and the full atonement price 
paid for all men. Then, the whole world of mankind will be no 
longer treated as sinners, but as forgiven human sons. [For 
remember that as the Bride of Adam was a sharer in the fall and 
curse, so the Bride of Christ is permitted to share in the 
redemption sacrifice, and blessing of all mankind.] 

God usually does things gradually and we regard these powers 
of faith now being given to some, as a sort of preparation for the 
giving of such power to any one and every one who will use it— 
"all flesh." 

We doubt not that in this way, or in some such way, the healing 
of human ills will be performed during the Millennial age; a way 
which would 

R227 : page 8 



seem too, to show God's special favor and power, and teach men 
to exercise faith in Him. 

The Spirit of God (God's power) operates differently at different 
times and for different works. Through the Prophets upon whom 
it came, its effects were to give utterance to truths not 
understood. During the Gospel Age, its object is to give us 
evidence through the Word, of our call to be spiritual beings like 
unto Christ's glorious body-to be his Bride; causing us to 
understand "what is the fellowship of the mystery which from 
the beginning of the world hath been hid;" (the sharing of the 
body with the Head both in the sufferings of this Gospel Age 
and also in the glory to follow)-- "This is a great mystery; but I 
speak concerning Christ and the church." Eph. 3:9, & 5:32. And 
when this mysterious work of the present age is ended and the 
Bride of Christ (and also the "great company"~"the virgins, her 
companions which follow her,") completed, then the Spirit is to 
do another and still different work. Being poured out "upon all 
flesh" it will lead the world to know of their justification as men; 
they shall dream dreams and see visions and prophesy (teach). 
They will come to understand the truths of God, and His plan 
concerning them—their restitution to the perfection of humanity. 
And as already suggested, we doubt not, that the healing of 
earth's woes and pains will then be done in answer to prayers of 
faith; thus tending to bring the world into union, harmony and 
love with their Creator. In this work of restoration, the Bride 
will have some important part-perhaps as yet, not fully 
understood-for the Spirit and the Bride will give the invitation 
to "come" and then they that hear will say "come," until all who 
will may come to the fountain of life and drink freely and 
forever of life to which they are justified by the death of Christ. 

We think then, that these healings are probably a beginning of 
the Millennial blessings to mankind, and that they will rather 
increase— that they will be mostly among the "poor of this world 
rich in faith," and probably after this fall, will only be granted 
through those who are outside of the nominal church; thus 
giving additional evidence that she is no longer recognized of 
God, and that those within her are "partakers of her sins" (Rev. 
18:4) and cannot please him. 



R227 : page 8 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 

QUESTION. I was much interested in the article, "The 
Resurrection," in last paper, and would like to enquire -when 
we read of the resurrection of the Prophets and Saints and those 
that fear God's name small and great, (Rev. 11:18.) are we to 
conclude that these are the orders Paul mentions in 1 Cor. 15:23, 
"Every man in his own order "-or rank? If so, does the mention 



of the prophets first, imply that they constitute "The first 
resurrection?" 

ANSWER. No, the "first resurrection" is first in the sense of 
chief or principal and not because it precedes others. 

If it meant first in point of time then Jesus was not the beginning 
of the first resurrection (as declared, Acts 26:23.) for the 
prophets had raised the dead and so had Jesus. [Lazarus was 
dead for a longer time than Jesus]. But, none of these were 
raised spiritual bodies, Jesus being the first of that order and all 
others who are raised in his likeness-spiritual, immortal beings 
-are sharers in the chief-most excellent -or first resurrection. It 
does not follow then that because mentioned or raised first, that 
the prophets would be in the first resurrection. 

QUES. Bro. Russell: How do you interpret Phil. 4:3. "I entreat 
thee with me in the gospel... whose names are in the book of 
life." And Acts 1:14: "All continued with one accord in prayer 
and supplication with the women." And 1 Cor. 11:5: "Every 
woman that prayeth or prophesieth (teaches)?" 

ANS. We understand these scriptures to teach, that women did a 
work in the apostles' days which was approved and appreciated 
by them and by the Lord. Yet we believe that women usually 
spoke only at the smaller gatherings, and that when Paul said 
"Let the women keep silence in the [congregations,] he probably 
had reference to the public gatherings, at which it was the 
custom to have more or less of a debate. In these public 
debatings, Paul thought a woman's voice would be out of place, 
and this is the opinion of most thinking men and women to-day, 
though we think that it has by many been carried to an extreme, 
forbidding them to pray or teach on any occasion, even in more 
private assemblies of Christians, and this we regard as an error. 

God has arranged that the man and woman are representative of 
Christ and his Bride the church, and this rule by which the 
husband is the head of the wife is always maintained in 
scriptures. (Though there are exceptions to the rule in nature.) 
And probably this is one reason, that men have always been 
given the more active and public work of the ministry and 
women more the work of assisting and more private teaching, 
yet equally as acceptable to God. So Christ is the active agent in 
carrying out his own plan. He is the great minister of all, and we 
as His church do a lesser part and yet an acceptable part, well 
pleasing to God. 

QUES. Bro. Russell: Please explain 2 Cor. 6:17. 

ANS. Paul makes a quotation from the Old Testament to support 
his teaching of the preceding verses, that Christians should be 
separate from unbelievers. We are to be a temple of God; and 
what association is proper between God's Temple and Idols? 
None. The quotation is as follows: "I will dwell among them and 



walk among them, and I will be their God and they shall be to 
me a people-Depart from the midst of them and be ye 
separated, and touch not the impure; and I will receive you, and 
will be to you for a Father, and you shall be to me for sons and 
daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." 

In person we are to be separate from sin-pure-clean in mind 
(and in body, for cleanliness of person is almost always 
associated with purity of thought. Sometimes the impure within, 
will clothe and cleanse the outward form to purity; but the pure 
within, clothing the outward form in filth can scarce be 
imagined), and we are to live separate from sinners. (See 1 Cor. 
5:10.) 

But we think that the pith of the apostle's reasoning is directed 
against association with false religious systems. Paganism 
claimed to be a religion then, and there was danger that 
Christians should come to look with favor upon moral pagans 
and treat them as though they were Christians and thus 
countenance their evils. In a word, whatever God condemns and 
disapproves we are to condemn and discountenance both in 
word and in deed-not even to encourage or countenance with 
our presence. 

The circumstances are different now from then, here Paganism 
does not require resistance, but it has its equivalent in modern 
"Spiritualism," "Freelovism" and "Infidelity." And more 
dangerous because associated with more light, are the worldly 
practices and customs of the nominal church of Christ to-day, 
which constitute her the Babylon of God's word. As we have 
already seen there is a message to us, to leave Babylon and thus 
discountenance the worldly corruptions which have of late years 
been brought into God's Temple as idols to distract and divide 
the worshiper's attention. Therefore, "Come out of her my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive not of her 
plagues." And this voice must be obeyed at any cost, or you 
become one of the idol worshipers. "What agreement hath the 
temple of God with idols?" 



R228 : page 8 

A MISAPPREHENSION. 

In our last paper we had an article headed "1,000 Preachers 
Wanted," which brought many good responses and we trust 
started some into the Vineyard who had been anxiously looking 
for some way in which they could give their time to teaching 
and preaching from house to house; making known to their 
fellow Christians "The good word of God," the gospel of which 
Paul was not ashamed. This was the meaning we wished to 



convey: if there are others such, we will be glad to hear from 
them and we continue to such the same offer. 

But some seem to have misapprehended us and thought we 
wanted everybody—regular canvassers and book agents, and 
called the attention of their friends to it as a nice chance to 
obtain some employment, etc. This is a misapprehension of our 
proposition. We want laborers (and so does the Lord) who will 
be working for heavenly wages, rather than for the price of a 
paper or book, be that ever so needful. No, we want those only 
who can explain the paper and book and plan, who as they go 
will preach, saying: "The kingdom of heaven is at hand, repent 
ye." (Matt. 3:2). 



R227 : page 8 

DR. CHALMERS beautifully said: "The little I have seen in the 
world and known of the history of mankind, teaches me to look 
at their errors in sorrow, and not in anger. When I take the 
history of one poor heart, that has sinned and suffered, and 
represent to myself the struggles and temptations it has passed 
through- the brief pulsations of joy; the tears of regret; the 
feebleness of purpose; the scorn of the world that has little 
charity; the desolation of the soul's sanctuary, and threatening 
voices within; health gone; happiness gone -I would fain leave 
the erring soul of my fellow-man with him from whose hands it 
came. " 



R285 : page 8 

WHAT pleases only for the moment, whether poetry, or 
oratory, or policy, will die with the moment. What looks beyond 
the moment will live beyond the moment. What speaks to the 
intelligent few will at last make a conquest of the unintelligent 
many; what speaks only to the unintelligent many will never 
reach the intelligent few, and will soon be forgotten by the 
unintelligent many also. -Dean Stanley. 



R228 : page 8 

TRACT SUPPLEMENT NO. 5. 

THE NARROW WAY TO LIFE. 

This tract we hope will be acceptable to you all. We hope that 
its general distribution will be productive of good results and 
that it may be used of the Lord as an eye salve to many to enable 
them to see "the exceeding riches of His grace in His loving 
kindness toward us." 



And for you, brethren, we pray that the viewing of the narrow 
way to life, may bless you, and that "The Father of Glory may 
give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the 
knowledge of him (that) the eyes of your understanding being 
enlightened; ye may know, what is the hope of his calling; and 
what the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the Saints; and 
what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us." Eph. 1:17. 

We have quantities of this tract, and will try to supply all your 
demands. Order all you can use, and use all that you order. 

Tracts 6 and 7 are not yet published, but will be out soon. 

R228 : page 8 

EXHAUSTED. 

We published very large editions of Tracts 1,2,3, and 4, but not 
enough for the demand. The supply is about exhausted. We are 
having them prepared again however, and next time will issue 
them all together with some additional matter under one cover. 
But we cannot expect this before July or August. 



R285 : page 8 

LOVE to Christ smooths the path of duty, and wings the feet to 
travel it; it is the bow which impels the arrow of obedience; it is 
the mainspring moving the wheels of duty; it is the strong arm 
tugging the oar of diligence. Love is the marrow of the bones of 
fidelity, the blood in the veins of piety, the sinews of spiritual 
strength; yea, the life of sincere devotion. He that hath love can 
no more be motionless than the aspen in the gale, the sear leaf in 
the hurricane, or the spray in the tempest. As well may hearts 
cease to beat, as love to labor. Love is instinct with activity, it 
cannot be idle; it is full of energy, it cannot content itself with 
littles; it is the well-spring of heroism, and great deeds are the 
gushings of its fountain; it is a giant —it heapeth mountains upon 
mountains, and thinks the pile but little; it is a mighty mystery, 
for it changes bitter into sweet; it calls death life, and life death; 
and it makes pain less painful than enjoyment. -Spurgeon. 



R298 : page 8 

ROME AND JERUSALEM.-The Roman Church maintains a 
steady attention to the Holy Land. At Jattha they have erected a 
new hospital, they have established a branch nunnery at Ramleh, 
and a nunnery and schools at Bethlehem. It would appear that 
the Franciscans have a new establishment at Emmaus, in 
addition to the large hospice at Jerusalem. On the Mount of 
Olives a grand sanctuary and an extensive nunnery have been 
erected and endowed by the Princess de la Tour d'Auvergne, 



who, with great devotion, spent several years on the spot, in 
order personally to superintend the work. 



R281 : page 8 

THE block of granite which was an obstacle in the pathway of 
the weak, becomes a stepping-stone in the pathway of the 
strong. -Carlyle. 


