R122 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., AUGUST, 1880. 

NO. 2. 

page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 

PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 

REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. ALLEN, HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R122 : page 1 



A REASON FOR THE HOPE. 

DIALOGUE. 

Questioner.— It is some time since we have had a talk together 
Brother W., and I have called now to make a few inquiries. I 
want you to give me in a few words, your reasons for believing 
that Jesus is now present. 

Watchman.— I am glad to talk with you upon so interesting a 
subject, and shall try to answer your queries. You are aware, I 
presume, that I and all the writers for the WATCH TOWER 
believe that Jesus has come the second time, and is now present 
in the world, and for this reason our paper is also called the 
"Herald of Christ's Presence. " If I understand your question, you 
want me to refresh your memory briefly on the reasons for so 
believing. 

Q. -Exactly. Of course all Christians believe that Jesus has been 
spiritually present with his church during all the Gospel Age, as 
He said: "Lo, I am with you always even unto the end of the 
world" [age]. In what sense is he now present, as He has not 
always been, and what are the proofs? 

W.— Let us for a moment then drop the idea of time and of His 
now being present, and see how He will be in His day, whether 
that day be now or a thousand years hence. First, come back 
2,000 years to the time when Jesus "being in the form of God, 
thought it not robbery to be equal with God" (when he was in 
glory.) See Him lay aside the glory which he had with the Father 
before the world was, and being rich for our sakes become poor. 
See Him take upon Him the form of a servant for the suffering 
of death. " Notice now the difference between bodily form of 
God and the form of servants; They are totally different and He 
must leave the one to take the other. 

Secondly, notice why He took the form of a servant. We read— 
for the suffering of death. God is a spirit, has a spiritual body, 
and could not die under any circumstances, for a spiritual body 
is an immortal, [undying] body, (1 Cor. 15). Man being a sinner, 
condemned to death and unable to release himself, Jesus became 
his ransom, giving His life a ransom for ours. We were 
redeemed from death, or justified to life, "by the precious blood 
[death] of Christ. " We see then that Jesus laid aside the form of 
God and took the form of man, so that He might pay our penalty 
for us— die for us. 

Thirdly, notice that when he had died "even the death of the 
cross" the purpose or object in taking our form was 
accomplished, and there is no reason why He should have the 
form of a servant since He died. And we claim that He is not 
now a man glorified, that He has not been a man since "the man 
Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all." I claim that these 
two natures-divine and human-are separate and distinct, that as 



He left the divine to take the human, so also He left the human 
when He resumed the divine. 

Jesus was put to death in the flesh but quickened [made alive] 
by the spirit. Let us look at this expression, "made alive by the 
spirit. " To what kind of life? Was it the life of the flesh that was 
quickened? No, it was spiritual life. Listen; Jesus tells 
Nicodemus "That which is born of the flesh is flesh, (Jesus as a 
man was born of a woman and was flesh, thus taking human 
nature,) and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. " Jesus at His 
resurrection was "born of the spirit," therefore was not flesh but 
spirit. He is called "the first-born from the dead," and was 
"quickened by the spirit." 

So it will be with us; we shall be satisfied when we awake in His 
likeness. Not in the likeness of men which He took for a 
purpose. We have that likeness now, but when "we see Him as 
He is we shall be like Him" and be satisfied-be like unto 
Christ's glorious body. 

Nor doth it yet appear, 
How great we shall be made, 
But when we see Him as He is, 
We shall be like our Head. " 

Q.--I see then that you understand the text, "Put to death in the 
flesh, quickened by the spirit" as being of the same import as the 
one which speaking of the death and resurrection of the Saints, 
says: "It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body;" 
and "as we now bear the image of the earthly, we shall then bear 
the image of the heavenly. " 

W.— Yes, very true, but let us not lose our subject. It is Jesus and 
His new condition after His resurrection, not what we shall be, 
although the inferential reasoning that our vile and earthly 
bodies must undergo so great a change, to be like His heavenly, 
or glorious body before we can see Him as he is, is the very best 
kind of proof that He is not and has not been, since His 
resurrection, like us, that is, in the form of a servant. 

Q.— If Jesus after his resurrection was a glorious spiritual body, 
how was it that the disciples never saw his glorious body? Why 
did he appear to them as he had done before his death? 

W. -If Jesus had appeared to them and shown his glory, they 
would probably have been so alarmed as to be unable to receive 
instructions; besides if they had gone forth saying the Lord arose 
and appeared to us in glory, they would have been accused of 
telling ghost stories. Remember that the object of Jesus 
appearing to them was to convince them that "He who was dead 
is alive forevermore;" that they might go forth as "witnesses." 
Being a spiritual body it was simply a question of expediency— 
which way could he best appear to them, i.e., in which way 
would his object in appearing be best accomplished? He could 



appear as a "flame of fire," as the angel of the Lord (also a 
spiritual body) had appeared to Moses "in the burning bush. " 
Thus Jesus might have appeared to, and talked with the 
disciples, or he might have appeared in glory as the angel did to 
Daniel, or as he afterward did to John and to Saul of Tarsus. 

If he had so appeared, they would doubtless also have had "great 
fear and quaking" and would have fallen to the ground before 
Him and "become as dead men; " or he could do, as angels had 
done and as he had done with Abraham (Gen. 1 8) when he 
appeared as a man. This last he saw to be the best way and he 
did appear as a man. But notice he did not appear to them as he 
had done before His death. First he appeared to Mary as the 
gardener and she "saw Jesus standing and knew not that it was 
Jesus." "After that he appeared in another form unto two of 
them" as they went to Emmaus (Luke 24:13). They knew not 
that it was Jesus, until he revealed Himself in breaking of bread. 
Then he vanished from their sight. 

Again, some had given up all hope of being any longer fishers of 
men and had gone again to their nets. They had toiled all night 
and caught nothing. In the morning Jesus is on the shore within 
speaking distance but they "knew not that it was Jesus." It was 
another form. He works a miracle giving them a boat full of fish 
in a moment; John, the loving disciple, remembers the feeding 
of the 3,000 and 5,000, the strange days in which they were 
living, and that Jesus had appeared to them already. He seems at 
once to discern who gave the draught of fishes; and said: "It is 
the Lord. " He recognized him not by the natural eye but by the 
eye of faith, and when they were come to shore "none of them 
dare ask him who art thou, knowing (feeling sure from the 
miracle for they saw not the print of the nails) that it was the 
Lord" (John 21). Thus did Jesus appear to his disciples at 
different times, to make of them witnesses of His resurrection, 
seemingly he was present but unseen during most of those forty 
days appearing in all, perhaps, not more than seven times. (John 
20:26,21:14.) 

Q.-What object could there be for His appearing in so many 
different forms? 

W.--I presume it was to guard against their idea that he was a 
fleshly body, by appearing in various forms and in miraculous 
ways, coming into their midst, the doors being shut, and 
vanishing from their sight. He not only showed that He had 
undergone a change since death, but He illustrated his own 
teaching to Nicodemus, that every one born of the spirit (that 
born of the spirit is spirit) can go and come like the wind. "Thou 
canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth, so is 
everyone that is born of the spirit." So did Jesus go and come. 
"But some doubted"-some wanted to thrust their hand into his 
side and put their fingers into the print of the nails; and Jesus 
thus appears, whether it was the same body that had been 



crucified, or one like it, I know not nor does it make any 
difference, in any case it was not his body, for he had been 
"quickened of the spirit"-a spiritual body— "sown a natural 
body raised a spiritual body," and none of the various forms or 
bodies in which he appeared were His body. They were only 
veils of the flesh which hid or covered the glorious spiritual 
body, just as angels had often used the same human form to veil 
themselves when appearing to mortals. 

Q.— One point which seems to confuse some is, that Jesus ate 
and drank with the disciples and said, "Handle me, for a spirit 
hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have. " How do you 
explain this? 

R123 : page 1 

W.~ It does not need to be explained away. Jesus affirms just 
what we have claimed, viz: That the body they saw and handled 
and which ate with them was not his 

R123 : page 2 

spiritual body for the spirit hath not flesh and bones. Look back 
to the time when the Lord and two angels appeared to Abraham. 
(Gen. 18.) Jesus had not then left "the form of God" and taken 
the form of a servant. He was a spiritual body then, and it had 
not flesh and bones but he then used the human form as a veil. 
He ate and drank and talked and could have said to Abraham, 
"Handle me, this body which you see is 'flesh and bones.'" 

"THIS SAME JESUS SHALL SO COME 
IN LIKE MANNER." 

Q.— Now with regard to Jesus' second coming, does not this text 
(Acts 1:11) teach that when he comes he will be seen by his 
watching disciples? Will he not appear in the flesh to prove that 
he has come? 

W.-No, I think not. There is not a word about the disciple or 
any one else seeing him. It merely tells us that he will come as 
he went. How did he go? With trumpet blasts and shouts or 
wails of the people of earth? No, but quietly and unseen of the 
world. As he said before he died, "Yet a little while and the 
world seeth me no more. " And the world did not see him after 
his resurrection. During the forty days he was seldom seen, 
showing himself only to his disciples. Did he go mid pealing 
thunder, flashing lightnings and rending rocks? No, quietly, 
unknown of the world, he "ascended up where he was before." 
Whenever he comes he will come in the same quiet manner, 
unknown of the world. We know from other scriptures that his 
church will not be in darkness. 

Q.--I see that there is nothing in this text to teach that when he 
should come he would be seen, but does it not seem reasonable 
to suppose that he will so appear? 



W. -There is no question as to his ability to appear now as then; 
but before calling your attention to scriptures which seem to 
teach that he will be present unseen, let me remind you that 
while it was necessary that he should then appear to make his 
disciples eye-witnesses of his resurrection, no such necessity 
now exists. He comes now not to call out a people to believe on 
Him, but to glorify a people already separated by his call then 
issued; to glorify his virgin church and make her His bride; "to 
make up His jewels." 

Thomas, who doubted and must see the print of the nails before 
he could believe, lived not in the Gospel Age but in the Jewish, 
not among spiritual children of God, but in the fleshly house 
(until Pentecost). He was used to seeing things after the flesh, 
and had not his eye of faith yet opened. Yet in Jesus' words to 
Thomas it would seem that he had expected even more from 
him. Jesus said to him: "Because thou hast seen me thou hast 
believed; happy those who see not and believe." (John 21:29. 
Diaglott). 

Would we consider it expedient for an earthly teacher after 
training his class up, up, up to the higher branches of learning to 
complete their studies by giving them a three months course in 
the alphabet. But this would be no more unreasonable than to 
suppose that our education in the school of faith, and growth in 
grace and knowledge under our Master's instructions, should be 
finished by illustrations in the flesh; "Having begun in the Spirit 
are ye now made perfect by the flesh?" (Gal. 3:3.) "It is the spirit 
that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing. " 

Q.— It does not seem as though much benefit would result to us 
by merely gratifying our desire to see him, and I remember he 
said before going: "It is expedient for you that I go away." 
"Unless I go away the comforter cannot come." Would this 
involve the thought that when he comes again the comforter will 
be withdrawn? 

W.-No, the reason the comfort of the Holy Spirit could not 
come was, that all were sinners and God could not recognize 
and comfort sinners. They must first be justified by Jesus' death. 
Afterward being justified by his death, we have peace with God. 
We become His children, and to such, He sends the spirit of 
adoption whereby we cry "Abba, (our) Father." Before this spirit 
could be sent to any, Jesus must not only die, but He must also 
ascend to the Father's presence and present the evidence of our 
purchase as typified by the High Priest's going into the holy 
place and sprinkling the blood. The coming out of the holy place 
(heaven) by our high priest does not undo the work of 
justification. We are still justified, and shall be forever; still sons 
and shall always be such, and consequently always possess the 
spirit as a comforter. It is the spirit of Christ. "Let the Spirit of 
Christ dwell in you richly. " 



Q.-If I understand you aright your view is, that though it was 
expedient that Jesus go from the world and present the proof of 
our ransom before the Holy Spirit, could come to us, yet the 
continuance of the Spirit's comforting presence is not dependent 
on his absence, for once given, it will never be withdrawn from 
those who abide in Him. 

W.— Yes, but let us not leave our subject: We seem to agree then 
that so far as we can see, there would be nothing to be gained by 
Jesus' appearing in the flesh to us at his second coming. But 
another point, if he should so appear, what satisfaction would or 
could it give any of us. It would not be Him we would see, for 
He is not flesh and if Jesus should so appear to me I should pray 
as did Moses,-Lord that I might see thy Glory— that I might see 
thee really, not an appearance, but thyself, thy glorious body, as 
Saul and John saw thee, as thou art. Oh no, I never could be 
satisfied with seeing an appearance of Jesus; I want to see Him 
as he is. "I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness," not 
by His appearing in our likeness. 

Remember too that he tells us about the time of his presence, 
before we "are made like Him." He says the world will not know 
of it but will go on eating, planting, building, marrying, etc., and 
"know not" of his (parousia) presence. Matt. 24:37-39. Luke 
17:26. 

Not only does Jesus intimate that his coming and presence will 
be unknown to the world, but that many of His servants will be 
so asleep, and overcharged with the things of this world, that the 
day of the Lord (His presence) will be upon them as a snare, and 
some will "begin to smite their fellow servants, saying: My Lord 
(the Bridegroom) delay eth His coming" while the ones smitten 
evidently are taking the opposite ground, viz: that the 
bridegroom does not delay, but is present. "Blessed is that 
servant whom his Lord when he (ako) has come shall find, 
giving meat in due season to the household of faith. (The meat 
due when the Lord has come, would unquestionably be, the 
evidences or proofs of His presence.) Evidently the presence is 
one not recognized by the natural eye, but by the eye of faith, 
else there could be no disagreement between the servants as to 
the fact of His presence. (Matt. 24:44-49.) 

Jesus tells us to beware, that false teachers will arise saying, 
"Lo, here or lo, there, believe them not, I will not come in any 
such seen manner, but as the "lightning" which cannot be seen 
(electricity, unseen, can go six to ten times around the earth in 
one second,) so shall the Son of Man be in His day. " (Luke 
17:24.) As the lightning when present frequently sends forth 
light which may be seen by those awake, so Jesus intimates that 
in His days of presence light will shine. 

Q.-That seems a beautiful thought taken in connection with the 
wonderful amount of spiritual light and truth which has shone 



on us and to us during the very years you claim as being the 
days of the presence of the Son of Man-since 1875. 

W.— Now we will glance hurriedly at some of the evidences that 
we are now in "the days of the Son of Man. " I will not attempt 
to prove the points of time. You can get them in full detail in 
Bro. Paton's new book, "Day Dawn," which you should by all 
means read. 

Q.--I have followed you so far, and can agree with your position 
fully, but when you come to prove that Jesus is now present and 
ask me to believe it without any sight evidence, I am afraid I 
have not strong enough faith to believe it. 

W.--I have not asked you to believe it, Bro. Q. I never ask any 
one to believe, I simply give the evidence; If it is as strong to 
them as to me they cannot help believing it. Now, you seem to 
think that if we had a little sight it would help matters. Let me 
remind you of a word from Peter. He was writing of things he 
had seen when on the mount of transfiguration; but when he has 
finished the narrative of the things seen, he adds: "But we have a 
more sure word of Prophecy whereunto ye do well that ye take 
heed." (2 Pet. 1:19.) And so I think now, the prophecies are 
more convincing to me than if Jesus were to appear as a man 
before me. Nay, more, I should say to such an one Begone, 
impostor; My Lord left word that if any so appear I was to 
"believe it not," and "go not after them nor follow them," "for as 
the lightning (not as a man— so shall the Son of Man be in His 
day." 

The "Jubilee Cycles" prove that the great jubilee or "times of 
restitution of all things" was due to begin in 1875. It is a clear, 
strong argument based upon both "the Law" and the Prophets; 
No one has ever yet been able to overthrow it. I believe that no 
one can overthrow it, nor even show a weak point in it, because 
it is of the Lord. Now, remembering this, turn to Acts 3:21, and 
hear Peter under inspiration, say: The heavens shall receive 
Jesus until the times of restitution of all things. Now, is it not 
clear that if the restitution times began in 1 875, the heavens do 
no longer retain Him. He is here present? 

Q.-That is strong, surely; but, are there any evidences that the 
restitution work began in 1875? 

R124 : page 2 

W.-Yes; we understand that before the human family are 
restored or even begin to be blessed the present kingdoms of 
earth which now bind and oppress mankind will all be 
overturned and that the kingdom of God will assume control and 
that the blessing and restitution come through the new kingdom. 
The work of demolishing human empire is beginning. The 
power that will overthrow them is now at work. The people are 
already organizing their forces under the name of Communists, 



Socialists, Nihilists, etc. True, there have always been 
Communists, but their work of organization and activity are 
within recent years, in 1875-6, scarcely any one knew the 
meaning of communist and nihilist. Now they are household 
words. 

Another prophetic proof is that of the 1335 days (yrs.) of Daniel 
to the time Jesus was due to be present— "the harvest," or end of 
this age- during which harvest time, Daniel was told that he 
should stand in his lot, or be resurrected with his class, the 
Prophets. The angel adds by way of comment: "Blessed is he 
that waiteth (remains alive) until (the 1335 days) 1874. Those 
days surely end there, but what blessing did any of us who live 
realize? We are blessed by the "Bright shining of the present 
one." (The literal rendering of last clause of 2 Thes. 2:8.) Jesus 
as the lightning is present, unseen, and is causing bright light of 
truth to shine into our minds. Wonderfully bright, and sweet, 
and precious, indeed, has been this light, on the presence of the 
Son of Man, separating between wheat and tares and preparing 
his chaste Virgin for glory. He is making up His jewels, 
finishing the work by selecting those who are alive and remain, 
that we may be caught up, together with those who sleep in him, 
to meet him in the air. 

As Jesus said to His disciples at the first advent, "Blessed are 
your eyes and your ears, etc., for I say unto you many prophets 
and righteous persons have desired to see these things and have 
not seen them"— So the angel said to Daniel-Blessed are they 
who will live to 1 874, for they shall see, (not with natural eye, 
but by faith) and hear (not with natural ear but through the sure 
word of Prophecy) and know (but not by worldly wisdom to 
which these things are hid, but by the Spirit of God freely given 
unto us "that we might know"-(l Cor. 2:11 and 12,) see, hear 
and know things which in times past God had not made known. 
Yes, truly blessed, we have found it— 

"To be living is sublime. " 

Again we have found the word to teach that the Jewish age was 
given as a pattern, or shadow, or illustration of the Gospel age, 
and we have found it so. The latter being on a higher plane than 
the former, but otherwise its exact counterpart. It was 1840-1/2 
years from the beginning of the age to their harvest when Jesus 
was present in the flesh to that fleshly house. And it was 1841- 
1/2 years from the commencement of our Gospel age at 
Pentecost (A.D. 33,) to the commencement of our "harvest" in 
the autumn of 1874, when our "sure word of prophecy" 
announces him as again present, but now on the higher plane, a 
spiritual body unseen, reaping, or harvesting the spiritual house. 
To the fleshly house the harvest work was on the fleshly plane 
and the chief reaper, Jesus and the other reapers, His disciples, 
were seen. Now there are under reapers, also, but they are "the 



angels," [Matt. 13] also spiritual bodies unseen, and so with the 
afterpart 



(Continued on Seventh Page.) 

R124 : page 7 

(Continued from Second Page.) 

of the harvest. As Jesus gave up the Nominal church at the close 
of his 3-1/2 years ministry because they "knew not the time of 
their visitation, so here too, at the parallel point of time, 1878, 
we believe the Nominal church to have been given up, and the 
"spewing out of His mouth" [Rev. 3] to have begun. As the 
Jewish house was shown some special favor for 3-1/2 years, the 
latter half of their covenant week so we expect some favor to 
continue with the Nominal Gospel church for 3-1/2 years, or 
until the autumn of 1881. As with the Jew, a period of 33 years 
of trouble followed these 7 years of favor, so we understand 
there will be upon Christendom, so called, a period of 33 years 
of trouble -making with the preceding 7 years the 40 years of 
trouble or "Day of wrath" ending with the times of the Gentiles 
in 1914, when the kingdom of God [soon to be set up or exalted 
to power] will have broken in pieces and consumed all earthly 
kingdoms. 

Q.— Wonderfully clear all this seems and how connected; my 
loss has been in not having a thorough knowledge of these time 
evidences of which you speak. I must study them up and make 
them my own that, as Paul says my faith may not stand in the 
wisdom of men but in the power of God-His word. (1 Cor. 2:5.) 

W.--I am glad to hear you say so. In no other way can you fully 
make them yours, or have in them such a basis for faith. 
Remember as Peter says the word is to be a "lamp to our feet," 
"a light shining in a dark place until the day dawn and the day- 
star arise in your hearts." It is evident then that no period of 
walking by sight comes to us here. We shall need the lamp all 
the way for "we walk by faith, not by sight." 

Q.-It speaks elsewhere of the "Sun of Righteousness arising 
with healing in his wings." When sunrise has come we do not 
need lamps. Does not this seem to indicate that we shall reach a 
condition whether by sight or not, where there will be no need of 
the light of "the lamp?" Does not this involve the thought of 
faith giving place to sight? 

W.--I think not. It is not we but the Jews who see the "Sun of 
Righteousness arise with healing in his wings;" and they are told 
in connection with it to "remember the Law of Moses." (Malachi 
4.) On the contrary, we, with Jesus our head will constitute that 
"Sun of Righteousness," as Jesus said (Matt. 13:43) speaking of 
the "harvest" or end of this age, when the wheat of the church 



should be completely separated from the tares of the same: 
"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom 
of their Father. " 

It is the same thought that is expressed in Rev. 21 :24 of the New 
Jerusalem shining and the Nations walking in the light of it. Yes 
it is a grand thought, that the day so long expected is near at 
hand. Not only natural Israel but as Paul says: "The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth together in pain until now, " and 
"waiteth for the manifestation of the Sons of God." (Rom. 8:19 
and 22.) All are now passing through a dark night of experience 
with sin, woe and death; all creation is sick; they groan in pain 
and soon they shall be delivered. Soon the "Great Physician" - 
"the Elijah"-"The Sun of righteousness (the Christ, head and 
body) shall arise with healing in his wings." 

Now the world is full of suffering, 
Sounds of woe fall on my ears, 
Sights of wretchedness and sorrow 
Fill my eyes with pitying tears. 

'Tis the earth's dark night of weeping, 
Wrong and evil triumph now, 
I can wait, for just before me 
Beams the morning's roseate glow. 

Yes, Bro. Q., "when He shall appear we shall appear with Him 
in glory." We will not be here when the "Sun" rises. True we are 
now in the dawn, but there is quite a while between first dawn of 
day and the Sun rise, and that is what Peter means. "We have a 
more sure word of prophecy— as a light in a dark place until the 
day dawn and the day star arise in your hearts." Jesus is the day 
star-"The bright and morning star." He must come first to us 
before we shine with Him as "the sun." And, dear Bro. Q., do 
you not see that this very thing is now being fulfilled? To all 
who recognize Jesus as present it is a fountain of joy to realize 
in Him the sure forerunner of our own glory with Him, and the 
great millennial day of restitution for the world. 

Q.-I must confess Bro. W., that your hope is the grandest to 
which mortals could aspire. 

W.-We could not aspire to such things. God has crowded these 
exceeding great and precious promises upon us; and while I urge 
that if interested in this great hope, you should make it yours, by 
personal investigation of the proofs, and recommend to you the 
"Day Dawn," yet let me suggest that the very object of our 
heavenly Father in giving us these exceeding great and precious 
promises, is "that by these ye might be partakers of the Divine 
nature. " (2 Peter 1 :4.) If we have put on Christ, let us walk in 
Him, and walk not after our own will, but according to the will 
of our head, Christ Jesus. 



R125 : page 3 



MY SACRIFICE. 



Laid on Thine altar, O my Lord divine, 
Accept this gift to-day, for Jesus' sake. 
I have no jewels to adorn Thy shrine, 
Nor any world-famed sacrifice to make. 

But here I bring, within my trembling hand, 
This will of mine-a thing that seemeth small; 
And Thou alone, O Lord, can'st understand 
How, when I yield Thee this, I yield mine all. 

Hidden therein Thy searching gaze can'st see 
Struggles of passions, visions of delight. 
All that I have, or am, or fain would be- 
Deep loves, fond hopes, and longings infinite; 

It hath been wet with tears, and dimmed with sighs, 
Clenched in my grasp till beauty hath it none. 
Now, from Thy footstool, where it vanquished lies, 
The prayer ascendeth-"May Thy will be done!" 

Take it, O Father, ere my courage fail; 
And merge it so in Thine own will, that e'en, 
If in some desperate hour my cries prevail, 
And Thou give back my gift, it may have been 

So changed, so purified, so fair have grown, 
So one with Thee, so filled with peace divine, 
I may not know or feel it as mine own; 
But, gaining back my will, may find it Thine. 

-New York Observer. 



R125 : page 3 

"IT HASTETH GREATLY." 

In the October number (1879) of the WATCH TOWER in the 
article headed "The Day of the Lord"— and in the November 
number in article headed "Babylon is Fallen," we gave 
expression to our view of the "time of trouble" and endeavored 
to prove scripturally that it began with the church and would 
first result in the complete overthrow of the nominal church, 
Protestant and Catholic, by infidelity and spiritualism, and 
afterward, it would reach and overthrow national governments. 
Many were inclined to make light of our statements, etc., and 
expressed themselves as believing that the trouble upon the 
nations was the only thing to be looked for by us. Our views 
then expressed are confirmed in us daily, and we are more than 
ever convinced of their truth; that around us in the nominal 



church, "a thousand shall fall at (our) side and ten thousand at 
(our) right hand;" that Infidelity's "arrows" and spiritualism's 
"pestilence," will for a short time sweep through the church- 
"and who shall be able to stand?"— "They who have made the 
most High their habitation and who have His truth for their 
shield and buckler." Psa. 91. 

We clip the following extracts to show our readers that the storm 
has already begun, and that others are noticing the fulfillment 
who never noticed the prophecies :— 

An anonymous writer in the North American Review affirms 
that the thinking minds of to-day are "drifting away from the 
religious belief and dogmatic theology of the past," and that "the 
wave of skepticism affects the orthodox church itself." He says: 
"The great body of orthodox religious doctrines known as 
systematic theology... is about to go to wreck with the 
mythology of Greece and the belief in witchcraft. " He also 
marks "the temporizing attitude of theology towards such 
modern doctrines as evolution. " 

Says Rev. Dr. Kittredge (Congregationalist) of Chicago: "It 
matters not in what direction you look, sin is on the increase, but 
the church is losing ground in her conflict with sin; she has 
almost ceased to be felt as a power. If a majority of our church 
organizations were to-day to become extinct, the world would 
hardly know it. -World's Crisis. 

Professor Von Oosterzee, the well-known evangelical teacher of 
Holland, said recently that a wave of infidelity is steadily 
advancing over Protestant Europe which the most favored 
country will not escape. "They have had it in Germany, and now 
we have it in Holland. They are beginning to get it in Scotland. 
In twenty years they will have it to the full, and all their 
theology will not save them. "-Messiah's Herald. 

The Christian Advocate (New York) writes: "The 
Congregationalist has received answers from twenty-nine 
ministers, to a circular sent out making inquiry as to the 
observance of Sabbath in New England. All testify to 
degeneracy and deplore results. Desecration has increased, and 
morality also decreases. Religion is losing its authority and the 
state of the community is becoming worse. " 

The N. Y. Herald quotes the veteran editor of the Observer as 
saying: "A great spiritual drought is prevailing, such as has not 
been known in the present century. We do not remember the 
time," says Dr. Prime, "when revivals of religion were so few 
and far between; when so few accessions to the churches were 
reported, and when the church seemed so much in danger of 
receding before the world." "A somber but true picture," says 
the Herald. 



Rev. Dr. Cuyler in the Evangelist, in a mournful article, asserts 
that Presbyterianism is on the decline; in 1875 there were 70,500 
members added to the churches; in 1877 there were 63,700 
added; but in 1878 there were only 53,000 additions, while in 
1879 only 49,000 were added-the real increase being only 
7,000 and perhaps not even that. What is true of the 
Presbyterian, is true, he says, of all the other evangelical 
bodies. -Montreal Witness. 

Rev. Dr. B. F. Campbell, of East Boston, in a lecture on "The 
Dangers of the Republic," said: "The world as a whole is 
undoubtedly growing more intelligent, but not moral. Moral 
power is on the decline in New England. The pendulum of 
religious belief has swung away from the rigid orthodoxy of 
Puritan times, has already passed the center, and is on its way to 
a heartless Nihilism."— East Boston Advocate. 

Rev. Henry Morgan says: "The cause of Boston's religious 
decline is Liberalism. It has broken down the Sabbath; paralyzed 
the arm of the law; opened Sunday theaters, concerts, 
excursions; emptied the churches; killed the public conscience; 
sown the seeds of distrust; sown to the wind, and we are now 
reaping the whirlwind. "-Boston Herald. 

The Church Union quotes a circular issued by most of the 
ministers of Baltimore, which urges all to prayer, and speaks of 
the forces of evil, general corruption, Sabbath-breaking, the 
thickening snares for the young, and adds: "The growing 
skepticism, as well as the intensely secular spirit of the age, are 
enough to awaken apprehension for our institutions and for the 
social fabric itself. "-Bible Banner. 

What is true of Christians in general is true of us who hold some 
advanced light on God's word and plan, viz: "Every man's work 
shall be tried of what sort it is." 

Should we expect to be exempted from the fire (trial) that is to 
try all? No, rather if we have the most advanced light we should 
expect to be the first and most severely tried. And we have been; 
and are now being, so tried. 

Your faith could not perhaps be tried by the same errors of 
infidelity, etc. Your knowledge of the plan of the ages and the 
work of restitution of all things renders powerless the arrows of 
infidelity, as also your knowledge of the condition of the dead 
protects you against the pestilence of "spiritualism." But for all 
this God is not without means of proving and sifting us. Our 
trial, which we hope is now almost over, has arisen mainly from 
the teachings scattered amongst us by some who walked with us 
and with whom we took sweet council together, who, denying 
the redemption and forgiveness of sins through Jesus Christ, 
have claimed it as possible for every man to pay his own penalty 
and climb his way up, and win for himself eternal life. Thus 
denying that the Lord bought them, thus seeming to fulfill to 



some extent, 2 Pet. 2:1, and thus have brought upon themselves 
by laying aside Christ's robe of righteousness-the wedding 
garment— and appearing in their own "filthy rags," the 
destruction of their light. 

"Light is sown for the righteous," but "there are none righteous, 
no not one, " except as covered by Christ's righteousness as with 
a garment. "Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, 
whose sins are covered." Blessed is the man to whom the Lord 
imputeth righteousness. These are the righteous for whom light 
was sown in God's word. Should we wonder if these brethren 
who have thus laid aside the imputed righteousness of Christ 
should be deprived of the light which was intended only for "the 
path of the just, "-those justified by faith in the ransom, and not 
by their own works. 

Such has been the result; these who once rejoiced in the light of 
"The sure word of Prophecy" which shows us the presence of 
our Lord as the "Bridegroom," "Reaper" and "King," that proves 
to us that the "times of restitution of all things began in 1874," 
and that consequently "the heavens" which were to receive Him 
until that time, now no longer receive him, but that He is 
present, and that soon when the separation of wheat and tares is 
complete, "we shall be changed to His glorious likeness and see 
Him as He is. All, all this light they have lost, and have now 
reached the condition of outer-darkness, the condition of 
darkness on the subject of the Lord's presence 

R126 : page 3 

that the world and a worldly church have always occupied. The 
parable says "there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth," 
meaning, we suppose, that such shall go through the time of 
trouble upon the world. 

With pain and sorrow we part company, but rejoice to know that 
many who followed them in a measure and were sorely tried are 
now able to discern between light and "outer darkness." "They 
went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of 
us they no doubt would have continued with us; but they went 
out from us that they might be made manifest, that they were not 
all of us." But "you have an anointing from the Holy one. You 
all know it." (1 John 2:19-20.) The Holy Spirit has revealed to 
us through the word the presence of the Bridegroom and we 
heard his voice and opened the door of faith and He came in to 
us and supped with us, and caused us to sit down to meat (truth), 
and himself has been our teacher and served us, (Rev. 3:20, 
Luke 12:37). And our faith does not stand in the wisdom of men 
but in the power and word of God. (1 Cor. 2:5.) And still 
beloved, there may be other trials for you. 



Oh, watch and fight and pray, 
The battle ne'er give o'er; 
Renew it boldly every day, 
And help Divine implore. 

Think not the victory won, 
Nor lay thine armor down, 
Thine arduous work will not be done 
Till thou hast gained thy crown. 



R215 : page 3 

THE CONCLUSIVE ARGUMENT. 

I have read that Benjamin Franklin tried to convince the farmers 
of his day that plaster enriched the soil. All his philosophical 
arguments failed to convince the farmers; so he took plaster and 
formed it into a sentence by the roadside. The wheat coming up 
through those letters was about twice as rank and green as the 
other wheat, and the farmers could read for months in letters of 
living green the sentence: This has been plastered. Arguments 
and culture, and fine sermons cannot convince sinners; they 
want to read in pulpit and pew, in our utter separation from the 
world, in our contentedness of mind and victorious joy, the 
clean-cut truth: This has been redeemed and sanctified by the 
Holy Ghost. Ah! brother, sister, the pierced hand of Jesus can 
pull out the throne of depravity from our heart, and open there a 
running stream of joy which will flow on through our pain, or 
poverty, or loneliness, or persecution, or trial, like a cooling 
river through a desert of sand. It is grand to live in a state where 
hallelujahs form the normal breathing of the soul. It is the joy of 
unwavering faith and repose in the blood of Jesus.— Advocate of 
Holiness. 



R124 : page 3 



Via. ELYRIA AND CLEVELAND, OHIO. 

I purpose visiting brother and sister Paton at Almont, Mich., 
and the other friends in that vicinity during August, and shall 
stop enroute at Elyria, on the 9th and 10th, and at Cleveland on 
the 22d, and be in Bro. Patorfs charge from 14th to 16th inst. 
Elyria meetings are in charge of Sister Avis Hamlin. Those at 
Cleveland are under Bro. Caleb Davies' control. May the Lord 
direct to His own praise and to our mutual profit. My dear wife 
accompanies me on this short trip. 

Your servant and editor of your paper. 



C. T. RUSSELL. 



R124 : page 3 

"It is man's relation to his God that must adjust and determine 
his relations to his fellow-creatures. The symmetrical position of 
the points in the circumference arises from their common 
relation to a common center. Set a man right with God, and he 
will certainly be set right with his neighbors." 



R126 : page 4 

"TO COMMUNICATE FORGET NOT." 

"But to do good and to communicate forget not, for with such 
sacrifices God is well pleased." Heb. 13:16. 

Our Heavenly Father is very rich, possessing all things, lacking 
nothing, yet if we may judge from his dealings with his earthly 
creatures, his pleasure has been not so much in the possessing of 
these great riches as in the using of them for the good and 
blessing of his creatures. 

His providence is kind and large, 
Both man and beast his bounty share; 
The whole creation is his charge, 
But saints are his peculiar care. 

So also as we become more and more like him— "partakers of the 
Divine nature" -benevolence, kindness and love will become 
more and more characteristic of us. Few perhaps of the "little 
flock" have been made stewards of this world's goods. It may be 
because there are few who could use and not abuse the trust, but 
such as have it should esteem it a privilege to be imitators of our 
benevolent Heavenly Father; not wasting it, neither hoarding it, 
but esteeming it merely as an agent for blessing and "doing good 
unto all men, especially to the household of faith. " And we 
should be anxious and careful to use whatever God has put into 
our hands, and to be faithful whether over a few things or many 
things, remembering that the man with but one dollar may be as 
really a miser or a philanthropist as he who has a million. 

What we should endeavor to possess is true benevolence and 
breadth of mind, charity, love. "Let the same mind be in you 
which was also in Christ Jesus our Lord," and it will lead you to 
regard and treat with tenderness and loving kindness, even those 
with whom you differ. Let us remember in this connection, too, 
that, "If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of His." 

The spirit or mind of Christ is a meek and quiet and charitable 
spirit. It "vaunteth not itself, is not easily puffed up. " Its fruits 
are the opposite of the depraved fleshly nature, viz. : love, peace, 



long suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, etc. "If we live 
in the spirit let us also walk in the spirit" and "not be desirous of 
vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another," but 
displaying the spirit of our Father in heaven, "and we shall be 
the children of the Highest, for He is kind unto the unthankful 
and to the evil." "Be ye therefore merciful as your Father also is 
merciful. " 

But if it is a joy and privilege to be God's stewards to a greater 
or less degree in earthly goods, how much more blessed is it to 
be permitted to dispense the spiritual blessings and thus to be 
"Stewards of the manifold grace of God. " Do we appreciate the 
fact that each disciple of Christ is a steward, some to a greater, 
some to a less extent; some with many talents, some with few, 
yet "To every man (in Christ) is given a measure of the spirit to 
profit withal"— to make use of. What use are you making of the 
talents given to you? Before saying to us, have you rule over 
two cities, five cities or many things, He will ask us to give an 
account of our stewardship. He will not expect me to give an 
account of your stewardship, nor you to give an account of 
mine. To the Master each servant will give an account and stand 
or fall. 

But while it is true that we each have been given special 
blessings of knowledge and truth and that certain responsibilities 
come with them, we had rather provoke you to love than fear. If 
we possess the spirit of Christ, love, we shall esteem it a great 
privilege to be permitted to carry to others that which has done 
so much good, which has removed the clouds from our minds 
and brought us into the clear sunshine of Gods love, revealing 
to us the grandeur of our Heavenly Father's character, the 
beauties and harmonies of his word, and the "exceeding riches 
of his grace in his loving kindness toward us in Christ Jesus." If 
it has set our hearts to ringing in melodious harmony with the 
heavenly music, "bringing glad tidings of great joy which shall 
be to all people," may it not produce the same effect upon 
others? Would that the story filled each of our hearts, that as a 
flame of fire it would consume all dross from our own hearts 
and set fire to all with whom we come in contact. Like the 
widow's cruse of oil, our treasure will fill to overflowing all the 
earthen vessels ready to receive it. Oh that every word of the 
beautiful song— "I love to tell the story"— could be the emphatic 
and truly heartfelt expression of all the readers of the WATCH 
TOWER: 

I love to tell the story, 
'Tis pleasant to repeat, 
What seems each time I tell it, 
More wonderfully sweet. 



I love to tell the story, 
It did so much for me, 
And that is just the reason 
I tell it now to thee. " 

Again, if we would "do good and communicate," how should we 
tell the story? Tell it simply, tell it plainly; be entirely 
swallowed up with the grandeur of your theme. Lose sight of 
yourself and what you have learned and let it be all "of Jesus 
and his glory, of Jesus and his love. " Too many take pleasure in 
telling the story only as they can make battle with it. They 
delight in using the truth as a knock-down argument. This is an 
element of the old nature which, not yet dead, asserts its right to 
fight what it terms the Lord's battles or the spiritual warfare. A 
sad mistake; be not deceived into developing an element of the 
carnal nature in direct opposition to the fruits of the spirit - 
meekness, gentleness, patience, love. 

Truly we are told that "the word of God is the sword of the 
spirit," but remember it is not our sword. The spirit does its own 
smiting and in its own way, but to us it says, "Put up thy sword. " 
The command to us is, Be light bearers. "Let your light so 
shine" by showing forth the fruits of the Spirit, that men may see 
your good fruits and glorify your Father in heaven. The word is 
a lamp, by its light put on Christ's righteousness, and truth as a 
garment, then lift it up to others that they may see your clean 
robes and be led to desire the same. Then let the Spirit use his 
sword upon others as he may see fit to humble them, strip them 
of pride, and bring them to the rock that is higher than they. 

We should not become discouraged if there are but few who 
love light rather than darkness. We should remember that the 
God of this world has succeeded in darkening the minds of 
many that they cannot appreciate the light of truth; that we are 
as it were, surrounded by men and women blinded totally or 
partially by sin and ignorance. Some, totally blind, can see and 
appreciate none of the good news; others can see a little but 
cannot see afar off. They can only see "the present evil world 
(age) and are losing much pleasure and joy because they cannot 
see afar off, how that, "In the ages to come, God will show forth 
the exceeding riches of his grace in his loving kindness toward 
us (who are) in Christ Jesus. (Eph. 2:7); and how it is his plan 
that both Jew and Gentile shall obtain mercy through your 
mercy. Rom. 11:31. Surely as it would afford great pleasure to 
strengthen and heal physical sight, much more should we rejoice 
to lead those who are blind spiritually to the Spirit's eye-salve- 
the word-that they may rejoice with us in singing: 

O, the prospect, it is so transporting, 
Savior hasten our gathering we pray. 

Of many it is as true to-day as when uttered: "Eyes have they 
but they see not, ears but they hear not. " God shows us through 



the lamp that this age ends the probation of none except those 
who do see and hear 

R127 : page 4 

clearly and plainly; that because of Jesus' ransom there is to be 
an age of Restitution. "Then the eyes of the blind shall be 
opened and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. " "Then all 
shall come to the knowledge of the truth" and "the knowledge of 
the Lord shall fill the whole earth" and none shall say to his 
neighbor, "know thou the Lord," for all shall know him, from 
the least to the greatest of them. 

In presenting the good news of the kingdom and the deep things 
of God, we should seek to follow Jesus' example, that is, while 
we at all times hold up Christ's righteousness to all men and 
thereby be to them "living epistles," we should seek to show 
"the deep things of God" to those who seem to have the spirit of 
God. (1 Cor. 2:9-16.) 

Knowing this, that spiritual or deep things cannot be discerned 
except by those having the spirit, "He that hath an ear let him 
hear," saith the Spirit. This must be our method, therefore, when 
we find any one without an ear to hear, leave off telling such an 
one. You cannot give him an ear; God will do that in his "due 
time. " Waste not valuable time and energy. Leave them in love 
and sympathy with God, and put no obstacle in their way. 

Whenever you meet what seems to be "an Israelite indeed, in 
whom there is no guile," expect in such a one to find "an ear to 
hear. " Commune with him first on Spiritual things familiar to 
you both, that he may come to recognize you as led of the same 
spirit-a fellow member of "the body of Christ," and an heir of 
the same glory. Then present to such the deeper things of God 
and your communion, instead of being a battle of words, will be 
profitable and blessed to both. To fully appreciate the meaning 
of our text, we should do good and communicate until we feel it. 
It is with such sacrifices God is well pleased. It does not amount 
to a sacrifice to merely give a dollar, or a moment, or an hour 
for which we have no other use. Give until you can feel it and 
then you may expect to feel in your heart that "with such 
sacrifices God is well pleased. " 



R127 : page 4 



THE FIG TREE. 



And seeing a single fig tree by the road he went to it but finding 
nothing on it except leaves, he said, "May no fruit grow on thee 
to the age," and the fig tree instantly withered. (E.D.) Matt. 
21:19. That Christ used the fig tree to represent the destruction 
of the Jewish nation seems evident. This event occurred about 



the time Christ rode into Jerusalem (verses 2,5) at which time he 
pronounced the curse (Luke 19:30,41). This is further evident 
when we notice the parable given in Luke 13:6,9. The three 
years he came seeking fruit, likely refers to the time of Christ's 
ministry during which time he confined himself almost entirely 
to the Jewish people (Matt. 10:5,6). Some may say however that 
Christ's ministry was 3-1/2 years and this would not apply, but 
while it was 3-1/2 years from the baptism of Christ until His 
crucifixion it seems there was no special work done until about 
the passover, which was about six months after his baptism, and 
so commencing in A.D. 30 would end in A.D. 33, time parable 
was given according to the year in the margin of your Bible. The 
dresser of the vineyard says let it alone this year, which of 
course would make it four and extend favor one year beyond the 
crucifixion, but I do not think it was allowed to remain another 
year, for the latter part of the chapter shows that Jerusalem was 
left desolate and as he came searching fruit and found none we 
know from the connection in Matt. 21:19, it was at that point it 
withered. Some however have thought it unreasonable to 
suppose that the fig tree represents the Jews, for Mark 11:13 
informs us, that the time of figs was not yet, which of course 
implies that the time for the Jews to bear fruit was not then, and 
if so why should Christ curse them? 

But I think the objection vanishes when we remember that they 
were only a typical people and that the time they will bear fruit 
is after the fullness of the Gentiles have come in. [Rom. 11:25- 

27]. 

It is also necessary to bear in mind that the curse did not seal 
their eternal doom, for blindness only happened to them for a 
time, says Paul, and the same thought is intimated by Christ 
when he left their house desolate, (Luke 13:35) for they are yet 
to say: "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." This 
being true we find how appropriate is the rendering given in the 
Emphatic Diaglott, viz. : "Cursed to the age. " And 'tis true that 
during the Gospel age, as a nation, they have borne no fruit, but 
when the bride is taken out from the Gentiles they will receive 
favor. [Acts 15:14,16.] We find that the cursed fig tree is to bud 
again according to Christ's own words in a parable given in 
connection with the signs of His coming in Matt. 24:32,33, and 
if the curse pronounced on it at the first advent shows us the 
blinding of the Jews, does not its putting forth leaves reveal to 
us the fact that they are in a fair way to bear fruit? So we 
understand it at least, and as there are unmistakable signs among 
the Jews to-day as a people, we recognize Christ's words and 
know "that summer is nigh. " And not only do we recognize that 
the restoration of the Jews is at hand but also that the kingdom 
of God is nigh. [Luke 21:29,31]. And as the kingdom of God is 
due at some time to be set up, we rejoice and lift up our heads 
because our redemption is nigh, [verse 28]. For the setting up of 
the kingdom implies nothing less than the resurrection of the 



dead in Christ and change of the living, and knowing that the 
restoration 

R127 : page 5 

of the Jews takes place in the midst of great trouble and during 
the pruning out of the seven last plagues according to the type, 
[Micah 7:14 to end], and having the promise that we are to be 
counted worthy to escape all these things, [Luke 21:34,36,] we 
patiently wait for our gathering together unto Christ. 

The redemption we understand to be the redemption of the body, 
[Rom. 8:23,] being caught away to meet Christ, and so to be 
forever with Him. This same idea seems to be brought out in 
Cant. 2:10,13, when Christ addresses the Church, saying: "Rise 
up my love, my fair one, and come away... the fig tree putteth 
forth the green figs;... Arise my love, my fair one, and come 
away. " 

We here find the fig tree maintained again and like Christ's 
words it is connected with our redemption. Surely we who 
recognize the signs of the times in connection with the prophetic 
measures, have great reason for rejoicing in hope of our speedy 
deliverance, and may we also give thanks to our Heavenly 
Father for the light shining on our path. May the truth have the 
designed effect, viz.: to sanctify us, separate us from the world, 
make us holy, for "without holiness no man shall see the Lord," 
[Heb. 12:14]. While in the presence of Christ we wait for our 
gathering together unto Him, and may the trial of our faith, 
being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, be found 
to the praise of His glory, whom having not seen we love, in 
whom, though now we see him not, yet believing, we 
rejoice... receiving the end of our faith, won the salvation of our 
souls, (1 Pet. 1:7,9). So here we find that we are not to see 
Christ until our salvation, when we shall be like Him and see 
Him as He is, (1 John 3:2), and then and not until then will faith 
end, and we will not longer need signs, not even that of the fig 
tree, but until then we expect to watch by faith. 

A. D. J. 



R127:page5 



DEAD WITH CHRIST. 



Growth in knowledge of truth is not only the privilege but also 
the duty of the Christian; so the education of the saints will not 
be complete until they have laid off the flesh, and been made 
like Christ. 

Then we ought to understand more fully the deep things of God 
now than at any other time in the past; and so we should 



comprehend more clearly what it is to suffer with Christ, as well 
as the glory which is to follow. 

Suffering with Christ involves more than a simple separation 
from the world. We must be dead to the world, then we shall not 
love the world or worldly things. 

Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the 
world, why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to 
ordinances; after the commandments and ordinances of men? 
Touch not, taste not, handle not the unclean thing. Col. 2:20,22. 

The conscience must be purged from dead works to serve the 
living God, (Heb. 9:14). For I through the law am dead to the 
law, that I might live unto God (Gal. 2:19). It is a faithful 
saying: "For if we be dead with Him we shall also reign with 
Him," (2 Tim. 2:11). Yea, doubtless and I count all things but 
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my 
Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do 
count them as vile refuse that I may win Christ and be found in 
him; not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, 
but that which is through the faith of Christ that I may know him 
and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his 
sufferings, being made conformable unto His death; if by any 
means I may attain unto the resurrection of the dead, (Phil. 
3:8,1 1). Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord 
Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our 
body. For we which live are always delivered 

R128:page5 

unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus might be 
made manifest in our mortal flesh. (2 Cor. 4:10,1 1.) 

These passages seem to teach more than a crucifixion of the 
flesh simply; i.e., an actual giving of ourselves, as did our head, 
for the purpose of completing the sacrifice for the world; to fill 
up that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ. He gave His 
flesh for the life of the world (John 6:5 1). Hereby perceive we 
love, because he laid down His life for us, and we ought to lay 
down our lives for the brethren, [1 John 3:16]. 

If we are still under the death penalty entailed upon us by Adam, 
how we can be counted as dead, crucified with Christ, I can not 
conceive; but if He redeemed us from that penalty, by His death, 
I can see how we can give ourselves a voluntary sacrifice for the 
world in Him. He could give Himself because of His own 
righteousness; His body can do it only by having His 
righteousness imputed to them. There were two sacrifices for 
atonement under the law Lev. 16; one for the priesthood or high 
priest's house, and the other for the people. Jesus, our high 
priest, gave himself a propitiation for our sins (1 John 2:2) or his 
house, whose are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the 
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, Heb. 3:6. 



Then again Christ, our Passover is sacrificed for us [the church 
of the first-born.] 1 Cor. 5:7. Whom God has set forth to be a 
mercy seat, by his own blood, through the faith; for an 
exhibition of His righteousness in passing by the sins formerly 
committed, during the forbearance of God; and for an exhibition 
of His righteousness at the present time, in order that he may be 
righteous while justifying him who is the faith of Jesus [Rom. 
3:25,26]. [Diaglott.] So faith in Christ, or the law of the Spirit of 
Life in Christ Jesus hath made us free from the law of sin and 
death [Rom. 8:2]. 

If the death of Christ releases us from the Adamic penalty, then 
why do we die? To complete the sacrifice. Presenting our bodies 
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is our 
reasonable service, [Rom. 12]. 

Dead with him. Not only dead to the world, to the law, to sin, to 
the flesh, but really dead with Him. Baptized into his death; for 
if we have been planted together in the likeness of His death, we 
shall also be in the likeness of his resurrection. Knowing this, 
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might 
be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin; for he that 
is dead is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with Him, we 
believe that we shall also live with Him [Rom. 6]. The 
completion of the individual sufferings of the head was his 
laying off the flesh; so with the body. 

The atonement was for the purpose of cleansing. That Jesus 
gave himself for the church-the church of the first-born-that 
they might be partakers with Him in making atonement for the 
world, seems to be clearly taught in Numbers 8. "Take the 
Levites from among the children of Israel and cleanse them. " 

"And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord for an 
offering of the children of Israel, that they may execute the 
service of the Lord. And the Levites shall lay their hands upon 
the heads of the bullocks; and thou shalt offer the one for a sin 
offering and the other for a burnt offering unto the Lord, to 
make an atonement for the Levites. 

"Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children 
of Israel; and the Levites shall be mine. For they are wholly 
given unto me from among the children of Israel; Instead of the 
first-born of all the children of Israel have I taken them unto me. 
For all the first-born of the children of Israel are mine. And I 
have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons among 
the children of Israel to do the service of the children of Israel in 
the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make atonement for 
the children of Israel. " 

Do not the first-born represent the church? And has not God 
chosen them out from among the nations and given them to 
Christ for a purpose? By virtue of Jesus having given Himself a 
propitiation for our sins; and as our passover having been slain 



for us, our sins go beforehand to judgment. We are first on trial, 
and do not come into Judgment [trial] with the world. We 
escape the things that are coming upon the world, and having 
suffered with Him, crucified the flesh with the affections and 
lusts; completed the sacrifice, we shall be exalted with Him to 
the throne, as kings and priests, to reign over, judge and bless 
the nations. When the sacrifice for the world shall have been 
completed, the ransom fully paid, and the perfected Christ 
exercises authority, not another individual will die on account of 
Adam's transgression; nor indeed for mere sins of the flesh, but 
for sins against the knowledge of the truth. 

B. W. K. 

[No other scripture or type shows so fully perhaps, the intimate 
relationship between Jesus, the head, and "the little flock" as 
members of His body as this. [Lev. 16.] The head was a sacrifice 
and the body follows in His footsteps. The Head died for all the 
household of faith; the body fills up the measure of the 
sufferings of Christ, and dies for all "the people" not of the 
household. We may learn better to appreciate the apostle's 
expression concerning the prophets when he says that "they 
spake before of the sufferings of Christ [head and body] and of 
the glory that should follow. Have patience, brethren, until the 
sufferings are full then we shall have the glory. "For if we suffer 
with Him we shall also be glorified together. " "If we suffer we 
shall also reign with Him. " And as when the suffering of death 
was accomplished for "His house" by the head they were 
recognized by the Father no longer as enemies and aliens, but as 
sons were given the spirit of adoption, [at Pentecost] so when all 
the sufferings are completed and filled up the Father will 
recognize all the world as free from Adam's transgression and 
justified to life, and the great work of the millennial age, 
"Restitution," will begin when the sufferings are complete for 
the world God will send the spirit upon them as he did upon the 
church when its redemption was finished as it is written: "It 
shall come to pass in the last days saith the Lord, I will pour out 
my spirit upon all flesh. " The first installment or "early rain" 
came upon us at Pentecost, the promise will be completed when 
we are glorified. 

But, another point shown by this atonement type is, that all 
believers constitute a part of the household, they are represented 
by the Levites and are a part of "the church of the first-born." 
Though apparently none except the willing living sacrifices- 
"The Lord's Goat," those who suffer and shall reign, are counted 
overcomers -His bride— the members of his body. Typified by 
the priests all other members of the household will be 
wonderfully blest but will lose much. It rejoices us however to 
think that many who through fear of death (afraid of the scoffs 
of the world, afraid though longing to crucify themselves,) and 
therefore subject to bondage. That these dear loved ones will not 



be suffered to have part with the world, but during the time of 
trouble "the rod and staff" of our shepherd will lead them 
through great tribulation to our Father's house and family. Thus 
they may become palm bearers even though they are not part of 
the "little flock" of crown wearers. It is the Lord's plan, and 
marvelous in our eyes. How wonderfully good our Father is and 
how His plan shows it. "Let me love Thee more and more."]— 
EDITOR. 



R128:page5 



'PERILOUS TIMES." 



In ordinary times it is the privilege and duty of the children of 
God to shine as "the light of the world. " As in nature, the 
energies of every thing that is germinated are directed to the 
building up and perfecting its own organizations, and thereby 
fulfilling its own mission in the realms of animated creations; so 
in the spiritual sphere of existence, the great business of "the 
begotten again" is to grow, develop and mature, and in the 
accomplishment of these processes to shine as "the lights of the 
world. " That which shines commands the observation and 
reflects its own light upon all its surroundings, and is as a 
consequence as "a city set upon a hill," it cannot be hid. This is 
the duty the Christian owes to the world, the filling of the 
perfect development of his character as a son of God. It is not 
teaching, instruction. His knowledge is imperfect and only 
gained by the slow process of his spiritual discipline as it 
displaces his natural ideas and makes revealed truth 
comprehensible to him. "The natural man receiveth not the 
things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness to him: 
neither can he know them because they are spiritually 
discerned," and discipline alone makes them comprehensible to 
the "begotten again. " All that Christians can do for the world, is 
to shine before it, that is illumine and illustrate by their 
luminous conduct, the principles their profession recognizes. 

When the Father sends teachers into the world they speak to it 
by inspiration, as in the case of the Prophets, the Son of God and 
His Apostles. But the revelation being 

R128 : page 6 completed for the preliminary age of the Gospel, 
the Father is pleased to complete the education of His sons 
before He sends them forth as teachers of His truth, for every 
one whom He sends forth gives utterance to no uncertain sound. 
Hence at present we are left under the guidance of the Holy 
Ghost to be led into all truth. We are not at liberty to rely upon 
human wisdom, learning or capacity to discover the meaning of 
the revelation which was given to us by the power of the Holy 
Ghost. Nor is there any promise that the 



R129 : page 6 

Holy Ghost will "endow any of us with power from on high" to 
speak by inspiration before the blessed Lord our living head is 
manifested in His glory. These being the normal conditions of 
Christian life. It may become our duty when abnormal 
conditions supervene, as we think they do at present, to lift up 
our voice of warning when those who would be recognized as 
the faithful teachers of the household seek to impress the 
household with the idea that they have been the recipients of a 
divine preparation to be its leader and teacher in these last days. 
When you read such utterances as this- "I felt and knew that it 
was a baptism for the work," stop and ask yourselves whether 
you recollect any utterances of the revealed word that leads to 
the expectation that the Holy Ghost's functions are to be 
supplemented by human agency? No, my Brethren, the agency 
that follows the invisible agency of the Holy Ghost is that of the 
manifested Lord and His Bride. It is true that prior to His 
manifestation He may, and undoubtedly is, personally directing 
the angels in their gathering work, but it is manifest that His 
presence and action now are kept in this, the limits of the Holy 
Ghost's sphere of invisibility. 

As long as we are in the flesh we are liable to be led astray, and 
we think our brother errs egregious ly in his extraordinary efforts 
to be recognized as a special missionary of the Lord in these last 
days. It seems possible "the elect" may deceive themselves as 
well as others. 

I wish the brethren would take their Concordance and find under 
the head of Holy Ghost what is judicated of Him, and having 
studied each passage where His offices and services are spoken 
of, ask themselves if there be left any possible avenue through 
which the man agency can supplement His work? 

I could say more on this subject. "A word to the wise is 
sufficient. " 

G. B. STACY. 

[Remarks by the Editor: We presume that Bro. S. -would not 
wish us to understand him as ignoring the fact that God always 
has, and perhaps always will use, special agents for special 
work, as for instance Abraham, Moses, Samson and Paul, the 
"chosen vessel." These were used as long as they kept humble— 
"kept their body under," but if even a Moses, allowed pride to 
overcome him, he would cease to be the leader of the Lord's 
hosts. 

If we rightly understand Bro. S., he wishes to guard us against 
the danger of receiving men's teachings or expositions of "the 
word" because they have had a vision or dream. 

We heartily endorse this sentiment. "To the Law and to the 
testimony if they speak not according to these it is because there 



is no light in them," no matter if they had a thousand visions. 
We should not take an angel's word unless it could be sustained 
as in harmony with the Bible. If any man be used of the Spirit as 
a special vessel he need not tell anyone of it. It will manifest 
itself through his exposition of "the word. "] 



R129 : page 6 

THE LIKENESS AND THE DIFFERENCE. 

[The following is an extract from an editorial in Zion's Herald 
(Boston) the leading organ of the M.E. church of New England.] 

That faculty of our moral nature by which we judge of the 
quality of our own acts and the acts of others, and which we call 
conscience, was given to us of God. Its judgment is immediate 
and decisive when occasion occurs. We cannot avoid it. The 
character, the law, and the acts of our Creator are passed upon 
before this personal tribunal in our heart. We cannot avoid doing 
this. God knows we must form these judgments, for he has given 
to us this moral nature. We cannot call that right, because it is a 
divine act, which really shocks our conscience. The fact of its 
being found in the Bible, if it is abhorrent to our moral sense, 
cannot give it any different ethical coloring to us. It is wrong 
there and everywhere— to us. God has given us this faculty, in 
order that we should make these judgments. We cannot help 
them. We are not responsible for them. They flash out their 
decisions involuntarily to us. 

In accordance with this common law of our natures, men freely 
express their judgments in reference to the divine government 
over us, and especially in regard to the sanctions revealed in the 
Bible as following a persistent breach of the law of God. They 
judge of the divine conduct towards themselves, as they would 
of their own towards their children. They would not justify 
themselves in an exacting, persistent, absolutely strict demand 
of entire obedience at the hand of the latter, but would be 
lenient, forgiving, patient, forbearing, hopeful and helpful until 
the last. This is what their moral nature exacts of them towards 
their children. Have they not a right to demand the same at the 
hand of the Great Heavenly Father? No human mind could 
endure the thought of the absolute and eternal ruin— the 
protracted, conscious, exquisite, and hopeless suffering of 
thousands upon thousands of intelligent immortals; the moral 
sense of no saved person could enjoy, it is affirmed, the bliss of 
heaven, to know that related and heretofore greatly beloved 
friends were enduring the unmitigated woes of an unlimited 
wretchedness. Our ethical natures must be of the same character 
as that of our Creator, for God has given us ours. He would not 
bestow upon us a moral sense which would apprehend that to be 
right which is in itself wrong, and conversely. He knows that all 



His acts and threatenings must pass in review before our own 
inward apprehensions of justice and righteousness. Can He 
expect that we will believe in reference to Himself that, that 
which shocks beyond expression our moral apprehension, is 
right simply because He has ordained it? 

We present the question quite boldly and without qualification 
in order that any suggestion that is made may cover, if possible, 
the strongest aspect of the case. We hear, in these days, in our 
religious discussions, expressions that would have been thought 
blasphemous a few years since. The divine Lawgiver and 
Creator is unceremoniously summoned before the tribunal of 
our lower human courts, and His character and acts are 
submitted to a summary judgment. If He treats His creatures as 
many believers in the Bible think He does, He is affirmed to be 
worse than a devil. If He permits them to enter upon such a life 
as ours, the character and circumstances of their birth largely 
deciding their moral conditions in spite of themselves, and then 
condemns them, after a life of frightful temptation, with small or 
no fair opportunities for moral recovery, to a fearful and 
hopeless retribution in a life to come, He is, as these modern 
religious philosophers say, simply a monster. Our own moral 
natures rise up involuntarily within us, it is urged, and repel such 
an idea of the infinite Creator and Father of the universe. 

Now, while a reverent and Christian believer would hesitate to 
use such language as this, every one may safely affirm that some 
time and somewhere every act of God, to every intelligent soul, 
will be made to appear, as it relates to the individual or universe, 
absolutely righteous. We may not be able to adjust all the 
questions involved, here and now, but some time God will 
justify himself before the moral sense He has Himself created 
within us. It is just as safe and proper, also, to say that at some 
point in the history of every soul, God's economy over him and 
all other souls will be made to appear as the reign of infinite and 
unqualified love. God expects this judgment at the hand of every 
person, for He has given to all this wonderful faculty of sitting 
upon His own acts, and He has revealed Himself both as holy 
and as a God of love; not simply merciful and forgiving, but 
essential love itself. 

We cannot look back upon the history of the race, or even read 
the Bible, or gather up the results of our own observation, and 
feel that, judged by our standard, the government of the world 
has seemed exactly just to individuals and nations. We cannot 
reconcile divine impartiality, with the special favor shown to 
some peoples and some individuals.... 

Amid all these conflicting moral elements, we readily hold our 
faith in both the divine wisdom and love. The Judge of all flesh 
will do right. And God is love. It becomes us, therefore, to be 
both modest and reverent in our expressions of opinion in 
reference to divine acts to occur on the other side of the vail. We 



only see now in part. God will be true to Himself and to our 
purified moral sense. Let us not dare summarily to express, in 
our ignorance and moral infirmity, a judgment upon His 
possible government hereafter, beyond the sure word of 
prophecy. 

REMARKS BY THE EDITOR: 

The above is evidently the expression of a noble, honest heart, 
yearning and longing for the bright light of truth to prove to him 
what the scriptures claim, that "God is love," and "His mercy 
endureth forever. " We are glad to think that this brother is one 
of many who are beginning to awake to the fact that there must 
be something in God's plan which they have not yet seen, which 
will harmonize His word and show its claim, that God is just and 
merciful and loving, to be borne out and proved by his dealings 
with his creatures. This Brother, while not alone in his unrest 
and disquiet, is comparatively alone in his utterances. Others 
think, but seldom speak, and the above utterances seem to 
indicate either a bolder or a larger heart than the majority of his 
colleagues possess. 

When we read such heart throbs how we wish we could give 
some of 

R130 : page 6 

the consolations of the "sure word of prophecy. " How we wish 
for opportunity to sing to them "The Song of Moses and the 
Lamb," and to show to them that only the few— that have "come 
to the knowledge of truth" and have "been made partakers of the 
Holy Ghost" (the church), only these have yet had their trial, or 
judgment, and that it is a blessed truth, and eventually will be 
"glad tidings of great joy to all people, that God hath appointed 
a day (age) in the which He will judge (Put on trial by giving 
them the clear knowledge of the truth) the world in 
righteousness by that man whom He hath afore ordained— Jesus 
Christ," the new man-the "anointed Savior" -head and body. 
("Know ye not that the saints shall judge the world?" If they 
could but see what is meant by Peter in Acts 3:21. ("The 
heavens must retain (Jesus) until the times of restitution of all 
things.") and that the very object of His coming is to glorify His 
Bride and "the Virgins, her companions that follow her," and 
then through them to "bless all the families of earth" and 
"restore all things "-restore poor fallen humanity to its original 
human perfectness which God declared "very good," freeing 
them from all the evils of Adam's transgression and placing 
them again where it is possible for them to keep a perfect law. 
Oh, would that they could see that this "time [these years] of 
restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of 
all the holy Prophets since the world began," is the magic key 
which unlocks God's goodness, love, mercy, and justice and 
discloses to our enraptured vision not only "the exceeding riches 



of His grace and loving kindness toward us in Christ Jesus," but 
that it also gives us a glimpse of "the depth of the riches, both of 
the knowledge and wisdom of God," that we might 
"comprehend with all saints the height and depth, length and 
breadth, and know the LOVE of God which passeth 
knowledge. " 

But why is it that souls expressing such longings for truth as the 
above, are unwilling [generally] to hear or investigate our sweet 
story? Alas, they are bound! Creeds made by fallible men in the 
Fifteenth to Seventeenth centuries, who, though honest, had 
much of the error, tradition and darkness of old Papacy clinging 
to them. These are the shackles and chains which bind men's 
consciences and prevent the reception of truth, or so dilute and 
mix it with error as to destroy much of its power and almost all 
of its beauty. Oh, that Christians could realize the liberty 
whereunto they are called, and that they would not be held in 
bondage to any man nor to any written creed, nor to any 
preconceived opinions of their own (an unwritten creed.) Let us 
put down no stakes, saying, thus far will I believe and no farther, 
but realize that the Lord is our shepherd and that he will lead His 
sheep day by day and arrange ways by which things both new 
and old shall be brought 

R130:page7 

out of the great treasure-house of His word as meat in due 
season for the household of faith. Let us remember that it is as 
much our work to follow as it is the Spirit's work to lead us into 
all truth. "Then shall we know if we follow on to know the 
Lord," [Hos. 6:3]. "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty 
wherewith Christ hath made you free, and be not again 
entangled with the YOKE OF BONDAGE. " 



R130:page7 

"HAVING THE HARPS OF GOD." 

And I saw as it were a sea of glass, mingled with fire: And them 
that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, 
[Omit: "and over his mark"] and over the number of his name, 
stand on the sea of glass having the harps of God. 

And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the 
song of the Lamb, saying— Great and marvellous are thy works 
Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways thou King of 
Nations [margin] who shall not fear thee O Lord and glorify thy 
name, for thou alone art holy? For all nations shall come and 
worship before thee; for thy judgments [righteous acts] are made 
manifest. Rev. 15:2-4. 



The question has often been asked: who sing this song and 
when? The most commonly received answer perhaps has been: 
This is the second or great company who come up through the 
great tribulation and they sing this song during the time of 
trouble. We think this incorrect and wish to express a different 
view. 

First. It cannot be the second company because these have 
gotten the Victory over the Beast and Image, etc. (As to what 
these symbolize, see first article in WATCH TOWER January 
1880.) The trouble with the mass of Christians is that they are in 
bondage to this beast and image. 

The second company never get the Victory over them and 
apparently do not recognize their true character until they are 
overthrown by the judgments of the "day of wrath," when the 
"Beast and false prophet are cast into the lake of fire," they still 
worship them and it is not until their power is gone that they 
recognize their overthrow as of God and say: "True and 
righteous are his judgments: for he hath judged the great harlot." 
(Rev. 19:2.) Not these are the Victors, but they who now stand 
out free while The Beast and Image are ruling and enslaving all 
who profess the name of Christ with their man-made creeds, and 
are Lording it over God's heritage. 

Secondly. This scene occurs before the pouring out of the vials 
of wrath for the angels are seen with the "seven vials full" (vs. 
7). 

As we proceed to analyze the song, I think you will recognize it 
as the very song of Restitution which we sing. Then too you will 
see how none who bow to the decrees of orthodoxy, so called, 
can sing it being hindered and chained by their creeds, until they 
get the Victory over them. 

"I saw a sea as it were of glass"— Sea symbolizes people of the 
world, as it were of glass, shows that their condition is easily 
recognized by those who stand on or above them. The Victors, 
we and all who can sing this song, we believe to be the Victors. 
We see the sea (people) mingled with fire, [judgments]. We 
believe that this fire [trouble] has been mingling or coming 
among the people since 1873, and that it is to continue until 
1914. Though pitying them we cannot stop to weep for our 
hearts are filled with joy by the unfolding before us of the Word 
and plan of God, and our mouths are filled with the song of 
Restitution saying: "Great and marvelous are thy works Lord 
God Almighty; just and true are thy ways thou King of Nations." 
Who but those seeing, that there is to be a "restitution of all 
things" can say or think God's ways with the Nations "just and 
true?" Look back to the slaughter of great nations-The 
Amorites, Amelekites, Hitites, Jebuzites, etc., without ever 
giving them a chance to know Him, whom to know is life 
eternal. Consider these dealings of God and none can do more 



than try in a feeble way to excuse God's action by saying that 
those were wicked people, forgetting that wickedness can only 
exist where there is law and a knowledge of good. 

Who could do more than attempt an excuse for the destruction 
of Sodom, when Jesus says that if His mighty works done 
among the Jews had been done in Sodom "it would have 
remained until this day." [Matt. 11:23.] It could not be excused - 
-God doesn't want us to excuse Him. 

God is His own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain" 

— if we will only let Him, and not bind ourselves with creeds so 
that we dare not believe what His word tells us, when we read 
that these same Sodomites are to be restored— brought back to 
"their former estate" and under the new covenant given to Israel 
"as daughters" for instruction in the next age. [Ezek. 16:48-63.] 
Only we, who see these beauties of God's plan, can truly say - 
"Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Nations." 

Again, as we sing our song we say "Who shall not fear Thee, O, 
Lord, and glorify thy name, for thou only art holy?" and our 
Christian brethren hold up their hands in horror saying, "That's 
almost universalism!" "According to orthodox belief nine out of 
every ten shall not, either in this life, or hereafter glorify God's 
name. " But we reply: "There is one Mediator between God and 
man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all 
men, to be testified in due time. " When in the millennial age, 
God's due time for testifying it to the world— to every man— shall 
have come, we believe that almost all will fear and glorify Him 
and love Him, too. What they lack is knowledge: 

If all the world my Savior knew, 
Then all the world would love Him too. 

Who but ourselves, believes the next clause? "All nations shall 
come and worship before Thee. " Not, those who think that all 
but a very few are gone to hell torment forever. Not those, 
either, who believe that all are annihilated except the saints. Nor 
yet, those who believe in a partial restitution, and that the living 
nations only are to come and worship God in the next age. No, 
none of these can or do sing this song. Only we, can sing it in 
full- a "Restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets." Even the Sodomites of whom 
no remnant was left when "fire came down from heaven and 
destroyed them all." "All nations shall come and worship before 
Thee." "Thy judgments [righteous acts] are made manifest." We 
can see in the unfolding of the great plan that God's dealings are 
all 

R131 : page 7 



righteous, and just, and we can make it manifest to all who are 
not so blinded by traditions of men that the word of God is made 
to them of none effect. 

Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, 
But trust Him for His grace; 
Behind a frowning providence 
He hides a smiling face. 

Yes, dear brethren and sisters, we have to some extent at least 
gotten the victory over the Beast and his image, etc. The song is 
ours and we are singing it. But you say where are our "Harps of 
God"-We haven't got the harps yet? Yes, we have; it is called 
"The word of God" and Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, David, Job, 
Moses and all the Prophecies are but strings to our harp; they 
only require keying up and they will produce the sweetest 
harmony to this "Song of Moses and the Lamb," for as Peter 
says God hath spoken of the restitution by the mouth of all these 
holy Prophets. (Acts 3:21.) 

Then tune up your harps, dearly beloved, and sing aloud our 
glad song of "Jubilee. " Sing to your dear friends who love God, 
despite what seems to them his injustice. But if they will not 
hear sing to the world. It will be a "Bow of promise" to them 
when they go further down into the time of trouble. And if you 
cannot do this sing it loudly in your own heart. It will joy and 
comfort bring you, to think of our Father's love and realize that 
"His mercy endureth forever." (Ps. 136.) It will open and warm 
your heart and enrich it with love, both for your Father and for 
those who are the objects of His care and love. 



R131 : page 8 

RESTITUTION--FOR WHOM? 

Restitution signifies the restoring of a thing which was lost. 
You might give a person anything, whether he had once 
possessed it or not; but it would be quite improper to call it 
restoring unless he had once possessed and then lost it. The 
human family once possessed a perfect mental, moral and 
physical nature as represented in the person of Adam their head. 
Beautiful and majestic in form, God-like in the mental and 
moral qualities of his being (in God's image) and commissioned 
to be the King or God over all earthly creatures ("In our likeness 
let him have dominion over the beasts, foul, fish," etc.) he stands 
before us the picture of human perfection. He passes the 
inspection of the great Jehovah and is pronounced a "very good" 
man. He was not a God— no it had not been God's purpose to 
make another God, but a man: "Let us make man in our image. " 
We should not suppose that to be mentally and morally in God's 
image means that we will have the same mental and moral 



capacity; but, our justice, mercy, love, truth, and powers of 
reasoning, deciding, etc., while limited in capacity are the same 
in kind, as the justice, love, etc., of God, so that he can say to us: 
"Come let us reason together. " 

But before Adam had ever learned to use his powers fully, sin 
entered, and death followed, degrading and destroying by its 
various agencies of sickness and vice the once noble form, and 
the perfection of his intellectual and moral faculties. 

We have seen that God foresaw the necessity of this victory of 
evil over man, that he might learn forever the lesson, that sin 
and death go hand in hand and both are his enemies; while 
obedience to God and life and happiness are indissolubly 
connected, and that God is his true and best friend. We see God, 
the loving Father permitting evil for man's good and taking 
advantage of its presence to prove to man His unalterable 
character, "the exceeding sinfulness of sin," the Justice of His 
Laws, The boundlessness of His mercy, "The exceeding riches 
of His grace," and "the great Love wherewith He loved us," by 
redeeming us from all sin through Jesus Christ. We have seen 
too, how that as through one man's disobedience the many were 
made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall the many be 
made righteous, (just). (Rom. 5:19) and that in His due time God 
intends to bring all men back to the condition of perfect 
manhood where they will again be "very good. " This is 
restitution, the restoring to mankind of the power, qualities, and 
things lost through the first Adam. 

We next inquire who will be restored, and answer all of Adam's 
family except "The Bride" of Christ, "The Virgins her 
companions follow her," and the few who commit the 
unpardonable sin, sinning willfully, after that they have received 
the knowledge of the truth, and who count the blood of the 
covenant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy thing. [Heb. 
10:26-29.] These three classes have made a covenant with God 
by which they renounced their rights to the benefits of 
restitution and the perfect fleshly condition. They declare that 
they will take up their cross and follow Jesus. Instead of living 
with the world they will become dead to the world. Instead of 
expecting a restitution of the flesh they agree to crucify the 
flesh. Why do they make this covenant? Because of the joy set 
before them in God's part of the covenant, which is, that if they 
thus die with Jesus to all earthly interests they shall be joint- 
heirs with him to a heavenly inheritance. If with Him we give up 
and crucify the human nature, we shall be made partakers with 
Him of the divine nature. Those who do not enter this covenant 
to crucify the human nature retain it; and will be raised and 
restored to human perfection. Another thought is that now is the 
time to suffer and die with Him It cannot be done in the next 
age. For there is no death there, neither sorrow nor suffering - 
for the former things are passed away. This is the age of sin and 



evil and crucifying; the next will be for Glory and Restitution. 
[Rev. 21:4.] True, the restored family may come to the fountain 
and drink of the river of water of life freely, have an abundant 
supply of their life, yet it will be different from having 
immortality as a fountain of life, "springing up in YOU" so that 
you will never thirst, neither need come to that river to refresh 
yourself or to continue your life. 

So it is written, "If we suffer [death] with Him, we shall also 
reign with Him. " "If we be dead with Him we shall live with 
Him. " "If we suffer with Him, we shall be glorified together. " 
When?-answer -"Being made conformable unto His death; If 
by any means I might attain unto the [chief or first] resurrection 
from among the dead." Diag. Phil. 3:10. From the moment we 
enter into this covenant of death and life-suffering and glory 
with God, we begin the work of crucifying the human nature 
and God begins also at the same time to develop in us the divine 
nature by imparting to us the Holy Spirit. Once entered into, the 
covenant or agreement is unalterable, the matter is fixed and 
sealed. "Who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the 
Spirit in our hearts." [2 Cor. 1 :22.] We can never have part with 
the world in the restitution because by our covenant we have 
abandoned the human nature; the question with us now is, shall 
we continue to develop our new nature [which now is but an 
embryo condition] until at our birth [resurrection or translation] 
we come forth "spiritual bodies" like unto Christ's glorious 
body." 

Who will develop, this higher nature-many or few of those who 
enter the covenant? We answer: All of them, except those who 
openly ignore the value of the "blood of the covenant wherewith 
they were sanctified," i.e., set aside and ignore the value of 
Christ's death-as their ransom or purchase and we believe this 
will be a small number. 

So to speak, Jesus enters the covenant for us. He agrees to 
guarantee that our part of the contract shall be fulfilled. All such 
sealed ones are set apart, from the world and dealt with 
differently; even as our's is a different hope and calling from the 
world's. We have been begotten of God, are now in our embryo 
condition; and all will ultimately come to birth in His likeness 
who abide under the blood of the covenant, but if any of these 
members of "the household of faith" go forth from their house 
upon which is the blood of the Paschal Lamb, these will be 
destroyed. (Ex. 12:22,23.) 

We see then, that the only ones who do not reach the birth 
[resurrection] among all who are begotten and sealed by the 
Spirit are those who renounce the "blood of the covenant" and 
withdraw themselves from its protection, they sin against light, 
knowledge, and against the Spirit's direction and leading 
therefore it is called "The sin against the Holy Ghost which hath 
never forgiveness." 



Aside from these, the entire household of faith being begotten of 
the Spirit are all, children of God; and are all ultimately to reach 
his likeness. "He who begun the good work in us will complete 
it. " But there will be a difference in our positions according to 
the way in which we "run the race set before us." All who run 
will ultimately reach the end of the race, but the prize, of our 
high calling in Christ Jesus will be obtained only by those who 
"so run that they may obtain." This prize is to be the Bride of 
Christ, to be made one with Him, and therefore, to "Sit with 
Him in His throne" and to "inherit all things." 

In what way, do we become overcomers and gain the victory, 
and win the prize of being part of the Bride? By presenting our 
bodies a living sacrifice, by crucifying our fleshly will and 
nature, becoming dead, so that our own will, will neither be 
known nor done by us, but in everything we must seek to know 
and do the will of Christ. When dead, you will seek to eat, drink, 
talk and be clothed, not as the world might dictate, nor your own 
tastes desire, but according to the best information you can 
obtain of the will of God concerning you. This is a 

R132 : page 8 

hard work and it involves much pain to the old nature to be thus 
crucified and ignored. It is so difficult a task that we never could 
accomplish it unaided. But we hear the voice of Him that saith: 
"My grace is sufficient for thee." "Seek and ye shall find." "This 
is the victory that overcometh the world, even your faith. " 
According to our faith in God we draw supplies of strength. We 
desire to overcome, we seek his grace, we find it and as we 
become daily more filled with the new divine nature the victory 
over the old nature becomes more easy. This is the first 
company, the bride-the body. Like their head, Jesus they have 
been willing sacrifices. 

The second or great company are of the household also. They 
have made the covenant to die, but poor frail humanity shrinks 
from becoming a "speckled bird," a target for this world's sneers 
and ridicule. They love the favor of God and the favor of man 
also. They restrain themselves from presumptuous sins, and 
console themselves that they are far better than many others. 
They have not the power of faith to lay hold of God's promised 
assistance. "How can ye believe who receive honor one of 
another and seek not, the honor that cometh from God only. " 
(Matt. 5:44.) Thus "through fear of death they are all their 
lifetime subject to bondage;" these will be freed from their 
bondage soon; they are to go into the time of trouble, be 
"delivered over to Satan (the adversary) for the destruction of 
the flesh (which they would not willingly crucify) that the spirit 
may be saved. " They love the present world, to some extent, 
therefore do not overcome it. But Jesus, who became the surety 
for all believers, will not suffer the Divine nature begun in them 
to become extinct. 



Oh, how great and loving is the plan of God. How grand the 
prospect of restitution for the world, to the likeness of Perfect 
Earthly man. But how much grander our hope of being elevated 
from this to the "new creation." Who would not lay aside every 
weight, and run with patience for the prize of our high calling in 
Christ Jesus. 



R132 : page 8 

Correspondents' Questions. 

Bro. R.-In what sense do you consider Christ our substitute? 
Since you believe that when the Saints are made immortal they 
give up their flesh life as Christ gave up his, they needed no 
substitute. And since the sinner will die the second death it 
cannot be that he has a substitute. 

Ans.— I seldom use the word substitute now because it does not 
occur in our English translation of the Bible, I prefer to use the 
Bible words purchase and ransom which mean exactly the same 
thing. All men were sinners through Adam's disobedience. The 
seeds of sin and its result death had been sown in our race and 
we daily became more weak and sinful. All must die, and the 
process- "dying thou shalt die" is in progress. There is no way 
by which we can keep ourselves alive, much less make 
ourselves alive when we become entirely dead. We can never 
justify ourselves to life, consequently can never live again. 

At this juncture Jesus steps in- Does he set aside the Father's 
law which had condemned all the sinful race to death? No, but 
recognizing death as the righteous penalty of sin; he paid that 
penalty for us. Being, "without sin," "holy," "undefiled," he was 
not liable to the penalty of sin-death He had a perfect right to 
continue his earthly life forever; but instead he gave it for, i.e., 
instead of ours that had been forfeited. So that now God can 
give back perfect natural life to the whole race, and he declares 
that he will do so in His "due time." Thus did Jesus make 
himself "a propitiation -[satisfaction] for our sins, and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world, so that, as 
death passed upon all the human race through Adam, life is to be 
restored to all in "the times of restitution of all things," because 
Jesus Christ "gave himself a ransom for all men. " 

Jesus informs His church of the purchase and tells them that 
soon all will be restored, but offers to admit them to the Spiritual 
plane of life if they will now freely give up the natural life- 
make a sacrifice of it. They could not offer a sacrifice of their 
natural life until it was purchased for them, because they were 
already dead. Jesus purchased our lives, then hands them to us 
saying: Do what you wish with them— here is the great prize, if 
you crucify yourselves. And we do so gladly for the prize set 



before us in the Gospel— For ye were bought with a price, even 
the precious blood of Christ. 

What about the sinner who will die the second death? We 
answer, the fact that he dies the second death on account of his 
own sins is clear proof that he must have been ransomed from 
the first death which was the result of Adam's sin. 


