Prisoner Rehabilitation​—Can It Succeed?
“I CONSIDER myself completely free! I am free of the darkness that formerly held me.”
“Every day of my life is happy!”
These are expressions of two inmates of the Iwahig Penal Colony in the Philippines. Both were convicted of murder, and have spent long years in prison. But they have found something that has brought them more joy than anything that they possessed during their previous years of freedom.
THE IWAHIG PRISON
The Iwahig Prison and Penal Colony​—to give it its full title—​is different from many other prisons. It is situated on the island of Palawan, the long island in the Philippine chain that stretches southwest into the China Sea. The prison includes 95,410 acres (38,612 hectares), and provides accommodations for about 5,000 inmates. However, these are called colonos (those who inhabit a colony) rather than prisoners.
Throughout most of the prison area there are no high walls or bars. There are no armed guards, and many inmates move about quite freely. Some do not wear uniforms. Most live in dormitories and work at producing the principal crops of the colony: rice, corn, copra, lumber, rattan and a small variety of bamboo.
The colonos receive a small cash gratuity each month, which they can augment in such ways as by making and selling handicrafts. A few, who have shown themselves trustworthy and can support their families, are allowed to bring them into the colony to live. These families live in duplex apartments; they are given necessary provisions free, and may grow crops or raise livestock to help to defray expenses.
Discipline is maintained, but the colonos are given greater freedom as they prove themselves trustworthy. Some even help in running the colony. Additionally, training in different skills is supplied, and illiterates are taught basic reading, writing and arithmetic. Leisure activities are allowed, including swimming, various competitive sports, music programs and picnics, while some religious meetings are permitted on Sundays.
Over the years Iwahig has been a fertile ground for the disciple-making work of Jehovah’s Witnesses. But how did this activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses get started?
PREACHING WORK INSIDE IWAHIG
Many persons have been involved in this activity over the years, and Domingo Obispo was one of the first.a He was serving a long sentence in Muntinlupa prison near Manila, and began to attend meetings held in that prison by a local elder of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Eventually he accepted what he was learning from the Bible and became a Witness. Then, when he was transferred to Iwahig, he shared what he had learned with others.
In another instance, a man who had been one of Jehovah’s Witnesses was disfellowshiped from his congregation because of bad conduct. He committed a very serious crime and was imprisoned. In prison he started to repent, just like King Manasseh of old. (2 Chron. 33:10-13) Finally, when this man was transferred to Iwahig, he contacted the elders in the nearby Puerto Princesa Congregation, and they could see that his repentance was genuine. Therefore he was accepted back as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and he began preaching in the colony.
Then there was the man who escaped from Iwahig. He went to a town in Palawan and started living as a private citizen. One of Jehovah’s Witnesses preached to him, and the escaped convict believed what he heard. Then his conscience began to bother him, so he consulted an elder in the congregation. What should he do?
The Christian elder gave him advice based on the apostle Paul’s words at Romans chapter 13, verse one. He was shown that it was the responsibility of a true Christian to pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar. Hence, accompanied by some Christian friends, he went back to the colony and surrendered himself. Now he is a trustworthy prisoner and has been assigned as a teacher of other inmates. He is using this assignment as an opportunity to spread the message of true Christianity.
Most of those who are now becoming Jehovah’s Witnesses in Iwahig have been reached by the preaching done right inside the colony. One of the men was handed the tract Is This All There Is to Life? Surprised to find Jehovah’s Witnesses active in prison, he agreed to a Bible study using the study aid The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. Responding to the things that he learned, the man gradually changed his life until he qualified for Christian baptism.
Actual house-to-house (or dormitory-to-dormitory) preaching is forbidden in the colony. However, twice a week a “head count” is held, and on these occasions all are gathered together to check that no one is missing. This is the time used by the Witnesses to preach to their fellow inmates. Bible studies are conducted with them under the trees or in the grandstand of the plaza.
Also, on Sundays Christian elders from the Puerto Princesa Congregation are allowed to conduct a Bible study inside the prison, using the Watchtower magazine as a study aid. Interested persons are invited to attend. Previously these meetings were held in the prison library, but the administration, appreciative of the work being done by Jehovah’s Witnesses, has now arranged to have a large Kingdom Hall built, at the colony’s expense.
Recently the authorities have allowed certain colonos to attend the circuit assemblies of Jehovah’s Witnesses held outside the prison. The elders from the nearby congregation accept responsibility for these persons, and the inmates are accompanied by only one unarmed guard. They wear civilian clothes and are not manacled. At each of the last three circuit assemblies, some of these men were baptized. In May 1977, two of the 12 who attended were immersed. The other Witnesses at the assemblies are always delighted to associate with their Christian brothers from Iwahig.
SUCCESSFUL REHABILITATION
The result of the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses has been a complete reformation of certain hardened criminals. Although it is often true that men return to their lives of crime after leaving prison, many of these have completely changed. In the words of the apostle Paul, they have been “washed clean.”​—1 Cor. 6:11.
The permanence of the reformation is seen in the experience of one man who, after serving a 15-year sentence for murder, was released and became a pioneer, as Jehovah’s Witnesses call full-time preachers. Others who have been released have progressed to become respected elders in the Christian congregation with which they associate.
The objective of the Iwahig Penal Colony is particularly “reformation,” rather than “punishment.” Hence, the members of the administration are delighted at the changes that they see in those inmates who have become Jehovah’s Witnesses. One penal supervisor exclaimed: “I wish all the inmates here were Jehovah’s Witnesses!”
The Acting Security Officer of the colony said: “I want this religion to have many converts here, because I have observed that the moment they become Jehovah’s Witnesses I see many good things in their habits and traits.
“That member of yours, Sanchez, he was the number one troublemaker here​—a drunkard, heavy smoker and full of vices. He was a pain in my neck. How he had the courage to change is something I do not know. All I know is that he became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and that was it!”
WHY THE CHANGE?
What is it that turns murderers, rapists, arsonists and assassins into good-living Christians? According to the men themselves, it is the reforming power of God’s Word and the good association with godly people. One commented that he was attracted by the Bible’s promise of everlasting life, and that God would wipe out every tear from the eyes of suffering mankind, as well as remove sickness and death. (John 5:24; Rev. 21:4) Since he had seen the bad side of life, these promises appealed to his heart.
Another commented that a true Christian brotherly love exists among the inmates who have become Jehovah’s Witnesses, and this is what attracted him. Now he says that he wants to strive to be “a good servant of Jehovah God.”
Others said that when they associated with Jehovah’s Witnesses, it was the first time in their whole lives that they had been treated like decent people. The reality of this love is seen in the case of one inmate at the time that he was to be released. He said that “his eyes filled with tears” because he had to part from his beloved Christian brothers.
So, even in prison, the power of the Bible to heal hearts and change people is being dramatically demonstrated. As they come into the light of God’s Word, these men, who have been incarcerated for previous wrongdoing, experience the real freedom that Jesus promised when he said: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) They are grateful for the loving-kindness of their God, Jehovah, who has permitted them to find true liberty and lasting rehabilitation even while they are in prison. You will enjoy reading the following first-person experience of one of these men.
[Footnotes]
You can read the first-person experience of Domingo Obispo beginning on page 8 of this magazine.

