Hawaii
1991 Yearbook Report
ON July 12, 1776, the ship Resolution set sail from Plymouth, England, in search of the fabled Northwest Passage​—a shortcut between Europe and Asia. At the helm stood a tall, fine-looking son of a Scots farmhand with the light of discovery in his eyes​—Captain James Cook.
Although unknown to him, this, his third world-circling voyage, was to be his last. After revisiting New Zealand, he sailed northeast to Tonga, then Tahiti. Leaving Tahiti, Cook navigated where few explorers had ventured, into North Pacific waters. There he made a great discovery​—a group of islands that he named the Sandwich Islands, in honor of his nobleman friend in the Admiralty.
When Cook and his crew landed in 1778, they became the first Europeans to set foot on the sands of those islands and were surprised to be reverentially greeted by natives from a highly developed aristocracy of Polynesians. However, a year later, Cook was killed during an altercation with the natives. Today, that string of volcanic islands has become the crossroads of the Pacific. They are the Hawaiian Islands.
Lying on the northern margin of the Tropics, this lovely archipelago of 132 islands, reefs, and shoals laces the mid-Pacific from southeast to northwest for a span of 1,523 miles [2,451 km]. Its seven main inhabited islands are Niihau, Kauai, Oahu, Molokai, Lanai, Maui, and Hawaii (called the Big Island).
From cascading waterfalls to snow-covered volcanic peaks, the enchanting loveliness of these islands has been told and retold in music, poetry, paintings, and motion pictures. Indeed, for millions the name Hawaii excites images of coconut palms swaying in tropical breezes and gentle ocean waves caressing ivory beaches. What a pleasant reminder of man’s universal longing for the beauty of paradise! However, the real beauty of Hawaii exists in other “desirable things,” namely in Jehovah’s meek, sheeplike people who inhabit a spiritual paradise. (Hag. 2:7) This is their story.
Grisly Rituals of the Past
Pagan religion with a fear-inspiring priesthood and deified kings reigned supreme among the first Polynesian inhabitants. If a person broke religious taboos, death was often the penalty. But, interestingly, cities of refuge provided sanctuary. For centuries the worship of many gods, along with the practice of offering human sacrifices, kept religion constantly to the fore in old Hawaii.
Into this atmosphere Protestant missionaries arrived from the east coast of the United States during the 1820’s. Shocked by the social life and religious rituals of the natives, these first missionaries brought great changes to the islands. One of these changes was putting the graceful Hawaiian language into writing. Soon, the Bible and other textbooks were printed. Also, efforts were initiated to educate the populace in Western ways. In a short time, Protestantism became the de facto religion, replacing the pagan priesthood of the past. In 1827 the first Catholic missionaries arrived in Hawaii. Then, immigrating Chinese and Japanese laborers brought with them their native Asian beliefs. So, by the end of the 19th century, the religious life of the Hawaiian peoples encompassed Protestantism, Catholicism, Buddhism, Taoism, and Shinto.
Advanced in Ethnic Cooperation
During this time many nationalities melded into the Hawaiian makeup and altered its culture. The ancient Hawaiians were a tall, strong-boned, rugged people of Polynesian extraction, with amber skin, large brown eyes, and thick dark-brown or black hair. After Captain James Cook’s landing in the late 18th century, successive waves of immigrants from China, Japan, Okinawa, Korea, the Philippines, the Portuguese islands of Madeira and the Azores, Puerto Rico, Spain, Scandinavia, and Germany sought a better life and came as indentured laborers on the sprawling sugar plantations. This ethnic mixture was enhanced during the 20th century by an increasing influx of people from Samoa and other Pacific islands, but after 1930, most came from mainland United States.
Hawaii’s colorful cross section of humanity has successfully blended over the years. Nearly 40 percent of all new marriages are interracial, resulting in a cosmopolitan mix of people that is a startling fascination to many a visitor. Yet, despite their varied backgrounds, people in Hawaii are generally good-natured and friendly. This, coupled with the tropical environs and generally sunny weather, has made Hawaii a delightful vacation resort. It was among such interesting and congenial people that Jehovah’s Witnesses would reap a grand harvest in this time of the end.
Visit by President
In 1912, with waters churning, the steamship Shinyo Maru chugged into Honolulu Harbor and docked. On board was the first president of the Watch Tower Society, Charles T. Russell, who had embarked on a tour around the world.
After visiting the Kamehameha Schools and Mid-Pacific Institute, he noted his observations in the April 15, 1912, issue of The Watch Tower: “We inquired respecting Christian instruction and were informed that the attempt to give it would alienate the pupils and thus cause the disruption of the schools. . . . It is our opinion that the work in Hawaii is a good one, viewed from the humanitarian standpoint, but an utter failure viewed from the standpoint of Christianization. So far as we could discern, faith in the Redeeming blood of Jesus, in his resurrection and in his coming kingdom have never been taught.”
Sowing the First Seeds
In 1915 Walter Bundy, a pilgrim (as a traveling minister was called back then), asked Ellis Wilburn Fox to accompany him and his wife on a trip to Honolulu, Hawaii, offering to pay his fare. Brother Fox accepted the invitation, leaving his job as the head operator of a motion-picture theater in Vancouver, B.C. Brother Bundy and his wife, as well as Brother Fox, traveling by steamship from Vancouver to Honolulu, ventured to sow the first seeds of truth among the friendly, neighborly Hawaiians. In their baggage was a small hand-operated printing press to be used for producing handbills to advertise the public talks these two brothers were planning to give. Brother Fox expected to stay in Honolulu only a few weeks and then return to his well-paying job in Vancouver. Little did he know, however, that the few weeks would turn into seven years.
On the first Sunday in February 1915, the first meeting of the Bible Students (as Jehovah’s Witnesses were called at that time) was held in a room of a hotel on the corner of Fort and Beretania streets in Honolulu, with five people in attendance: the Bundys, Ellis Fox, and an interested man and his wife.
On ship a day or two before they reached Honolulu, the three agreed that the one who could obtain a job first would provide for the other two. Brother Bundy, a pianist, got work immediately in a music store.
Regarding those early days, Ellis recalled: “We prepared for a public lecture each Sunday. Walter would write up the announcement for the next Sunday’s talk, while my job was to set type, print handbills, and try to cover as much of Honolulu as I could each week. That brother seemed never to run out of public talks.”
Sensing Ellis’ apprehensions about public speaking, Walter would take him to the park, where they would work at improving his grammar and speech. As Ellis later said, “Very patiently he tried to rub some of himself off on me.”
Working With the First Group
This training was necessary and invaluable, for at the end of 1915, Brother Russell had Walter Bundy return to take up another assignment in mainland United States. Ellis Fox remained in Honolulu as the one and only elder for the small group of newly interested ones. It was then that he came to the realization that he would not be returning to his lucrative job in Canada in the immediate future. But he was enthusiastic about the truth and had the proper attitude toward staying in Honolulu and putting Kingdom interests ahead of those of a material nature.
Ellis also proved to be modest and humble in caring for his responsibilities during those early days. The study of Tabernacle Shadows was difficult. Recognizing his limited experience, he would, in open view, lay down paper and pencil and announce that for any questions that the group could not answer, a written note would be made of the question, and during the next week, each one could do some research on it. But as you might expect, most of the research was left for Brother Fox to do, and he had to work hard to come up with correct answers.
Witnessing as a Taxi Driver
A piece of chalk and a taxi, a curious combination with which to broadcast the Kingdom message​—but not for Ellis Fox. While working as a taxi driver, Brother Fox would witness to other drivers. Using chalk to write on the pavement, he illustrated Jehovah’s promises and explained Bible chronology, such as the length of the Gentile Times, thus fostering many questions that resulted in lively discussions.
Another driver, James Harrub, enthusiastic about those Bible truths, requested further reading material. After racing through the books “New Creation” and other books in the set of Studies in the Scriptures, he was convinced that the message they contained was without doubt the truth of God’s inspired Word.
By 1918 Ellis was conducting a Bible study regularly with James and his wife, Dora. Dora, an Episcopalian, had her interest sparked by a newspaper clipping given to her husband by Ellis. It carried an account of the debate between a “Reverend” Troy and the second president of the Watch Tower Society, Joseph F. Rutherford, during which Brother Rutherford successfully exposed the doctrines of Trinity, hellfire, and immortality of the soul as unscriptural. Sparked by this little tidbit, she began her more than 50 years of serious study and application of the Scriptures.
First Disciples Baptized
When James Harrub expressed his desire to be baptized, Brother Fox obtained permission to use an old church that was vacant and that had its baptistery under a trapdoor. However, the sheet-metal tank leaked like a sieve. After doing their best to patch the holes with a soldering iron, they found the tank would hold the desired water level only if the tap was turned on full. Brother Fox related: “I had finished giving the baptism talk and was standing down in the water waiting for James to come out of the dressing room when something happened that came as a complete surprise to me. That lovely, sharp-eyed little Dora Harrub got down so she could whisper in my ear without the others hearing and asked, ‘Ellis, can I get baptized too?’ ‘Of course, you can! Get in there and get your clothes changed.’ What a thrilling experience for both her husband and me!” Thus, the first two Christian disciples in Hawaii were baptized on November 19, 1919.
The group of Bible Students moved their meeting place from the Leonard Hotel, where Ellis was living, to the home of the Harrubs on Spreckles Street in Honolulu. Nine persons regularly attended the Wednesday “prayer, praise and testimony” discussions and the Sunday Watchtower Study.
From Freemason to Witness
During World War I, Brother Fox worked as manager of a local business. One Sunday morning, at his home in Honolulu, he received a call from David Solomon. Mr. Solomon, operating a garage at a local military post, requested supplies and inquired if Ellis would open the store to fill his order, and this Ellis consented to do.
Brother Fox recalls: “As he drove me to the store, he remarked that I must be a Mason to be so accommodating. On being informed that I was a minister with the local Bible Students, he asked, ‘Do you ever give talks outside your own church?’ I answered, ‘Yes, if invited.’ Then he informed me that he was the master of the Masonic lodge at Fort Schofield and invited me to speak there. Of course, I did not tell him that I had never given a public talk. I prepared and used a chart similar to the one found at the front of Volume I of the Studies in the Scriptures. Preparing for and giving that first public talk gave me a chance to put into practice some of what I had learned from Walter Bundy.”
David Solomon thereafter met regularly with the small group of Bible Students. In spite of stiff opposition, he later resigned from the Masonic order and was baptized by Brother Fox.
Changing Places at Sunday School
Always innovative and having great initiative, Brother Fox was ever alert to opportunities to spread the truth. For example, with considerable boldness, he would venture into churches and Sunday schools. During the services, he would raise doctrinal questions, thus creating an opportunity right in the church to witness to attending members.
One Sunday he entered a church where, in the absence of the regular minister, a certain Mr. Elder was conducting a lesson on Matthew chapter 24. Brother Fox then proceeded to ask questions and give Scriptural comments concerning the material under consideration. Mr. Elder was so impressed that in the presence of all, he asked Brother Fox if he would please change places with him. Fine discussions ensued in this Sunday school class until the minister returned, and he, needless to say, quickly put an end to that arrangement. Mr. Elder, in turn, left the church and opened his downtown store one evening each week for the group of Bible Students to use for a Bible study.
In 1922 circumstances developed that required Brother Fox to leave the Hawaiian Islands and move to California. Entrusting the work to James Harrub and the remaining ones, he left with the confidence that the preaching work was established on a small but solid foundation.
From Italy to Hawaii
It was in 1923 that the Society dispatched O. E. Rosselli of Italy on a round-the-world trip to encourage the use of The Harp of God, a book designed to help the beginner in Bible study. One of his stops was Hawaii. Brother Rosselli was a live wire, zealous for the truth, and he visited every main island with the Harp, including the privately owned and usually restricted island of Niihau.
Brother Rosselli also strengthened the small group of Hawaiian brothers by relating heartwarming experiences enjoyed during his travels. Among those he witnessed to was Amy Ing, while she was working in her father’s store in Honolulu. He placed with her a set of Studies in the Scriptures, which she would treasure for years to come. She married Harry Lu, and both became stalwart supporters of Kingdom truth.
He Was a Buddhist
Kameichi Hanaoka and Albert Kinoshita were among those attending the Bible study meetings being held in the home of the Harrubs. The small seeds of truth sown in their hearts caused them to blossom into big trees of faith. These two Japanese-speaking brothers participated in the formation of the first Japanese-language study, organized in 1924. Both of them endured in Kingdom service for the rest of their lives. Brother Hanaoka helped to open up the work in Japan after World War II, completing 20 years of full-time service there by the time of his death in 1971.
James Nako, of Okinawan descent, was a strong Buddhist, which was true of the rest of his family. While he was browsing through a bookstore in Honolulu one day, a Bible captured his attention, and he began reading it but without much understanding. It was enough, however, to impel him to leave Buddhism and join the Makiki Congregational Church.
James said: “I read that a Japanese lecture would be given at the Nuuanu YMCA in Honolulu on the subject ‘Millions Now Living Will Never Die.’ This was something so different from what I had heard before, so I decided to attend. Since the advertisement invited us to bring our Bibles, I did so. I was very impressed with the speaker, who answered from the Bible all the questions asked. I filled out a slip of paper saying that I wanted to study the Bible.” This led him to the group study of 12 persons that comprised all the Bible Students associating together in 1926. James Nako progressed quickly and was baptized in July 1927.
In describing what it was like witnessing in Honolulu in 1927, Brother Nako related: “I owned an old junk Model T Ford, which had to be started by a hand crank. I would load the trunk with supplies of The Golden Age and The Watchtower in Japanese. The magazines had been translated from English into Japanese in Japan and were shipped to us for only the cost of the shipping freight. We distributed them free, asking people if they would like to study the Bible. I recall that Brother Hanaoka and I received about a thousand magazines a month for distribution.”
The “Rascal” Boys
Working as a cook on Sundays prevented James from sharing in field service, so he decided to go into business for himself. This, however, proved to be very time-consuming and resulted in his becoming inactive spiritually.
Nevertheless, he was very much concerned about the spiritual welfare of his family. For this reason he asked one of the brothers, James Watson, to study the Bible with his family, which Brother Watson did faithfully and patiently.
“When it was time to study,” Brother Nako remembered, “my two rascal boys, Richard and Tommy, would climb out the bedroom window and hide outside. My oldest daughter, Adeline, and I would comb the area and usually find them down the street at a park.” To this day, Adeline is serving in the missionary field in Japan as are the two “rascal” boys and their wives.
Did their father ever become active again in Kingdom witnessing? Yes, and he frequently auxiliary pioneered until his death in 1972. His widow, Alice, often shares in the auxiliary pioneer service in Honolulu.
But, let us go back to the time that family opposition developed from their Buddhist relatives because the Nakos’ Christian way of life departed so radically from what was traditionally accepted among the ancestor-worshiping Okinawans. Relatives could not understand why the Nakos would not participate in the seemingly small matter of burning incense at funerals and on other occasions in honor of the deceased. Relatives would ask, “Why do you believe that?” and before the Kingdom Hall was built in Honolulu in 1935, they would ridicule the Nakos, asking, “Where is your church?” However, James Nako and his wife were instrumental in helping a number of their relatives of three generations to come into the truth.
“A Fire Burning in My Bones”
Joseph Dos Santos, of Portuguese ancestry, was raised in Hawaii in a Roman Catholic home. By the tender age of 12, he had already lost faith in the church. After attending Berkeley Chiropractic College in California, in 1927 he moved to Inglewood, California. Sincerely searching for Bible truth, he spent his spare time listening to religious programs on the radio and visiting various churches but found these left him feeling empty, devoid of any satisfaction.
This feeling vanished when, in 1929, his landlady lent him a copy of The Golden Age dealing with the Catholic Inquisition. He said: “What I read in that magazine started to change my whole view of life. It began to fill the emptiness. A local Bible Student heard of my interest and supplied me with more literature. Soon I had no doubt that I had found the truth.”
During that year, he returned to Hawaii to practice chiropractic, and he continued to devour the Scriptural truths as explained in the Society’s literature. “As in the case of Jeremiah, Bible truth was like a fire burning in my bones,” he recalled. “And I could not keep quiet.” (Jer. 20:9) Although alone and without any contact with the other local Bible Students, he began of his own initiative to visit his neighbors at their homes in the Aiea district of Oahu. Eagerly, he organized a group study with a handful of immigrant workers from the Philippines, and by 1931 the attendance at the study had soared to 22. Since there was no literature in their dialect, Brother Dos Santos read scriptures from his English Bible and then had the students read them in their own Filipino Bibles.
This vigorous witnessing did not go unnoticed by the clergy. It did not take long for the Catholic priest in Aiea to start circulating a rumor that Brother Dos Santos was pupule (pronounced poo pooʹ lay, meaning “crazy” in Hawaiian). This led to his becoming known in the area as Pupule Joe.
One day, while visiting a friend, he was shocked at seeing the book Prophecy. He had honestly felt until this time that he was the only one in Hawaii possessing books from the Bible Students. He anxiously inquired of his friend how he had obtained the book. What a surprise and delight it was for him to learn of James Watson and the other five active Bible Students on the islands!
A Weighty Decision Made
“A time of decision in my life came,” related Brother Dos Santos. “I realized I had to make a definite decision, either to pursue my profession of chiropractic work, which could give temporary relief to physically ailing people, or to devote myself to the disciple-making work, which will result in man’s eternal benefit.” Confident in the words of Jesus about the kindly yoke of discipleship, he took the matter in prayer to Jehovah. (Matt. 11:29, 30) He could hardly wait to tell David Solomon (the Society’s depot overseer in Honolulu) that he had decided to devote himself to the preaching work and that he wanted to preach in the outer islands of Hawaii, thus leaving Honolulu for the other six Bible Students to cover. Even though no one had taken the good news outside of the island of Oahu, Brother Solomon was convinced of this young man’s determination and therefore built a house truck for his use in the colporteur work. So it was in 1929 that the full-time preaching career of Joseph Dos Santos began. He later remarked: “I went throughout the chain of islands of Hawaii in my 1927 Dodge truck for three and a half years, planting the seeds of truth without even one flat tire!”
Since the territory was vast and he was the lone worker, he concentrated on spreading the message primarily by literature placements. Describing what it was like, he wrote: “Because of the pace of the Kingdom work at that time, the Bible Students used big book bags or valises to carry spiritual ammunition. People were kind, and there were no insults or slamming of doors. It was like eating candy! People were glad to see you and quickly contributed a dollar for four books, which was the usual offer. I was then young and vigorous and could walk for miles on mountain trails and climb mountains with two valises full of literature, and I enjoyed many wonderful experiences. In some places the roads were so rough and rugged that I could neither drive the car nor walk, especially in the Kohala district on the Big Island. Sometimes I literally crawled to reach the homes. I even left a sizable amount of spiritual victuals for the lepers in the leper settlement on Molokai.”
He maintained a rigorous schedule, preaching six days a week and averaging 230 hours of service a month. In the three and a half years he spent working alone through the Hawaiian Island chain, he placed 46,000 pieces of literature.
On returning to Honolulu in 1933, Brother Dos Santos advised Brother Solomon that his next move was to go around the world with the good news. As matters turned out, however, he traveled only as far as the Philippines, where he spent almost 17 years. During that period, he withstood intense opposition, including three years of cruel imprisonment meted out by Japanese occupation forces during the second world war.
In 1949 Brother Dos Santos returned with his family to Hawaii, where he and his wife continued in the pioneer service until he finished his earthly course in 1983 at 88 years of age. His determination and fiery missionary zeal had considerable impact on the Kingdom work both in Hawaii and in the Philippines.
Branch Office and World’s First “Kingdom Hall”
After serving over eight years at Brooklyn Bethel, Don and Mabel Haslett were assigned to Honolulu in the spring of 1934 to assist the handful of active brothers to carry out their preaching assignment. In no time, a new branch office of the Watch Tower Society was established. Brother Haslett was appointed as its overseer. In the following year, the Watch Tower Society president, J. F. Rutherford, visited the islands and approved of purchasing property on the corner of Pensacola and Kinau streets in Honolulu as the site of the new branch office facilities. He also conducted the Memorial, which was held in a rented house on Young Street that had been used for meetings. A total of 25 persons were in attendance.
Noting a great potential for growth on the islands, Brother Rutherford also arranged to have the local brothers construct a meeting hall in connection with the new branch building. James Harrub approached him and asked, “What are you going to call this place when it is finished?” Brother Rutherford’s reply was, “Don’t you think we should call it ‘Kingdom Hall,’ since that is what we are doing, preaching the good news of the Kingdom?” Thus, in 1935, was coined the name that would designate the tens of thousands of meeting places of Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide. That little house of worship at 1228 Pensacola Street, which has since been expanded and renovated three times, holds the noteworthy distinction of being the first to be named Kingdom Hall.
“My Health Improved”
It was in January 1933 that James and Dora Harrub finally realized their long-awaited dream of entering the pioneer service. During their first year, they remained in Honolulu, awaiting the construction of the house trailer that was to become their pioneer home on wheels. After its completion, they moved to Maui, covering the island in six months, placing literature and using the phonograph to play recorded Bible lectures to the people. Next was the Big Island of Hawaii, where they spent an entire year covering the territory, but with minimal response.
Moving to the island of Kauai in 1936, they settled on the east side of the island near Kapaa. James loved the people there so much that he wrote to the Society and requested permission to make Kauai his permanent assignment. Permission was granted.
When James and Dora began to pioneer, both had poor health. Dora recalled: “My health improved with pioneering, and I didn’t worry about it.” With Jehovah’s help they went on to complete a lifetime of rich blessings, enjoying full-time service. The self-sacrificing spirit and absolute faith of this husband-and-wife team won them deep respect and love on Kauai, where many people still remember them fondly. After James’ death in 1954, Dora sold their home and, right in character, used the money to finance the construction of a Kingdom Hall in Kapaa on Kauai. She completed her earthly service as a regular pioneer, in August 1984 at 94 years of age. She and her husband had the grand hope of receiving their reward in the heavens.
Sound Car Spreads Message
Meanwhile, back in 1935 some brothers from Australia assisted the Hasletts in purchasing an automobile, a Plymouth, which was used as a fully equipped sound car. A loudspeaker mounted on top of the car would broadcast a public lecture in English, Japanese, Iloko, or Tagalog as the car cruised through the streets. During that year, over 17,000 persons heard the name Jehovah by means of such equipment. At the close of each lecture, house-to-house visits were made in the neighborhood, and the message was distributed in printed form.
This method of preaching came just in time as opposers, stirred up by Brother Rutherford’s visit to Honolulu in 1935, coerced the local radio station into dropping the broadcasts of Brother Rutherford’s lectures. However, it appears that a greater number of people were reached by means of the sound car than previously by radio.
A Pioneer Moves to Hawaii
Eddie Medalio arrived in Honolulu in 1936 to strengthen the small group of publishers. After his baptism in 1932 in Los Angeles, California, he wrote to the Society’s headquarters in Brooklyn about his desire to go to the Philippines at his own expense to preach full-time among his fellow countrymen in Manila. However, the Society suggested instead that he proceed to Hawaii and pioneer with the Hasletts in order to reach the many Filipino people there.
Eddie was a veteran of World War I, and he used his Navy bonus to pay his boat fare to Honolulu. Don and Mabel were so excited to receive help! They heartily welcomed Eddie and had him stay at the branch. Later, he married Eulalie, and the family left for their assignment in Hilo, where Eddie was appointed as overseer of that small congregation. While pioneering, the Medalios would cover many of the outlying towns and ethnic communities of workers on sugar plantations, called camps.
Eddie’s pioneer motto was: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart.” (Prov. 3:5) He would repeat these words to himself and others constantly throughout each day, and they would unfailingly be included in his admonition to young ones who sought out his advice. By his life course, it could be seen that he truly lived by those inspired words. He was unflagging in his zeal, full of zest for living and for worshiping Jehovah. Eddie was also fondly regarded for his good humor and positive spirit regardless of the problems he personally faced. His frequent and infectious cackling laughter was a trademark. Many young ones appreciated his deep and sincere interest in them and affectionately called him Grandpa.
Brother Medalio served as a regular pioneer until his death due to pneumonia and other complications on January 3, 1990. He was 93 years of age and had completed 58 years of whole-souled service to Jehovah. Till the end he was still sharp of mind and single-minded in his devotion to Jehovah. On the last field service report he submitted, just two days before his death, he wrote: “My spirit is willing, but my flesh is getting weaker. I keep praying for Jehovah’s help.”
The brothers in Hawaii have truly been blessed by their association with such anointed brothers of Christ, many of whom expended their life’s energies in being used by Jehovah to pioneer the Kingdom work. After a lifetime of such service, it could truly be said of them: “Happy are the dead who die in union with the Lord from this time onward. Yes, says the spirit, let them rest from their labors, for the things they did go right with them.”​—Rev. 14:13.
Birth of Second Congregation
Outstandingly, in 1939, the number of publishers increased to 30, compared with 18 the year before. A second congregation was formed, in Hilo.
The witnessing work intensified, with information marches of publishers wearing sandwich boards advertising recorded lectures held in Hilo and in Honolulu. The spiritual feeding program enjoyed by Jehovah’s people also included the shortwave transmission of Brother Rutherford’s talks received at the Honolulu Kingdom Hall and on the outer islands. Since there were so few people in the islands who had taken their stand for Jehovah, it was of such encouragement to hear the message of truth going out on such a tremendous scale.
Pearl Harbor Attack
“A station-wagon load of us were headed for a day of witnessing in Pearl City, just past Pearl Harbor,” said Mabel Haslett concerning December 7, 1941. “We were turned back at Pearl Harbor Road by the police and clouds of billowing smoke. War!” The Japanese armed forces had launched their devastating air attack on Pearl Harbor that made a shambles of the American fleet docked there. Mabel continued: “A few days after December 7, there was a knock on the door. Four men armed with pistols took Don to military headquarters for questioning. Martial law was in force. As one after another of the officers shot questions at him, Don would answer from the Scriptures. One said angrily, ‘Leave the Bible out of this!’ But Don replied, ‘I can’t​—it’s my defense.’ Finally, the one in charge stood up, apparently satisfied, and well after ‘blackout’ time they brought Don home. . . . Although we were occasionally harassed, the work progressed.”
With World War II came fuel rationing, evening blackouts, curfews, and shipping difficulties. Despite these problems, the little group of publishers and pioneers that were scattered throughout the islands persisted in the preaching work. In fact, pioneer couple James and Dora Harrub wrote to the branch office in 1942: “Before Pearl Harbor, many took literature, but the majority refused to believe that any serious trouble would reach Hawaii. That is all changed now, and often questions are asked about the immediate future, etc. When they are told that the WATCH TOWER publications will answer all their questions, they are glad to get them.”
Molokai and a 50-Pound [20 kg] Load
It was just after learning the truth in Honolulu and after the bombing of Pearl Harbor that Harold Gale received his first pioneer assignment. He reports: “My assignment was the island of Molokai, where I had never been before. All alone with only a suitcase, I didn’t even know where I would stay the first night. But with Jehovah’s help, I was able to stay in the home of one of the most prominent Hawaiians on the island. He later arranged for me to rent a large house on an acre [less than half a hectare] of land, with 16 coconut palms on it, for only $7 per month. It was right across from the beach, about five miles [8 km] south of the port town of Kaunakakai.”
Not having any means of transportation, Gale would walk up to 18 miles [30 km] a day lugging a 50-pound [20 kg] load that included a suitcase of books, booklets, and magazines in up to six languages and a phonograph with 11 records in just as many languages. Many times the Filipinos asked to buy the records and even wanted to buy the phonograph. Later, a bicycle was sent to Gale by a brother on Oahu, and he was able to cover about 40 miles [60 km] in a day. Norman Chock, a Chinese brother, came to pioneer with him, bringing his Willys sedan. Though permitted only ten gallons [38 L] of gas a month because of wartime rationing, they covered the length and breadth of the island like real troupers. In three months’ time, they were conducting 18 Bible studies.
On the north side of the island is situated the isolated Kalaupapa leper colony, accessible only by boat or plane or by descending a 2,000-foot [600 m] pali, or cliff. Brother Gale recalls: “Carrying two suitcases of books, I took the steep trail and placed 65 copies of the Children book with Mr. Anderson, who was in charge and who promised to pass them on to the lepers that I could not contact personally.”
On the Big Island of Hawaii
Among those coming into the truth during those turbulent war years were Shinichi and Masako Tohara. Brother Tohara first obtained literature in 1935 and watched the Witnesses in 1938 walking the streets of Hilo with sandwich boards. Ralph Garoutte later began studying with him, and after just one month of study, Shinichi began witnessing to his friends during lunch hour at his job, the sake (rice wine) brewery in Hilo.
Remembering his first taste of house-to-house witnessing, he says: “One morning in March 1942, I prepared a book bag, filling it to the brim with literature. I was determined to go out witnessing with my son Loy. I went to the first house and knocked at the door, but my heart was knocking harder. I do not remember just how I got through this first call. But I did not have the courage to continue to the next house, so I went home.” After he received assistance from more-seasoned Witnesses, his apprehensions soon faded away. During the next month, he took a week’s leave from work to join the pioneers working in distant Waimea and Kohala. He had one joyful time! On April 19, 1942, he and his wife were baptized in the calm Pacific waters of Hilo Bay.
Reminded of Jesus’ parable of the traveling merchant who promptly sold the things he had in order to obtain the pearl of high value, just one month after their baptism the Toharas sold their household goods and began building a house trailer. By June they received their first pioneer assignment, in Pahala, a rural district in the volcanic area of the Big Island of Hawaii. After working this remote area, they were transferred to the district of Kona, where they trekked numerous mountain trails to witness to the humble coffee farmers.
“Caesar Says We Can’t Build”
The Honolulu Kingdom Hall began bursting at the seams with increasing attendance. Since it was obvious that a larger meeting place was required, it seemed logical to add an extension to this building, the first in the world to be designated “Kingdom Hall.” But in 1943 building materials were scarce and Hawaii was under martial law. It was for this reason that the military government said no to the extension.
Mabel Haslett recalled, “When I came home one day, Don was sitting, serious, a letter in his hand. It was an authorization from Brother Knorr, the Society’s new president, to build a new Kingdom Hall on the property back of the branch. Don said: ‘Caesar says we can’t build. Jehovah’s organization says, “Build.” Of course, we build.’”
Empowered by Jehovah’s spirit, the brothers overcame the obstacles, working day and night, bringing sand from the beaches and rocks from the mountains. Discarded steel rails were purchased at a minimal price from Oahu Railway Company, and scrap lumber from the dump was used for building cement forms.
Even the sisters toiled tirelessly, chipping rust from the rails, then painting them. A friend of Harry Lu lent a gasoline-powered welder, and in spite of gasoline rationing, there was always enough fuel to weld the steel rails into trusses.
One of the volunteers, Harold Gale, remembered: “We asked a contractor what this building project would have cost if contracted and how much time would have been needed to construct it. He stated that it was worth about $17,000 and would take a year and a half to build. After the building was completed, we calculated the actual cost to be about $700, including meals for 65 brothers; and it took the brothers three months to complete it!”
First Missionaries Arrive
The brotherhood emerged from the second world war in a spiritually prosperous condition. In 1946 there was a peak of 129 publishers, more than double the number at the time of the Pearl Harbor attack some five years earlier. During the year, 38 new ones were immersed.
Very crucial in this period following the war was the visit by Nathan H. Knorr and Milton G. Henschel from the Society’s headquarters in New York. During this visit, it was suggested that missionaries trained at the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead be sent to Hawaii to accelerate the work.
On their arrival on September 27, 1947, Martha Hess and Ruth Ulrich, graduates of the seventh class of Gilead, received the traditional Hawaiian welcome at the pier, with lilting Hawaiian music as played by the Royal Hawaiian Band and with swaying hula girls. The brothers and sisters were so elated by the coming of the missionaries that they loaded them down with flower leis.
The sincere and conscientious work by these two missionaries would be a welcome sweet odor to the Hawaiian people compared to Christendom’s missionaries, who had left a sour taste. Martha recalls hearing a local comedian say bitterly, “The first missionaries came to the islands, gave you a Bible, and told you to look up to the great God in heaven, and while you were looking up, they took all your land away from you.”
At the time of the arrival of the two Gilead graduates, the 129 publishers in Hawaii were serving in association with three congregations on Oahu (Honolulu, Maili, and Waimea) and two on the Big Island of Hawaii (Hilo and Kona), as well as smaller groups on Kauai, Maui, and Molokai.
For ten and a half years, the two missionary sisters worked diligently in Hawaii, assisting many on the road to life. It was their excellent example and enthusiasm for the ministry that aroused the pioneer spirit among many youths. In 1957 Martha and Ruth were reassigned to Japan, where they continue as missionary partners to this day.
When a crisis arose in Japan, Brother Knorr inquired by letter in 1947: “Who of the Hawaiian brothers would be willing to go to Japan?” Hawaiian-Japanese Jerry and Yoshi Toma, Shinichi and Masako Tohara, and Elsie Tanigawa volunteered. In writing Brother Knorr, Don asked, “But what about the Hasletts?” So they too were included. Those seven later became nine, as the Toharas’ two young daughters, who accompanied them to Gilead School and subsequently to Japan, also became missionaries upon reaching adulthood. All of these still remain in their missionary assignments in Japan, except for the Hasletts, who as anointed Christians have finished their earthly course.
True Pioneer Spirit
With the work well organized on Oahu, attention could now be given to covering unworked territories on the neighbor islands. The time was ripe for willing and zealous ones to pioneer these isolated areas with the good news. However, pioneering in the 1950’s often meant dealing with some very trying circumstances.
John Ikehara moved to Kona on the Big Island of Hawaii on April 1, 1955, to aid the small group there. Unable to secure a part-time job, he subsisted mainly on vegetables and fruits raised in the garden at the Kingdom Hall. Describing his study with a Filipino man living on one of the coffee plantation trails, he remembers, “My eyes would get sore from the smoke of the kerosene lantern. He would give his answers in English and read the paragraphs in the Iloko language.” John really looked forward to this Bible study, for more reasons than one. He explained, “Before studying each week, my student insisted that we eat first.” This was greatly appreciated, for it provided John with protein to supplement his vegetarian diet.
Experiences such as this one in Kona provided him with excellent training for his later missionary assignment in Japan, where he served until his death. Far from complaining, John once wrote: “I thank Jehovah for his many blessings he has poured on me and thousands of others too. I am very grateful to the Society for being so helpful and patient with me.”
In the autumn of 1954, Keith Stebbins, then branch overseer, approached Nathaniel Miller, a missionary from Japan who was in  Hawaii because of his wife’s health, and asked if he would accept a special pioneer assignment in Kekaha, Kauai.
Though not owning an automobile needed for this rural assignment, Nat Miller and his wife, Allene, agreed to leave right away. Since Allene’s health prevented her from meeting the hour requirement for special pioneers, both of them had to manage on Nat’s special pioneer allowance of $30.00 a month.
The transportation problem was solved when Harry Lu gave the Millers a 1933 Dodge. The bearings were knocking, and this limited the speed to about 25 miles per hour [40 km/​hr], but it never left them stranded. Sometimes, however, it took 30 minutes or so to get it started.
Having only limited funds to buy gasoline, they concentrated their activity in the immediate area of the Kingdom Hall in the towns of Kekaha and Waimea. About a year later, after Allene started special pioneering, they began to preach in Hanapepe, Port Allen, and Koloa. They would pack lunch and supper, and then they would witness all day and conduct studies in Koloa till 10:00 p.m. Soon, the congregation in Kekaha doubled in size, and a new congregation was formed in the nearby town of Koloa.
Host to Hundreds of Delegates
It was a thrill for the brothers in Hawaii to be informed that they would host hundreds of delegates traveling on the Society-arranged round-the-world tour for the “Everlasting Good News” Assemblies in 1963. The program was scheduled to be held at the Waikiki Shell, an amphitheater adjoining the shores of renowned Waikiki Beach.
The warm fellowship with so many visiting brothers was a delight. Over 6,000 people were present to listen to Brother Knorr’s main discourse, which was also televised live throughout the island chain. The community could not help noting that Jehovah’s Witnesses are truly an international people. Delegates were also delighted to have the convention at the very romantic Shell, nestled at the base of famous Diamond Head, where soft prevailing trade winds caressed the audience.
New Branch Overseer
After completing a training program at Gilead School specifically designed for branch overseers, Keith Stebbins was reassigned with his wife to the Dominican Republic in 1964. During his 11 years of service in Hawaii, he had seen how Jehovah had blessed the work with remarkable growth. The number of publishers more than doubled, from 770 to 2,064. Congregations tripled from 12 to 37. Brother Stebbins’ fine ability to organize solidified the local organization and laid the groundwork for further increases in the future.
At the “Fruitage of the Spirit” district assembly in Hilo in 1964, Brother Knorr announced the appointment of Robert K. Kawasaki, Sr., as branch overseer. Brother Kawasaki, born and raised in Hawaii, was then serving as district overseer following his graduation from Gilead School in 1961.
Something Amiss
During 1965, the brothers at the branch office were puzzled and concerned when the field service reports for the first three months of the service year revealed successive declines in the number of publishers reporting. This was most unusual, as Hawaii had always enjoyed a steady increase.
At Brother Knorr’s direction, a special meeting was conducted with selected circuit and district overseers. After nine hours of intense and prayerful discussion, two causes of the decreases were clearly discerned​—materialism and weakened spirituality.
At the time, Hawaii’s economy was booming with tourism. The construction industry enjoyed unprecedented success. As a result, the cost of living escalated. Some brothers were enticed to take on two jobs. Some wives went to work full-time secularly, and many young ones were choosing secular work over pioneering. Even some brothers with responsibilities in the congregations became preoccupied with material gain.
However, even more serious and deeply rooted was a lack of spirituality among the brothers and sisters. Many were just not reading the Bible daily, nor were they considering the daily Scriptural text. Parents were not studying with their children.
How appropriate was Brother Knorr’s counsel from headquarters: “We need to give all the spiritual admonition we can to build up the SPIRITUALITY of the congregations. When people are strong spiritually they will be regular in field activity. The field work strengthens one’s spirituality too. A person cannot be strong in the field, however, if he is not feeding on spiritual things.”
Daily Spirituality Emphasized
In the light of this timely direction, it was decided that through the traveling overseers, the theme of daily spirituality would receive strong emphasis. Daily Bible reading, regular family study, and consideration of the daily Scriptural text would be conscientiously promoted on the congregation level. A campaign of Yearbook distribution (which then contained the daily texts) was successfully initiated so that each publisher and Bible student would have a personal copy.
Plans were also made to hold the annual district convention on each of the major islands of the Hawaiian chain. In this way brothers throughout the state would have easy access to the convention, being spared the substantial cost of air transportation to Honolulu.
Employing these various avenues to stress spirituality in the personal lives of the brothers began reaping excellent results. In 1966 there was a 4-percent increase in publishers, and from 1967 to 1969, there were successive 10-percent increases. How true it is that prompt application of instructions from Jehovah’s organization surely brings his blessing!
Increased spirituality stimulates Christian zeal. This became more and more apparent among the youth. Many began reaching out for expanded privileges of service. The 1968 service year saw ten hardworking pioneers receive invitations to Gilead School, Brooklyn Bethel, and missionary assignments in Micronesia.
Expanding the Work in Micronesia
Just prior to Brother Knorr’s zone visit in April 1968, a major airline announced in the Honolulu Star Bulletin its initiation of air service between Hawaii, Micronesia, and Guam. Since the Marshall Islands district (in the eastern reaches of Micronesia) had recently been assigned to the Hawaii branch, the brothers at the branch office eagerly showed Brother Knorr the newspaper article. Brother Kawasaki relates: “I could see his eyes light up as he began visualizing in his mind the possibilities this new air route would provide to expand the work in the seven districts of Micronesia and Guam.” After a moment of silence and meditation, he turned to Brother Kawasaki and said: “Brother [Nathaniel] Miller could serve these islands as circuit overseer, and you could go also, taking turns.”
Micronesia embraces 2,000 islands, 97 of which are inhabited, scattered over three million square miles [7,800,000 sq km] of ocean to the west of Hawaii. Each island district has its own language, though it must be remembered that Japan occupied most of this area after it was mandated to them by the League of Nations following the first world war. Therefore, for some 25 years, Japanese was taught in the schools, and many in the territory became fluent in that language. Since Brother Miller studied Japanese while a missionary in Japan, he was well suited to travel through these islands.
These events were actually preliminary to the eventual assignment of Guam and the rest of the territories of Micronesia to the oversight of the Hawaii branch on January 1, 1969. Because of its proximity to these islands, it appeared that the Hawaii branch would be in a position to render better service and keep in closer touch with those few publishers on this spiritual frontier. While Brother Miller served the area as circuit overseer, Brother Kawasaki, Sr., visited the nine missionary homes once a year. Even after some of the missionaries were appointed to serve as circuit overseers, the two brothers made annual visits to the missionary homes and served as district overseers throughout Guam and Micronesia. Thus began an extremely busy and spiritually rewarding chapter in the history of the Hawaii branch.
Off to Untouched Fields
It was also decided to staff the existing missionary homes in Micronesia with pioneers from Hawaii. Brother Knorr had concluded that most would readily adapt to the island way of life and fit in well with the local people. This was a significant decision, for it would afford many zealous young ones from Hawaii the once-in-a-lifetime opportunity truly to pioneer the Kingdom work as missionaries in virtually untouched fields.
While the prospect of serving as a missionary in Micronesia was exciting, it definitely would not be effortless. Much of the second world war between Japan and the Allies was fought on these very islands. Places like Kwajalein, Truk Islands, Saipan, Guam, and Peleliu were the infamous sites of horrific battles. Devastation throughout the district was extensive, and recovery was slow. There were only a few paved roads, and those that existed were alternately dusty trails and muddy quagmires, depending on the weather. Electric service was either erratic or nonexistent. The absence of sewage systems and potable water often spawned health problems from intestinal parasites. Then there was the relentless tropical heat and humidity, much more extreme and intense than in Hawaii.
It was amid these conditions that the missionaries, most of them pioneers from Hawaii, established the work. They would wade through streams, travel on small boats, and walk through dense forests to reach the homes of the people. Wet and muddy conditions made shoes impractical. So most of the missionaries started to wear rubber slippers while in the preaching work.
The Micronesian islanders proved to be of a friendly and meek nature. Their deep reverence for the Bible made preaching among them a delight.
Any initial apprehension about whether Jehovah would bless this arrangement of assigning Micronesia to the Hawaii branch was removed by the August 1970 field service report: Guam reported an 88.6-percent increase in publishers, Marshall Islands a 25-percent increase, Ponape an 82.4-percent increase, and Saipan a 114.3-percent increase. Missionaries were also successfully opening up the work in Belau (Palau), Yap, and the Truk Islands.
Youths Set Good Record
During the 1960’s and 1970’s, a healthy pioneer spirit spread among the young ones in Hawaii. It was estimated in 1971 that upon graduating from high school, 95 percent of the youth entered the full-time service. Many of these later ventured out as missionaries to Micronesia and were instrumental in intensifying the sounding of the Kingdom message in those faraway islands. Scores of young, healthy brothers were privileged to serve at Bethel in Brooklyn and at Watchtower Farms.
Stimulating this zeal for the full-time service was a solid group of traveling overseers, whose enthusiasm was contagious. Many congregation elders were very active and thus set a fine example in the ministry, and they were always positive in placing before young ones the full-time service as a viable career. Parents and the congregations in general were very supportive of the pioneers. It is no wonder that many young ones blossomed spiritually.
Typhoon Pamela​—Good From Bad
On May 13, 1976, the supertyphoon Pamela slammed into Guam. Its sustained winds of 140 miles per hour [230 km/​hr] made it one of the worst typhoons ever to hit the island. Eighty percent of the buildings on the island were damaged, at least half of them beyond repair. The Kingdom Hall and adjacent missionary home were totally demolished. Gratefully, none of the missionaries or publishers lost their lives.
The need to rebuild in the wake of this disaster prompted the brothers at the Hawaii branch office to rethink carefully how the work in Guam and Micronesia was being administered. After prayerful consideration, they discerned that a branch office in Guam would probably provide closer supervision of the work in Micronesia. Therefore, recommendations and plans for a new branch office were submitted to the Governing Body, and these were approved. The new branch would oversee the Kingdom-preaching work in Guam and in all the island districts of Micronesia. A modern building with six bedrooms, an office, a large Kingdom Hall seating 400 persons, and facilities for some printing was designed. This project proved be a major undertaking and was not as readily accomplished as had originally been expected.
Guam Branch Construction​—Hot and Humid
A prime parcel of land, convenient and centrally located, was purchased. Construction began in January 1978. From among the Witnesses in Hawaii and the continental United States came carpenters, plumbers, painters, architects, electricians, and a civil engineer. Many on this volunteer work staff possessed superb building skills. The work got off to a good start.
However, the stress of performing construction labor in the exhausting tropical heat and humidity of Guam in the midst of crowded living conditions began taking its toll. Work demands often resulted in the neglect of meetings and field service over extended periods of time.
The brothers at the Hawaii branch recommended that to alleviate stress, greater emphasis and attention should be focused on the spirituality of those working on the project. This served to improve the overall spirit. To their credit, the volunteers made considerable sacrifices to stick with the work. These brothers and sisters who labored together, often under a very hot sun, displayed a real willingness to exert themselves unstintingly. Jehovah God blessed their faithfulness and endurance with the successful completion of a lovely new branch facility, splendidly landscaped and situated in a tropical, rural setting. On April 20, 1980, Brother Milton Henschel of the Governing Body, during his zone visit to Guam, dedicated the new building to the pure worship of Jehovah.
On May 1, 1980, the Guam branch began operation, giving able oversight to the islands of Micronesia and Guam. Nathaniel Miller of the Hawaii Branch Committee, who had traveled extensively throughout these island districts while it was supervised by Hawaii, was appointed as Branch Committee coordinator of the newly organized Guam branch. Hideo Sumida and Arthur White, also former members of the Hawaii Branch Committee, were transferred from Hawaii to complete the Guam Branch Committee.
For 11 years the Hawaii branch served the islands of Micronesia and Guam. What a privilege it was to work with the hardworking missionaries and local publishers, who literally pioneered the Kingdom work in these scattered, isolated islands, planting and watering seeds of truth in the hearts of the humble native islanders!
Second Wave of Immigrants
During the 1980’s, Jehovah blessed Hawaii with steady and consistent growth. In October 1983, peak publishers exceeded the 5,000 mark for the first time in Hawaiian history, with 5,019 reporting field service in association with 60 congregations.
In recent years a second wave of immigrants from other Pacific island nations converged on Hawaii, attracted by its relative material prosperity. Of course, they brought with them their native cultures and languages. To accommodate the many sheeplike ones included among these, more foreign-language congregations had to be organized. In swift succession, Japanese, Korean, Samoan, Spanish, and Iloko congregations were formed. The brothers in these congregations are well organized and very diligent in caring for their Christian responsibilities.
A Cramped Branch Office
Growth in the publisher ranks meant a greater demand for literature and an increasing number of congregations for the branch office to serve. The little garage warehouse connected to the office was becoming overtaxed. The office was also becoming crowded as more personnel was required to handle the swelling load of correspondence.
The office on Pensacola Street, which had served the interests of Jehovah’s people in Hawaii for nearly 50 years, was now just too small. Being situated in a densely populated area of central Honolulu, expansion on the same site was prohibitive. Hence, a search was initiated for a suitable location for an expanded, new branch office.
In 1985 a local real estate agent sent a flier to the branch office advertising a 1.12-acre [0.45 ha] lot for sale with a 25,000-square-foot [2,300 sq m] building, formerly a supermarket, on it. The location was ideal, right near the airport and downtown Honolulu. Although another party had agreed in principle to purchase the property, with the Governing Body’s approval, the brothers on the Branch Committee contacted the agent to present an offer. Surprisingly, the first party withdrew from the negotiations. In further apparent evidence of Jehovah’s hand in the matter, the property owner was very favorable toward Jehovah’s Witnesses. In a few short months, the transaction was completed, and in November 1985, the deed was handed over to the Society.
Converting a former supermarket into a branch office, warehouse, Bethel Home, and two Kingdom Halls posed an interesting challenge. The brothers in Hawaii had never taken on a construction project of that magnitude. A building committee was appointed, architectural plans were drawn up, and various construction departments were arranged. There was complete confidence in the readiness of the local brotherhood to provide the necessary skills and labor to accomplish the task. But, of course, it was recognized that the foundation on which the success of the project rested was best expressed by the psalmist at Psalm 127:1: “Unless Jehovah himself builds the house, it is to no avail that its builders have worked hard on it.”
“Just Like Building Solomon’s Temple!”
In order to inform everyone regarding the branch office building plans, special meetings were held beginning in February 1987 at seven locations statewide. Over 5,000 gathered at the Waikiki Shell. The brothers on the building committee explained what had already been accomplished, and they outlined the construction schedule, which was targeted to begin on March 1, 1987.
Work began in earnest. Literally thousands of brothers and sisters on Oahu and on other islands arranged their affairs to have a share. Some traveled to the site on weekends, others for longer periods. Many Witnesses on Oahu graciously opened their homes to workers traveling from the neighboring islands. During the peak construction period, about 150 volunteers came on weekdays and 250 to 300 on weekends.
Though the work was strenuous and the hours were long, a willing and happy spirit prevailed. The emphasis was placed on spirituality. The text was considered daily, and The Watchtower was studied each week. Biblical talks were given regularly, with the entire work force in attendance.
The cooperation of various tradesmen and of scores of ready laborers resulted in the work’s flowing smoothly to completion. One volunteer worker commented: “This is just like building Solomon’s temple!” Well, there was quite a difference between Solomon’s temple and the new branch building. The temple was in part overlaid with gold on a structure that was “prefabricated,” so there was little noise in its construction. The branch building was built with cement, wood, steel, and a lot of noise. However, one thing was similar​—the same spirit that moved the temple workers in Solomon’s day was motivating the brothers and sisters in Hawaii. An attractive branch building rose out of a vacant, dilapidated supermarket. Almost a miracle!
Despite the consuming activity related to branch construction, five publisher peaks were reached in 1986. At the end of that service year, two new congregations were formed. There were three publisher peaks in 1987, and three more congregations were established. By July 1987 the structure was completed. The following month branch office operations were transferred to the new location.
Falling Rain​—Rising Spirit
Rain was falling early in the morning on April 3, 1988, in Honolulu, but the spirit was not dampened for the 5,870 gathered in the Neal Blaisdell Center for the branch dedication program. Another 2,838 brothers, assembled on Maui, Kauai, and the Big Island of Hawaii, were tied in by telephone line for the day-long program originating in Honolulu. The Branch Committee coordinator reviewed the history and progress of the Kingdom work in Hawaii. Those publishers preaching in the islands for over 38 years were seated in the front rows of the arena, and they heartily agreed with the speaker’s comment that Jehovah had richly blessed His people in Hawaii.
A 30-minute slide presentation, simultaneously shown at each assembly location, documented the transformation of the former supermarket into a new branch office. Each of the four visiting members of the Governing Body took his turn in speaking to the large audience. In a stirring delivery, Daniel Sydlik described Jehovah’s righteousness as being as unchangeable and constant as the mountains. (Ps. 36:6) Lyman Swingle encouraged the audience to “Count Your Blessings” in harmony with Psalm 144:15b. Lloyd Barry drew a parallel between the rejoicing that accompanied the celebration of the Festival of Booths and modern times when true worshipers are similarly celebrating the great ingathering being accomplished by Jehovah. (Lev. 23:40) In his dedication discourse, Milton Henschel stated: “Our God is a God of purpose, and in his dealings he manifests supremacy. This dedication of the new branch facility is part of the purpose of Jehovah. We want to recognize how this new building will be used in connection with Jehovah’s will.”
As this very special day of worship drew to a close and the crowds were united in the closing song and prayer, their sentiments were like those of the Israelites after the dedication of Solomon’s temple. They went to their homes “rejoicing and feeling merry of heart over all the goodness that Jehovah had performed.” (1 Ki. 8:66) It was a grand spiritual event, a real milestone in the 70-year history of Jehovah’s people in Hawaii.
As anticipated, construction of the new branch facilities prompted many brothers to reflect seriously on upgrading their aging Kingdom Halls or on the possibility of building new ones for flourishing congregations. In May 1986 the first quickly built Kingdom Hall in Hawaii was erected in Kekaha, Kauai. Since then, statewide, six new Kingdom Halls have been built and two were completely renovated. Also, the former branch office and Kingdom Hall on Pensacola Street have received a face-lift, and six other Kingdom Hall building projects are planned.
Good Example for All
What made the 1988 “Divine Justice” District Conventions uniquely exciting were the 63 missionaries who returned home to Hawaii for a visit. For all in the audience, heartbeats quickened and eyes filled with tears of joy when all these missionaries crowded onto the stage at the Honolulu convention during the Saturday discourse “What Effective Missionary Activity Requires.” The brothers and sisters in the audience could not contain themselves and, out of appreciation, followed the program with a powerful and long round of applause.
What a reminder that so many from Hawaii have striven to reach out for greater privileges of service! Since the end of World War II, 164 missionaries have been sent from Hawaii to Japan, Taiwan, Okinawa, Korea, Samoa, and countries in South America and Africa, with the majority of them having been sent to the islands of Micronesia. Currently, 77 are still serving at their assignments as missionaries, traveling overseers, and special or regular pioneers.
For others, Bethel service has been the goal, especially for the robust young brothers. The first one was invited to serve at Brooklyn Bethel in the early 1960’s. Since that time 127 have shared in this privilege of full-time service. At present, 25 are serving at Brooklyn Bethel and Watchtower Farms, and 13 serve as members of the Hawaii Bethel family.
The exceptional interest in the full-time service, especially among the young ones, can be attributed to the example set by the zealous early missionaries and, later, energetic elders and traveling overseers. Also, supportive parents back home in Hawaii have been of much encouragement to their children serving overseas as missionaries or as Bethelites. This has enabled many of them to stick to their assignments, instead of succumbing to unmanageable homesickness and discouragement. Thus, they reap the long-range benefits that accrue to those holding fast to their privileges of service.
Status of the Work Today
In August 1990 an all-time peak of 6,194 publishers was attained. As a result, Hawaii now enjoys a healthy ratio of 1 Kingdom publisher for every 180 persons of the population (based on 1989 population figures). The territories of the 72 congregations are worked frequently, averaging once every four to six weeks statewide. Also, in August, an all-time peak of 608 publishers reported as regular pioneers. We happily note that many of these are in their teens and 20’s.
The colorful array of people with their contrasting racial and cultural backgrounds can make field service an intriguing experience. For example, it is not unusual to encounter Caucasian, Japanese, Chinese, Filipino, and Hawaiian householders professing Catholic, Protestant, Buddhist, and Mormon faiths. And all living on the same street! Although apathy to the Kingdom message seems to be increasing, sheeplike ones continue to stream to the mountain of Jehovah, as can be seen by the Memorial attendance of 15,245 in April 1990.
As is true in other areas of the world, Jehovah’s people in Hawaii are not immune from problems and the assaults of our chief Adversary, the Devil. Even though jobs are plentiful because of tourism and foreign investment, residents in Hawaii still have to cope with an unusually high cost of living. Resisting these economic pressures that often compel both husband and wife to work secularly in order to make ends meet, God’s people strive to maintain a healthy spiritual attitude. Illegal drug usage is pervasive in some neighborhoods and is reaping its tragic harvest, hence youths need to reject its insidious lure. Also, by virtue of Hawaii’s year-long sunny and mild climate, it is a place that is very conducive to play and fun, making recreation and pleasure-seeking a major distraction. Needless to say, it requires constant vigilance to avoid succumbing to these subtle enticements of Satan.
However, Hawaiian people, as is true of many island societies, are noted for their relaxed demeanor, friendliness, and hospitality. Perhaps this is due to the successful blending of the variety of peoples and cultures or the perennial sunshine and delightful weather. And especially among Jehovah’s people, these attractive qualities have become further enhanced by cultivation of the fruitage of the spirit.
Jehovah’s Witnesses in Hawaii continue active and zealous, with their lives revolving around spiritual activities. And throughout Hawaii’s modern-day history, they have proved themselves wholehearted and loyal in their support of Jehovah’s organization.
Without question much of the loveliness of a tropical paradise can be found in the Hawaiian Islands. But the real, exquisite beauty of Hawaii prevails in the spiritual paradise existing among the 6,000 loyal slaves of Jehovah, who cherish and delight in their service to him. How grateful they are that he has seen to it that ‘the mountain of the house of Jehovah has become firmly established’ even in the distant and exotic Hawaiian Islands.​—Isa. 2:2.
[Chart on page 115]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
     Hawaii                              8,000
1950     320
1960       1,589
1970         3,340
1980           4,494
1990             6,194
     Peak Publishers
                                         1,000
1950     30
1960       80
1970         447
1980           591
1990             938
     Av. Pioneers
[Box/​Map on page 66]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
HAWAIIAN ISLANDS
HAWAII
  Hilo
  Kailua-Kona
  Pahala
LANAI
MAUI
MOLOKAI
  Kalaupapa
  Kaunakakai
OAHU
  Aiea
  Pearl Harbor
  Honolulu
KAUAI
  Kekaha
  Kapaa
  Hanapepe
  Koloa
NIIHAU
  Pacific Ocean
[Box]
HAWAIIAN ISLANDS
Capital: Honolulu
Official Language: English
Major Religion: Diverse beliefs
Population: 1,112,100
Branch Office: Honolulu
[Picture on page 71]
Ivory beaches and quiet coves grace the Hawaiian Islands
[Picture on page 72]
Ellis Fox, along with the Bundys, began the preaching work, in 1915
[Picture on page 73]
Dora Harrub and her husband, James, were the first to be baptized, in 1919
[Picture on page 79]
Joseph Dos Santos began pioneering in 1929. Why was he nicknamed “Pupule Joe”?
[Picture on page 83]
Don and Mabel Haslett. He became Hawaii’s first branch overseer, in 1934
[Picture on page 84]
The first meeting place named Kingdom Hall was built in Honolulu, on Pensacola Street, in 1935
[Picture on page 85]
Sound cars broadcast Bible messages. This one was shipped from Honolulu to the outer islands in 1937
[Picture on page 88]
Sound cars cruised along streets, advertising Bible talks and playing recorded lectures
[Picture on page 94]
Don Haslett, Nathan Knorr, Mabel Haslett, and Milton Henschel. Knorr’s visit to Honolulu in 1947 sparked the sending of missionaries to Hawaii
[Picture on page 95]
The first two missionaries arrive in Honolulu on September 27, 1947. Martha Hess, front row, fourth from left, and Ruth Ulrich, back row, second from left. Hess and Ulrich now serve in Japan
[Pictures on page 96]
Waikiki Shell, site of the “Everlasting Good News” Assembly in 1963. Many were baptized at Waikiki Beach
[Picture on page 101]
Nathaniel and Allene Miller arrived in Hawaii in 1954 and served there until assigned to Guam in 1980a
[Footnotes]
Allene Miller died faithful in November 1989.
[Picture on page 105]
Guam branch office and Kingdom Hall was dedicated April 20, 1980. Guam oversees the preaching work in the 2,000 islands of Micronesia
[Picture on page 107]
Branch office and Kingdom Hall, located on Pensacola Street, served the Kingdom interests for nearly 50 years, until August 1987
[Pictures on page 108]
Former supermarket that was converted into branch office, warehouse, Bethel Home, and two Kingdom Halls was dedicated April 3, 1988
[Picture on page 109]
Branch Committee members and wives. From left to right, Robert and Hatsuko Kawasaki, Frans and Endeline van Vliet, and Gary and Carol Wong

