Adjustment in Theocratic Ministry School
1 In the October issue of Our Kingdom Ministry we received the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1983. Under the heading “Counsel and Remarks” you will note it says: “The school overseer will give specific counsel, not necessarily following the program of progressive counsel outlined on the Speech Counsel slip. Rather he should concentrate on those areas where the student needs to improve.” This means that in 1983 the school overseer will exercise his own discernment in determining the points on which to counsel.
2 A new student would need encouragement, and so commendation can be given for the effort he has put forth in connection with his first assignment. After the new student’s second talk, the school overseer can offer commendation on some speech quality that was good and then offer counsel on a point on which the student can work. When a student has a reading assignment, the counsel will not necessarily follow the progressive Speech Counsel slip but may deal with points such as volume, sense stress, pausing or accuracy of statement where explanatory statements are made on texts in the reading assignment. In the case of more experienced students, after offering commendation on an outstanding quality displayed in the presentation, the school overseer may draw attention to a quality that was lacking or that needed more attention. Otherwise, the quality shown next on the counsel slip may be referred to and the school overseer would show why it was good.
3 The school overseer will want to give commendation before offering his observation or counsel on a point that needs to be improved or worked on to achieve further progress. A student’s presentation may be so effective that the counselor will simply offer commendation on two speech qualities, showing why they were good.
4 In counseling, the school overseer will have in mind the immediate need of the student. Depending on whether the slips were marked with a “W” or an “I” following the last assignment, students will know whether to work on developing some particular speech quality or to strive to further improve on that point. In the case of experienced students, if their slips were marked “G” on two points following their last presentation, they may want to have in mind a point that has not yet been marked “G” on the counsel slip when preparing for their next assignment.
5 It is hoped that this new arrangement will help us all to make even greater advancement so that we will be more effective in sharing the truth with others.—1 Tim. 4:15, 16.

