Announcements
● Literature offer for December: New World Translation and any 192-page book for $3.75. January and February: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, for a contribution of $2.50. March: One of the older 192-page books for 75c.
● Presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit congregation accounts on December 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● Bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! for 1982: Publishers and pioneers, please order your volumes through your congregation. Congregations should begin accepting requests for these volumes now. Then on January 1, 1983, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). Order only the number of volumes for which you have requests. The volumes will be available in English, Dutch, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese and Spanish at $4.00 each. (Please order the Dutch, German, Italian and Japanese after February 1, 1983.) There is no pioneer rate. Payment should not accompany the congregation order sent to the Society. (See Cost List, paragraph 21.) Please announce to the congregation when the volumes are received so that all who ordered can obtain their copies.
● It is suggested that all congregations display the new yeartext by January 1, 1983.
● New Publications Available:
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 3, Es-Gr)—German
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 7, Be-Ca)—Italian
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 8, Ca-Ce)—Italian
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 9, Ce-Co)—Italian
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 10, Co-Cr)—Italian
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 1, A-Da)—Portuguese
Choosing the Best Way of Life—Hungarian
Good News—To Make You Happy—Malagasy
Happiness—How to Find It—Cebuano, Croatian
“Let Your Kingdom Come”—Dutch, Portuguese, Swedish
My Book of Bible Stories—Lingala, Yapese
True Peace and Security—From What Source?—Icelandic
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth—Danish, Dutch, Finnish, German, Japanese, Norwegian, Swedish
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!—Cibemba, Citonga, Danish, Dutch, Greek, Hiri Motu, Japanese, Kaonde, Kikamba, Luvale, New Guinea Pidgin, Norwegian, Papiamento, Shona, Solomon Islands Pidgin, Swahili, Swedish, Thai
Watch Tower Publications Index for 1981—French
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The Good News According to Luke (set of two)—Dutch, Japanese
The Good News According to Luke (set of three)—Finnish
The First to the Corinthians (single cassette)—Finnish
The Second to the Corinthians, To the Galatians (single cassette)—Finnish
The First to the Thessalonians through To Philemon (single cassette)—Finnish, Japanese
To the Hebrews, The Letter of James (single cassette)—Finnish, Japanese
Jehovah’s Name to Be Declared in All the Earth” (Drama) (single cassette)—Danish, Italian
Kingdom Melodies No. 3 (single cassette) Available also with Braille label

