Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 5
Song 5
 7 min: Local announcements. Enthusiastically encourage all to attend the Congregation Book Study as we begin to study the book Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand! Also encourage support for second Saturday magazine activity.
13 min: Talk on subject “Why Admit It When You Are Wrong?” from September 1, 1982, Watchtower. Elders and publishers alike need to acknowledge their own mistakes with humility and honesty, not taking themselves too seriously. This can work for the upbuilding of all.
10 min: Discuss Question Box. Speaker should emphasize our loving concern for the spiritual welfare of all and the need to give no cause for stumbling.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News—With Effective Introductions.” Question-and-answer discussion of material. Ask audience for introductions they have found particularly helpful. Encourage making use of such introductions in weekend field service activity. Remind all to bring their October 1, 1982, Watchtower to the meeting next week.
Song 18 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 12
Song 11
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements. Discuss how the congregation did in field activity during November, including the number of auxiliary pioneers, if any. Accounts report.
15 min: “Making Wise Use of Our Time.” Question-and-answer discussion of material. From paragraph 9 demonstrate briefly how street work may be done effectively by talking with people regarding specific articles rather than simply holding up magazines.
20 min: “Bring Your Heart Back to Jehovah.” Well-developed talk by a qualified elder on material from October 1, 1982, Watchtower. Audience participation. Allow time for a brief demonstration to show how a parent could tactfully bring the article to the attention of his child who has become inactive. Emphasize that parents may wish to mail a copy of the article to their children if they cannot give it to them directly. It is designed to help all who were reared in the truth but have drifted away from it. (Note: This part should be rescheduled if meeting is not held because of a circuit assembly or for other reasons.)
Song 82 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 19
Song 90
10 min: Local announcements. Discuss with audience the value of making wise use of time off by sharing in the field service during worldly holidays.
15 min: “Adjustment in Theocratic Ministry School.” School overseer should discuss with audience the new adjustments in counseling for 1983. Stress the need for each student to prepare well and accept with appreciation the loving counsel given in the school.
20 min: Use time for local needs or have an elder give a talk on the article “Cast Your Anxieties Upon Jehovah” in the September 15, 1982, Watchtower. Remind publishers to share in field service on fourth Saturday, which is part of the holiday weekend.
Song 87 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 26
Song 7
10 min: Local announcements. Remind brothers of new public talks scheduled for January. Encourage all to attend and bring their Live Forever book along to mark in it particular points that they may use in field service.
20 min: “Conduct Progressive Bible Studies.” Cover material by questions and answers, except paragraph 7. It should be handled as a demonstration showing how to prepare an interested person for opposition from family members, workmates, and so forth.
15 min: “Make Plans Now.” Discussion. Show how January Topic for Conversation may be used in placing new book. Pick out points from Live Forever book that will be particularly appealing to interested ones. Start with very first weekend of the new year by sharing in the field service. January 2 is first Sunday of the month. Outline specific arrangements for holiday witnessing.
Song 92 and prayer.

