Presenting the Good News—With Effective Introductions
1 Through theocratic education and experience in the Christian ministry, Jehovah gives us “the tongue of the taught ones.” (Isa. 50:4) This enables us to be more discerning in what we say to stimulate interest in the Kingdom message. Whether engaging in house-to-house work or street work, our initial expressions must be choice, reflecting an understanding of people and their varied circumstances.—1 Cor. 9:22, 23.
HOUSE TO HOUSE
2 Unique challenges confront us in the door-to-door ministry as we share Kingdom truths with ‘deserving ones.’ (Matt. 10:11) First of all, approaching a total stranger may be difficult. Behind the doors are persons of differing personalities, circumstances and viewpoints. These factors may have a bearing on our introductory expressions.
3 If your introduction is to carry sufficient impact, advance preparation is required. Several different simple and pointed approaches will allow you to be more flexible. Be discerning, confident and adaptable. Is there anything that shows that the householder may be religiously inclined? Are there indications that children are in the home? Prayerful concentration on these features may aid in determining the direction of your opening remarks.
4 Many publishers have enjoyed encouraging results using any one of the following suggested introductions:
“In view of the insurmountable problems society is facing, some feel that man’s future on earth is doomed. Despite the increase in family breakdowns, the constant threat of war and other problems, we’re calling this morning to share good news with all persons who would like to have a secure future.”
“Many families today do not feel confident about their future. Increased crime, unemployment and inflation have given rise to extreme depression and insecurity. We have made a special effort to visit you this morning to explain briefly how you and your family can have a bright outlook for the future.”
“We have found that many in our neighborhood welcome the opportunity to discuss the Bible. That is why I am at your door now to discuss the hope it offers.”
You may find these suggestions effective in your territory.
5 Our approach to people should be friendly and conversational. Many publishers choose to begin by offering a free tract or handbill. Using this approach, one overseer said, “This method holds their attention just long enough to get into a Bible conversation.” Why not see if some of these methods will work for you!
STREET WORK
6 Street work also calls for both friendly and conversational introductions. People are busy and on the move. In large cities, fear of strangers may be a factor to overcome. There may also be a reluctance to speak in public about religious matters. Keep these things in mind in making your approach.
7 Some publishers make effective use of pointed, thought-provoking questions to get the attention of passersby: “Our streets—will they be safe again?” Or, perhaps, “Will the earth be destroyed?” Keep in mind the need to tailor your question to fit the person and his circumstances. Does his appearance indicate that he is a student, businessman, laborer, and so forth? Try to determine wherein the person’s interest may lie and shape your introduction accordingly.
8 Each week many publishers use the early morning hours before work and the lunch hour to share in the witnessing activity. In visiting one local college the publishers pointedly address the students, seeking “opinions on man’s future in the next 5 to 10 years.” Many purposeful discussions have been enjoyed and one brother has already started four studies.
9 We seek Jehovah’s blessing on our efforts to spread the Bible’s comforting message effectively. As we give thoughtful attention to our method and manner of approach, we can confidently expect his spirit to teach us “how to answer the tired one with a word.”—Isa. 50:4.

