Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“Aglow With the Spirit” in Mexico
“THE entire country seems to be aglow and vibrating with activity.” So writes the Watch Tower Society’s branch office in Mexico, and how true that comment is! The vibrant activity in that land is evidenced in that as of August, there had been 70 consecutive monthly peaks, culminating in 277,436 publishers. In addition, more than 400,000 Bible studies were reported, and the Memorial attendance last year reached 1,046,291. What a fine basis for future growth!
A highlight of 1989 was a change in the status of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico. As a result, the Bible could be used in the house-to-house preaching work for the first time, and meetings could be opened with prayer. This had an immediate effect. In two months, the number of publishers jumped by over 17,000.
The joy of the brothers at this development is seen in their comments. One wrote: “When the letter was read in the congregation, it was interrupted twice by spontaneous applause. It was thrilling!” Another said: “We could not hold back the tears of joy. The results have been manifest in better punctuality. Everyone wants to be present for the opening prayer.”
“In our territory,” said another Witness, “a woman who is active in the Bible study program of the Catholic Church commented: ‘If before with just their comments and their magazines, [the Witnesses] left us speechless, now that they are opening the Bible at the doors, we are lost!’”
Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico also stress informal witnessing with the Bible. One sister approached a woman who asked what she thought about abortion. The Witness replied: “What I think is not as important as what the Bible says.” After reading several scriptures, the sister reasoned: “To the Creator life is very important, even the life of those who have not yet been born.”
The lady then confessed that she was expecting her first baby, but clinical examinations suggested that the baby would be abnormal. Her doctor wanted her to have an abortion, and her husband agreed, but the lady herself was not sure. The publisher reasoned with her further from the Bible, gave her name, and then they parted.
Five years later at a district convention, a couple with a four-year-old child wanted to see the sister and her husband. It was the same woman! What had happened? After her conversation with the Witness, the woman decided to have her baby. Her doctor refused to see her again, and her husband even threatened to leave her if the baby was born deformed. When the time came for her to give birth, she just went for help to the first doctor she could find.
Immediately after the baby was born, the doctor said: “Congratulations, mother! You have a lovely little girl.” Not believing her ears, she asked him to check the baby carefully. Then she told him her story. The doctor could only say: “This is a miracle.” The woman was delighted that she had had the courage to respect Jehovah’s view of the sanctity of life, and she named her beautiful, healthy baby after the sister. As soon as she was strong enough, she sought out the Witnesses and started to study the Bible with them. In less than a year, she and her husband were baptized.
The apostle Paul urged: “Be aglow with the spirit. Slave for Jehovah.” (Romans 12:11) Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mexico, like true Christians everywhere, respond to this exhortation with all their heart. That is why the whole country is aglow and vibrating with spiritual activity. How richly Jehovah blesses his faithful ones!

