Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
□ Since the disobedient angels have been consigned to Tartarus, what has this meant for them? (2 Peter 2:4)
They no longer occupy a place in Jehovah’s holy organization and are now cut off from divine illumination. However, they still operate under Satan’s direction and continue to maintain close contact with humans, endeavoring to control men, women, and even children. (Revelation 12:12, 17)​—4/15, page 14.
□ Why is it essential to “hate what is bad” in Jehovah’s eyes? (Psalm 97:10)
Those who hate what is bad will not seek ways to indulge in it. On the other hand, people who do not hate it may physically refrain from it while mentally wishing that they could share in bad things.​—4/15, page 21.
□ In Jesus’ illustration of the talents, what solemn lesson is set forth for all who profess to be Christ’s followers? (Matthew 25:14-30)
They must work to increase the belongings of their heavenly Master by having a full share in the preaching work. Only then can they be assured of having Jesus’ commendation and be rewarded. They thus avoid being thrown into the darkness outside and ultimate destruction.​—5/1, page 9.
□ What did Jesus mean when he told his disciples to pray: “Do not bring us into temptation”? (Matthew 6:13)
These words should not be construed to mean that Jehovah tempts us to commit sin. Instead, we, in effect, can ask Jehovah not to allow us to succumb when tempted or pressured to disobey him. We can entreat our Father to guide our steps so that no temptation overtakes us that is too severe for us to bear. (1 Corinthians 10:13)​—5/15, page 19.
□ Is it proper for a Christian to receive an injection of a blood fraction, such as immune globulin or albumin?
Responding to God’s law, Christians do not accept blood transfusions of the major blood components​—plasma, red cells, white cells, or platelets. Some of Jehovah’s Witnesses, however, have conscientiously felt able to receive an injection of one of the small protein fractions of the plasma. Interestingly, some of these proteins naturally pass from the bloodstream of a pregnant woman to the separate blood system of her fetus.​—6/1, pages 30, 31.
□ What purpose was served by Jesus’ washing the feet of the disciples at the last valid Passover?
Jesus was teaching his disciples a lesson in humility. No one should ever seek first place, thinking that he is important. Rather, all should follow Jesus’ example and be willing to serve one another without partiality, no matter how unpleasant or menial the task might be. (John 13:12-17)​—6/15, page 9.
□ In what sense did the Jews in Beroea ‘carefully examine’ the Scriptures? (Acts 17:11)
It was not that the Beroeans doubted Paul and the message that he brought to them, but they did research to prove that Jesus was the Messiah. That many of them became believers shows that their motive was genuine. (Acts 17:12)​—6/15, page 18.
□ What was “the book of the Wars of Jehovah”? (Numbers 21:14)
This was a reliable history of God’s wars in behalf of his people. It probably had its beginning with Abraham’s victory over the armed invaders of the Promised Land as recorded in Genesis chapter 14. The grand finale of the book will be “the war of the great day of God the Almighty” at Har–Magedon. (Revelation 16:14, 16)​—7/1, pages 20, 22.
□ How does God’s Word, the Bible, help us to bear pain?
The Bible tells us why Jehovah has permitted pain, and it also assures us that pain will soon end. (Romans 5:12; Revelation 21:1-5)​—7/15, pages 4, 5.
□ How can God’s people today “reflect like mirrors the glory of Jehovah”? (2 Corinthians 3:18)
God’s glory shines by means of “the glorious good news about the Christ, who is the image of God.” Jehovah’s Witnesses reflect this glory by speaking of the glory of Jehovah and the glory of his Kingdom by his Son. (2 Corinthians 4:4-6)​—7/15, pages 15, 16.
□ When should a person be baptized?
Baptism is a step to take when one has made a complete, unreserved, and unconditional dedication to Jehovah through Christ Jesus to do God’s will.​—8/1, page 14.

