Exercise Caution While in the Ministry
 1. Why is a cautious approach necessary in the ministry?
1 “As sheep amidst wolves,” God’s servants are preaching “among a crooked and twisted generation.” (Matt. 10:16; Phil. 2:15) Alarming reports of civil unrest, mob violence, and cruel kidnappings are commonplace, evidence of wicked men advancing “from bad to worse.” (2 Tim. 3:13) Applying what Scriptural principles will help us to ‘prove ourselves cautious’ in the ministry?—Matt. 10:16.
 2. What circumstances may make it advisable to leave the territory and preach in another area?
2 Act Shrewdly: Proverbs 22:3 emphasizes the wisdom of ‘concealing ourselves’ from calamity. Stay alert! The conditions in a normally safe neighborhood can unexpectedly change. You may see an increase of police activity or crowds forming in the street. Sometimes a kind householder will provide a warning. Rather than lingering out of curiosity, it is shrewd to leave promptly and continue elsewhere.—Prov. 17:14; John 8:59; 1 Thess. 4:11.
 3. How does the principle at Ecclesiastes 4:9 apply to our ministry?
3 Work Together: “Two are better than one,” says Ecclesiastes 4:9. While you may have been accustomed to working safely alone in the ministry, is it now safe to do so? In some areas, it is. But in others, it now is ill-advised for a sister or a young person to work from door to door alone, especially after sunset. Experience has proved that an attentive partner is invaluable. (Eccl. 4:10, 12) Remain watchful over other members in your group. Make it your habit to let others know that you are leaving the territory.
 4. How can we work toward the protection of all in the congregation?
4 As ones ‘keeping watch over our souls,’ the elders are responsible to provide practical guidance according to the local circumstances. (Heb. 13:17) Jehovah’s blessing is assured as we demonstrate Christian modesty and cooperate fully with them. (Mic. 6:8; 1 Cor. 10:12) May all of God’s servants contribute to giving an effective witness in our territory, yet always with due caution.

