God’s Word for Us Through Jeremiah
 1. What publication was released at the 2010 district convention, and how will we use it?
1 How excited we were when a new book by that name was released at the 2010 “Remain Close to Jehovah!” District Convention! This publication highlights lessons for our daily life found in the books of Jeremiah and Lamentations. (Rom. 15:4) Designed for use in the Congregation Bible Study, it will be considered beginning the week of November 5, 2012.
 2. Why can we benefit from a consideration of the Bible books of Jeremiah and Lamentations?
2 Beneficial Today: Jeremiah, the writer of this inspired Bible book, prophesied during a turbulent period in Judah. At first, he did not feel qualified for his assignment. (Jer. 1:6) He was also persecuted by acquaintances and perhaps relatives from his hometown, Anathoth. (Jer. 11:21, 22) Understandably, Jeremiah became discouraged at times. (Jer. 20:14) As we fulfill our commission to “make disciples of people of all the nations,” we often experience challenges and feelings similar to those of Jeremiah. (Matt. 28:19) A consideration of his writings will help us to carry out our ministry with confidence and zeal.
 3. How will we use certain features of the Jeremiah book?
3 Features: Key scriptures that should be read during the discussion are identified in italics. The end of each week’s study is marked by a meaningful question or two set in bold that highlights the main points of the lesson. These should be asked of the audience in review. Throughout the book are beautiful illustrations that the congregation will no doubt want to comment on.
 4. How can we benefit to the full from a consideration of the Jeremiah book?
4 To benefit to the full, prepare your lesson in advance. Look for points that you can use in your life and ministry. Have a full share in commenting. With Jehovah’s blessing, Jeremiah fulfilled his assignment with joy and contentment. (Jer. 15:16) May our consideration of this new publication help us to carry out our ministry in the same way.

