Jehovah’s Witnesses—Faith in Action, Part 2: Let the Light Shine
After Brother Rutherford and his associates were released from prison in 1919, a huge work lay ahead of the Bible Students. As depicted in the video Jehovah’s Witnesses—Faith in Action, Part 2: Let the Light Shine, the Bible Students would have many opposers, their understanding of the Scriptures would continue to grow, and their faith would be refined. (Prov. 4:18; Mal. 3:1-3; John 15:20) After viewing the video, can you answer these questions?
(1) What methods did the Bible Students use to spread the good news? (2) What happened at the landmark conventions in 1931 and 1935? (3) What was significant about the November 1, 1939, issue of The Watchtower? (4) Describe what occurred at Madison Square Garden during Brother Rutherford’s talk “Government and Peace.” (5) What was noteworthy about Brother Knorr’s talk “Peace—Can It Last?” (6) In 1942, what plans did Jehovah’s Witnesses make to expand their preaching work? (7) Explain some of the legal battles that were fought in the United States, Canada, and Greece. (8) What impact did Gilead have on the growth of the preaching work? (9) What important work began in 1946, and why? (10) What steps did Jehovah’s Witnesses take to make sure their conduct was in harmony with the standard set forth in the Bible? (11) Explain some of the adjustments that were made in the 1970’s to align the organization more closely with the pattern in the Bible. (12) How has viewing this video deepened your appreciation that Jehovah is in full control and that this is his organization? (13) How has this video strengthened your determination to continue zealously preaching despite obstacles? (14) How could we use this video to help our relatives, Bible students, and others?
Each day that passes adds a new chapter to the history of Jehovah’s Witnesses. What will the record say about our efforts in the ministry? As our brothers have done in the past, may we zealously continue to “let the light shine”!—2 Cor. 4:6.

