Missionaries of Micronesia
ALTHOUGH separated by vast stretches of the seemingly endless Pacific Ocean, missionaries of Micronesia still manage to gather each year for a “family reunion.” And where do all these evangelizers from far-flung islands meet? Fittingly, at the place that the local government has named Jehovah Street​—the address of the Guam branch office under which they serve.
In June 1992, 56 missionaries converged on the branch in order to attend the “Light Bearers” District Convention. Laughter and lighthearted conversation filled the air as they renewed longtime friendships and cultivated new ones. As always, they arranged themselves on the stairs of the Kingdom Hall for a group photograph and then sat down at three long banquet tables to share an annual missionary meal, highlighted this year by a visit from Albert Schroeder, a member of the Governing Body.
For many of the missionaries, this yearly get-together in Guam is their only opportunity to leave their tiny tropical homes. And tiny these are. Ebeye Island, one of the Marshall Islands, consists of only 78 acres [32 ha]. The Majuro missionary home in the Marshalls and the Kiribati home in the Gilbert Islands are both located on long, narrow atolls less than a half-mile [0.8 km] wide. So the missionaries make the most of their exciting trip to Guam.
While the notion of preaching on a remote tropical island sounds romantic, in reality it is a challenge few are equipped to meet. Interestingly, only 7 of the 56 missionaries are from the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. Most came from Hawaii or the Philippines where they were pioneer ministers already accustomed to life in the tropics, and they went directly from their home countries to their missionary assignments.
Because the islands of Micronesia are located so near the equator, missionaries battle stifling heat and humidity to reach residents with the good news. Communication can be an even greater challenge. Each island or island group has its own language​—some so obscure they are not even recorded in a dictionary—​and it may be years before a newcomer can speak fluently. To help people in these diverse island cultures understand the Bible, the Guam branch prints literature in 11 languages, 9 of which are spoken exclusively in Micronesia.
Some islands are so isolated that they can be reached only by boat. The Tol missionary home in Chuuk (Truk) is located on such an island, and the missionaries there rely on solar panels to provide electricity for just a few hours each day.
Altogether, there are 14 missionary homes throughout Micronesia, which encompasses an area roughly the size of the continental United States. Of the more than 400,000 people who live in the region, 1,000 are publishers of the good news, organized into 20 congregations and 3 isolated groups.
While the people of Micronesia are generally very friendly, local religious customs and family pressure discourage many from accepting the truth of God’s Kingdom. So although the preaching work is flourishing overall (those 1,000 Kingdom publishers are conducting in excess of 2,000 Bible studies), some congregations and groups remain small. For instance, there are only 5 publishers on the island of Tinian, just 7 publishers on the island of Nauru, and the congregations in Yap, Kosrae, and Rota have fewer than 40 publishers each. Nevertheless, some missionaries have remained in their assignments for more than 20 years. Notably, all six on the island of Belau have been there at least 12 years.
For those who endure, the rewards are great. There are daily opportunities to marvel at the beauty of Jehovah’s creation. The lush islands of Micronesia are scattered like small green jewels across the blue backdrop of the Pacific. Miles of uncrowded beaches and coral reefs teeming with colorful fish lure snorkelers and scuba enthusiasts to explore some of the choicest diving spots in the world. And at the end of each day, there is the breathtaking sight of the sunset on the ocean.
The greatest reward, however, is the privilege of serving Jehovah by telling others about his wonderful promises for the future. Because the missionaries of Micronesia continually reach out for that reward, they are living the words of Isaiah 42:12: “Let them attribute to Jehovah glory, and in the islands let them tell forth even his praise.”
[Map/​Picture on page 31]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Barrigada, Guam
Santa Rita, Guam
Koror, Belau
Chuuk (Truk) Islands
Tarawa, Kiribati
Kosrae
Ebeye
Marshall Islands
Majuro
Kolonia, Pohnpei
Songsong, Rota
Saipan
Yap
MICRONESIA
MELANESIA
CAROLINE ISLANDS
PACIFIC OCEAN
PHILIPPINES
NEW GUINEA
EQUATOR
[Picture]
Missionaries assemble in Guam, June 1992

