Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Satisfying the Spiritually Hungry​—In School
“HAPPY are those conscious of their spiritual need,” said Jesus in his Sermon on the Mount. (Matthew 5:3) Many schoolchildren are thirsty for knowledge of God and his wonderful purposes. They want answers to questions about life and want to know how they should live in order to receive God’s approval and be happy. This was evident in a school in the British Virgin Islands. One of Jehovah’s Witnesses there relates:
□ “I attended a parent-teacher meeting at the local school, and much was said about drugs, drinking, dating, TV viewing, grades, and other matters, so I decided to take the book Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work and present it to the headmistress. After she examined the book, she said that it was just what they needed and asked if the school could obtain a copy for each of the 120 students. The matter was discussed with the congregation elders, and they decided to donate the books to the school. When we mentioned this, the teachers asked that we present the books to the student body. Two Witnesses went, and the room was full of students waiting for them. The brothers spoke for a half hour, and experiences showing how the book has helped young and old were read from the Watch Tower Society’s magazines. Then the books were presented to the eager students.”
It is a joy to know that the school has decided to use the book as part of the regular fourth- and fifth-grade courses. It will truly answer many questions these students have about life and the future.
Satisfying the Spiritually Hungry​—In Papua New Guinea
The following experience was received from a traveling overseer. It illustrates how spiritually hungry the people are in that country and how effective our Bible-based publications are in satisfying their hunger.
□ “As I was unable to visit the village of Kamberatoro,” said the overseer, “I spent my time working along with the small congregation in Vanimo. There is much interest there. A number of people from Bewani accepted literature. One man asked me to come and visit this village, and he would provide me with accommodations. Many people are familiar with our literature. Each time we have gone to the town of Vanimo, we have run out of literature despite taking three boxes of books. My Book of Bible Stories is considered as valuable as gold. People are searching for it. The books I took were placed very quickly. When we showed people our literature, some would ask: ‘Where is the yellow book?’ One man ordered six. He gave me his name and address and asked me to have an announcement made on the radio when I received them. He would then come from his village to get them.” The traveling overseer adds: “I found that many people in Vanimo accepted the books Mankind’s Search for God and Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work.”
This illustrates how hungry honesthearted persons are for the spiritual food found in the Bible and the publications that Jehovah has provided by means of “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matthew 24:45-47) How happy Jehovah’s Witnesses are to be able to help these truth-hungry people!
[Picture on page 19]
Witnessing in Papua New Guinea

