What Reasons for Believing the Bible?
HAVE you ever asked, How can I be certain that the Bible is not merely another good book written by wise men of ancient times? How can I benefit from something that was written thousands of years ago? How practical is the Bible for people who need to spend their time working hard to feed and clothe their families? If the Bible’s influence really is for good, why have the nations of Christendom wreaked such havoc in lives and property in two world wars?
If you have such questions you are not alone. Nor are you to be censured for asking them. Ever so many persons are asking these very questions and many related ones. Persons who ask such questions in all sincerity are likely to be conscious of their spiritual need, and Jesus Christ said, “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.” You may be happy to know that the Christian witnesses of Jehovah have prepared a series of lectures that will carefully consider such questions.​—Matt. 5:3.
There will be six of these lectures, two each month for January, February and March in the United States. They will be given at the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses in many lands in the months to come. You are welcome to attend, seats are free and no collection will be taken. If you do not know the location of the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses nearest you, feel free to write the publishers of this journal. (See page 2.)
The first of these lectures is entitled “Bible Accounts of Creation and Flood​—Fact or Fiction?” This lecture deals directly with attacks that critics have made on the Bible accounts of creation and the Deluge. It carefully weighs these objections. This lecture will help you to distinguish between what is mythical or theory and what is fact. It will produce evidence that shows what is true regarding creation and the Flood.
The second talk is entitled “Is the Bible Record Really Historical Fact?” It goes into such questions as, Do reliable secular history and the Bible, where they touch each other or overlap, harmonize with each other? What factors must one take into account when considering ancient secular history?
The next lecture in the series is entitled “The Bible​—Contradictory or Consistent?” What about the charges that the Bible repeatedly contradicts itself? that it is not consistent? Can the seeming inconsistencies and apparent contradictions be satisfactorily explained? These questions you will want to have answered.
You may also be among the many persons today who are interested in the future. In their desire to know it, some turn to astrology and other methods of divination, only to experience frequent failures. But did you know that the Bible claims to foretell the future many, many centuries in advance? Does the Bible actually do this? Is it consistently accurate? How important to you are the answers? The fourth lecture, “Bible Prophecies Involve Your Life,” fully considers these and other questions. Here is further information you will not want to miss if you would have your spiritual need satisfied.
Do you also feel the need of sound counsel for dealing with the everyday problems of life? If so, then you will surely want to hear the fifth talk in this series: “Practical Counsel Provided by God for Man.” Just what is right and what is wrong? Are ethics matters for each individual to determine for himself? Among other things, this lecture will show how sound Bible principles are; that following them is conducive to both mental and physical health as well as to happiness in your family.
And finally, calling for a decision on your part if you would take the truly wise course is the last lecture of this series: “The Churches or the Bible​—Which Do You Choose?” This question may sound rather strange to your ears, especially if you are a churchgoer whose pastor professes to have great regard for the Bible as the Word of God. But after hearing all the evidence as to whether the churches of Christendom really stand foursquare upon the Bible or prefer their creeds and have their own gospel, it may well be that you will appreciate the need of making a choice in favor of the Bible.
So, if you are interested in reasons for believing the Bible; if you are conscious of your spiritual need; if you would take the truly wise course, then be sure to attend these lectures, all of them. Do not miss a one.
Learn the answers to the questions that may have been puzzling you, such as, How can we be certain that the Bible is not the work of mere men? How practical is the Bible for our day? You will find a warm welcome and friendly greeting awaiting you at the local Kingdom Hall. And remember, such knowledge is of the greatest value to you, for as Jesus Christ said, taking in knowledge of Jehovah God and of his Son, Jesus Christ, means everlasting life.​—John 17:3.

