VOL. XXVII DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 371 

Socialism Menacing Great Britain 371 

Strong Words in the House of Lords 371 

Heathen New England 372 

Restatement of Methodist Faith 372 

Business Methods in Church Work 373 

Brooklyn and Worcester Conventions 373 

Berean Studies in "Tabernacle Shadows" 374 

He Thresheth His Wheat (Poem) 375 

In the Cross of Christ I Glory 375 

Bearing the Cross After Him 376 

"He is Risen, as He Said" 380 

Two Views of the Resurrection 381 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



1907--MOTTO CARDS--1907 



We announce these a little in advance because some of 
the friends may be ordering other 
mottoes before the first of the year, 
and may desire to include some of 
these. We hope that they will be 
found in every home, if not in every 
room of WATCH TOWER subscribers. 
Put up singly and postpaid, 10 cents. 
In packs of 10 to one address, postpaid, 
60 cents. In quantities by 
freight or express collect, 5 cents 
each. 

The "In Due Time" mottoes we 
now have in good supply at same 
prices as the above. 

General information with regard 
to other mottoes will be found on 
page 4 of the Catalogue in this issue. 
British friends order of London office. 

HYMNS OF DAWN and ZION'S GLAD SONGS are the only hymn 
books we expect to handle. Between them we have a large 
and choice selection of nearly 400 hymns and tunes. We trust 
that all will familiarize themselves with these, that we may 
sing the same hymns of praise as well as "mind the same things" 
doctrinaily. Quality the choicest, prices one-third the usual. 



R3898 : page 371 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
SOCIALISM MENACING GREAT BRITAIN 



THE Liberal Party in the present House of Commons 
stands committed to a considerable degree 
to the laboring class— indeed quite a few of its 
members were chosen on the Labor ticket. British 
statesmen have been wondering to what extent this 
new element in their politics will affect future legislation, 
wondering how conservative or otherwise the new 
members from the lower strata of society would prove 
to be. Heretofore the members have generally been 
chosen either from the aristocratic or wealthy class, or 
from the middle class of merchants, lawyers, etc., who 
have a great respect for traditions. It is causing 
quite an awakening amongst the British to find that 
the new members representing the working classes are 



by no means disposed to be conservative, but rather 
are laying their plans for the ultimate capture of the 
majority in Parliament— planning also something of a 
socialistic turn to legislation. Thus, in their due time, 
matters are shaping around for the termination of Gentile 
rule in anarchy by the appointed time— by October, 
1914, when their lease or permit will expire. We quote 
the following from the pen of an English writer who 
evidently is well posted on his subject. He says:— 

"The enormous majority secured by the Liberal 
party in the last British parliamentary elections had 
its embarrassments as well as its pleasant features. 
...A section of the Labor party in parliament, composing 
about one-half the labor vote, is socialistic in 
its program and principles, and has been striving vigorously 
to whip into line with itself the other half by 
seeking to get control of the trades unions to which 
the conservative half owes and confesses allegiance. 
This movement has become so successful that the 
leaders of the Liberal party, especially the Scotch, became 
alarmed at the growth of Socialism in the labor 
end of the party, and have recently taken steps to warn 
the Government that any further encouragement of the 
socialistic element would result in serious trouble. 
Alexander Murray, the Liberal Scottish whip in the 
House of Commons, in a recent speech made a fierce 
attack upon Socialism and its representatives in Parliament. 
The Scottish Parliamentary Association, 
under Mr. Murray's influence, passed a resolution that 
'it is the primary duty of the Liberal party to present 
strenuous opposition to all candidates who are not prepared 
to dissociate themselves from the Socialist 
party, the avowed object of which is the complete destruction 
of those principles of individual liberty for 
which Liberalism has always contended.' 

"In the meantime, the Labor representation committee, 
whose chairman is Keir Hardie, and which is 
the controlling body of the Socialistic element in politics, 
is working with might and main among the unions 
to bring them over body and soul to Socialism, with 
which they are all more or less deeply leavened, and 
seems to be in the way of fully succeeding. This presages 
a cleavage between the whole Labor vote and the 
Government." 

STRONG WORDS IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS 



"It is strange that the strong, impressive words 
spoken by Lord Avebury in the House of Lords last 
week should have failed, as they have, to excite international 
discussion. Lord Avebury said: 

"The unrest of Europe, the spread of Socialism 
and the ominous rise of anarchism are warnings to the 
governments and the ruling classes that the condition 



of the working classes in Europe is becoming intolerable, 

and that if a revolution is to be avoided some 

steps must be taken to increase wages, reduce the 

hours of labor and lower the prices of the necessaries 

of life. Europe is a great military camp. We have no 

peace, only an armistice, with unlimited expenditures. 

The result is that instead of accumulating capital for 

our children we are piling up for them debt and overwhelming 

responsibilities.' 

"These words were spoken, not by a labor agitator 
or a Socialist, but by an aristocrat and a member of 
the most conservative body in all Europe. That gives 
them all the more significance. They contain more 
valuable political economy than is to be found in most 
of the books. They sound a note of warning. Take 

R3898 : page 372 

heed, gentlemen of the war and navy departments!"— 
Wall Street Journal. 



The matter that confuses many is that really the 
working people of the civilized world are better off in 
many respects today than they ever were before: the 
unrest is the result of knowledge, the increase of the 
spirit of liberty. When the people supposed that God 
had created the royal families to rule and had specially 
blessed them financially, they looked to them as they 
properly looked to the Almighty, as their benefactors, 
and were thankful for whatever they received, thankful 
to be permitted to live at all, thankful to have enough 
of food and raiment and shelter to make them reasonably 
comfortable. But with the opening of the eyes of 
their understanding, with the information from the 
pages of history that their kings and nobles in times 
past had seized the property and power which they 
now possessed— seized it by force and without divine 
authorization— this knowledge has rendered the masses 
dissatisfied. They now reason that those who have 
seized the earth and its honors, authorities and powers 
in the past and who hold them by force may be reasonably 
required to surrender to the public enough of 
their surplus to make the entire people reasonably 
comfortable. Nor need we be surprised that frequently 
unreasonable demands are made by those whose 
minds have not been developed along the lines of 
finance, politics and religion, but who are coming to 
these subjects with crude, half-formed impressions, 
surmises, expectations. Is not this exactly what the 
Scriptures tell us respecting our day, the "time of the 
end"— in which we have already been for one hundred 
and seven years? Do they not tell us that in this 
period would come the running to and fro of travel, 
which we now see about us everywhere, by which the 



various nations and peoples and classes are intermingled 
and waked up to the true situation of matters? 
Do we not see about us as another evidence of this 
time the fulfilment of the prediction, "Knowledge shall 
be increased"? And is it not as a result of the increase 
of knowledge from this intermingling that the further 
prediction is to be fulfilled, "There shall be a time of 
trouble such as was not since there was a nation"?— 
Daniel 12:1. 

HEATHEN NEW ENGLAND 



Rev. Dr. Hoar, of the Newton Theological Seminary, 
has been making a study of conditions in New 
England, and finally raises his voice in protest that 
instead of civilization elevating the people a marked 
degeneracy is in progress. This may be disappointing 
to those who have the wrong expectation for the 
future— to those who are hoping that the Millennium 
will be introduced by the conversion, sanctification, of 
the whole world of mankind to the extent that God's 
will shall be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 
But for those who take the Scriptural view, Reverend 
Hoar's findings are a further corroboration of the 
truth of the Bible. Our Lord's words are confirmed, 
for he said, "When the Son of man cometh shall he 
find the faith on earth?"— implying that the true faith 
would be very scarce at that time. It confirms the Apostle 
Paul's statement that "evil men and seducers shall 
wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived"; 
and again, that "In the last days [in the close of the 
present age, before the dawning of the new dispensation] 
perilous times shall come. For men shall be 
lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, 
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, 
without natural affection, truce breakers, false 
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that 
are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasure 
more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, 
but denying the power thereof."— 2 Tim. 3:1-5. 

Reverend Hoar says:— "There has come to some 
communities a disintegration and degeneration of public 
morals which has brought them down in moral tone 
below the mining camps of the west. Degenerates in 
mining camps are willing to acknowledge that they 
are bad, but not so with degenerates in New England. 
They commit the sins of the mining camps while they 
lay claim to respectability, and refuse to admit their 
guilt. There must be a mixture of wickedness in order 
to free them from a charge of being Puritanical. In 
90 per cent, of the New England towns the large majority 
of the people have no intelligent faith about anything, 
and do not wish to have any. Serious religion, 
which interferes with personal aims and pleasures, is 



shunned and its advocates ridiculed. The condition 
seems utterly hopeless." 

RESTATEMENT OF METHODIST FAITH 



Considerable agitation has been caused amongst our 
Methodist friends looking toward a revised statement 
of their creed; but, says the Michigan Christian Advocate, 
commenting on the question, "Present indications 
are that no revision of the Methodist creed will be undertaken 
in this generation." 

The Methodist Times (London) admits that honesty 
seems to call for a revision, but claims that expediency 
frowns upon it. It says:— 

"Theoretically a great deal might be said in favor 
of the American proposal, especially on the score of 

R3899 : page 372 

honesty. But, practically, we are convinced that any 
attempt at definition just now would be inexpedient. 
The fact is, every Methodist Church now allows a certain 
latitude to its ministers and people on points of 
doctrine, so long as the 'substance of doctrine' is accepted 
and honorably adhered to. We all know in 
practice what that substance is, for it has been clearly 
laid down in the admirable Free-Church catechism. 
Anything further in the way of an attempt to bring the 
whole body of Methodist belief into the strait-waistcoat 
of a doctrinal standard would probably have an effect 
of a far-reaching and disastrous character. 

"For the plain truth is, that the world of religious 
thought is still in a state of flux. True, Christian 
thought has assimilated and been enriched by the 
theory of evolution as the result of the researches into 
natural science. But even on the subject of evolution 
we have not heard the last word. Meanwhile, a new 
realm of thought is being opened up by the investigations 

R3899 : page 373 

of the psychologist. The secrets of man's higher 
self are being laid bare with the scientific exactness 
which has been already brought to bear on his physical 
frame, and the thoughtful Christian is being led into 
new realms of thought, which must still further widen 
the theological horizon. In these circumstances no 
finality is practicable, and any effort to force it prematurely 
might conceivably end in a fissure which would 
rend our Church asunder from pole to pole. Students 
of theological history know well that these periods of 
flux in thought occur in cycles; and it will be quite 
time enough to examine our own doctrinal position 
when the present movement has reached a standstill— 



of which no signs are yet discernible. If the invitation 
comes to the British conference, we hope that it will be 
courteously declined— and declined not on the grounds 
proffered by Bishop Wilson and others, of any slavish 
dread of breaking with traditional views, but because 
the time is not opportune." 

BUSINESS METHODS IN CHURCH WORK 



Reverend E. D. Decker, pastor of Ebenezer M.E. 
Church, Manayunk, Philadelphia, finding that even 
short sermons and elaborate choir service failed to 
attract the people to his Church, has introduced a new 
plan to draw "worshipers," as follows:— 

"He has formed the young, attractive and unengaged 
girls of his congregation into an ushers' association, 
the chief duties of membership being to conduct 
worshipers, and especially strangers, to their seats and 
to collect the offertory. The girls take turns, twelve 
of them officiating each week. They wear a simple, 
neat and very effective uniform of white, with a becoming 
lace cap, and stand ready in a double row at the 
Church door to welcome arriving worshipers. 

"The first trial of the innovation yesterday was an 
enormous success, crowds of young men who have 
been stubbornly 'unregenerate,' coming from far and 
near. The pastor is delighted with the success of the 
experiment, which, he said, he was sure would prove 
the long-sought solution of the difficult problem of how 
to bring light to many young men whom the distractions 
of business and pleasure have hitherto 
monopolized. 

"The Church's principal supporters are prominent 
business men, and they are equally delighted. They 
say that the opposition churches in the neighborhood 
must follow suit or 'go out of business.' The treasurer 
said the fact was sufficient that the offertory showed a 
150 per cent, increase over the corresponding Sunday 
of last year." 



The difficulty with Christian people in general is 
their misunderstanding of the divine plan, with the 
thought which is so general amongst them, that an 
outward moral gloss and membership in some of the 
sectarian churches is what the Lord is seeking and 
approves. The enterprising Church members, with a 
measure of good intention, resort to Trilby shows, 
raffles, chances, and various methods that are somewhat 
shady for the raising of money, or, as in the above 
case, for the increase of their attendance. What they 
all should see is that the Lord "seeks such to worship 
him as worship him in spirit and in truth." (John 4:23.) 



And the call is not to an outward gloss of morality, 
nor to an earthly Church membership, but a call 
to saintship, to full consecration of heart and life to 
the Lord, and these, as the Lord himself forewarned 
us, will be but a little flock, amongst them not 
many wise, great, learned or noble according to the 
course of this world. 

But the friends of the various denominations ask, 
How then would the world be converted and the Millennium 
be ushered in? We answer that the conversion 
of the world and the bringing in of the Millennium 
are matters beyond human power. With all the stooping 
to worldly methods and ignoble practices, there 
are twice as many heathen today, after a hundred years 
of the most noted missionary effort the world has ever 
known, as there were a century ago. The natural 
increase of the human family operates effectively to 
stop any thought of a conversion of all the heathen— 
we are getting farther from such a possibility every 
day. But even if the heathen were all converted to the 
condition of the Church members of Christendom we are 
all witnesses that the work of conversion would need 
to be repeated, because surely amongst Church members 
God's will is not done on earth as it is in heaven. 
The vast majority of them have no wish for God's will 
to be done in them, but rather are walking after the 
flesh and not after the Spirit. The real hope is in the 
divine plan: the selection now of the little flock to be 
the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and the work for the world 
to begin after the marriage of the Lamb has taken 
place at the second coming. Then the Spirit and the 
glorified Bride will say, "Come," and whosoever will 
may come and take of the water of life freely. Then 
Satan will be bound and all the families of the earth 
be blessed with the uplifting influences that will then 
be world-wide and ocean-deep— the knowledge of the 
Lord. 



R3899 : page 373 

BROOKLYN AND WORCESTER CONVENTIONS 

ON November 1 1th Brooklyn, N.Y., had a splendid 

one-day Convention. About 200 gathered with 

the local friends— mainly from New York City, 

but various cities of New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, 

Connecticut and Maryland were represented. 

The forenoon rally was heart-cheering. One dear Colporteur 

present, on hearing a testimony given by one 

newly come into the light through his efforts, declared 

that it was worth more to him than a thousand-dollar 

gift. Testimonies from the newly-interested often 

astonish us, showing how rapidly some can grow in 

grace and knowledge. 



The afternoon session for the public was splendidly 
attended, considering that it rained all day;— about 
1000 very attentive hearers were present. The friends 
must have been very industrious and liberal in their 

R3900 : page 374 

advertising, else no such assemblage could have been 
gathered on such a day. We were pleased, too, that when 
they noted the unfavorable weather they did not murmur 
nor complain, but said,— "The Lord knows best: 
He could have ordered it otherwise had he so desired." 

The evening discourse on "Two Purgatories"— one 
for the Church and one for the world— those who desire 
already possess, through the newspapers; so we 
do not elaborate its features here. We parted with 
joyful greetings at 9 p.m., all of us wishing for the 
General Convention with our Lord— hoping that it 
will be soon. 

Worcester, Mass., had its first One-Day Convention 
on Nov. 18. It was surely a joyous occasion for the 
dear friends there as well as for us who visited them; 
over 200 from all parts of New England, but particularly 
from Boston and vicinity. The local Church is 
small in numbers and financially weak, but had been 
saving up in preparation for the Convention expenses 
for fully two years. They seemed greatly rejoiced 
with the results of their efforts. 

The morning session led off as a Testimony Rally, 
then came Brother Russell's discourse to the interested 
on the "Times of Restitution"— slightly different and 
more elaborated than the reports of it in the daily 
newspapers. Next came the noon-day repast, and in 
the afternoon the public service— the event of the occasion. 
The friends had secured "Mechanics' Hall," the 
largest and finest auditorium in Worcester, seating 
over 2,000. A grand audience was present, and the 
close attention given to so lengthy a discourse told of 
an interest which with some will, we trust, grow and 
deepen into love, devotion, zeal. About 1100 were 
present. Brother Russell's train left just at the close 
of this service, but the friends had, we understand, 
further spiritual feasting in the evening. 



page 374 

BEREAN STUDIES IN "TABERNACLE SHADOWS" 

In the references below, Z. represents this journal 
and T. stands for Tabernacle Shadows. The references 
should be given to brethren and sisters for reading 
in the classes. Free comment should be permitted 
after each reading. 



ISRAELITES, LEVITES AND THE PRIESTHOOD 



DECEMBER 9 

1. What did the nation of Israel frequently typify? 
T.25,par. 2, 3. 

2. What did Israel typify in its relation to the Tabernacle? 
T.25, par. 3, to 26, par. 1. 

3. What did the Levites typify? T.26, par. 2. 

4. What did the Aaronic priesthood typify? T.26, 
par. 2 to 4. 

5. Who is the head of the antitypical priesthood? 
Heb. 3:1;T.27, par. 1. 

6. What is the significance in the tribe of Levi having 
existed before the priesthood was instituted? 

T.27, par. 2. 

7. What is the significance of the fact that in the ordination 
of the priesthood the Chief Priest was 

always first? T.28, par. 1, 2. 

8. What did the ceremony of the anointing signify 
and typify? T.28, par. 3. 

DECEMBER 16 

9. What was the significance of Aaron's being washed 
before putting on the garments of "glory and 
beauty"? T. 29, par. 1. 

10. What were the High Priest's garments of "glory 
and beauty"? and what did they typify in general? 
Ex. 28:4; T.29, par. 2, 3. 

11. What did the white linen "coat" represent? T.29, 
par. 4. 

12. What was the "mitre"? and what did it typify? 
T.29, par. 5. 

13. Describe the golden plate or "crown." What did it 
typify? and why was it fastened with a blue lacer 

to the "mitre"? T.30, par. 1; T.29, par. 5. 

14. What was the significance of the "linen girdle"? T.30, 
par. 2. 

15. Describe the "upper robe." What did its color 
(blue) and its golden bells and pomegranates 
signify? T.30, par. 3. 

16. How was the "ephod" made? and what was the 
significance of its two parts with their golden 
clasps? T.30, par. 4. 

17. What did the "curious girdle" signify? T.33, par. 1. 

DECEMBER 23 

18. Respecting the statement on page 33, par. 2, "Sealed 
with the sacrifice of himself once for all," are 

the members of his body all counted in with the 



Head in this work of sealing the New Covenant? 
and has the great High Priest yet finished this 
work of sealing and confirming the New Covenant? 
and has it gone into effect? or will this 
all be accomplished with the passing beyond the 
vail of the last member of the body, the sprinkling 
of the blood of the sin-offering, and the coming 
forth in glory robes for the blessing of the 
people? Z/05-378 (1st col. par. 1.) 

19. Why is that part of the "ephod" representing the 
Abrahamic Covenant still incomplete? T.33, par. 3. 

20. What is meant by "the Seed of Abraham"? Gal. 3:16,29; 
T.33, par. 3. 

DECEMBER 30 

21. How do we know that the natural seed of Abraham 
will not be members of the great antitypical High 
Priest? T.33, par. 4. 

22. What part will natural Israel have in fulfilling the 
Abrahamic Covenant? and upon what conditions? 
T.34, par. 1. 

23. What did the colors of the "ephod" signify? T.34, 
par. 2. 

24. How was the "breastplate of judgment" worn, and 
what did it represent? T.34, par. 3. 

25. How did natural Israel regard the Covenant (represented 
by the ephod), and the Law (represented 

by the breastplate), and why? T.34, par. 3. 

JANUARY 6 

26. Describe the Law emblem (the breastplate). Why 
was it bound upon the High Priest's heart? 

T.35, par. 1. 

27. What were the dimensions of the breastplate? and 
what the significance of its being a span long and 

a span wide when doubled? T.35, par. 2. 

28. What was the significance of its being doubled, and 
what did each half represent? T.35, par. 3. 

page 375 

29. What is the precious significance of the breastplate 
being suspended by a gold chain from the 

gold clasps of the "ephod"? T.36, par. 1. 

30. What did Aaron represent when clothed in these 
beautiful robes and anointed with the holy oil? 
T.36, par. 2. 

31. How were the under priests, "the body," clothed, 
and what was the significance of their garments? 
T.36, par. 3, 4. 

32. What beautiful and appropriate antitypical application 
does the Apostle Paul make to the Gospel 

Church in this connection? T.36, par. 3; F.271, 
par. 1-3. 



33. How was the anointing oil applied, and what did 
this ceremony typify primarily? T.37, par. 1. 

34. Why was the anointing oil poured only upon Aaron's 
head, and not upon the under priests? T.37, par. 2. 

35. What is the antitype of this anointing in its secondary 
significance? T.37, par. 2, 3; E.304 to 305, 

par. 1; F.132, par. 1. 

36. From what standpoint should we view Aaron thus 
robed and anointed? T.38, par. 1. 



R3899 : page 375 

HE THRESHETH HIS WHEAT 

When the Wheat is carried home 
And the threshing time is come, 

Close the door. 
When the flail is lifted high, 
Like the chaff I would not fly; 
At His feet oh let me lie 

On the floor. 

All the cares that o'er me steal, 
All the sorrows that I feel 

Like a dart, 
When my enemies prevail, 
When my strength begins to fail— 
'Tis the beating of the flail 
On my heart. 

It becomes me to be still, 
Tho' I cannot all His will 

Understand; 
I would be the purest wheat, 
Lying humbly at His feet, 
Kissing oft the rod that beat, 

In His hand. 

By and by I shall be stored 
In the garner of the Lord 

Like a prize; 
Thanking Him for every blow 
That in sorrow laid me low, 
But in beating made me grow 

For the skies. 

—Unknown. 



R3900 : page 375 

IN THE CROSS OF CHRIST I GLORY. 
-LUKE 23:33-46. -DECEMBER 9- 



Golden Text:— "Father, forgive them; 
for they know not what they do." 

THE Gospel of salvation by the blood of the cross 
is becoming more and more unpopular. That 
divine justice required a "life for a life," and 
accepted the life of Jesus as the ransom price for the 
life of Adam and that of the race which lost life through 
him, seems to be repugnant to the natural mind, and, 
alas! the number of those begotten of the Spirit and 
able to appreciate spiritual things from the spiritual 
standpoint seems to be remarkably small. Worldly wisdom 
rejects the entire story of redemption when it rejects 
the Bible record of the fall and substitutes the 
theory of evolution, which assumes that man is gradually 
raising himself from bestial to more and more 
rational conditions. Of course, it must be logically 
true that if there was no fall from perfection there was 
no original sin and condemnation, and if Adam and his 
race were not cursed, condemned, sentenced to death, 
redemption from such a sentence would be impossible. 
From this standpoint of worldly wisdom (which is 
taught in all the colleges, seminaries and high schools) 
the entire Bible story of redemption through the blood 
of the cross is foolishness. 

"Christian Science," falsely so-called, is aiding also 
in the undermining of faith in the Bible testimony respecting 
redemption through the blood. Its theory is 
that there is no sin, never was any sin nor evil of any 
kind, but all such matters are purely mental hallucinations 
and deceptions;— that there was therefore no 
divine sentence against Adam and his race as sinners, 
and that there is no such thing as death. They thus 
contradict the Apostle who declares, "By one man's 
disobedience sin entered into the world and death as 
the result of sin; and so death passed upon all men for 
all are sinners." (Rom. 5:12.) This delusion, which 
seems so weak and nonsensical to those who have 
learned to rightly divide the Word of Truth, is, as the 
Scriptures declare, a "strong delusion" upon many who 
have only a superficial knowledge of the divine Word. 
These, after learning to deny the facts in their own experiences, 
after practising the denial of all pain, gradually 
so pervert their minds that they cannot reason 
properly and truthfully on any subject. These, being 
mentally blindfolded, the Scriptures are twisted for 
them into such shapes as to bind them hand and foot 
and render them thoroughly impervious to the Truth. 

ERRORS BEGET ERRORS 

The third view of the cross is the offspring of the 
two delusions foregoing: it seeks to hold to the Scriptures 
and to the cross of Christ, and to some kind of a 
work there accomplished for mankind, but is confused 



and blinded, and sees not clearly just what was accomplished. 

In its blindness it grasps the statement that 

Christ set an example to us his followers, but that his 

sufferings were in no sense of the word redemptive, but 

merely educational, instructive to his followers. They 

claim that Jesus suffered to show us how to suffer, that 

he died to show us how to die, to show us his resignation 

to the Father's will. They totally overlook and 

ignore the true view of our Lord's death set forth in 

many Scriptural, positive statements, some of them in 

this lesson: that Christ died for our sins, that he gave 

himself a ransom for all, that he bought us with his 

precious blood, that we are redeemed by the blood of 

Christ. 

R3900 : page 376 

The true view of the cross recognizes that while 
Jesus is indeed the Teacher of the Church, the Head of 
the Church, the Bridegroom for the Bride, the Church, 
it is the Lord who obtained not only the rightful authority 
to be our Teacher and by and by to be King of 
the world, but also by the same sacrifice, by the same 
ransom price, he bought the Church and the world, 
securing for all mankind release from the original 
sentence of death, release from the "curse," thus making 
it possible for God to be just and at the same time 
the justifier of him that believeth on Jesus. It is when 
the death of Christ is recognized as the ransom price 
for Adam, and incidentally for all of his family who 
lost through his disobedience, that we see its real signification, 
and how it was impossible under the divine 
arrangement for the baptism into death to be omitted 
by our Lord. At the same time we see how all who will 
be members of his glorious Bride class must also share 
with him in this baptism into death, and that without 
the shedding of his blood there could be no remission 
of sins, no reconciliation to the Father, no resurrection 
out of death, no reattainment of everlasting life. With 
the true view before us we have not only feelings of 
sympathy for our dear Redeemer's sufferings at Calvary, 
portrayed in this lesson, but we have joy also in 
his faithfulness, which means our redemption and ultimately 
through him, in the resurrection, our deliverance 
from the power of sin and death. 

EN ROUTE TO CALVARY 

Our last lesson showed us Pilate signing the death-warrant 
of Jesus under protest, washing his hands as 
indicating that he considered the matter an outrage of 
justice, but was helpless as respects further protestation 
against the will of the people who cried out, 
"Crucify him!" The scourged Jesus, who knew in advance 
the result, was the most calm and collected one 
of the company, fully prepared to drink to its dregs the 



cup which the Father had allowed to be prepared for 
him— conscious that the Father's love and care would 
do nothing amiss and would cause ultimately all things 
to work together for his good. Soon all was in readiness, 
and the little procession was formed and wended 
its way from Pilate's castle along the narrow streets of 
Jerusalem to the Damascus gate. First went a soldier 
with a white wooden board, on which was written the 
nature of the crime of the convict; next followed four 
soldiers under the command of a centurion, with hammer 
and nails, guarding Jesus, who bore his own cross; 
then followed the two robbers, each bearing his own 
cross and guarded by four soldiers. A multitude 
thronged the way, the curious throng, the exultant enemies, 
and some of the Lord's friends, "Mary with other 
women weeping" (vs. 27). The entire distance from 
castle Antonio to the hill-top called Calvary is about 
three-fourths of a mile. Calvary is the Latin name, 
signifying the skull; Golgotha, the word used by Matthew, 
also signifies a skull, being the Aramaic, the 
original language of the Jews in Palestine. The name 
was probably applied because, looked upon at a little 
distance, it much resembled a skull. A recent writer 
thus describes it:— 

"Two hundred yards outside the Damascus gate of 
Jerusalem there is an isolated white limestone knoll, in 
contour like the crown of the head and about 60 feet high. 
It contains in its perpendicular face the most remarkable 
likeness to a skull. The two eyeless sockets, the 
overhanging forehead, the lines of the nose, the mouth 
and chin will be plainly seen. It is also concave, and 
the same color as a skull. On the summit of Golgotha 
there is a great pit heaped over with stones. . . . This 
pit is filled with the skeletons and bones of criminals, 
who, from time immemorial, have been crucified and 
stoned. The bodies of criminals are still hurled into 
that same pit. A mighty earthquake upheaved this 
solid earth and split this very rock asunder. To the 
right of the skull the face of the cliff is oddly riven. . . 
At the bottom of the western cliff there is a large garden 
with a very ancient well. Where it touches the foot 
of the cliff, six feet below the surface, the rock-hewn 
sepulcher of our Lord has been discovered. There is 
now a general concensus of agreement that this is the 
true Calvary." 

R3901 : page 376 

En route, and probably near the Damascus gate, a 
women's society for the mitigation of the sufferings of 
those executed met the procession and tendered refreshments 
in the form of a narcotic drink of wine and 
myrrh, intended to relieve the pains of the crucified by 
benumbing their sensibilities. Their sympathy was 
also expressed by their tears. The account gives us to 
understand that Jesus courteously tasted of the beverage 



to show his appreciation of the kindness, but declined 

to drink the potion. He was willing to endure 

to the end all that the Father might be pleased to permit 

to come upon him. "More than conqueror" we behold 

him— we glory in the principles which actuated 

the Captain of our Salvation in his every act, and we 

are inspired by his example to press with vigor on, assured 

by him that "Greater is he that is for us than all 

that be against us," and that he will not permit any experience 

to happen to us that he is not able to overrule 

for our best interests. 

BEARING THE CROSS AFTER HIM 

Another incident occurred about this time: Simon, 
a countryman, a Cyrenian, met the procession at a time 
when, according to tradition, Jesus— weakened through 
the experiences of the night and through his previous 
experiences, in which virtue went out of him when he 
healed the multitudes— was about to faint under the 
weight of the cross. Simon was compelled to bear the 
cross after Jesus, but whether this means that Jesus 
walked before and that Simon carried the cross behind 
him, or whether it means that Simon walked back of 
Jesus carrying the end which otherwise was dragging 
on the ground, we cannot surely know. If, however, it 
was the latter, the figure becomes all the more striking 
as an illustration of how the Lord's true followers today 
are to walk in his footsteps and to join with him in 
the carrying of the cross— not the literal, but the 
symbolical. 

R3901 : page 377 

If we are inclined to wonder where were Peter, 
John and James and the others of the apostles that they 
proffered the Master no helping hand, we are to remember 
that they were "common people" and rather despised 
as Galileans, and that they had reason to fear 
that the wrath of the chief priests and rulers against 
Jesus might also attach more or less to them, and no 
doubt these considerations had something to do with 
their backwardness. Besides, they were in a great 
maze of perplexity at the experiences through which 
their Master was passing— they understood not until 
after our Lord's resurrection and his explanation of the 
Scriptures bearing upon the subject. We are not, 
therefore, to plume ourselves upon superior courage 
when thinking how we would delight ourselves in such 
an opportunity. We are to remember that we have the 
light and the knowledge and the holy Spirit, which 
they did not then have, and that thus we have much 
advantage over them every way. 

When we think, however, how nobly Peter, James 
and John and the others carried on the work of the 
Lord— how they took up the cross of Christ in the 



highest sense as his apostles and servants— we have 
every reason to rejoice and to do them honor. And now 
the cross is with us. The truths represented in our 
Lord, in his teachings, in his sacrifice, are still despised 
and rejected of men— not only by the world, but 
also by the chief priests, scribes and Pharisees of nominal 
Christendom. The members of the body of Christ, 
their hope of glory, honor and immortality, and the 
blessing of all the families of the earth, are still 
laughed to scorn, and there is still room for bearing 
the cross and experiencing crucifixion of the flesh as 
the representatives of him who loved us and bought us 
with his precious blood. How faithful have we been 
in the past? how faithful will we be in the future? 
Here is our opportunity also for coming off conquerors 
through faithfulness in walking in his steps. 

"FATHER, FORGIVE THEM" 

Arrived at Calvary, Golgotha, the wooden crosses 
were laid upon the ground, the victims stretched 
thereon, and nailed by hands and feet; then the 
soldiers lifted the crosses and set them into already 
prepared holes or sockets. The torture of these experiences 
can better be imagined than described. It was 
a most cruel death, though perhaps not more cruel than 
some other forms by which the Lord's followers and 
others have died. It was not the pain, not the suffering 
that was our ransom price— it was the death. The 
penalty upon father Adam was not the amount of pain 
he should suffer, but the fact that he must lose life. 
And so some of Adam's children have lost their lives 
with great pain, others with little suffering, but over 
all the sentence reigns, "Dying thou shalt die." It was 
sufficient in some respects that the Lord should have 
died, no matter how, but in other respects this was not 
sufficient. Under the Mosaic law it was decreed, 
"Cursed is everyone that hangeth on a tree." (Gal. 3:13.) 
That vilest sentence or curse against sinners under the 
Law Jesus bore, that he might not only be the Redeemer 
of the world in general but also the Redeemer 
of the Jew, as it is written, "He was made a curse for 
us"— experienced the sentence of the accursed ones 
under the Law. 

It was supposed that it was just about the time 
that the cross was dropped into the sockets, which 
would be one of the most agonizing moments of the 
entire experience, that our Lord in the midst of his 
agony prayed for his enemies, "Father, forgive them, 
for they know not what they do." It certainly would be 
just like our dear Master to utter such a prayer, and 
we feel very sure that it was the sentiment of his heart, 
as it was also that of the first martyr, Stephen, who 
cried in dying, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge." 
It is but truthful, however, for us to note the fact that 
these words credited to our Lord are omitted from the 



Vatican MS., which is one of the very oldest; and 

although they appeared in the Sinaitic, they were subsequently 

stricken out of the latter as though their 

authenticity were doubted. We cannot, however, have 

any doubt that the words represented our Master's 

sentiments toward his enemies, for they are in full accord 

with his instructions to his followers, Love your 

enemies, do good to them that persecute you, and pray 

for them. 

"THEY PARTED HIS RAIMENT" 

The four soldiers who had Jesus in charge, after 
they had set the cross in place, began to look after his 
personal effects, his clothing, which became their portion 
according to usage. Little did they think as they 
divided his garments, and then cast lots for his seamless 
tunic, which was the most valuable article, that 
they were thus fulfilling prophecy. (Psa. 22:18.) Just 
so it is with the whole world; matters are moving on 
from day to day, prophecies are being fulfilled, many 
of us have part in them, but few can see and understand, 
because only a few have the guidance of the holy 
Spirit. As an illustration of prophecy being fulfilled 
in our day, note the statement in Daniel about many 
running to and fro and knowledge being increased, and 
the approach of a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation— all declared to be indications of 
the time of the end of this age. (Dan. 12:1-4.) Yet 
how few of those who see and acknowledge that we are 
living in peculiar and wonderful times realize that 
these are fulfilments of prophecy. 

DECEPTIVE OUTWARD EVIDENCES 

The crowd stood around gaping, and the rulers 
joined with them in deriding the one who so recently 
had ridden upon the ass as the King of the Jews. They 
made light also of his miracles of healing, of awaking 
the dead, saying, "He saved others, let him save himself." 
Let him save himself if he be the Messiah of 
God, his elect one. How deceived they were, and what 
a lesson it should teach us of the fallibility of human 
judgment and the necessity for looking deeply, especially 
in matters pertaining to God and his Word. If the 
rulers had any compunctions of conscience respecting 
their course previously, they did not now manifest it, 
since they were fully convinced that our Lord was a 

R3901 : page 378 

deceiver, a fraud. This was implied in their willingness 
to say, "His blood be upon us and upon our 
children." If they had any qualms of conscience these 
apparently were satisfied as they beheld Jesus on the 
cross, helpless and dying. Here was certainly a test, they 



said. If he were the Messiah undoubtedly he would 
not thus suffer ignominiously, but would come down 
from the cross; hence they said, We have proof that 
our course has been a wise and proper one in ridding 
our nation of a disturber of its peace, whose teaching 
would ultimately have overthrown our priestly authority 
and control of the people. 

Similarly in the harvest of this age, with antitypical 
nominal spiritual Israel, the Truth is stranger than 
any fiction, and the masses, in a wrong condition of 
heart, not guided by the Spirit of the Lord, are blind 
to it, and also the rulers, the Doctors of Divinity. 
Doubtless the hour will come when measures of force 
will be used against all who stand faithful to the Lord 
and his Truth; and they, too, will suffer under the 
claim that their death will be for the good of the cause, 
that it is expedient that injustice in some measure be 
done to a few rather than that their influence should 
prevail to any further extent against the systems in 
power. 

Spurred on by the influence of the Jewish rulers, 
the Roman soldiers also derided the one just crucified 
as the King of the Jews; and the whole multitude, as 
they read over his head in Greek, the language of literature 
—in Latin, the language of the Romans, their 
rulers— in Hebrew, the language of their own nation, 
the words, "This is the King of the Jews," were struck 
with the absurdity of the situation— its impossibility, 
so to speak,— that a king of the nation should be thus 
completely denounced and rejected by the people of his 
realm! Alas, how little they understood his power! He 
could indeed have come down from the cross, could 

R3902 : page 378 

have refused to die, could have resisted their insults, 
could have had "more than twelve legion of angels" for 
his defence. But this would not have been in accord 
with his consecration, nor in accord with the Father's 
will, and would have left us as the race of Adam under 
the sentence of death, without hope of a future life- 
dead as brute beasts. 

How we may rejoice that the dear Redeemer did 
not when he was reviled revile again, when he was maltreated 
resent it and do injury to his executioners. How 
we may rejoice in his faithfulness and love, which 
enabled him to present the acceptable sacrifice on our 
behalf. How we can exult also in the great glory, honor, 
dominion and power everlasting which have come to 
him as a reward and as a token of the Father's approval, 
and what a hope it gives us that we also by his 
grace and assistance may attain to joint-heirship with 
him in his Kingdom. 

"WITH ME IN PARADISE" 



As the multitude of onlookers were divided, some 
sympathizing and some deriding, it is not surprising 
that similar emotions were awakened in the minds of 
the two robbers crucified with Jesus. In his company, 
following him, they had been witnesses of his meekness, 
gentleness, patience and evident faith in God, 
yet but one of them had the eyes of understanding to 
appreciate this in any measure. The other, blind as 
the rulers and the populace, joined with them in reviling 
the Lord as an impostor, a hypocrite. The first- 
manifesting a faith which, under all the circumstances, 
was a remarkable one— reproved his fellow saying, 
"Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same 
condemnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive 
the due reward of our deeds, but this man hath done 
nothing amiss." Our Lord's light indeed shined in 
darkness and the children of darkness comprehended 
it not, but his disciples at least sympathized. And so 
also this poor thief perceived that our Lord was suffering 
injustice, being buffeted, yet taking it patiently. 

Doubtless the thief had heard of Jesus, that he was 
reputed by some to be the Messiah, and, notwithstanding 
the incongruous condition of things, the thief realized 
that with our Redeemer there was a kingly demeanor, 
and the thought had doubtless been growing 
in his mind, What if this is some great one from the 
spirit world, who, as he claims, will by and by in 
another age establish his Kingdom! What if these 
rulers are moved by envy and selfishness, and are blind 
to his teachings! The raillery of his companion only 
opened his mouth in defense of the Savior. Confessing 
his own unworthiness, he nevertheless pled for justice, 
suggesting that both he and his companion thief had 
reason to be fearful in their dying hour as respects 
what might be their future in the hands of the 
Almighty; but here was one traduced, buffeted, crucified, 
of whom they were witnesses that "This man hath 
done nothing amiss." 

"LORD, REMEMBER ME" 

Having administered the rebuke he appealed to 
our Lord, saying, "Lord, remember me when thou comest 
into thy kingdom"— when you receive your kingdom, 
wherever it may be and under whatever conditions, 
if it is in your power remember me. I look to you 
as vastly my superior and the superior of all of us. It 
seems to me not at all improbable that you are indeed 
a mighty king, misunderstood by some of your subjects. 
I venture this appeal to you, even though in the 
eyes of others it may seem foolish. "Remember me" 
when you become a king, for I verily believe somehow, 
sometime, somewhere, you shall have a kingdom, 
for you certainly would be worthy of it. 

Our Lord's recorded answer has caused much debate 
amongst Christian people. As it appears in the 



English it seems to give the thought that the Lord 
himself expected to be in Paradise that same day, and 
that the thief would be there and receive blessing and 
favor at his hand. If by Paradise heaven be understood, 
we know that there must be some mistake, because 
our Lord certainly did not go to heaven that 
day. The Apostle quotes the Prophet David's words, 
which imply that he was in sheol (Greek hades) until 
his resurrection on the third day. (Acts 2:31; Psa. 16:10.) 
Our Lord himself on the morning of his resurrection 

R3902 : page 379 

told Mary to tell the disciples that he had not 
yet ascended to his Father and their Father, to his God 
and their God. Paul's declaration is that he was dead 
during the interim— that "he rose from the dead on the 
third day. "-I Cor. 15:4. 

PARADISE LOST TO BE RESTORED 

The word Paradise, elsewhere mentioned in the 
Scriptures, refers to the Garden of Eden, from which 
Adam and Eve were cast out, and to the Paradise restored 
—the entire earth turned into a Paradise at the 
second coming of our Lord and the establishment of 
his Kingdom. The Garden of Eden had long been destroyed 
at the time of this conversation; the Paradise 
of the Kingdom is therefore the only one to which the 
Lord could have referred. The whole question hinges 
upon the word today, which is not generally used now 
as in this text, where it is used to express emphasis, 
and is better appreciated when we transpose the 
comma and place it after today instead of before it. 
Then the passage would read, "Verily I say unto thee 
today [when everything seems unfavorable, when I appear 
as an impostor, subject to the insults and taunts 
of my enemies— notwithstanding all this, I tell you] 
thou shalt be with me in Paradise." But the Lord 
and the thief went to hades, the tomb, the state of 
death, that very day. The Lord arose on the third 
day, but the thief remained a prisoner in the great 
prison-house of death, with the remainder of the world, 
unconscious. 

When the Lord at his second coming, in due time, 
shall call forth the thief from the tomb he will come 
forth to Paradise, for the whole earth at that time shall 
be filled with the glory of the Lord, the Sun of Righteousness 
shall fill the earth with the light of 
divine truth. Then that thief of remarkable faith will 
be remembered and receive blessing proportionate to 
his faith and to the blessing which he ministered to 
his dying Redeemer. Furthermore, the thief's request 
was to be remembered when Messiah would come in 
his Kingdom, and we still pray, "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven." There 



can be no Paradise until his Kingdom shall come. Our 
Lord's answer, as expressed in the words "Verily, verily," 
signifies, "Amen, so be it,"— Be it as you have 
suggested, thou shalt be with me in Paradise, I declare 
this today amidst all this contradiction of sinners 
and exhibition of the powers of darkness. 

MANY OR FEW STRIPES IN PARADISE 

But will not all mankind, except those who have 
now seen and tasted and wilfully rejected the grace of 
God— will not all others have some blessed opportunity 
in Paradise, too, under the ministration of the 
Millennial Kingdom? We answer, Yes. The blinded 
thief will be there, and all those blind spectators who 
railed upon the Lord and those who cried, "Crucify 
him," and pierced him, and who said, "His blood be 
upon us and upon our children"— they will all be there, 
as it is written, "All that are in their graves shall hear 
the voice of the Son of man and shall come forth." (Jno. 5:28,29.) 
What advantage then will the friends of the 
Lord have over the others? We answer they have 
much advantage every way: first they have the blessing 
and peace which come in believing even in the present 
life. All the Lord's disciples know this, and the 
believing thief assuredly realized a blessing from it, 
too, and died the happier. As for the future life we 
may readily see that the blinded ones, while not to be 
held entirely responsible for their blindness, which 
the Scriptures declare comes from the god of this world, 
who blinds the minds of them that believe not, are 
nevertheless to some extent responsible, and will be 
handicapped in the future in proportion to their degree 
of present wilfulness in sin. 

The believing thief was certainly not prepared for 
heaven. He was not begotten of the Spirit, and hence 
could not be born of the Spirit in the resurrection. He 
had not cultivated the fruits and graces of the Spirit 
and therefore would not be acceptable as an overcomer 
and joint-heir with the saints. But we may be sure 
that the faith developed and acted upon to the extent 
of defending the Lord in such an emergency implies a 
considerable degree of principle and love of righteousness 
at heart, and that under the Millennial Kingdom 
conditions the believing thief would undoubtedly have 
made rapid progress under the blessing of the Lord up 
to full perfection of all that was lost in Adam and redeemed 
by the precious blood. 

Dr. Alford has well said, "What is really astonishing 
is the power and strength of that faith which, 
amid shame and pain and mockery, could lift itself to 
the apprehension of the Crucified as his King. The 
thief would fill a conspicuous place in the list of triumphs 
of faith supplementary to Hebrews 11." 

"DARKNESS OVER THE LAND" 



It was about noon that Jesus, seeing his mother 
and John standing near, said, "Woman, behold they 
son," and to John, "Behold thy mother." We thus see 
that, in the extremity of his pain even, our Lord was 
thinking less of himself than of his disciples and of his 
dear ones. It was about this time that darkness began 
to settle, beclouding the scene for about three hours. 
Undoubtedly the shade was more comfortable for the 
crucified ones than the sunlight of that bright land. 
And surely it was appropriate that nature should be 
draped, the shadowy vail drawn over such a scene. Well 
did it picture the temporary triumph of the power of darkness 
over him who is the Light of the world. Thanks 
be to God and to our Lord that through his blessed 
sacrifice for sins very soon all the shadows will be past, 
for the Sun of Righteousness will rise with healing in 
his beams for the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. 

"GAVE UP THE GHOST" 

The last verse of our lesson tells of our Lord's last 
agonizing cry with a loud voice— consuming the remainder 
of his strength. His words elsewhere recorded 
were, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken 
me?" We have already noticed the serene calmness of 
our dear Master from the time in Gethsemane 
when the angel strengthened him with the assurance 

R3903 : page 380 

that his course had thus far been pleasing 

and acceptable in the Father's sight. But it was 

necessary that he should have the sinner's bitter 

experience, even to the extent of being entirely cut off 

from fellowship with the Father. In God's providence, 

however, this was not prolonged, but merely "for a moment." 

The Father hid his face from his beloved Son 

in the sense of withdrawing all spiritual fellowship 

and communion: for a moment, therefore, our Redeemer 

was left in a depth of darkness, and his agonizing 

cry pictures the loneliness of his heart. It was not 

enough that of the people there were none with him— 

it must come to this, that the Father should temporarily 

withdraw sustaining strength and assistance. 

Yet our Lord triumphed, and his final words as he 
breathed his last were, "Father, into thy hands I commit 
my spirit," and having said this "he gave up the 
ghost." The word ghost was at one time used as a 
synonym for spirit, and the meaning of this statement 
is that our Lord gave up his spirit, his breath of life. 
In other words, he breathed out his last breath, he let 
go his hold upon life. 

But what was meant by the words, "Into thy hands 
I commit my spirit"— my breath, my life? We answer 



that when God created Adam he first formed him and 
then gave him the gift of life. The right to this gift 
Adam forfeited by disobedience. He was able to transmit 
to his posterity a spark of vitality, but not perfection 
of life, because he had lost all right to that. 
Hence Adam and each member of his race in dying 
surrenders his life to God under the divine edict that 
they were unworthy of life, that they could not have it 
nor claim it either soon or ever. But with our Lord 
Jesus it was different: he had a life that was not derived 
from Adam, but, transferred from a heavenly 
condition, he had a right to life, and it was this life to 
which he had a right that he was now laying down on 
behalf of, and as a redemption price for, Adam and his 
race. In letting go his hold on life he surrendered it 
to the Father, who had already promised that his life 
being thus surrendered should entitle him to a higher 
life under still greater favor, and this he received when 
he arose from the dead on the "third day," for, as the 
Apostle declared, "He was put to death in the flesh, 
but quickened [made alive] in the Spirit"— a spirit being. 
-I Pet. 3:18. 



R3903 : page 380 

"HE IS RISEN, EVEN AS HE SAID" 

-MATTHEW 28:1-15.-DECEMBER 16.- 

THE PROOFS of our Lord's resurrection from the dead 
are quite necessary to be kept in mind by those who 
have been begotten of the holy Spirit; and as they 
were indispensable to our attainment of justifying faith in 
Jesus, so they are also necessary for others. Indeed none 
could reach the higher developments of faith and Christian 
experience without this foundation well established. As it 
was necessary for us to know that Christ died for our sins 
before we could believe in him as the Redeemer, as the one 
who had secured the right to be the Life-giver to Adam and 
his race, so it was necessary for us to believe more than 
this, namely, that he who died for our sins rose again, so 
that he might be our justifier, our Lord, our guide, our 
helper, our advocate with the Father, and by and by the 
Mediator between God and the world. From this standpoint, 
therefore, our lesson is important as providing us 
with the necessary reasonable proofs to lay before those 
who are approaching the subject— our friends, the members 
of our families, etc., who have not yet accepted Christ. 

SUMMING UP THE PROOFS 

we find that they are numerous and well substantiated, as 
follows:— 
(1) Our Lord's death could not have been a case of 



suspended animation: the spear-thrust in his side made this 

evident, not only because it was a mortal wound, but because 

it furnished evidence that our Lord was already dead 

in that there issued from his side water as well as coagulated 

blood. 

(2) The centurion charged with the execution was 
convinced of his death, and so reported to Pilate, the 
Governor. 

(3) The request of the chief priests, that the stone 
against the door of the sepulcher be sealed and the Roman 
guard placed around the tomb, so that no one could remove 
the body and then pretend that Jesus had risen, was a further 
evidence that he was regarded as dead. 

(4) His friends believed that he was dead and wrapped 
him in spices for burial: indeed in their grief they seem 

to have forgotten his promise of a resurrection— so much so 
that even after he had risen it was with difficulty that they 
were convinced. 

(5) The record that the guards dissembled and declared 
that the disciples stole his body while they slept, being 
bribed by the Jewish rulers, served at last to prove that 
the guard had been set and that everybody recognized that 
Jesus was dead. 

(6) The tomb in which Jesus was buried was a new 
one, in which no one had previously been buried, so there 
could be no doubt as to the identity of the one who arose. 
We are glad that there is such satisfactory evidence that 
Christ died, and that thus we have further foundation for 
the Scriptural assurance that he died as the Redeemer of 
the world. Even Strauss, the agnostic, is constrained to 
say on this subject, "The whole countryside knew he was 
dead." 

THE WITNESSES MOST RELIABLE 

The resurrection of Christ is vouched for by many most 
honorable witnesses, of whom it cannot be said that they 
were shrewd and learned and took advantage of opportunity 
to hoax the public. On the contrary, they had nothing 
to gain by their course— everything to jeopardize. The witnesses 
were not only poor but unlearned, and write themselves 
down as "ignorant." It would have been to their 
advantage to have dropped Jesus and the malodorous reputation 
associated with his name. They testified to his resurrection, 
and preached in his name and through his power 

R3903 : page 381 

as the risen one the forgiveness of sins— and did this at 
their own expense, with sufferings, stripes, imprisonment 
and cruel death as the reward. Their testimony fully concurs 
with the Master's own words before he died— words 
which his own intimate followers could not appreciate, 
could not comprehend— that on the third day he would rise 
from the dead. 
The doctrine of the resurrection itself is peculiar to the 



Jewish and Christian religions. Other religions the world 
over ignore the necessity for a resurrection, and claim that 
those who die are more alive than they were before 
their death. The Apostles, on the contrary, admitted that 
all their hope rested in the fact that Christ did rise from the 
dead. Mark the Apostle Paul's words, "If Christ be not 
risen, then is our preaching vain, your faith is also vain; 
yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we 
have testified that God raised up Christ: whom he raised 
not up if the dead rise not; for if the dead rise not then is 
not Christ risen: and if Christ be not raised, your faith is 
vain; ye are yet in your sins. Then they also that are 
fallen asleep in Christ are perished."— 1 Cor. 15:14-18. 

It is not reasonable to suppose that honest men would 
misrepresent such a matter as the resurrection of our Lord, 
and it would be foolish for them to lay such stress upon a 
matter of which they were not morally convinced themselves. 
Why dwell so earnestly upon the resurrection of the dead 
if they had the least doubt on the subject? Why declare 
that all faith and all hope in Christ, all hope of forgiveness 
of sins, all hope of a future life by a resurrection was at an 
end if Christ had not risen, unless they were satisfied beyond 
peradventure? Especially so when the learned of that time 
were teaching Plato's philosophy, that the dead are not dead 
but more alive, and hence need no resurrection. 

Our Lord announced in advance that he would rise 
from the dead on the third day. In any view of the matter 
our Lord could not have been exactly three days and three 
nights in the tomb according to the record— it would have 
been either more or less, because he died in the afternoon 
and rose from the dead in the morning, hence no exact 
statement of even days and nights would fit the case. 
We recognize the custom of the times of reckoning a portion 
of a day or a year as though it were a complete one. For 
instance, throughout all the records of the chronicles of the 
kings we find that a portion of a year is counted for a year; 
that if a king reigned three years and three months it would 
be counted a reign of four years, or if he reigned two years 
and three months it would be counted three years, since he 
did reign for a portion of the third year. So in the statement 
of our Lord's period in the tomb, it is properly enough 
spoken of as three days and three nights, and shown thus: 

JEWISH RECKONING 

4 to 6 P.M. Friday==2 hours. 

6 P.M. Friday to 6 P.M. Saturday==24 hours. 

6 P.M. Saturday to 4 or 5 A.M. Sunday==10 or 11 hours. 

R3904: page 381 

BY MODERN RECKONING 

4 P.M. to 12 midnight, Friday==8 hours. 

From midnight Friday to midnight Saturday==24 hours. 

From midnight Saturday to 5 A.M. Sunday==5 hours. 



Or another possible view of the matter would indicate 
Thursday as our Lord's death-day as follows:— 

Laid in tomb— 6 P.M. Thursday. 

6 P.M. Thursday to 6 A.M. Friday— First night. 

6 A.M. Friday to 6 P.M. Friday-First day. 

6 P.M. Friday to 6 A.M. Saturday-Second night. 

6 A.M. Saturday to 6 P.M. Saturday-Second day. 

6 P.M. Saturday to 6 A.M. Sunday-Third night. 

6 A.M. Sunday— Beginning third day. 

Either view thus reckoned fulfils Peter's words, "He 
rose again the third day." 

TWO VIEWS OF THE RESURRECTION 

The view of the majority of Christian people is that our 
Lord arose from the dead to the same conditions exactly that 
he had during his life on earth— a man subject to the same 
limitations that he had before he died. The other view is 
ours, namely, that our Lord arose from the dead a spirit being, 
but since human beings cannot see a spirit being 
without injury, our Lord— really a spirit being— clothed 
himself as it were with flesh and clothing in order to appear 
to his followers— in order to give them a demonstration 
that he was no longer dead; and secondarily by appearing 
to them in various forms, as a gardener, as a stranger, 
as a man on the shores of Galilee and as the one who was 
pierced— that by all these changes he might demonstrate to 
his followers that, although risen from the dead, he was no 
longer the same being as before nor subject to the same limitations 
as before; but now as a New Creature, a spirit being, 
even as he explained to Nicodemus, he had power to 
come and go as the wind, and none could tell from whence 
he came or whither he went— so is everyone born of the 
Spirit, everyone who experiences a resurrection to the spirit 
nature.— John 3:6-8. 

Our Lord had indeed appeared subsequently to Saul 
of Tarsus, and manifested to him a certain measure of the 
glory of his resurrection condition, but the effect upon Saul 
was to blind him so that it required a miracle for his relief. 
To have so appeared to the eleven apostles and the others 
of the five hundred brethren who believed on him would not 
have been a satisfactory proof of our Lord's resurrection. 
They would merely have known that they had seen a great 
light, experienced a shock, and that they had heard certain 
wonderful words, but where would have been the proof to 
them or others of mankind that the one who was buried in 
Joseph's tomb had arisen from the dead and was now a 
spirit being? Our Lord, therefore, evidently chose by all 
means the better plan for making known the great fact of 
his resurrection. He appeared as a man, but under varying 
conditions, showing that he was not bound by the limitations 
of the human nature, but that he appeared and disappeared 
in bodily forms as the angels had in previous times, 



as for instance the three who appeared as men to Abraham 
for the purpose of communion with him, who ate dinner with 
him and whom he afterwards came to know as the Lord 
and two angels. For a similar purpose the Lord had appeared 
to his disciples after his resurrection: he vailed his 
glory and they saw it not when he appeared in various 
forms. 

ERROR ALWAYS CONFUSING 

The majority of Christian people are greatly confused 
over the matter of the resurrection anyway. Having received 
from heathen philosophies in the "dark ages" the same 
doctrines that were communicated by the Adversary to all 
the heathen, namely, that the dead are more alive than they 
ever were before, Christian people in general wonder why 
the Scriptures lay such stress upon the resurrection— why 

R3904 : page 382 

there is any necessity at all for a resurrection. They properly 
enough reason that if they were told at the time of the 
funeral that their dead friend was now "free," no longer 
trammeled with the earthly body, etc., why would he need 
to be trammeled with it in the future any more than in the 
present? and if some had gotten along without bodies for 
eighteen centuries or more, why would they need bodies 
thereafter any more than before? All this confusion of 
thought is directly traceable to Satan's falsehood, "Ye 
shall not surely die," and the rejection of God's statement, 
"Ye shall surely die." When we accept the teachings of 
the Word of God that the dead are really dead, then we 
perceive that there is no hope for them ever to have any 
knowledge or consciousness except by resurrection of the 
dead— we learn that there is neither knowledge nor device 
nor wisdom in the grave, sheol, the state of death, whither 
all go. (Eccl. 9:10.) As an illustration of how confused 
some of the ablest clergymen of the country are on this 
matter, we quote a few words from Doctor Peloubet. He 
says:— 

"The resurrection of Jesus shows us the meaning of the 
New Testament teaching concerning the resurrection of the 
body. So in the Apostles' Creed we declare our belief in 
the 'resurrection of the body.' But these things do not express 
what the New Testament teaches concerning the resurrection, 
especially in 1 Corinthians 15. Jesus himself did 
not have his resurrection body till he ascended. The disciples 
saw the same body they had seen before the crucifixion. 
Our present bodies with flesh and bones cannot inherit 
the Kingdom of God, but out from them in some way 
will grow spiritual bodies." 

What confusion we find here! The cause is not far 
to seek: it is first the error of supposing that the dead are 
not dead, and secondly the failure to see that our Lord was 
"put to death in the flesh but quickened in the spirit," as 
the Apostle most explicitly tells us. (1 Pet. 3:18.) Thank 



God that with the morning light shining upon the divine 
Word these shadows so confusing to heart and mind are 
gradually fleeing away, disclosing to us new beauties in our 
heavenly Father's Word— consistencies, harmonies. Here 
we see the Apostle's statement that we are sown in weakness, 
raised in power, sown in dishonor, raised in glory, sown 
a natural body, raised a spiritual body (1 Cor. 15:42-44)— 
not sown a natural body and raised a natural body out of 
which will grow a spiritual body. The Scriptures are consistent, 
harmonious, beautiful, when allowed to interpret 
themselves. 

REVEREND DOCTORS CONFUSED 

We suggested foregoing that the doctrine of the resurrection 
is a confusion to the majority of Christians, and we 
give another sample of this from Doctor Peloubet:— 

"What is the need of a resurrection body? The body 
is the instrument of the soul: it is probable that the soul 
must have some medium of communication with other souls 
and with nature." 

Now consider: Our dear friends hold that the souls 
never die, although the Scriptures tell us that a death sentence 
is upon every soul of man, and that Christ poured 
out his soul unto death as our ransom price.) For our views 
on this subject, "What is the soul?" we refer the reader to 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI., page 346.) Doctor Peloubet probably 
holds in common with others that the undying souls go 
either to heaven or hell immediately at death, that the resurrection 
will not take place until the second coming of 
Christ, which he in common with others probably places a 
long way off; and yet he tells us here that the souls in 
heaven and in hell would have no instrument of communication 
with each other and with nature without a body. 
Hence we might reason, if they could not in any manner 
communicate with nature, they could not even enjoy pleasures 
or suffer pain. How much more reasonable is the 
Scriptural proposition that man himself is a soul, a being, 
that in dying his being is dissolved, that the resurrection is 
a resurrection of being by a reorganization of conditions 
necessary to restore him— the producing of a body with talents 
and powers to correspond and vitalized by the great 
Life-Giver who declares, "I am the resurrection and the 
Life." 

OUR LORD'S RESURRECTION 

With the foregoing suggestions respecting the fact that 
our Lord's resurrection is well vouched for by good authority, 
and that he was raised a spirit being, let us proceed to 
an examination of the lesson. The narrative is simple, unvarnished, 
natural. The different gospels tell of the matter 
in different language, narrating sometimes the same item in 
different form and sometimes different items connected with 
the manifestations of the forty days of our Lord's presence 
after he arose from the dead and before he ascended on 



high. Although these accounts differ they in nowise contradict 
each other; each told what he himself saw and knew, 
whereas had the account been a spurious one, gotten up to 
deceive, undoubtedly great care would have been exercised 
to have every witness tell the same thing. Here, then, is a 
sure proof of the truthfulness of the records. 

To draw an illustration from more modern history: We 
notice the fact that several generals present at the battle of 
Waterloo gave very different accounts of the same— especially 
respecting the time of the beginning of the battle. 
Two armies of men witnessed the matter, yet an authoritative 
account of just when it opened cannot today be known. 
The Duke of Wellington declared that it began at ten 
o'clock in the morning, and General Alba, who rode beside 
him, says the hour was eleven-thirty; Napoleon and one of 
his assistants, Douret, claimed that it began at twelve 
o'clock, and General Ney asserted that it began at one 
o'clock. Evidently these different persons had different 
conceptions of the matter: one may have counted from the 

R3905 : page 382 

time the first gun was fired, another from a period of the 
general engagement, or what not. No one thinks of questioning 
the fact that there was a battle of Waterloo because 
of these divergent statements respecting the time it began. 
So with the matter of our Lord's resurrection, the fact that 
the different records of it are not in the same language militates 
nothing against the fact as a fact. All agree that the 
resurrection took place on the first day of the week (Sunday) 
following the Passover, early in the morning. Mary 
Magdalene and the other Mary, the mother of James the 
Less and of Joses, were there (Matt. 27:56), and Mark 
and Luke tell us that shortly afterward came Salome the 
mother of John, Joanna the wife of Chuza, and other women, 
who brought spices for a more thorough embalming of the 
Lord's body than was possible on the night of our Lord's 

R3905 : page 383 

burial, on account of the lateness of the hour and the approach 
of the Passover. 

The earthquake had already rolled away the stone, the 
sentries had fled in terror from the manifestation of the 
angel's presence— they fled to the high priest, who probably 
had engaged to be their paymaster— having them detailed 
for a special police duty by Pilate. But the angel, so terrible 
to those out of harmony with the Lord, spoke graciously 
to those who were his friends, assuring them that Jesus was 
risen, and directing them to go quickly and tell his disciples, 
also assuring them that Jesus would go into Galilee, and intimating 
a general meeting of his friends there, which later 
took place. En route they met Jesus, who sent the same 
message to his disciples. Seemingly the Lord recognized 
that woman can exercise faith more readily than can man, 
and here he used them as his servants and mouthpieces to 



bear his message— to prepare his disciples, to assist them 

more readily to accept the truth of his resurrection. Meantime 

the affrighted guard fled and told the circumstances 

to the prominent elders who had set them their task and 

who were probably special enemies of our Lord. They 

were assured that their work would be considered satisfactory 

if they would keep the facts to themselves or report 

that Jesus' disciples had stolen the corpse. They gave them 

a handsome present for their cooperation in this matter and 

assured them of protection should their conduct ever be called 

in question. 

ELEVEN APPEARANCES AT MOST 

For forty days our Lord was with his disciples before 
his ascension, yet he revealed himself to them, according to 
the records, not more than eleven times in all— and some of 
these instances are probably duplications. His interviews 
with the disciples lasted but for a few moments each, and were 
surrounded by circumstances and conditions which said to 
them in thunder tones that a great change had occurred to 
him— that he was no longer the same being, although he 
evidently had the same loving interest in them as before. 
He was still their Lord and Master, this same Jesus, although 
no longer Jesus in the flesh. He was "the Lord, that spirit," 
a "quickening spirit." To bring the matter more clearly 
before our minds let us note the records covering these manifestations 
or appearances, as follows: 

ON THE DAY OF THE RESURRECTION 

(1) Sunday morning early— to Mary Magdalene— near 
the sepulchre at Jerusalem.— Mark 16:9; John 20:11-18. 

(2) Sunday morning— to the women returning from 
the sepulchre— near Jerusalem.— Matt. 28:9,10. 

(3) Sunday— to Simon Peter alone— near Jerusalem. 
-Luke 24:34. 

(4) Sunday afternoon— to the two disciples going to 
Emmaus— between Jerusalem and Emmaus.— Luke 24:13-21. 

(5) Sunday evening— to the apostles excepting Thomas 
—at Jerusalem.— John 20:19-25. 

All five of these were on the first day, the resurrection 
day, the remaining six appearances being scattered through 
the remaining thirty-nine days of our Lord's presence, as 
follows: 

THE NEXT SUNDAY-THE EIGHTH DAY 

(6) Sunday evening, a week after the resurrection— 
to the apostles, Thomas being present— at Jerusalem.— 
John 20:26-29. 

Following this was a long interval apparently in which 
there was no appearance whatever, and the disciples, discouraged, 
perplexed, resolved to go back to their homes in 
Galilee and there to reengage in the fishing business, considering 
that the Lord and his mission had been a failure. 



Our Lord evidently expected just such a process of reasoning 
on their part, and his delay was undoubtedly to help 
them over the difficulty and to start them afresh as servants 
of the Kingdom of God on a higher and still grander plane 
than their previous ministries had been— under the ministration 
of the holy Spirit. 

APPEARANCES IN GALILEE 

Quite probably three weeks intervened without the 
slightest communication. Meantime the apostles had reengaged 
in the fishing business, when our Lord appeared to 
them on the shores of Galilee. 

(7) As a stranger on the shore Jesus called to seven of 
his disciples who were fishing— John 21:1-13. 

(8) Shortly after the manifestation on the shores of 
Galilee Jesus appeared to the eleven disciples on a mountain 
in Galilee.-Matt. 28:16-20. 

(9) Very shortly after this he again appeared to a general 
company of his followers gathered together by previous 
appointment, "above 500 brethren at once"— in Galilee.— 

1 Cor. 15:6. 

LAST APPEARANCE IN JERUSALEM 

(10) At the close of the forty days our Lord appeared 
to the Apostle James only, probably at Jerusalem.— 

1 Cor. 15:7. 

(11) At the end of the forty days our Lord appeared 

to all of the apostles at the time of his ascension. This was 
at the Mount of Olives. -Luke 24:50,51; Acts 1:6-9. 

It was years after this that Paul wrote, "Last of all he 
was seen by me also, as of one born before the time." He 
was seen of the other apostles as the gardener, as a stranger, 
as the Crucified One, etc., etc., but when Paul, the last of the 
apostles, saw him it was not so, but as we shall see him by 
and by when we are changed to his likeness— he saw him 
as one of premature birth. The Church of the First-Born 
are at the resurrection changed to be like their Lord and 
see him as he is. Any special revelation of the Lord might 
have been withheld from the Apostle Paul until the same 
time except that it was necessary that the apostles should 
be "witnesses," testifiers to the fact that Christ had 
not only died but had also risen from the dead; and in 
order that Paul as an Apostle might thus testify he was 
granted the vision of the glorified one. He saw him as we 
shall see him in that he saw him in the brightness of his 
excellent glory and not as the others, veiled in the flesh. 
Thank God that the time is not far distant when, those who 
sleep in Jesus having been changed to his image, we who 
are alive and remain shall also be changed, in a moment, in 
the twinkling of an eye, to be made like him, to see him as 
he is, to share his glory. Not all in the same moment, but 
each in his own moment, changed instantly— until gradually, 
thus being changed by passing from death to life, the 
full number of the very elect shall be completed and the 



reign of glory shall begin. 



Bibles, Testaments, Students' Helps, Etc. 

SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES 



IN presenting our list of Bibles this year we have dropped 
a number which we previously carried and 
have selected others which we think more desirable. 
We give below a list which, although not very large, we 
think will cover a range sufficiently broad to suit the wants 
of nearly all. However, should any of the friends desire 
a more complete list to select from, we shall be pleased 
to mail publishers' catalogues upon postal card 
application. 

This list supersedes all previous lists. Bible publishers 
announce that, owing to increased cost of material 
and labor, they have found it necessary to advance the 
price of many of the cheaper grades. 

THUMB INDEX ON ANY BIBLE, 25c EXTRA 



TEACHERS' BIBLES 

No. (Add Postage on these, 20c each.) Pub. Our 

04403 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., round corners, Price Price 

red under gold, references, linen lined, 

7-1/4x5 1.35 .94 

8301 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, illustrated, full teachers' helps, references, 

linen, 7-3/4x5-1/4 1.45 .95 

(Add Postage on these, 26c each.) 

8701 Long Primer, French Morocco, div. cir., red 
under gold, helps, references, concordance, 
illustrated, linen, 8-1/2 x 6 1.95 1.25 

8702 Same as 8701, leather lined 2.35 1.55 

COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES 

These Bibles show the variations of the Revised Version at 
the foot of each page. Otherwise it is an ordinary "Teachers' 
Bible," with maps, concordance, etc., illustrated. 

(Add Postage on these, 28c each.) 
610 Bourgeois, French Seal, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 6 x 1-3/4 5.00 1.25 

614 Same as 610, leather lined 6.00 1.55 

LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLES 

Hitherto these Bibles have been sold by Subscription 



Agents only. Its special feature, differentiating it from other 

Teachers' Bibles, is that it shows the readings of the Common 

and Revised Versions side by side in the same line, self pronouncing 

(This is the Bible of which we procured a special 

edition with wide margins and DAWN and TOWER references 

thereon; and of which edition we have no more.) 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 
350 Small Pica, French Seal, red under gold, full 

teachers' helps, 8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 6.00 2.10 

360 Small Pica, Levant Morocco, kid lined, otherwise 

same as 350 10.00 4.25 

POCKET BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 15c each.) 
01 153 Ruby, French Morocco, round cor., red under 

gold, div. cir., text only, 5-1/2 x 3-7/8 x 1-1/8... .85 .58 
01327 Minion, French Morocco, div. circ. red under 

gold, text and maps, 6x3-3/8 x 1-1/4 1.10 .75 

01329 Same as 01327, leather lined to edge 1.50 1.00 

194 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text, 5-7/8 x 4 x 1-1/4 1.10 .75 

INDIA PAPER POCKET BIBLES 

"Mite" Bible (the smallest Bible). 
093x Venetian Morocco, div. cir., gilt edges with 

magnifying glass, 1-3/4 x 1-1/4 x 5/8 1.00 .75 

(Add Postage on these, 8c each.) 
01 103 Diamond, French Morocco, div. cir., red 

under gold, text only, 4-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1/2 1.40 .98 

01112 Persian Morocco, leather lined to edge, otherwise 

as 01103 2.00 1.35 

01157x Ruby, French Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, text only, 5-5/8 x 3-7/8 

x9/16 2.00 1.35 

03029x Pearl, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined 

silk sewed, red under gold, references, 

5-1/8 x 3-7/8 x 5/8 3.25 2.15 

03114x Ruby, Persian Levant, div. cir., leather 

lined, silk sewed, red under gold, references, 

5-5/8 x 4 x 3/4 3.25 2.15 

(Add Postage for these, 4c each.) 
0612 Diamond, Persian Morocco, div. cir., 

leather lined, red under gold, text only, 

3-3/4 x 2-1/2 x 7/8 2.25 1.55 

02002x Brilliant, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, maps (smallest 

reference Bible made), 3-5/8 x 2-1/2 x 5/8 2.50 1.70 

INDIA PAPER BIBLES 

(Add Postage for these, 15c each.) 

8635 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, references, maps, 7 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 1.75 1.13 

8636 French Seal, leather lined, otherwise as 



8635 3.00 1.94 

9635 Brevier, large face, French Morocco, div. 

cir., red under gold, references, 7-1/8 x 5 x 1 2.75 1.94 

9636 French Seal, silk sewn, leather lined, otherwise 
as 9635 4.00 2.55 

03265x Minion, Levant Morocco, div. cir., calf 

lined, silk sewed, red under gold (thinnest 

minion reference Bible), 6-7/8 x 4-3/4 

x 5/8 4.25 2.85 

03274x Minion, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather 

lined, silk sewed, red under gold, references, 

index, concordance and maps 

5-5/8 x 4 x 7/8 4.50 3.00 

03554x Brevier, black face, Alaska Seal, div. cir., 

leather lined, red under gold, references, 

index, self-pronouncing, concordance and 

maps, 8-1/8 x 5-1/2 x 7/8 5.50 3.60 

0358 lx Long Primer, black face, same as 03554x, 

7-3/4 x 5-1/4 x 15/16 6.00 4.00 

0865-l/2xLong Primer, Levant, div. cir., calf lined, 

silk sewed, red under gold, teachers' helps, 

arranged as cyclopedic concordance, 7-3/4 x 

5-1/4 x 1-1/8 8.00 5.20 

THE FOLLOWING ARE NEW AND SPECIALLY DESIRABLE BECAUSE 
TYPE IS VERY LARGE AND CLEAR FOR SIZE OF BOOK. 

2596xB Bold Face Brevier, Alaska Seal, calf lined 

to edge, with maps, Biblical Gazetteer 

and Concordance 5.75 2.40 

2596xC Same type and binding as 2596x, without 

concordance 5.50 2.30 

REVISED VERSION BIBLES 

(Add Postage, 10c.) 
040 Pearl, Cloth, red edges, 5-1/2x4-1/2 40 .30 

(Add Postage, 20c.) 
0750 Bourgeois, Cloth, red edges, 8 x 5-5/8 1.00 .75 

OXFORD REVISED BIBLES (Amer. Com.) 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 
3750 Brevier, Cloth, round cor., red edges, maps, 

8x5-5/8 1.00 .70 

3752 Brevier, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 5-5/8 2.00 1.30 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE 

(Add Postage on these, 20c each.) 

160 Bourgeois, Cloth, references 1.00 .80 

172 Bourgeois, Egyptian Seal, references, red 

under gold 2.00 1.60 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 
260 Long Primer, Cloth, references, 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 1.50 1.15 



272 Long Primer, Egyptian Seal, references, red 

under gold, 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 3.00 2.25 

LAP BIBLES FOR THE AGED-References, Light 
Weight Large Print 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 

2002 Pica, Cloth, red edges, 9-1/4 x 6-1/2 x 1-1/4 2.00 .90 

2014 Pica, French Seal, limp, size same as 2002 2.75 1.37 

2022 Pica, French Seal, div. cir., size same as 

2002 3.50 1.75 

CHILDREN'S ILLUSTRATED BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, lie each.) 
216 Minion, French Morocco, limp, red under 

gold, 5-3/4 x 3-5/8 1.15 .82 

215B Minion, French Morocco, references, div. 

cir., red under gold, 7-1/4x5-1/4x7/8 1.50 .85 

TESTAMENTS 

(Add Postage on these, 3c each.) 
21 13 Nonpareil, French Morocco, limp, gold title, 

side and back, gold edges (vest-pocket 

edition), 4-3/8 x 2-7/8 x 1/2 36 .20 

2113P Same as above, with Psalms 46 .26 

21 15 Same as 21 13, with div. cir., and red under 

gold 52 .29 

2115P Same as 2115, with Psalms 62 .34 

013RL Same as 21 13, with words of our Lord in 

red letters 60 .33 

015RL Same as 013RL, with div. cir., red under 

gold 75 .40 

2142X Nonpareil, French Seal, limp, grained leather 

lining, red under gold, gold roll (thin), 

4-3/8x2-3/4x3/8 85 .42 

2142PX Same as 2142X, with Psalms 1.00 .50 

010 Diamond, Venetian Morocco, limp, gold 

edges, 3-3/4 x 2-1/4 x 1/4 50 .35 

014 Diamond, Arabian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, India paper, 

3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4 90 .65 

(Add Postage on these, 5c each.) 
287 Brevier, Roan leather, flexible, gold edges, 

with Psalms, 6-1/4x4-1/2 42 .42 

NEW TESTAMENTS FOR THE AGED 

(Add Postage on these, 10c each.) 

212 Small Pica, Roan, square cor., 5-3/4x8-1/4 45 .45 

283 Same as above, with Psalms, 8-1/4x5-1/2x3/4 50 .50 

REVISED TESTAMENTS 

0100 Brevier, Cloth, red edges, 16 mo., including 



postage, 23c. 

TEXT BIBLES 

(Postage, 7c.) 
178 Agate type, cloth, red edges, 4 x 5-3/4 17 .17 

(Postage, 12c.) 
131 Nonpareil type, cloth, red edges, 5-1/4 x 7-1/4 25 .25 

CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this 
journal for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following 
publications by other presses, which we supply at specially 
low prices because of the assistance they will lend to the study 
of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the order in 
which they seem to us to be desirable aids. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's 
copyright by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been 
sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For 
several years a friend, an earnest Bible student, desirous of 
assisting the readers of our Society's publications, has supplied 
them through us at a greatly reduced price; now he has purchased 
the copyright and plates from the Fowler & Wells Co., 
and presented the same to our Society as a gift, under our assurance 
that the gift will be used for the furthering of the 
Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of price 
as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have this help in 
the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. 
On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red 
under gold edges, silk sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— 
includes postage and one year's subscription to Z.W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. 
As footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek 
MSS., Sinaiticus, Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these 
differ from the Common Version. This is a very valuable little 
work, published in Europe, which we specially import for the 
benefit of our readers. Price, 40c, including postage. 

THE SYRIAC-PESHITO NEW TESTAMENT- 
MURDOCH'S 

This, too, is a valuable work, and an aid in critical study. 



It is translated from the Syriac instead of from the Greek. It 
is claimed by some that it was the language in which our Lord 
and the apostles spoke and wrote, and that the Greek was translated 
from this. Our price, in half leather binding, postage 
included, $2.00. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD 
TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a 
valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special 
price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in 
cloth binding, $5, including postage. We are not permitted by 
the publishers to cut this price; but may and do give postage 
free and give besides a premium of any four volumes of the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series in cloth binding with each Concordance, 
or six volumes if purchaser pays the expressage. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. 
It has some advantages over Young's; after getting used to it 
we prefer it. Special reduced prices,— in cloth binding, $3; 
half leather, $5. Carriage prepaid, 65c extra. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have 
either one of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, 
$1, postage included. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's 
work. It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, 
$1.30, including postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and 
seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this 
class of books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday 
Bible lesson with their children, and this book furnishes interesting 
topics, to which may be added as much concordant "present 
truth" as the age of the children will justify. Parents are 
responsible for their children's training in theology as well as 



morals. This will assist you in the discharge of this duty, and 
thus be a blessing to yourself as well as to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special 
price 75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

HEAVENLY MANNA 

FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FArTH. 

This is a new publication of our own which we believe will 
be in great demand as soon as known. It is a text-book for 
each day in the year— and good year by year continuously. 

But this is more than a text-book; it has an appropriate 
comment under each text selected from the columns of back 
issues of the WATCH TOWER. 

The pages are of the same width as those of DAWN, but a 
little shorter. The paper, etc., are good and the cloth binding 
is neat and attractive; 190 pages, price 35c postpaid;— to 
WATCH TOWER subscribers at the wholesale rate, 20c each, 
postpaid, or in quantities, charges collect, 15c. Free to any 
WATCH TOWER subscriber too poor to pay for it, on request. 

Leather edition, handsome and durable, $1, postpaid; wholesale 
rate to subscribers, 60c, postpaid, or in quantities, charges 
collect, 50c. 

We hope that this little book will find a place at every 
breakfast table; and that spiritual refreshment may thus be 
enjoyed with the natural food, stimulating thankfulness to the 
Giver of all Good and thus inducing the peace of God and favoring 
both spiritual and natural health and well-being. 

DAWN-SCRIPTURE STUDIES-INDIA 

Calls for DAWNS divided into small portions, light, convenient 
for the pocket, that could be read on the cars, etc., led 
us to prepare an India-paper edition. The entire volume is on 
this very fine paper reduced to three-eighths of an inch in thickness 
and about four ounces in weight. The type is exactly the 
same size as in the regular editions. It is a beauty. Leather 
covers, gold edges. Its cost, with postage, is raised to 75c 
each for first three volumes and 85c each for the remainder per 
volume, at which price it is supplied to WATCH TOWER 
subscribers. 

We regret inability to promise these definitely, as we are 
experiencing great trouble in securing the India paper. We 
hope to have the first three volumes by April, 1907, and the 
succeeding three about June. 



Specimen Lines of Various Sizes of Type Referred to on 
Reverse Page: 

This line is Brilliant type. This line is Diamond type. 

This line is Pearl type. This line is Ruby type. 



This line is Nonpareil type. This line is Emerald Minion. 

This line is Emerald type. 

This line is Minion type. 

This line is Brevier type. 

This line is Bourgeois type. 

This line is Long Primer type. 

This line is Small Pica type. 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" 1907. 

[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 
for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 
naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 
righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 
the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 
that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 
so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 
and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 
to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 
during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 
to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 
the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 



judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 
me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 
the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 
upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 
than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 
well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 
of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Millennial Dawn in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 

or, 24 Eversholt St., London, N.W., England; or, Equitable Building 
Collins St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

-ON GOOD HOPES ACCOUNT.- 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the Watch Tower to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give 
us such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from 
their donations. Give full addresses, and write very plainly 



please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



For several years we have been supplying our readers 
with handsome text and motto cards for the walls of their 
homes. Their influence is excellent; for they continually 
and cheerfully catch the eye and remind the heart of our 
great favors present and to come, based upon the exceeding 
great and precious promises of our Father's Word. We 
commend these as helps in the "narrow way,"— helps in 
character-building . 

We have laid in a large supply of very choice mottoes 
this year and expect to be able to fill all orders promptly. 
Late orders last year we were unable to supply. 

We have for your convenience put these up in four assortments 
at $1.00 per package, including postage. We also 
have a 50c assortment of the smaller sized mottoes. If you 
get any of these you will be pleased; but if you have already 
had some, mention when and how many, that we may send 
you different ones now. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



These are published quarterly, copies being sent to all subscribers. 
Other copies, for distribution among friends, from 
house to house, for enclosure in letters, and in general for use 
in such ways as seem judicious, are supplied freely, the expense 
entailed by the great demand for them being borne by the 
Tract Fund of voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as 
you feel able to use them, even if not so well able to contribute 
toward the expense; some who are not able, and do contribute, 
do not have opportunities personally to use all that their 
contributions pay for, so that the matter is equalized 
and all may have a part in this service of disseminating 
the truth. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE. 



We are convinced that the Watch Tower lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content that 
the name of any should be missing. We believe that all such 
will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow way" by 
its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding them 
afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh and the 
devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 



Hitherto we have required that all desiring the Watch Tower 
on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make personal 
application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in present truth, 
and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may necessitate. 
Any getting it on credit may at any future time request 
that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. We 
desire that as nearly as possible the Watch Tower lists shall 
represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
22,000; but it should be at least 30,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS. 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take this 
opportunity to remark that we will be glad to hear promptly 
from such as desire the visits of the Watch Tower continued. 
This applies to all who get it on the Lord's Poor list as well 
as to those who pay. When names are dropped and afterward 
renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. 



page 385 

SEMI-MONTHLY 