Chapter 9
Identifying God-Inspired Truth
Did you know that modern Hindu reformers such as Ramakrishna and Vivekenanda were influenced by the Bible? Mohandas Gandhi also maintained that its teachings can ‘solve the problems of the whole world.’ Both Hindus and Sikhs are indebted to it for their concept of bhakti, which, says Hindu World, resulted from “the impact of Christianity in the early centuries of the present era.”1 Thus, the Bible has earned the respect of great Indian thinkers.
Scripture and Science
2 Written nearly 3,500 years ago, the opening verse of the Bible described the origin of the universe, saying: “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.” (Genesis 1:1) In harmony with this statement, scientists now acknowledge that the universe did have a beginning, a genesis.2
3 The source of matter in the universe, says the Bible, is “the abundance of [God’s] dynamic energy.” (Isaiah 40:26) Today, some 2,700 years after that was written, modern science has discovered that all matter is basically materialized energy.3
4 At a time when men believed that the universe was made up of the few thousand stars they could see with unaided eyes, the Bible compared the number of stars to the grains of sand on the seashore. (Genesis 22:17) In the past this comparison was said to be greatly exaggerated, yet today the evidence shows that the number of stars is indeed incalculable.4 Similarly, far in advance of modern science, the Bible accurately described the earth as a “circle,” or globe, that is ‘hanging upon nothing.’—Isaiah 40:22; Job 26:7.
5 The Bible states that Adam, the first man, was created “out of dust from the ground.” (Genesis 2:7) We now know that our human body is composed of a number of different chemical elements, all of which are found in the earth. Amazing insight is also evident in the Bible’s comment that ‘parts of a developing embryo are written down in a book.’ This was 3,000 years before modern science discovered the genetic code, which, like a book, contains all aspects of a growing human embryo.—Psalm 139:14-16.
An Authentic Record
6 Students of history are often amazed at the Bible’s accuracy. Says Indian scholar D. D. Kosambi: “The historical value of the Veda is rather small in comparison with that of the Old Testament of the Bible, which was always presented as history by people who retained contact with their particular land. The archaeology of Palestine . . . provides ample confirmation of many Biblical events.”5
7 The Bible also records key events in world history and how these affected other nations, including India. Consider, for example, the Persian invasion of India in the fifth and sixth centuries B.C.E., in which Darius Hystaspis gained control of Sind and parts of Punjab, as they are now known. As noted in Advanced History of India, “this territory continued to form part of the Persian empire under Xerxes.”6 This historical fact was accurately recorded in the Bible at Esther 1:1 about the year 475 B.C.E.—one of the oldest known references to India.7
A Clean Form of Worship
8 The Bible tells us that there is one true God. Only in the Bible has he revealed to us his name, JEHOVAH. There he states: “Before me there was no God formed, and after me there continued to be none.” Jehovah, therefore, does not have avatars, nor does he exist in different aspects. All the qualities and forces needed to sustain creation exist in him alone. “To whom can you people liken God, and what likeness can you put alongside him?” the prophet asks.—Isaiah 40:18; 43:10.
9 In Jehovah’s worship, it is clean conduct, not ritual, that is required for his blessing. God says: “Of what benefit to me is the multitude of your sacrifices? . . . Incense—it is something detestable to me. New moon and sabbath, the calling of a convention—I cannot put up with the use of uncanny power along with the solemn assembly. . . . Even though you make many prayers, I am not listening; . . . cease to do bad. Learn to do good.”—Isaiah 1:11-17.
10 Those who live by the Bible are well protected from the dangers of spiritism. It counsels: “There should not be found in you anyone who makes his son or his daughter pass through the fire, . . . anyone who looks for omens or a sorcerer, or one who binds others with a spell or anyone who consults a spirit medium or a professional foreteller of events or anyone who inquires of the dead. For everybody doing these things is something detestable to Jehovah.”—Deuteronomy 18:10-12.
A Superior Moral Code
11 Another important difference between the Bible and other holy books is its power to help us lead better lives. For example, it states: “Let the stealer steal no more, but rather let him do hard work, doing with his hands what is good work, that he may have something to distribute to someone in need. Let a rotten saying not proceed out of your mouth, but whatever saying is good for building up as the need may be . . . Let all malicious bitterness and anger . . . be taken away from you along with all badness. But become kind to one another.” (Ephesians 4:28-32) What fine counsel!
12 The superiority of the Bible’s moral code is also evident in its appeal to a person’s love for God. For instance, it exhorts women: “Do not let your adornment be that of the external braiding of the hair and of the putting on of gold ornaments or the wearing of outer garments, but let it be the secret person of the heart in the incorruptible apparel of the quiet and mild spirit, which is of great value in the eyes of God.” Husbands are similarly counseled to ‘assign honor’ to their wives “in order for [their] prayers not to be hindered.”—1 Peter 3:3, 4, 7.
The Greatest Evidence of All
13 Is the God of the Bible the true and living God? In order to prove his Godship, Jehovah invites the gods of other religions to a test. “Summon the nations to come to the trial,” he says. “Which of their gods can predict the future? Which of them foretold what is happening now? Let these gods bring in their witnesses to prove that they are right.”—Isaiah 43:9, Today’s English Version.
14 Who has been able to explain the significant events of today’s world? Nearly 2,000 years ago, the Bible accurately foretold the turmoil that the world has witnessed since the year 1914. It said: “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there will be great earthquakes, and in one place after another pestilences and food shortages.” (Luke 21:10, 11) In contrast with Hindu teachings, the Bible, now translated in whole or in part into some 2,000 languages and dialects, contains true prophecy, which we are seeing fulfilled in our day.
15 Decades before World War I began in 1914, Jehovah’s worshipers were making known the significance of that year. The New York World of August 30, 1914, explains: “The terrific war outbreak in Europe has fulfilled an extraordinary prophecy. For a quarter of a century past, through preachers and through press, the ‘International Bible Students’ [as Jehovah’s Witnesses were then known] . . . have been proclaiming to the world that the Day of Wrath prophesied in the Bible would dawn in 1914.”8 Ever since the momentous events of that year, so accurately foretold in the Bible alone, the whole world system of things has been in its “last days.”—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
16 The fulfillment of many other Bible prophecies establishes it as “inspired of God.”a (2 Timothy 3:16) Therefore, you can have complete confidence in the things it teaches and foretells. This includes God’s purpose soon to rid the earth of all religion that dishonors God (as bloodguilty Christendom has done) and to establish peace and harmony between all races of mankind forever. (Revelation 18:4, 5) It is urgent that you heed the exhortation: “Fear God and give him glory, because the hour of the judgment by him has arrived, and so worship the One who made the heaven and the earth.” (Revelation 14:7) What does this require?
[Footnotes]
For a detailed discussion of the fulfillment of Bible prophecies, see pages 117-48 of the book The Bible—God’s Word or Man’s? published in 1989 by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Box on page 21]
Jehovah—How Different?
Comparing the Hindu concept of God with that of other religions, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan observes: “The God of Hebrews [Jehovah] is of a different type. He is personal and active in history and interested in the changes and chances of this developing world. He is a Being who communicates with us.”—Hinduism and Its Rationalism, M. Hariharan, 1987, page 56.
[Box on page 23]
How does the Bible measure up to these criteria?
It should:
1. Magnify God and answer our questions about him
2. Be available to all
3. Be easy to understand
4. Teach true doctrines and morals
5. Be free from myths
6. Be free from demonism
7. Provide solutions for our problems and have a good effect on our lives
[Picture on page 21]
The Bible, in whole or in part, can now be read in over 130 Indian languages
[Pictures on page 22, 23]
The Bible is the only sacred book to foretell the world events that have happened since the year 1914!

