1995​—What of Our Future?
“The world needs a compass better than simple appeals to democracy and markets​—but there is none to hand.”​—Will Hutton, Guardian Weekly.
FROM the human standpoint, that statement might seem true. The world appears to be lacking a reliable compass to point out the direction to peace, security, justice, equity, and good government. Man has tried just about every system of government, from monarchies to republics, from dictatorships to democracies, and still he finds his world almost ungovernable. Which way should he now turn?
There appears to be a choice​—the pathway down to a world of more violence, crime, corruption, injustice, religious and political hypocrisy, nationalistic hatred, and exploitation of the poor. That is the path that some say leads to anarchy.
Or there is the stiff, self-​sacrificing climb to a better world that is based on God’s solution for government, found in the Bible. It is stiff because it requires moral courage, personal sacrifice, a spiritual outlook on life, and belief in a purposeful God. But for that climb to be successful man must also be humble​—humble before his Creator. He must turn to God for righteous rulership. The Christian apostle Peter counseled: “Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time; while you throw all your anxiety upon him, because he cares for you.”​—1 Peter 5:6, 7; Revelation 4:11.
Who Throws the Switch of Hatred?
Man alone cannot permanently change this world for the good​—the selfish, evil elements are too numerous and too powerful. The prophet Jeremiah was right when he wrote: “I well know, O Jehovah, that to earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” (Jeremiah 10:23) Without God, man cannot direct his steps successfully for the benefit of the whole human family. Why is that? Because in addition to our inherent imperfection there is always that invisible enemy Satan, who is ready to throw the switch, as he did in Rwanda, turning people loose in a bloodletting conflict.​—Genesis 8:21; Matthew 4:1-11.
In order to throw that switch of prejudice, hatred, and murder in people’s hearts and minds, Satan has inculcated the nations with notions of national, tribal, and religious superiority. This deep-​seated education in hatred is implanted from infancy by parents whose minds are locked into it, often by centuries of tradition. This tradition is then fortified by school systems and religious teachings. Thus millions of people are raised with hatred and prejudice in their hearts. They are conditioned, brainwashed from infancy, to turn against their fellowman at the behest of unscrupulous political and religious demagogues. The spewing of irrational slogans and sound bites can throw a switch, can light a wildfire, that terminates in an “ethnic cleansing” or a pogrom.
Indicating what the near future might hold, Martin van Creveld, a military historian in Israel, wrote in The Transformation of War: “From the vantage point of the present, there appears every prospect that religious . . . fanaticisms will play a larger role in the motivation of armed conflict” in the West than at any time “for the last 300 years.” Thus religion, instead of being a force for peace and for elevating mankind’s spirituality, is stagnating in its historical role of provoking hatred, conflict, and killing.
A Different Future Promised
If humankind is to qualify for life in a just new world, then they must share in fulfilling Isaiah’s prophecy: “He [Jehovah] will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths. . . . And he will certainly render judgment among the nations and set matters straight respecting many peoples. And they will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”​—Isaiah 2:3, 4.
Who today are heeding this magnificent prophecy worldwide? Who were the ones who died in Rwanda rather than kill their fellow believers of a different tribe? Who were the ones who died in Nazi concentration camps rather than serve in Hitler’s armies? Who have spent time in the prisons of many countries rather than learn war? They are those who have enjoyed the fulfillment of Isaiah 54:13: “All your sons will be persons taught by Jehovah, and the peace of your sons will be abundant.”
Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide have that peace now because they have accepted Jehovah’s teaching from his Word, the Bible. They follow the teachings and example of Christ Jesus. And what did he say? “I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, that you also love one another. By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.” (John 13:34, 35) Jehovah’s Witnesses practice this love to such a degree that, though formerly Catholics and Protestants, they now work harmoniously together in Northern Ireland. Though formerly religious enemies, they now cooperate as Christians in Israel, Lebanon, and other lands. They learn war no more. What a difference it would make if all peoples of the world heeded Jesus’ words and applied them in their lives!
Jehovah’s Witnesses believe that God’s promised new world is near, a world that will be ruled by a heavenly government. What basis do they have for such a positive hope?
God’s Promised Decisive Action
In his Word, the Bible, God has promised a righteous rulership for all obedient humankind. Through his prophet Daniel, he prophesied that in the time of the end of this present system, he would set up a permanent and righteous government. “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. And the kingdom itself will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” (Daniel 2:44) This is the same Kingdom rulership that Christ taught believers to ask for in his famous prayer: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.”​—Matthew 6:9, 10.
In that prayer we are asking for God to fulfill his promises regarding his righteous rulership. And we know that God cannot lie. Paul spoke of “the everlasting life which God, who cannot lie, promised before times long lasting.” (Titus 1:2; Hebrews 6:17, 18) And what has God promised? The apostle Peter answers: “There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.”​—2 Peter 3:13; Isaiah 65:17; Revelation 21:1-4.
Before that righteous rulership can be fully appreciated here on earth, a great cleanup must take place. Bible prophecies combine to indicate that this action to cleanse the world of Satan and his wicked forces will soon take place. (See Matthew, chapter 24; Luke, chapter 21; and Mark, chapter 13.) This final act of cleansing is called the battle of Armageddon, “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.”​—Revelation 16:14, 16.
In spite of what many may think, the year 2000 is not significant. After all, that date is only valid for Christendom. Other cultures have their own dating systems. What is significant is that now is the time to turn to God and to his Word to prove for yourself what is “the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.” (Romans 12:1, 2) What matters is that now is the time for you to choose​—either to walk into a future blessed by God or to continue down the path of frustration that Satan’s world offers. We urge you to choose God’s way. Choose life!​—Deuteronomy 30:15, 16.
[Blurb on page 14]
“There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise.” ​—2 Peter 3:13
[Picture on page 13]
Nations can truly beat their swords into plowshares only under the rulership of God’s Kingdom

