From Our Readers
Courageous Youth  I am 15 years old, and I want to thank you for the January 22, 1995, article “Joshua’s Faith​—A Victory for Children’s Rights.” How moving it was to read about someone my own age who has such faith and love for Jehovah! Reading this article made me realize that I need to take Jehovah more seriously.
M. S., United States
I am 16 and find it very hard to find time to read all of our magazines. But I read the article about Joshua, and I have never felt so touched by anything. His stand against taking a blood transfusion was so strong! I couldn’t help but cry. I now realize that I need to read everything I can that comes from Jehovah’s organization.
T. S., Britain
I am an Anglican, but I enjoy reading Awake! I cannot help but cry for what Joshua went through and at the same time praise God that there are people with such faith in Him.
P. O., Nigeria
I am a 17-​year-​old full-​time minister, and I suffer from a disease that causes acute anemia. My doctor has wanted to prescribe blood, but I am dealing with this problem. I read the article several times, and each time it gave me more courage.
I. L. M., Brazil
Even the death of loved ones has never moved me to the point of shedding tears. But I found myself shedding tears as I read Joshua’s experience. His faith, courage, and integrity touched me.
T. M., Zimbabwe
Sleeping With Baby  We noted in your July 22, 1994, issue an excerpt reporting Dr. James McKenna’s research. (“Watching the World”) It suggested that mothers’ sleeping with their babies will reduce SIDS (Sudden Infant Death Syndrome). The New Zealand Cot Death study has shown that there is a greatly increased risk of SIDS if the parents have the baby in the bed when they are asleep.
Dr. S. L. T., New Zealand
Thank you for this information. Dr. McKenna recently clarified his position and acknowledged the dangers of accidental infant suffocation when a mother sleeps with her child. (Compare 1 Kings 3:19.) Most doctors therefore discourage sleeping with one’s baby and recommend putting an infant to sleep in a crib that has no pillows or thick comforters.​—ED.
Bee Versus Computer  I simply have to express my thanks for the article “Bee Versus Computer.” (February 8, 1995) The article touched me very deeply. Our Grand Creator made even tiny creatures like the bee to be wonderful and unique.
C. K., Germany
Autism  Thank you very much for the article “Autism​—Meeting the Challenges of a Puzzling Disorder.” (February 8, 1995) There is an autistic boy in my congregation, and I have become very attached to him. The article helped me to understand autism. Now I know that I can help out just by spending time with him and his mother.
A. F., Japan
Our daughter is not autistic, but she does have similar traits. We are glad you inform people about the problems many children have. It is so encouraging when people treat such children as human beings worthy of life. Comments such as ‘I feel so sorry for you’ or ‘I could never do what you do’ are not upbuilding. Our daughter is happy, and sometimes our other children put more of a strain on us. We do not regret her birth.
L. H., United States

