The Bible’s Viewpoint
Your Role in Your Prayers
ON A mountainside overlooking the city, the beleaguered king pauses briefly to contemplate his majestic palace, the sprawling capital, and the sad plight of his household. A large army has gathered to the south and is now marching on the city. High-​ranking government officials have defected, and popular opinion has swung in favor of the rebels. Downhearted, the king offers a prayer to God. A deeply religious man, his confidence rises that God will hear his plea and thwart the plans of the conspirators. Then, turning away from his resplendent city, he descends the mountain and continues north in the direction of the wilderness beyond the river. What more can he do? The situation is now in God’s hands.
In like manner, humble believers today turn to God in prayer in times of difficulty with the comforting assurance that along with providing clear guidelines on how to pray, the Bible reveals that Jehovah God is the “Hearer of prayer.” (Psalm 65:2) We are assured that all honesthearted seekers of God will get a hearing ear.
Yet, are faith and prayer enough? What part do we play in the outcome of our prayers?
How Can We Contribute?
The king mentioned at the outset was King David of ancient Israel. Faced with the conspiracy of his conniving son Absalom and his hypocritical counselor Ahithophel, he chose to flee Jerusalem and seek refuge in the fortified wilderness city of Mahanaim on the eastern side of the Jordan River. Likely burdened by disappointment, depression, and anxiety, he petitioned Jehovah in prayer, saying: “Turn, please, the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness, O Jehovah!” (2 Samuel 15:11-15, 30, 31) However, David did more than pray. He contributed in a positive way toward the successful outcome of his prayer. How so?
His contribution began long before the trials he faced. Over a period of many years, even before he was king, David proved himself a loyal worshiper of Jehovah. (1 Samuel 16:12, 13; Acts 13:22) He became intimate with God. Thus, when under trial David had faith that Jehovah would hear his prayer and respond in an appropriate way.
The same is true today. Often a primary method of contributing to the outcome of our prayers is to follow Bible counsel as a regular pattern of life. Such loyal adherence to God-​given principles engenders a close relationship with him. This nearness to God and pattern of faith should be in place before the trials begin. It should be like a strong foundation on which a house is to be built; it should be there before the weight of the structure is laid upon it. Thus we can​—even now, before trials come—​contribute to the successful outcome of many of our prayers.
Take an Active Role!
Although it is true that David’s relationship with God played a vital role, he also recognized that he could not be a passive observer in the outworking of his prayer. To the contrary, David took an active role as is evident in the wise course of action that followed his prayer.
Among David’s loyal friends was an Archite named Hushai. Hushai met the fleeing king on the Mount of Olives. Although wishing to accompany David in exile, Hushai submitted to the urging of David that he remain in the city. He was  to feign loyalty to Absalom, endeavor to frustrate traitorous adviser Ahithophel’s counsel, and keep David informed of events. (2 Samuel 15:32-37) As hoped, Hushai was successful in gaining the confidence of Absalom. Now Jehovah would intervene.
The ingenious, though devious, Ahithophel proposed a brilliant plan. He urged Absalom to give him 12,000 men to attack David that very night while he was on the run, disorganized and vulnerable​—a deathblow that would clinch a successful revolution! To the surprise of many, however, Absalom sought the counsel of Hushai on the matter. He advised Absalom to take the time to gather an overwhelming force of men, commanded by none other than Absalom himself. By Jehovah’s direction, Hushai’s counsel was accepted. Ahithophel, evidently realizing that following Hushai’s counsel meant sure defeat, returned to his home and committed suicide.​—2 Samuel 17:1-14, 23.
There was no doubt that Jehovah had answered David’s prayer​—just as he had prayed. David’s example of working in harmony with his prayer provides a valuable lesson for all who seek the assistance of God through prayer.
Jehovah Will Do His Part
True, Jesus taught his followers to pray for their daily bread and promised that if they put God’s interests first, He would take care of their needs. (Matthew 6:11, 33) For example, if a person is unemployed, he must work in harmony with his prayer for sustenance by doing all he can to find or to create work.
Whatever the subject of our prayers, our ability to contribute to the outcome varies greatly. There are times when we can do much and times when we can do very little, if anything at all. The important point is not what we can or cannot contribute but whether we are doing the best we can.
We can be sure that Jehovah knows our circumstances and abilities. He fully realizes what it is possible for us to do, and he would never require us to do more than we can accomplish. Whether we can do a great deal or very little, Jehovah will make up for any lack. He appreciates and supports our efforts and will work along with them to accomplish the best outcome for all involved.​—Psalm 3:3-7.
In the midst of hardship, King David could declare with confidence: “Salvation belongs to Jehovah. Your blessing is upon your people.” (Psalm 3:8) May our confidence in the power of Jehovah along with our contributing our part, great or small, work to the successful outcome of our prayers.

