Be Persuasive in Your Teaching
 1. What does effective use of God’s Word in the ministry often involve?
1 Effective ministers, like the apostle Paul, appreciate that “handling the word of the truth aright” involves more than simply quoting from the Holy Scriptures. (2 Tim. 2:15) When using God’s Word, how may we use “persuasion” in our teaching?—Acts 28:23.
 2. How can we heighten appreciation for God’s Word?
2 Let God’s Word Speak: First, direct attention to the Bible in a way that engenders respect for the godly wisdom it contains. Our confidence in God’s Word may motivate our listener to pay careful attention to the reading of a scripture. (Heb. 4:12) We could simply say: “I have found it beneficial to get God’s thoughts on this matter. Notice what his Word states.” Whenever possible, let God’s Word speak by reading from it directly.
 3. After reading a scripture, what can be done to help our listener comprehend its meaning?
3 Second, explain the scripture used. Many people find it difficult to understand a verse the first time that it is read. An explanation is usually needed to establish its relevance. (Luke 24:26, 27) Isolate the key expressions. A question may help confirm that the point is clearly understood.—Prov. 20:5; Acts 8:30.
 4. What last step is necessary to be persuasive in our teaching?
4 Reason on Scriptures: Third, endeavor to reach the mind and heart. Help the householder to see how the verse applies to him personally. Reasoning on the Scriptures can persuade a person to change his thinking. (Acts 17:2-4; 19:8) For example, after reading Psalm 83:18 we could reason on how learning someone’s name is fundamental in developing a personal relationship. Then, perhaps ask, “Do you feel that knowing God’s name will make your prayers more meaningful?” Connecting the scripture to the householder’s personal life in this manner demonstrates its practical value. Such persuasive teaching from God’s Word draws honesthearted ones to worship the true and living God, Jehovah.—Jer. 10:10.

