Announcements
“PRAISE JEHOVAH AS KING” TESTIMONY PERIOD
“Praise Jah, you people.” (Rev. 19:6, NW) In obedience to this compelling exhortation hundreds of thousands in 1951 have raised their voices in a mighty song of praise to the universal sovereign, Jehovah God. Other thousands are catching up the joyful words and joining in the chorus that lauds their Creator as King. What of you? Do you believe the Bible? the evidences of our day which prove Jehovah reigns, and a new world is at the doors? Perhaps, then, the desire to praise the Most High exists within your heart, too. You can use your faculties to “Praise Jehovah as King” during December, when that theme will be sounded in a special way world-wide. The Bible message extolling God’s greatness will be presented to the public in the form of the book entitled “What Has Religion Done for Mankind?” and a 32-page booklet, on a contribution of 50c. Literature for distribution may be obtained from a company of Jehovah’s witnesses, or from Watchtower, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn 1, N. Y. Write us for information regarding a nearby company of Jehovah’s witnesses, or as to how you may have a further share.
RELIGION REAPS THE WHIRLWIND
A clergyman of national renown remarks: “The world is a mess . . . and religion has helped to make it so.” Another sermonizes: “Religious teaching . . . is a curse . . . most of it is false religion.” Obviously this world’s religions have failed to create for all mankind a better life, abounding with peace, neighbor love, godliness, freedom. And since, as clergymen attest, religion shares blame for the international “mess”, one might ask, “What may be expected for religion in the time to come? What does God have in store for the systems that bear His name, yet teach false dogma, mislead millions, contribute to man’s degradation, and generally flout righteous principles of God’s Word?” The candid answer from the Bible is contained in the 64-page booklet Religion Reaps the Whirlwind. The booklet also enlightens the reader on the “true church”, making it possible to identify pure religion today. It is available on a contribution of 5c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 2: The Triumph of Clean, Undefiled Worship, ¶1-27.
Week of December 9: The Triumph of Clean, Undefiled Worship, ¶28-32; also, Final Victory over Babylonish Religion Near.

