VOL. XXVI. APRIL 15, 1905. No. 8 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 115 

The Welsh Revival 115 

Several American Revivals 116 

An Editor Who Sees Something 116 

Spirit Phenomena Increasing 117 

Washing One Another's Feet 118 

A Favorable Opportunity Lost 119 

The Meaning of the Lord's Action 120 

The True Vine and Its Fruit 121 

The Vine of the Earth 121 

Many Illustrations of our Oneness 122 

The Object of Pruning 122 

"Now Ye are Clean" 123 

Withered Branches Burned 124 

Interesting Letters from the Antipodes 125 

page 114 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



CHRISTIAN SCIENCE. 



If you have friends who are Christian Scientists to whom 
you would like to give reading matter to help them into the 
light, we recommend that you give or loan them the TOWER 
of May 1, 1903, which contained an article on that subject. 
We have a quantity of that issue which we will be pleased to 
supply free for said purpose. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



Order all the sample copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER and 
of OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS that you can use judiciously. We 
supply them in any quantity free. 

We trust that all friends of Present Truth do what they 
can to secure DAWN and TOWER readers, and these samples 
will prepare the way. 

VOLUNTEERING BY MAIL. 



Our output of tracts free as Sample Copies is limited. This 
year please follow this plan: Procure wrapping paper of the 
size in which your tracts go to you, write on these the addresses 
of all of your friends and acquaintances of the godly 
sort and mail the bundle to us. Do not this year send us "all 
sorts" of addresses. Do "sharp shooting" rather. You may 
repeat the lists every quarter if you desire, indicating other 
tracts for same, as we would not remember which were previously 
sent. 



R3540 :page 115 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE WELSH REVIVAL. 



CONFLICTING views of the significance of the 
Welsh revival abound. The movement is novel 
in that it seems to be outside the labors of "ministers," 
carried on by men and women hitherto without 
reputation and still manifesting "little ability." Indeed, 
the meetings are described as "go-as-you-please," in 
many respects. We rejoice that it seems well established 
that better morals and much less drunkenness 
mark the region affected. 

Lady Henry Somerset writes to friends respecting 
this spontaneous revival, contrasting it favorably with 



the less successful efforts being put forth in London by 
the ministers and others, in cooperation with Dr. Torrey 
and Mr. Alexander, "American Evangelists." The latter 
movement has had all kinds of advertising, and every 
assistance that $57,000 could command. An extract 
from Lady Somerset's letter follows: 

"Dr. Torrey spoke simple, straightforward words 
without any great magnetic force, although you could 
not but feel the earnestness of the man and the strength 
of his belief, and yet his words to me were a disappointment. 
Ten thousand men and women were there, who, 
speaking generally, professed Christianity. They were 
gathering in a city where sadness and sin abound, 
where the indifferent crowd the pavements, and the 
hopeless fill our slums and mean streets. The revivalist 
took for his text, 'Rejoice in the Lord alway, and again 
I say, Rejoice.' Joy, he said, was the characteristic of 
the Christian, joy overflowing filled his heart, illumined 
his features, welled out in his words. Does it? I thought, 
as I looked round the audience. Ought it to do so? was 
the question that rose in my heart. 

"The cries of the oppressed in Russia are ringing in our 
ears, the cruel grasp of poverty holds our people in the 
iron grip of hunger, the steps of the man who is seeking 
work in vain beat upon our streets, the sin which mars, 
blights and destroys is stalking abroad at this very hour, 
the drink poison is inflaming men's brains and cursing 
their lives. Can our attitude as Christians be one of 

joy? 

"Ought we not rather to weep with Christ over 
sorrowful, wayward Humanity, and humbly face the 
dread responsibility which rests upon us? Calm, self-satisfied 
we all sat there, and never a word did the 
revivalist say to those listening thousands to arouse them 
to the fact that the state of London, nay of the world, 
lies at the door of the lethargic church itself. We sang 
songs over and over again about heaven, about joining 
our loved ones yonder. 

"A young man with a beautiful voice in the top 
gallery sang a solo about "Telling Mother I'll Be There," 
but to me the note of a real revival was missing, which 
should sound the call to be about the business of our 
Master, to be in dead earnest that God's will be done on 
earth, and to understand that it is the business of His 
Church to get it done. And as I went away after the 
meeting, to the slums of the East End, I felt more 
strongly than ever that to define our understanding of 
what heaven will be is an impossibility. One thing we 
know, however— that it must mean an eternal harmony 
between our will and God's, and that our present peace lies 
in doing His will now. 

"But it is still more difficult to understand how joy 
can be the keynote of our Christianity if the revivalists 
really believe that for some an eternity of torment 
awaits them, without even the escape through the purifying 
fire which the tenderer spirit of the medieval 



church granted as a recognition of the mercy of God; for 
them it surely seems to me joy is impossible. 

"It is as though one individual, with a cry of exultation 
and a shout of Alleluia, found the fire escape, while the rest 
of the household perished in the flames. But the impression 
produced on my mind may have been possibly 
heightened by the contrast presented by the wonderfully 
vivid realization of the simple work of the Spirit 
which has been blowing like the divine breath through the 
valleys of South Wales. 

"There organization has been unknown, money has 
been unsought, newspaper puffs nonexistent; indeed, 
the revivalist has still to be found. True it is that the 
figure of Evan Roberts stands out strongly, and yet the 
revival is independent of him. 

"There is no order of service, no set choir, only bursts 
of wonderful Welsh melody, no hymn books— the words 
are written in the hearts of the worshipers. The little 
whitewashed chapels resound with song, song exquisite 
in its harmony, solemn as death, and yet jubilant as a 
choir of angels. Then stillness, prayers, soft sobbing 

R3540 :page 116 

from broken hearts, confession, profession, all the wonderful 
gamut of the soul's experience, but all spontaneous, 
with no settled effect, only the greatest effect of all, the 
reality of human need and divine power. 

"What wonder Wales has been shaken as never 
before since the great religious revival a century and a 
half ago! What wonder the drink shops are empty, that 
at the assizes there has been no crime! 

"Everywhere as you move about you feel a great 
hush as though Christ walked over the mountains and 
into the mining towns and out through the valleys among 
the sons and daughters of toil, whose eyes have been 
opened to see Him as He came to them by the way." 



This dear writer seems to be "ripe" for the message 
of Present Truth as are all the best hearts the world over. 
We trust that somehow she and all such will be reached 
within the next ten years. It is said to be remarkable, 
too, that the eternal torment idea is but seldom referred 
to in the Welsh movement. 

The editor of Review of Reviews, Mr. Stead, has 
given considerable attention to the Welsh movement 
and predicts that the blaze there started will sweep over 
the world. He declares that he sees evidences of clairvoyance 
in connection with Mr. Evan Roberts, the leader 
of the revival. Mr. Stead is himself an avowed Spiritualist 

R3541 :page 116 

and ought to be good authority on the subject. 



The "lights" which follow one of the women 
leaders of the revival, Mrs. Jones, we have referred to on 
the next page. A reader sends us the following, which 
purports to be an extract from a work, Luminous 
Phenomena, by no less a celebrity than 

SIR WILLIAM CROOKS 

"Under the strictest test conditions, I have seen 
a solid self-luminous body, the size and nearly the 
shape of a turkey's egg, float noiselessly about the room, 
at one time higher than anyone present could reach 
standing on tiptoe, and then gently descend to the floor. 
It was visible for more than ten minutes, and before it 
faded away it struck the table three times with a sound 
like that of a hard solid body.... I have seen luminous 
points of light darting about and settling on the 
heads of different persons; I have had questions answered 
by the flashing of a bright light a desired number of 
times in front of my face. I have seen sparks of light 
rising from the table to the ceiling, and again falling 
upon the table, striking it with an audible sound. I 
have had an alphabetic communication given by luminous 
flashes occurring before me in the air, whilst my 
hand was moving about amongst them. I have seen a 
luminous cloud floating upwards to a picture. Under 
the strictest test conditions I have more than once had 
a solid, self-luminous, crystalline body placed in my 
hand by a hand which did not belong to any person in 
the room. In the light I have seen a luminous cloud 
hover over a heliotrope on a side table, break a sprig off, and 
carry the sprig to a lady; and on some occasions I have 
seen a similar luminous cloud visibly condense to the 
form of a hand and carry small objects about." 



When we remember how Satanic influence operated 
toward the work of Paul and Silas (Acts 16:16-19) and when 
we remember, too, the repeated declarations of the Bible, 
that Satan is to have great power and signs and lying 
wonders in the end of this age, which, "if it were possible, 
would deceive the very elect," we are not yet sure that 
Spiritism (demonism) has not something to do with 
these signs. We are to expect that as a last resort to 
gain power, Satan will in effect cast out Satan— thereby 
to gain and hold a greater influence against the Truth. 
In the temptations to our Lord, Satan practically offered 
everything if he might but retain his power; and doubtless 
he would be no less willing now to do good, that evil 
might follow. Without judging until more fruits are 
ripe, and surely without opposing good moral results, 
let us beware lest we fall into any of Satan's traps, for 
we are not ignorant of his devices. 

For a week Evan Roberts would not speak one word 
nor attend a meeting. The latest word is that on the 



eighth day he broke silence and said: "I have wrestled, 
not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, 
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of 
this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places, 
but power has been given to me, and I have obtained the 
victory." 

SEVERAL AMERICAN REVIVALS 

The newspapers tell of a remarkable revival in New 
York state, of one in New Jersey, which converted 
almost the entire population, closed the saloons, etc.; 
of another in Southern Illinois, where the principal 
minister seems to have been a professional base ball 
player, whose efforts for righteousness are turning many 
from sinful ways to sobriety and religion of a sort; and 
of a similar movement in a Dakota town, which has 
apparently awakened some to a changed course of life, 
"turning over a new leaf," etc. 

Let us rejoice with those who rejoice! Let us be 
glad to note every evidence of reform in heart or conduct! 
But let us remember that conversion is the 
beginning and not the end of the Christian life. If 
these converts are now of "the household of faith," 
let us greet them as such and congratulate them and hope 
for their growth in grace and knowledge to the point 
where they will be ready for the next step,— full 
consecration. 

The privilege and responsibility for the instruction 
of these lies at our door; for alas! most other Christians 
through lack of development are unable to assist these 
into right paths of faith and hope, not having found these 
for themselves,— being still bewildered by the fog and 
smoke of the "dark ages." Let us be as wise and kind 
and helpful as possible along these lines; and let us pray 
for the wisdom from above promised in our year-text. 

Meantime let us stand fast in our uncompromising 
but kindly opposition to Churchianity, "Babylon," and 
our loyalty to the One Church of many members of 
which Christ is the Head. While repudiating sectarian 
systems as of the Adversary, let us fellowship as brethren 
all who trust in the precious blood and are consecrated 
to his service— no matter how imperfectly they discern 

R3541 :page 117 

the truth— hoping for the fuller opening of the eyes of 
their understanding soon. 

AN EDITOR WHO SEES SOMETHING 

The Methodist Advocate, of Richmond, Va., 
editorially notes the need of a revival of religion, but 
fears that the prosperity of our times is unfavorable for 
its development. He concludes thus: 

"The South, in 1865, was the land of woe. No words 



have been coined to rightly represent its anguish. God 
in mercy gave them a divine solace. For years a revival 
continued. There was a million of accessions to our 
Church, unparalleled. But 'prosperity' spread to 
the cotton, cane and tobacco fields. We erected temples, 
hired men singers and women singers, set up sackbut, 
dulcimer, cornet, flute and harp, as never was seen or 
sought after by our fathers. We admired ourselves. 
And so likewise did our brethren of the "Twin Methodism," 
[Methodists of the North]. Such superb fanes, 
each with its baritone, alto, soprano and imported 
music master. 

"There has been a dry-rot. The evolution is the 
'boll weavil' of the pulpit. It has sapped the faith of 
the prophet. Commercialism raving in a delirium is 
the cut-worm of the piety of the pew. If ever this 
Republic had need of 'old-time religion,' it is in this 
era. The Trust is hatching the cockatrice eggs of Socialism. 
There are men living who saw 'Black Republicanism,' 
as then called, hooted. And presently that 
genius, a dwarf corked in a bottle, grew into a giant. 
He turned into the Demon of Civil War. Socialism 
yesterday cast but a handful of ballots. At last election 
it was a head taller than the 'Black Republicanism' 
of its early days. The contest, now on, is one of political 
economy. The Strike and the Trust are 'foot to foot, 
beard to beard,' at the ballot-box. And to-morrow, 
it will be the cartridge-box. 

"America needs the inflow of the divine influence. 
The rainbow must arch the sky or the Deluge of Death 
will overwhelm this fair land." 

SPIRIT PHENOMENA INCREASING. 



It should not surprise us that spirit-manifestations 
are on the increase. In Pittsburg recently a Miss Fay 
gave public exhibitions of her power to read questions 
in the pockets of her audience, others held tightly in 
their own hands, etc. Her answers to the questions were 
said to have been remarkable everyway. True, it was 
claimed by some that her work was fraudulent; but others 
as positively declared that stolen goods were recovered 
by her advice and matters explained as no human being 
could have done without supernatural aid. 

A SCHOOL GIRL'S POWER 

A newspaper report tells of a school girl in the West 
who has just discovered that she possesses similar 
powers. She first found that she could "see the answers 
in her books" when they were closed, just as accurately 
as when they were open before her, etc. 

"STRANGE SIGHTS" IN WALES 



From London come cablegrams telling of peculiar 
manifestations of "supernatural lights" in the vicinity 
of the Revival scenes, and are regarded as signs from 
heaven. These follow one of the women preachers and 
are seen near one of the chapels. We quote further:— 

"Suddenly I saw what appeared to be a ball of 
fire above the roof of the chapel. It had a steady, 
intense, yellow brilliance and did not move. Later two 
lights flashed out, one on each side of the chapel; they 
seemed about 100 feet apart and considerably higher in 
the air than the first one. In the distance they looked 
like large, brilliant motorcar lights. Just after 10:30 I 
was startled by a flash on the dark hillside. It looked 
like a solid ball of light, six inches in diameter, and was 
tiring to look at." 

SPIRITS IN A TREE 

The public press reports that a tree on the farm of 
W. Albert, near Paducah, Ky., called the "talking tree" 
has attracted much attention lately— crowds going to 
see and hear it. Strange noises emanate from the tree, 
including a crash, as though it were being crushed, and 
then a voice can be distinctly heard, saying, "There are 
treasures buried at my roots." One journal says:— 

"A party consisting of the most reliable citizens of 
the county visited the tree to make a thorough investigation 
for themselves as to the noises being heard. They 
listened patiently for several hours, when there was a 
sudden crash, which has been given many times before, 
and the marvelous reproduction of human voice came 
out. 

"The mystery remains unsolved, and so great has 
the number of people been who have gone there in the 
last several months that the tree is now dead, caused by 
the continuous tramping on the earth surrounding the 
tree. 

R3542:page 117 

"The only theory that has been suggested is that a 
man was killed under the tree in 1862, and while many do 
not believe in "spirits," the facts are so plain and the 
voice can be so distinctly heard that they cannot dispute 
the fact." 

THE OBJECT INTENDED 

Evidently the time is nearing when the Lord will 
permit this "strong delusion" to mislead many; and we 
may be sure that the fallen spirits will be ready to use 
whatever liberty is granted them. We may expect their 
manifestations to increase and to deceive many more, 
and be one of the important influences leading up to the 
persecution of the followers of the Truth, and ultimately 



to the great world-trouble. There have been so many 
applications for extra copies of our issue of January 15 
that we have concluded to issue its article on Spiritism 
in tract form at once. Order samples for your friends as 
you can use them to advantage. 

TO FOUND AN INSTITUTE OF PSYCHICAL RESEARCH 

Professor Hyslop and others recently held a meeting 
in New York City to take steps to found a Research 
institute. It was decided that it would require one 
hundred thousand dollars to found it properly, and fifty 
thousand dollars a year to maintain it. Speaking on the 
subject, Rev. M. J. Savage said:— 

DESIRES KNOWLEDGE OF NEXT WORLD 

"If the life we are leading here is all there is to it, 
every sensible man would wish to know it, and yet there 
is no use in hiding from us the fact that such a knowledge 
would be sad to most of us and that it would change the 
entire meaning and outlook of existence. 

R3542:page 118 

"I have been immensely interested in these investigations 
because I believe that if we could make 
people sure of continued existence and could couple with 
this in popular appreciation a recognition of the universal 
law of cause and effect, we should be able to lift 
the level of the moral life of the world. That is, if people 
could know that they must keep right on and if they 
could couple with this the further knowledge that as 
the past has made the present, so the present must make 
the future; that there is no magic in the fact of death to 
change our nature, but that we keep right on what we 
have made ourselves— this knowledge would seem to me 
the mightiest moral lever that the human mind can possibly 
conceive. 

SOLUTION OF THE LABOR PROBLEMS 

"It would become a practical motive bearing on 
every thought, every feeling, every action of the daily 
life. Right here I believe we should find the best possible 
solution of our industrial problems. 

"If the mass of men come to believe that this life 
is all, it is the most natural thing in the world that people 
should struggle for their share of whatever good things 
life may seem to have for them as they go along. If we 
are only dogs in a world kennel whose roof is the sky, 
why should one smarter and fiercer than the rest be 
allowed to monopolize a pile of bones a thousand times 
larger than he can personally use while the rest simply 
snarl and starve? 

"There is no use in my saying that this is not a 



practical question. It seems to me the most practical 
and vital of all of which we can possibly conceive. What 
kind of being am I? What is the rational way for me to 
live? On what scale shall I lay out my life? What is to 
be the possible outcome and what shall I try to attain? 
If these questions are not practical and important, 
then I do not know of any which are more than trifles." 



R3542:page 118 

WASHING ONE ANOTHER'S FEET. 

JOHN 13:1-14. -APRIL 30. 

Golden Text:— "By love serve one another."— Gal. 5:13. 

OUR lessons can only be properly understood by taking 
note of the surroundings. The feast at Bethany, 
followed by our Lord's triumphal entry on the 
ass amid the shoutings of the multitude, his several days' 
preaching in the Temple to large crowds, and the coming 
of the Greeks to inquire for him, all seemed to indicate a 
growing popularity; and the disciples, thoroughly unable 
to comprehend the Master's declaration that he was shortly 
to be put to death by the chief priests, were full of ambitious 
thoughts respecting the future— respecting their 
identity with the Lord, and how his exaltation as a king 
would bring them into prominence and honor with him, 
as well as confer upon them the coveted opportunity of 
accomplishing a large amount of good, blessing a larger 
number of people, etc. 

The thirteenth of Nisan apparently was spent by our 
Lord in quiet retirement, and the evening following, beginning 
the fourteenth, was the time appointed for the 
celebration of the Passover Supper in the upper room. 
Some of the apostles had, by the Lord's instruction, made 
ready beforehand; and now, as they assembled without a 
host to appoint them their places at the Supper, a discussion 
as to their prominence and their rights to the most 
honorable places, nearest to the Master, is not surprising. 
Our Lord twice before had rebuked them on this 
very line, assuring them that unless they cultivated and 
attained a spirit of meekness like little children they 
could have no part in the Kingdom. And only a week 
before, while en route to Jerusalem, James and John had 
made the request that in the Kingdom, when established, 
they might sit the one on the right hand and the other 
on the left hand of the Master, in closest proximity to 
his person. It was this spirit that controlled on this 
occasion, and led up to our Lord's washing of the disciples' 
feet as a lesson of humility and willingness to serve 
one another even in the humblest capacity. 

SELFISHNESS EVEN IN LOVE 



Nor are we to think of the apostles as each striving 
for the highest position merely from a selfish standpoint. 
Rather we should suppose that Peter, James and John, 
whom the Lord had in various ways specially favored 
in times past and who seemed to be specially close to 
him, loved the positions nearest his person, not merely 
because of the honor thus implied, but largely because 
of their love and esteem for the Master himself, and 
perhaps with the feeling that they appreciated this 
privilege more than some others could appreciate the 
same. Indeed we may suppose that a considerable 
number of the other apostles strove on their behalf, 
insisting that they should have the most honorable 
position. But however we view the matter, it is evident 
that a wrong spirit had been engendered, one very 
inappropriate to the occasion, especially inappropriate 
to the Memorial Supper which our Lord intended to 
institute after the Passover Supper. 

It is difficult for us to gage our own hearts thoroughly 
and hence we should use great charity in measuring the 
hearts and intentions of others, and should err rather on 
the side of too great sympathy and leniency than on the 
side of too strong condemnation. Doubtless had the 
apostles been inquired of respecting the matter they 
would have denied any elements of selfishness in their 
motives and conduct, and would have thought and 
spoken only of their zeal for the Lord and desire to be 
near him. This illustrates to us, what the Scriptures 
declare, that the human heart is exceedingly deceitful— 
that it needs scrutinizing carefully lest, under the cloak 
of something good, it might harbor qualities which without 
that cloak we would despise or spurn. 

As further illustrating this subject, and as helping 
us each and all to apply the lesson personally, we relate 
a dream told by a Scotch minister, Horatius Bonar, shortly 

R3542:page 119 

before his death. He dreamed that his zeal was represented 
in a package of considerable size and weight, and 
that some angels came to it and weighed it and assured 
him that it was full weight, an hundred pounds— all that 
was possible. In his dream he was greatly pleased with 
this report. They next determined to analyze it. They 
put it into a crucible and tested it in various ways and 
then reported the result thus: "Fourteen parts selfishness; 
fifteen parts sectarianism; twenty-two parts ambition; 
twenty-three parts love to man; twenty-six 
parts love to God." Awakening he realized that it was 
but a dream, yet felt greatly humbled, and doubtless was 
profited by it throughout the remainder of life. That 
dream may be equally profitable to each of us in leading 
us to a close inspection of the motives which lie beyond 
our words and thoughts and doings— especially beyond 
our service for the Lord and for the brethren. 



The first verse of our lesson calls attention to our 
Lord's love as the basis of all his dealings with "his 
own." Because of his love he laid aside his glory and 
became a man; because of his love he devoted himself 
as the man Christ Jesus; because of his love he was now 
anxious to help his dear disciples over a difficulty which, 
if not conquered, would hinder their usefulness as his 
followers both in the present and future. This love not 
only led our Lord to administer the reproof necessary, 
but led him to do it in the wisest and best and kindest 
manner. His example in this respect should be observed 
and copied by all his followers, especially those who in 
any public capacity or service are his representatives 
in the Church. 

Had our Lord and his disciples been the guests of 
some host on this occasion, it would have been considered 
the duty of the host to have sent some menial 

R3543 :page 119 

to wash their feet. This was the custom of the country, 
and very necessary to comfort. The open sandals or 
imperfectly sewed shoes allowed the dust of the highway 
to soil the feet, and really made washing a necessity 
after every journey, but particularly on a festal occasion 
of this kind. As the Lord's company were not guests, 
but merely had the use of the room, no servant appeared 
to wash their feet, and it would have been properly the 
duty and custom for one of the number to have performed 
the menial service for the others. As we have 
just seen, however, the spirit of rivalry was warm in 
their hearts, and no one volunteered to render the service, 
nor had any one the right to demand it in a company 
in which the Lord had made no special rank and 
appointed none as menials. This, however, rightly 
understood and appreciated, would have left the greater 
opportunity for some of them to have volunteered this 
service to the others. What an opportunity they all 
lost! 

A FAVORABLE OPPORTUNITY LOST 

Our Lord apparently let the matter go to the full 
limit to see whether or not any of them would improve 
the opportunity and make himself servant of all: he 
waited until the supper was being served (not ended, 
as in our common version;) then arising from the table 
he laid aside his outer garment or mantle and took a 
towel and girded himself— that is to say, tightened the 
girdle worn around the waist, which would hold up the 
flowing under-garments and keep them out of the way 
of his activity. We can well imagine the consternation 
of the apostles as they watched this procedure, and then 
saw the Lord go from the 
feet of one and another as 
they protruded from the 



couches on which they reclined 

(as illustrated in a previous 

lesson). The method 

of washing feet was different 

from ours: the basin was 

merely a receptacle for holding 

the soiled water, the 

water being poured from 

the pitcher in a small stream while the foot was being 

washed, rubbed, rinsed. 

Apparently the apostles were so astonished at our 
Lord's procedure, and so felt the condemnation which 
his course implied, that they knew not what to say, and 
so silence reigned until it came Peter's turn. Peter had 
a peculiar combination of character, part of which was 
extremely good. He objected to having his feet washed 
by the Lord, saying, "Dost thou wash my feet?— It 
is not appropriate, Lord, that one so great as you should 
serve a person of my standing, a poor fisherman." But 
our Lord answered that although Peter did not discern 
the full meaning of the matter, he would explain to him 
later when he had finished the washing of all. Peter's 
second remark was less praiseworthy than his first. 
He said, "Thou shalt never wash my feet." 

It was hard for Peter to realize that he was the 
disciple and the Lord was the Teacher,— that it was for 
him to obey and not to dictate; but Jesus' answer, "If 
I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me," at once 
brought out the better side of Peter's impulsive nature. 
If his washing had anything to do with his nearness to 
the Master and his relationship to him, then he wanted 
it. Going even to the other extreme again, fearing to 
leave matters in the Lord's care, he cried, "Lord, not 
my feet only, but also my hands and my head." There 
is a lesson for us in this matter: We are not to dictate 
to the Lord, not to attempt to be wise or good or obedient 
in ways that he has not directed. This is a hard 
lesson for some dispositions to learn,— continually they 
want to do more than is written in the Scriptures. Such 
a course indicates either a lack of reverence for the Lord 
and his Word and the wisdom thereof, or else a too 
great self-confidence, too much self-esteem. A humble 
and trustful heart should learn to say, Thy will, O, 
Lord, thy way and in thy time— "Thy will, not mine be 
done." 

WASHING THE FEET OF THE BATHED 

Our Lord's answer in our common version is somewhat 
obscure; the revised version is better— he that is 
bathed needeth not save to wash his feet to be clean 
every whit. Properly they had all bathed in accordance 
with the Jewish requirement of the putting away of all 
filth at the beginning of the Passover season. Our Lord's 

R3543 : page 120 



intimation, then, signified that having bathed they 
merely now needed the rinsing of their feet, the cleansing of 
the members that had come in contact with the earth. 
Our Lord added, referring to Judas, "Ye are clean, but 
not all." This expression shows us clearly that he had 
in mind a higher cleansing, of which this washing of their 
feet and their previous bath were but figures. 

The Lord knew that the hearts of his disciples were 
loyal. He had accepted them as his disciples and had 
reckonedly imputed to them the merit of his sacrifice 
as a covering of their blemishes, the full testimony of 
which would be given them by and by at Pentecost, 
the holy Spirit testifying that the Father had accepted 
the Lord's atoning sacrifice on their behalf. But there 
was one in the number whose heart was not clean. Our 
Lord did not pass him by, but washed the feet of Judas 
with the rest, knowing the while of his perfidy, and that 
he had already bargained with the chief priests, and was 
merely awaiting the opportune moment for the carrying 
out of his malevolent scheme. 

Our Lord's words, although not understood by the 
rest, must have been appreciated by Judas, as were 
also his subsequent words recorded in verses 18,26,27,28. 
Our Lord went so far as to quote the very prophecy 
which marked Judas and his disloyalty, his violation of 
even the common hospitality. None of these things 
moved Judas; none of these things appealed to his heart 
in such a manner as to change his course. We have thus 
strong evidence of the willful intention which marked 
his crime and enforced the meaning of our Lord's words 
when he called him the "son of perdition," and declared 
that it would have been better for him that he had never 
been born. The quotation from the Psalm was, "He 
that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against 
me." 

PATIENCE TO ITS LIMIT 

We may be sure that our Lord's conduct in dealing 
with Judas is not only a proper outline of what our conduct 
should be to any of a similar class, but additionally 
we should note the lesson that the Lord is long suffering 
toward all who become his disciples, not willing that any 
should perish, but disposed to do for them until the very 
last, and to bring to their attention the error of their 
ways repeatedly, in hope that thus they may be turned 
therefrom. The latter lesson has associated with it 
the thought that those who have received the Truth, 
and who in spite of all the favors connected therewith 
encourage and develop in themselves the spirit of selfishness, 
are apt to become so hardened, so calloused, that 
not even the Master's reproofs and the words of the 
Scriptures will influence them. This reminds us of the 
Apostle's words, "It is impossible to renew them again 
unto repentance"— to a proper course— if once the 



Spirit of the Lord has been fully subjected to the spirit 
of selfishness in their hearts. 

In harmony with what he told Peter— that he should 
know later on the significance of the washing— our Lord 
explained the matter after he had gone the rounds of 
all the apostles. He said, "Know [understand] ye what 
I have done to you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and 
ye say well; for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, 
have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another's 
feet." 

THE MEANING OF THE LORD'S ACTION 

Here we have the entire lesson explained. In their 
fear to be the least, all the disciples had shunned the 
opportunity of service for the Master and for each other. 
Our Lord, their acknowledged Head and Master, the 
Messiah, had humbled himself to serve them all, and 
had thus rebuked their inhumility, and at the same time 
set them an example that would apply to every affair 
of life, namely, that they should be glad to serve one 
another on every proper occasion, in the high things or 
in the common affairs of life. This washing of one 
another's feet we may readily see applies to any and 
every humble service of life, any and every kindness, 
though specially to those services and kindnesses which 
would be along the lines of spiritual assistances and 
comfort. 

From this standpoint it will be seen that we do not 
understand that our Master here enjoined a form or 
ceremony as our Dunkard friends and others believe. 
We do not even see in the matter the groundwork for 
the custom of the pope of Rome, who once every year, 
at this season washes the feet of twelve poor men, perhaps 
beggars, who are first prepared by a general washing 
and then brought in while the pope performs the 
special public service in the washing of their feet. We 
see no such formality in our Lord's intention. Indeed so 
far from it being a comfort or necessity to literally wash 
feet in our day and under our conditions, the reverse 
would be true. On the contrary, the Apostle points out, 
to wash the saints' feet in olden times was a mark of 
special hospitality, and entitled the performer to a loving 
respect in the Church.— 1 Tim. 5:10. 

How many blessed opportunities we have for comforting, 
refreshing, consoling one another and assisting 
one another in some of the humblest affairs of life, or in 
respect to some of the unpleasant duties, experiences 
or trials of life. As our Golden Text expresses it, we are 
in love to serve one another and not through formality. 
Any service done or attempted to be done in love, with 
the desire to do good to one of the Lord's people, we may 
be sure has the divine approval and blessing. Let us 
lose no opportunities of this kind; let us remember the 
Master's example; let us, like our Master, not merely 
assume humility or pretend it, but actually have that 



humility which will permit us to do kindness and services 
to all with whom we come in contact, and proportionately 
enjoy this privilege as we find the needy ones 
to be members of the Lord's body— the Church. 
As our Lord said to the disciples, "He that is 
bathed need not save to wash his feet," even so we may 
realize that all who are justified and consecrated members 
of his body have already had the bath, the washing of 
regeneration, and are already clean through the word 
spoken unto them. (John 15:3.) Nevertheless, although 
thus cleansed and sanctified, so long as we are in contact 
with the world we are liable to a certain degree of earthly 
defilement, and it especially behooves each one not only 

R3544 : page 121 

to look out for himself but to help one another to get 
rid of earthly defilements, thus serving his brethren, 
helping them in the weaknesses, trials and imperfections 
of the flesh, assisting them to become overcomers. 
In these respects he is cooperating in the great work of 
washing the saints' feet, cleansing from all filthiness of 
the flesh and spirit, and perfecting holiness in the reverence 
of the Lord.-2 Cor. 7:1. 



R3544 : page 121 

THE TRUE VINE AND ITS FRUIT. 

JOHN 15:1-12.-MAY7. 

Golden Text:— "Herein is my Father glorified, 
that ye bear much fruit."— v. 8. 

FOLLOWING the institution of the Memorial Supper, 

the Lord and his disciples, excepting Judas, 

who had gone to betray him, went forth from the 

upper room toward the Garden of Gethsemane. It was 

while the disciples were troubled in heart in respect to various 

things the Lord had said unto them and his declarations 

respecting his coming death, and while the Lord, 

too, had in mind the parting from his disciples and their 

future experiences, that he gave them the parable of 

the Vine. Some have inferred that this, like other of 

the Lord's parables, was an object lesson— that something 

seen by them all suggested it. Some surmise that 

the vineyards on the route offered the suggestion, and 

others that their journey probably led past the golden 

gate of the Temple, on which there was a large golden 

vine, which Josephus describes as having had clusters 

as large as a man: another Jewish writer declares that 

its "leaves and buds were wrought in gleaming, reddish 

gold, but its clusters of yellow gold and its grapestones 

of precious stones." According to Jewish authorities, 



this vine kept growing by means of offerings of a leaf 
or a cluster or a branch by the wealthy, just as some 
to-day present memorial windows to churches. In any 
event the Lord and the apostles must frequently have 
seen this golden vine. 

The Lord announced himself as the true Vine and 
his Father as the true Husbandman who planted the 
true vine, and his followers as the true branches of that 
vine. The expression "true vine" suggests a false vine, 
and this thought is accentuated and elaborated in our 
Lord's last message to his people in the symbols of 
Revelation. There he speaks of the gathering of the 
fruitage of the "vine of the earth," and the casting of 
the same into the wine-press of the wrath of God at 
the end of this age. (Rev. 14:19.) There was, therefore, 
a deeper meaning in our Lord's words, "true vine," 
than the apostles could have possibly gathered from 
them. We who are living at a time when both the true 
vine of the Father's planting and the false vine of the 
earth, earthly, have developed, have opportunity for 
noticing the difference between the two vines, and of 
noticing also that the vine of the earth is a counterfeit 
of the heavenly vine. In proportion as we see this 
matter clearly it will assist us not only in the understanding 
of the Lord's parable, but also in our application 
of it in our daily lives. We will be in less danger 
of misunderstanding, misconstruing and being deceived 
by the false vine, or by the false branches and the false 
principles represented in connection with its development, 
for it is not under the divine Husbandman's care. 

THE TRUE VINE 

The vine of the earth is the nominal Christian system 
organized along the lines of earthly wisdom. Its 
branches are the various sects and parties of Christendom. 
Its fruitage is cathedrals, temples, tabernacles, 
chapels, orphanages, hospitals, etc., political power, honor 
of men, wealth and social standing. It is great and 
influential in the world, and has the spirit of the world 
running through its branches and governing all of its 
affairs, and brings forth a fruitage which is not entirely 
bad, but which is entirely earthly, and which is relished 
and appreciated because it is earthly and practical rather 
than heavenly. This vine has grown wonderfully, 
has some three hundred branches and claims four hundred 
million adherents, and through its untold wealth 
of property and in its adherents it may be said to practically 
control the wealth of the world. 

Great is the vine of the earth, wonderful in the 
eyes of men. But the harvesting time will show that 
these nominal systems are not the vine of Jehovah's 
right-hand planting (Isa. 60:21), and it is, therefore, 
the system which the Lord declares he will utterly uproot 
and destroy, and whose destruction is so graphically 
described in Revelation. In the wine-press of the 



wrath of God, in the great time of trouble which is 
nearing— which we believe the Scriptures to teach will 
be fully upon the world ten years from now— the blood 
of Babylon's grapes will mean a flood of trouble and 
anguish to the world. By that time, however, the true 
vine and its branches will all have been glorified, and 
the results of their proper fruit-bearing will mean blessings 
to all the families of the earth. 

Let us consider carefully the "true Vine" and our 
relationship as branches of it, and the character of the 
fruit which the great Husbandman expects, that this 
last of our Lord's parables may greatly profit us, strengthen 
us, encourage us, assist us as it was intended that 
it should. 

THE VINE OF THE EARTH 

In the true Vine the branches are not sects, parties, 
and it is only by delusions of the Adversary that any 
who are his people recognize these systems of men. As 
the apostles were not Presbyterians, Methodists, Lutherans, 
etc., neither should any of the Lord's followers 
be such, and it is only because we have been blinded 
by the Adversary's misteachings that any of the true 
children of God are in such error, and so we understand 
this parable and other teachings of the Word. The 
apostles did not join each other, but each Apostle was 
united in heart, in faith, in hope, in love, in devotion 
to the Lord himself. And so we should not join the 
apostles, nor say, I am of Paul, I am of Peter, etc., 
but each should individually join the Lord as a member, 
as a branch; each must have the sap of the vine 
if it would bear fruit. Sectarian sap is of no value in 
producing the real fruitage which the Lord desires— it 
is only a hindrance. By this we do not mean that none 
of the branches of the true Vine are by mistake associated 
with the nominal Church system, the vine of the 
earth. We recognize that this is so, and we also recognize 

R3544 : page 122 

the Lord's voice calling— "Come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive 
not of her plagues"— the great troubles coming upon 
her, mother and daughters. 

As the branches do not represent denominations 
and sects, but the individuals who are united to the 
Lord, so the teaching of the parable is that our Lord 
does not prune sects and denominations but the individual 
Christians, whoever and wherever they may be— 
"The Lord knoweth them that are his." Our Lord's 
word on the subject is, "Every branch in me that 
beareth not fruit he taketh away, and every branch 
that beareth fruit he purgeth [pruneth] it, that it may 
bear more fruit." Everything in the Scriptures teaches 
us that our salvation and our relationship to the Lord 



are individual, personal matters; that we are not saved 
by congregations and sects and parties and families, 
but that individually and personally we must be united 
to the vine if we would have the sap, if we would have the 
life, if we would be counted members of the Church, 
which is his body. 

MANY ILLUSTRATIONS OF OUR ONENESS 

It is remarkable how fully the Lord has covered 
the whole range of illustration in describing the oneness 
subsisting between himself and his consecrated followers. 
He gives us an illustration from the mineral kingdom, 
saying that we are living stones built together upon 
him as the foundation and capstone, to be the Temple 
of our God. From the animal kingdom our Lord drew 
illustrations of this oneness, likening himself to the good 
Shepherd and his true followers to the sheep under 
his care, one with him in fellowship. From the 
vegetable kingdom he drew the illustration of this lesson 
—I am the Vine, of which my true disciples are the 
branches. From the family relationship he drew an 
illustration of the true husband and true wife, and their 
complete, thorough union of heart and of every interest. 
From the family again he drew another illustration representing 
the Creator as the Father, himself as the elder Son 
and all of his followers as brethren. From the human 
body we have another illustration, Jesus himself being 
the Head over the Church, which is his body, for, as the 
Apostle declares, we are members in particular of the 
body of Christ. In proportion as our faith can grasp 

R3545 : page 122 

these declarations, in proportion as we can realize their 
truthfulness, in that same proportion we may have 
strong faith and confidence that he who has begun the 
good work in us is both able and willing to complete 
it. Whoever of a loyal, obedient heart can exercise 
faith has thus provided for himself strength and grace 
for every time of need, for every hour of trial, for every 
difficulty and perplexity and for all the affairs of life — 
the ballast which will give equilibrium and enable us 
to profit by all of life's experiences, the bitter as well 
as the sweet. 

Our Lord's declaration that where two or three of 
his disciples are met together in his name they constitute 
a Church or body of Christ, and he as the head 
is with them for their blessing in proportion as their 
hearts are loyal to him and seeking his guidance, leads 
us to conclude likewise that wherever two or three of 
his members are there we have a representation of the 
vine, and they may have all the blessings of branches 
and all the privileges of fruit bearing. Very evidently, however, 
the Lord did not wish us to understand that in every 
little company of those who have named the name of 



Christ there would be so thorough a purging, so thorough 
a burning, that only the true branches would remain. 
His intimation is that he deals with us individually, as 
well as collectively, and that if we would maintain our 
personal relationship to him it must be by the receiving 
of the sap from the vine, the receiving of the holy 
Spirit, as one of the results of the union and fellowship 
with him. 

So surely as we receive the holy Spirit into good 
and honest hearts the result will be a tendency to fruit-bearing 
but the illustration our Lord gives teaches that 
some may become true branches in the vine and yet 
overlook and not possess the fruit-bearing disposition. 
Sometimes a healthy, strong branch develops from a 
good stock and root but has no fruit-bearing qualities. 
The husbandman with a trained eye discerns between 
buds which would bring forth grape clusters and the 
buds which would have only leaves. Those which do not 
have the fruit buds are known as "suckers"— because 
they merely suck the juices of the vine and bring forth 
no fruitage such as the husbandman seeks. These are 
pruned or cut off, so that the strength of the vine may 
not be wasted in such merely outward splendor, but 
may be conserved for its purposes of fruit bearing. 
Evidently a class of true professors resemble these suckers, 
who selfishly would draw to themselves as much of 
the righteousness of the Vine as possible, and would 
make a fair outward show in the world with leaves or 
professions, but would have no thought of bringing forth 
the fruitage which the Lord requires and which can only 
be brought forth through sacrifice. 

THE OBJECT OF PRUNING 

Aside from the suckers there are branches which, 
while having fruit buds, would never bring the fruit to 
a good ripe development if allowed to take their own 
course and to develop themselves as branches merely, 
and hence the wise husbandman, noting the bud, is 
pleased with it, and pinches off the sprout of the vine 
beyond the bud, not to injure the branch but to make 
it more fruitful. So with us who have not only joined 
the Lord by faith and consecration and been accepted 
as branches, but who as branches desire to bring forth 
good fruitage, which the Lord seeks in us— we need the 
Husbandman's care so that we may bring forth the 
much fruit, so that the fruit that we bear may be more 
to his pleasement, large fruit, luscious fruit, good fruit, 
valuable fruit. The methods of the Lord's prunings 
should be understood by all the branches, otherwise 
they may be discouraged and droop and fail to bring 
forth the proper fruitage. 

It would appear that the great Husbandman prunes 
the branches of the Christ sometimes by taking away 
earthly wealth or property, or sometimes by hindering 
cherished schemes and plans. Sometimes he prunes us 



by permitting persecutions and the loss of name and 
fame, and sometimes he prunes by permitting the loss 
of earthly friendships toward which the tendrils of our 
hearts extended too strongly, and which would have 
hindered us from bearing the much fruit which he desires. 
Sometimes he may permit sickness to afflict us 
as one of these prunings, as the prophet declared, 
"Before I was afflicted I went astray." Many others 
of the Lord's dear people have found some of 
their most valuable lessons on the bed of affliction. 

R3545 : page 123 

Some have written us how they were too busy, too 
much absorbed in earthly matters and interests that 
seemed to press for attention, so that they had not the 
proper time to give to the study of the Divine Plan 
of the Ages and the cultivation of their own hearts and 
the bearing of the fruits of the Spirit, and how the Lord 
in much mercy had laid them aside for a season, and 
given them the opportunities which they needed for 
thought and for Christian development, for growth in 
knowledge that they might have growth in grace. So 
far, then, from the true branches esteeming the prunings 
of the Husbandman to be injuries and wounds, 
they should conclude that according to the good promises 
of the Word all things are working together for good 
to them that love him— to the true fruit-bearing branches 
of the true Vine. Such prunings, instead of causing discouragements, 
should be to us, rightly understood, sources 
of encouragement. We realize that the world is left to 
itself; that the vine of the earth has not special prunings 
of the Lord, and that when we have these special 
prunings it is an evidence that the Father himself loveth 
us and is caring for our best interests. 

"NOW YE ARE CLEAN" 

Applying this lesson to his disciples our Lord intimated 
that the proper pruning work had already been 
done on them up to date, and in the Lord's providences 
they had been purged of an unfruitful branch, Judas. 
He therefore said to them, "Now ye are clean through 
the word I have spoken unto you"— you are justified 
and accepted because of your faith, obedience and loyalty. 
What a joy the eleven must have felt when they 
heard those words, and what a joy we may properly 
feel as we realize the truth of the same words applied 
to ourselves. Praise the Lord for this great gift of his 
favor through Christ— that we have in him not only the 
forgiveness of sins and the covering of his robe of righteousness, 
but that through him we are accepted of the 
Father as branches of the true Vine, clean through the 
acceptance of the message or word sent to us. But this 
is not all, this is merely the beginning. The thing necessary 
to be remembered is that our ultimate blessing and 



acceptance of the Father will depend upon our abiding 
continually in this blessed close relationship of branches 
in the Vine. 

If we will not bear the fruitage we may not remain 
in this relationship; if we do bear the fruits, if we have 
that spirit and disposition, and desire the Lord's grace 
and strength and assistance, his grace will be sufficient 
for every time of need and we will come off conquerors 
and more than conquerors through him who loved us 
and bought us with his precious blood. The bearing of 
the fruit which the Father desires cannot be accomplished, 
we cannot be pleasing to him, except as we are 
related to Christ and as his fruit is born in us by our 
relationship to him and the power of his Spirit and his 
Word working in us to will and to do of his good pleasure. 
The assurance is that if we abide in him we will 
bear much fruit and that without him we can do nothing, 
have no fruit that the Father will accept. 

What is the nature of this fruit-bearing? How may 
we know the fruitage which the Father seeks? We answer 
that many, under the misguidance and wrong 
example of the vine of the earth, incline to think of grand 
earthly temples, orphanages, etc., as being the fruits 
which the Lord desires to see well developed. We 
answer, No. If these were the fruits, then Jesus and the 
apostles bore no fruits: they built no churches or cathedrals 
or temples, they neither built nor founded orphanages 
or asylums or hospitals. If these were the fruitage which 
the Father seeks, then the Lord and the apostles erred 
totally. But we hold that they did not err, that the 
error rather has come from another quarter; that the 
vine of the earth guided by the spirit of the world has 
taken a utilitarian direction, and is bringing forth the 
fruitage of the kind which the world approves. 

THE WORLD MAKES PROVISION 

We are not saying a word against hospitals, asylums, 
etc.,— we believe them to be very good, very desirable, 
very proper adjuncts of society and civilization,— but 
we believe that the world is thoroughly capable of 
providing for all those things, and that the world is 
quite ready to provide for them; indeed we find that the 
world really does make provision as it is. For instance, 
the various St. Francis, St. James, and St. Agnes hospitals, 
asylums, etc., Protestant and Catholic, all seek 
support from the donations of the State for their maintenance 
and all get them, and the State might just as 
well, and better in some respects, have full charge of 
these. And indeed we are not sure but that it does have 
full charge of them now as fully as possible. Not that 
we wish to intimate that there are none of the true 
branches of the true Vine connected with any of these 
earthly institutions; but we hold that these are not their 
fruitage according to the Lord's parable, and that if 
they are members of the body as well as members of 



Babylon, they must bear the fruit of the Vine of the 
Father's planting as well as be identified with other 
good fruits. 

The fruits of the Spirit are sometimes taken to be 
activities in the service of the Truth, as, for instance, 
the scattering of the Truth, the talking of the Truth, the 
bringing of some out of darkness into the light and 

R3546 : page 123 

knowledge of the Truth, the expenditure of money for 
the publishing of the Truth,— all these are sometimes 
considered the fruits which the Lord expects of the 
branches. Not so! The fruits are something still 
nobler and grander than these things, and are described 
by the Apostle as the fruits of the Spirit. The Spirit 
of the Vine must permeate all the branches, and the 
fruit of the Vine must be in every branch. These fruits 
of the Spirit are enumerated— meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long suffering, brotherly kindness, love; if 
these things be in us and abound, says the Apostle, they 
make us to be neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge 
of our Lord and Savior. 

These fruits are all one in some particulars: that is 
to say, the essence of proper Christian patience is love; 
the essence of hope and faith and joy is love for our 
Father, and our confidence in his love, as expressed in 
his promises to us. So the name of all these fruits and 
graces of the Spirit is expressed in the one word, Love. 
These are the fruits which must be found in every branch 
if it would retain its place as a branch and be of the 
glorified Vine by and by. Let us not deceive ourselves 
into thinking that other things will do, and that we may 
pass the divine inspection without these. The other 
things, the good works, the seeking of the Truth, the 
distribution of the literature, etc., are only to be acceptable 
to the Father in proportion as they are the results 
of this fruitage in our hearts. The Apostle expresses 

R3546 : page 124 

this forcefully when he says, If I should give my body 
to be burned and all my goods to feed the poor, and 
have not love, it would profit me nothing. 

The same thought is true in regard to service to 
the Lord: if we should spend every day and every hour 
in harvest work, if we should give all our money to printing 
tracts and books, or use ourselves in any other way 
for the service of the Lord's cause, it would profit 
nothing unless it were the result of love in our hearts. 
We see, then, that the thought is that we must cultivate 
in our hearts the graces of the holy Spirit, meekness, 
gentleness, patience, etc., love, and that we must have 
these in abounding measure to be pleasing to the Lord, 
to bear "much fruit." The expression of these fruits, 
therefore, undoubtedly will be through various channels, 



perhaps of giving goods to the poor, perhaps of such 
faithfulness in the presentation of the Truth as might 
lead us to martyrdom, that our bodies might be burned. 
If the burning of the body or the loss of all our goods 
comes in such a course through our faithfulness to the 
principles of righteousness, through our love and loyalty 
to the Lord, then happy are we indeed. 

WITHERED BRANCHES BURNED 

The declaration that those who will not bear the 
fruit of the Vine will be cut off from being branches and 
will wither and ultimately be burned, seems to imply 
the second death, utter destruction of the class indicated. 
This is not the worldly class, for they were never united 
to Christ, never were branches in the Vine and hence 
never were on trial in this respect. It refers only to 
those who have gone the lengths of making a full consecration 
to the Lord, a full union with him, a thorough 
consecration and begetting of the holy Spirit. These 
words, then, seem to correspond with the Apostle's 
declaration, "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands 
of the living God." 

The world is not in the hands of the living God, 
but is at the present time reckoned as dead in Adam, 
under the Adamic sentence, not being judged by the 
Lord. The Church only is reckoned as free from Adamic 
condemnation and placed on trial or judgment, and 
these only, therefore, could fall out of the hands of 
Christ, the Mediator, and into the hands of the Father 
in the sense here indicated. Being cut off from Christ 
their case is hopeless; for such we can look forward to 
nothing better than the second death. Even then we 
are glad that the theory of eternal torment is not true; 
that when they die the death of utter extinction they 
have suffered all that God has pronounced, terrible as 
that loss will be to those who appreciate everlasting life. 

This statement about the branches cut off, withered 
and burned does not seem to take cognizance at all of 
the household of faith class, which, though believing in 
Jesus, never comes to the point of becoming branches 
or members in the Christ. Nor does it seem to take 
into consideration the great company. Indeed this 
class is mentioned in but few Scriptures and then obscurely, 
the Lord thus indicating, we believe, that none 
were called to such a company. The Apostle speaks 
of some as being "saved so as by fire," and a little 
suggestion in this same line might be taken from the 
Master's words that, being cut off as branches, they 
wither and are burned— burned as branches, destroyed 
as members of the company to which they originally 
were by covenant attached, but not necessarily destroyed 
individually to all eternity. The Apostle speaks of this 
class saying that themselves shall be saved so as by fire, 
but their works shall suffer loss. Perhaps we should 
consider these as being included in this manner in the 



Lord's statement. 

FRUITS OF MEMBERSHIP IN THE VINE 

Our Lord proceeds to tell us what some of the 
fruits of this union with him will be:— 

First, such may ask whatsoever they will and it 
shall be done unto them. There is only one condition or 
limitation, namely, that before they are thus prepared 
to ask they must see to it that they give attention to the 
Lord's word that they may ascertain what is his will and 
what they may ask according to his will. Those who 
abide in Christ must have no will of their own, theirs 
must be the will of their Head, and their Head has 
already declared that his will is the Father's will. These, 
then, are the limitations, that we have the Father's 
will in our hearts and the Father's promises in our 
hearts; then our requests will be in conformity to these 
and the Lord will be pleased to grant all such. 

The second fruitage or result will be that the Father 
will be glorified the more in proportion as our fruit 
increases, and on these terms our discipleship shall 
continue, namely, that we shall habitually seek to 
know and to do the Father's will and to glorify and 
honor him by lives obedient to his will. Anything short 
of this would forfeit our discipleship. Not that it would 
be forfeited instantly, as though the Lord would take 
occasion to cast us off lightly; but that it is a part of our 
covenant relationship that we will grow in grace, grow 
in knowledge, grow in harmony with God, grow in the 
fruits of the Spirit, and if we turn from this engagement or 
contract we cannot be considered as retaining our 
relationship as disciples, members. 

The third fruit or evidence of this membership in 
the Vine and of our continued growth as branches is 
stated in verse nine, namely, that as the Father loved 
the Lord Jesus, the Vine, so our Redeemer loves us, 
his branches or members. What a wonderful thought 
this is, that our Master has toward us the same kind of 
love that the Father has toward him! Could our faith 
always grasp this thought and maintain this hold, we 
should indeed have nothing to wish or to fear— our 
summer would last all the year. The next thought 
suggested is that having reached, having attained this 
high position in the Lord's favor, if we are his disciples 
and truly appreciate what he has done for us in this 
respect, we will desire to continue in his love. Next in 
order come the terms and conditions upon which we 
may continue in that love, namely, that we keep his 
commandments . 

By way of showing us that this is not an unreasonable 
proposition, our Lord declared that these are the 
same terms on which the Father deals with him, namely, 
"Even as I have kept my Father's commandments and 
abide in his love." We cannot expect to abide in the 
Lord's love and be careless of his injunctions. The 



measure of our faithfulness to him will be indicated by 
our obedience to him, as the measure of his love for the 
Father was indicated by his obedience to the Father. 
The Apostle intimates this same thought and adds a 
little to it, saying, "For this is the love of God that we 
keep his commandments, and his commandments are 
not grievous." (1 John 5:3). It is not enough that we 

R3546 : page 125 

keep the commandments, but that we keep them lovingly 
and loyally, of good pleasure, that we do not consider 
them grievous but rather are to be glad to be in 
line, in harmony, with all the Lord's righteous provisions 
and arrangements. Let us all more and more seek this 
spirit of full heart-harmony with all the principles of 
righteousness laid down by our Lord Jesus— his 
commandments. 

Our Lord's commandments are not the ten commandments 
of Moses, but more or less according to the 
standpoint of expression. They are less in the sense of 
requirements on our flesh; they are more as respects 
the requirements on our hearts. Briefly summed up he 
tells us that his law is love with all our heart, mind, 
soul, and strength to the Father and for our neighbor 
as for ourselves. This is possible to our regenerated 
hearts though not possible to our imperfect flesh. The 
Lord's requirement, therefore, is that with our hearts 
we serve this law of God and with our flesh we shall do 
to the best of our ability, and we have the assurance that 
in the resurrection we shall have the new bodies in which 
we shall be able to serve the Lord thoroughly, completely, 
satisfactorily. 

MY JOY REMAIN, YOUR JOY BE FULL 

Our Lord concluded this little lesson, so short and 
yet so full of meaning and depth, by an illustration of 
why he gave it, saying, "These things have I spoken unto 
you that my joy may be in you and that your joy may 
be filled full." This is my commandment that ye love 

R3547 : page 125 

one another even as I have loved you." Wonderful 
words of life are these that have come down to us through 
the centuries, that have helped to cheer and encourage 
so many of the Lord's followers in the narrow way. 

Many are the objections that are raised to pure and 
undefiled religion: Some complain that it is gloomy, 
joyless, a fetter upon heart and brain; that it drives men 
from every temple of pleasure with a whip of small 
cords; that it posts notice, "No trespassing here," in 
every field of enjoyment. Our answer must be that this 
is a mistake: that these are the words of those who know 
not, neither do they understand the things whereof they 



speak. Those who have truly made a covenant with the 
Lord, who have truly accepted him, who have truly 
laid down their lives at his feet and become his followers 
in sincerity, are filled with his joy, as he promised; and 
it is an increasing joy, which day by day and year by year 
becomes more nearly complete— a joy which will not 
be complete, however, until that which is perfect shall 
come and that which is in part shall be done away, until 
in the resurrected condition we shall see as we are seen 
and know as we are known and appreciate to the full 
the joys of our Lord, hearing his welcome invitation, "Enter 
thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

We enter now into those joys through faith, through 
anticipation, through rest of heart, but by and by we 
shall enter upon them in the actual sense. Meantime it 
is the world, that has not submitted itself to the Lord, 
that has not appreciation of the joys of the Lord, that 
is full of selfishness and ambition and strife and envy; 
it knoweth us not even as it knew him not; it knows not 
of our joys in the Master's service even as it never appreciated 
the joys of our Lord in doing the Father's will, 
even at the sacrifice of his life. 

"AS I HAVE LOVED YOU" 

It does not astonish us that the Lord directs that 
we love one another, but we stand amazed with the 
thought contained in these words, "As I have loved you." 
How can we love one another with the same love which 
the Lord has for each of us? is our first inquiry. We reply 
that this is impossible at first, but as we become more and 
more filled with the Spirit of the Lord, we approximate 
more nearly to this standard of perfect love to all that 
are his, a love that not only would refuse to do injury 
to another, but a love which would delight to do good to 
a brother, yea, to do good at the expense of one's own 
time and convenience. Thus Jesus loved us all and 
redeemed us with his precious blood, and to whatever 
extent we grow in grace, knowledge and love of him, in 
that same proportion we are Christlike and have a 
Christlike love. This love is the fulfilling of the Law, 
and whoever has such a love for the brethren will have 
undoubtedly a full, sympathetic love for the whole 
groaning creation, and will be glad to do now the little 
that is possible to be done on their behalf, and doubly 
glad that the Lord in his own good time and pleasure 
has a great and wonderful blessing for every member of 
Adam's race. 

Some one has said, "Do not imagine that you have 
got these things because you know how to get them. 
As well try to feed upon a cook book." There is a good 
and an important thought here: it is very important 
that we should know these things and understand the 
Lord's plans and appreciate the principles laid down in 
his Word, but though we had all knowledge it would not 
benefit us unless we used it. Let us not think of getting 



the benefit of the Lord's gracious provisions by merely 
learning how to get them, but let us take the necessary 
steps— see that we are fully his, see that we live close to 
him, see that we are fruit bearers, see that we abide in 
his love, in the Father's love, in the love for one another, 
which he has enjoined. 



R3547 : page 125 
INTERESTING LETTERS FROM THE ANTIPODES. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have the pleasure herewith 
to hand you extracts from interesting letters received 
at the Society's Melbourne office. Accompanying 
are extracts from two Reviews of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN Vol. I., which recently appeared in Australian 
newspapers. 

We have been made very glad by the safe arrival 
at Auckland of Colporteurs Brother and Sister Richardson. 
They had a very successful three weeks at Honolulu 
arriving at Auckland without a volume of DAWN in 
their possession. The arrival of Colporteurs Brother 
and Sister Nicholson and Brother Zink is expected early 
in March, D.V. Brother Anderson, who is laboring in 
Southern New Zealand, reports some interest in and 
opposition to the Present Truth. 

Pray for us, and also that the Lord may send more 
laborers into the vineyard. 

Faithfully yours, in the Anointed, 

E. C. HENNINGES. 



DEAR FRIEND:— I am enclosing 4s. for a year's 
subscription to ZION'S WATCH TOWER. I feel I cannot 

R3547 : page 126 

do without the reading. We never read such beautiful 
explanations of the Bible; my daughter and I think it 
wonderful, almost too good to be true, only that we know 
God is Love, and he doeth all things well. 

My daughter said when I was reading to her a bit 
about the Millennial Age, "Why, mother, you might get 
your desire after all!" I always desired to be a missionary; 
since childhood I have wished to tell the heathen 
about the Love of Jesus. What a privilege that would be; 
may the Lord help me to be ready for His work. 

If I can't keep on paying for the paper, I shall send 
a card at Christmas. Do not think I don't want to pay 
for the paper; if I had money, I should pay the people to 
read it. 

Yours in the love of God, 

, VICTORIA. 



DEAR FRIEND: --Please accept thanks for the liberal 
supply of tracts for distribution, which I shall do my 
best to place judiciously. 

It is about seven months since I first heard of these 
publications. The first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN 
was handed to me by a friend. He said, "Now, George, 
here's something that will just about suit you, and when 
you've read it, you can tell me what it means, for I have 
no time. And here is some lighter reading; you ought to 
read something lively, for you need a change, but it 
seems nothing goes down with you but something religious; 
and if you don't alter you'll become quite 
mopish." In a few days I returned the light books unread, 
but I read the DAWN four times, carefully referring 
to every text quoted therein. 

During the last few years I have always denied the 
doctrine of Eternal Torment, also the teaching that the 
heathen would all be lost to the Jesus who died for them; 
but I was quite unable to confute these matters. By 
some means, my reason disdained to receive such a 
portrait of God as the various sectarians presented to 
me; but I could merely affirm that I was unable, nay, 
that I dare not, believe these doctrines. I was not trusting 
in any but God, and he caused me to get that volume 
put into my hands, I am assured. 

I have since read volumes 2 and 3, and now have a 
fuller comprehension of God's Plan, and feel very earnestly 
that it is my bounden duty to talk of God's Love; to tell 
of his Kingdom; to lovingly exhort people to brush aside 
all shadows that would intervene between themselves and 
the Truth, to verify for themselves all the doctrines advanced 
in the DAWN series, and the portion of life remaining 
to me I consecrate to his service, for the enlightenment 
of any and all such brothers and sisters as 
I may be thrown into contact with. I am now fully His, 
and in fellowship with all who believe in His Kingdom. 
I am, dear Brother, 

Yours in the Glad Tidings, 

, South Australia. 



DEAR FRIEND:— I received your welcome letter and 
the paper some time ago, and should have written before 
this, only I wished to read the "Plan" first, so as to tell 
you what I thought of it. I am indeed very glad that it 
has dropped into my hands, and believe it has come in 
answer to prayer. I have been studying the Bible deeply 
for the last three years, and I thank God for the day that 
I determined to "search the Scriptures." He has blessed 
me wonderfully. Although I failed in business, and am 
now totally deaf, God has given me something in this 
last three years that I would not exchange for the best 



business in New Zealand, or the best pair of ears in 
Australia. There are several things in the paper you sent 
me that are very different from what is generally held 
in the churches, but which I fully agree with, and I want 
some more. With kind regards, 
Yours and His, 
, New Zealand. 



DEAR FRIEND:— I have much pleasure in sending 
payment for the valuable and interesting pamphlet you 
loaned me, and my most sincere thanks added, as well. 
I must say it not only afforded me much pleasure to 
read, but opened up new avenues for thought, never 
before dreamt of. The masterly way in which every subject 
is handled, one after another, and the proofs 
brought forward to substantiate the argument, leave 
the whole matter beyond contradiction. 

It grieves me to think that so many to-day ignore 
the inspiration of the Bible. Most of our colonial youths 
know nothing at all about it, and the theology that is 
preached from many of our pulpits does not improve 
matters much. But I am certain that anyone reading 
carefully The Divine Plan of the Ages cannot but be impressed 
by the doctrine contained therein. Please send 
me the next volume. 

Yours faithfully, 
, New Zealand. 



R3556 : page 126 

DEAR FRIEND:— I tender you special thanks for 
the volume, MILLENNIAL DAWN, which I have already 
read, and re-read with intense interest, as it has thrown 
an entirely new light upon many passages of Scripture 
which previously were a puzzle and worry to me. I 
would be very glad to see any subsequent volumes by 
the same author, and shall be only too happy at any 
time to give a friendly notice of same through the columns 
of our paper. 

Trusting that the book may be instrumental in removing 
many of the misconceptions regarding the 
attributes and plans of our Heavenly Father, I remain, 
Yours fraternally, 

, Editor, New South Wales. 



DEAR FRIEND:— I thank you very much for sending 
me The Divine Plan of the Ages, which I have been 
studying at intervals ever since it reached me— as I 
have been endeavoring to read and study my Bible all 
my thinking years. The work is inestimable; it has 



opened the eyes of my understanding, and lifted a harrowing 
weight from my mind. This grand opposite 
arrangement, and application of the Scriptures texts is 
far and away before anything of the kind I have ever 
been privileged to see. The study of them all in their 
respective and most reasonable connections as now 
presented dispels the gloom of the stern ascetic Calvinism, 
in the atmosphere of which I was brought up in 
Scotland. 

Our so-called spiritual advisers in these parts would 
perhaps be benefitted by the study of this book; for, 
alas! they don't seem to know too much about the Bible 
Truths they profess to preach and explain. I have resided 
here many years, and there seems to be far less 
fear and love of God in men's hearts now than even in 
what were termed the wild old times. We are fallen 

R3556 : page 127 

upon evil days; the age is throbbing with mercenary 
passion, and grows mad with the lust of gold; men's 
hearts are failing them for fear. Truly I believe and have 
believed for years past, that we are fast approaching the 
close of this dispensation. 

And so, may the Lord Jesus come quickly; for with 
the advent of his chariot wheels and the brightness of 
his coming, such a rose-light will flush over the world 
that the tired nations will up-leap with joy. 
Yours faithfully, 

Editor, New South Wales. 

page 127 

[The reviews will appear in our next issue.— EDITOR.] 



R3548 : page 127 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION 

THE annual celebration of our Lord's death, rather 

than a more frequent one, commends itself to the 

Lord's people more generally every year. At Allegheny 

the number participating this year was much larger 

than ever before. Anticipating this, Carnegie Hall was secured 

for the afternoon discourse on Baptism, as well as 

for the Memorial Service of the evening of April 16th. 

The death-baptism was symbolized in water at Bible House 

baptistry by 10 brethren and 31 sisters, after their public 

confession of faith in the redemption accomplished by the 

precious sacrifice of Christ, of their renunciation of sin, 

and of their full consecration to walk in Jesus' footsteps 

in self sacrifice, even unto death. 

THE EVENT AND THE DAY 



At the Memorial service explanation was made of 
why we celebrate the greatest event of history annually— 
not weekly, monthly, quarterly, etc. Not that the very day 
or hour or moment is of special consequence, but that it was 
meant to be a yearly celebration, and that so observed it is 
more than proportionately impressive. In fact, as all are 
aware, it could not be celebrated throughout the world at 
the same moment or hour or even on the same day, so 
great is the difference of time. For instance, the brethren 
in London had celebrated, and it was past midnight and 
they were asleep while we at Allegheny were celebrating. 
And for us to have partaken at the same hour with them 
would have been a day too early. A similar difficulty is 
met with by the Jews in their celebration of the Passover. 
History tells us that the early Church met with the same 
difficulty and that it was partly to correct this that it was decided 
to always commemorate our Lord's death on the 
day of the week nearest to the Passover date— "Good 
Friday." This arrangement has three advantages:— 

(1) It groups the events of that momentous week 
more accurately before the mind's eye: Palm Sunday, 
when our Lord rode on the ass as King of the Jews; Monday, 
Tuesday and Wednesday at the Temple teaching; 
Thursday preparing for the Passover Supper eaten 

that night and followed by the institution of our 
Memorial Supper, the lessons and prayer of John 14-17, 
the experiences of Gethsemane, of Caiaphas' 
court, and on Friday morning before the Sanhedrin, and at 
Pilate's and Herod's palaces. Then the scenes of Calvary 
and Joseph's new tomb. Saturday our Lord lay dead, 
hope being buried with him. Sunday, the resurrection 
day, with its new hopes, then comes in most appropriately 
—an Easter-day of new hopes and impulses. 

(2) It would bring us into closer fellowship and sympathy 
with those who celebrate Good Friday and Easter 
Sunday, and our celebration of the Memorial on Thursday 
night would suggest the appropriateness of that date and 
cause them the more to question the authority for and 

the wisdom of more frequent celebrations. 

(3) In civilized lands Good Friday is quite generally 

a legal holiday, and all the associations and precious memories 
of our Lord's death-day would find the better opportunity 
for exercising our minds. 

Since it is impossible for all to celebrate on the same 
night and hour anyway, the congregation was asked to consider 
these arguments for hereafter having the celebration 
on the Thursday night before Easter Sunday. And now 
the same thought is offered to all the dear friends scattered 
abroad. 

THIS DO, REMEMBERING ME 

The occasion was, as usual, a very solemn one as we 
communed respecting our Lord, the "Bread from heaven" 
broken for us. Nevertheless we rejoiced as we recognized 



in it a token of the "Love divine all love excelling." We 
rejoiced afresh as we assured our hearts that if God so 
loved us while we were yet sinners, much more does he 
love us now as he sees us daily striving to walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus,— "not after the flesh but after the spirit." 

The bread spoke to us of the human rights of Jesus 
sacrificed for us and of which we who believe may eat— 
appropriate by faith to ourselves, reckoning ourselves justified 
to all the rights originally possessed by Adam. Then 
we took the further lesson suggested by the Apostle's 
words,— "The loaf which we break, does it not signify 
the communion [fellowship] of the body of Christ? For 
we being many are one body: for we are all partakers of 
that one loaf. "-1 Cor. 10:17. 

The "cup" we recognized as symbolic of our Lord's 
blood— his life poured out during the three and a half 
years of his ministry and the dregs at Calvary. It was 
shed for us, yes, "shed for many for the remission of sins." 
Not the blood which flowed from our Redeemer's side 
when pierced by the soldier's spear. No, he was already 
dead then. Blood is used symbolically to represent life, 
and our Lord's life or being or soul was poured out unto 
death before the spear was thrust. We saw the necessity 
for this under God's law, that "without the shedding of 
blood there is no remission of sins." While we sorrowed 
we again rejoiced, singing in our hearts unto the Lord— 

"His blood can make the foulest clean. 
His blood availed for me." 

Then we got the still deeper meaning of the "cup" 
from the Spirit's teaching through the Apostle's words,— 
"The cup of blessing for which we bless God, is it not 
a participating [sharing] of the blood of the Anointed 
One?" (1 Cor. 10:16.) Viewing it thus our Lord's words 
would have a deep meaning to our hearts, "Drink ye all 
of it;"— partake of my shame and death, walk in my 
steps; so shall ye be my disciples indeed and where I am 
there shall my disciples be. 

We thanked God then for the privilege of being 
broken with him as part of the great loaf; and for the 
privilege of drinking of his cup and so filling up that which 
is behind of the afflictions of Christ; assured that "if we 
suffer with him we shall reign with him." 

About 550 were present and probably 525 partook of 
the emblems of the broken body and shed blood. Then 
we sang a hymn and went out to remember the scenes 
of the night of the betrayal, and of the day of suffering 
which followed it. 



page 129 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 