Announcements
‘LIGHT IS FOR THE RIGHTEOUS’
Have you longed for an understanding of the Bible? Now, more than at any other time in man’s history, Jehovah God’s purposes are being revealed. Why, you ask? Because it is time for their fulfillment. Foretold in prophecy for centuries, long the object of Christians’ hopes, the reconciliation of man to God is now being realized. But man must first know what Jehovah has promised if he is to avail himself of the blessings. Therefore, the greatest campaign of Bible education ever undertaken is now in progress. Have you availed yourself of any of its provisions? You should. It means your life. You must first gain knowledge and faith. Then you will be able to perform those works of faith that glorify God and edify others. So begin your own advancement now by reading your Bible with the help of these three books: You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World, “New Heavens and a New Earth” and What Has Religion Done for Mankind? Send only $1.50 and you will also receive three smaller publications for additional study.
THE FRAGRANCE OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD MADE PERCEPTIBLE
The truth concerning God’s purposes is like fragrant perfume to the hearer who appreciates it. (2 Cor. 2:14, NW) And how can it be made perceptible so that many people may appreciate it? By telling it and seeing to it that it is circulated everywhere. Jehovah’s witnesses consider it the grandest privilege to be instrumental in making perceptible the fragrance of the knowledge of God in all places that can be reached by them. During summer vacations, as well as on week ends, all who can will make special effort to reach isolated territory and far-off villages and towns where people are not often served the fragrant Kingdom message. Those who cannot travel to such sections will diligently carry on the work in congregation assigned territory, offering three valuable Bible study aid books and three booklets on a contribution of $1.50. Contact the local Kingdom Hall for information as to how you may share.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
August 19: The Divine Interests, and Individual Human Interests, ¶1-18. Page 428.
August 26: Individual Human Interests, ¶19-21, and Community or Congregational Interests. Page 435.

