The President’s Visit to Singapore and Thailand
BIG things have taken place in the British colony of Singapore. War’s scars are healed. All the streets are alive with business. Fine broad roads have been built, leading from the new modern airport; and in just ten minutes the two visitors from the Watch Tower Society’s headquarters were in the branch office and missionary home at 33 Poole Road. During their stay many things needed to be checked in connection with the branch and how to expand the preaching work. One big problem considered was how to hold the interest of those who had studied with the missionaries and associated with the New World society. In past years many had dedicated their lives to Jehovah but then drifted back into the old world. It may be that some good-will persons, after coming to the point of making their dedication, were left too soon to stand on their own feet. The mature witnesses may have believed that since the newly interested ones had come to know the fundamentals of Bible teaching they now would continue to make progress without any assistance. Often publishers would quit studying with those who were now dedicated, in order to look after other interested persons. However, those still in an immature state were not able to stand up under pressures and temptations of the old world. So the president of the Society gave good counsel to the missionaries and others, that they should keep on studying with the immature ones until they had finished the books “Let God Be True” and “This Means Everlasting Life”, even though the person had dedicated himself to Jehovah and the doing of his will. Such helpful studies will enable those new in the truth to grow to full maturity and stand firm.
No one having dedicated himself to Jehovah God can ever let up in studying. The time never comes when one knows it all. He must keep on preparing himself with the aid of the stronger brothers, to bear his own load of responsibility in due time. A number of those previously associated with the Society, whom the president had met there five years before, had drifted back to old-world living. To the missionaries this was disappointing, and they were very much concerned. However, the organization is still strong because many new ones have come in. But now it is the responsibility of those taking the lead to strengthen those within the organization so they will stand firm and endure even to the end of this system of things.
Arrangements had been made for an interview over Radio Malaya, and this was taken care of on Wednesday evening, March 28.
NORTH INTO MALAYA
Crowded into the busy schedule was a trip by Brother Knorr and Brother Yaremchuk, the branch servant, to Kuala Lumpur. This is the capital of the Federation of Malaya, a dependency of the British Commonwealth of Nations. Since 1951 the Watchtower and Awake! magazines have been banned in this country. By advance arrangement the Society’s president now was to see the Minister of Home Affairs, Inche Bahaman bin Samsuddin, about having the restrictions lifted. When the plane in which the branch servant and the president were traveling arrived at Kuala Lumpur airport another plane had just come in, carrying the Chief Minister of the Federation. Consequently the airport was crowded with officials, movie cameramen and many of the public, all present to greet the Chief Minister. A royal welcome was given him on his return from Bangkok. And it was at this busy place that the two brothers met the government official they had come to see—the Minister of Home Affairs, and also Mr. Tan, secretary of the party in power, who had arranged for the interview. The four then got into a limousine and headed for town. On the way they found themselves in the midst of the Chief Minister’s entourage, and it was impressive to see police and soldiers in line along the way, saluting the men in the cars as they passed.
Before long they reached the Home Affairs Minister’s office and proceeded to get right down to business. The old file concerning banning of the Society’s publications (which file had been built up during many years by the former British Colonial government) was brought out, and the Minister read aloud some of the accusations it contains against the Watch Tower Society and Jehovah’s witnesses. One of the principal points raised was that Jehovah’s witnesses would not obey all the laws of the land, but if those laws conflicted they would instead obey God’s law, thus they would constitute a danger to the security of the country. The charge was made, too, that the witnesses attack other religions and creeds, and particularly that The Watchtower attacks the Islamic religion.
A very friendly discussion ensued between Brother Knorr and the two government officials. The Society’s president had the opportunity to explain in detail the position of Jehovah’s witnesses and the work of the Society. Stressed was the fact that the government never had found occasion to accuse Jehovah’s witnesses of violating any of its laws, even though they do put God’s law ahead of man’s law. Also it was pointed out that anyone who lives by God’s high principles of truth and righteousness would certainly never be found interfering with any government action or violating its laws of moral decency and conduct. Furthermore, it was shown that Jehovah’s witnesses never have been promoters or starters of any disturbances or riots anywhere. During the discussion the case was mentioned of the girl who was brought up as a Moslem but had been seized by the Catholics and taken to a Catholic institution. The child was of Catholic parents. But taking her into a Catholic institution caused a riot in the land. The riot was a result of different religious beliefs, and some were killed and many injured; yet the government never took occasion to ban the Catholic Church because of this incident.
Nevertheless, the Minister argued that such a disturbance might happen because we do not agree with other religious creeds. (This is the same argument that the British Colonial office has used all over the world. Jehovah’s witnesses never have caused any disturbances or riots, but because they “might some day” they are banned or their publications are banned.) In reply it was shown that in the early days of Christianity the apostles went about preaching the resurrection of Christ Jesus and that ‘there is no salvation in anyone else’—though government officials then insisted they had to stop teaching this doctrine. “And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus. But Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.” (Acts 4:12, 18-20) How strange it is that with only about fifteen of Jehovah’s witnesses in all the Federation of Malaya they are considered a danger to the security of the country and are not allowed to distribute a few Watchtower and Awake! magazines to bring comfort and help to the people!
Brother Knorr explained that the expression of different ideas brings progress to the people of any nation. If there were never disagreement there would never be improvement of old ideas. If every religion had to stand still and no one were permitted to discuss doctrine or prove error, no progress would ever be made in understanding the true God. The Bible is a forward-looking book and stimulates progressive thinking. That is why Europe and America are the way they are today, because they broke away from the stagnated Roman Catholic system of things. They wanted to make progress and get away from the traditions of false worship they had been in for ages.
The Minister agreed that this was all right for educated people, but not for the people of Malaya, many of whom lack education.
Brother Knorr insisted this is the time for enlightenment and that truth should be allowed free circulation, not to cause disturbance but to help men seek the way of real life.
All in all it was a friendly discussion, and the facts were clearly set before the Minister as to the Society’s position. It was shown that Jehovah’s witnesses never have caused riots or disturbances anywhere in the world. They are not the instigators of trouble but have love for the people they serve in every land. It is the truth that makes one free and any people who want to be free love to allow the truth to enter in.
What the final outcome will be is not known. When Brother Knorr returned to Singapore he sent a letter to the Minister, having put into writing some of the things previously discussed and making a formal request for the lifting of the ban on the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. It may take considerable letter writing and further discussion, we believe, to have the ban lifted. Malaya is a Moslem land and they do not like Christian beliefs to be spread freely.
SINGAPORE ASSEMBLY
The branch servant and Brother Knorr returned after dark that evening to Singapore. From the air, on that clear night, Singapore was a beautiful sight, with multicolored, sparkling lights of the city like a huge treasure chest full of precious jewels.
Friday, March 30, dawned with a clear blue sky over Jalan Besar Stadium where Jehovah’s witnesses began their assembly. The temperature was about 90 degrees, but the slight breeze across the spacious football field helped to keep the speakers and audience relatively comfortable. At 4 p.m. the public meeting was to be held, with the discourse “Making All Mankind One Under Their Creator” to be delivered by Brother Knorr. There were 491 in attendance. It was an international audience with Chinese, Tamils, Sikhs, Eurasians, Indonesians and others, many in their colorful national dress. Some day soon all of these persons of good will will be made one under their Creator.
After this big first day the assembly moved to the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses. Fine experiences were given at the convention as well as interesting talks. One Ceylonese brother recounted how he was born of Buddhist parents and ran away from home at thirteen to join a Hindu monastery in the Himalayas, where he lived with monks and learned the art of yoga. Not being satisfied after years of this training, he migrated to Malaya, where he met with different “Christian” sects, but still dressed with his long hair and the beard of the Sadhu (Hindu priest). After reading a single tract this brother’s eyes were opened. He soon shaved his beard, cut his long hair and removed his flowing robes and quit using his “miraculous” powers. He is now dedicated to the service of the living God, Jehovah, and preaches the good news of Jehovah’s established kingdom.
The Triumphant Kingdom assembly at Singapore brought abundant rich blessings to all those in attendance. Eleven persons of good will symbolized their dedication to Jehovah by water immersion. Among them were three young sisters from Penang in Malaya, who came into the truth on their own just by reading a book. They have made wonderful progress and during their one hour off at school each day they have gone out witnessing from house to house. It was a joy to have them at the assembly and to see their youthful zeal, as they ranged in age from fifteen to seventeen. The Singapore convention was a real success, and Jehovah’s blessing was upon it.
Brothers Knorr and Adams were scheduled to leave Singapore for Bangkok Saturday, March 31, at 9:35 a.m. The president gave his final remarks to the conventioners at eight o’clock that morning and then learned that the flight was delayed. In fact, it was postponed several times during the day. Finally he spoke a second time, which meant that he had spoken four times in all to the assembly in addition to the public talk. Further delays kept the two brothers there all night and they did not get away until Sunday for the next stop, Bangkok, Thailand.
SIAMESE CONVENTION
Meantime the branch servant at Bangkok was very much excited. Already the travelers were a day late. The president of the Society was scheduled to speak at Chiengmai at four o’clock Sunday afternoon, but because the airplane was a day late it appeared impossible for him to get to Chiengmai in time for the public meeting. Early Sunday morning the branch servant sent a telegram to Chiengmai telling the brothers to put on a substitute speaker. When Brothers Adams and Knorr arrived at Bangkok at 1 p.m. they found that Brother Babinski had persuaded the Thai Airlines to hold up the 1 p.m. plane until they could clear customs and immigration and go through the regular formalities to get aboard. So at 1:20 the plane rolled down the runway and headed for Chiengmai. The three had much to say and, of course, there still was a little hope that should the plane make no stops en route to Chiengmai they might reach there by four o’clock. It proved to be a through plane and the group arrived at 3:40 in the afternoon. A car was at the airport to pick up the passengers and they reached the convention hall at ten minutes to four.
There were 348 in attendance to hear the talk “Making All Mankind One Under Their Creator” as it was interpreted into the Thai language. It was a thrilling day and Jehovah’s witnesses and the missionaries in their midst were overjoyed that the brothers arrived on time for the public talk at least. The convention continued the next day with great enthusiasm and eighteen were baptized. There was an average of 173 of Jehovah’s witnesses in attendance at this convention in the northern part of Thailand.
The day after the convention, while Brother Knorr was having a discussion with all the missionaries on their work and problems that afternoon, the telegram came, saying that Brothers Knorr and Adams would not reach Chiengmai in time for the public talk. It was just as well that the telegram had not gotten through, as everything went according to schedule.
In this country the Buddhist religion predominates, and it is not uncommon to find Buddhist priests in the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses. The Buddhists are in high hopes that things will take a big change for the better, as they believe that Buddha’s prophecy of 2500 years comes to its fulfillment in 1957. Just what improvements will be made in the world in 1957 is not entirely clear, as there are different ideas put forth by the various priests, but 1957 appears to be their great year. So the missionaries have quite a difficult time convincing the people that the new world of righteousness of which Jehovah’s witnesses speak is different from what the Buddhist priests talk about. But many persons are willing to listen and hear what the witnesses have to say about the kingdom of Jehovah God.
It is a pleasure to witness among these people. Approaching a typical little wooden or bamboo home built up on stilts, one climbs the stairs and then takes his shoes off before joining them on the floor of the porch, where they sit and listen as he talks to them at length, giving the message of hope. At almost every home he has opportunity to talk at length and the people listen with interest as the witness presents the sermon from the Thai Bible and then offers the publications. This is one country where it is possible to use the sermon at almost every home, even though in the next room one may see their Buddhist shrine with flowers and food set out on the altar. Some of the most zealous pioneers in the country have come from such a background to join with the New World society in announcing a real hope to the people.
During the stay in Chiengmai there was a big festival at the Buddhist temple and thousands turned out to enjoy it, with a carnival spirit. Vendors of many different foods appeased the appetites of the crowds while games of skill, music and dancing interested others. Finally in came a long, slow-moving procession from one of the neighborhood wats, bearing gifts for the temple. First came the priests bearing standards to lead the throng, followed by several men beating drums and metal pieces to attract attention; then the gracefully dancing temple girls moving to the rhythm of the drums, with a slow dance step. Prominent in the procession was the money tree with leaves of money—the contribution of the people to their temple. This was followed by a float illustrating an event in Buddha’s life as it was recounted in chanted verse by the singer who followed in a little cart. The float was pulled along by a number of the people who took a place on the rope in front of it while a crowd of others from the wat brought up the rear of this typical religious procession. It would take a long time to convert all these people to Christian belief. It could never be done; for only those with a sheeplike disposition actually will pull away and avoid being slain at Armageddon.
At the next stop, Bangkok, time was spent to check the branch office of Thailand and see what could be done to help advance the work of Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the country. On Wednesday evening Brother Knorr spoke to fifty-seven of the local congregation. Wonderful improvements have been made in the city of Bangkok since Brother Knorr’s last visit there. It is good to see the advancement made by the country in hygiene and living conditions in this short period of time. But it was especially good to see the new peak of publishers in Thailand and to observe that the missionaries were working diligently on learning the language and were able to speak in the tongue of the people. Arrangements were made to open up new territory, sending missionaries in to take care of the interest and establish congregations.
[Picture on page 444]
BANGKOK

