Effectively Working From House to House
1 Today the “good news” is being preached throughout the earth. (Matt. 24:14) This is being accomplished primarily by means of the house-​to-​house ministry.​—Acts 20:20, 21.
2 Our presentations must have real meaning to the people we meet. Men, women, and youths differ in their fields of interest. So it would be good to be prepared with a variety of Scriptural subjects that are likely to appeal to the people in our territory.
3 Make Good Use of the Publications: The Live Forever book covers a wide range of subjects that should appeal to many people everywhere. The illustrations, both visual and verbal, are effective aids. The book appeals to the heart, and it helps people see the need to make decisions, yes, to change their beliefs, conduct, attitude, and way of life. Being thoroughly familiar with the contents of the Live Forever book will enable us to converse effectively with people on a wide variety of topics. This will help us discern the extent of the householder’s interest.
4 To be effective in the ministry, we need to show genuine personal interest. (Phil. 2:4) Endeavor to focus the conversation on a Kingdom theme that involves the person and his needs. Seek to understand the person’s thinking by drawing him out with pertinent questions. Listen attentively to his answers. His comments may help you discern what subject will interest him. We want to help people see the value of the Kingdom message and show them how to learn more about it. One couple explained that they accepted a Bible study because the brother who called on them projected a sincere personal interest in them.
5 In Frequently Worked Territory: Developing effectiveness is especially important in territory that is worked frequently. A more effective ministry helps us to expand our territory. (w88 7/15 pp. 15-20) Rather than acting as though we have never called at that home before, we can acknowledge the householder’s past attitude and use it to our advantage. We can allude to our previous visit and then build on what was said at that time. Presentations suggested in past issues of Our Kingdom Ministry and in the Reasoning book can be adapted to the needs of the territory.
6 Jehovah is patiently keeping the door open for more people to benefit from Kingdom blessings. Jesus’ ministry was effective because of his love for people. (Mark 6:34) Are we doing our utmost to follow his example? (1 Pet. 2:21) Let us not hold back from sharing fully and effectively in the house-​to-​house ministry.​—2 Tim. 4:5.

