Positive Action Toward Further Progress
1 By now most of us have finished reading the 1992 Yearbook. Learning about the 1991 worldwide peak of more than four-​and-a-quarter-​million Kingdom publishers in 211 lands​—a 6.5-percent increase—​thrilled our hearts! Certainly, Kingdom increase now taking place around the world gives striking evidence of the fulfillment of Isaiah 2:2-4 and Micah 4:1-4.
2 Although the report for the 1992 service year is not complete, the evidence is clear that Jehovah is crowning this service year with outstanding increases. The invitation to join our vast international brotherhood continues to go forth. Memorial and district convention attendance figures show that millions of people are turning a hearing ear to the Kingdom message. From all nations, they are responding to the inspired invitation that calls out: “Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.”
3 Be Determined to Progress: Jehovah’s organization is on the move. With so many new ones streaming up to the mountain of Jehovah’s true worship, it is vital that each one take positive action toward further spiritual progress and then reach out to help still newer ones do the same. The need for such progress is implied in the statement that those responding to the invitation to come up to Jehovah’s mountain say to others, “Come.” The apostle John reported something similar at Revelation 22:17: “And the spirit and the bride keep on saying: ‘Come!’ And let anyone hearing say: ‘Come!’”
4 Jesus demonstrated how this invitation is to be given. When people responded to his teaching, he invited them to share in his ministry and taught them how to do so. (Matt. 4:19; 10:5-7, 11-14) His disciples learned the effective methods he used by accompanying him and observing how he did things. They then patterned their ministry after his. They learned his methods so well that their bold witnessing drew the attention of opposers who clearly recognized that they were disciples of Jesus. Acts 4:13 reports: “Now when they beheld the outspokenness of Peter and John, . . . they began to recognize about them that they used to be with Jesus.”
5 Before returning to heaven, Jesus gave the command that his disciples should perpetuate the Christian ministry by making new disciples, teaching them just as they themselves had been taught. At Matthew 28:19, 20, Jesus commanded: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.” And indicating that he meant for this to continue down to our day, he gave this added assurance: “Look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”
6 The true disciples of Jesus Christ have not failed to obey his instructions to teach new disciples all the things he commanded. However, the outstanding growth in the worldwide congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses requires that we consider the special needs of newly baptized members of the congregation and unbaptized publishers as well as people who are studying the Bible with us and who perhaps are starting to attend congregation meetings with some degree of regularity.
7 At the beginning of the 1992 service year, approximately 1 out of every 9 publishers had been active in the ministry only one year. In addition, 1 out of 6 had been publishing three years or less; and 1 in 4 had been sharing in the ministry for no more than five years. Although many newer ones have made fine progress since becoming members of the congregation, further assistance in some respects would undoubtedly help speed up their spiritual progress.
8 Hebrews 6:1 encourages all to “press on to maturity.” Christian maturity goes far beyond just putting in a service report. It involves progressing in personal study and regular meeting attendance as well as zealous participation in the field ministry. Helping others to come to a knowledge of the truth for salvation is also involved. We must work at sharpening our skills in ‘reasoning from the Scriptures.’ (Acts 17:2) Growing to maturity requires time, and it depends to a great extent on our godly devotion and on our gaining practical experience in the field. Although we have control over the depth of our own godly devotion, it is the course of wisdom to allow other mature brothers and sisters to help us gain practical experience. We can learn from their experience, especially in the field ministry. We do not have to learn everything on our own by trial and error.
9 Help for Those Lacking Experience: The pattern for giving assistance was set at the beginning of the Christian congregation. Jesus instructed his disciples. (Mark 3:14; Luke 9:1; 10:1) In turn, they taught others. Timothy received special encouragement and help from the apostle Paul, and the disciple Apollos progressed with personal assistance from the more experienced Aquila and Priscilla. (Acts 18:24-27; 1 Cor. 4:17) Mature members of the Christian congregation follow those examples today, teaching and encouraging the less experienced, especially newer ones and youths. As Romans 15:1, 2 says, “We, though, who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of those not strong.”
10 Parents are responsible for taking positive action to help their children progress spiritually. This involves family study, teaching the children how to study personally, regular meeting attendance and participation, and experience in applying what they learn. (Eph. 6:4; 1 Tim. 5:8) Congregation Book Study conductors especially should take the lead in making arrangements to help all in their book study and field service groups to progress in a spiritual way. The service overseer and other elders as well as ministerial servants and other members of the congregation also can help.
11 Provide What Is Needed: The need may be for assistance with only a certain aspect of Christian activities, such as personal study. A person may need suggestions for establishing a practical study schedule. Someone else could need help preparing comments or assignments. Others perhaps need to learn how to research Bible subjects.
12 Many new ones need help in the field ministry. A publisher may want to become more effective in the house-​to-​house work, making return visits, or starting and conducting a Bible study. A few practice sessions using suggested introductions and presentations from the Reasoning book or from Our Kingdom Ministry may suffice. At other times, suggestions for a practical schedule for field service and help to stick with it may be all that is needed. Making definite arrangements to work with a person who needs assistance will enable him or her to progress toward specific objectives.
13 God’s Word encourages us to let our spiritual advancement be manifest to others. This was the counsel Paul wrote to his fellow worker Timothy. (1 Tim. 4:15) In harmony with that encouragement, the apostle emphasized the need to be training ourselves as for competing in an athletic contest or for successfully engaging in spiritual warfare. (1 Cor. 9:24-27; 2 Cor. 10:5, 6) We should be quick to apply all that we learn about God’s will so that observers will see in us living examples of true Christian faith. Likewise, we should be progressing in the art of teaching others to become dedicated disciples of Jesus Christ.​—Jas. 1:22-25; 1 Tim. 4:12-16.
14 Progress Involves Enduring Trials: Even Jesus Christ learned valuable lessons from the things he suffered. (Heb. 5:8) So can we. Accordingly, spiritual advancement is enhanced when we take the positive attitude recommended at James 1:2, 3: “Consider it all joy, my brothers, when you meet with various trials, knowing as you do that this tested quality of your faith works out endurance.” Thus, whether we have to cope with the challenge of chronic illnesses, economic difficulties, living in a divided household, opposition in the territory, or any number of other adverse circumstances, we have Jehovah’s assurance that with his help we can overcome and continue to progress in our worship of him. (1 Cor. 10:13; 2 Cor. 12:9; 1 Pet. 5:8-11) Success is achieved by steadfastness under all circumstances, ‘speaking the sacred pronouncements of God and ministering as dependent on the strength that God supplies, so that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ.’​—1 Pet. 4:11.
15 Accept Help Toward Further Progress: If you are one who needs assistance in order to make further spiritual progress, be willing to accept help from a more experienced member of the congregation. Even if you have not been approached with an offer of help, you need not allow shyness to rob you of your opportunity to get help. Ask for assistance. Feel free to seek the help of any of the experienced ones in the congregation. Or you may ask your Congregation Book Study conductor, the service overseer, or any of the other elders for needed assistance.​—Compare Genesis 32:26; Matthew 7:7, 8.
16 Certainly, it is a wonderful privilege to be included in the ever-​increasing international “great crowd” streaming up to Jehovah’s mountain of pure worship. (Rev. 7:9) It is also a privilege to invite others to come with us in this ascent. With heartfelt appreciation, may we continue taking positive action toward further progress, building spirituality in ourselves and doing what we can to help others progress along with us in Jehovah’s service.

