Service Meetings for August
Week Starting August 3
Song 162
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Discuss talking points from the current magazines. Encourage all to share in field service this weekend.
15 min: “Introductions to Stimulate Interest.” Question-and-answer consideration. Demonstrate points outlined in paragraph 5.
20 min: “Positive Action Toward Further Progress.” Develop first two paragraphs of insert as a talk. Cover remainder of article by questions and answers. Emphasize points for local application. Conclude with brief summary.
Song 155 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 10
Song 133
10 min: Local announcements, including accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Commend congregation for financial support of local congregation, as well as Society’s worldwide work.
20 min: Developing Interest on Return Visits. Discussion by service overseer. Many find it enjoyable to speak with people and leave literature. (om pp. 87-8) Our responsibility includes cultivating interest in the hearts of those with whom we speak. Present a brief demonstration of how a tract can be used to develop interest on a return visit where no literature was placed initially. Highlight only one or two points. Present a brief demonstration showing how information found in the index of the Reasoning book can also be used. Emphasize concise and direct points made in publication that can be used to develop interest in Bible. Show how to arrange for further visits.
15 min: “Babylon the Great.” Discussion of Reasoning book, pages 49-53. Demonstration: Publisher discusses Bible student’s progress with him. Stresses need to be viewed by Jehovah as holy, worthy of His help and blessing. (1 Pet. 1:15, 16) Emphasize the importance of now fleeing Babylon and associating with Jehovah’s holy organization. Chairman concludes by encouraging brothers to use publications to direct students to the organization and take advantage of help the elders offer.
Song 129 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 17
Song 113
15 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Discussion of article “Living With Soundness of Mind and Righteousness.” Encourage brothers to make advance plans for attending the special assembly day program during 1993 service year. Announce date and place if known. Also, encourage participation in weekend field activity.
20 min: “The Challenge of Making Return Visits.” Questions and answers. After considering paragraphs 5 and 6, have two demonstrations. (1) Show how a tract can be used to start a Bible study. (2) Select a subject from Reasoning book and show how it can be used to answer a question on a return visit. Highlight value of practice sessions. Encourage following up all interest.
10 min: Discussion of article “Do You Remember?” in the April 15, 1992, Watchtower. Encourage all to maintain a good schedule for reading the magazines. Give practical suggestions.
Song 130 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 24
Song 72
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Effectively Working From House to House.” Question-and-answer discussion. Encourage auxiliary pioneering in September. Mention that those who auxiliary pioneer usually maintain a higher level of activity in the following months.
15 min: Send Your Children to School With God’s Thoughts in Their Hearts. Talk by elder. We live in a world that is bent on trying to squeeze us into its mold. And this is especially true of our young people. Parents need to be sensitive to their needs and problems. (Prov. 20:5) Inculcate God’s laws and love along with parents’ love for their children. Demonstration: Family discusses how to use School brochure. One child is going to school for the first time, whereas the other two children have been in school for a few years. Choose a point that will be applicable to the circumstances of each one. Have children express themselves in their own words to parent playing role of teacher. Make sure children understand principles involved. Brother handling part encourages family Bible study and emphasizes need for parents to have a close, intimate relationship with their children.
10 min: “Using the Live Forever Book on Return Visits.” Briefly discuss points in first two paragraphs. Then demonstrate a return visit using the direct approach to start a Bible study.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 31
Song 30
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Are You Making Spiritual Advancement? Discussion by elder. Have those in the congregation met specific goals during the past service year? If not, why? Suggest possible goals. Progress necessary to safeguard spirituality. (Phil. 3:16) Brief demonstration of a family, during family study, reviewing their own ministry to determine where they can make spiritual advancement.
10 min: Local needs or discussion of congregation field service activity by elder.
15 min: Feature the Creation book in September. Talk with demonstration. Discuss talking points and illustrations that can be featured when offering the Creation book. Points in the Reasoning book under the heading “Creation” can be used where applicable. Perhaps material in chapters 16 and 19 on “Why Would God Permit Suffering?” and “An Earthly Paradise Soon to Come” would appeal to householder. Have qualified publisher demonstrate offer, using Proverbs 2:21, 22 and the picture on page 197, highlighting that God’s original reason for creating the earth will soon be fulfilled.
Song 109 and concluding prayer.

