The Challenge of Making Return Visits
1 As ministers of the good news, we are commanded to make disciples. (Matt. 28:19, 20) This involves making return visits. Do you have a positive view of this vital part of our Christian ministry? Becoming skillful in making return visits can be a stimulating challenge.​—Prov. 22:29.
2 Each dedicated Christian should feel a responsibility to share in the disciple-​making work. This may require that we set aside a measure of personal convenience in order to share the Kingdom hope with others. Return visits afford us the opportunity to help sincere ones satisfy their spiritual needs.
3 Follow Up All Interest: Return visits should be made on all who express interest in the Kingdom message, even though they may decline our publications. There are many people who show interest by their willingness to discuss Bible subjects with us. Jesus and the apostles showed how interest in the Kingdom message can be cultivated by engaging people in pointed Scriptural discussions.​—Mark 10:21; Acts 2:37-41.
4 Our purpose in calling back should be to start a Bible study. We may be able to demonstrate to the householder how a home Bible study is conducted. You can be sure that Jehovah will respond to your prayer for help in finding an honesthearted person to teach. Jehovah will bless your earnest efforts in his service. Why not seek Jehovah’s help and make it a goal to start a Bible study?
5 Make Good Use of Tracts: Tracts can be used effectively in starting Bible studies. Many have been able to get a conversation started simply by discussing the picture on the cover. Read one paragraph at a time with the householder. When a question is asked, stop and invite the householder to express himself. Look up the scriptures and show how they apply. The conversation can then be directed to the publication in which the study can be conducted.
6 Use Reasoning Book: Effective return visits can be made with the Reasoning book. Reviewing the listing of principal subjects or the index can help you select appropriate information to discuss when following up previous conversations. The section “Scriptures Often Misapplied” can be useful in dealing with objections that may arise. Pioneers report much success starting Bible studies by using information such as is found in the Reasoning book on page 204 under “How do Jehovah’s Witnesses arrive at their explanation of the Bible?” They show the interested person how we let the Bible provide its own explanation. This works well and has resulted in starting a number of Bible studies.
7 Like Jesus and the apostles, we need to demonstrate a sincere interest in Jehovah’s sheep. (Luke 9:11) Love for people will help us to reach out to them with the Kingdom truths. (2 Cor. 2:17) When we place the greater emphasis on giving of ourselves in behalf of the spiritual welfare of others, we are able to meet the challenge of making return visits.

